Control of the molecular orientation in small molecule-based organic photovoltaics  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE00704H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00704H
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4934-4955Control of the molecular orientation in small molecule-based organic photovoltaics

        
          
            Liang 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shengwei 
            Guo
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ke 
            Zhou
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Ma
          
        
      b
aSchool of Materials Science & Engineering, North Minzu University, Yinchuan 750021, China. E-mail: feidehai@163.com
bState Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China. E-mail: msekzhou@xjtu.edu.cn
Received 
      7th May 2020
    , Accepted 12th July 2020First published on 13th July 2020AbstractThe continuously improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic photovoltaics in the past few years is largely ascribed to the synthesis of new molecular donors and acceptors as well as the subsequent optimization of morphology of the active layers. As one crucial morphological parameter, the interfacial molecular orientation of organic semiconductors not only determines the charge separation and transport, but also influences the device energy loss process. The control of the molecular orientation of photoactive materials via tuning process conditions, especially for molecular semiconductors, is becoming vitally important and is full of challenges. Here, we systematically summarize previous work on molecular orientation control in small molecule (SM)-based thin films and discuss the dependency of molecular orientation on three critical aspects, including substrate properties, processing methods, and solution systems. More importantly, the impact of the molecular packing configuration on the device performance in terms of generation of photocurrent and photovoltage in SM-based devices is comprehensively analyzed. Finally, we propose future potential directions for further promoting research on molecular orientation control in SM-based OPVs.
1. Introduction
In the last few decades, organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have drawn enormous attention in consideration of their obvious merits, such as light weight, solution processability, and simple processing techniques with widespread development and application prospects of large-area solar cell devices.1–6 In particular, non-fullerene small molecule acceptors (NF-SMAs), which have exhibited significant potential and obtained encouraging results for OPVs in the past few years,7–9 possess considerable advantages over their fullerene counterparts by offering easy synthesis and purification routes, tunable energy levels and bandgaps, and a broad absorption spectrum and the capability of realizing efficient charge separation when there exists a remarkably decreased energetic difference between the polymer donors and NF-SMAs.10,11 By developing new NF-SMAs and optimizing device fabrication in terms of interface engineering and active layer morphology at both the molecular and aggregation scales,12–15 several groups have demonstrated solar cells having power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 17% both in single-junction and tandem fullerene-free OPVs.12,16–19
To boost the PCE of OPVs, the photoactive layer morphology of solar cells should be finely optimized to obtain efficient charge generation and transport as well as reduced energy loss in the devices.20,21 Morphological details, such as the interpenetrating structure, domain size, crystallinity, and packing configuration of organic semiconductors in the photoactive layer, are all crucial for determining the good photovoltaic behaviour.22,23 Typically, the electron donor (D) and acceptor (A) within the binary active layer provide the energy offset to split pairs of electrons and holes at the D/A interface via transferring electrons from the D-rich phase to the A-rich phase.24 The interfacial molecular orientation, as one crucial morphological parameter, is closely related to the π–π interactions between the donor and acceptor molecules, which will influence the degree of electron delocalization and thus charge separation efficiency and charge recombination kinetics.25,26 Besides, interfacial molecular orientation can also significantly influence the carrier transport in solar cells. When the π–π stacking and backbone are arranged normal to the substrate, it is beneficial for carrier transport along the vertical direction of the device and carrier transfer to the buffer layers.27
Researchers have recently found that the molecular arrangement of the highly efficient small molecule Y6 was strongly associated with the superior device performance in the Y6-based blend system.28,29 Zhu et al. revealed that the crystallization and molecular orientation of Y6 could be refined via performing CF solvent and thermal annealing (TA) treatments. They suggested that Y6 exhibited a 2D molecular packing configuration with polymer-like conjugated backbones arranged with a face-on orientation. The tilted molecular geometry contributed to the improvement of charge transfer and better suited vertical carrier transport, resulting in a certified PCE of 16.4% after blending with PM6.30 Besides, He et al. reported that trifluoromethylation is a useful method to enable an ultra-low bandgap small molecular acceptor denoted as BTIC-CF3-γ, which not only resulted in the red-shift of the absorption but also refined the molecular packing with a three-dimensional interpenetrating network originating from the cooperative H- and J-aggregation and strong interactions between BTIC-CF3-γ molecules. In the BHJ films, such a molecular configuration could be partially retained, as well as showing close π-stacking and optimized face-on configuration, which provided more efficient electron transport between adjacent molecules to elevate the electron mobility and photovoltaic performance.31 Therefore, it is vitally important to precisely control the molecular packing behaviour of SMs in the photovoltaic layer to realize impressive photovoltaic performance in the highly efficient OPV systems.32 Although some reviews have been remarkably carried out on the morphology control of OPVs, all the morphological parameters in the active layer are generally discussed, while no specialized study exists which adequately covers a more in-depth understanding of the influential structural parameters of molecular orientation. Moreover, most of them have completely analysed the orientation control of conjugated polymers in OPVs, while not many systematic summaries of the orientation control based on small molecules via tuning the processing conditions have been reported.
In this review, we discuss the previous understandings about the packing orientation of small molecular donors and acceptors. Special attention is devoted to molecular orientation control and its effects on device physical processes. This work starts with a brief introduction to the different configurations of molecular orientation, followed by a review and summary of previous studies that have been carried out to tune the orientation of small molecules from three critical aspects, including substrate properties, processing methods, and solution systems. Subsequently, we discuss in detail the effect of molecular orientation on device physics. In the end, we propose to envisage the challenges and provide future directions for the regulation of the molecular orientation of small molecule-based OPVs.
2. The configuration of molecular orientation
Early OPV devices mainly adopted a planar heterojunction (PHJ) structure that contained a single D/A interface and thus lacked plenty of interfacial area for the separation of charge.33 In later work, an active layer with a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure blending donor and acceptor materials in a certain ratio and dissolving them in the same solvent was developed.34,35 The BHJ structure has a nanometer-scale morphology, which is largely ascribed to the interaction between the donor and acceptor and their spontaneous phase separation during solution processing. Consequently, the D/A interface area is significantly increased by intimately mixing the donor and acceptor molecules in the blend film, which is favorable for the exciton dissociation process.36 However, constructing the PHJ bilayer model system with an orientation-controlled donor or acceptor layer is still a powerful tool to study the morphological parameters concerning the device performance.37–41 This provides ideas for investigating the relative orientation distribution of donor or acceptor molecules, and thus supports the processes of optimizing the BHJ morphology, which probably features too many interfaces that are arranged with disordered molecular orientation.
As a general rule, the stacking configuration of molecular crystals with respect to the substrate can be classified as face-on (also known as lying-down), edge-on, end-on (also known as standing-up), and disordered according to their molecular packing behaviour. Typically, the backbone packing of organic semiconductors along the π-orbitals and the side chain direction can be categorized into π–π stacking and lamellar stacking, respectively, which provides the orientation packing information for the organic semiconductors.42 As illustrated in Fig. 1a and b, organic semiconductors primarily adopt a face-on orientation in the solid films as the π–π stacking is perpendicular to the substrate surface, while an edge-on orientation mainly occurs as the lamellar crystal is stacked in a direction that is perpendicular to the substrate.43–46 In other words, a face-on or edge-on arranged film is a typical configuration with the molecule planes either parallel or vertical to the substrate. As shown in Fig. 1c, an end-on configuration usually occurs as the molecular long axes align perpendicularly to the substrate surface.47 In many cases, there always exists a tilt angle between the substrate surface and backbone plane, instead of the absolutely perpendicular or parallel packing organic molecules (see Fig. 1d and e). That is to say, molecular backbones in thin films are usually tilted because of the herringbone packing of molecules. When the angle with the substrate is close to 90°, it indicates that the molecule is preferentially edge-on arranged.48–50 When the long axis of molecules lies flatter on the substrate (the angle with the substrate surface tilts to approximately 0°), it corresponds to the face-on arrangement.51,52 Sometimes, molecules could be randomly oriented, giving rise to a disordered orientation with mixed face-on and edge-on features (see Fig. 1f).53,54
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of molecular orientations with respect to the substrate: (a) face-on packing orientation; (b) edge-on packing orientation; (c) end-on packing orientation; (d) face-on orientation with a tilt angle (α); (e) edge-on orientation with a tilt angle (β); and (f) disordered packing orientation with mixed face-on and edge-on orientation. 
There are various key parameters to induce molecules to form different packing orientations. The fundamental factor lies in the intrinsic chemical structure of organic semiconductors with various self-assembly packing behaviours.55 Molecular structure factors, like the planarity of the molecular backbone,56–58 side chain format,59–61 and terminal group engineering,62,63 all have notable impacts on the aggregation and packing behaviour of active layer materials, thus leading to various photovoltaic properties. On the other hand, tuning the processing conditions can be another powerful method to adjust the molecular orientation of SMs. For example, the interaction between the organic layer and controlled substrate, as well as the intermolecular interactions between different organic photovoltaic materials, could lead to a variety of orientation distributions.64,65 Moreover, treatments such as substrate preheating, thermal annealing (TA), solvent vapor annealing (SVA), and solvent additives can influence the film-forming process and the molecular rearrangement, which is responsible for the molecular packing orientation to some extent.
As discussed above, particular processing conditions can achieve the expected control of the molecular orientation. Sometimes, some of these strategies are strongly associated with each other to tune the molecular orientation; therefore simultaneously applying several methods can modify the orientation population more effectively. To date, researchers have reported various ways for the precise regulation of the orientation proportion for the SMs, which are illustrated in Fig. 2. Section 3 will describe the mechanisms and effects of these strategies in more detail on modifying the molecular orientation, and a clear comparison is shown in Table 1.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of effective strategies for controlling molecular orientation. (a) Substrate control, (b) processing methods, and (c) solution systems. 
Table 1 Summary of molecular orientation control and relevant information of small molecule-based heterojunctions discussed in Section 3




Sections
Material systems
Control methods
Resulting orientation
Characterizationa
Ref.





a The abbreviation for the characterization techniques: GIWAXS (grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering); NEXAFS (near edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy); GIXD (grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction); XAS (X-ray absorption spectroscopy); IR-RAS (infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy); XRD (X-ray diffraction); VASE (variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry); AFM (atomic force microscopy); IRSE (infrared spectroscopic ellipsometry).





3.1 Substrate control
Coronene:C60
Deposited on coronene
Face-on coronene
GIWAXS, IR-RAS

64



Grown on ZnPc
Face-on coronene


ZnPc:C60
Grown on coronene
Edge-on ZnPc


Deposited on ZnPc
Face-on ZnPc


PEN/C60
Deposited on SiO2
Standing PEN
NEXAFS

70



Deposited on graphite
Lying-down PEN


CuPc/C60
Deposited on HOPG
Face-on CuPc
GIXD, XAS

71



Grown on top of C60
Standing CuPc


ZnPc/C60
Using the ITO substrate
Edge-on ZnPc
GIWAXS

75



Inserting the CuI template
Face-on ZnPc


DRCN5T:C60
Depositing CuI on the substrate
Increased face-on DRCN5T
GIWAXS

78



CuPc
Using the rGO template layer
Face-on CuPc
XRD

81



CuPc/C60
Grown on Au nanodots
Highly face-on CuPc
XRD

82



6T/DIP
Deposited at RT
Random
X-ray reflectivity spectra, NEXAFS

50



Heated substrate
Edge-on 6T and DIP


CIAIPc/C60 or CIAIPc:C60
Grown at RT
Flat-lying CIAIPc
VASE, XRD

52



Increasing Tsub
More horizontal


Si/DSA-Ph
Controlling Tsub = 0.6Tg
Flat-lying DSA-Ph
IRSE

84



PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC
Hot substrate
H-/J-type face-on
GIWAXS

87



PEN/C60
Grown on graphene at 273 K
Face-on PEN
AFM

88



Grown on graphene at 333 K
Edge-on PEN


3.2 Processing methods
DCV6T-Et/C60
Increasing film thickness
More face-on
IRSE

89



CuI/6T//SubPc
Using the vacuum method
Reduced tilt angle
XRD

90



α-6T/PTCBI
Grown on rubbed α-6T
Face-on α-6T/PTCBI
AFM

94



Merocyanine/C60
As cast
Edge-on
IRSE

49



Post-annealing at 80 °C
Reduced tilt angle


SIDPP-OE:PCBM
TA at 110 °C
Random
XRD, GIXD

59



Hexabenzocoronene
Post-deposition
Enhancing edge-on
GIXD, NEXAFS

96



3.3 Solution system
2F-C6C8:IDIC
CF + 0.4% 2-chlorophenol
Edge-on IDIC
GIWAXS

25



(p-DTS(PTTh2)2):C70
CB + 1% DIO
Improved edge-on

53



CB + 0 or 0.25% DIO
Random with more face-on


p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2/C60
Cast from CB
Face-on donor

97



CB + 0.4% DIO
Edge-on donor


PTB7:DR3TSBDT:C70
Adding DR3TSBDT
Mixed face-on and edge-on

54



PTB7-Th:F8IC:C70
Incorporating PC71BM
Increased face-on F8IC

56



PPBDTBT:ITIC:C70
Doping PC71BM
Enhanced face-on ITIC

99



BT-TO-ID:BT-OT-ID:C70
Strong interactions between the two donor isomers
BT-TO-ID induced face-on packing mode

100





3. Control of packing orientation of small molecules
3.1 Substrate control
The previously observed phenomena on the substrate-dependent molecular orientation make it possible for application to OPVs. Several substrate control factors, such as substrate properties, the introduction of template layers, and the role of substrate pre-processing, have been demonstrated to be useful for modifying the molecular orientation. In most early work, researchers employed PHJ structured devices with a clear D/A interface to investigate the interfacial orientation of the absorber molecules. Given some of the molecular properties, construction of a BHJ device with the desired molecular orientation can be realized by studying the molecule–substrate interactions, molecule–molecule interactions, adsorption or desorption ability of molecules on substrates, and so on.66–68

3.1.1 Substrate properties. 
Many studies have successfully demonstrated the substrate effects on the control of small molecule orientation in an evaporated film on the substrate via tuning molecule–molecule interactions and interactions between molecules and substrates. Different combinations of substrates and organic materials may result in different degrees of interaction strength and switched molecular orientation, which could be attributed to the surface properties of the defined substrate and the intrinsic characteristics of the material.69
The substrate effect of coronene and ZnPc deposited onto Au/coronene substrates and coronene:C60 blends deposited onto glass/Au/ZnPc substrates was investigated by Shahiduzzaman et al. Pure ZnPc deposited onto a coronene substrate can be successfully modified to exhibit face-on oriented ZnPc molecules via π–π interactions between coronene and ZnPc compounds. Similarly, a pure coronene film deposited onto the ZnPc substrate showed the adjustability of coronene into face-on configuration on the ZnPc substrate. Coronene in the coronene:C60 blend film deposited onto the coronene substrate showed a face-on configuration owing to the strong coronene–coronene interaction. A similar result was observed in the ZnPc:C60 blend deposited onto the ZnPc substrate (see Fig. 3a–c). This suggested the similar controllability of packing orientation in the blend film due to the π–π interaction between the same molecules. Coronene compounds in a co-evaporated coronene:C60 blend layer grown on the ZnPc substrate can be tuned to show the face-on configuration via π–π interactions between coronene and ZnPc molecules, while ZnPc in the ZnPc:C60 blend layer deposited onto the coronene substrate is oriented edge-on. The above results indicate that the π–π interactions between the same molecules are stronger than those between different molecules.64 To probe the impact of the pentacene (PEN) configuration on the interface formation with subsequently deposited C60 films, Breuer et al. prepared a well-defined PEN bottom layer with different molecular configurations. On a pristine graphite surface, PEN adopts a face-on arrangement, whereas when deposited on SiO2, PEN is uprightly oriented. The authors concluded that only upright PEN molecules could induce crystalline growth of C60 while fullerene forms a rather amorphous film on lying-down PEN.70 Molecular orientation of copper(II) phthalocyanine (CuPc) could be successfully controlled by employing intermolecular interaction between the substrate and organic semiconductor material. Considering that lying-down orientation can be successfully induced on the graphite surface, Ayzner et al. deposited C60 and CuPc onto highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrates. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) measurements indicate that the CuPc molecules are preferentially oriented lying on the HOPG substrate and standing in the sub-monolayer grown on top of C60 (see Fig. 3d).71
 Fig. 3  (a–c) Effects of the interactions between molecules and substrates on molecular orientation. (a) 2D GIWAXS images of coronene/ZnPc (left) and coronene/ZnPc:C60 (right). (b) Left: Orientation parameter S from in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IR-RAS) measurements for two blend films with various thicknesses. Right: Schematics of ZnPc:C60 on ZnPc and coronene:C60 on coronene. Inset: Pink, blue, and green curves represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coronene/Au and ZnPc/CuI, respectively. (c) Left: Calculated S for two blend films. Right: Schematics of ZnPc:C60 on coronene and coronene:C60 on ZnPc. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Mean tilt angle of the CuPc molecular plane relative to the substrate normal measured with XAS for HOPG/CuPc (top) and HOPG/C60/CuPc (bottom) at 20° and 70° incidence between the substrate and the incident electric field. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e–g) Orientation dependency of DIP on different substrates measured with variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE). (e) n and k spectra of the DIP film on SiO2 at Tsub = 100 °C and the average molecular tilt angle. (f) n and k spectra of the DIP film on the Au sublayer containing a schematic of the average molecular tilt angle. (g) n and k values of the DIP film on the PTCDA template layer. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
The Si:H (1:1) substrate is atomically smooth, and the naturally oxidized Al (111) substrate is almost atomically smooth, while ITO has a surface roughness of several nanometres. Du et al. fabricated ITIC films on the above three inert substrates and performed XAS characterization. Although these substrates exhibit different surface characteristics, ITIC still predominantly showed a face-on orientation on all the substrates because the LUMO and LUMO+1 orbitals (π*) are aligned in a direction that is normal to the plane of the ITIC molecular backbone. Thus, ITIC prefers to form a lying-down oriented film on the inert substrate with a slightly rough surface.65 Organic small molecules, like DIP and ZnPc molecules with planar geometry are arranged upright in the film to some extent. By altering the organic underlayer or substrate properly, we can obtain the desired molecular orientation. Christoph et al. found that edge-on molecular configuration appeared in the ZnPc film grown on commonly used weakly interacting substrates, such as glass or amorphous buffer layers, and almost edge-on configuration for DIP molecules on these substrates (see Fig. 3e). Growth of DIP on strongly interacting substrates (like Ag and Au metal) induces a more lying-down molecular configuration of DIP molecules (see Fig. 3f). Pristine DIP films growing on 3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) sublayers showed coexistence of standing and lying-down DIP crystallites (see Fig. 3g). This change induced a remarkable increase in the maximum extinction coefficient.72 Mixed-stack structural motifs in molecular orientation sometimes also depend on the substrate nature. Duhm et al. found that mixed PEN:perfluoropentacene (PFP) co-deposition on the HOPG substrate is primarily lying-down oriented while primarily presents a standing orientation on the SiOx substrate.73


3.1.2 The effect of the structural template. 
Inserting a template material between the substrate and organic layer is a feasible approach for modulating a top-deposited molecular configuration in the film, whereby organic materials could exhibit lying-down orientation rather than standing-up or edge-on configuration dominated by the molecule–molecule interactions. Commonly used template materials, like CuI and graphene, have been successfully proved to tune the molecular configuration in the thin film.
Since the orientation of ZnPc molecules can be adjusted by using a CuI seed layer before ZnPc is deposited, researchers are particularly interested in studying the packing behavior of ZnPc.74 For example, Rand et al. used a CuI template layer to control the orientation of ZnPc molecules from their normally edge-on orientation on the ITO substrate to a lying-down configuration.48 Similarly, a 3 nm-thick CuI layer as the template layer material between the vapor-deposited ZnPc layer and ITO substrate was used by Kim et al. The ratio of the lying-down oriented ZnPc film deposited onto the CuI template layer was remarkably increased compared with that of the ZnPc film without the CuI template layer.75 Taima's group also reported that the ZnPc film can exhibit a lying-down configuration due to the strong interaction between the π-conjugation of ZnPc and the d-orbital of CuI.76,77 Modifying the orientation of ZnPc molecules enhanced the photovoltaic properties of the resulting devices by promoting the photon absorption and charge transport. In another study, they reported a wet processing method to increase adoption of the flat-lying configuration of DRCN5T with linear side chains via strong interaction between the π-conjugation of DRCN5T molecules and d-orbital of the CuI layer by depositing the CuI material onto the substrate during processing (see Fig. 4a).78
 Fig. 4  The role of the structural template in molecular orientation. (a) GIWAXS patterns of DRCN5T films on PEDOT:PSS without (left) and with (right) a CuI template. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (b and c) 2D GIXRD images of PEN films for three different thicknesses. (b) PEN on ITO/MoO3 and (c) ITO/MoO3/graphene substrates including illustrations of the packing orientation of PEN molecules during deposition. The subscripts B and T mark the bulk phase and thin film of PEN crystals, respectively. Brackets {xy} represent the 2D group of Miller indexes corresponding to the Bragg rods in a specific crystallographic plane direction, while parentheses (xyz) represent the 3D Miller indexes of the lattice planes of the PEN crystal. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Other metal phthalocyanines, such as FePc and CuPc, also adopted the flat-lying configuration on the CuI template layer or other substrate surfaces.79,80 Yamada et al. prepared an ultra-smooth reduced graphene oxide (rGO) using a simple solution coating method without the transfer process. They used the rGO film as the template layer to promote the lying-down configuration of CuPc compounds via the interaction between the rGO and upper CuPc. The rGO film-coated substrate shows high optical transparency and high electronic conductivity. Because of the favorable π-stacking in the vertical direction, hole mobility in the device was improved by nearly two orders of magnitude.81 The packing orientation of CuPc molecules was also modified by Sasaki et al. by employing Au nanodots inserted between the organic material and the bottom substrate. The CuPc film grown on the Au nanodot-coated substrate exhibits highly flat-lying molecules with large surface roughness, which is favorable for photon absorption, as well as charge separation and carrier transport.82 Besides the above-mentioned metal phthalocyanines, other small molecular orientations can also be precisely controlled via the templating effect. As shown in Fig. 4b and c, Jo et al. obtained a nearly lying-down orientation of PEN molecules. They inserted residue-free monolayer graphene between the anode interface and organic layer, which was used as an atomically epitaxial template layer to grow the ordered PEN molecules.83


3.1.3 Substrate temperature dependence. 
Control of the molecular configuration at the D/A interface is closely associated with the intermolecular interactions, as well as the film drying process and molecule rearrangement via hot-substrate processing. Because of the temperature-dependent packing behavior of small molecules deposited on the substrate, controlling the substrate temperature (Tsub) could effectively tune the molecular orientation with respect to the substrate, giving rise to superior device performance.
As shown in Fig. 5a and b, Ulrich et al. demonstrated that the deposition temperature of the bottom 6T layer affects the molecular orientation and crystallinity of the 6T film, in which the 6T layer serves as the template for the deposition of the upper acceptor film. Growing the 6T film onto a substrate heated at 100 °C results in an enhanced ordering with a nearly upright standing orientation in both the 6T and the top layer, compared with that deposited at room temperature (RT). The morphology variation from a random orientation grown at RT to only standing oriented molecules in the elevated temperature case leads to a significant improvement of open-circuit voltage (VOC) in the 6T/DIP bilayer device.50 Zheng and coworkers studied the dependence of the packing orientation of chloroaluminum phthalocyanine (CIAIPc) molecules on Tsub during deposition. As Tsub is raised, ClAlPc molecules present clear self-aggregation and higher crystallinity. The molecular orientation of the CIAIPc film grown at RT is predominantly flat-lying, and the molecular configuration is more horizontal with an increasing Tsub up to 420 K.52
 Fig. 5  Indication for a variation of molecular configuration upon heating the substrate. (a and b) Effects of Tsub in 6T-based bilayer devices. (a) X-ray reflectivity (XRR) results of 6T films, as well as 6T/DIP and 6T/C60 bilayer films. Blue: 6T grown at room temperature (RT). Red: 6T deposited at high temperature (HT, 100 °C). (b) Reciprocal space maps of 6T(RT)/DIP (top) and 6T(HT)/DIP (bottom). Edge-on 6T and DIP are labeled yellow and green, respectively, while lying-down 6T and DIP, in red and blue, respectively. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) GIWAXS images of PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC BHJ films cast at RT (left), at RT + SA (centre), and on a 100 °C hot substrate (right). Inset: Schematic of different stacking behaviours of COi8DFIC. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
Organic glasses serving as the photoactive layer are usually fabricated by using vapor deposition.84 The characteristics of stable glasses can be determined by the fast surface mobility during deposition.85 Owing to lowered constraints to motion, a near-equilibrium arrangement during deposition can be formed when molecules are near the free surface.86 Dalal et al. showed that organic materials can form glasses, and the mobility of the free surface dominates the bulk molecular configuration in these materials. They studied the effect of the Tsub on three semiconductors and found that the molecular configuration of N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-N,N′-diphenyl benzidine (TPD), N,N′-di(1-napthyl)-N,N′-diphenyl-(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine (NPB), and 1-4-di-[4-(N,N-diphenyl)amino]styryl-benzene (DSA-Ph) could be continuously controlled by the ratio of Tsub/Tg, where Tg represents the glass transition temperature. Especially for the DSA-Ph on the Si substrate, when the Tsub = 0.6Tg, the long axes of all molecular backbones lie in the substrate plane with a flat-lying arrangement of DSA-Ph molecules. Such a flat-lying arrangement would be helpful in enhancing the photon harvesting in the active layer of OPVs.84 In another study reported by Li et al., decreasing the time of molecular organization by solution-casting on a hot substrate (100 °C) is efficient in restraining the crystallization and facilitates the orientation of COi8DFIC molecules from flat-on and edge-on orientation to H-/J-type face-on orientation in a more enriched state, as reflected by the occurrence of strong scattering peaks (see Fig. 5c).87 Moreover, a graphene film could serve as a template layer for modifying the packing configuration of PEN molecules, selectively promoting the adoption of either standing-up or lying-down orientations by tuning the Tsub during deposition. The packing configuration of PEN molecules deposited onto the graphene substrate is likely to be face-on and upright standing in the cases of 273 K and 333 K, respectively, due to the π–π interactions between the graphene substrate and PEN molecules.88

3.2 Processing methods

3.2.1 Processing conditions. 
Variations in intermolecular interaction and molecular ordering are sometimes strongly manipulated by the film-processing conditions, thereby having a considerable effect on the interfacial molecular orientation and the device performance of the associated solar cells. For DCV6T-Et molecules deposited onto the RT-substrate, optical simulations and infrared spectroscopic ellipsometry (IRSE) characteristics showed that with the increasing film thickness, the molecular configuration varied. As shown in Fig. 6a, the approximately 20 nm-thick films display preferred in-plane molecular configuration while the 4 nm film is characterized by a random distribution of configurations. This is beneficial for the application of thick DCV6T-Et films serving as light-absorbing materials in OPVs as they yield increased photo absorbance and thus superior charge generation efficiency. With the elevating Tsub, the band shifted bathochromically and the photon absorption is essentially enhanced for the thick layers. The rise of the absorption is associated with the enhancement of short circuit current (JSC) in solar cells containing an elevated DCV6T-Et film and subsequently deposited C60, thus contributing to improved device performance.89 Taima et al. found that when sexithiophene (6T) is grown directly on a CuI interfacial layer, the tilt angle of the molecular backbone with respect to the substrate plane is reduced in the low-temperature (LT) polymorph (the so-called “lying-down” orientation) by holding the film samples in a vacuum for 12 h, compared to the high-temperature (HT) polymorph (see Fig. 6b and c). The absorption coefficient of lying-down 6T at the 6T/SubPc interface due to the polymorph was 10% larger than that without using the vacuum method. Simultaneously, the free carrier transport is improved and the energy barrier between the CuI layer and 6T film is decreased.90
 Fig. 6  (a) Top: Schematics of the orientation of DCV6T-Et molecules. The 4 nm-thin films with a random arrangement configuration correspond to a mean molecular tilt angle of 54.7°. Centre: Simulated (gray) and experimental (black) ellipsometric parameters Δ and tanΨ of DCV6T-Et films (with two different thicknesses) on the Si substrate. tanΨ stands for the proportion of the amplitudes of p- and s-polarized complex reflection coefficients and Δ represents the phase shift between them. The asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of the thiophene rings, as well as the estimated tilt angles θasym and θsym are manifested. Bottom: Corresponding extinction coefficients k and indexes of refraction n of DCV6T-Et films probed by infrared spectroscopic ellipsometry (IRSE). Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2012, Elsevier B.V. (b) X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of 6T films formed (as-deposited or kept overnight) using a vacuum technique without or with a CuI template layer. (c) Corresponding schematics of the packing orientations of 6T on the CuI in the HT (left) and LT (right) polymorphs. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
There are some reports that demonstrate that a rubbing method can induce a face-on orientation in the p-type and n-type absorber layer of a multilayer structure, which could be ascribed to the quasi-homoepitaxial growth effect of organic molecules on a rubbed molecular surface.91,92 Consequently, the device performance of OPVs could be significantly improved through appropriate control of molecular orientation by means of a rubbing technique.93 For instance, in the research reported by Matsushima et al., they studied the effect of molecular orientation of p-type PTCBI on the device performance of OPVs. Owing to the quasi-heteroepitaxial and quasi-homoepitaxial growth effects, the authors obtained flat-lying configuration in both α-6T and PTCBI films by growing the α-6T film and then the PTCBI film on multiaxially and uniaxially rubbed α-6T buffer surfaces with a nylon cloth. Device performance and the operational stability of the rubbed solar cells were remarkably enhanced when compared to an unrubbed device. This is confirmed to be because of the enhancement in photon absorbance, favorable exciton diffusion length (LD), energy offset between the n-type and p-type molecules, and charge extraction by electrodes, which were attributed to the rubbing-induced double face-on orientations of α-6T and PTCBI films.94


3.2.2 Post treatment. 
Post treatments, like solvent vapor annealing (SVA), thermal annealing (TA), and physical contact are also commonly adapted to rearrange molecular ordering and thus to control the molecular orientation of organic photovoltaic materials. SVA is carried out by confining the processing solvent and the active layer film together in a confined space, which is a feasible method to fabricate the active layer with a well-arranged molecular orientation as the solvent vapor in the confined space slows the solution-to-dry-film process and thereby provides adequate time to control the active layer morphology.
Due to the temperature-dependent packing behavior of some small molecules, TA could usually modify the molecular orientation of PHJ and BHJ systems, leading to better device properties. Jung et al. found that after TA at 110 °C, both SIDPP-EO and DIDPP-EE molecules in fullerene-based blend films showed edge-on orientation with good crystallinity, whereas SIDPP-OO and SIDPP-OE preferred random orientation with a large population of edge-on configuration (see Fig. 7a). The highly edge-on arranged SIDPP-EO compounds showed the highest hole mobility, whereas the randomly oriented SIDPP-OE molecules in SIDPP-OE:PCBM BHJ films exhibited high photovoltaic properties.59 As shown in Fig. 7b, in the as-deposited merocyanine dye/C60 PHJ interface, the dye molecules primarily adopted an edge-on orientation with their long axis normal to the substrate. While the TA temperature of the film was higher than the Tg of the dye molecules, the tilt angle between the molecular backbone and the substrate plane shifted to 45°.49 For the as-coated PC61BM film, PC61BM molecules are amorphous while crystalline PC61BM can be obtained via heating the film. Akaike et al. reported that PC61BM switches its packing configuration at the film surface upon crystallization by keeping the film at a TA temperature of 160 °C for 10 min, preferentially exposing the side chains to the film surface. In the amorphous-PC61BM/6T PHJ film, the C60 molecular backbone of PC61BM was in direct contact with the end-on oriented 6T donor through the side chain of PC61BM.95
 Fig. 7  Evidence for variations of molecular orientation via post-treatment. (a) GIXRD intensity profiles of 110 °C-annealed SIDPP films along the out-of-plane (left) and in-plane (right) directions, respectively. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Experimental ellipsometric quantities Ψ and Δ derived from ellipsometry measurements for the as-deposited and 80 °C-annealed ID583 films on Si/SiO2/MoO3 substrates at 60° incidence, and the corresponding modeled spectrum. The 30 nm ID583 films were modeled as optically uniaxial. Inset: Schematics of the orientation of dye molecules without or with TA treatment. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH. (c) GIXRD patterns of HBC films, which were prepared by using hexane-vapor annealing, TA, and physical contact. Azimuthal anisotropy of diffraction intensity reveals the preferable configuration of HBC molecules. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Different molecular configurations in contorted hexabenzocoronene (HBC) films were induced by developing post-deposition techniques that were decoupled from the initial processing methods. HBC films lacked any long-range order in the as-deposited films. When they were subjected to hexane-vapor annealing, TA, and physical contact with elastomeric polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), the films presented crystallization with enhanced degrees of preferred edge-on configuration, corresponding to a large extent of π–π stacking in a direction that is parallel to the substrate (see Fig. 7c). Consequently, HBC films that have been prepared in these cases exhibited enhanced charge carrier mobilities by two orders-of-magnitude with enhanced distributions of the edge-on configuration in the films.96

3.3 Solution system

3.3.1 Solvent and additives. 
Adding a solvent additive to the host processing solution has been confirmed to be another viable route to tune the molecular packing configuration at the D/A interface. This method has been applied in many PHJ and BHJ structured systems, giving rise to favorable crystallinity and molecular configuration in the active layer.42 The commonly used additives include 1-chloronaphthalene (CN), 2-chlorophenol (CP), 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), 1,8-octanethiol (ODT), and so on. These solvent additives with high boiling points can selectively dissolve the donor or acceptor material and change the film drying process, in which the molecular packing configuration can be tuned resulting from the various molecular diffusion abilities.20
DIO is usually employed to adjust the molecular packing of organic molecules in OPVs. Perez et al. found that when increasing the volume of the added DIO to 1% in the CB cast 5,5′-bis{(4-(7-hexylthiophen-2-yl)thiophen-2-yl)-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-c]pyridine}3,3′-di-2-ethyl-hexylsilylene-2,2′-bithiophene (p-DTS(PTTh2)2):C70 blend film, the edge-on population of donor crystallites and the degree of crystallinity improve. While adding a certain amount of 0 or 0.25% DIO to the blend solution, p-DTS(PTTh2)2 molecules are nearly random and exhibit a larger distribution of face-on orientation (see Fig. 8a–e). Device testing revealed that the performance parameters all dropped markedly from 0.25 to 1% DIO. The decline in current density and fill factor (FF) is associated with the differences in crystallite structure, while the increased packing orientation is usually related to the improvement of electronic transport. The more random orientation in the 0.25% DIO treated films allows more three-dimensional charge transport and effective carrier extraction. Besides, the reduction of carrier transport and extraction efficiency at 1% DIO is due to the high edge-on distribution of donor molecular backbones with larger stacking distance, where the extended spacing impedes charge transport in a typical vertical direction of devices. Meanwhile, the authors inspected the nanometer-scale structure in the blend film by using energy filtered transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM) and grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) methods to further explain why adding 1% DIO resulted in a dramatic drop in the JSC and photovoltaic behavior. The extent of homogeneity and phase connectivity in the blend is more uniform in the film treated with 0.25% DIO. When the volume of DIO improves, the phase separation size of the donor domain increases, and the associations between phases weaken.53 Ran et al. demonstrated that a slight amount of solvent addition can result in significant variation of molecular orientation at a clearly identified PHJ interface consisting of benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b]bis(4,4′-dihexyl-4H-silolo[3,2-b]-thiophene-2,2′-diyl)bis(6-fluoro-4-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophene]-5-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole) (p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2) and PC61BM. As shown in Fig. 8f, the donor molecules had a high proportion of face-on configuration in the film as they were cast from chlorobenzene (CB), while a high proportion of edge-on orientation emerged as the donor film was prepared from a mixed solution with 0.4% DIO added to the CB solvent.97
 Fig. 8  Indication of a switch in molecular orientation upon using a solvent additive. (a–c) 2D GIWAXS image of p-DTS(PTTh2)2:C70 blend films with various ratios of DIO added to the host solution. (d and e) Corresponding GIWAXS intensity profiles in the out-of-plane (d) and in-plane (e) directions. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) 2D GIWAXS images of the lying-down (left) and edge-on (right) arranged p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2 molecules cast from CB and CB with 0.4% DIO, respectively. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
For some systems, 2-chlorophenol (CP) is an effective additive to modulate the interfacial packing configuration of BHJ by adjusting the interactions among the active layer components. Adil et al. demonstrated that the incorporation of 0.4% CP into the host solvent of chloroform (CF) in the 2F-C6C8:IDIC blend offers a long film-drying window, which enables more efficient interaction between the photoactive layer components as compared to the blend film without the CP additive. Thus, the relatively higher solubility of 2F-C6C8 provides plenty of time to make the long alkyl chains interact with each other in the donor domain, leading to the variation of molecular configuration of the acceptor IDIC from face-on to edge-on.25 Additives with low volatility provide enough time for the active layer component to interact with them. However, solvent additives with a long residence time may lead to adverse photovoltaic performance and reduce the device stability as they are excessive or are not completely removed in the active layer.98 Therefore, sometimes it seems particularly important to perform the necessary post-processing on the device.


3.3.2 Multiple components. 
Multiple component blending of donors and acceptors, which is usually performed by adding a third component in binary systems, has been extensively explored in recent years. Multiple component blending of donor and acceptor materials is commonly used due to the requirement of broadening the photon absorption spectrum. It simultaneously offers chances to optimize the film morphology of the active layer. The morphological orientation of multiple-component blending may be more favorable compared to that of the binary control devices due to the intermolecular interactions and the crystallite structure variations induced by the third component.42
Adding fullerene derivatives to the binary system is a remarkable route to optimize the molecular orientation. Zhan et al. observed an increased lying-down orientation and condensed stacking of F8IC molecules in the PTB7-Th:F8IC host matrix incorporated with PC71BM (see Fig. 9a and b).56 Similarly, as shown in Fig. 9c and d, a multiple-component blending film comprising PPBDTBT:ITIC:PC71BM displayed an enhanced lying-down orientation of ITIC molecules as doped with PC71BM.99 Interestingly, besides introducing fullerene derivatives as the third component into the host system to induce a face-on oriented ordering, doping NF molecules can have a favorable effect in a fullerene-based binary matrix. Yang et al. showed that the ternary mixture PTB7:DR3TSBDT:PC71BM had a co-existent configuration with mixed face-on and edge-on arrangements by adding the DR3TSBDT donor to the PTB7:PC71BM host system, which was much better with enhanced charge transport compared to the only face-on oriented binary system because of the formation of the so-called 3D textured structures. Synergistic impacts with improved JSC and FF values were obtained, which can be ascribed to not only the enhanced light absorption but also the improved carrier transport and reduced charge recombination. These were obtained via a combination of cascade energy levels and finely optimized active layer morphology. This intriguing work refuted for the first time a common paradigm that highly efficient OPVs are unambiguously associated with lying-down orientation.54 Recently, two small molecule isomers (named BT-TO-ID and BT-OT-ID) with the same molecular backbone and different alkoxy group positions were developed by Wei's group. Owing to their different effective conjugated lengths and molecular planarities, the two isomers showed dramatic differences in the molecular packing behaviour. When blending these two donor isomers with PC71BM, an ideal alloy in the corresponding ternary system was formed and a face-on molecular packing orientation was observed because of the strong interactions between the two isomers.100
 Fig. 9  Evidence for variations of molecular orientation in the ternary system. (a) 2D GIWAXS images of PTB7-Th:F8IC (left) and PTB7-Th:F8IC:PC71BM (right) BHJ films and (b) the corresponding line-cut profiles in the out-of-plane (solid lines) and in-plane (dotted lines) direction. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (c) GIWAXS spectra and (d) the line-cut profiles of PPBDTBT:ITIC:PC71BM BHJ films with various ratios of ITIC:PC71BM. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. 

4. The effect of molecular orientation on the device physics
This section provides insight into understanding the relationships between the molecular orientation of organic semiconductors and their characteristics in small molecule-based electronic devices. Table 2 summarizes the effect of molecular orientation on the device physics and photovoltaic parameters in the small-molecule OPVs discussed in this section. Favorable molecular orientation is a critical parameter to obtain high absorptance and photocurrent as well as fast charge separation and superior charge-transport ability. In general, a flat-lying arrangement normal to the substrate is in favor of carrier transport between molecules as the π–π stacking of lying-down molecules promotes the charge transport in the perpendicular direction to solar cells.101 Besides, the optical properties of organic semiconductor materials may be different and significantly affected by the distribution of molecular orientation.82 There were many studies to demonstrate these orientation effects using PHJ or BHJ interfaces. For instance, Taima et al. reported that the bilayer device with the CuI interlayer exhibited enhanced light absorption and charge transport, leading to increased efficiency from 1.55% to 4.56% because of the face-on oriented donor molecules.78 Zheng et al. found that when the Tsub is raised during deposition, both PHJ and BHJ devices using ClAlPc and C60 exhibit higher JSC, which is derived from the enhanced light absorptance of the ClAlPc molecules with a more flat-lying configuration and enhanced carrier transport among the crystalline domains.52 Next we will summarize the orientation effect on the photovoltaic properties in both PHJ and BHJ devices.
Table 2 Summary of effects of molecular orientation on the device physics and photovoltaic parameters based on small-molecule OPVs discussed in Section 4




Devicea
Resulting orientation
Effects on device physics
Photovoltaic parameters
Ref.



V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
EQE (%)





a “/” represents the PHJ structure and “:” stands for the BHJ structure.
b Maximum values estimated from the corresponding EQE curves.





ITO/ZnPc/C60
Edge-on ZnPc
—
0.48 ± 0.01
4.6 ± 0.2
56 ± 1
1.2 ± 0.1
23

75



ITO/CuI/ZnPc/C60
Face-on ZnPc
Enhanced absorption and charge transport
0.59 ± 0.02
8.9 ± 0.2
61 ± 2
3.2 ± 0.1
45


CuPc/C60
Edge-on CuPc
—
0.39
4.8
43
0.80
—

82



Au dots/CuPc/C60
Face-on CuPc
Enhanced photon harvesting and increased interfacial area
0.40
7.2
0.38
1.10
—


PEN/C60
Standing PEN
—
0.39 ± 0.01
5.8 ± 1.1
38 ± 5
0.85 ± 0.2
36b

83



Graphene/PEN/C60
Lying-down PEN
Enhanced photon harvesting, charge transport, and exciton diffusion length and reduced recombination
0.62 ± 0.01
8.5 ± 1.3
74 ± 3
3.89 ± 0.3
51b


HOPG/C60/CuPc
Edge-on CuPc
—
—
—
—
—
—

71



HOPG/CuPc/C60
Face-on CuPc
Faster electron transfer rate and enhanced D/A electronic coupling
—
—
—
—
—


ZnPc/C60
Edge-on ZnPc
—
0.48
5.5
56
1.5
34b

48



CuI/ZnPc/C60
Face-on ZnPc
Low-lying HOMO level and improved charge separation and photocurrent generation
0.55
8.1
63
2.8
37b


Merocyanine/C60
Edge-on dye
—
1.07
5.4
39
2.3
—

49



Merocyanine/C60 (TA > Tg)
Reduced tilt angle
Accelerated charge separation and reduced geminate recombination
1.04
4.5
70
3.3
—


p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2/C60
Face-on donor
Higher charge transfer state energy and less non-radiative recombination
0.84 ± 0.03
2.97 ± 0.3
66 ± 5
—
24b

97



p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2/C60 (with 0.4% DIO)
Edge-on donor
More efficient charge generation
0.69 ± 0.04
3.03 ± 0.4
68 ± 3
—
28b


6T/DIP
Random 6T/DIP
—
1.22
1.4
57
0.97
—

50



6T/DIP (Tsub = 100 °C)
Edge-on 6T/DIP
Increased photovoltaic energy gap and reduced electronic coupling
1.35
1.2
59
0.96


6T/C60
Random 6T
—
0.44
2.6
61
0.67


6T/C60 (Tsub = 100 °C)
Edge-on 6T
Increased charge recombination
0.33
2.2
43
0.31


DRCN5T:C60
Edge-on donor
—
0.88
12.24
51
5.46
61b

78



CuI/DRCN5T:C60
Face-on donor
Enhanced absorption
0.89
13.75
48
5.96
66b


PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC
Flat-on and edge-on acceptor
—
0.69 ± 0.002
24.8 ± 0.4
66 ± 0.6
11.2 ± 0.2
75b

87



PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC (100 °C Tsub)
H- and J-type face-on acceptor
Enhanced photon absorption and exciton dissociation
0.69 ± 0.002
27.3 ± 0.5
71 ± 1.0
13.4 ± 0.2
80b


PM6:Y6 (CB-TA)
—
—
0.796
21.16
72.15
11.94
68.0

30



PM6:Y6 (CF-as cast)
Face-on Y6
—
0.852
25.33
74.39
15.68
83.2


PM6:Y6 (CF-TA)
2D packing Y6 (face-on)
Improved carrier transport and fast charge transfer
0.835
26.52
76.21
16.54
85.8


PBDB-TF:BTIC-CF3-γ
Face-on acceptor
More electron-hopping junctions
0.85
25.19
72.82
15.59
> 80

31



BT-OT-ID:C70
Edge-on donor
—
0.81
11.34
49.96
4.61
58b

100



BT-TO-ID:C70
Less ordered
—
0.96
10.62
61.83
6.29
55b


BT-TO-ID (40%):BT-OT-ID:C70
Face-on packing
Improved carrier transport and reduced charge recombination
0.86
13.09
72.59
8.14
66b


PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC
Weak π−π stacking
—
0.73 ± 0.002
19.8 ± 0.3
57.5 ± 0.7
8.3 ± 0.1
70b

111



PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC (0.5 vol% DIO)
Face-on J-aggregation of the acceptor
Enhanced light absorption and improved carrier transport
0.70 ± 0.002
27.4 ± 0.2
66.2 ± 0.4
12.7 ± 0.1
74b


PTQ10:IDTCN
Isotropic acceptor
—
0.98
13.9
54
7.4
70b

43



PTQ10:IDTPC
Face-on acceptor
Strong absorption and efficient carrier transport
0.93
17.5
74.6
12.2
76.4


DR3TSBDT:C70
Edge-on donor
—
0.94
11.27
55.0
5.82
70b

60



DR3TBDTT:C70
Face-on DR3TBDTT
Efficient charge transport and reduced charge recombination
0.91
13.04
61.3
7.27
75b


DRTB-T-C2:IT-4F
Edge-on donor
—
0.893
16.66
64
9.52
68b

63



DRTB-T-C4:IT-4F
Face-on donor
Improved charge transport and balanced carrier mobility
0.909
18.27
68
11.24
75




4.1 Effects of interfacial molecular packing in PHJ structured OPVs
Constructing a bilayer model system with orientation-controlled organic small molecule layers is a powerful method because it is not easy to explore the configuration distribution in the blend films because of the many interfaces that are arranged with varying angles. Bilayer devices in general with a sharp and identified D/A heterointerface in the photoactive layer emanated from organic absorber materials, where the critical photo-physical process takes place. Usually, the sequential vacuum evaporation and contact-film-transfer method with the aid of water or polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) are employed to fabricate the bilayer films, which generally enabled the formation of a sharp D/A interface with negligible intermixing and well-defined molecular orientations comparable with its respective pure counterpart.39,47,102 Indeed, the sharpness of the bilayer interface is difficult to characterize and sometimes can be affected by molecular diffusion if the packing structure of one component is thermodynamically unstable. Therefore, the robust and sharp D/A interface should be primarily ensured in the bilayer models and thereby an accurate relationship between the molecular orientation and bilayer device performance can be achieved. In order to address this issue, a series of characterization techniques have been employed to confirm the sharpness of the bilayer interface, such as cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray scattering, in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), etc.74,102

4.1.1 Light absorption. 
Many researchers have found that adjusting the molecular orientation can improve the photon absorption of the device. Kim et al. fabricated bilayer OPVs with orientation-controlled ZnPc layers by using CuI as a template material. The face-on arranged ZnPc molecules harvest light more effectively because of the parallel alignment of the incident electric field to the transition dipole moments of the molecular long axis, leading to improved current density. Furthermore, ZnPc with the face-on configuration enables efficient carrier transport pathways between adjacent molecules along a direction that is perpendicular to the substrate and thus improves the FF.75 Sasaki et al. reported that CuPc can be oriented face-on at the CuPc/C60 interface by using Au nanodots as a template layer. The continuous Au film absorbs or reflects photons, which decreases the luminous intensity reaching the absorber material. Au dots showed blue-shifted plasmon bands so that the overlap of the Q-band with the plasmon absorption of CuPc was reduced. The device with Au nanodots had a PCE 1.4 times and 1.5 times those of the devices without Au dots and with a thin Au layer, respectively. This difference originates from the enhanced photon harvesting, increased interface, and the blue-shifted plasmon absorption bands of Au nanodots which allows the absorptance of the CuPc film to become more efficient, and thus leads to better photovoltaic output.82 Jo et al. fabricated a bilayer device with lying-down PEN layers by introducing graphene between the organic layer and anode surface. This orientation significantly enhances the properties of optical absorption and exciton diffusion length, hence improving the photon harvesting ability via the pentacene film over that with a standing-up-oriented film. The charge transport was also enhanced with the face-on pentacene film; moreover, carrier lifetime was improved, and the nongeminate recombination was decreased. Consequently, OPVs with face-on oriented PEN showed an efficiency five times those of the solar cells with upright standing oriented PEN.83


4.1.2 Charge transfer and photocurrent generation. 
Interfacial molecular configuration can affect the charge transfer (CT) process. Two ZnPc phosphonic acids (PA) were grown on the ITO substrate by Lin et al. to probe the evolution of CT processes as a function of the orientation distribution at the phthalocyanine/metal-oxide interfaces. They characterized the CT kinetics of the samples, and showed that ZnPc subpopulations with the highest CT rate are arranged more flat-lying to the surface plane of ITO. The CT rate constants of ZnPc(PA)4 exceeded 104 s−1 and were 10–100 times higher than those of ZnPcPA, which arises as a result of both the short ZnPc-electrode spacing and its molecular configuration. The ZnPc(PA)4 film in the active layer is mainly monomeric and planar to the surface plane of ITO, which provides a small adjusting distance for charge transfer and shows enhanced charge transfer and device properties. This indicated that the cooperation among the molecular packing orientation, dynamics, and energetics at the interfaces is rather important in solar cells.103 In another study, Ayzner et al. characterized the electron transfer rate of the CuPc/C60 PHJ devices. The lying-down interface had an electron transfer rate from CuPc to C60 four times faster than that at the interface with an edge-on configuration. This can be chalked up to the intensive electronic coupling in the case of a lying-down orientation at the D/A interface, which is attributed to the enhanced overlap of the molecular orbital between CuPc and C60.71
Meanwhile, the charge separation and photocurrent generation in OPVs are significantly affected by the orientation distribution at the D/A interface. As shown in Fig. 10a–c, the dependence of charge separation on molecular orientation at the ZnPc/C60 PHJ interface was reported by Rand et al. Owing to the existence of the CuI template underneath the ZnPc film, both the charge separation and photocurrent generation were improved in the film with lying-down ZnPc molecules, as evidenced by a rising internal quantum efficiency (IQE) and JSC value, compared with the film with edge-on oriented ZnPc molecules. The relative electronic coupling strength between the ground state (GS) and excited states was obtained as a function of the angle between the C60 and ZnPc molecular plane, which explained the reason for this improved charge separation. This showed that the exciton dissociation took place more effectively as the angle between the C60 and ZnPc molecular plane corresponds to a lying-down orientation, compared to that with an edge-on orientation.48 Ojala and co-workers demonstrated that charge separation can be affected by the molecular configuration at a merocyanine dye/C60 PHJ interface. The variation in dye orientation from preferentially edge-on to the tilted edge-on with a angle of 45° between the backbone and the substrate doubled the FF value. The authors constructed an analytic model that presents electric-field-dependent charge separation and suggested that this variation is due to the reduction of geminate recombination. The energy of the charge-transfer state (ECT) and charge separation rate further indicate that the interfacial packing configuration in the presence of a tilt angle accelerates the charge separation because of the lack of energetic traps and leads to decreased exciton stabilization at the D/A interface.49
 Fig. 10  (a–c) Influences of molecular configuration on the device properties of a ZnPc/C60 interface. (a) Complex optical indices of refraction n + ik measured with spectroscopic ellipsometry for face-on (dashed lines) and edge-on (solid lines) ZnPc films grown on a Si substrate. (b) Orientation-dependent exciton diffusion length (LD) of edge-on (top) or face-on (bottom) ZnPc films measured with spectrally resolved photoluminescence quenching (SR-PLQ) which was indicated by the photoluminescence (PL) excitation quenching ratio of the unquenched to the quenched case. The solid curves illustrate a transfer matrix model fit incorporating all refractive indices of the film using the given LD. (c) Effective electronic coupling squared (Veff2) at the ZnPc/C60 interface as a function of molecular tilt angle for the charge separation of a ZnPc exciton and C60 exciton and geminate recombination. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH. (d and e) Effects of molecular orientation in 6T-based bilayer devices. (d) Left: Device architecture of the studied solar cells. Right: J–V curves of 6T/DIP and 6T/C60 devices under illumination. (e) Tsub dependence of the VOC of 6T/DIP and 6T/C60 devices. The dashed curves indicate extrapolations of the linear regimes. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, there are also some studies that demonstrate opposite impacts, in which the charge separation and free carrier generation at the D/A interface with an edge-on configuration could be faster than those at the interface with a face-on orientation. Ana et al. reported that the edge-on configurations of diiPr-BTBT and ditBu-BTBT molecules facilitate the carrier transport efficiency, reducing the charge transfer time because of the good π-orbital overlap. The authors also deduced that the ultrafast electron transfer process occurs more efficiently at the resonance of well-arranged ditBu-BTBT molecules, demonstrating an enhanced coupling when compared with other oligomers.26 Besides, a PHJ device with a p-SIDT(FBTTh)2/C60 interface was fabricated by Nguyen et al. The IQE is observed to be higher in the edge-on oriented donor film cast from a mixed solvent than in the face-on oriented film cast from a host solvent. This suggests that the edge-on interface exhibits charge generation that is more efficient than that of the interface with a lying-down configuration. Furthermore, photocurrent generation appears to be more temperature-dependent at the interface with a lying-down configuration than at the interface with an edge-on configuration; this suggests that a higher energy barrier to charge generation is present at the interface with a lying-down configuration as compared to the edge-on interface. The authors calculated the electronic structures and claimed that the much faster charge generation rate in the edge-on oriented film results from the weaker strength of electronic coupling between its CT state and GS. The lower electronic coupling of the CT state/GS in this system at the interface with an edge-on configuration is favorable for the reduction of geminate recombination, thus effectively promoting charge generation there compared with that in the oriented device with a lying-down configuration.97


4.1.3 Energy loss and open-circuit voltage. 
The VOC value as one photovoltaic parameter of OPVs is very important in terms of evaluating device performance and is highly dependent on the energy alignment of the D/A frontier orbitals. Therefore, various combinations of D/A pairs with an energy offset within an expected region allow for the controllability of VOC. Besides, the energy levels can be tuned by controlling the interfacial molecular configuration.104 It is seen that the interfacial molecular packing configuration significantly affects the energy alignment and thus the VOC values of solar cells. Nishi et al. performed ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) to elucidate the energy ordering of the two resulting PEN/C60 heterointerface configurations. A smaller vacuum level variation took place at the PEN/C60 interface with standing-up oriented PEN, while a large variation took place at the D/A interface with lying-down oriented PEN, which is caused by the existence of dipoles at the interface that possibly resulted from the quadrupole field of donor molecule.88 Besides, the ECT, which is mainly defined by the energy difference between the LUMO level of the acceptor molecule and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the donor molecule, is linearly correlated with the VOC of solar cells if the coulombic binding energy of excitons at the D/A interface is deducted. In the meantime, the voltage losses could be divided into non-radiative and radiative recombination from the gap between ECT and VOC.6
Given the above-mentioned orientation effects, many researchers have reported the relationship between molecular orientation and device VOC. For example, Rand et al. demonstrated that the increased VOC in the device can be attributed to the low-lying HOMO position owing to the face-on ZnPc/C60 interface.48 Besides, the energies of the CT state for the D/A pairs influence the VOC value in solar cells. Switches in the molecular configuration at the D/A interface affect the energy levels of the D/A pairs, which influences the separation of the bound electron–hole pairs. In the work reported by Olguin et al., they examined the impact of relative molecular configuration on the CT state energies of (zinc)tetraphenyl-porphyrin/C60 (ZnTPP/C60) and tetraphenyl-porphyrin/C60 (TPP/C60) dyads.104 For porphyrin/C60 pairs with self-assembly constructs, experimental research revealed two competing orientation populations and suggested that C60 tends to form a 2D network and/or long chain arrangement upon co-deposition on the porphyrin–metal template layer.105,106 The long-chain C60 arrangement behavior results in co-facial porphyrin/C60 supramolecular orientations where the 2D-array orientation exhibits end-on interactions between C60 and the porphyrin molecules. The authors compared the end-on configuration energetics with a few low-lying CT states to the co-facial configuration with previously calculated energies of the CT state. The energies of the CT excited state are smaller for the co-facial configuration as compared with the end-on geometry by approximately 0.7 eV, which is predominantly because of the decreased binding energies of bound excitons when switching the geometrical orientation from co-facial to end-on.104
Ulrich et al. reported that the variation of molecular configuration from coexisting mixed lying-down and standing-up arranged 6T and DIP molecules to only upright standing oriented molecules is accompanied by a remarkable improvement of VOC. They attributed this transition to a molecular configuration-dependent electronic coupling, which likely altered the origin of the photovoltaic difference. As shown in Fig. 10d and e, a linear extrapolation of the Tsub dependent VOC indicated that the observed VOC difference was derived from the different photovoltaic gaps. They claimed that the mutual configuration of the D/A pairs has a significant influence on the VOC of a device. Energetic changes and configuration-dependent electronic coupling were responsible for this VOC variation.50 Nguyen and coworkers studied the effect of the molecular configuration at the D/A interface on the energy loss because of charge recombination. For the p-SIDT(FBTTh)2/C60 bilayer devices, the energy losses were smaller in the film with a lying-down interface than in the film with an edge-on interface because of nonradiative recombination. However, the energy losses as a result of radiative recombination were almost independent of the interfacial packing configuration of organic photovoltaic materials. The lying-down oriented device simultaneously exhibits a larger ECT and thereby a larger VOC value than the edge-on oriented device.97 Akaike et al. investigated the impact of the relative configuration of PC61BM on the photovoltaic behavior. The photoelectron spectrum of an amorphous/crystalline-fullerene/6T bilayer device and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) as well as electroluminescence of solar cells in the CT absorption region indicated that the variation of orientation for fullerene increased the ECT at the D/A interface. Furthermore, the side chain of fullerene molecules at the crystalline-fullerene/6T interface decreased the electronic coupling strength between the CT state and GS, restraining charge recombination without a sacrifice of current. Therefore, the reduced electronic coupling and raised ECT resulted in a higher VOC of the crystalline-fullerene/6T device as compared with its amorphous counterpart.95

4.2 Effects of relative molecular orientation in BHJ devices
As discussed in Section 3, the processing strategies of organic thin films strongly affect the molecular configuration and thus the device performance in the BHJ OPVs. Although it is difficult to check the orientation distribution in the blend film, there are still some reports to probe the effects of the relative configuration of the donor or acceptor component at the BHJ interface on the photovoltaic behavior of solar cells.107,108 For instance, Taima et al. reported a characterization method using infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy measurements to identify the ZnPc molecular orientation during the vacuum deposition of coevaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on various substrates.109 The relationship between the D–A orientation and the photocurrent generation in fullerene-based BHJ devices has also been revealed by performing resonant soft X-ray scattering measurements.110 In this section, the effect of molecular orientation on the light absorption, charge transport, recombination loss, and energetic barriers at contacts based on BHJ devices will be discussed in detail.

4.2.1 Light absorption. 
The device characteristics of BHJ OPVs are strongly affected by the underlying buffer layer induced molecular orientation variation of the D/A interface. For instance, Yamamoto et al. demonstrated that the JSC of the DRCN5T:C60 BHJ device varies obviously with the changing orientation of the donor molecules. As illustrated in Fig. 11a–c, the favorable lying-down configuration of DRCN5T compounds induced upon inclusion of a CuI layer is in favor of increasing the absorption coefficient of donor materials, and therefore contributing to the improvement of JSC.78 Besides, a maximum PCE of 13.8% and superior stability were achieved in binary PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC BHJ devices by Li et al. In the photoactive layer, optimized morphology with lying-down arranged donor and acceptor molecules induced by hot substrate casting broadens the photon absorption at long wavelengths and helps to dissociate the excitons efficiently at the D/A interface, together with high and balanced charge mobility. These effects contribute to the increased JSC and FF and thus result in the achievement of notable efficiency.87
 Fig. 11  (a–c) The impact of orientation of four donor molecules on the photovoltaic properties of IT-4F-based BHJ devices. (a) 2D GIWAXS images of pure C2, C4, C6, and C8 films. (b) Measured J–V characteristics and (c) the corresponding EQE spectrum. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Impacts of molecular orientation on the device performance of DRCN5T:C60 BHJ OPVs. (d) UV-vis spectrum of DRCN5T films without or with a CuI interlayer. (e) J–V characteristics and (f) incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of BHJ solar cells. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. 


4.2.2 Charge transport and recombination loss. 
In blend films, especially those containing small molecules, the organic photovoltaic materials are organized in a distributed network in the active layer where the crucial photo-physical processes take place. Liu et al. recently investigated the BHJ film morphology in a PM6:Y6 blend system and revealed the effect of the packing motif of Y6 molecules on the device performance. When the solar cells were fabricated by using a CF solvent and TA treatment, the PM6:Y6 blend film adopted a unique 2D packing configuration that benefited the improvement of the ultrafast charge transfer and carrier transport. Consequently, a device efficiency of 16.88% was obtained largely originating from the polymer-like conjugated backbones arranged with a face-on orientation.30 In another recent study, He et al. achieved a device efficiency of 15.59% by blending ultra-narrow bandgap NF-SMAs (BTIC-CF3-γ) with the polymer donor PBDB-TF. The optimized packing motif of BTIC-CF3-γ with a 3D interpenetrating network originated from the cooperative π–π interaction of H-aggregation of central fused cores and J-aggregation of end groups. In blend systems, such molecular packing configuration showed compact π–π stacking and favourable face-on orientation, which provided more electron-hopping junctions between acceptor molecules to improve the electron mobility and photovoltaic behavior.31 The photovoltaic properties in terms of the light absorption and carrier transport could be strongly affected by the aggregation characteristics of NF-SMAs. Wang et al. introduced the DIO additive into the host solvent CF to regulate the molecular aggregation behaviour of the acceptor COi8DFIC. The incorporation of 0.5 vol% DIO promoted the crystallization and face-on J-aggregation of COi8DFIC molecules, providing 3D carrier transport pathways at the molecular level and notably improved electron mobility. Furthermore, the face-on J-aggregates of COi8DFIC molecules via π–π stacking in the active layer strengthened light absorption and improved carrier transport through the 3D J-aggregation channels. As a result, a maximum device efficiency of 12.9% was achieved.111
Molecular structure engineering of organic photovoltaic materials plays a significant role in improving intermolecular packing behaviour and active layer morphology. Recently, BT-TO-ID and BT-OT-ID were developed by Wei et al. to form an ideal alloy in the ternary blends with fullerene acceptors. The appearance of the ideal alloy behaviour resulted in a face-on molecular orientation and an appropriate phase separation, which was ascribed to the strong interactions between the two donor isomers. The alloy model and face-on packing of the two isomers in the ternary blends were more beneficial for the improvement of carrier transport and the reduction of charge recombination.100 Besides, Cui et al. developed two NF-SMAs of BTP-eC9 and BTP-eC7 through minimizing the alkyl chains on the edge of the Y6-type molecule. All the NF-SMAs prefer face-on orientation and BTP-eC9 exhibits suitable morphological features with more ordered molecular packing. This packing behaviour did not change when blending with the PBDB-TF donor, which contributed to the improvement of carrier transport and the suppression of charge recombination in the BTP-eC9-based device. As a result, OPVs approaching 18% PCE were achieved with BTP-eC9-based BHJ devices due to the simultaneously improved JSC and FF.112 In Li's group, the authors developed two small molecular donors of SM1-S and SM1-F with different substituents on their thiophene conjugated side chains. The morphological details indicated that both of them have a preferential edge-on orientation. When blending SM1-F with the Y6 acceptor, the molecular aggregation and stacking features of SM1-F are hampered. An appropriate D–A interpenetrating network in the active layer was formed after conducting the TA treatment, which contributed to the improvement of charge separation and carrier transport and resulted in a device efficiency of 14.07% in SM1-F-based OPVs.113
There are some other reports also that demonstrate the importance of molecular packing behavior and its effect on the device physics and photovoltaic properties. Luo et al. reported that a BHJ device using the IDTPC acceptor showed a decreased VOC but remarkably improved JSC and FF compared with the PTQ10:IDTCN-based control devices. The smaller VOC is primarily because of the lower LUMO position of the IDTPC molecule, while the higher JSC is linked to the redshifted and strong light absorption of the IDTPC component. Compared to IDTCN, the IDTPC acceptor exhibited highly ordered lying-down configuration, as well as higher electronic mobility and smaller bandgap, which contributed to the efficient carrier transport in the solar cells. An explanation for the higher FF of the OPVs using IDTPC could be the lower bimolecular recombination when compared with the solar cells using IDTCN. Furthermore, the more ordered configuration is favorable for the carrier transport and extraction, giving rise to the improved FF in the IDTPC-based OPVs.43 Kim et al. demonstrated that the current density and fill factor values of the DR3TBDTT:C70-based BHJ OPVs are closely related to the orientation proportion of the DR3TBDTT compound, which has an alkyl thienyl group. Both the JSC and FF improved with the increase in the population of the preferential lying-down configuration. The favorable face-on configuration contributes to efficient charge transport and charge extraction by the electrodes, which could originate from the lower non-geminate recombination.60 In addition, Yang et al. demonstrated that modifying the length of the alkyl chains can efficiently adjust the configuration of the small molecule donor and thus the associated device performance (see Fig. 11d–f). A device efficiency of up to 11.24% was obtained for the DRTB-T-C4:IT-4F BHJ solar cell as the favorable face-on configuration of the donor molecule was a critical factor in the substantial improvement of the PCE. This performance was strongly correlated with the improvement of carrier transport. DRTB-T-C4 exhibited the most balanced charge transport and the highest carrier mobility as compared with its counterparts, which contributed to the enhancement of photovoltaic parameters of OPVs.63


4.2.3 Energetic barriers at contacts. 
There are inevitable energy losses between the metal cathode and organic layer due to the existing carrier transport barriers at the interfaces. It has been successfully proved that introducing an interlayer with ordered orientation can enhance the built-in potential through the solar cell because of the formation of an interface dipole, which is conducive not only to refine the charge transfer but also to eliminate the built-up space charge and diminish the recombination losses.114,115 In the study by Song et al., they developed three small molecules to investigate their effects when introduced as interlayers in the PTB7:PCBM blend system to achieve efficient carrier transport between the metal cathode and organic material. The solar cells using DPPA showed enhanced photovoltaic properties compared to the devices without an interlayer because of the reduction of the interfacial resistance as well as the flat and ordered molecular orientation. QA and DPPA-based OPVs realized a higher fill factor than the BPA-based device due to the reduced RS in the cells, which can be explained by the more strongly ordered packing orientations and efficient charge transfer in QA and DPPA molecules.116

5. Conclusion and outlook
This contribution is intended to identify the key parameters affecting the orientation of small molecules as well as obtain the relationships between the molecular orientation and device performance of OPVs. Previous work demonstrated that various aspects such as substrate properties, processing methods and solution systems, would be able to modify the interfacial molecular packing configuration. In most cases, modifications of molecular orientation with a predominantly face-on configuration at the interface are beneficial for the photovoltaic properties of solar cells. However, sometimes this molecular configuration was not reported to be favorable for the device properties as expected and caused opposite effects.97 Besides, multiple-component blending with mixed face-on and edge-on configuration resulted in superior charge-transport ability compared with the face-on only binary film, which was caused by the formation of the so-called 3D textures.54 Therefore, deep insights into understanding the molecular orientation control and their effects still give rise to opportunities and challenges.
Small molecules are apt to arrange into polycrystalline domains, thus providing many pathways to molecular orientation control and causing lots of complications. More profound considerations are required to regulate the crystalline packing effectively for both donor and acceptor molecules that can contribute to high-efficiency OPVs. After device preparation, the residues of various solvent additives used for modifying the molecular orientation sometimes can cause morphological degradation. Therefore, it is essential to find novel and effective approaches for eliminating the residual additives in the photoactive layer or processing without additives. Besides, many modified molecular configurations are not stable for a long time due to the potential molecular diffusion behavior and material degradation via exposure to the surrounding environment. Consequently, researchers also have to study long-term device operation to restrict morphological degradation in a diverse ambient environment. Furthermore, to satisfy the requirement of maintaining a thickness-independent active layer during the large-area device fabrication, designing organic semiconductors with controlled molecular orientation and superior charge transport is also very important. We believe that if more in-depth studies could be carried out on regulating the molecular orientation in terms of the existing requirements, it will help to further boost the photovoltaic behavior and the morphological stability, thereby promoting the commercial applications of OPVs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The support from the Ministry of science and technology (No. 2016YFA0200700), NSFC (21704082, 21875182 and 21534003), Key Scientific and Technological Innovation Team Project of Shaanxi Province (2020TD-002), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2017M623162), 111 project 2.0 (BP2018008), Natural Science Foundation of Shaanxi Province (2020JQ-015), and Natural Science Foundation of Ningxia (NZ16084) is acknowledged.
References
S. Hotta and K. Waragai, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 896–908 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. Reinspach, Y. Zhou, Y. Diao, T. McAfee, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Z. Bao and H. Ade, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3131–3137 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, H. Yao, Y. Cui, L. Hong, C. He and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902302 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xiao, H. Mao, Z. Li, C. Yan, J. Liu, Y. Liu, J. A. Reimer, Y. Min and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16387–16393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Hong, K. Xian, B. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Peng, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2515 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yan, W. Song, J. Huang, R. Peng, L. Huang and Z. Ge, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902210 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7692–7709 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mai, T.-K. Lau, J. Li, S.-H. Peng, C.-S. Hsu, U. S. Jeng, J. Zeng, N. Zhao, X. Xiao and X. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6186–6195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Q. Zhang, S. Li, C. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Hou, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705485 CrossRef PubMed .
C. B. Nielsen, S. Holliday, H.-Y. Chen, S. J. Cryer and I. McCulloch, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2803–2812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, Z. Chen, S. Qin, J. Yao, W. Huang, L. Meng, H. Zhu, Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1908373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, L. Hong, T. Zhang, Y. Tang, B. Lin, K. Xian, B. Gao, C. An, P. Bi, W. Ma and J. Hou, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 1239–1246 CrossRef .
D. Mo, H. Chen, J. Zhou, N. Tang, L. Han, Y. Zhu, P. Chao, H. Lai, Z. Xie and F. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8903–8912 RSC .
J. Liu, N. Zheng, Z. Hu, Z. Wang, X. Yang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 1136–1144 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Lin, B. Hu, X. Xu and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800343 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Kan, K. Gao, J. Wang, M. Zhao, H. Chen, C. Zhao, T. Jiu, A.-K. Y. Jen and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, B. Adilbekova, Y. Firdaus, E. Yengel, H. Faber, M. Sajjad, X. Zheng, E. Yarali, A. Seitkhan, O. M. Bakr, A. El-Labban, U. Schwingenschlögl, V. Tung, I. McCulloch, F. Laquai and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1908205,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201908205 .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, R. Xia, H.-L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Science, 2018, 361, 1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, C. Park, D. H. Sin, J. H. Park and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800453 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Perdigón-Toro, H. Zhang, A. Markina, J. Yuan, S. M. Hosseini, C. M. Wolff, G. Zuo, M. Stolterfoht, Y. Zou, F. Gao, D. Andrienko, S. Shoaee and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906763 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Aghamohammadi, A. Fernández, M. Schmidt, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, A. R. Goñi, J. Fraxedas, G. Sauthier, M. Paradinas, C. Ocal and E. Barrena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14833–14839 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mai, H. Lu, T.-K. Lau, S.-H. Peng, C.-S. Hsu, W. Hua, N. Zhao, X. Xiao and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11739–11745 RSC .
Z. Tu, G. Han and Y. Yi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2585–2591 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Adil, J. Zhang, D. Deng, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Wu and Z. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31526–31534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Fernández, A. Garcez da Veiga, A. Aliev, C. Ruzié, G. Garbay, B. Chattopadhyay, A. R. Kennedy, Y. H. Geerts and M. L. M. Rocco, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 221, 295–300 CrossRef .
V. Skrypnychuk, N. Boulanger, V. Yu, M. Hilke, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. F. Toney and D. R. Barbero, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vohra, K. Kawashima, T. Kakara, T. Koganezawa, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and H. Murata, Nat.
Photonics, 2015, 9, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Zhang, G. Zhou, T. Hao, J. Xu, J. Wang, C. Qiu, N. Prine, J. Ali, W. Feng, X. Gu, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, H. Zhu, L. Ying, Y. Zhang and F. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1904234 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lai, Q. Zhao, Z. Chen, H. Chen, P. Chao, Y. Zhu, Y. Lang, N. Zhen, D. Mo, Y. Zhang and F. He, Joule, 2020, 4, 688–700 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karki, J. Vollbrecht, A. L. Dixon, N. Schopp, M. Schrock, G. N. M. Reddy and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, A. K. K. Kyaw, J.-R. Pouliot, M. Leclerc and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300835 CrossRef .
K. Zhou, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, L. Zhang and W. Ma, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhou, Y. Liu, A. Alotaibi, J. Yuan, C. Jiang, J. Xin, X. Liu, B. A. Collins, F. Zhang and W. Ma, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 589–596 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, D. Lee, D. H. Sin, S. W. Kim, M. S. Jeong and K. Cho, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 469–481 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kafle, B. Kattel, S. Wanigasekara, T. Wang and W.-L. Chan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904013 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kitchen, O. Awartani, R. J. Kline, T. McAfee, H. Ade and B. T. O'Connor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13208–13216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao and X. Lu, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 5, 100030 CrossRef .
Z. Luo, C. Sun, S. Chen, Z.-G. Zhang, K. Wu, B. Qiu, C. Yang, Y. Li and C. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800856 CrossRef .
M. Gruber, M. Mayr, T. Lampe, B.-C. Gallheber, B. J. Scholz and W. Brütting, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 083303 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bin, S. Chen, L. Gao, L. Xue, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15011–15018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Akaike, S. Ando, H. Enozawa, A. Kosaka, T. Kajitani and T. Fukushima, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 583, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shioya, R. Murdey, K. Nakao, H. Yoshida, T. Koganezawa, K. Eda, T. Shimoaka and T. Hasegawa, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 579 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, K. Vasseur, N. C. Giebink, S. Mothy, Y. Yi, V. Coropceanu, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, J.-L. Brédas and J. Genoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2987–2995 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ojala, A. Petersen, A. Fuchs, R. Lovrincic, C. Pölking, J. Trollmann, J. Hwang, C. Lennartz, H. Reichelt, H. W. Höffken, A. Pucci, P. Erk, T. Kirchartz and F. Würthner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .
U. Hörmann, C. Lorch, A. Hinderhofer, A. Gerlach, M. Gruber, J. Kraus, B. Sykora, S. Grob, T. Linderl, A. Wilke, A. Opitz, R. Hansson, A. S. Anselmo, Y. Ozawa, Y. Nakayama, H. Ishii, N. Koch, E. Moons, F. Schreiber and W. Brütting, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26462–26470 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, C. Wang, F. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Li and J. Zhang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 465106 CrossRef .
Y.-Q. Zheng, J. Zhang, F. Yang, T. Komino, B. Wei, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, W. Pu, C. Yang and C. Adachi, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 405202 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Perez, J. T. Rogers, M. A. Brady, Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, K. Schmidt, M. F. Toney, H. Jinnai, A. J. Heeger, M. L. Chabinyc, G. C. Bazan and E. J. Kramer, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6531–6541 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kumari, S. M. Lee, S.-H. Kang, S. Chen and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 258–265 RSC .
J. Hu, L. Liang, T. Chen, P. Liu and W. Deng, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 100, 158–161 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dai, T. Li, W. Wang, Y. Xiao, T.-K. Lau, Z. Li, K. Liu, X. Lu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706571 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Xiao, T. Xiao, R. Zhu, C. Yan, Y. Fu, G. Lu, X. Lu, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9140–9147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, M. A. Burgers, B. B. Y. Hsu, J. E. Coughlin, L. A. Perez, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 89144–89148 RSC .
M. Jung, Y. Yoon, J. H. Park, W. Cha, A. Kim, J. Kang, S. Gautam, D. Seo, J. H. Cho, H. Kim, J. Y. Choi, K. H. Chae, K. Kwak, H. J. Son, M. J. Ko, H. Kim, D.-K. Lee, J. Y. Kim, D. H. Choi and B. Kim, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5988–6003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim and C. E. Park, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7654–7662 RSC .
H. Feng, X. Song, Z. Zhang, R. Geng, J. Yu, L. Yang, D. Baran and W. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903269 CrossRef .
S. Dai, F. Zhao, Q. Zhang, T.-K. Lau, T. Li, K. Liu, Q. Ling, C. Wang, X. Lu, W. You and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1336–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Zhang, C. He, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Zhu, Y. Cui, W. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei and J. Hou, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2129–2134 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shahiduzzaman, T. Hirayama, T. Chikamatsu, T. Koganezawa, M. Nakano, T. Miyadera, M. Karakawa, K. Takahashi and T. Taima, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2020, 5, 559–564 RSC .
Y.-Y. Du, D.-Q. Lin, G.-H. Chen, X.-Y. Bai, L.-X. Wang, R. Wu, J.-O. Wang, H.-J. Qian and H.-N. Li, Chin. Phys. B, 2018, 27, 088801 CrossRef .
W. Chen, D.-C. Qi, H. Huang, X. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 410–424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yim, S. Heutz and T. S. Jones, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 165308 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari and Y. Yoshida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6369–6377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mizokuro, K. Takeuchi, C. Heck, H. Aota and N. Tanigaki, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 3130–3137 CrossRef CAS .
T. Breuer, A. Karthäuser and G. Witte, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500452 CrossRef .
A. L. Ayzner, D. Nordlund, D.-H. Kim, Z. Bao and M. F. Toney, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 6–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schünemann, D. Wynands, K.-J. Eichhorn, M. Stamm, K. Leo and M. Riede, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11600–11609 CrossRef .
G. D'Avino, S. Duhm, R. G. Della Valle, G. Heimel, M. Oehzelt, S. Kera, N. Ueno, D. Beljonne and I. Salzmann, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1261–1271 CrossRef .
G. O. Ngongang Ndjawa, K. R. Graham, R. Li, S. M. Conron, P. Erwin, K. W. Chou, G. F. Burkhard, K. Zhao, E. T. Hoke, M. E. Thompson, M. D. McGehee and A. Amassian, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5597–5604 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kim, H. J. Kim, T.-M. Kim, T. G. Kim, J.-H. Lee, J. W. Kim and J.-J. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 7–11 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, T. Taima, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari, M. Kitamura, K. Nakatsu and Y. Yoshida, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4146–4152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, T. Taima, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari, M. Kitamura, K. Nakatsu and Y. Yoshida, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 233302 CrossRef .
K. Yamamoto, M. Shahiduzzaman, A. Yamada, T. Takaya, T. Chikamatsu, T. Koganezawa, M. Karakawa, T. Kuwabara, K. Takahashi and T. Taima, Org. Electron., 2018, 63, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Cheng, J. Wang, G. T. Du, S. H. Shi, Z. J. Du, Z. Q. Fan, J. M. Bian and M. S. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 083305 CrossRef .
L. A. Rochford, D. S. Keeble, O. J. Holmes, G. J. Clarkson and T. S. Jones, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6056–6060 RSC .
K. Yamada, M. Okamoto, M. Sakurai, T. Suenobu and K.-i. Nakayama, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 32940–32945 RSC .
T. Sasaki, K. Tabata, K. Tsukagoshi, A. Beckel, A. Lorke and Y. Yamamoto, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 562, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Jo, H. H. Kim, H. Lee, B. Kang, S. Lee, M. Sim, M. Kim, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8206–8219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Dalal, D. M. Walters, I. Lyubimov, J. J. de Pablo and M. D. Ediger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, C. W. Brian, S. F. Swallen, P. T. Straus, M. D. Ediger and L. Yu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 256103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Léonard and P. Harrowell, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 244502 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, M. Chen, J. Cai, E. L. K. Spooner, H. Zhang, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu, Z. Xiao, D. G. Lidzey, L. Ding and T. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 819–833 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nishi, M. Kanno, M. Kuribayashi, Y. Nishida, S. Hattori, H. Kobayashi, F. von Wrochem, V. Rodin, G. Nelles and S. Tomiya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 163302 CrossRef .
K. Hinrichs, M. Levichkova, D. Wynands, K. Walzer, K. J. Eichhorn, P. Bäuerle, K. Leo and M. Riede, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 525, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
T. Taima, M. Shahiduzzaman, T. Ishizeki, K. Yamamoto, M. Karakawa, T. Kuwabara and K. Takahashi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19699–19704 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushima and H. Murata, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 024503 CrossRef .
H. Tanaka, T. Yasuda, K. Fujita and T. Tsutsui, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2230–2233 CrossRef CAS .
C. Videlot, A. El Kassmi and D. Fichou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 69–82 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushima, H. Matsuo, T. Yamamoto, A. Nakao and H. Murata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 123, 81–91 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akaike, T. Kumai, K. Nakano, S. Abdullah, S. Ouchi, Y. Uemura, Y. Ito, A. Onishi, H. Yoshida, K. Tajima and K. Kanai, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8233–8243 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Hiszpanski, S. S. Lee, H. Wang, A. R. Woll, C. Nuckolls and Y.-L. Loo, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 294–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Ran, S. Roland, J. A. Love, V. Savikhin, C. J. Takacs, Y.-T. Fu, H. Li, V. Coropceanu, X. Liu, J.-L. Brédas, G. C. Bazan, M. F. Toney, D. Neher and T.-Q. Nguyen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 79 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhou, J. Xin and W. Ma, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 447–455 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, J. Zhang, J. Chen, Q. Liu, X. Gong, S. Feng, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9559–9566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, H. Zhang, Q. Wu, M. A. Adil, C. Yang, J. Zhang and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7519–7526 RSC .
J. H. Oh, L. Helena Wong, H. Yu, Y. J. Park, J. Min Kim and Z. Bao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 053304 CrossRef .
A. Mohapatra, A. Singh, S. A. Abbas, Y.-J. Lu, K. M. Boopathi, C. Hanmandlu, N. Kaisar, C.-H. Lee and C.-W. Chu, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103826 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Lin, G. A. MacDonald, Y. Shi, N. W. Polaske, D. V. McGrath, S. R. Marder, N. R. Armstrong, E. L. Ratcliff and S. S. Saavedra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10304–10313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Olguin, R. R. Zope and T. Baruah, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 074306 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bonifazi, S. Mohnani and A. Llanes-Pallas, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 7004–7025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rojas, X. Chen, C. Bravo, J.-H. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. Xiao, P. A. Dowben, Y. Gao, X. C. Zeng, W. Choe and A. Enders, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9408–9415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Zheng, D. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Liu, S. Xie, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei, J. Hou, Z. Tang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806921 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sakurai, R. Fukasawa, K. Saito and K. Akimoto, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 702–708 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chikamatsu, M. Shahiduzzaman, K. Yamamoto, M. Karakawa, T. Kuwabara, K. Takahashi and T. Taima, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 5678–5684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Tumbleston, B. A. Collins, L. Yang, A. C. Stuart, E. Gann, W. Ma, W. You and H. Ade, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Li, M. Chen, Y. Mao, B. Du, Y. Zhuang, W. Tan, W. Huang, Y. Zhao, D. Liu and T. Wang, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 3747–3755 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, Z. Chen, S. Qin, J. Yao, W. Huang, L. Meng, H. Zhu, Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Jiang, M. Gao, S. E. Watkins, P. Lu, H. Wang and X. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 203304 CrossRef .
H. J. Song, E. J. Lee, D. H. Kim, D. K. Moon and S. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 232–239 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of molecular orientations with respect to the substrate: (a) face-on packing orientation; (b) edge-on packing orientation; (c) end-on packing orientation; (d) face-on orientation with a tilt angle (α); (e) edge-on orientation with a tilt angle (β); and (f) disordered packing orientation with mixed face-on and edge-on orientation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of effective strategies for controlling molecular orientation. (a) Substrate control, (b) processing methods, and (c) solution systems.	 


3.1 Substrate control	Coronene:C60	Deposited on coronene	Face-on coronene	GIWAXS, IR-RAS	
64

Grown on ZnPc	Face-on coronene
ZnPc:C60	Grown on coronene	Edge-on ZnPc
Deposited on ZnPc	Face-on ZnPc
PEN/C60	Deposited on SiO2	Standing PEN	NEXAFS	
70

Deposited on graphite	Lying-down PEN
CuPc/C60	Deposited on HOPG	Face-on CuPc	GIXD, XAS	
71

Grown on top of C60	Standing CuPc
ZnPc/C60	Using the ITO substrate	Edge-on ZnPc	GIWAXS	
75

Inserting the CuI template	Face-on ZnPc
DRCN5T:C60	Depositing CuI on the substrate	Increased face-on DRCN5T	GIWAXS	
78

CuPc	Using the rGO template layer	Face-on CuPc	XRD	
81

CuPc/C60	Grown on Au nanodots	Highly face-on CuPc	XRD	
82

6T/DIP	Deposited at RT	Random	X-ray reflectivity spectra, NEXAFS	
50

Heated substrate	Edge-on 6T and DIP
CIAIPc/C60 or CIAIPc:C60	Grown at RT	Flat-lying CIAIPc	VASE, XRD	
52

Increasing Tsub	More horizontal
Si/DSA-Ph	Controlling Tsub = 0.6Tg	Flat-lying DSA-Ph	IRSE	
84

PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC	Hot substrate	H-/J-type face-on	GIWAXS	
87

PEN/C60	Grown on graphene at 273 K	Face-on PEN	AFM	
88

Grown on graphene at 333 K	Edge-on PEN
3.2 Processing methods	DCV6T-Et/C60	Increasing film thickness	More face-on	IRSE	
89

CuI/6T//SubPc	Using the vacuum method	Reduced tilt angle	XRD	
90

α-6T/PTCBI	Grown on rubbed α-6T	Face-on α-6T/PTCBI	AFM	
94

Merocyanine/C60	As cast	Edge-on	IRSE	
49

Post-annealing at 80 °C	Reduced tilt angle
SIDPP-OE:PCBM	TA at 110 °C	Random	XRD, GIXD	
59

Hexabenzocoronene	Post-deposition	Enhancing edge-on	GIXD, NEXAFS	
96

3.3 Solution system	2F-C6C8:IDIC	CF + 0.4% 2-chlorophenol	Edge-on IDIC	GIWAXS	
25

(p-DTS(PTTh2)2):C70	CB + 1% DIO	Improved edge-on	
53

CB + 0 or 0.25% DIO	Random with more face-on
p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2/C60	Cast from CB	Face-on donor	
97

CB + 0.4% DIO	Edge-on donor
PTB7:DR3TSBDT:C70	Adding DR3TSBDT	Mixed face-on and edge-on	
54

PTB7-Th:F8IC:C70	Incorporating PC71BM	Increased face-on F8IC	
56

PPBDTBT:ITIC:C70	Doping PC71BM	Enhanced face-on ITIC	
99

BT-TO-ID:BT-OT-ID:C70	Strong interactions between the two donor isomers	BT-TO-ID induced face-on packing mode	
100


 	Fig. 3  (a–c) Effects of the interactions between molecules and substrates on molecular orientation. (a) 2D GIWAXS images of coronene/ZnPc (left) and coronene/ZnPc:C60 (right). (b) Left: Orientation parameter S from in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IR-RAS) measurements for two blend films with various thicknesses. Right: Schematics of ZnPc:C60 on ZnPc and coronene:C60 on coronene. Inset: Pink, blue, and green curves represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coronene/Au and ZnPc/CuI, respectively. (c) Left: Calculated S for two blend films. Right: Schematics of ZnPc:C60 on coronene and coronene:C60 on ZnPc. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Mean tilt angle of the CuPc molecular plane relative to the substrate normal measured with XAS for HOPG/CuPc (top) and HOPG/C60/CuPc (bottom) at 20° and 70° incidence between the substrate and the incident electric field. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e–g) Orientation dependency of DIP on different substrates measured with variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE). (e) n and k spectra of the DIP film on SiO2 at Tsub = 100 °C and the average molecular tilt angle. (f) n and k spectra of the DIP film on the Au sublayer containing a schematic of the average molecular tilt angle. (g) n and k values of the DIP film on the PTCDA template layer. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The role of the structural template in molecular orientation. (a) GIWAXS patterns of DRCN5T films on PEDOT:PSS without (left) and with (right) a CuI template. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (b and c) 2D GIXRD images of PEN films for three different thicknesses. (b) PEN on ITO/MoO3 and (c) ITO/MoO3/graphene substrates including illustrations of the packing orientation of PEN molecules during deposition. The subscripts B and T mark the bulk phase and thin film of PEN crystals, respectively. Brackets {xy} represent the 2D group of Miller indexes corresponding to the Bragg rods in a specific crystallographic plane direction, while parentheses (xyz) represent the 3D Miller indexes of the lattice planes of the PEN crystal. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Indication for a variation of molecular configuration upon heating the substrate. (a and b) Effects of Tsub in 6T-based bilayer devices. (a) X-ray reflectivity (XRR) results of 6T films, as well as 6T/DIP and 6T/C60 bilayer films. Blue: 6T grown at room temperature (RT). Red: 6T deposited at high temperature (HT, 100 °C). (b) Reciprocal space maps of 6T(RT)/DIP (top) and 6T(HT)/DIP (bottom). Edge-on 6T and DIP are labeled yellow and green, respectively, while lying-down 6T and DIP, in red and blue, respectively. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) GIWAXS images of PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC BHJ films cast at RT (left), at RT + SA (centre), and on a 100 °C hot substrate (right). Inset: Schematic of different stacking behaviours of COi8DFIC. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Top: Schematics of the orientation of DCV6T-Et molecules. The 4 nm-thin films with a random arrangement configuration correspond to a mean molecular tilt angle of 54.7°. Centre: Simulated (gray) and experimental (black) ellipsometric parameters Δ and tanΨ of DCV6T-Et films (with two different thicknesses) on the Si substrate. tanΨ stands for the proportion of the amplitudes of p- and s-polarized complex reflection coefficients and Δ represents the phase shift between them. The asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of the thiophene rings, as well as the estimated tilt angles θasym and θsym are manifested. Bottom: Corresponding extinction coefficients k and indexes of refraction n of DCV6T-Et films probed by infrared spectroscopic ellipsometry (IRSE). Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2012, Elsevier B.V. (b) X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of 6T films formed (as-deposited or kept overnight) using a vacuum technique without or with a CuI template layer. (c) Corresponding schematics of the packing orientations of 6T on the CuI in the HT (left) and LT (right) polymorphs. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Evidence for variations of molecular orientation via post-treatment. (a) GIXRD intensity profiles of 110 °C-annealed SIDPP films along the out-of-plane (left) and in-plane (right) directions, respectively. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Experimental ellipsometric quantities Ψ and Δ derived from ellipsometry measurements for the as-deposited and 80 °C-annealed ID583 films on Si/SiO2/MoO3 substrates at 60° incidence, and the corresponding modeled spectrum. The 30 nm ID583 films were modeled as optically uniaxial. Inset: Schematics of the orientation of dye molecules without or with TA treatment. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH. (c) GIXRD patterns of HBC films, which were prepared by using hexane-vapor annealing, TA, and physical contact. Azimuthal anisotropy of diffraction intensity reveals the preferable configuration of HBC molecules. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Indication of a switch in molecular orientation upon using a solvent additive. (a–c) 2D GIWAXS image of p-DTS(PTTh2)2:C70 blend films with various ratios of DIO added to the host solution. (d and e) Corresponding GIWAXS intensity profiles in the out-of-plane (d) and in-plane (e) directions. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) 2D GIWAXS images of the lying-down (left) and edge-on (right) arranged p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2 molecules cast from CB and CB with 0.4% DIO, respectively. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  Evidence for variations of molecular orientation in the ternary system. (a) 2D GIWAXS images of PTB7-Th:F8IC (left) and PTB7-Th:F8IC:PC71BM (right) BHJ films and (b) the corresponding line-cut profiles in the out-of-plane (solid lines) and in-plane (dotted lines) direction. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (c) GIWAXS spectra and (d) the line-cut profiles of PPBDTBT:ITIC:PC71BM BHJ films with various ratios of ITIC:PC71BM. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH.	 



ITO/ZnPc/C60	Edge-on ZnPc	—	0.48 ± 0.01	4.6 ± 0.2	56 ± 1	1.2 ± 0.1	23	
75

ITO/CuI/ZnPc/C60	Face-on ZnPc	Enhanced absorption and charge transport	0.59 ± 0.02	8.9 ± 0.2	61 ± 2	3.2 ± 0.1	45
CuPc/C60	Edge-on CuPc	—	0.39	4.8	43	0.80	—	
82

Au dots/CuPc/C60	Face-on CuPc	Enhanced photon harvesting and increased interfacial area	0.40	7.2	0.38	1.10	—
PEN/C60	Standing PEN	—	0.39 ± 0.01	5.8 ± 1.1	38 ± 5	0.85 ± 0.2	36b	
83

Graphene/PEN/C60	Lying-down PEN	Enhanced photon harvesting, charge transport, and exciton diffusion length and reduced recombination	0.62 ± 0.01	8.5 ± 1.3	74 ± 3	3.89 ± 0.3	51b
HOPG/C60/CuPc	Edge-on CuPc	—	—	—	—	—	—	
71

HOPG/CuPc/C60	Face-on CuPc	Faster electron transfer rate and enhanced D/A electronic coupling	—	—	—	—	—
ZnPc/C60	Edge-on ZnPc	—	0.48	5.5	56	1.5	34b	
48

CuI/ZnPc/C60	Face-on ZnPc	Low-lying HOMO level and improved charge separation and photocurrent generation	0.55	8.1	63	2.8	37b
Merocyanine/C60	Edge-on dye	—	1.07	5.4	39	2.3	—	
49

Merocyanine/C60 (TA > Tg)	Reduced tilt angle	Accelerated charge separation and reduced geminate recombination	1.04	4.5	70	3.3	—
p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2/C60	Face-on donor	Higher charge transfer state energy and less non-radiative recombination	0.84 ± 0.03	2.97 ± 0.3	66 ± 5	—	24b	
97

p-SIDT(FBTTh2)2/C60 (with 0.4% DIO)	Edge-on donor	More efficient charge generation	0.69 ± 0.04	3.03 ± 0.4	68 ± 3	—	28b
6T/DIP	Random 6T/DIP	—	1.22	1.4	57	0.97	—	
50

6T/DIP (Tsub = 100 °C)	Edge-on 6T/DIP	Increased photovoltaic energy gap and reduced electronic coupling	1.35	1.2	59	0.96
6T/C60	Random 6T	—	0.44	2.6	61	0.67
6T/C60 (Tsub = 100 °C)	Edge-on 6T	Increased charge recombination	0.33	2.2	43	0.31
DRCN5T:C60	Edge-on donor	—	0.88	12.24	51	5.46	61b	
78

CuI/DRCN5T:C60	Face-on donor	Enhanced absorption	0.89	13.75	48	5.96	66b
PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC	Flat-on and edge-on acceptor	—	0.69 ± 0.002	24.8 ± 0.4	66 ± 0.6	11.2 ± 0.2	75b	
87

PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC (100 °C Tsub)	H- and J-type face-on acceptor	Enhanced photon absorption and exciton dissociation	0.69 ± 0.002	27.3 ± 0.5	71 ± 1.0	13.4 ± 0.2	80b
PM6:Y6 (CB-TA)	—	—	0.796	21.16	72.15	11.94	68.0	
30

PM6:Y6 (CF-as cast)	Face-on Y6	—	0.852	25.33	74.39	15.68	83.2
PM6:Y6 (CF-TA)	2D packing Y6 (face-on)	Improved carrier transport and fast charge transfer	0.835	26.52	76.21	16.54	85.8
PBDB-TF:BTIC-CF3-γ	Face-on acceptor	More electron-hopping junctions	0.85	25.19	72.82	15.59	> 80	
31

BT-OT-ID:C70	Edge-on donor	—	0.81	11.34	49.96	4.61	58b	
100

BT-TO-ID:C70	Less ordered	—	0.96	10.62	61.83	6.29	55b
BT-TO-ID (40%):BT-OT-ID:C70	Face-on packing	Improved carrier transport and reduced charge recombination	0.86	13.09	72.59	8.14	66b
PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC	Weak π−π stacking	—	0.73 ± 0.002	19.8 ± 0.3	57.5 ± 0.7	8.3 ± 0.1	70b	
111

PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC (0.5 vol% DIO)	Face-on J-aggregation of the acceptor	Enhanced light absorption and improved carrier transport	0.70 ± 0.002	27.4 ± 0.2	66.2 ± 0.4	12.7 ± 0.1	74b
PTQ10:IDTCN	Isotropic acceptor	—	0.98	13.9	54	7.4	70b	
43

PTQ10:IDTPC	Face-on acceptor	Strong absorption and efficient carrier transport	0.93	17.5	74.6	12.2	76.4
DR3TSBDT:C70	Edge-on donor	—	0.94	11.27	55.0	5.82	70b	
60

DR3TBDTT:C70	Face-on DR3TBDTT	Efficient charge transport and reduced charge recombination	0.91	13.04	61.3	7.27	75b
DRTB-T-C2:IT-4F	Edge-on donor	—	0.893	16.66	64	9.52	68b	
63

DRTB-T-C4:IT-4F	Face-on donor	Improved charge transport and balanced carrier mobility	0.909	18.27	68	11.24	75

 	Fig. 10  (a–c) Influences of molecular configuration on the device properties of a ZnPc/C60 interface. (a) Complex optical indices of refraction n + ik measured with spectroscopic ellipsometry for face-on (dashed lines) and edge-on (solid lines) ZnPc films grown on a Si substrate. (b) Orientation-dependent exciton diffusion length (LD) of edge-on (top) or face-on (bottom) ZnPc films measured with spectrally resolved photoluminescence quenching (SR-PLQ) which was indicated by the photoluminescence (PL) excitation quenching ratio of the unquenched to the quenched case. The solid curves illustrate a transfer matrix model fit incorporating all refractive indices of the film using the given LD. (c) Effective electronic coupling squared (Veff2) at the ZnPc/C60 interface as a function of molecular tilt angle for the charge separation of a ZnPc exciton and C60 exciton and geminate recombination. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH. (d and e) Effects of molecular orientation in 6T-based bilayer devices. (d) Left: Device architecture of the studied solar cells. Right: J–V curves of 6T/DIP and 6T/C60 devices under illumination. (e) Tsub dependence of the VOC of 6T/DIP and 6T/C60 devices. The dashed curves indicate extrapolations of the linear regimes. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–c) The impact of orientation of four donor molecules on the photovoltaic properties of IT-4F-based BHJ devices. (a) 2D GIWAXS images of pure C2, C4, C6, and C8 films. (b) Measured J–V characteristics and (c) the corresponding EQE spectrum. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Impacts of molecular orientation on the device performance of DRCN5T:C60 BHJ OPVs. (d) UV-vis spectrum of DRCN5T films without or with a CuI interlayer. (e) J–V characteristics and (f) incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of BHJ solar cells. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
