Electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction on heteroatom-doped nanocarbons and transition metal–nitrogen–carbon catalysts for alkaline membrane fuel cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA08690C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA08690C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 776-804Electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction on heteroatom-doped nanocarbons and transition metal–nitrogen–carbon catalysts for alkaline membrane fuel cells†

        
          
            Ave 
            Sarapuu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Elo 
            Kibena-Põldsepp
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Maryam 
            Borghei
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Kaido 
            Tammeveski
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. E-mail: kaido.tammeveski@ut.ee;  Fax: +372 7375181;   Tel: +372 7375168
bDepartment of Bioproducts and Biosystems, Aalto University, FI-00076 Espoo, Finland
Received 
      1st October 2017
    , Accepted 5th December 2017First published on 5th December 2017AbstractOver the last decade, great progress has been made in the development of non-precious metal catalysts for the electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Among these, heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials and transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts are especially advantageous in an alkaline environment, showing high electrocatalytic activity for the ORR and good durability. Over the past few years, substantial achievements have also been made in improving the performance of anion exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs) and the commercialisation of these devices has emerged as a viable option. This review article provides an outline to the most relevant studies of the ORR on heteroatom-doped nanocarbons and M–N–C type catalysts in alkaline media. In addition, an overview of the studies employing these materials as cathodes in AEMFCs is presented. A separate section is devoted to the results obtained with alkaline direct methanol and ethanol fuel cells. Further perspectives in the field of AEMFC research and development are also highlighted.Ave SarapuuAve Sarapuu studied Chemistry at the University of Tartu, Estonia, and received her PhD in 2008 under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Kaido Tammeveski. She is currently working as a senior research fellow at the Institute of Chemistry of the University of Tartu and her research is devoted to developing novel electrocatalyst materials for oxygen reduction, focusing on non-precious metal catalysts. She is the author of more than 30 papers published in peer-reviewed international journals.Elo Kibena-PõldseppElo Kibena-Põldsepp received her PhD in 2014 at the University of Tartu (Estonia) under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Kaido Tammeveski. She is currently a researcher at the Institute of Chemistry of the University of Tartu. Her research interests include modification of metal and carbon-based materials with aryl films, synthesis of nanocomposites and heteroatom-doped carbon materials and studying their electrocatalytic properties. She is a co-author of 16 peer-reviewed papers.Maryam BorgheiMaryam Borghei with a Chemical Engineering background conducted her masters thesis research on the synthesis of carbon nanotubes in Iran. During her doctoral studies at Aalto University, Finland (2010–2015), she developed her research on the synthesis of Pt-based electrocatalysts and N-doped carbon nanomaterials for fuel cells. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems (Aalto University), and co-author of 30 peer-reviewed papers and one book chapter. Her interest is application of biomaterials for more sustainable and environmentally friendly energy conversion and storage, as well as developing organic–inorganic hybrid materials for smart printed electronics.Kaido TammeveskiKaido Tammeveski was born in Tartu, Estonia in 1964. In 1989 he graduated from the University of Tartu as a chemist. He was awarded a PhD degree in 1998. In 1999/2000 he was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Liverpool working with Prof. David Schiffrin. He has been Associate Professor at the Institute of Chemistry of the University of Tartu since 2001. His main research interest is oxygen reduction electrocatalysis. He has also been involved in fuel cell research. In 2014 he received the National Science Award. He has supervised 7 PhD thesis completed and is supervising four PhD students at present. He is a co-author of more than 120 original articles, which have been cited more than 3800 times and his h-index is 38 (Dec. 2017).
1. Introduction
The worldwide increasing demand for clean energy has directed the research efforts towards alternative and efficient energy conversion technologies. Low-temperature fuel cells hold great promise as future power sources for residential and transportation applications, thanks to their high power density and conversion efficiency. It is expected that fuel cells will play an increasing role in future energy security. There is a high demand for the use of renewable energy resources in modern energy technology. Unfortunately, solar and wind energy is produced in an irregular manner. At the peak times it would be desirable to accumulate extra energy in the form of H2 gas (for example via water electrolysis), which allows one to store it for a longer time and then to convert the chemical energy into electricity in a fuel cell at any suitable time. Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) have already been widely recognised and commercialisation of these devices is gradually progressing, but anion exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs) are also being intensively developed. As one of the subcategories of AEMFCs, alkaline direct methanol fuel cells (ADMFCs) are promising alternative power sources for portable electronics, thanks to the easier storage and handling of alcohols as compared to hydrogen.
Due to the inherently sluggish kinetics of the electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), a major focus of fuel cell research is development of efficient cathode catalysts. The ORR is a multi-step reaction and its pathway depends on the nature of the catalyst and type of electrolyte.1 Molecular O2 can be reduced via 4e− or 2e− pathways, in alkaline solution following the reactions: O2+2H2O+4e−→4OH−(1) O2+H2O+2e−→OH−+HO2−(2)
The peroxide produced may be further reduced: HO2−+H2O+2e−→3OH−(3)or it can disproportionate: 2HO2−→2OH−+O2(4)
To gain the maximum energy from the reaction, the catalyst should support the direct 4e− or two-step 2e− reduction pathway and production of peroxide should be avoided. Peroxide formation not only decreases the operating potential and current efficiencies, but also causes degradation of the fuel cell components, which result in unstable performance. The kinetics of the ORR on various electrocatalysts has been usually investigated using the rotating (ring)-disc electrode (RDE or RRDE) methods.
The state-of-the-art catalyst to drive the ORR through the direct 4e− pathway is Pt nanoparticles supported on high surface area carbon, mainly carbon black (Pt/C). However, the high cost of platinum and limited resources hinder the commercialisation of Pt-based electrocatalysts for fuel cells. Another major obstacle is the low long-term durability of Pt/C catalysts due to the dissolution and agglomeration of Pt nanoparticles. Therefore, finding alternative low-cost catalyst materials for the ORR to replace Pt-based catalysts is essential. The most promising results have been obtained with heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials and metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts, where M denotes a transition metal, most often Fe or Co. These materials can be easily prepared by high-temperature pyrolysis of inexpensive precursors, such as various carbon substrates or organic polymers, nitrogen-containing compounds and transition metal sources. Non-precious metal catalysts (NPMCs) have shown high ORR activity particularly in alkaline media, performing on par with or even better than commercial Pt/C catalysts, typically with higher long-term stability. Thus, applying these catalysts at the cathode side in AEMFCs should be a great advantage. In the case of ADMFCs, NPMCs have shown much higher tolerance to methanol oxidation compared to the Pt-based counterparts, which is beneficial to avoid potential drop due to methanol crossover.
NPMCs have been developed using different substrates, including carbon nanotubes, graphene, (ordered) mesoporous carbon and various nanocomposite materials. In the fuel cells, an optimal pore structure of the catalysts is essential. A hierarchical porous structure is often suggested to be advantageous, where macro- and mesopores facilitate the transport of reactants and products (O2 and H2O), and high microporosity enables hosting a large number of electrocatalytically active surface sites. However, rational design of the catalysts is the major challenge in the synthesis of efficient electrocatalysts. The pyrolysis procedure mainly results in the simultaneous formation of several different active centres and the exact role of these sites in ORR electrocatalysis is not yet fully understood.
Besides enhancing the activity and durability of cathode catalysts, a big challenge in developing AEMFCs is improving the properties of anion exchange membranes (AEMs). A typical AEM consists of a polymer backbone containing cationic ion-exchange groups, which allow the movement of OH− anions. The diffusion coefficient of OH− is considerably lower than that of H+, which limits the performance of AEMFCs. However, studies have shown that substantial increase of the AEMFC performance can be achieved through effective water management. Another important issue is the low durability of AEMFCs due to the chemical degradation of OH−-conducting ionomers. A proper membrane-electrode assembly (MEA) fabrication is of utmost importance in order to achieve high performance of AEMFCs. In spite of the above-mentioned challenges, the AEMFC technology holds great promise to reach the aim of developing affordable and sustainable power sources and several breakthroughs have been made in AEMFC research in the last five years. Therefore this is considered to be a hot topic in the development of low-temperature fuel cells.2 This review presents an overview about these achievements using NPMC cathode materials.
2. Oxygen reduction on non-precious metal catalysts in alkaline media
2.1. Oxygen reduction on metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon materials
Carbon nanomaterials including graphene and graphene-related materials (e.g. reduced graphene oxide, rGO), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC), carbon nanofibers (CNFs), carbon black, etc. have many essential properties such as good electrical conductivity, high surface area, wide potential window in electrochemistry, mechanical stability and low cost as compared to metals.3 Therefore, carbon-based materials have been widely used as a support for the ORR electrocatalysts. It is known that pristine nanocarbon materials (e.g. pristine CNTs4 or graphene5,6) have rather low electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR. However, the ORR performance of carbon-based materials can be significantly improved by doping with heteroatoms (e.g. N, P, S, B). Nitrogen is the most widely used dopant for modification of carbon among other heteroatoms. Nitrogen with an extra electron and higher electronegativity compared to carbon can shift the band gap and effectively modulate the charge distribution so that the carbon atoms adjacent to N become more positively charged, resulting in enhanced dissociative adsorption of O2 molecules.7
N-Doped carbon-based materials have shown comparable or even better ORR activity than commercial Pt/C, as well as long-term operation stability and good tolerance to methanol and CO.8–10 For example, Liu et al.11 synthesised N-doped ordered mesoporous graphitic arrays from N,N′-bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide using ordered mesoporous silica SBA-15 as a template and the one annealed at 900 °C was the most active electrocatalyst towards the ORR.11 An interesting study was carried out by Liang et al. in which the half-wave potential (E1/2) for O2 reduction of hierarchically porous N-doped carbon (meso/micro-PoPD) obtained from polymerised o-phenylenediamine (PoPD) further improved with increasing loading of meso/micro-PoPD.12 It was concluded that besides the presence of N, the hierarchical micro- and mesoporous catalyst structure is beneficial for higher ORR activity,12 which has also been evidenced in other research papers.13,14
In general, all these studies have highlighted that the ORR electrocatalytic activity of carbon-based materials has improved because of the incorporation of N in the carbon nanomaterial structure. However, there is still debate about which type of nitrogen functionalities are the most active for the ORR: e.g. graphitic-N (also called quaternary-N), pyridinic-N or pyrrolic-N, and whether the total N content plays an important role in the ORR activity. The proposed schematic structure of nitrogen-doped graphene containing different N functionalities is presented in Fig.1.15 Parvez et al.16 reported about N-doped graphene with high electrocatalytic activity (higher than commercial Pt/C) towards the ORR (Fig. 2). The authors suggested that the electrocatalytic activity is dependent on the content of graphitic-N, while the pyridinic-N does not significantly contribute to the ORR performance.16 Quaternary-N as ORR active sites in N-doped carbons has also been suggested by others.17,18 An interesting study was carried out by He et al.19 in which 3D hierarchically porous N-doped carbon materials synthesised using polydopamine-modified mixed cellulose ester filter films followed by KOH activation (NC-A) exhibited ORR activity close to that of Pt/C.19 They claimed that the high specific surface area (SSA) of NC-A (2191 m2 g−1) contributes to the exposure of ORR catalytic sites, more dominantly than the pyrrolic-N and pyridinic-N functionalities.19 On the other hand, it has been proposed that pyridinic-N species incorporated into carbon-based materials are active sites for the ORR in alkaline medium.20,21 Tuci et al.22 suggested that in N-doped CNTs pyridinic-N is responsible for the high ORR electrocatalytic activity in terms of the onset potential (Eonset) as well as limiting current density, comparable to Pt/C. In addition, Yasuda et al.23 claimed that on N-doped graphene a 4e− reduction of O2 occurred due to the pyridinic-N, while a 2e− transfer pathway was observed due to the quaternary-N, suggesting that pyridinic-N species are more effective sites for the reduction of oxygen.23 Moreover, other researchers reported that both graphitic-N and pyridinic-N are important to enhance the ORR activity on N-doped carbon materials. For example, Lai et al.24 suggested that graphitic-N and pyridinic-N can improve the limiting current density and the onset potential, respectively. Ratso et al.25 synthesised a novel type of ORR catalyst based on N-doped carbide-derived carbon (CDC) and concluded that the dicyandiamide (DCDA)-derived N-doped CDC material exhibited excellent ORR performance. The good electrocatalytic activity was attributed to the high SSA and the presence of pyridinic-N and quaternary-N groups on the surface of the N-CDC material.25 A similar conclusion was arrived at very recently by Huang et al. in the case of hierarchically porous N-doped carbon nanosheets.26 Besides the presence of N and a large SSA, the porous structure (presence of mesopores or a micro–mesoporous network), ratio of nitrogen/oxygen, and the edge and topological defects in N-doped carbon-based catalysts are also important to enhance the ORR performance as highlighted by Titirici's workgroup.27–31 Regarding the influence of the total N content on the ORR electrocatalytic activity, there is still disagreement in the literature. Vikkisk et al.32 studied CNTs doped with nitrogen using DCDA and cyanamide (CM) as nitrogen precursors and the O2 reduction results revealed that the electrocatalytic performance of NCNT–DCDA was comparable with that of Pt/C. The better ORR activity of NCNT–DCDA compared with NCNT–CM was explained by the higher N content (more pyridinic-N and quaternary-N and less pyrrolic-N). Moreover, the authors noted that defects on CNTs might also contribute to the ORR activity.32 Chen et al. proposed that a higher amount of nitrogen in the catalyst (N-doped CNTs) leads to higher ORR performance.33 In contrast, it has been suggested that the total N content does not play an important role in the ORR process.24 Borghei et al. showed that even a very low amount of nitrogen (0.56 at%) can enhance the ORR performance of N-containing few-walled carbon nanotubes (N-FWCNTs).34 Zhao et al. concluded that the ORR activity is correlated with the amounts of pyridinic-N and quaternary-N groups, rather than the total N content.35
 Fig. 1  Schematic structure of nitrogen-doped graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 2  Rotating-ring disc electrode voltammetric response for the ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (ν = 10 mV s−1, ω = 1600 rpm). The Pt ring electrode was polarized at 0.5 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Phosphorus doping on carbon-based catalysts has also shown significant influence on the ORR activity compared with the undoped material.36,37 In the case of P-doped graphite prepared by the pyrolysis of toluene and triphenylphosphine, the Eonset was higher, but the current densities were lower than those of the Pt/C catalyst.38 Li et al. showed that P-doping of graphene (P-TRG) (P doping level of 1.16 at%) improved the ORR activity comparable to that of Pt/C.39 P-TRG was synthesised by annealing graphene oxide (GO) in the presence of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate, which was used as a P source for in situ doping of the thermally reduced GO.39 Yang et al. showed that despite a low phosphorus content (0.89 at%) in P-doped platelet OMC, the ORR performance was enhanced compared to the undoped material.40 In addition, the improvement in the ORR catalytic activity was explained by the higher SSA (1729 m2 g−1) and pore volume, and shorter mesopore channels,40 compared to their previous study using rod-like P-doped OMCs with longer meso-channels.41
It has been reported that doping graphene with sulphur improves the catalytic performance towards the ORR,42,43 since the C–S as a catalytically active site is responsible for the enhanced ORR kinetics.43 Furthermore, Park et al.44 claimed that the ORR activity of S-doped graphene improved with increasing the sulphur content. Although lower Eonset was observed compared to commercial Pt/C, S-graphene showed better durability compared to N-graphene and commercial Pt/C.44 In addition, Yang et al.45 showed that the kinetic current density of S-doped graphene was lower than that of N-doped graphene.45 Moreover, other carbon materials (e.g. aerogels, nanotubes) have been doped with S and tested towards the ORR,46–48 but still the electrocatalytic activity is not as good as that of commercial Pt/C. Similarly, B-doped carbon materials have shown only moderate ORR activity, although B-doping improves the catalytic performance of the materials compared with that of undoped counterparts.37,49–52
Not only carbon-based materials doped with a single heteroatom possess good electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR, but also dual and triple doped nanocarbons have shown excellent electrocatalytic properties and sometimes even better activity than only using one heteroatom for doping. For example, Liang et al.53 synthesised N,S-dual doped mesoporous graphene and observed better ORR electrocatalytic activity than graphene doped with only S or N. In order to improve the ORR performance, the incorporation of sulphur into the catalyst material was also found to be beneficial in the case of N,S co-doped carbon nanospheres54 and S,N co-doped CNTs.55 Recently, it was also shown that S,N dual-doped graphene-like carbon nanosheets pyrolysed in a mixture of melamine and dibenzyl sulphide (S1N6CT) showed good electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR (Fig. 3).56 It was suggested that a high content of graphitic-N and pyridinic-N is necessary for efficient ORR electrocatalysis and an appropriate amount of S contributes to the improvement of ORR activity.56 Also, N,S co-doped carbon (derived from a nitrogen and sulphur-rich polymer pyrolysed at 800 °C) exhibited comparable ORR activity to that of Pt/C and revealed good stability and high tolerance to methanol.57 Wang et al. showed that vertically aligned CNTs containing both B and N displayed better electrocatalytic ORR performance than only B or N-doped nanotubes.58 It has also been suggested that the ORR activity is better in the case of CNTs doped with B and N sequentially than in the case of CNTs doped with B and N simultaneously.59 In the case of B,N co-doped graphene nanoribbons, the ORR activity comparable to that of the 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst was attributed to the synergistic effects of N,B co-doping and the active sites on the edges of the nanoribbons.60 B,N-co-doped graphene with a modest B- and N-doping level showed Eonset and E1/2 close to that of the Pt/C catalyst.61 In addition, P,N-doped vertically aligned CNTs with 0.8 at% P and 2.9 at% N were synthesised using a mixture of ferrocene, pyridine and triphenylphosphine as precursors by an injection-assisted chemical vapour deposition (CVD) method and showed high ORR electrocatalytic activity.62 N-, O-, and S-triple-doped polypyrrole-derived nanoporous carbon exhibited good activity for the ORR in terms of the Eonset (ca. 0.96 V) and E1/2 values (ca. 0.74 V).63 Moreover, it was noted that the ORR activity of N, P, B-co-doped porous nanocarbon was better than that of single or dual-doped catalysts in terms of the ORR current density and onset potential.64 These results indicate that both dual and triple doping of the catalyst with different heteroatoms plays an important role in enhancing the ORR activity of the catalyst material.
 Fig. 3  LSVs of S1N6CT and Pt/C (20 wt%, E-TEK) at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH aqueous solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, a lot of efforts have been made on the synthesis of heteroatom-doped composites for the ORR. For example, Higgins et al.65 reported that a N,S-co-doped graphene/nanotube composite (GC-NLS) exhibited better electrochemical ORR behaviour than only graphene or CNTs co-doped with N and S.65 In another study, the catalyst consisting of CNTs and graphene after dual doping with N and P revealed higher ORR activity than the composite material solely doped with N or P.66 Ratso et al. prepared N-doped few-layer graphene/CNT composites by pyrolysis using a variety of N precursors.67,68 The higher ORR activity of the doped composite catalysts was attributed to a larger amount of total surface nitrogen and pyridinic-N groups.67
In recent years, there has been increasing attention toward more environmentally friendly procedures to produce heteroatom-doped catalysts using biomass-derived materials.69 For example, Ba et al. synthesised a N-doped carbon material using food-grade components displaying good ORR activity comparable with 20 wt% Pt/C.70 In addition, 3D N-doped porous carbon derived from shrimp shells showed good ORR performance.71 An interesting study was carried out by Chaudhari et al.72 in which human hair was used as a source of heteroatom-doped carbon. It was shown that the graphitised sample at 900 °C exhibited an SSA of 1813 m2 g−1, high content of N (3.8 at%) and S (1.73 at%), with comparable ORR electrocatalytic activity to that of commercial 20 wt% Pt/C.72 Borghei et al.73 synthesised porous N,P-doped carbon (AC-F-U-P) from coconut shells, urea and phosphoric acid, and reported that the Eonset of AC-F-U-P (−0.02 V vs. Ag/AgCl) was close to that of commercial Pt/C (Eonset = 0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl). The good electrocatalytic activity of AC-F-U-P (Fig. 4) was attributed to the contribution of both P (2.3 at%) and N (1.1 at%), as well as the high SSA (1216 m2 g−1) and the large contribution of mesopores.73
 Fig. 4  Linear scan voltammograms recorded at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH of carbon samples derived from coconut shells (commercial Pt–C is included for comparison). Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
It is also important to note that the improved ORR activity of metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon-based materials can be influenced by metal impurities present in the catalyst.74–76 For example, it has been proposed that metals in very low concentrations77 as well as trace amounts of metal residues78 greatly affect the ORR activity of heteroatom-doped carbons. The metal impurities may originate from the carbon materials (e.g. graphene, graphene nanoribbons79) used for doping, the reagents or chemicals used for the synthesis of carbon materials or even from the synthesis process (e.g. ball-milling80) used during the preparation of heteroatom-doped carbons. Therefore, in order to claim the “metal-free” electrocatalytic effect of heteroatom-doped carbon-based catalysts in the ORR, it should be ascertained that no metal impurities or residues are present in the catalyst that may contribute to the ORR performance.
2.2. Oxygen reduction on transition metal-containing nitrogen-doped carbon materials
To date, the most promising class of non-precious metal catalysts for the ORR is transition metal-containing N-doped carbon (M–N–C) materials, which show high ORR activity in both alkaline and acidic solutions. The early studies of such catalysts date back to 1964, when the good ORR performance of macrocyclic compounds with metal–nitrogen (M–N4) centres was disclosed.81 Low stability was the main drawback of these materials, which was greatly improved after pyrolysis at high temperatures and it also enhanced the ORR activity of the catalysts.82,83 A major breakthrough in the synthesis of M–N–C catalysts was the discovery that similar materials can also be obtained by the pyrolysis of carbon substrates in the presence of precursors that do not contain M–N4 moieties, allowing the use of simple and inexpensive nitrogen sources and transition metal salts.84 Most of the studies are focused on iron- or cobalt-containing materials, since they have displayed the highest ORR activity.
The methods for the preparation of M–N–C catalysts can be categorised into two main approaches. The first strategy is direct carbonisation of organic materials in the presence of nitrogen and transition metal precursors, where heteroatom doping occurs simultaneously with the formation of graphitic carbon structures. Nitrogen-containing organic polymers have been frequently used as both N and C sources, for instance, polyaniline,85 polyethyleneimine,86 melamine resin,87–89etc. The structure and pore size distribution (PSD) of the resulting materials can be efficiently controlled by using mostly silica-based hard templates86,90 or soft templates.91 In recent years, preparation of M–N–C catalysts by pyrolysis of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) has emerged as a prospective route.92 The rational design of MOF precursors yields catalysts with tailored morphology and high density of active sites. Another approach to synthesise M–N–C catalysts is post-treatment of the existing nanocarbon materials, such as carbon black,93,94 CNTs,95–98 GO,16,99 and carbide-derived carbon.100,101 This is usually carried out by high-temperature pyrolysis in the presence of N and metal precursors. The main advantage of this route is that the structure of the carbon substrate is retained, which allows suitable selection of nanocarbons.
The development of M–N–C catalysts for low-temperature fuel cells would strongly benefit from the elucidation of the active sites for the ORR and corresponding reaction mechanisms. Besides the metal-containing centres, pyrolysis in the presence of nitrogen sources always yields metal-free N centres that are especially active in alkaline solution; therefore, it is difficult to determine the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity of metal-containing centres. In addition, the final performance of the catalysts is also affected by their morphological features, such as PSD, SSA and degree of graphitisation. Thus, thorough physico-chemical characterisation of the catalysts is of utmost importance and several different methods have been usually employed, such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) including X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), Raman spectroscopy, Mössbauer spectroscopy, N2 adsorption analysis, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, etc. However, the information acquired from ex situ measurements may not be sufficient to reveal the nature of the processes occurring under real conditions and only in situ observations can provide reliable information about the ORR mechanism.
Although some previous reports suggest that transition metals are not directly involved in the ORR process and serve only as catalysts for the formation of N-doped carbon structures,102,103 most of the studies point out the dominant role of the metal centres embedded in the N-doped carbon scaffold. The metal is typically suggested to be coordinated with 2 to 4 nitrogen atoms.104–108 Mössbauer spectroscopy has allowed identification of various types of Fe–Nx centres as well as Fe3C phases in the Fe-containing catalysts prepared from polyaniline109 or MOFs110 (Fig. 5). Analysis of EXAFS and XANES data has indicated that in graphene-based M–N–C electrocatalysts porphyrin-like FeN4C12 moieties play an important role.105 Recent advances in XPS instrumentation allow using ambient pressure XPS analysis for in situ characterisation of the M–N–C catalysts in an environment similar to fuel cell operating conditions.111 Combining these data with theoretical calculations, it has been revealed that there are numerous centres able to bind oxygen in M–N–C catalysts as well as in metal-free N-doped materials and these can promote multiple pathways of the ORR. The 4e− reduction of O2 is energetically most favourable on Fe–Nx sites, while the graphitic and hydrogenated N centres mainly catalyse the 2e− reduction of oxygen to peroxide.111
 Fig. 5  
57Fe Mössbauer spectrum of FePhen@MOF–ArNH3 measured at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
An indirect proof to the role of N-coordinated metal centres in O2 reduction electrocatalysis has been obtained by comparing the ORR activity of the materials in the absence and presence of anions that are able to bind strongly with these centres, thus inhibiting their ORR activity. The poisoning tests have been carried out using CN− or SCN− anions as probes and a significant decrease in the O2 reduction activity has been observed.112–117 In alkaline solution a shift of the oxygen reduction pathway from a 4e− to a 2e− transfer process has also been noted, confirming that the full reduction of O2 occurs on N-coordinated metal centres.112
More recently, metal-rich nanoparticles encapsulated in graphitic carbon have been suggested as alternative ORR active sites in M–N–C catalysts. The carbon layer prevents their dissolution during the acid washing steps frequently involved in catalyst preparation and such materials are rather stable in long-term operation. High ORR activity has been observed on various catalysts containing embedded iron and/or iron carbide particles,110,118–120 including materials of very low N content119 and even completely N-free catalysts.121 A synergistic effect of Fe-containing nanoparticles and N-coordinated Fe centres has been proposed, where nanoparticles promote the ORR activity of the neighbouring Fe–Nx sites.117 The other studies suggest that peroxide is produced on Fe–N4 centres and Fe nanoparticles serve as active sites for further reduction of H2O2 only in acidic solution, whereas in alkaline media, the reduction of HO2− occurs on the same Fe–N4 centres (Fig. 6).112 An attempt has been made to elucidate the roles of various active centres by designing model catalysts selectively containing Fe–Nx sites, metal-free N centres and Fe-containing nanoparticles.116 It was revealed that a 4e− reduction of O2 predominantly occurs on Fe–Nx centres, whereas Fe/Fe3C particles catalyse the reduction of O2via the 2e− route. However, very high activity of M–N–C catalysts consisting of iron/iron carbide particles embedded in nitrided carbon fibres and containing no metal–nitrogen centres has been demonstrated.110 The results of in situ element-specific XAS indicated that the ORR proceeds on the N-doped carbon surface and the role of subsurface Fe/FexC is stabilising the peroxide intermediate in the alkaline medium, thus promoting the 4e− reduction of O2.
 Fig. 6  Proposed ORR mechanistic pathways on Fe–N4/C and adjacent FeNPS/C in acidic (H+) and alkaline (H2O/OH−) electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The active centres in Co-containing materials have been less studied. Dual active sites have also been proposed for Co-containing materials, where nitrogen centres catalyse the 2e− reduction of O2 to H2O2 and the formed H2O2 is further reduced or it disproportionates on oxide-covered Co nanoparticles.122 Similarly, N-doping of graphene has been shown to increase the ORR activity of Co3O4/graphene hybrid catalysts.123,124 Comparison of Fe- and Co-containing M–N–C catalysts derived from polyaniline has revealed that in pyrolysis above 800 °C, Fe–Nx centres remain stable, but breaking of the Co–N bonds and formation of Co9S8 particles is favoured.125 Electrocatalysts containing nanoparticles of cobalt and nickel carbides have also shown high ORR activity in alkaline solution.121 Some reports suggest that the activity of bimetallic catalysts can surpass those of monometallic counterparts.108,126,127
Computational approaches have become widely used for additional interpretation of the experimental results of electrochemical and spectroscopic studies.128 Theoretical calculations employing density functional theory (DFT) help to reveal the possible active centres in the ORR by calculating the adsorption energies of reactants and intermediates.105,129–131 M–N4 structures are usually used in DFT modelling, as these are the most likely and stable centres due to their lowest energy of formation.129,130 The calculations show that graphitic Fe–N4 and Fe–N2 sites both support the 4e− reduction of O2, but the former are more stable.131 Similarly, Co–N4 centres are more stable as compared to Co–N2 sites and play a dominant role in ORR electrocatalysis, but catalyse only the 2e− reduction of O2 due to weak interaction with peroxide.130 Further reduction of peroxide on Co-containing catalysts can occur at some other active sites, so a dual-site reduction mechanism is expected.
It has been suggested that the binding energy of oxygen-containing species correlates with the MIII/MII redox potential. In the case of Fe–N4, Mn–N4 and some Co–N4 catalysts, MII is the active state and the onset potential of O2 reduction follows the pH dependence of the MIII/MII redox transition.132,133 For most of the Co-containing catalysts, however, CoI is the active site and the ORR onset potential follows the pH dependence of the MII/MI redox transition. There is also a difference in the reaction mechanism, Fe-containing catalysts supporting mainly the 4e− reduction and Co-containing catalysts the 2e− reduction of O2. Besides the nature of the central metal cation, the redox potential of the metal ion is also affected by the surrounding macrocyclic ligand.134 The Fe3+/Fe2+ redox potential of macrocycles shifts towards much higher potentials after pyrolysis, which considerably increases the ORR activity of the catalysts. Thus, the ORR electrocatalytic activity of Fe–Nx centres is determined by the electron-donating or -withdrawing properties of the surrounding carbon, and the turnover number of O2 reduction linearly depends on the Lewis basicity of the carbon support.134 In alkaline media, the ORR has been proposed to occur via an inner sphere electron transfer mechanism, in which O2 chemisorbs directly on the Fe2+ active site. The HO2− intermediate is stabilised on Lewis acidic Fe2+ active sites at pH > 12 and undergoes a complete 4e− reduction, while in acidic solution, the hydrogen peroxide intermediate easily desorbs, leading to a 2e− reduction and lower activity.134
3. Non-precious metal catalysts for H2/O2 AEMFC cathodes
In their recent perspective article, Setzler et al. have reported on the US Department of Energy (DOE) long term target cost for PEMFC vehicles (USD30 kW−1).135 Indeed, a high power density of fuel cells is needed in order to reach this target. PEMFCs have been the flagship of low-temperature fuel cells in recent decades. Therefore, the majority of polymer electrolyte fuel cell research studies have concentrated on the development of PEMFCs and substantial progress has been made in this field. There are still several challenges regarding the PEMFC technology and the most fundamental one is the high cost of Pt-based catalysts and their instability under acidic conditions. The selection of potential cathode catalysts in an alkaline environment is much wider and based on this consideration AEMFCs have received increasing attention over the past decade.136 The main advantage of AEMFCs is that NPMCs could be used as active and stable cathode materials. The main obstacle of AEMFCs is the poor performance of anion-exchange ionomers and membranes as compared to Nafion®, which needs to be improved in order to reduce the overall cost of fuel cells. Setzler et al. in their perspective article also proposed activity targets for AEMFCs.135 The most important parameter for NPMC-type materials is volumetric activity, which is the product of specific activity and interfacial area per unit volume. The electrocatalyst design allows one to enhance the turnover frequency of an active centre. Pore size distribution is another key parameter that affects the catalyst activity. A suitable distribution of pores would enable efficient mass transfer of reagents and products in the catalyst layer. The required volumetric activity target has been set to be 700 A cm−3 at 1 bar O2 partial pressure at 80 °C.135 The following sections present an overview of the alkaline membrane fuel cell testing results. Technical details can be found from the respective tables presented in ESI.†
3.1. Metal-free catalysts for H2/O2 AEMFCs

3.1.1. N-Doped CNT and CNF cathodes. 
Higgins and Chen synthesised N-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs) using different nitrogen sources and a CVD setup at 800 °C.137 The electrocatalytic ORR performance was the best for the NCNT material, which showed the highest N content (4.74 at%). The most active NCNT derived from ethylenediamine (EDA) was used under AEMFC conditions. The advantages of NCNTs as compared to commercial Pt/C have been highlighted. High ORR activity, good O2 diffusion in the catalyst layer and excellent stability of NCNTs are significant benefits of these cathodes. The NCNT and Pt/C catalysts showed peak power densities (Pmax) of 25.5 and 19.1 mW cm−2, respectively (Table S1†). The fuel cell current density values at 0.6 V operating voltage were 37.5 and 27.5 mA cm−2 for NCNT and Pt/C catalysts, respectively. Both values showed the advantage of NCNTs for use as a cathode material for AEMFCs, which is due to the high inherent electrocatalytic activity as compared to Pt/C.
Venkateswara Rao and Ishikawa also studied the ORR activity of NCNTs and their application as cathodes in the AEMFC environment.138 The NCNT catalysts were prepared using an aluminium oxide template. Unrealistic ORR current densities were obtained in RDE mode, exceeding the theoretical limiting current densities for a 4-electron reduction of O2 by a factor of 3 at −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The NCNT modified electrode appeared to be quite stable during the chronoamperometric experiment at −0.25 V vs. Ag/AgCl showing relative current of 89% after 2 h as compared to Pt/C, which showed only 80% relative current. In the AEMFC test the peak power densities were 37.3 and 61.7 mW cm−2 for NCNTs and Pt/C, respectively (Fig. 7a). The cell voltage was rather stable at 20 mA cm−2 for 30 h (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Anion-exchange membrane fuel cell performance of the MEA with N-CNTs and Pt/C as cathodes at 323 K (open and closed symbols correspond to the cell voltage and power density, respectively) and (b) corresponding cell voltage–time curves at 20 mA cm−2 for 30 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Sung and co-workers developed entirely metal-free catalysts for low-temperature fuel cells.139 Their graphitic carbon nitride (gCN) and carbon nanofibre (CNF) hybrid-based MEAs were tested in both acidic and alkaline environments. The gCN catalyst was prepared in the liquid phase from cyanuric chloride and melamine in a gram scale. The electrocatalytic properties of the gCN material depended on the heat-treatment temperature, 700 °C being the optimum temperature in terms of Eonset in 0.1 M KOH. In a control experiment iron was added (1.8 and 3.6 wt% Fe) and surprisingly this did not affect the ORR activity in alkaline media. The graphitic N moiety was suggested to be responsible for the high ORR activity. For AEMFC testing the Pmax was 171 mW cm−2 for the gCN-CNF cathode-based MEA, which was 77% of that using Pt/C as the cathode. Further development of AEMFCs is related to the improvement of ionic conductivity, membrane stability and water management.
Joo and co-workers studied the reduction of O2 and AEM fuel cell performance using carbon nanotube/heteroatom-doped carbon (CNT/HDC) catalysts.140 CNTs were suspended in an ionic liquid (IL), 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BMITFSI), and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) was added to this mixture. Formic acid was added to trigger the formation of silica gel. After solvent evaporation a CNT–IL–silica composite formed, which was heat-treated at 800–1000 °C and silica was etched in HF (CNT–HDC-X, where X is the carbonisation temperature) (Fig. 8). For comparison, N-doped CNTs were also prepared using NH3 and urea as the nitrogen sources. The formation of a CNT/HDC core-sheath nanostructure was confirmed by TEM measurements. XPS analysis revealed that the HDC sheath contained three heteroatom dopants (N, S, F). The main advantage of the IL-based approach is that the type and quantity of heteroatoms in the CNT/HDC material can be easily controlled. The formation of HDC layers on CNTs remarkably improved the ORR activity. Both the Eonset and E1/2 values shifted positive as compared to those of pristine CNTs. The CNT/HDC-1000 material showed the best ORR performance in 0.1 M KOH (Eonset = 0.92 V, E1/2 = 0.82 V), which was still slightly lower than that of Pt/C (Eonset = 0.98 V, E1/2 = 0.85 V). The ORR activity of N-doped CNTs was lower than that of CNT/HDC-1000. The accelerated durability test (ADT) showed the superior stability of CNT/HDC catalysts. The AEMFC performance characteristics using MEAs with the CNT/HDC-1000 cathode material were tested at 50 °C. The peak power density was 270 mW cm−2, which was inferior compared to that of Pt/C (520 mW cm−2) (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 8  Synthesis of the CNT/HDC core–sheath nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 9  Performance of MEAs that employ CNT/HDC-1000, CNTs, or Pt/C as the cathodes in alkaline fuel cells at 50 °C; open and closed circles correspond to cell voltages and power densities, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.2. N-Doped graphene-based cathodes. 
Praveen Kumar et al. adopted a procedure taken from the literature to prepare N-doped graphene (NG) catalysts for AEMFC application.141 The NG catalysts were synthesised by pyrolysis of GO in the presence of melamine. The GO-to-melamine weight ratio (1:3 to 1:10) and heat-treatment temperature (800–1000 °C) were varied. Even for the best NG catalyst the ORR activity was considerably lower than that of Pt/C. Both Eonset and E1/2 values were more negative and the current densities were lower at the same rotation rate (1600 rpm), even though it was claimed that the ORR follows a 4e− transfer pathway on the NG catalysts. The RRDE results indicated that the average HO2− yield and n value were 8% and 3.8, respectively. The NG catalysts were relatively stable during 10000 potential cycles in 0.1 M KOH. The AEMFC testing using the NG cathode catalyst revealed exceptionally low values of Pmax (2.6 mW cm−2) and current density (6.8 mA cm−2). For the Pt/C cathode the Pmax was 8 times higher, which indicates that further optimisation of MEA preparation is required.
Palaniselvam et al. used N-doped nanoporous graphene for electrocatalytic investigations.142 Graphene (Gr) sheets were prepared by the thermal treatment of GO at 900 °C and porous graphene (pGr) was prepared by H2O2 oxidation of graphene. Simultaneously, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) were formed. Different peroxide oxidation time periods yielded different pGr materials (for example, pGr-72 for 72 h treated material). N-Doped nanoporous graphene (NpGr-72) was obtained by the pyrolysis of pGr-72 in the presence of 1,10-phenanthroline at 900 °C for 3 h in an Ar atmosphere. For comparison, a non-porous N-doped graphene (NGr) was prepared analogously. According to TEM studies the average size of pores of the pGr material was about 5 nm and the GQDs formed by the H2O2 oxidation were 3–5 nm in size. By N2 adsorption analysis the presence of smaller pores (0.7–3 nm) was also observed. Surprisingly, the BET area of non-porous graphene sheets (SSA = 452 m2 g−1) was higher than that of pGr-72 (SSA = 204 m2 g−1). XRD analysis showed the graphitised structures of Gr, pGr-72, NpGr-72 and GQD-72, and Raman spectra revealed a high degree of defects in these materials. The RRDE results indicated the mediocre ORR activity of the NpGr-72 catalyst compared to Pt/C. The reduction current density was significantly lower than the theoretical value for a 4e− reduction of O2 in 0.1 M KOH. A large amount of peroxide was produced (15% HO2−) and the n value was between 3.2 and 3.8. These results are not favourable for the development of cathode catalysts for AEMFC application. The MEA performance of the NpGr-72 cathode was inferior to that of the Pt/C catalyst. Peak power densities were 27 and 67 mW cm−2 for AEMFCs using NpGr-72 and 40 wt% Pt/C, respectively.
Arunchander and co-workers synthesised nitrogen and sulphur co-doped graphene (N–S/Gr) materials using 6-N,N-dibutylamine-1,3,5-triazine-2,4-dithiol (DBATDT) as a precursor for N and S doping.143 Graphene was dispersed in water–methanol solution containing DBATDT, followed by addition of ammonium persulphate dropwise and vigorous stirring to polymerise DBATDT at 0–5 °C for 4 h. The polyDBATDT–graphene composite was dried at 60 °C and then annealed at 900, 1000 and 1100 °C. Raman analysis revealed the ID/IG ratios of 1.23, 1.36, 1.39 and 1.26 for undoped graphene, N–S/Gr-900, N–S/Gr-1000 and N–S/Gr-1100, respectively. TEM images displayed crumpled and entangled sheet-like morphology of N–S/Gr samples. The Eonset values were 0.84, 0.92 and 0.88 V and the E1/2 values 0.76, 0.79 and 0.72 V in 0.1 M KOH for N–S/Gr-900, N–S/Gr-1000 and N–S/Gr-1100, respectively. Surprisingly, even for the most active catalyst (N–S/Gr-1000) the reduction current densities were considerably lower than the theoretical value at 1600 rpm. This was also reflected by the RRDE results, which showed 17% peroxide yield and an average n value of 3.7. The durability studies indicated good stability of the N–S/Gr-1000 catalyst in both CV and chronoamperometry modes. After 10000 cycles the E1/2 value shifted negative only by 20 mV. Untypically, the AEMFC performance was tested at room temperature. The Pmax values were 11.2, 19.8 and 17.6 mW cm−2 for N–S/Gr-900, N–S/Gr-1000 and N–S/Gr-1100 catalysts, respectively. On the basis of these results N–S/Gr-1000 appeared to be the best cathode catalyst, even though the Pmax value was rather low apparently due to the low fuel cell operating temperature. The Pmax of Pt/C was 70 mW cm−2.


3.1.3. N-Doped porous nanocarbon cathodes. 
Unni et al. used single-walled carbon nanohorns (SWCNHs) for the development of cathode catalysts for AEMFCs.144 For N-doping the SWCNH material was functionalised by refluxing in H2O2 at 60 °C for 5 h (FCNHs). N-Doping of FCNH materials was achieved by pyrolysing with urea at 600, 800 and 1000 °C (N-600, N-800 and N-1000). The BET area increased with increasing annealing temperature (SSA = 1384, 1534 and 1836 m2 g−1 for N-600, N-800 and N-1000, respectively). The RDE results obtained in 0.1 M KOH revealed that N-800 possessed the highest Eonset (0.026 V vs. Hg/HgO). This value was only 50 mV lower than that of Pt/C (0.076 V vs. Hg/HgO). The N-600 and N-1000 catalysts showed slightly lower Eonset values (0.019 and 0.018 V, respectively). Similarly, E1/2 was the highest for N-800 (E1/2 = −0.036 V vs. Hg/HgO) among the N-doped materials studied, but it was still lower than that of the Pt-based catalyst (E1/2 = −0.002 V vs. Hg/HgO). The ORR current density at 1600 rpm was only 4.5 mA cm−2 for N-800, which was also reflected in the lower value of n (n < 3.5). The N-doped carbon nanohorns were tolerant to methanol and survived mild durability testing. The Eonset was the same after the ADT and only a small decrease of reduction current was observed. The MEA using the N-800 cathode catalyst exhibited the highest power density of 30 mW cm−2 among N-doped materials. For the Pt/C cathode the value of Pmax was higher by a factor of two (60 mW cm−2).
To et al. used Pluronic P-123 as the soft template and 4-(pyrrol-1-yl)butanoic acid as the N source to synthesise N-doped hierarchical carbon (NHC) catalysts for ORR electrocatalysis and AEM-regenerative fuel cell testing.91 FeCl3 was used as a polymerisation agent of the pyrrole-based monomer. Aqueous solution of these components was sonicated for 20 min followed by hydrothermal heating at 100 °C. The hydrothermal product was heated at 350 and 600 °C and finally carbonised at 800 °C for 2 h. NH3 treatment at 900 °C for 15 min was used to chemically activate the NHC catalysts (Fig. 10). This preparation procedure using a soft template yielded a hierarchical porous material with a SSA of 573 m2 g−1 and total pore volume of 0.42 cm3 g−1 consisting of macropores (ca. 1 μm), mesopores (ca. 5.6 nm) and micropores (2 nm). The N content increased by NH3 treatment and 3.6 wt% of N was measured by elemental analysis. A small amount of Fe was measured by inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy. The NH3 activation remarkably improved the ORR electrocatalytic activity by shifting the E1/2 value from 0.832 to 0.882 V and increasing the limiting current densities. Overall, the NH3 activated NHC material showed the ORR performance in 0.1 M KOH similar to that of Pt/C. The n value was 3.94 revealing that a 4e− transfer is the predominant pathway of the ORR on NHC catalysts. The maximum power density of MEA using the NHC cathode material was 228 mW cm−2 compared to 260 mW cm−2 for Pt/C (Fig. 11). The volumetric activity at 0.8 V was found to be 2600 A cm−3.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustrating the synthesis procedure for NHC. A rationally designed pyrrole monomer with a hydrophilic anchoring group was synthesized and co-assembled with a triblock copolymer to form a mesophase in an aqueous solution upon polymerization. Carbonization of the polymer co-assembly yields mesoporous carbon with ordered mesopores. Subsequent ammonia activation generates additional micropores to provide abundant active sites for electrochemical reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016, Springer. 
 Fig. 11  Evaluation of NHC performance as a regenerative fuel cell catalyst. Polarization and power density curves for an AEMFC at 70 °C utilizing NHC as the ORR catalyst and commercial Pt/C as the HOR catalyst. An analogous Pt/Pt AEMFC is shown as a comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016, Springer. 
Lee et al. attempted to study the effect of pore size and doping site position on the catalyst performance.145 Phosphorus-doped ordered mesoporous carbons (POMCs) were prepared using tri(p-tolyl)phosphine (TPTP) as the P source. POMC materials of two different pore sizes (smaller and larger) were employed for comparison purposes. Smaller pores were less than nm in size (POMC-S) and larger ones >nm (POMC-L). Both materials showed comparable ORR activity in RDE mode. However, in the AEMFC test the material with larger pores outperformed the one with smaller pores, pointing to the importance of the pore size in AEMFC performance. The POMC materials were further doped with nitrogen using DCDA. The P,N-co-doped material possessing smaller pores showed higher ORR activity in RDE. In contrast, the material with larger pores performed better under the AEMFC conditions. This NPMC material showed 70% of the power density of MEA based on the Pt/C catalyst. Apparently, the accessibility of doping sites and availability of larger pores is beneficial for obtaining good AEMFC performance.
Xu et al. employed nitrogen and sulphur co-doped mesoporous carbon (N–S-MPC) as a cathode catalyst for AEMFCs.146 The N–S-MPC material was prepared from polyethyleneimine on the surface of SiO2 nanoparticles using FeSO4 as an activation reagent. After pyrolysis at 800 °C for 1 h the SiO2 was leached out by HF solution. The resulting material was treated in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 80 °C for 8 h and pyrolysed again at 800 °C for 1 h. Cathode catalyst (N–S-MPC) loading (1–5 mg cm−2) and anode catalyst (40 wt% Pt/C) loading (0.3–0.5 mg cm−2) were varied to find optimum conditions for AEMFC performance, and the optimal anode and cathode catalyst loadings were found to be 0.4 and 3 mg cm−2, respectively. In this case, peak power density of 21.7 mW cm−2 was achieved, which is still rather low compared with MEA using the Pt/C cathode catalyst (Pmax = 37.7 mW cm−2). The maximum current density in the case of Pt/C (122 mA cm−2) was larger by a factor of 2 as compared to the N–S-MPC counterpart.
Halloysite clay was used as a template to prepare N-doped carbon materials by Lu et al.147 Flaky materials were obtained from glucose and urea (denoted as GU) and those derived from furfural and urea (FU) were rod-like materials. The essential differences in the preparation procedure of GU and FU materials resulted in different surface morphologies and textural properties. GU was mostly mesoporous (SSA = 118 m2 g−1 and pore diameter 4.1 nm), while FU was micro–mesoporous (SSA = 824 m2 g−1) with the PSD pattern showing two peaks at 1.5 and 3.6 nm. The RRDE results showed similar ORR activities of GU and FU in 0.1 M KOH, the E1/2 values being 0.76 and 0.75 V for FU and GU, respectively. Under identical conditions the value of E1/2 for Pt/C was 0.81 V. The RRDE data analysis revealed that a significant amount of peroxide was produced, which is not advantageous for AEMFCs. The MEA was prepared by spraying the catalyst directly on gas-diffusion layers. A radiation grafted AEM based on poly(ethylene-co-tetrafluoroethylene) containing benzyltrimethylammonium head groups was synthesised. The beginning-of-life AEMFC polarisation tests were performed at 60 °C. The OCVs were 0.59 and 0.95 V and Pmax 403 and 703 mW cm−2 for GU and FU cathodes, respectively. For the Pt/C cathode these values were as follows: OCV = 1.04 V and Pmax = 1160 mW cm−2. Also the operating current density was rather high for these AEMFCs, reaching 1.6 and 1.8 A cm−2 for GU and FU, respectively. The fuel cell performance was comparable to that of state-of-the-art NPMCs. The main issue appears to be the low long-term stability of the AEM used.

3.2. M–N–C cathode catalysts for H2/O2 AEMFCs

3.2.1. Catalysts based on carbon black. 
Intensive research on NPMC cathodes under AEMFC conditions has started only recently. Piana et al. prepared an MEA using a commercial membrane and an in-house produced transition metal-based catalyst (HYPERMEC™ 4020 from Acta S.p.A) on the cathode side and commercial 40% Pt/C catalyst on the anode side.148 A H2–air AEMFC was tested at 50 °C. A new anionic ionomer (I2) was used in the catalyst ink preparation. The MEA with an NPMC cathode showed the peak power density of 205 mW cm−2 (Table S2†). For comparison the Pt/C cathode was used, which showed enhanced polarisation behaviour and higher power density. The low durability of these MEAs is an issue (Pmax decreased by more than a factor of 2 during 24 h).
Commercial Co-based catalysts supported on Vulcan carbon XC-72 (GP2) and graphite (GP4) were employed by Scott and co-workers for ORR and AEM fuel cell studies.149 RRDE testing was performed in 1 M KOH and GP2 showed twice lower current densities in the limiting current region than 20 wt% Pt/C. The RRDE results revealed that a significant amount of HO2− was produced on the Co-based/C catalyst (for Pt/C the peroxide yield was less than 5%). The Eonset value of GP2 was 120 mV more negative than that of Pt/C. Aminated poly(LDEP-co-VBC) membranes produced by radiation grafting were used for MEA preparation. At low current densities (50 mA cm−2) the Pt/C cathode outperformed Co-based/C catalysts in the AEM environment. At 0.6 V the current densities for MEAs using both cathodes were rather similar. The peak power densities for AEMFCs using GP4 and 30 wt% Pt/C cathodes were also similar (Pmax = 260 mW cm−2 (in O2) and 200 mW cm−2 (in air at 1 bar)). This work showed promising results for application of Co-based catalysts in AEMFCs.
Li et al. prepared NPMCs using EDA as the nitrogen source, transition metal salts (Co(NO3)2 and FeSO4) and Ketjen black® (EC300J) as the carbon support material.94 The catalyst materials were pyrolysed at 900 °C followed by acid leaching in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 80 °C. Then the catalyst material CoFeN/C was pyrolysed again at 900 °C. For comparison, the metal-free N/C catalyst and entirely transition metal based CoFe/C were used for RDE testing in 0.1 M KOH and revealed that CoFeN/C was the most active electrocatalyst for the ORR. Heat-treatment was beneficial for increasing the ORR activity leading to higher Eonset and E1/2 values. A slight improvement was observed after acid leaching and second pyrolysis. The most active CoFeN/C material was compared with Pt/C using the RRDE technique. Similar ORR activity was observed for CoFeN/C and Pt/C catalysts in alkaline media and only a small amount of peroxide was generated on both catalysts. The maximum power densities were 177 and 196 mW cm−2 for CoFeN/C and Pt/C catalysts, respectively. Apparently, the good AEM fuel cell performance is related to the formation of active MNx sites in the NPMC catalyst.
Sanetuntikul and Shanmugam prepared an M–N–C catalyst based on Vulcan carbon under autogenic pressure conditions.93 Melamine was mixed with cobalt and iron acetate in the presence of Vulcan carbon XC-72R. After solvent evaporation the mixture was pyrolysed under autogenic pressure at 900 °C. The product was acid-washed in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 90 °C for 6 h to remove metallic particles and was subjected to a second pyrolysis at 900 °C for 1 h. Porous M–N–C catalysts were obtained showing BET areas of 377 and 369 m2 g−1 for Fe–N–C and Co–N–C materials, respectively. The average pore sizes of 3.61 and 3.63 nm indicate a large contribution of mesopores. Both M–N–C materials were active electrocatalysts for the ORR in 0.1 M KOH. For the Fe–N–C catalyst the Eonset was nearly the same as for Pt/C being 1.05 V. The E1/2 value was even more positive for Fe–N–C (0.86 V) than that of Pt/C (0.84 V). Co–N–C exhibited slightly lower ORR activity (E1/2 = 0.81 V). The n value was close to 4 for both NPMC materials (n = 3.96 for Fe–N–C and 3.91 for Co–N–C). The M–N–C catalysts were more active than their metal-free (N–C) counterparts in alkaline media. The long-term stability of the Fe–N–C material was substantially higher than that of Pt/C. Remarkably high OCV values of 1.04, 0.99 and 1.04 V were obtained in AEMFC testing for Fe–N–C, Co–N–C and Pt/C catalysts, respectively. Still, the Pt/C cathode exhibited the highest power density (80 mW cm−2), followed by Fe–N–C (75 mW cm−2) and Co–N–C (68 mW cm−2). Further optimisation of catalyst preparation and fuel cell operation conditions might improve the fuel cell performance. MEAs based on the Fe–N–C catalyst showed higher durability at 0.4 V as compared to the Pt/C cathode. For Fe–N–C cathode the current density decreased by 8% and for Pt/C by 20%.
Guo et al. studied O2 reduction on metal phthalocyanines (MPc) supported on Vulcan XC-72 carbon black.150 The following MPc catalysts were used: FePc, CoPc, MnPc and NiPc. Surprisingly, these MPc/C catalysts were not heat-treated before use. As expected, FePc showed the highest ORR activity and the value of n was 3.8, while the others showed lower electron transfer numbers. The n value at −0.5 V vs. Hg/HgO was 3.0, 1.9, 1.7 and 1.6 for MnPc, CoPc, NiPc and unmodified Vulcan XC-72, respectively. These results were further confirmed by RRDE measurements, which showed a large yield of HO2− on these electrodes. The MPc/C materials were used as cathodes of AEMFCs. Interestingly, the CoPc/C cathode showed the best fuel cell performance, although the Pmax values were in the range of 85–105 mW cm−2 for all the MPc/C cathodes studied. The FePc/C electrode, which showed the highest ORR activity in RDE, was not advantageous for AEMFC application. This might indicate the poor stability of the unpyrolysed catalyst material, which affects the AEMFC operation.
Carbon-supported MPc-based catalysts were fabricated and tested under AEMFC conditions by Qiao and co-workers.151 The metal phthalocyanines supported on Vulcan carbon (MPc/C, M = Co, Cu, Zn and Ni) were heat-treated at 600 and 800 °C and for comparison non-pyrolysed MPcs were used. Untreated MPcs revealed the following order of the ORR activities: CoPc/C > CuPc/C > NiPc/C > ZnPc/C. For 600 °C pyrolysed catalysts the activity increased and still CoPc/C was the most active one among the MPc/C catalysts studied. For 800 °C treated materials the activity order changed and CuPc/C showed the highest ORR activity. These results indicate the large influence of heat-treatment temperature on the MPc/C catalyst activity. MPc/C catalysts were used as cathode materials in the fabrication of MEAs. Relatively low power densities were observed. Pmax decreased in the following order: 12.8, 6.8, 6.1 and 6.0 mW cm−2 for CoPc/C, CuPc/C, NiPc/C and ZnPc/C, respectively. For comparison the Pt/C cathode catalyst showed better MEA performance (Pmax = 37 mW cm−2).
Jiang and Chu used a CoFeNx/C catalyst for O2 reduction studies and AEMFC testing.152 The electrocatalyst was synthesised from hemin and Co porphyrin by annealing at 700 °C. The CoFeNx/C catalyst exhibited good electrocatalytic properties in alkaline media and the RRDE results indicated that the value of n was 3.5. The fuel cell performance of MEAs based on CoFeNx/C cathodes has been evaluated. Rather low peak power density (37 mW cm−2) was obtained and the fuel cell performance decreased during subsequent scans. This might indicate that the AEM used was not stable during the AEMFC test.
Miller et al. explored FePc based catalysts for O2 reduction and AEMFC application.153 These catalysts were prepared on a Ketjen black EC-600JD support (C) using a FePc-to-C ratio of 0.172. These materials were pyrolysed between 400 and 1000 °C for 2 h. It was evident that annealing the FePc/C catalysts at higher temperature (900 and 1000 °C) resulted in a decrease in the ORR activity in alkaline electrolytes. A concomitant increase in ring current indicates that the ORR pathway changes by pyrolysing at higher temperatures, which is related to a change in the nature of active sites. The highest ORR activity was observed by annealing at 600 and 700 °C. The FePc/C(600) and FePc/C(700) materials showed the most positive E1/2 values and the lowest HO2− yield. As expected, the best power densities were obtained using FePc/C(600) and FePc/C(700) cathode catalysts (120 mW cm−2). The fuel cell performance significantly decreased for FePc/C catalysts annealed at 900 and 1000 °C. Structural investigations showed that at higher annealing temperatures than 800 °C iron nanoparticles were formed indicating that the Fe–N4 structure starts to decompose. This was also confirmed by EXAFS measurements, which revealed the appearance of Fe–Fe coordination for FePc/C samples pyrolysed at 900 and 1000 °C.
Song et al. used carbon black-based Fe–N–C catalysts for AEMFC applications.154 The carbon black BP2000 was treated in 6 M HNO3 by refluxing at 80 °C to obtain oxidised BPox materials for further Fe and N doping. BPox was dispersed in water and mixed with FeCl3. After drying a different amount of urea was added and the prepared mixture was pyrolysed at 900 °C. The best BPox-to-urea mass ratio was found to be 1:10. The Fe content was optimised by varying it between 0.02 and 15 wt% (designated as BPox–NFe). For comparison purposes, metal-free BPox–N was prepared in a similar way without the addition of FeCl3. The RDE results indicated superior ORR performance of the BPox–NFe catalyst. Both the Eonset and E1/2 values were remarkably higher for this catalyst as compared to those of Pt/C and the ORR followed a 4e− transfer pathway. The Eonset of 1.07 V observed for BPox–NFe is one of the highest reported so far for NPMCs in alkaline media. The role of iron in ORR electrocatalysis was studied using CN− poisoning. The E1/2 value shifted negative by 64 mV in 0.1 M KOH containing 10 mM KCN. The remaining ORR activity after CN− poisoning was still comparable to that of Pt/C. It has been proposed that when the Fe nanoparticles are covered by a N-doped carbon layer, this particular structure might have higher ORR activity than metallic Fe and N–C sites separately. A self-aggregated alkaline polymer electrolyte aOAPS was used to prepare an AEM (50 μm thick) for AEMFC testing. The Pmax value of the BPox–NFe cathode based MEA reached 107 mW cm−2.
Lee et al. prepared Fe–N–C catalysts for AEMFCs using aniline as the N source, FeCl3 as the iron precursor and a Ketjen black EC-300J support.155 The obtained Fe–PANI–K material was annealed at different temperatures between 300 and 900 °C (denoted as Fe–pyPANI–K). The RDE results indicated that the ORR activity in 0.1 M KOH was the highest for Fe–pyPANI–K catalysts pyrolysed at 700 and 900 °C. Both the Eonset and E1/2 values were lower for materials annealed at 300 and 500 °C. Acid leaching (AL) was used to treat the Fe–pyPANI–K 700 °C material followed by a second pyrolysis step. The acid treatment positively shifted the E1/2 value by 30 mV making the Fe–pyPANI–K 700 °C-AL catalyst more active. After acid washing large Fe oxide nanoparticles were removed as evidenced by TEM and XRD analysis. It was explained that the ORR performance improved by increasing the availability of active sites after FexOy removal. The catalyst materials were tested under AEMFC conditions. The MEA with 2 mg cm−2 cathode loading showed the best fuel cell performance (Pmax = 157 mW cm−2). The peak power density was still 17% lower than that of Pt/C (189 mW cm−2). At higher Fe–pyPANI–K 700 °C loading (3 mg cm−2) the power density was lower, apparently due to the large thickness of the cathode catalyst layer (96 μm). Surprisingly, for Fe–pyPANI–K 700 °C-AL the AEMFC performance was inferior in contrast to the RDE results.
Fe–N–S type catalysts for the ORR were synthesised from a mixture of FeCl3, melamine and lipoic acid by Huang et al. using carbon black as a support material.156 The catalyst materials were pyrolysed at different temperatures between 500 and 900 °C (Fe–M–LA/C). The material annealed at 700 °C exhibited the highest ORR activity in alkaline media. The ORR proceeded via a 4e− pathway on Fe–M–LA/C-700, producing less than 0.5% of HO2−. The SSA of this catalyst was 200 m2 g−1 and the average pore size 7.4 nm, indicating that the material had a mesoporous structure. Fe–M–LA/C-700 largely retained its ORR activity after 30000 cycles between 0.6 and 1 V. The EXAFS results revealed that there was a significant amount of Fe–N and Fe–S in the structure of Fe–M–LA/C-700. At a higher pyrolysis temperature a Fe–Fe signal appeared, showing the formation of Fe nanoparticles. The OCV was 0.94 V and Pmax was 137 mW cm−2 for the AEMFC using the Fe–M–LA/C-700 cathode catalyst. Under identical conditions the MEA using a 40 wt% Pt/C cathode showed Pmax of 157 mW cm−2, which is only 13% higher than that of Fe–M–LA/C-700. The AEMFC durability test was carried out at 0.5 V operating voltage. Surprisingly, only 16.5% of the initial performance was retained after 1 h. The big loss of fuel cell performance was attributed to the degradation of the AEM.


3.2.2. Catalysts based on graphene. 
Wu and co-workers prepared a composite catalyst CoO–rGON for O2 reduction and AEMFC studies.157 rGON was synthesised by a hydrothermal method using NH3 and hydrazine as N precursors and CoO was obtained by the thermal decomposition of Co(NO3)2. Individual rGON and CoO were found to be poor catalysts for the ORR. The CoO–rGO composites containing 7% CoO showed similar electrochemical ORR performance to that of rGON in 0.1 M KOH. The CoO–rGON composite exhibited the highest ORR activity, the Eonset (0.95 V) and E1/2 (0.83 V) being only slightly more negative than those of Pt/C, indeed at a significantly higher loading (0.6 mg cm−2 for CoO–rGON vs. 0.02 mgPt cm−2 for Pt/C). The peroxide yield of the CoO–rGON materials was less than 5%. In interpreting these results it is still possible that part of Co2+ ions are coordinated to Nx sites on the surface of rGON. In the AEMFC test peak power densities of 260 and 190 mW cm−2 were observed for Pt/C and CoO–rGON, respectively. MEAs using CoO–rGON cathodes showed relatively good stability (performance loss of 50% during 240 h). It is still unclear whether this decrease in fuel cell performance is caused by the degradation of the catalyst or is partly due to the loss of the AEM properties.
Dhavale et al. prepared a Fe–Fe2O3/NGr hybrid material employing an emulsion method.99 N-Doped graphene was synthesised from GO in the presence of melamine at 900 °C. XRD revealed the crystalline form of Fe–Fe2O3 with an average size of 13 nm. XPS indicated various bonding interactions on the Fe–Fe2O3/NGr composite surface. It has been concluded on the basis of the XPS results that Fe–N–C sites are also present on the Fe–Fe2O3/NGr hybrid catalyst surface. The redox transition on the catalyst surface would be beneficial for ORR electrocatalysis. The Eonset is more positive for Fe–Fe2O3/NGr as compared to Fe–Fe2O3/rGO and NGr modified electrodes. The E1/2 values followed the sequence: Pt/C > Fe–Fe2O3/NGr > NGr > Fe–Fe2O3/rGO > rGO in 0.1 M KOH. The highest n value was also found for Fe–Fe2O3/NGr (n = 3.8) as compared to the other catalysts studied. This is in agreement with the peroxide yield (13%) during the RRDE measurement. This indicates that the N-doping of graphene and attachment of Fe–Fe2O3 nanoparticles create active sites on the surface of the hybrid material for the ORR. In the next step the Fe–Fe2O3/NGr system was used as a cathode in AEMFCs and Pmax of 54.4 mW cm−2 was observed. For the Pt/C cathode it was 70 mW cm−2.
Palaniselvam et al. studied the ORR on iron- and cobalt-containing N-doped porous graphene (Fe/Co–NpGr) materials in alkaline media.158 For comparison single Fe-containing (Fe–NpGr) and metal-free N-doped (NpGr) electrocatalysts were explored. The Fe/Co–NpGr catalyst was prepared by the pyrolysis of porous graphene (pGr) using Fe and Co acetates as metal precursors and 1,10-phenanthroline as the nitrogen source. The resulting mixture was annealed at 900 °C and the product was treated in 3 M H2SO4 solution at 90 °C to remove metallic phases. After the initial pyrolysis the formation of Fe3C and Co3C particles was observed. The presence of N-coordinated metal sites in the Fe/Co–NpGr catalyst was confirmed by XPS and TOF-SIMS analysis. The XPS results confirmed the presence of Fe–N and Co–N sites, but also other metal-containing species on the catalyst surface. The Eonset for the metal-free NpGr material in 0.1 M KOH was 0.88 V and peak potential (Ep) 0.77 V. For the Fe–NpGr catalyst the Eonset was 0.9 V and Ep = 0.79 V, both values shifted positive by 20 mV as compared to the metal-free counterpart. The ORR activity of the Fe/Co–NpGr catalyst was significantly higher (Eonset = 0.93 V and Ep = 0.8 V). The Fe/Co–NpGr material was more durable than Pt/C during potential cycling between 0.3 and 1.4 V. Only 23 mV shift in the E1/2 value was observed for this NPMC upon 10000 cycles as compared to the 70 mV shift for 20 wt% Pt/C. The MEA based on the Fe/Co–NpGr cathode displayed Pmax of 35 mW cm−2, which is a modest value for this type of fuel cells. For the 40 wt% Pt/C cathode Pmax was 60 mW cm−2.
Chen et al. prepared N,S,Fe-graphene nanosheets using 2-aminothiazole (2-AT) as the starting compound and KJ600 as carbon black.159 First, 2-AT was oxidatively pyrolysed to polyAT. Then FeCl3 was added and the dried mixture was pyrolysed at 900 °C, followed by treatment in 1 M HCl at 80 °C (denoted as AT–Fe/N/C). For comparison, SiO2 nanoparticles were used instead of carbon black (AT–Fe/N/SiO2). Also, the material synthesised in the absence of the Fe precursor was tested (AT–N/C). The E1/2 values in 0.1 M NaOH were as follows: 0.926, 0.913, 0.827 and 0.907 V for AT–Fe/N/C, AT–Fe/N/SiO2, AT–N/C and Pt/C, respectively. The durability and methanol tolerance of AT–Fe/N/C was significantly better than that of Pt/C. According to RDE and RRDE results, the AT–Fe/N/C material catalysed a 4-electron reduction of O2. The AEMFC performance was also tested using an aQAPS-S8 anion exchange membrane and a very high peak power density was observed (0.164 W cm−2).


3.2.3. Catalysts based on CNTs. 
Our group used pyrolysed CoPc and FePc materials supported on MWCNTs for AEMFC application.95 The presence of Co and Fe species in the final catalyst was confirmed by XPS. The value of n was close to 4 for the CoPc/MWCNT catalyst and about 3 for its FePc/MWCNT counterpart. The Eonset for both pyrolysed MPc/MWCNT catalysts was lower than that of Pt/C. For AEMFC testing the MPc-to-MWCNT weight ratio of 1:1 was used for the preparation of cathode catalysts for MEAs. 46 wt% Pt/C catalyst (TKK) showed the highest fuel cell performance (Pmax = 120 mW cm−2). The CoPc/MWCNT catalyst showed quite similar power density (Pmax = 100 mW cm−2), followed by the FePc/MWCNT material, which showed about 60 mW cm−2 of maximum power density (Fig. 12). The fuel cell performance of unmodified MWCNTs was significantly lower, indicating the key role of MPcs in determining the catalyst activity for AEM fuel cell application.
 Fig. 12  Fuel cell performance of MEAs with Co and Fe phthalocyanine modified MWCNTs along with E-TEK and Tanaka Pt/C catalysts based cathodes using Tokuyama's A201 series anion exchange membrane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
Sa et al. used an elegant approach for electrocatalyst preparation.160 Carbon nanotubes were used as a support for an Fe porphyrin precursor. It appeared to be advantageous to coat the CNT/PC material with a thin layer of silica before thermal treatment. It was found that this step was essential in order to observe high electrocatalytic activity for the ORR in alkaline media. The catalysts prepared in the absence and presence of silica layers were thoroughly studied using various surface analytical techniques. It was confirmed by Mössbauer spectroscopy and XAS that by applying a silica layer in the synthesis of the CNT/PC catalyst the formation of Fe nanoparticles and the Fe3C phase was completely suppressed and most of the iron that remained in the catalyst material was coordinated to nitrogen (Fe–N4 sites). Several FePc-to-CNT ratios and annealing temperatures were employed to optimise the catalyst preparation conditions. The CNT/PC catalyst showed E1/2 of 0.88 V in alkaline media, which was comparable to that of Pt/C. The ORR follows a 4e− transfer pathway on these materials. The CNT/PC catalyst survived stability testing for 10000 cycles. Turnover frequencies were also determined by using the data from Mössbauer spectroscopy for active sites. These materials showed high power density in MEA testing at 80 °C (0.38 W cm−2). The MEA based on Pt/C showed even higher power density. For comparison, these materials were also tested under PEMFC conditions and excellent fuel cell performance was evident.
In a recent study by our group we employed cobalt and nitrogen co-doped multi-walled carbon nanotube (Co/N/MWCNT) catalysts for AEMFC testing.96 The catalyst materials were prepared by adding CoCl2 as the Co precursor and DCDA as the N source to the dispersion of CNTs. After solvent evaporation the material was pyrolysed at 800 °C. The as-prepared catalyst (Co/N/MWCNT-1) was acid-treated in a mixture of 0.5 M HNO3 and 0.5 M H2SO4 at 50 °C and pyrolysed for the second time at 800 °C (designated as Co/N/MWCNT-2). TEM and HAADF-STEM revealed the presence of metal nanoparticles in both the as-prepared and acid-washed samples. HR-TEM images clearly showed that these nanoparticles were covered by graphitic layers and for this reason cannot be removed by acid leaching. The XRD analysis indicated that Co oxides were also present in the as-prepared material and were removed by acid wash. For both catalysts metallic Co peaks were detected. The Co content in the Co/N/MWCNT-1 sample was 0.8 at%. The reduction of O2 was studied in 0.1 M KOH using the RDE technique and high ORR activity was observed for Co/N/MWCNT-1 and Co/N/MWCNT-2 catalysts. For both materials the Eonset was −0.05 V vs. SCE and the E1/2 value for Co/N/MWCNT-1 was −0.17 V vs. SCE and it improved by 60 mV for Co/N/MWCNT-2. The stability testing was conducted in both CV and RDE modes and good durability of the electrocatalyst materials was observed. The peak power density obtained with the Co/N/MWCNT catalyst was 115 mW cm−2, which is very close to that of Pt/C (Pmax = 120 mW cm−2) at an AEMFC operating temperature of 50 °C.
Kurungot and co-workers developed a zeolitic imidazolate framework- (ZIF-) derived electrocatalyst deposited on CNTs for AEM fuel cell cathodes.161 Methanolic solutions of 2-methylimidazole and Co nitrate containing CNTs were mixed and the amount of CNTs in the mixture was varied. The Co-ZIF-67/CNT composite was annealed at different temperatures (800–1000 °C). The material pyrolysed at 900 °C (CoNC-900) showed the highest SSA (364 m2 g−1) and a wide range of pore sizes. The Eonset of this catalyst in 0.1 M KOH was 0.94 V and E1/2 = 0.81 V. The latter value was only 30 mV more negative than that of Pt/C (Eonset = 1.0 V, E1/2 = 0.84 V). After ADT for 5000 cycles the E1/2 shifted only 6 mV, indicating the good durability of the electrocatalyst. AEMFC testing using the CoNC-900 cathode showed OCV of 0.92 V (1.01 V for Pt/C) and Pmax of 60 mW cm−2 (64 mW cm−2 for Pt/C). At 0.6 V the MEA using the CoNC-900 cathode displayed a current density of 80 mA cm−2, the same as for Pt/C.


3.2.4. Catalysts based on other nanostructured carbon materials. 
Unni et al. used SWCNHs for the preparation of Fe,N-codoped catalysts.162 Functionalised carbon nanohorns (FCNHs) were obtained by refluxing in H2O2 solution. The FCNH material was mixed with melamine and FeCl3 and after solvent evaporation the mixture was pyrolysed at 800–1000 °C. The FeNCNH samples were treated in concentrated HCl to remove metal phases. Also, a purely N-doped material was synthesised (NCNHs). For comparison, Fe,N-codoped carbon samples (FeNC) were prepared using Vulcan carbon. TEM measurements revealed the flower-like morphology of FeNCNH-900 samples and the absence of iron particles. The XRD analysis emphasised the absence of iron oxides and carbides. Surprisingly, the BET area of doped materials (SSA = 1315 and 1327 m2 g−1 for FeNCNHs and NCNHs, respectively) was four times larger than that of the starting SWCNH material (340 m2 g−1). The pore size of NCNH and FeNCNH samples was in the range of 0.5–20 nm indicating the presence of mesopores in these materials, but majority of the pores were between 0.5 and 3 nm. The FeNCNH-900 catalyst showed 40 mV more positive Eonset for the ORR than Pt/C. Also, the E1/2 of FeNCNH-900 (−0.026 V vs. Hg/HgO) was higher than that of Pt/C (E1/2 = −0.046 vs. Hg/HgO). The E1/2 value of the metal-free NCNH material shifted negative and FeNC showed the lowest ORR activity. The effect of Fe content (between 1 and 5%) was also studied and the best ORR performance was observed for the 2% Fe-based catalyst. By comparing different annealing temperatures the FeNCNH catalyst synthesised at 900 °C was the most active and the ORR followed a 4e− pathway. Interestingly, the surface iron content of the FeNCNH samples was relatively low. It was proposed that Fe–N4 sites (Fe atoms coordinated to pyrrolic N) are mostly responsible for the ORR activity. The FeNCNH-900 material was highly tolerant towards methanol and stable during long-term potential cycling. The ORR activity even increased after 1000 potential cycles. The MEA with the NPMC cathode showed maximum power density of 35 mW cm−2. The commercial 40 wt% Pt/C cathode outperformed the FeNCNH-900 based MEA showing peak power density of 60 mW cm−2.
Ratso et al. prepared transition metal–nitrogen co-doped carbide-derived carbon (M/N/CDC) catalysts for ORR and AEMFC applications.100 The main advantage of the CDC material is the fine tuning of its porosity by selecting suitable metal carbide and chlorination conditions. The Co/Fe,N co-doped catalysts were prepared by pyrolysing CDCs with DCDA in the presence of CoCl2 or FeCl3. The CDC-to-DCDA ratio was 1:20 in all preparations and the mixture was pyrolysed at 800 °C for 2 h. The BET area of Fe/N/CDC was 1035 m2 g−1, still lower than that of parent CDC (SSA = 1735 m2 g−1). The total porosity of Fe/N/CDC was 0.733 cm3 g−1 to which micropores contributed 0.473 cm3 g−1. The average pore diameter was 1.43 nm. Various types of N were determined in the M/N/CDC materials, part of which could be coordinated to transition metal atoms (Co or Fe). The XPS signal in the Co2p and Fe2p regions was too noisy to deconvolute this to various components. The total surface content of Co was 0.54 at% and the total content of Fe only 0.11 at%. The ORR polarisation curves recorded in 0.1 M KOH indicated the high electrocatalytic activity of M/N/CDC materials. The Eonset was −0.05 V vs. SCE for both materials, which is 100 mV more positive than that of metal-free N-doped CDC catalysts.25 Importantly, both M/N/CDC materials possessed similar ORR activity to that of the 46.1 wt% Pt/C catalyst. These materials were remarkably stable during 1000 potential cycles between 0 and −1.2 V vs. SCE. The MEAs with Co/N/CDC and Fe/N/CDC cathodes reached the maximum power density of 80 and 78 mW cm−2 (Fig. 13). This is only slightly lower than that of Pt/C (Pmax = 90 mW cm−2). These results indicate the excellent AEMFC performance of M/N/CDC catalysts.
 Fig. 13  H2/O2 fuel cell performance of MEAs with M/N/CDC catalysts and commercial 46.1 wt% Pt/C cathodes using a Tokuyama A201 anion exchange membrane. T = 50 °C, anode: 46.1 wt% Pt/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 


3.2.5. Catalysts synthesised by direct carbonisation of organic materials. 
Sanetuntikul et al. studied the reduction of O2 on Fe–Nx sites on hollow N-doped carbon spheres (HNCSs) synthesised from iron(III)diethylenetriaminepentaacetate (Fe–DTPA),163 which was used as the single precursor for the metal, nitrogen and carbon. Fe–DTPA was pyrolysed at different temperatures (600–900 °C) to prepare HNCS catalysts. The core of the pyrolysed material contained Fe/FexOy, which was removed by stirring in concentrated HCl. After acid treatment the diameter of HNCS was 850 ± 40 nm and wall thickness 92 ± 10 nm. The N content in the materials decreased at higher pyrolysis temperature. The electrocatalytic activity of HNCS materials for the ORR depended on their synthesis temperature. For example, the HNCS catalyst prepared at 700 °C showed the highest n value (n = 3.9) and highest Eonset (0.97 V), which was rather close to that of Pt/C (1.02 V). The presence of pyridinic-N on the surface of HNCS materials is advantageous for the formation of Fe–Nx sites. In addition, N-containing sites (N–C) might be ORR active. The most active HNCS material showed Pmax of 68 mW cm−2 in AEMFC testing (Fig. 14). Still, the MEA based on the Pt/C cathode outperformed the HNCS catalyst (Pmax = 80 mW cm−2). The durability of HNCS materials under AEMFC conditions was reasonably good.
 Fig. 14  Polarization and power density curves of alkaline exchange membrane fuel cell performance with the HNCS71 catalyst (with a loading of 4 mg cm−2) and Pt/C (40% Pt/C, 0.5 mg cm−2) at 60 °C. For MEAs, the A201 membrane and AS-4 ionomer were used. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Ferrero et al. prepared Fe,N-codoped carbon capsules (Fe–N–CC) using a special synthesis method.164 Silica particles with a hollow core and mesoporous shell were impregnated with FeCl3 followed by exposure to pyrrole, which was used as the carbon and nitrogen source. The solid obtained was carbonised in a N2 atmosphere at 850 °C. Then the material was treated with HF for 4 days to leach the silica support. The physico-chemical properties of the Fe–N–CC catalyst material were thoroughly investigated (Fig. 15). A high SSA of 1590 m2 g−1, large pore volume (1.46 cm3 g−1) and mesopore volume (1.28 cm3 g−1), and average pore size of 3.8 nm were estimated for this material. The TEM-EDX elemental mapping and XPS showed the presence of Fe in the catalyst layer. It was proposed that the Fe is mostly coordinated with N even though the HR-TEM method revealed the formation of Fe3C nanoparticles embedded by a graphitic carbon layer of 15 nm. The prepared Fe–N–CC material was a good electrocatalyst for the ORR in alkaline and acidic media showing the Eonset of 0.94 V and E1/2 of 0.83 V in 0.1 M KOH compared with 0.93 and 0.78 V for the Pt/C catalyst, respectively. The Fe–N–CC catalyst showed good stability during 3500 potential cycles between 0.6 and 1.0 V in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes. The catalyst was also methanol tolerant and the cyanide poisoning experiment revealed the coordination of Fe and N. These materials were tested in an AEMFC at relatively low cathode catalyst loading (0.2 mg cm−2). At higher current densities the performance of MEAs using the Fe–N–CC cathode was better than that of the Pt/C catalyst. The peak power density of the Fe–N–CC cathode based MEA was higher than that of Pt/C (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 15  (a) SEM image of the hollow carbon capsules (inset: particle diameter distribution determined over 200 particles), (b) high magnification TEM images of the hollow carbon capsules, (c) KJS pore size distribution and αs-plot method applied to the N2 adsorption branch (inset), and (d) XPS N 1s core level spectra of the Fe–N-doped carbon capsules (Fe–N–CC). Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 16  Polarization curve and power density of alkaline exchange membrane fuel cells operating at 50 °C with Fe–N–CC and Pt/C as cathode catalysts (0.2 mg cm−2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Sung and co-workers developed a new synthesis procedure for the preparation of Fe–N–C catalysts for AEMFC application.165 Fe phthalocyanine and 10,10′-dibromo-9,9′-bianthryl monomer were dissolved in hexane, and NaCl was added as a template. After solvent evaporation the mixture was heat-treated at 200 °C for 2 h to induce polymerisation of the monomer followed by annealing at 450 or 750 °C for 2 h. This single-step synthesis procedure yielded a highly porous material (CS_FePc_450) with a BET area of 212 m2 g−1. The NaCl template was removed by treatment with water. Raman analysis confirmed the formation of the carbon material and TEM images revealed the existence of 2D nanocarbon sheets. XANES further supported the formation of the Fe–N–C structure in the final catalyst material. The ORR activity of CS_FePc_450 was compared with that of Vulcan carbon supported FePc (FePc/C) and commercial Pt/C. Both FePc catalysts showed similar electrocatalytic activity for the ORR in 0.1 M KOH. The Eonset of the Pt/C catalyst was slightly higher than that of CS_FePc_450, however the E1/2 value of the latter catalyst was higher indicating the remarkable electrocatalytic properties of CS_FePc_450. The long-term durability of CS_FePc_450 was much better than that of FePc/C. The MEA performance under AEMFC conditions was compared using the same loading of CS_FePc_450 and Pt/C cathode catalysts. The Pt/C catalyst outperformed its NPMC counterpart in AEMFC testing (ca. 210 and 180 mW cm−2 for Pt/C and CS_FePc_450 catalysts, respectively). Furthermore, the volumetric power density of the CS_FePc_450 cathode was even better than that of Pt/C. This shows the great potential of this NPMC material to be used as a cathode catalyst in AEMFCs.
Atanassov and co-workers explored the electrocatalytic properties of Fe–N–C catalysts towards the ORR and tested the AEMFC performance of a benzimidazole-derived catalyst (BIDC).166 Silica powder (SSA = 150 m2 g−1) was used as a template for the preparation of electrocatalysts by the sacrificial support method (SSM). Three different procedures were applied for synthesising BIDC materials using benzimidazole carboxylic acid as the nitrogen source and Fe(NO3)2 as the iron precursor. The mixture was pyrolysed in an Ar atmosphere at 950 °C, followed by stirring in dilute HCl/H2SO4 and concentrated HF solution. Then a second heat-treatment was conducted at 950 °C for 30 min in an NH3 atmosphere. The most active catalyst (BIDC3) contained 1.7 at% of N by XPS indicating the presence of various N species. The BET area of BIDC3 was 930 m2 g−1 and this material exhibited hierarchical distribution of pores consisting of macro-, meso- and micropores. A 50 mV positive shift of the E1/2 value was observed in 0.1 M KOH as compared to Pt/C and according to the RRDE results the HO2− yield was ca. 5%. The BIDC3 modified electrode appeared to be very stable in RDE mode after 7500 potential cycles. The AEMFC current density was 50 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V and Pmax = 47 mW cm−2 showing an average AEMFC performance.
Mun et al. synthesised Fe–N–C catalysts from Pluronic P127 solution in ethanol containing 1,10-phenanthroline and FeCl2.167 After various annealing procedures the catalyst denoted as m-FePhen-C was obtained by final heating at 900 °C. The OMC structure of m-FePhen-C was observed by SEM and TEM. XANES provided information about the chemical state and coordination symmetry of Fe and EXAFS about the local geometry around Fe. It was found that the metal centre was displaced out of the square plane. The EXAFS curve showed the dominant presence of Fe–Nx/C sites. The silica framework in the mesopore wall prevented undesirable sintering of iron to Fe nanoparticles. The high content of pyridinic-N as determined by XPS is useful for the formation of Fe–Nx/C sites. In electrochemical testing the m-FePhen-C catalyst showed higher ORR activity than 40 wt% Pt/C (Eonset = 1.0 V and E1/2 = 0.904 V for m-FePhen-C). In the absence of Fe in the catalyst the Eonset and E1/2 values were significantly lower. The peroxide yield was less than 5% for m-FePhen-C, indicating a predominant 4e− transfer process on these catalysts. The presence of Fe–Nx/C sites was also confirmed by CN− poisoning. For AEMFC testing the amount of the m-FePhen-C on the cathode varied between 1 and 4 mg cm−2. The Pmax of the m-FePhen-C cathode based MEA was 272 mW cm−2, which was 40% higher than that of the 40 wt% Pt/C catalyst of the same loading (1 mg cm−2). This is quite exceptional that the NPMC cathode outperforms the Pt/C catalyst in H2/O2 AEMFC testing. It might point to the advantage of the mesoporous structure of the m-FePhen-C cathode, which could arise from the better mass-transfer conditions in the OMC.
Hossen et al. prepared three different Fe–N–C catalysts derived from: (i) nicarbazin, methylimidazole and glucoril (Fe–NMG), (ii) nicarbazin, methylimidazole and pipemedic acid (Fe–NMP) and (iii) mebendazole (Fe–MBZ).168 In all cases a modified sacrificial support method was used and iron nitrate served as the Fe precursor. The mixtures were heated at 975 °C in a N2 flow, followed by HF etching and second heat-treatment in NH3. The SSA values were 525, 565 and 560 m2 g−1 for Fe–NMG, Fe–NMP and Fe–MBZ catalysts, respectively. The RRDE results for Fe–NMG (Eonset = 0.96 V, E1/2 = 0.83 V) were quite similar to those of Fe–NMP (Eonset = 0.97 V, E1/2 = 0.84 V), while Fe–MBZ showed the lowest ORR activity (Eonset = 0.85 V, E1/2 = 0.74 V). At low overpotential the %HO2− was less than 2%, however the peroxide yield increased at higher overpotentials and was above 10% at 0.1 V. The AEMFC test using the Fe–MNG cathode showed higher power density than Fe–NMP or Fe–MBZ catalysts. The OCV and Pmax for Fe–NMG were 1.05 V and 140 mW cm−2. The Pmax values for Fe–NMP and Fe–MBZ based MEAs were 110 and 90 mW cm−2, respectively. The anion-exchange ionomer (AEI) concentration optimisation using Fe–NMG catalysts showed that 35 wt% AS-4 yielded the best Pmax of 218 mW cm−2. At higher AEI concentrations the AEMFC performance decreased due to the blockage of active sites. With 35 wt% AS-4 the Fe–NMG catalyst outperformed Pt/C (Pmax = 200 mW cm−2), emphasising the advantages of Fe–N–C cathodes. At the operating voltage of 0.6 V the power density was 190 mW cm−2.

3.3. Summary of the H2/O2 AEMFC results
On the basis of the RRDE/RDE data both groups of the cathode catalyst materials (heteroatom-doped nanocarbons and M–N–C catalysts) display excellent electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR in alkaline media and some NPMC materials show similar activity or even outperform commercial Pt/C catalysts,96 even though typically at a higher catalyst loading. Therefore one would expect that most of these NPMCs could be suitable cathode catalysts for H2/O2 AEMFCs. However, the AEMFC testing results presented above show that the peak power densities can vary by more than two orders of magnitude (from a few mW cm−2 up to 700 mW cm−2, see Tables S1 and S2†). This indicates that the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity of NPMC materials might not be the main factor determining the AEMFC performance, although the requirements for electrocatalysts for RDE and AEMFC testing are rather different. It is obvious that the processes taking place in AEM and catalyst layers basically determine the overall AEMFC performance. Apparently, this is the main reason for the large variety of AEMFC results reported in the literature.
Rational electrocatalyst design should enable the formation of high-surface-area materials with high number density of ORR active sites, which should be accessible for O2 molecules. A hierarchical porous structure of the catalyst should be formed, which ensures high mass-transfer and availability of active sites. The turn-over frequency of NPMC materials is lower than that of Pt-based catalysts and therefore a thicker catalyst layer is needed for fuel cells, which could involve transport issues. The AEI-to-catalyst ratio should be optimised for each type of electrocatalyst to achieve the best fuel cell performance. Proper design of MEAs is essential to obtain high power densities. It can be concluded on the basis of the literature that by using a commercial AEM (for example A201 by Tokuyama or FAA3 by FumaTech) the peak power densities reported in several studies are approximately 200–250 mW cm−2 for AEMFCs using NPMC cathodes, which are apparently limited by the properties of the anion-exchange membrane. Maximum power densities higher by a factor of three have been obtained with non-commercial (laboratory-made) AEMs, however there are stability issues with those membranes. A high beginning-of-life Pmax indicates that the performance of AEMFCs is approaching that of PEMFCs.
A thorough durability testing has shown that both M–N–C catalysts and heteroatom-doped nanocarbons are highly stable under alkaline conditions and the latter materials retained their ORR activity even after 30000 potential cycles. Therefore it is quite clear that the stability issue is related to the anion-exchange membrane, the preparation of MEAs and the AEMFC operation conditions. Chemical stability, ionic conductivity, ion-exchange capacity, water uptake and thermal stability should be taken into account when selecting an AEM for suitable AEMFC application. In this regard viable AEMs are urgently needed. Proper water management should avoid catalyst layer flooding or dehydration, which are among the typical reasons for loss in fuel cell performance. Various aspects of AEMFC technology development and remaining issues have been very recently reviewed by Gottesfeld et al.136
4. Non-precious metal catalysts for ADMFC cathodes
4.1. Direct methanol fuel cells: electrocatalysts and membranes
Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) are attractive energy conversion devices for portable electronics and small-scale stationary and transportation. Methanol as a fuel provides lower power density than hydrogen, however, the high theoretical energy storage capacity of methanol (5019 Ah kg−1) offers higher energy density.169 Moreover, performance at low-temperatures, fast recharging, easy handling and storage of the liquid fuel make DMFCs more favourable as alternative power sources.170 Since the last decade, developing more efficient and durable electrocatalysts for both anode and cathode has been the focus. With the aim of reducing the cost of anode electrodes relative to the Pt catalyst, different strategies have been implemented such as alloying with other precious or nonprecious metals, developing novel carbon substrates and enhancing interactions in order to increase the electrochemically active surface area.171–174 The technological advances in solid polymer electrolytes and the emergence of Nafion® as a commonly accepted proton-exchange membrane (PEM) led to the wide contribution of efforts on acidic DMFCs. However, under alkaline conditions, both the ORR and methanol oxidation are kinetically faster than in acidic media as depicted below:
Anode: CH3OH + 6OH−→ CO2 + 5H2O + 6e−, E0 = −0.81 V(5)
Cathode: (6)
Overall: (7)
This allows the use of non-noble metal electrocatalysts. Moreover, methanol crossover is eliminated through the membrane, due to the reverse direction of OH− ions from the cathode to the anode. Fig.17 shows the schematic diagram of a PEM–DMFC compared to an AEM-DMFC. As can be seen, water is consumed at the cathode in an AEM–DMFC rather than being produced in a PEM–DMFC, therefore water management would be easier without critical flooding issues.175 After the breakthrough of Hunger in introducing solid AEMs in DMFCs,176 more progress was achieved in producing commercially available membranes, such as Fumatech, Tokuyama and Morgane ADP from Solvay. AEMs commonly contain a main polymer backbone covalently bound with quaternary ammonium groups, enabling anion transfer. In the case of AEMs, one of the challenges is the slower mobility of OH−, which is almost half that of H+, leading to lower molar conductivity of hydroxide ions (198 S cm2 mol−1) compared to protons (349 S cm2 mol−1).177,178
 Fig. 17  Schematic of a PEM compared to an AEM direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC).175 
4.2. Metal-free cathode catalysts for ADMFCs

4.2.1. Electrocatalysts based on CNTs. 
The most attractive feature of alkaline DMFCs is the competitive performance of metal-free catalysts and their tolerance to methanol oxidation when placed at the cathode. Table S3† presents a concise summary of AEM–DMFC performance using the metal-free catalysts at the cathode. Borghei et al. produced N-doped few-walled carbon nanotubes (N-FWCNTs) by post-treatment of FWCNTs through acid functionalisation, deposition of polyaniline (PANI) and subsequent pyrolysis at 900 °C.34 Despite containing only about 0.5 at% nitrogen, the N-FWCNTs showed comparable ORR catalytic activity to the Pt/C catalyst in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte and outperformance in ADMFC using the Fumatech AEM exhibiting maximum power density of 0.75 mW cm−2 similar to that of the Pt/C cathode (0.70 mW cm−2). Furthermore, Kanninen and Borghei179 studied the influence of FAA3 ionomer (20–60 wt%) on the structure of a N-FWCNT cathode layer and ADMFC performance, and found 40 wt% ionomer content to be optimal. In such a system, when air was used at the cathode, 4-fold superior performance was observed with N-FWCNTs compared to the Pt counterpart (0.18 mW cm−2).
In our group a N-doped few-layer graphene/multi-walled carbon nanotube (N-FLG/MWCNT) composite was prepared using DCDA as the nitrogen precursor.180 N-Doped carbon nanotubes (N-MWCNTs) were also prepared and their performance was studied in ADMFCs containing an FAA3 membrane and under optimised ionomer conditions obtained by Kanninen et al. Interestingly, Pt/C and the N-FLG/MWCNT composite performed similarly (0.72 mW cm−2), although N-MWCNTs outperformed both with better OCV and peak power density (0.92 mW cm−2).
In a systematic study Goswami et al. investigated the influence of NCNT loading at the cathode as well as concentration of MeOH and NaOH at the anode on the ADMFC performance.181 They synthesised NCNTs through an in situ strategy using ferrocene and C6H12N4 (HMT) as both the nitrogen and carbon precursor, and varied the N-doping level with addition of benzene to the reaction mixture. As shown in Fig. 18a and b vertically aligned NCNTs, containing 9.5 and 6.3 at% nitrogen, with a bamboo-like structure were obtained. By increasing the NCNT loading to 7 mg cm−2, the OCV and Pmax were first increased and then levelled off, indicating the role of higher N content in a better cathode reaction. As presented in Fig. 18c and d, alkali concentration linearly improved the cell performance to 8.4 mW cm−2, due to an enhanced anodic oxidation and ionic conductivity. Furthermore, increasing MeOH concentration from 1 to 8 M (at a fixed 6 M NaOH) initially increased the OCV which then levelled off at 4 M MeOH (Fig. 18e), implying the inertness of the NCNT cathode layer to MeOH crossover. Finally, better stability of the ADMFC with the NCNT cathode was observed compared to the commercial Pt/C (Fig. 18f).
 Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of an NCNT bundle. (b) TEM image of NCNTs with a bamboo-like structure. The inset shows the HRTEM image of the same. (c) Cell voltage vs. current density and (d) power density vs. current density for 4 mg cm−2 NCNT loading for different NaOH concentrations at 2 M MeOH. (e) Variation of OCV with different MeOH concentrations at a 6 M NaOH concentration for 4 mg cm−2 NCNT loading. (f) The fuel cell durability of NCNT catalysts of different loadings from 4 to 11 mg cm−2 at 20 mA cm−2 current density is compared with that of a Pt/C based cathode (1 mgPt cm−2) for 2 M MeOH in 2 M NaOH fuel feedstock. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.2.2. Electrocatalysts based on mesoporous carbons. 
Wan et al. developed a vaporisation-capillary condensation method to synthesise N-doped OMCs through infiltration of pyrrole into the mesoporous template followed by pyrolysis.182 This strategy resulted in porous carbon with a larger SSA (661 m2 g−1) and pore volume than the traditional incipient wetness method (292 m2 g−1). The ORR activity considerably improved with pyrolysis temperature above 600 °C, despite the continuous decrease in the total N content from almost 10 to 3 at%. The superior performance of the mesoporous carbon (C-PY-900) compared to the commercial Pt/C was also confirmed in an AEM fuel cell by feeding MeOH and 6 M KOH at the anode at 50 °C.
Heteroatom-doped materials consisting of fluorine and nitrogen were also developed by Sun et al.183 They proposed a synthesis procedure using low cost carbon black (Black Pearls), melamine and NH4F as starting materials. For the F-doped samples, a volcano-shaped dependence of the ORR activity on F-doping was obtained, reaching a maximum at 0.65 wt% F content.184 Additional doping with nitrogen showed a synergic influence of N and F (BP2000-NF) on the ORR electrocatalytic activity exhibiting more positive Eonset and E1/2 than Pt/C catalysts. BP2000-NF resulted in superior stability and performance (15 mW cm−2) compared to commercial Pt/C (13 mW cm−2), when placed at the cathode in an ADMFC at 60 °C.

4.3. Transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) cathode catalysts for ADMFCs

4.3.1. Electrocatalysts made of various nitrogen and metal precursors. 
Non-precious metal catalysts were also investigated among which transition metals coordinated with nitrogen are widely considered as potential future candidates and the recent progress in this area is summarised in Table S4.†
Gu et al.185 synthesised a Fe–N–C catalyst with high SSA (1501 m2 g−1) via two-step pyrolysis from polypyrrole and FeCl3, and investigated the ORR electrocatalytic activity and DMFC performance under acidic and alkaline conditions. Fe–N–C exhibited superior ORR activity (Eonset = 1.08 V, E1/2 = 0.88 V) in the alkaline electrolyte compared to the acidic one (Eonset = 0.85 V, E1/2 = 0.75 V). However, a DMFC using the Nafion membrane yielded higher peak power density (47 mW cm−2) than the one containing the alkaline Tokuyama membrane (33 mW cm−2). However, in an alkaline fuel cell, the Fe–N–C electrode outperformed with much higher OCV and Pmax than its commercial Pt/C counterpart (8 mW cm−2).
Xiao et al.186 developed the fabrication of iron carbide encapsulated in N-doped graphitic carbon layers (Fe3C/NG) with a controlled meso/macroporous structure to enhance the transport of ORR related species. The synthesis strategy was based on pyrolysing hybrids of poly(1,8-diaminonaphthalene) (PDAN) and FeCl3. The SEM micrographs of the pyrolysed sample (Fe3C/NG-800) confirmed the presence of Fe/Fe3C nanoparticles (20–50 nm) as the core, encapsulated by graphene-like layers as the shell. In addition, pores in the range of 20–80 nm were observed, which likely originated from the removal of iron species by acid washing, providing high SSA up to 920 m2 g−1. Interestingly, the XPS analysis could not detect any Fe signal, implying the coverage of Fe-species by graphitic layers, although inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) analysis revealed a low content of 0.81 wt% Fe in the sample. Fe3C/NG-800 exhibited extraordinary activity for the ORR in 0.1 M HClO4 with Eonset and E1/2 of 0.92 and 0.77 V, and peroxide yield as low as 1–1.8% and a value of n around 3.7–3.85. The ORR in 0.1 M KOH resulted in more positive onset (1.03 V) and half-wave (0.86 V) potentials, lower peroxide yield and better n value (3.89–4). When Fe3C/NG-800 was integrated in a PEM-DMFC, promising performance was obtained displaying OCV (0.75 V) close to that of the Pt/C electrode (0.77 V) and power density as high as 31 mW cm−2 compared to 45 mW cm−2 for Pt/C, however much higher stability was observed with Fe3C/NG-800. However, in an AEM-DMFC better OCV (0.87 V) and Pmax (19 mW cm−2) were obtained with Fe3C/NG-800 compared to that of Pt/C (0.74 V and 15 mW cm−2, respectively).
Inspired by the strong metal coordination properties of DNA, Shen et al.187 synthesised self-assembled Co–adenine nanospheres (Co–A NSs), as a result of the tetrahedral Co–N4 configuration. Further pyrolysis at 700 °C led to the formation of Co–N/C with a rambutan-like structure (Fig. 19a), consisting of porous nanospheres and random outstretched MWCNTs (with 2–5 nm in diameter), rendering SSA as high as 253 m2 g−1. The special design of active sites provided high ORR electrocatalytic activity (n = 3.94 at 0.6 V vs. NHE) with long-term stability in 160 h of chronoamperometic measurements (Fig. 19b and c). A DMFC test using a poly(arylene ether ketone) (PAEK) membrane confirmed the outstanding performance of Co–N/C, with OCV of 0.8 V and maximum power density (40.1 mW cm−2) almost double that of Pt/C (Fig. 19d). The lower production estimate around USD3 g−1 compared to the expensive Pt/C is considered to be another advantage for large-scale production.
 Fig. 19  (a) SEM image of rambutan-like Co–N/C-700, inset: photograph of real rambutans. (b) Polarization curves at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH for various samples. (c) Chronoamperometry measurements for Co–N/C and 20 wt% Pt/C at 0.6 V at 225 rpm. (d) Polarization and power density curves of the ADMFC with Co–N/C as the cathode catalyst compared to 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst. The catalyst loadings for Co–N/C and 20 wt% Pt/C are both 3 mg cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 


4.3.2. Electrocatalysts made of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). 
Zhao et al.188 developed the synthesis of carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) by the pyrolysis of MOFs with controlled shape and size. In this work, the Fe-based MOF, MIL-88B-NH3, was obtained from FeCl3 and 2-aminoterephthalic acid via hydrothermal treatment. As depicted in Fig. 20a and b, the spindle-like structure and size of the MOFs remained intact after the pyrolytic process, but the SSA increased from 203 to 326 m2 g−1 when transformed into CNPs. As can be seen in Fig. 20c, CNPs provide high ORR electrocatalytic activity in KOH with n = 3.97, Eonset = 1.03 V and E1/2 = 0.92 V. This excellent electrocatalytic activity possibly could be due to the high crystallinity and large contribution of heteroatoms such as N (4.4 wt%) and O (6.6 wt%) and the presence of Fe (3.3 wt%) and the highly active species Fe/Fe3C–C. Finally, CNPs were applied as the cathode in an ADMFC using an anion-exchange membrane (A201 Tokuyama) at 60 °C (Fig. 20d). Compared to the Pt/C, the CNP electrode produced 1.7 times higher power density (22.7 mW cm−2) and 1.4 times larger current density (93.9 mA cm−2) and improved OCV up to 0.81 V.
 Fig. 20  TEM images of spindle-like (a) MIL-88B-NH3 and (b) CNPs after pyrolysis, (c) LSV curves of MIL-88B-NH3, CNPs, and Pt/C at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH, (d) ADMFC performance with CNPs and Pt/C catalysts at 60 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF) is another type of MOF composed of a metal–imidazolate complex with nitrogen content and a porous structure. Ai et al. synthesised a Co-containing ZIF with controlled size from 3 μm to 200 nm by adjusting the molar ratio of the starting components (methylimidazole and cobalt nitrate). After the carbonisation at 700 °C, Co,N-doped carbon particles (Nano-P-ZIF-67) with high yield (75%), surface area, and porosity, and rhombic dodecahedron morphology were obtained. It was observed that by decreasing the particle size from 3 μm to 300 nm, the limiting current density was significantly increased (without any effect on Eonset), however further size reduction below 300 nm did not influence the ORR activity. In comparison to Pt/C, Nano-P-ZIF-67 showed similar Eonset (1.01 V vs. NHE), remarkable positive shift of E1/2 (29 mV) and stability (<10% activity loss after 25000 s) in a KOH electrolyte. In a DMFC using a PAEK membrane, Nano-P-ZIF-67 outperformed Pt/C with more than two times power density (45.5 mW cm−2 at 0.35 V) and better OCV (0.84 V vs. 0.7 V) because of tolerance to methanol crossover.189
Zhang et al. utilised ZIF-8 to synthesise N-doped porous carbon sheets (NPCS) by anchoring to GO.190 In this case, 2-methylimidazole was applied as a N-containing ligand to coordinate with Zn2+ ions. Poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) was used to functionalise GO so that the amide carbonyl groups interact with Zn2+ and facilitate the nucleation and uniform distribution of ZIF-8 on the surface of GO. Finally, freeze drying and pyrolysis of this hybrid material at 800 °C resulted in a porous carbon structure GNPCSs-800 with a large SSA (911 m2 g−1) and N content (4.38%), rendering high ORR activity (n∼3.98). A DMFC measurement using the PAEK membrane suggested the superior performance of GNPCSs-800 (OCV = 0.71 V, Pmax = 33 mW cm−2) compared to that of Pt/C (OCV = 0.65 V, Pmax = 22.5 mW cm−2).


4.3.3. Effect of catalyst surface groups and fuel OH− content on ADMFC performance. 
In an interesting design of active centres, Yan et al. reported that the ORR can be enhanced by the synergic effect of hydroxyl and epoxy groups of Fe–N–C catalysts and methanol under alkaline conditions.191 The DFT calculations revealed that on epoxy groups methanol can be oxidised into formaldehyde, resulting in the formation of hydrogen atoms. Some of the hydrogen atoms are further converted to OH˙ and H2O by hydroxyl groups, thus lowering the energy barrier of the rate determining step (RDS). The experiments also showed that increasing the hydroxyl and epoxy contents of Fe–N–C:O improved the ORR electrocatalytic activity. Moreover, the synergy-induced enhancement was observed to be almost 5.5 times higher than that of Pt/C that cannot tolerate methanol crossover. In contrast to the conventional catalysts, increasing the concentration of methanol increased the ORR current density.
The performance of a DMFC using Fe-based catalysts was investigated with and without KOH.192 The reason was to study the influence of hydroxide ions on methanol oxidation as well as chemical degradation of MEA. Methanol oxidation requires 6 OH− per molecule, thus the addition of KOH can improve the stoichiometry of the anode reaction to increase the production of CO2 and consequently flushing out carbonate and bicarbonate formed as by-products. On the other hand, AEMs may undergo degradation at high alkaline concentrations.193 The AEMs were developed at Sandia National Laboratories (SNL) based on the poly(phenylene) backbone, including aminated tetramethyl poly(phenylene) (ATMPP) and trimethylamine hexamethylene poly(phenylene) (TMAC6PP).194 These membranes showed good stability especially under a higher operation condition (80 °C). In KOH-free fuel cells using the ATMPP membrane, Fe-based cathodes performed better (Pmax = 2.78 mW cm−2) compared to Pt-based counterparts (Pmax = 0.85 mW cm−2) due to their better tolerance to methanol crossover. However, lower performance was observed using TMAC6PP, possibly due to the inferior compatibility of the Fe-based catalyst with the TMAC6PPC6 ionomer. Increasing KOH concentration in the anode feed together with 1 M methanol improved the performance of the Fe-based system to 44.3 and 47.6 mW cm−2, respectively with 1 M and 2 M KOH. Additional increase of MeOH concentration to 2 M enhanced the maximum power density even higher to 52 mW cm−2, in contrast to the Pt-based fuel cell catalyst that resulted in poorer performance (20 mW cm−2). Ratso et al. applied carbide-derived carbon (CDC) as a support for co-doping Fe–N or Co–N, using dicyandiamide and iron or cobalt salts.195 Both M–N–CDC catalysts displayed similar electrocatalytic activity in 0.1 M KOH, showing the values of Eonset and E1/2 were almost 100 mV and 50 mV more negative compared to those of Pt/C, respectively. The alkaline DMFC tests were done using 1 M methanol with and without 0.1 M KOH. Without KOH the performance of all the samples was mediocre, about 1.4 mW cm−2 for the M–N–CDCs. However, the addition of KOH improved the DMFC performance to higher than 6 mW cm−2 for both M–N–CDCs and outperformed commercial Pt/C (4.7 mW cm−2).

4.4. Non-precious metal cathode electrodes in alkaline direct ethanol fuel cells
Ethanol is another alternative fuel for small electronic devices because of its non-toxicity and high energy density (8.3 Wh kg−1).196 Zhiani et al.197 investigated the performance of an alkaline direct ethanol fuel cell (ADEFC) using a commercial non-noble metal cathode catalyst (Hypermec K14 made by Acta SpA) and compared with the conventional 10 wt% Pt/C cathode. It was observed that the cell made of the Hypermec K14 catalyst provided higher power density and OCV than Pt/C, when both O2 (102 mW cm−2) and air (85 mW cm−2) were used at the cathode. The ethanol crossover current density was measured by flowing N2 to the cathode and shown to be about 30 mA cm−2 for the Pt/C catalyst, while almost no change was observed with the Pt-free catalyst. The ethanol crossover is attributed to the cathode potential drop and decrease in the cell voltage.
Rauf et al. synthesised N-doped CNTs with encapsulated Fe particles using benzoguanamine (Bg), cyanuric acid (CA) and melamine (M) as multiple N-precursors and FeCl3. It was found that the combination of N-precursors was important for the formation of NCNTs (50–200 nm in diameter). The as-prepared catalysts showed low ORR activity, however after acid-wash and second pyrolysis, the activity increased significantly. The highest ORR activity was obtained by annealing at 800 °C with Eonset = 1.1 V and E1/2 = 0.93 V and less than 1% peroxide yield in alkaline medium. The high stability (29% loss after 100 h) could be due to the double heat-treatment and the coverage of Fe particles with 5–10 atomic carbon layers, protecting them from corrosion. As a cathode catalyst in an alkaline direct ethanol fuel cell, (Bg–CA–M)–Fe/N/C@800 provided high power density of 64 mW cm−2 at 350 mA cm−2.198
Osmieri et al.199 also investigated the influence of four different types of carbon materials as supports for the synthesis of Fe–N/C catalysts. Acetylene black and MWCNTs were used as received. Two other carbon materials were synthesised by a hard-template method using silica mesoporous particles as well as silica nanopowder via impregnation and pyrolysis of sucrose, named respectively as MPC and CNS. It was observed that the properties of the carbon support have a significant effect on the performance of the DMFC under acidic conditions, because of the slower ORR kinetics. However in an ADEFC, the influence of the carbon support was less evident because of enhanced ORR kinetics at higher pH. Furthermore, they used Fe phthalocyanine to produce Fe–N–C via hard templating.200 When the catalyst performance was evaluated in an ADEFC, a high peak power density of 62 mW cm−2 was reached. It was also shown that the ionomer content in the catalyst layer has a significant influence on the fuel cell performance.
5. Concluding remarks and further perspectives
This review provides recent progress in the development of non-precious metal ORR catalysts and their integration as cathode electrodes in AEM fuel cells. One approach for replacing Pt from ORR electrocatalysts is doping of carbon nanomaterials with heteroatoms (nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, etc.). Among these, N-doped carbon materials have demonstrated on par or better ORR activity, stability and tolerance to CO and methanol oxidation in alkaline media compared to Pt-based electrocatalysts. The next generation of transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts enhanced the ORR performance competitive to Pt-based electrocatalysts even under acidic conditions.
From the basic research point of view it would be of utmost importance to determine the number of active sites on the surface of NPMC materials. This would allow one to estimate turnover frequencies (TOFs), which would be highly relevant in order to determine the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity of various catalysts analogously to Pt-based catalysts for which the number of surface sites can be determined by hydrogen underpotential deposition or CO stripping. For instance, for Fe–N–C catalysts the contribution of different types of Fe species can be determined by poisoning experiments and Mössbauer spectroscopy, however, the quantification of various surface sites is still a big challenge. The extensive knowledge gained about the nature of active sites would enable a rational design of novel catalyst materials. A suitable pore size distribution plays an extremely important role in fuel cell electrocatalysis, regarding the mass transport of reactants and products and the availability of active surface sites. Various strategies have been employed for that purpose, including the design of hierarchically porous catalyst materials and the application of templates in the synthesis.
Alkaline membrane fuel cells have received considerable attention since the last decade. There has been remarkable activity in the field of AEMFC research and development and significant progress has been made. However, the entire AEMFC technology is still somewhat behind that based on PEMFCs. The AEM fuel cells have several advantages over their PEM counterparts. The selection of cathode catalyst materials is much wider and there has been intensive research activity to study the electrocatalytic properties of various non-precious metal cathode catalysts for AEMFC application.
The commercial anion-exchange membranes available at present cannot compete with Nafion® in PEM fuel cells. The main challenges in AEMs are low ionic conductivity, inadequate chemical stability in oxidative and alkaline media and lack of suitable ionomers compatible with the membranes. Therefore, further studies on designing more stable anion-exchange membranes are necessary for more durable AEM-based fuel cell performance. The fabrication of MEAs based on AEMs needs further optimisation. Water management in AEMFCs is vitally important in order to achieve good performance characteristics. Taking into account all these important aspects (catalyst design, anion-exchange membrane development, proper fabrication of MEAs, water management, etc.) would make it possible to have a real breakthrough in this area.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the institutional research funding of the Estonian Ministry of Education and Research (IUT20-16) and the EU through the European Regional Development Fund (TK141 “Advanced materials and high-technology devices for energy recuperation systems”). M. B. would like to acknowledge the Academy of Finland Centre of Excellence (HYBER).
References
M. H. Shao, Q. W. Chang, J. P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Serov, I. V. Zenyuk, C. G. Arges and M. Chatenet, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 149–157 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Alexeyeva, E. Shulga, V. Kisand, I. Kink and K. Tammeveski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 648, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lilloja, E. Kibena-Põldsepp, M. Merisalu, P. Rauwel, L. Matisen, A. Niilisk, E. S. F. Cardoso, G. Maia, V. Sammelselg and K. Tammeveski, Catalysts, 2016, 6, 108 CrossRef .
E. Kibena, M. Mooste, J. Kozlova, M. Marandi, V. Sammelselg and K. Tammeveski, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 35, 26–29 CrossRef CAS .
D. Srivastava, T. Susi, M. Borghei and L. Kari, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 15225–15235 RSC .
K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shanmugam and T. Osaka, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4463–4465 RSC .
J. Sanetuntikul, T. Hang and S. Shanmugam, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9473–9476 RSC .
R. L. Liu, D. Q. Wu, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2565–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, X. D. Zhuang, S. Bruller, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, T. P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, H. W. Liang, K. Parvez, X. D. Zhuang, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1570–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Sheng, L. Shao, J. J. Chen, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, S. B. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sharifi, G. Hu, X. E. Jia and T. Wagberg, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8904–8912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Haque, S. Sarkar, M. Hassan, M. S. Hossain, A. I. Minett, S. X. Dou and V. G. Gomes, J. Power Sources, 2016, 328, 472–481 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. He, C. H. Jiang, J. B. Wang and L. H. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9503–9507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xing, Y. Zheng, L. H. Li, B. C. C. Cowie, D. Gunzelmann, S. Z. Qiao, S. M. Huang and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6856–6862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, X. Wang, X. Q. Cui, G. M. Yang and W. T. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 557–559 RSC .
G. Tuci, C. Zafferoni, A. Rossin, L. Luconi, A. Milella, M. Ceppatelli, M. Innocenti, Y. F. Liu, C. Pham-Huu and G. Giambastiani, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 6226–6236 CAS .
S. Yasuda, L. Yu, J. Kim and K. Murakoshi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9627–9629 RSC .
L. F. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. H. Tang, H. Gong, Z. X. Shen, L. Y. Jianyi and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
S. Ratso, I. Kruusenberg, M. Käärik, M. Kook, R. Saar, M. Pärs, J. Leis and K. Tammeveski, Carbon, 2017, 113, 159–169 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, C. Q. Yang, X. J. Wang, F. Qiu, F. Jing, J. Z. Jiang, R. L. Liu, S. Han and D. Q. Wu, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, S. A. Wohlgemuth, P. Osiceanu and M. M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2514–2524 RSC .
G. A. Ferrero, K. Preuss, A. B. Fuertes, M. Sevilla and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2581–2589 CAS .
G. A. Ferrero, A. B. Fuertes, M. Sevilla and M. M. Titirici, Carbon, 2016, 106, 179–187 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang, X. Chen, B. Q. Li, T. Z. Hou, B. S. Zhang, Q. Zhang, M. M. Titirici and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6845–6851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Preuss, L. C. Tanase, C. M. Teodorescu, I. Abrahams and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16336–16343 CAS .
M. Vikkisk, I. Kruusenberg, S. Ratso, U. Joost, E. Shulga, I. Kink, P. Rauwel and K. Tammeveski, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 59495–59505 RSC .
Z. Chen, D. Higgins, H. S. Tao, R. S. Hsu and Z. W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21008–21013 CAS .
M. Borghei, P. Kanninen, M. Lundahl, T. Susi, J. Sainio, I. Anoshkin, A. Nasibulin, T. Kallio, K. Tammeveski, E. Kauppinen and V. Ruiz, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 233–241 CrossRef .
A. Q. Zhao, J. Masa, W. Schuhmann and W. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24283–24291 CAS .
C. Z. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. L. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jo, J. Sanetuntikul and S. Shanmugam, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 53637–53643 RSC .
Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, W. X. Zheng and J. A. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3257–3261 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, Z. D. Wei, X. L. Gou and W. Xu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9978–9984 RSC .
D. S. Yang, D. Bhattacharjya, M. Y. Song and J. S. Yu, Carbon, 2014, 67, 736–743 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Yang, D. Bhattacharjya, S. Inamdar, J. Park and J. S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16127–16130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Poh, P. Simek, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5262–5272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. F. Li, G. Y. Fang, H. G. Nie, Z. Liu, X. M. Zhou, X. Chen and S. M. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Park, Y. J. Jang, Y. J. Kim, M. S. Song, S. Yoon, D. H. Kim and S. J. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 103–109 RSC .
S. B. Yang, L. J. Zhi, K. Tang, X. L. Feng, J. Maier and K. Mullen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634–3640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inamdar, H. S. Choi, P. Wang, M. Y. Song and J. S. Yu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 30, 9–12 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seredych, K. Laszlo and T. J. Bandosz, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2924–2931 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Li, D. G. Yang, H. B. Chen, Y. Gao and H. M. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Sheng, H. L. Gao, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 390–395 RSC .
G. Jo and S. Shanmugam, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 101–104 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Bo and L. P. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2459–2465 RSC .
J. M. Su, X. C. Cao, J. Wu, C. Jin, J. H. Tian and R. Z. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 24728–24737 RSC .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. You, S. J. Liao, H. L. Li, S. Y. Hou, H. L. Peng, X. Y. Zeng, F. F. Liu, R. P. Zheng, Z. Y. Fu and Y. W. Li, Carbon, 2014, 69, 294–301 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Shi, F. Peng, S. X. Liao, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, Z. W. Liu, B. S. Zhang and D. S. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14853–14857 CAS .
J. J. Li, Y. M. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, J. Z. Huang, J. C. Han, Z. H. Zhang, X. J. Han, P. Xu and B. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 398–405 CAS .
Z. K. Yang, L. Lin, Y. N. Liu, X. Zhou, C. Z. Yuan and A. W. Xu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 52937–52944 RSC .
S. Y. Wang, E. Iyyamperumal, A. Roy, Y. H. Xue, D.
S. Yu and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11756–11760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. J. Yang, S. Chen, X. Z. Wang, Y. W. Ma, Q. Wu, Y. F. Jiang, W. J. Qian and Z. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1201–1204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Z. Yazdi, H. L. Fei, R. Q. Ye, G. Wang, J. Tour and U. Sundararaj, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7786–7794 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, L. P. Zhang, Z. H. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yu, Y. H. Xue and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2863–2870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Meng, D. Voiry, A. Goswami, X. X. Zou, X. X. Huang, M. Chhowalla, Z. W. Liu and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13554–13557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Zhao, J. Liu, C. X. Li, W. B. Ji, M. M. Yang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22297–22304 CAS .
D. C. Higgins, M. A. Hoque, F. Hassan, J. Y. Choi, B. Kim and Z. W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2734–2740 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Y. Sun, H. Y. Liang, H. X. Ji, L. Song, C. Gao and H. X. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4606–4613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ratso, I. Kruusenberg, U. Joost, R. Saar and K. Tammeveski, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 22510–22519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ratso, I. Kruusenberg, M. Vikkisk, U. Joost, E. Shulga, I. Kink, T. Kallio and K. Tammeveski, Carbon, 2014, 73, 361–370 CrossRef CAS .
M. Borghei, J. Lehtonen, L. Liu and O. J. Rojas, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201703691 .
H. Ba, Y. F. Liu, T. P. Lai, D. V. Cuong, J. M. Nhut, D. L. Nguyen, O. Ersen, G. Tuci, G. Giambastiani and P. H. Cuong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1408–1419 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Liu, H. M. Zhang, S. W. Liu, X. Zhang, T. X. Wu, X. Ge, Y. P. Zang, H. J. Zhao and G. Z. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4095–4101 RSC .
K. N. Chaudhari, M. Y. Song and J. S. Yu, Small, 2014, 10, 2625–2636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Borghei, N. Laocharoen, E. Kibena-Põldsepp, L. S. Johansson, J. Campbell, E. Kauppinen, K. Tammeveski and O. J. Rojas, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 394–402 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 12550–12562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masa, W. Xia, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10102–10120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and M. Pumera, Applied Materials Today, 2016, 5, 134–141 CrossRef .
J. Masa, A. Q. Zhao, W. Xia, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 128, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa, A. Q. Zhao, W. Xia, Z. Y. Sun, B. Mei, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 113–116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. H. A. Wong, B. Kherzi, R. D. Webster and M. Pumera, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1650–1654 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chua, Z. Sofer, B. Khezri, R. D. Webster and M. Pumera, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17875–17880 RSC .
R. Jasinski, Nature, 1964, 201, 1212–1213 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Jahnke, M. Schönborn and G. Zimmermann, in Physical and Chemical Applications of Dyestuffs, ed. F. P. Schäfer, H. Gerischer, F. Willig, H. Meier, H. Jahnke, M. Schönborn and G. Zimmermann, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1976, pp. 133–181 Search PubMed .
V. S. Bagotzky, M. R. Tarasevich, K. A. Radyushkina, O. A. Levina and S. I. Andrusyova, J. Power Sources, 1978, 2, 233–240 CrossRef .
S. Gupta, D. Tryk, I. Bae, W. Aldred and E. Yeager, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1989, 19, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Serov, M. H. Robson, K. Artyushkova and P. Atanassov, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 127, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarapuu, L. Samolberg, K. Kreek, M. Koel, L. Matisen and K. Tammeveski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 746, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kreek, A. Sarapuu, L. Samolberg, U. Joost, V. Mikli, M. Koel and K. Tammeveski, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 2079–2088 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarapuu, K. Kreek, K. Kisand, M. Kook, M. Uibu, M. Koel and K. Tammeveski, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 81–88 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, R. Gokhale, A. Serov, K. Artyushkova and P. Atanassov, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. F. To, J. W. D. Ng, S. Siahrostami, A. L. Koh, Y. J. Lee, Z. H. Chen, K. D. Fong, S. C. Chen, J. J. He, W. G. Bae, J. Wilcox, H. Y. Jeong, K. Kim, F. Studt, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and Z. N. Bao, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1163–1177 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Barkholtz and D. J. Liu, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 20–37 RSC .
J. Sanetuntikul and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7644–7650 RSC .
X. G. Li, B. N. Popov, T. Kawahara and H. Yanagi, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kruusenberg, L. Matisen, Q. Shah, A. M. Kannan and K. Tammeveski, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 4406–4412 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kruusenberg, D. Ramani, S. Ratso, U. Joost, R. Saar, P. Rauwel, A. M. Kannan and K. Tammeveski, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 1455–1465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ratso, I. Kruusenberg, A. Sarapuu, P. Rauwel, R. Saar, U. Joost, J. Aruväli, P. Kanninen, T. Kallio and K. Tammeveski, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dominguez, F. J. Perez-Alonso, J. L. Gomez de la Fuente, S. A. Al-Thabaiti, S. N. Basahel, A. O. Alyoubi, A. A. Alshehri, M. A. Pena and S. Rojas, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Dhavale, S. K. Singh, A. Nadeema, S. S. Gaikwad and S. Kurungot, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20117–20125 RSC .
S. Ratso, I. Kruusenberg, M. Käärik, M. Kook, L. Puust, R. Saar, J. Leis and K. Tammeveski, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 233–243 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Kasatkin, R. Jager, E. Hark, P. Teppor, I. Tallo, U. Joost, K. Smits, R. Kanarbik and E. Lust, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 80, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Matter, E. Wang, J. M. M. Millet and U. S. Ozkan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1444–1450 CAS .
H. S. Oh and H. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Kramm, J. Herranz, N. Larouche, T. M. Arruda, M. Lefevre, F. Jaouen, P. Bogdanoff, S. Fiechter, I. Abs-Wurmbach, S. Mukerjee and J.-P. Dodelet, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11673–11688 RSC .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M. T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Y. Ma, H. D. Tang, X. Mamat, T. Wagberg, G. Z. Hu and S. J. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jia, N. Ramaswamy, H. Hafiz, U. Tylus, K. Strickland, G. Wu, B. Barbiellini, A. Bansil, E. F. Holby, P. Zelenay and S. Mukerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12496–12505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Sahraie, U. I. Kramm, J. Steinberg, Y. J. Zhang, A. Thomas, T. Reier, J. P. Paraknowitsch and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ferrandon, A. J. Kropf, D. J. Myers, K. Artyushkova, U. Kramm, P. Bogdanoff, G. Wu, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16001–16013 CAS .
K. Strickland, E. Miner, Q. Jia, U. Tylus, N. Ramaswamy, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen and S. Mukerjee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Artyushkova, I. Matanovic, B. Halevi and P. Atanassov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2836–2843 CAS .
U. Tylus, Q. Y. Jia, K. Strickland, N. Ramaswamy, A. Serov, P. Atanassov and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8999–9008 CAS .
J. Liu, X. J. Sun, P. Song, Y. W. Zhang, W. Xing and W. L. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6879–6883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Li, W. Zhou, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, F. Wei, J. C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Thorum, J. M. Hankett and A. A. Gewirth, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 295–298 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, Y. J. Sa, H. Y. Jeong and S. H. Joo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9567–9575 CAS .
W. J. Jiang, L. Gu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. J. Zhang, J. Q. Wang, J. S. Hu, Z. D. Wei and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3570–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Deng, L. Yu, X. Q. Chen, G. X. Wang, L. Jin, X. L. Pan, J. Deng, G. Q. Sun and X. H. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. F. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3675–3679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Yang, X. J. Liu, X. Y. Yue, J. B. Jia and S. J. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1436–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Fan, Z. W. Peng, R. Q. Ye, H. Q. Zhou and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7407–7418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Olson, S. Pylypenko, P. Atanassov, K. Asazawa, K. Yamada and H. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5049–5059 CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Xiao, X. J. Bian, L. Liao, S. Zhang, C. Ji and B. H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17654–17660 CAS .
G. Wu, C. M. Johnston, N. H. Mack, K. Artyushkova, M. Ferrandon, M. Nelson, J. S. Lezama-Pacheco, S. D. Conradson, K. L. More, D. J. Myers and P. Zelenay, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11392–11405 RSC .
R. Z. Zhang, S. J. He, Y. Z. Lu and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3559–3567 CAS .
G. Wu, M. Nelson, S. G. Ma, H. Meng, G. F. Cui and P. K. Shen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3972–3982 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Holby and P. Zelenay, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 54–64 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Szakacs, M. Lefevre, U. I. Kramm, J. P. Dodelet and F. Vidal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13654–13661 RSC .
S. Kattel, P. Atanassov and B. Kiefer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 148–153 RSC .
S. Kattel, P. Atanassov and B. Kiefer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13800–13806 RSC .
J. H. Zagal, F. J. Recio, C. A. Gutierrez, C. Zuniga, M. A. Paez and C. A. Caro, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 24–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510–14521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, Q. Y. Jia and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15443–15449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Setzler, Z. B. Zhuang, J. A. Wittkopf and Y. S. Yan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1020–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gottesfeld, D. R. Dekel, M. Page, C. Bae, Y. Yan, P. Zelenay and Y. S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 170–184 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Higgins and Z. W. Chen, ECS Trans., 2010, 28, 63–68 CAS .
C. V. Rao and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4340–4346 Search PubMed .
O. H. Kim, Y. H. Cho, D. Y. Chung, M. J. Kim, J. M. Yoo, J. E. Park, H. Choe and Y. E. Sung, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Sa, C. Park, H. Y. Jeong, S. H. Park, Z. Lee, K. T. Kim, G. G. Park and S. H. Joo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4102–4106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Kumar, M. M. Raju, A. Arunchander, S. Selvaraj, G. Kalita, T. N. Narayanan, A. K. Sahu and D. K. Pattanayak, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F848–F855 CrossRef CAS .
T. Palaniselvam, M. O. Valappil, R. Illathvalappil and S. Kurungot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1059–1067 CAS .
A. Arunchander, S. G. Peera, S. K. Panda, S. Chellammal and A. K. Sahu, Carbon, 2017, 118, 531–544 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Unni, S. N. Bhange, R. Illathvalappil, N. Mutneja, K. R. Patil and S. Kurungot, Small, 2015, 11, 352–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, M. Choun, Y. Ye, J. Lee, Y. Mun, E. Kang, J. Hwang, Y. H. Lee, C. H. Shin, S. H. Moon, S. K. Kim and E. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9230–9234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Xu, T. S. Zhu, J. L. Qiao, F. Y. Zhang and Z. W. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 9159–9166 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, L. Wang, K. Preuß, M. Qiao, M.-M. Titirici, J. Varcoe and Q. Cai, J. Power Sources, 2017, 372, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
M. Piana, M. Boccia, A. Filpi, E. Flammia, H. A. Miller, M. Orsini, F. Salusti, S. Santiccioli, F. Ciardelli and A. Pucci, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5875–5881 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mamlouk, S. M. S. Kumar, P. Gouerec and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7594–7600 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Guo, H. He, D. Chu and R. R. Chen, Electrocatalysis, 2012, 3, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, X. Qing, P. Xu, Y. Song and J. Qiao, ECS Trans., 2015, 66, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Jiang and D. Chu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 352–361 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Miller, M. Bellini, W. Oberhauser, X. Deng, H. Q. Chen, Q. G. He, M. Passaponti, M. Innocenti, R. O. Yang, F. F. Sun, Z. Jiang and F. Vizza, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 33142–33151 RSC .
P. Song, Y. W. Zhang, J. Pan, L. Zhuang and W. L. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1972–1975 RSC .
H. Lee, M. J. Kim, T. Lim, Y. E. Sung, H. J. Kim, H. N. Lee, O. J. Kwon and Y. H. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 5396 CrossRef PubMed .
H. C. Huang, Y. C. Lin, S. T. Chang, C. C. Liu, K. C. Wang, H. P. Jhong, J. F. Lee and C. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19790–19799 CAS .
Q. G. He, Q. Li, S. Khene, X. M. Ren, F. E. Lopez-Suarez, D. Lozano-Castello, A. Bueno-Lopez and G. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8697–8707 CAS .
T. Palaniselvam, V. Kashyap, S. N. Bhange, J. B. Baek and S. Kurungot, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2150–2162 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, X. D. Yang, Z. Y. Zhou, Y. J. Lai, M. Rauf, Y. Wang, J. Pan, L. Zhuang, Q. Wang, Y. C. Wang, N. Tian, X. S. Zhang and S. G. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17092–17095 RSC .
Y. J. Sa, D. J. Seo, J. Woo, J. T. Lim, J. Y. Cheon, S. Y. Yang, J. M. Lee, D. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, C. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15046–15056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Aiyappa, S. N. Bhange, V. P. Sivasankaran and S. Kurungot, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2928–2933 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Unni, S. Ramadas, R. Illathvalappil, S. N. Bhange and S. Kurungot, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4361–4367 CAS .
J. Sanetuntikul, C. Chuaicham, Y. W. Choi and S. Shanmugam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15473–15481 CAS .
G. A. Ferrero, K. Preuss, A. Marinovic, A. B. Jorge, N. Mansor, D. J. L. Brett, A. B. Fuertes, M. Sevilla and M. M. Titirici, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5922–5932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Chung, M. J. Kim, N. Kang, J. M. Yoo, H. Shin, O. H. Kim and Y. E. Sung, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2890–2898 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gokhale, Y. C. Chen, A. Serov, K. Artyushkova and P. Atanassov, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mun, M. J. Kim, S.-A. Park, E. Lee, Y. Ye, S. Lee, Y.-T. Kim, S. Kim, O.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Cho, Y.-E. Sung and J. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 222, 191–199 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hossen, K. Artyushkova, P. Atanassov and A. Serov, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Yu and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2004, 137, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
M. Borghei, G. Scotti, P. Kanninen, T. Weckman, I. V. Anoshkin, A. G. Nasibulin, S. Franssila, E. I. Kauppinen, T. Kallio and V. Ruiz, Energy, 2014, 65, 612–620 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santasalo-Aarnio, M. Borghei, I. V. Anoshkin, A. G. Nasibulin, E. I. Kauppinen, V. Ruiz and T. Kallio, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 3415–3424 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. He, P. Song, J. J. Feng, R. Fang, D. X. Yu, J. R. Chen and A. J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 204–213 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Yang, W. W. Cai, Q. Zhang, Y. Ling, X. X. Yu and Y. F. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 12583–12592 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Huang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6266–6291 CAS .

          M. Borghei, Novel carbon nanomaterials for the direct methanol fuel cell electrodes, Aalto University publication series,  2015 Search PubMed .
H. F. Hunger, Proc., Annu. Power Sources Conf., 1960, 14, 55 CAS .
S. Maurya, S. H. Shin, Y. Kim and S. H. Moon, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 37206–37230 RSC .
J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. Kucernak, W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer, K. Scott, T. W. Xu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3135–3191 CAS .
P. Kanninen, M. Borghei, O. Sorsa, E. Pohjalainen, E. I. Kauppinen, V. Ruiz and T. Kallio, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156, 341–349 CrossRef .
I. Kruusenberg, S. Ratso, M. Vikkisk, P. Kanninen, T. Kallio, A. M. Kannan and K. Tammeveski, J. Power Sources, 2015, 281, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Goswami, R. Nandan, B. K. Barman and K. K. Nanda, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3133–3139 CAS .
K. Wan, G. F. Long, M. Y. Liu, L. Du, Z. X. Liang and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 566–571 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Sun, P. Song, Y. W. Zhang, C. P. Liu, W. L. Xu and W. Xing, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2505 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Sun, Y. W. Zhang, P. Song, J. Pan, L. Zhuang, W. L. Xu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1726–1729 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Gu, L. H. Jiang, X. N. Li, J. T. Jin, J. H. Wang and G. Q. Sun, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 539–548 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Xiao, J. B. Zhu, L. G. Feng, C. P. Liu and W. Xing, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2521–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. X. Shen, L. R. Zheng, W. H. He, C. P. Ruan, C. H. Jiang, K. L. Ai and L. H. Lu, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 120–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Zhao, H. J. Yin, L. Du, L. C. He, K. Zhao, L. Chang, G. P. Yin, H. J. Zhao, S. Q. Liu and Z. Y. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12660–12668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ai, Z. Li and X. Cui, J. Power Sources, 2017, 368, 46–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhong, J. Wang, Y. W. Zhang, W. L. Xu, W. Xing, D. Xu, Y. F. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14235–14239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Yan, Z. K. Tang, X. Xu, F. Fang, D. S. Song, J. G. Liu, S. F. Lu, L. M. Liu, J. Luo and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
R. Janarthanan, A. Serov, S. K. Pilli, D. A. Gamarra, P. Atanassov, M. R. Hibbs and A. M. Herring, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 175, 202–208 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chempath, B. R. Einsla, L. R. Pratt, C. S. Macomber, J. M. Boncella, J. A. Rau and B. S. Pivovar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3179–3182 CAS .
R. Janarthanan, S. K. Pilli, J. L. Horan, D. A. Gamarra, M. R. Hibbs and A. M. Herring, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F944–F950 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ratso, I. Kruusenberg, M. Käärik, M. Kook, R. Saar, P. Kanninen, T. Kallio, J. Leis and K. Tammeveski, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 276–286 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kanninen, M. Borghei, J. Hakanpaa, E. I. Kauppinen, V. Ruiz and T. Kallio, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 793, 48–57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhiani, H. A. Gasteiger, M. Piana and S. Catanorchi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5110–5116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rauf, R. R. Chen, Q. Wang, Y. C. Wang and Z. Y. Zhou, Carbon, 2017, 125, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
L. Osmieri, R. Escudero-Cid, M. Armandi, A. H. A. Monteverde Videla, J. L. G. Fierro, P. Ocon and S. Specchia, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 637–653 CrossRef CAS .
L. Osmieri, R. Escudero-Cid, A. H. A. Monteverde Videla, P. Ocón and S. Specchia, Renewable Energy, 2018, 115, 226–237 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta08690cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Ave Sarapuu	Ave Sarapuu studied Chemistry at the University of Tartu, Estonia, and received her PhD in 2008 under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Kaido Tammeveski. She is currently working as a senior research fellow at the Institute of Chemistry of the University of Tartu and her research is devoted to developing novel electrocatalyst materials for oxygen reduction, focusing on non-precious metal catalysts. She is the author of more than 30 papers published in peer-reviewed international journals.
Elo Kibena-Põldsepp	Elo Kibena-Põldsepp received her PhD in 2014 at the University of Tartu (Estonia) under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Kaido Tammeveski. She is currently a researcher at the Institute of Chemistry of the University of Tartu. Her research interests include modification of metal and carbon-based materials with aryl films, synthesis of nanocomposites and heteroatom-doped carbon materials and studying their electrocatalytic properties. She is a co-author of 16 peer-reviewed papers.
Maryam Borghei	Maryam Borghei with a Chemical Engineering background conducted her masters thesis research on the synthesis of carbon nanotubes in Iran. During her doctoral studies at Aalto University, Finland (2010–2015), she developed her research on the synthesis of Pt-based electrocatalysts and N-doped carbon nanomaterials for fuel cells. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems (Aalto University), and co-author of 30 peer-reviewed papers and one book chapter. Her interest is application of biomaterials for more sustainable and environmentally friendly energy conversion and storage, as well as developing organic–inorganic hybrid materials for smart printed electronics.
Kaido Tammeveski	Kaido Tammeveski was born in Tartu, Estonia in 1964. In 1989 he graduated from the University of Tartu as a chemist. He was awarded a PhD degree in 1998. In 1999/2000 he was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Liverpool working with Prof. David Schiffrin. He has been Associate Professor at the Institute of Chemistry of the University of Tartu since 2001. His main research interest is oxygen reduction electrocatalysis. He has also been involved in fuel cell research. In 2014 he received the National Science Award. He has supervised 7 PhD thesis completed and is supervising four PhD students at present. He is a co-author of more than 120 original articles, which have been cited more than 3800 times and his h-index is 38 (Dec. 2017).
O2+2H2O+4e−→4OH−	(1)
O2+H2O+2e−→OH−+HO2−	(2)
HO2−+H2O+2e−→3OH−	(3)
2HO2−→2OH−+O2	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic structure of nitrogen-doped graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Rotating-ring disc electrode voltammetric response for the ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (ν = 10 mV s−1, ω = 1600 rpm). The Pt ring electrode was polarized at 0.5 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  LSVs of S1N6CT and Pt/C (20 wt%, E-TEK) at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH aqueous solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Linear scan voltammograms recorded at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH of carbon samples derived from coconut shells (commercial Pt–C is included for comparison). Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  
57Fe Mössbauer spectrum of FePhen@MOF–ArNH3 measured at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Proposed ORR mechanistic pathways on Fe–N4/C and adjacent FeNPS/C in acidic (H+) and alkaline (H2O/OH−) electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Anion-exchange membrane fuel cell performance of the MEA with N-CNTs and Pt/C as cathodes at 323 K (open and closed symbols correspond to the cell voltage and power density, respectively) and (b) corresponding cell voltage–time curves at 20 mA cm−2 for 30 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthesis of the CNT/HDC core–sheath nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Performance of MEAs that employ CNT/HDC-1000, CNTs, or Pt/C as the cathodes in alkaline fuel cells at 50 °C; open and closed circles correspond to cell voltages and power densities, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustrating the synthesis procedure for NHC. A rationally designed pyrrole monomer with a hydrophilic anchoring group was synthesized and co-assembled with a triblock copolymer to form a mesophase in an aqueous solution upon polymerization. Carbonization of the polymer co-assembly yields mesoporous carbon with ordered mesopores. Subsequent ammonia activation generates additional micropores to provide abundant active sites for electrochemical reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 11  Evaluation of NHC performance as a regenerative fuel cell catalyst. Polarization and power density curves for an AEMFC at 70 °C utilizing NHC as the ORR catalyst and commercial Pt/C as the HOR catalyst. An analogous Pt/Pt AEMFC is shown as a comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 12  Fuel cell performance of MEAs with Co and Fe phthalocyanine modified MWCNTs along with E-TEK and Tanaka Pt/C catalysts based cathodes using Tokuyama's A201 series anion exchange membrane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  H2/O2 fuel cell performance of MEAs with M/N/CDC catalysts and commercial 46.1 wt% Pt/C cathodes using a Tokuyama A201 anion exchange membrane. T = 50 °C, anode: 46.1 wt% Pt/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Polarization and power density curves of alkaline exchange membrane fuel cell performance with the HNCS71 catalyst (with a loading of 4 mg cm−2) and Pt/C (40% Pt/C, 0.5 mg cm−2) at 60 °C. For MEAs, the A201 membrane and AS-4 ionomer were used. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) SEM image of the hollow carbon capsules (inset: particle diameter distribution determined over 200 particles), (b) high magnification TEM images of the hollow carbon capsules, (c) KJS pore size distribution and αs-plot method applied to the N2 adsorption branch (inset), and (d) XPS N 1s core level spectra of the Fe–N-doped carbon capsules (Fe–N–CC). Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Polarization curve and power density of alkaline exchange membrane fuel cells operating at 50 °C with Fe–N–CC and Pt/C as cathode catalysts (0.2 mg cm−2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 
CH3OH + 6OH−→ CO2 + 5H2O + 6e−, E0 = −0.81 V	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of a PEM compared to an AEM direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC).175	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of an NCNT bundle. (b) TEM image of NCNTs with a bamboo-like structure. The inset shows the HRTEM image of the same. (c) Cell voltage vs. current density and (d) power density vs. current density for 4 mg cm−2 NCNT loading for different NaOH concentrations at 2 M MeOH. (e) Variation of OCV with different MeOH concentrations at a 6 M NaOH concentration for 4 mg cm−2 NCNT loading. (f) The fuel cell durability of NCNT catalysts of different loadings from 4 to 11 mg cm−2 at 20 mA cm−2 current density is compared with that of a Pt/C based cathode (1 mgPt cm−2) for 2 M MeOH in 2 M NaOH fuel feedstock. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) SEM image of rambutan-like Co–N/C-700, inset: photograph of real rambutans. (b) Polarization curves at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH for various samples. (c) Chronoamperometry measurements for Co–N/C and 20 wt% Pt/C at 0.6 V at 225 rpm. (d) Polarization and power density curves of the ADMFC with Co–N/C as the cathode catalyst compared to 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst. The catalyst loadings for Co–N/C and 20 wt% Pt/C are both 3 mg cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  TEM images of spindle-like (a) MIL-88B-NH3 and (b) CNPs after pyrolysis, (c) LSV curves of MIL-88B-NH3, CNPs, and Pt/C at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH, (d) ADMFC performance with CNPs and Pt/C catalysts at 60 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta08690c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
