Design strategies and applications of novel functionalized phenazine derivatives: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02085H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02085H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 11119-11174Design strategies and applications of novel functionalized phenazine derivatives: a review

        
          
            Yu-Xin 
            Che
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Ni 
            Qi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Yao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen-Juan 
            Qu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bingbing 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            You-Ming 
            Zhang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tai-Bao 
            Wei
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Eco-Environment-Related Polymer Materials, Ministry of Education of China, Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials of Gansu Province, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Northwest Normal University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730070, P. R. China. E-mail: weitaibao@126.com;   Tel: +86 9317973191
bCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Ningxia Normal University, Guyuan, Ningxia 756000, China
Received 
      20th May 2022
    , Accepted 1st July 2022First published on 8th July 2022AbstractPhenazine derivatives have made significant progress owing to their favorable photophysical and chemical properties in recent years. Nevertheless, only a few overviews on phenazine derivatives are reported in the optoelectronic area. Herein, we comprehensively summarize and discuss the tremendous progress on the innovative design strategies, excellent properties and promising applications of novel functionalized phenazine derivatives in optical sensing and electrochemical fields. We anticipate that this review will facilitate new researchers to expand their horizons on the molecular design and development of advanced materials in the future.
1. Introduction
Phenazine is a significant class of aza-polycyclic compound. Compared with other nitrogen heterocyclic compounds, phenazine systems possess irreplaceable advantages, such as strong and stable fluorescence emission, good biocompatibility, excellent antifungal and antimicrobial activities. Recently, more than 6000 compounds based on the phenazine skeleton have been synthesized and recognized, including natural products and synthetic phenazine derivatives. Among them, natural products have antibacterial activity, greatly participating in significant biological processes.1,2 Similarly, various synthetic phenazine derivatives are well-known for use in biology and medicine. Moreover, with the successful development of natural products, enormous enthusiasm has been attracted among researchers to explore their remarkable properties and widespread applications. So far, phenazine derivatives have been employed in a wide variety of applications ranging from medicine to electronics owing to their stable optical and chemical properties.3–10
Phenazine is a rigid planar, redox-active and electron-deficient aromatic compound, which could be easily modified with functional groups or combined with some ligands to create novel functional materials.11–25 In the design of photoelectric functional materials, it becomes one of the most attractive and appropriate structures.26–40 Typically, the functionalization of nitrogen atoms on the phenazine skeleton leads to the formation of a series of phenazine derivatives with variable absorption and fluorescence properties. From then on, researchers have functionalized phenazine in a variety of ways, including alkyl, thiophene, aryl, cyanide and metal bridging, resulting in obvious colored, excellent conductive functional materials with photophysical properties that differ dramatically from those of other unmodified materials.41–50 Most importantly, by functionalizing phenazine derivatives to construct smart molecular materials, the unique properties of the phenazine framework and the merits of the introduced groups are integrated together, which further promotes the development of phenazine derivatives and broadens the types and applications of smart molecular materials.51–55 At present, intelligent materials based on novel functionalized phenazine derivatives have been applied to optical sensing, anti-cancer drugs, cell imaging, and biological antibacterial and other fields due to their unique optical properties and good biocompatibility, presenting huge potential for research.55–62
Up to now, previous reviews on phenazine derivatives have mainly focused on a summary of synthetic methods and their application in the detection of heavy metal ions, and in antineoplastic and antimicrobial activity.63–66 Herein, the present review is designed to provide a more comprehensive and up-to-date overview of novel functionalized phenazine derivatives in recent years. Moreover, we mainly emphasize the design of innovative and exceptional strategies to create functional materials based on novel phenazine derivatives, such as multicolor-tunable dihydrophenazine, thermally activated delayed fluorescent dibenzo[a,c]phenazine, mechanochromic luminescent dibenzo[a,j]phenazine and stable organic frameworks. Simultaneously, it explores the new design thought, excellent properties and promising applications in optical sensing and electrochemistry. We expect that this review will attract particular attention from the researchers working in this field but also serve as a useful starting point to new researchers in the future.
2. 
        N,N′-Dihydrophenazine
Synthetic methodologies for multicolor-tunable molecules involved complicated design and rigorous processes in previous decades. Since then, researchers have already made tremendous progress in exploring methods for generating functionalized phenazine derivatives that might also conveniently and economically exploit excellent photophysical characteristics and potential application. Surprisingly, N,N′-dihydrophenazine and its derivatives demonstrate a distinctive vibration-induced emission (VIE) behavior that facilitates multicolor emission owing to excited-state configuration transformations from bending to planar.67–73 Most notably, the photophysical properties of dihydrophenazine derivatives might generate extraordinary stimuli responsiveness to external environmental factors, such as temperature, humidity, pH, solvent polarity and viscosity.74–80 As a consequence, through altering the environmental factors, such special VIE-active molecules might achieve a significant change in fluorescence color from blue to orange-red and even white. These interesting molecules have been extensively investigated in the fields of sensors, white-light-emitting materials and other multicolor smart materials.81–90
Tang and Li et al.91 designed and synthesized a series of N,N′-dihydrophenazine derivatives 1–5 to give a white-light-emitting, aqueous temperature sensor in 2020. It was observed that such VIE-active fluorophore 5 was considerably encapsulated in F127 micelles to create a multicolor emission by altering the temperature, successfully avoiding the use of organic solvents and the weak solubility of the fluorophore. Firstly, as shown in Scheme 1, this strategy proceeds via the Vilsmeier–Haack formylation at the p-position of dihydrophenazine 1 was required to afford molecule 2. Subsequently, intermediate 2 underwent reduction to give bi-functionalized compound 3. Moreover, the chlorinated dihydrophenazine 4 could be derived from the nucleophilic substitution reaction of compound 3 and SOCl2. In the functionalization strategy, the desired molecule 5 was furnished in moderate yield through phenolic modification of compound 4 and propanoic acid under optimal conditions. Due to the amphiphilic nature of F127 micelles, they could facilitate hydrophobic molecule 5 to be greatly solubilized in an aqueous system. Hence, in F127 micelles, the fluorescence properties of VIE-active molecule 5 were illustrated (Fig. 1). As the temperature increased, the microviscosity change of the F127 micelles could availably affect the intramolecular vibrations of molecule 5 according to the mechanism of the VIE effect, which further achieved multicolor fluorescence from blue to orange, including nearly the pure white-light emission. Meanwhile, the fluorescence of molecule 5 in the F127 solution could be observably quenched after addition of Fe3+. Interestingly, when adenosine 5-triphosphate (ATP) was added, the quenched fluorescence of 5 was dramatically recovered. This was due to the competition of the combination with Fe3+ between molecule 5 and ATP, resulting in the fluorescence quenching or recovery. In light of these fluorescence properties, this aqueous system could be applied in anti-counterfeiting fluorescent ink and white-light-emitting materials with temperature-sensitive response.
 Scheme 1  Synthetic routes of molecules 1–5. 
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration and application of a temperature-sensitive multi-fluorescent system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society). 
The same year, Zhang and Su et al.92 employed a similar strategy to furnish a white-light-emitting system based on crown-ether functionalized dihydrophenazine (6) by supramolecular assembly. Herein, as shown in Scheme 2, this approach involved introducing two benzo-15-crown-5 units into the intermediate followed by ester formation to obtain the desired product 6. The dihydrophenazine unit could act as a fluorescence signal and the crown ethers combined with K+. It was worth noting that crown ethers could possess hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties. They were regarded as phase transfer catalysts and strongly combine appropriate metal ions to form stable complexes. In view of this, the fluorescence properties of molecule 6 were illustrated (Fig. 2). With the addition of K+, the supramolecular interaction between molecule 6 and K+ could result in furnishing supramolecular aggregates, achieving blue emission. Nevertheless, disaggregation of the supramolecular assembly occurred when further 18-crown-6 was added, obtaining orange-red emission. Very interestingly, water solution also had the same effect as 18-crown-6. Utilizing the supramolecular assembly successfully gave tunable multicolor emission from blue to orange-red and even to white-light emission, which provided forceful connection between the VIE effect and supramolecular chemistry.
 Scheme 2  Synthetic route of molecule 6. 
 Fig. 2  The reversible supramolecular assembly process with molecule 6. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society). 
Considering their sustainability and affordability, non-volatile molecular liquids as soft materials have attracted considerable attention for organic methodologies. In 2021, Zhang and Su et al.93 developed a facile approach for the preparation of four non-volatile molecules 7–10 again, which were exploited in non-volatile luminescent materials. As shown in Scheme 3, in this method, the reaction involved the esterification of an alcohol intermediate and various carboxylic acids with long alkyl chains to achieve four non-volatile dihydrophenazine derivatives 7–10 in good to excellent yields. Introducing long side chains into the dihydrophenazine backbone could obviously decrease the melting points and confirm excellent fluidity, resulting in affecting inthermolecular interactions. Meanwhile, due to the VIE effect of molecules 7–10, these nonvolatile materials showed remarkable temperature-responsive capability and dynamic multicolor fluorescence emission. As shown in Fig. 3, these molecular liquids could mainly emit blue fluorescence at 20 °C. Nevertheless, they exhibited orange-red fluorescence at 85 °C. Moreover, these luminous liquids without solvents could be applied to multicolor printing, anti-counterfeiting and information encryption (Fig. 4).
 Scheme 3  Synthetic routes of molecules 7–10. 
 Fig. 3  (1) Schematic illustration of temperature sensing of solvent-free luminescent dihydrophenazine derivatives based on the VIE mechanism. (2) Schematic representation of the influence of the alkyl chain length on the excited-stated configuration change of the solvent-free liquids 7–10 with temperature response. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 (Copyright©2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 4  The applications of molecules 7–10 with the temperature change. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 (Copyright©2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Meanwhile, Su et al.94 developed and synthesized two new compounds (11 and 12) that combined the VIE effect and aggregation-induced emission (AIE) to accomplish single-molecular white-light emission with a high degree of control over solution viscosity and aggregation extent. To create a white-light material, the authors used VIE-active dihydrobenzo[a,c]phenazine and AIE-active tetraphenylethene or triphenylethene (Scheme 4). As shown in Fig. 5, in the mixture of toluene and polytetrahydrofuran, molecule 11 demonstrated a dynamic fluorescence shift ranging from red to green, including white-light emission. Moreover, molecule 12 had tunable transitions from red to blue, including white light, depending on the degree of aggregation in THF–water solution. Due to the competition between the VIE and AIE effects, as well as the restriction of intramolecular rotation, this technique might achieve single-molecular white-light emission.
 Scheme 4  Synthetic routes of molecules 11 and 12. 
 Fig. 5  The fluorescence changes of molecule 11 in poly THF–toluene solution and molecule 12 in THF–water solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 (Copyright©2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Interestingly, Zhang et al.95 combined two colorless compounds (13 and 14) to create an excellent panchromatic fluorescent system by changing the mixture proportion and solvent polarity in order to obtain a full-color luminescent material. This unusual combination worked for a variety of reasons. First and foremost, 13 and 14 had nearly identical absorption in the near-UV region, which favored simultaneous convenient excitation. Furthermore, there was no association between the donor and recipient, resulting in avoidance of any interference from electron and energy transfer. Surprisingly, 13 with the excellent VIE effects was polarity-insensitive and acted as the red primary color. 14 possessed sensitive polarity and a dynamic fluorescence color ranging from blue to green. It was easy to achieve the entire luminescent system and form an RGB color triangle by adjusting the mixing ratio and solvent polarity of two fluorophores (Fig. 6). The full-color reproduction strategy was first reported by combining two colorless compounds. Moreover, this two-component tunable full-color material had potential applications in special fluorescent crayons and multicolor printing. Furthermore, the single molecule 15 was successfully synthesized (Scheme 5), exhibiting similar fluorescence emission, even including white light. Such an interesting molecule could be used as a white-light material.
 Fig. 6  The construction of a tunable full-color system and practical applications of molecules 13–15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society). 
 Scheme 5  Synthetic routes of molecules 13–15. 
Notably, N,N-dihydrophenazine could be used as a sensing material to capture and distinguish ions and or biomacromolecules.96–109 Using the same functionalized strategy, Tian and co-workers110 developed a supramolecular system based on bis-calix[4]pyrrole modified dihydrophenazine derivative 16, which could detect dicarboxylate anions. Scheme 6 showed its synthetic route. Introducing calix[4]pyrrole into dihydrophenazine could be beneficial to exploit fluorescent chemosensors due to its remarkable affinities for carboxylate anions. As shown in Fig. 7, when molecule 16 was exposed to the dicarboxylate dianions of various linear alkyls, the fluorescence emissions and colors successively exhibited distinct and different responses. Because of the multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions both calix[4]pyrrole and dicarboxylates resulted in a blue-shift in the fluorescence emission of the phenazine backbone with the VIE effect.
 Scheme 6  Synthesis route of molecule 16. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Mechanism of proposed fluorescence tuning and dicarboxylate anion sensing. (b) Various guests with dicarboxylate dianions. (c) The photographs showing the fluorescence features of 16 with various guests under UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society). 
As the typical example above, the sensors based on N,N-dihydrophenazine could achieve the detection and recognition for specific anions. in sharp contrast, they111 also developed a ratiometric fluorescent sensor 17 for a noxious metal ion (Hg2+). The synthetic route shown in Scheme 7 introduces a thymine into the dihydrophenazine core allowing it to combine with Hg2+, causing a configurational change. With the addition of Hg2+, the fluorescence intensity of sensor 17 gradually increased at 470 nm, and the emission at 601 nm vastly decreased. Moreover, the fluorescence color of sensor 17 could dramatically change from orange-red to blue (Fig. 8). It was worth noting that the stimulus response of sensor 17 for Hg2+ obtained within 2 min. Such distinct changes were not observed when adding other metal ions, including Ag+, Al3+, Ca2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Cr3+, Cu2+, Fe3+, K+, Mn2+, Na+, Ni2+, Pb2+, and Zn2+, which exhibited high sensitivity and selectivity for Hg2+. The result was attributed to the combination between sensor 17 and Hg2+, leading to a configuration transition from planar to bent shape by the mechanism of the VIE effect.
 Scheme 7  Synthetic route of molecule 17. 
 Fig. 8  Proposed recognizing mechanism of Hg2+ with 17 as a probe, in which a butterfly type planarization in 17 was prohibited due to the formation of nanoparticles of the 2:1 17/Hg2+ complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 (Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Besides that, Ramos-Soriano and co-workers112 developed a novel supramolecular chemosensor 18 in 2021, which could selectively and visually recognize glucose in aqueous media. Herein, as shown in Scheme 8, this synthetic strategy involved introducing bis-2-(N-methylaminomethyl)phenylboronic acid into dihydrophenazine with the VIE effect to furnish the desired molecule 18. The characteristic feature of 18 resided in forming dynamic covalent bonds with 1,2-diols of carbohydrates. Next the fluorescence properties of D-glucose, D-fructose and D-galactose in blood were studied. As shown in Fig. 9, with the addition of D-glucose, an obvious change in the fluorescence color from orange-reddish to bright turquoise was observed by the naked eye. Moreover, the recognition could be observed in a ratiometric way, endowing the molecules with the VIE effect to detect carbohydrates in aqueous systems.
 Scheme 8  Synthetic route of molecule 18. 
 Fig. 9  The fluorescence emission of molecule 18 for D-glucose, D-galactose and D-fructose observed even by the naked eye (a), fluorescence titration of 18 with D-glucose associated with the photographs showing the fluorescence features of 18 with various amounts of D-glucose under irradiation with UV light (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Meanwhile, Li and Yao et al.113 developed a phosphatase probe 19 through introducing the phosphate radical into the VIE-active dihydrophenazine (Scheme 9). As shown in Fig. 10, 19 exhibited the “free” vibration state and red-light emission when it had good solubility in organic solvents. Very surprisingly, when it reacted with protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), probe 19 showed the “fixed” vibration state and blue-light emission. Simultaneously, the emission intensity at 450 nm obviously increased and the emission at 600 nm nearly remained constant after the enzymatic reaction with PTP1B, demonstrating that 19 could serve as an “internal standard”. In addition, probe 19 has interesting potential for imaging. The cell experiment indicated that it could respond to PTP1B in living cells.
 Scheme 9  Synthetic route of molecule 19. 
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the fluorescence change of molecule 19, which showed the VIE phenomenon before and after reacting with phosphatase in living cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 (Copyright©2020 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Impressively, it was of great scientific value and practical significance to monitor specific processes.114–121 As early as 2018, Su and Mei et al.122 reported a ratiometric indicator 20, applied in monitoring the gelation process. Firstly, as shown in Scheme 10, adduct 20 as a gelator was obtained by introducing a gelating moiety cholesterol into the VIE-active dihydrophenazine, where cholesterol acted as a steroidal group and dihydrophenazine served as a fluorescent signaler. Furthermore, the fluorescence properties of adduct 20 were studied. As shown in Fig. 11, in the sol state, adduct 20 exhibited the hyaline form and orange-red fluorescence emission. Interestingly, when it turned into the gel state, the fluorescence color of 20 was blue under a UV lamp (365 nm). Furthermore, the dynamic gelation process of 20 was vividly illustrated by the time-dependent fluorescence measurement. Moreover, a fluorescence color change from orange-red to white, and even to bright blue was observed during this process. It was noteworthy that this gelator 20 could be extensively suitable for various gelation systems. Undoubtedly, this could not only provide universal functional materials, but also afford useful help for deeply understanding the gelation process.
 Scheme 10  Synthetic route of molecule 20. 
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the ratiometric visualization of the gelation process by the proposed self-indicating VIE-active gelator 20. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 (Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society). 
Afterwards, in 2021, Ma and co-workers123 introduced a novel chiral molecule 21, efficiently achieving the monitoring of the complex supramolecular self-assembly process through optical spectrometry. As shown in Scheme 11, the synthetic approach involved the aminolysis reaction of functionalized phenazine derivatives with carboxylic acid and chiral cyclohexane-1,2-diamine to afford the desired molecules in good yields. Afterwards, the photophysical properties were studied by fluorescence spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 12, with the increase in the fraction of water, the fluorescence emission of the chiral molecule 21 showed an obvious change from red to blue. In this process, the molecules aggregated to form nanoparticles in THF/H2O (3/7, v/v) due to their flexibility, and could achieve configuration transformation, which produced a multicolor emission. Interestingly, this conversion process was spontaneous. Utilizing tunable fluorescence based on the VIE effect the real-time monitoring of the relevant self-assembly process was achieved.
 Scheme 11  Synthetic route of molecule 21. 
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process by the morphological transition of (R)/(S)-21. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Most significantly, Tian and co-workers124 reported a series of VIE molecules 22 and 23 as fluorescent rulers, used for measuring and monitoring the microphase separation of polyurethanes. Polyurethanes, as a remarkable segmented polymer, are closely connected with the microphase separation structures. In light of this, as shown in Scheme 12, introducing the molecules into polyurethane networks through physical blending or chemical bonding could afford various polyurethane films adulterated with dihydrophenazine based on the VIE effect. Very interestingly, as shown in Fig. 13, owing to the different doping methods and bonding positions, the polyurethane films doped with different dihydrophenazines at room temperature exhibited obvious fluorescence behaviors. Moreover, the fluorescence emission could be changed into both orange-red and blue with a change in the temperature. The SAXS experiments further observed a dramatic change in the internal microstructure. The results demonstrated that these VIE molecules could act as fluorescent rulers to study microphase separation.
 Scheme 12  Synthetic routes of molecules 22 and 23. 
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the structures of 1/22/3/23-incorporated polyurethanes. (b) Schematic illustration of internal space in films changed by temperature and fluorescence photographs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society). 
Meanwhile, Ma et al.125 introduced carboxylate modified dihydrophenazine 24 into three different polymer materials (PCL, SBS and PMMA) to create three new polymer films, greatly exhibiting excellent multicolor fluorescence emission and directly reflecting the essential characteristics of a polymer system (Fig. 14). Moreover, the VIE molecule had attractive fluorescence properties and dynamic multicolor fluorescence emission, really focusing on the favorable conditions to explore and detect a polymer system. Three different polymer materials could provide variable external environments for VIE molecules. Surprisingly, the obtained films showed distinct fluorescence behaviors from light orange to blue owing to the tunable configurations of the VIE molecules and simultaneously the change of fluorescence intensity with temperature was recorded. Most importantly, these polymer films also displayed different room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP) with ultralong lifetime. Moreover, these excellent luminescence behaviors and temperature responses could clearly reveal the rigidity and regularity of the polymer system. Furthermore, utilizing these brilliant photoluminescence properties two blend films with sporadic distribution of various polymer networks were obtained to fulfill the microcosmic detection of polymers.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the preparation and exhibition of PCL-24, SBS-24 and PMMA-24 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society). 
The brilliant properties and applications of such molecules stimulate us to explore more about the VIE mechanism. In 2017, Chou and co-workers126 devised a series of various macrocycles 25–32 (n = 1–8), which were greatly exploited in snapshotting the excited-state planarization. In this new strategy, the bi-functional alcohol intermediate was used as the main skeleton, in which the p-positions of 9,14-diphenyl were completely enclosed by phenyl ester or ether with different alkyl lengths (Scheme 13). Moreover, its synthetic approach was similar to the open-chain synthesis. The difference was that the key precursor could be further cyclized with carboxylic acids bearing various alkyl lengths to the corresponding macrocycles. It was observed that this could inflict different levels of constraints to prevent the structural deformation through their chain length, which could enable us to deeply understand the coupling of excited-state electronic processes with conformational motions. As shown in Fig. 15, we could see clearly that these molecules 25–32 exhibited obvious changes from blue, green to orange (n = 1–8) in toluene. Subsequently, by the time-resolved emission experiment and computational approaches three types of emission (R* → I* → P* process) could be observed. Therefore, this process constrained the specific structural changes and thus various fluorescence emissions were observed in excited states. Furthermore, by cutting alkyl-ester linkages the structural freedom could be released, resulting in prominent changes of the emission.
 Scheme 13  Synthetic routes of molecules 25–32. 
 Fig. 15  The fluorescence images of 25–32 (n = 1–8) in toluene under irradiation of a 365 nm UV light and the proposed excited-state planarization process of 25–32 (n = 1–8). Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 (Copyright©2017 American Chemical Society). 
Soon afterwards in 2019, they127 developed five novel platinum(II) metallacycles 33–37(a–e) by the coordination-driven self-assembly and the adjustment of the bite angles between the carboxylate components again, which changed the degree of inhibition of the excited-state planarization and led to the achievement of multicolor emission. Coordination-driven self-assembly is an efficient strategy for acquiring supramolecular coordination complexes with specific sizes and shapes. The internal control of the molecules by the coordination-driven self-assembly could enable them to exhibit tunable photoluminescence when they have sensitive response toward the environment. Scheme 14 showed the self-assembly process of metallacycles 33–37(a–e). In this method, through dihydrophenazine derivatives with two pyridyl groups, dicarboxylate and Pt(II) heteroligated acceptors were mixed in a stoichiometry of 1:1:2 to acquire metallacycles. As expected, with the decrease of the bite angles for the dicarboxylate donor (a < b < c < d < e), the degree of structural relaxation for the metallacycles also reduced, leading to a fluorescence emission change from red-orange to blue (Fig. 16). Furthermore, through the modification of metallacycles with hydrogenation, the transformation of the molecular structure from rigid to flexible could lead to an obvious red-shift in the emission. The results demonstrated that the coordination-driven self-assembly could achieve systematic control by utilizing the selection of building blocks.
 Scheme 14  The self-assembly of metallacycles 33(a)-37(e). 
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration for the tunable fluorescence controlled by increasing steric hindrance from metallacycles 33(a) to 37(e) based on the proposed molecular design. Inset: Photographs of the metallacycles obtained under irradiation by a 365 nm UV lamp. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society). 
In view of this, we could also study the conformation change of the VIE phenazine core from bent to planar by introducing various groups. Tian and Chou et al.128 introduced methyl groups into the VIE dihydrophenazine derivatives in different positions (38–42), demonstrating the conformation change from bent to planar by increasing the steric hindrance of the side chain. To our knowledge, this design strategy first confirmed that the conformation and multicolor emission of conjugated polyheterocyclic skeletons could be adjusted by utilizing the steric hindrance. As shown in Scheme 15, the synthetic approach involves the C–H amination/Ullmann N-arylation domino reaction to obtain the target molecules in the presence of copper as catalyst. Furthermore, due to enhanced planarization, the energy gap for conjugated molecules could thus drastically change in a systematic manner (Fig. 17).
 Scheme 15  Synthetic routes of molecules 38–42. 
 Fig. 17  The fluorescence emission of molecules 38–42 and single-crystal as well as DFT-optimized structures along the view of the N–N axis, together with values for the bending angle (θb) of the dihydrodibenzo[a,c]phenazine skeleton. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 (Copyright©2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Besides that, Miyake et al.129 utilized N,N′-diaryl dihydrophenazine (43) as a photoredox catalyst to study and investigate intramolecular charge transfer (CT) and ion paring, greatly facilitating radical polymerization. The typical molecule 43 was studied by density functional theory calculations. Moreover, the experiment indicated that this molecule possessed remarkable discrepancy in terms of the solvatochromic effect in the visible spectrum (Fig. 18). Therefore, we know that the solvent polarity not only affected the CT state of radical polymerization and increased electron transfer rates, but also significantly influenced the intensity of ion paring, which achieved the ability of controlled radical polymerization. Furthermore, through the above properties and mechanism of the photoredox catalyst the polymerization of methyl methacrylate can be greatly accomplished.
 Fig. 18  The fluorescence change of molecule 43 with a 365 nm light in various solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 (Copyright©2017 American Chemical Society). 
By using these mechanisms, N,N′-diphenylphenazine as a redox active unit could be introduced into organic electrode materials, performing different degrees of ordering. Abruna et al.130 studied the influence of structural ordering on the charge storage mechanism. Through the cyclic voltammetry experiment it is indicated that a branched polymer network could accomplish a fast charge/discharge process. Troshin et al.131 reported a dihydrophenazine polymer as an active cathode material for potassium ion batteries, displaying high energy and high power density. Surprisingly, these designed batteries exhibited a higher specific capacity of 162 mA h g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1 and outstanding specific power. Additionally, Endo et al.132 synthesized a novel triphenylamine polymer for ultrafast battery cathodes. Such a polymer exhibited superfast charge–discharge performance and superior long cycle life. It could serve as an additive for a high-performance lithium ion battery. This further proved that polymeric aromatic amines could be used as electrode materials for metal ion batteries. Indeed, in 2020, Zhao et al.133 selected dihydrophenazine polymer 44 to construct organic electrode materials (Scheme 16). In the different types of heterocyclic aromatic compounds, dihydrophenazine derivatives greatly exhibited stable redox plateaus, which could act as basic units to furnish a new π-extended active center skeleton. With the extension of the π-conjugated structure, the active center unit showed cyclic voltammetry stability of the battery. Moreover, its polymerized product could further reduce its solubility in organic electrolytes and improve battery performance owing to a flexible chain group chosen as a linker in the polymerization process (Fig. 19). Fig. 19 exhibits the optimized geometries of 44. The dihydrophenazine group on 44 formed a twist angle with the benzene ring, even though the stereoscopic geometry provided storage space, which could be beneficial to anion diffusion and intercalation/deintercalation appropriately. Furthermore, the cyclic experiment result demonstrated that the battery based on the dihydrophenazine polymer showed high performance and its specific discharge capacity still remained at 138 mA h g−1 after the 2000th cycle. Meanwhile, the battery also displayed an excellent energy density and power density of 522 W h kg−1 and 4320 W kg−1, respectively.
 Scheme 16  Synthetic route of molecule 44. 
 Fig. 19  Redox mechanism of 44 (a), calculated AICD plots of 44 with neutral, 3+, and 6+ valence states (b) and a picture corresponding to the top view of the molecule (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society). 
3. Dibenzo[a,c]phenazine
The dibenzo[a,c]phenazine unit has a highly conjugated skeleton and molecule rigidity. It is such a distinct structural feature that it facilitates prominent intermolecular interactions when combined with donor units. Impressively, dibenzo[a,c]phenazine employed a deeper LUMO level in the D–A molecule, which is used as a novel electron accepting moiety. Notably, such multi-ring fused phenazine might be used as an emitter for organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). In light of this, Lee and co-workers in 2020134 developed a novel strategy to obtain two highly efficient yellow or red TADF emitters 45 and 46, which led to the fabrication of OLEDs with high external quantum efficiencies (EQE). As shown in Scheme 17, one fluorine atom of intermediates were selectively replated with an acridine unit, which were subsequently reacted with copper cyanide to acquire 45–46 in moderate yields. Among them, introducing cyano groups into the molecules 45 and 46 was beneficial to increase electron-accepting capacity and conjugated length. Fluorine acted as a subsidiary acceptor to fortify the HOMO–LUMO overlap, improving device performances. The experimental result showed that owing to the planar structure of emitter 46, the HOMO–LUMO gap decreased to 0.3 eV and the emission peak red-shifted 58 nm in comparison to the other emitter 46. Furthermore, the two emitters 45 and 46 possessed high EQEs, 27.6% and 23.8%, respectively (Fig. 20).
 Scheme 17  Synthetic routes of molecules 45 and 46. 
 Fig. 20  The properties of molecules 45 and 46 as TADF emitters for OLEDs. 
Adachi and co-workers135 also reported a novel TADF emitter 47, which possessed highly efficient electrofluorescence and applied in near-infrared organic light-emitting diodes. As shown in Scheme 18, the synthetic strategy involved the condensation reaction between tetraphenyl tetraamine and dibromo-9,10-dione to obtain the target molecule 47 with strong rigidity in the presence of CuCN, where dibenzo[a,c]phenazine and the tetracarbonitrile unit on 47 possessed high molecular rigidity, which could act as an electron acceptor. Two triphenylamine units as electron-donating moieties greatly provided efficient NIR-TADF behavior. More importantly, molecule 47 could availably act as an energy sensitizer for NIR fluorophores. The experimental result indicated that emitter 47 showed triplet-harvesting capacity. Moreover, it exhibited longer device lifetime during high current operation. Most importantly, the near-IR emitter 47 exhibited high PLDY than 40% at 729 nm and showed an EQE of 13.4% at 734 nm, which could be nonfrequent for near-IR OLEDs in this spectral range.
 Scheme 18  Synthetic route of molecule 47. 
In the same year, they136 developed three emitters 48–50 based on the tetrabenzo[a,c]phenazine core again, exhibiting highly efficient TADF performance for OLEDs owing to the π-conjugated rigid structure and steric hindrance. Scheme 19 shows the synthetic routes of three emitter molecules. Among them, tetrabenzo[a,c]phenazine as an electron acceptor unit could effectively control the 1CT and 3CT states within 0.25 eV, greatly strengthening the RISC rate constant. Moreover, introducing the nitrile or 4-cyano-phenyl group into the tetrabenzo[a,c]phenazine core could conspicuously manipulate the alignment of the excited energy levels of TADF emitters. The OLEDs based on the three emitters showed remarkable EQEs of 23.7%, 17.3% and 27.4%, respectively. Meanwhile, they greatly inhibited the decrease of electroluminescence efficiency. Particularly, by controlling the molecular orientation of emitters to strengthen the horizontal ratios of the transition dipole moment direction device performances could be improved.
 Scheme 19  Synthetic routes of molecules 48–50. 
In order to obtain high rigid emitters for inhibiting non-radiative decay could reduce emissivity and hinder their application in solution, Lee and Zhang et al.137 developed three novel red TADF emitters 51–53, which could be used for up-conversion between vacuum and solution processes as OLEDs by managing locally excited and charge-transfer triplet states. As shown in Scheme 20, the synthetic method involves two steps. Firstly, Suzuki cross-coupling reactions between the dibromobenzene-1,2-diamine derivatives and two boronic acids occurred to obtain the intermediates. Subsequently, three emitters were furnished through cyclization reactions of both phenanthrene 9,10-dione derivatives and the intermediates. According to their structural features the triplet energy levels of the α-position could be adjusted by introducing phenyl or o-tolyl groups into the dibenzo[a,c]phenazine core, promoting the RISC process. As expected, the three emitters all exhibited a remarkable reverse intersystem crossing process and fluorescence rediative decays. One of the emitters displayed an excellent EQE of 20.1% as an OLED by the vacuum process in the red region and a high EQE of 18.5% in the solution process. This work could solve not only previous problems, but also provide a new idea for improving the device performance.
 Scheme 20  Synthetic routes of molecules 51–53. 
In 2019, Tang and Zhao et al.138 furnished several kinds of TADF emitters (54–56) based on dibenzo[a,c]phenazine for green-red OLEDs, where dibenzo[a,c]phenazine acted as the acceptor core owing to its coplanar π-conjugated structure and high rigidity. Meanwhile, various amounts of dimethylacridine served as a donor by introducing into the different positions of the dibenzo[a,c]phenazine unit to furnish a series of TADF materials (Scheme 21). By increasing the number of dimethylacridine units could the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) intensity could be enhanced. Moreover, such typical molecule structures could simultaneously achieve long wavelength emission and small S1–T1 energy splits (S1: singlet excited state, and T1: triplet excited state). Therefore, a visible difference occurs in the emission colors of the emitters from green to orange-red (Fig. 21). Additionally, the electroluminescence properties of the emitters were further studied. The experimental results indicated that emitter 56 with three dimethylacridine units for OLEDs exhibited an orange-red emission with a peak at 606 nm. Meanwhile, such an emitter displayed an excellent external quantum efficiency of 22.0% (Table 1).
 Scheme 21  Synthetic routes of molecules 54–56. 
 Fig. 21  The structures and properties of molecules 54–56 as TADF emitters for OLEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society). 
Table 1 The electroluminescence performance of emitters for TADF-OLEDs




Emitters
TADF color

λ
EL (nm)
EQEmax (%)
ΔEST (eV)




45
Yellow
554
27.6
0.087


46
Red
597
23.8
0.047


47
Near-infrared
734
13.4
0.14


48
Yellow
554
23.7
0.04


49
Red
605
17.3
0.05


50
Orange-red
580
27.4
0.04


51
Red
608/612
8.0 (vacuum), 9.3 (solution)
0.23


52
Red
604/608
16.0 (vacuum), 14.4 (solution)
0.10


53
Red
604/612
20.1 (vacuum), 18.5 (solution)
0.04


54
Green
560
10.1
0.22


55
Red
576
11.8
0.21


56
Orange-red
606
22.0
0.05


58
Orange
588
23.8
0.112


59
Orange
624
8.3
0.075


60
Red
627
8.7
0.062


61
Red
655
0.8
0.057




Very impressively, Yang et al.139 designed and synthesized two isomers (57–60) with TADF properties by regulating the different spots of the acceptor molecules, increasing the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY). Meanwhile, it was significantly essential to study the relation between the isomerization effect and luminescence properties. With short delayed lives of roughly 0.9 μs, they all had high thermal stabilities and evident TADF characteristics. Surprisingly, due to the efficient suppression of non-radiative vibration modes, receptors 57 and 59 at the 11-site attained significantly greater PLQY than those substituted at the 10-position. The experiment indicated that the orange emitter based on molecule 57 showed a greatly EQE ranging up to 23.8% and the red emitter based on molecule 59 accomplished a EQE ranging up to 13.7% (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  The structures and properties of two isomers 57–60 as TADF emitters for OLEDs. 
Furthermore, to our very surprise, Ma et al.140 linked phenothiazine with dibenzo[a,c]phenazine to obtain a novel molecule 61 (Scheme 22), successfully attaining an excellent AIEE effect, polymorphism, unique mechanochromism and high sensitivity to pressure owing to its twisted structure. The AIEE behavior in THF/H2O solution was illustrated (Fig. 23). Upon increasing the water fraction to 90%, the fluorescence intensity constantly strengthened. This was because the aggregation of 61 resulted in the occurrence of the AIEE phenomenon. Very interestingly, molecule 61 has two different kinds of single crystal. One crystal was needle-shaped and exhibited yellowish-green fluorescence. The other was plate-shaped and exhibited orange-yellow fluorescence. Simultaneously, the X-ray analysis experiment clearly observed the structural differences of the two crystals. Most significantly, two different kinds of single crystals displayed a dramatic change in mechanical lapping and pressure. Such a remarkable molecule could act as a stimuli-responsive solid material, presenting power potential.
 Scheme 22  Synthetic route of molecule 61. 
 Fig. 23  The various properties of molecule 61. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 (Copyright© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved). 
Simultaneously, dibenzo[a,c]phenazine was present in organic macrocyclic molecules that might encapsulate a variety of guest molecules by adjusting the main skeleton unit and cavity size. Most reported macrocyclic compounds had generally lower yields, hampering their further development. Its participation has improved the production of macrocyclic molecules and produced many excellent performances. Liu et al.141 successfully synthesized two novel donor–acceptor π-conjugated macrocycles 62 and 63 with moderate yields by post-functionalization. As shown in Scheme 23, the synthetic strategy involves the oxidation of methoxide and condensation of diketones and phenylenediamine from a planar dimer macrocycle and a high-torsional macrocycle. Meanwhile, the functionalized macrocycles 62 and 63 possessed unique donor–acceptor characteristics through density functional theory calculations. Moreover, the HOMO–LUMO gap (ΔEg) of functionalized macrocycles 62 and 63 got narrower than that of the initial macrocycles. This was because the addition of the dibenzo[a,c]phenazine core observably stabilized the LUMO energy level. Furthermore, functionalized macrocycle 63 presented a face to face packing alignment.
 Scheme 23  Synthetic routes of molecules 62 and 63. 
4. Dibenzo[a,j]phenazine
In 2014, Takeda et al.142 reported a novel and efficient synthetic strategy to form dibenzo[a,j]phenazine. The approach involved oxidative skeletal rearrangement of 1,1′-binaphthalene-2,2′-diamines between C–C bond cleavage and nitrogen migration. It is worthwhile noting that this unprecedented rearrangement could efficiently and selectively give the unique dibenzo[a,j]phenazine in moderate to good yields. Owing to this simple and facile synthetic strategy, dibenzo[a,j]phenazine has attracted enormous interest in the field of materials science. Meanwhile, they also found that the lowest triplet state of the unique dibenzo[a,j]phenazine moiety could enable the moiety to perform a significant role in facilitating the TADF process.143–153 Thus, dibenzo[a,j]phenazine moieties could be introduced into novel OLED emitters. In addition to this, some molecules containing dibenzo[a,j]phenazine also presented mechanochromic luminescence (MCL), enriching the field of applications to chemical sensors, data storage devices and security inks.154–163 Besides that, Takeda and Gilch et al.164 systemically investigated the photophysics of the dibenzo[a,j]phenazine by steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopy. In fact, the polarity of the solvent only weakly affected the photophysical properties of dibenzo[a,j]phenazine. The lowest triplet state was populated with yields of ≈0.3. The quantum chemical computations indicated that a 3nπ* state actively close to the primarily excited singlet state was reliable for the efficient intersystem crossing towards the triplet manifold.
In 2018, Takeda and co-workers165 designed and synthesized a π-conjugated molecule 64, which showed thermally activated delayed fluorescence and multicolor mechanochromic luminescence. Interestingly, it could exhibit room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP). As shown in Scheme 24, molecule 64 was achieved in good yield via the Hartwig–Buchwald reaction between the dibromo molecule and intermediate in Pd as catalyst. Molecule 64 also showed a prominent reversible emission in the visible and near-IR area, sensing a strong change of fluorescence color to acids and bases (Fig. 24). There was little literature on this phenomenon. Most importantly, it simultaneously showed TDAF and RTP. This would provide useful insight into the design and fabrication of OLEDs (Schemes 25 and 26).
 Scheme 24  Synthetic route of molecule 64. 
 Fig. 24  The fluorescence properties of molecule 64. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165 (Copyright©2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Scheme 25  Synthetic routes of molecules 65–67. 
 Scheme 26  Synthetic routes of molecules 68 and 69. 
Based on the uniqueness of these U-shaped D–A–D molecules, they166 developed several kinds of dibenzo[a,j]phenazine molecules 65–67 as green-to-red/NIR TADF emitters with high EQEs of up to 16% again (Fig. 25). In the background of organic electronics, these twisted D–A structures have been confirmed to be one of the promising molecular moieties for TADF emitters. This was because such structural motifs usually permit valid HOMO/LUMO separation, resulting in narrow energy splitting (ΔEST) between the excited singlet (S1) and triplet state (T1). Significantly, in the case of 66, this might be the first unequivocally verified instance in which acceptor triplet state coupling generated appropriate and efficient TADF, illustrating that TADF production was irrelevant to which triplet state (D or A) couples to 1CT. This discovery significantly broadens the design requirement for efficient and successful TADF molecules.
 Fig. 25  The fluorescence properties of molecules 65–67 as TADF emitters for OLEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166 (Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Notwithstanding, in 2021 Takeda et al.167 introduced a carbazole analogue into dibenzo[a,j]phenazine units 68 and 69 to explore the effect of diarylamine substituted carbazole on their performance, where the twisted dibenzo[a,j]phenazine core served as a central acceptor, and the carbazole analogue acted as the electron donor. Herein, owing to the substitution of the more flexible 7-member aromatic amines, the photophysical behavior of 68 and 69 has undergone a drastic change. They showed unique double emission from RTP and triplet–triplet annihilation, attributed to slight structural modification (Fig. 26). Furthermore, the electrochemical studies of materials 68 and 69 employed remarkable electropolymerization and dimerization in the D–A–D system.
 Fig. 26  The physicochemical properties and spin densities of 68 and 69 in different conformers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
In the same year, they168 also inserted selenium (Se) or tellurium (Te) into dibenzo[a,j]phenazine cores 70 and 71 to investigate thoroughly the internal heavy atom effect on the photophysical properties. The synthetic strategy involved the Buchwald–Hartwig double amination in the presence of Pd as catalyst (Scheme 27). The introduction of a Se or Te atom resulted in strong intermolecular interactions and electrostatic interactions in the solid state, greatly facilitating effective charge carrier transport. The physical and chemical properties of 70 and 71 were measured. As a result, 70 exhibited mechanochromic luminescence emission and polymorph-dependent multi-functional materials. By grinding the solid sample, an obvious change in the fluorescence color from yellow to red was observed. Very interestingly, the original color could be recovered by heating in an organic vapor such as AcOEt and CHCl3. Most importantly, its fluorescence emission showed an obvious change for acid/base and redox response as well as dual emission of RTP for OLED devices (Fig. 27). In contrast, 71 showed not so distinct change, but it displayed RTP in hot matrices and OLED devices. Furthermore the experiment found that 70 and 71 significantly caused a rapid increase in the axial-oriented conformation that was superior to the equatorial ones in the D–A–D molecule. This change strongly influenced the photophysical properties of D–A–D molecules owing to the internal heavy atom effect.
 Scheme 27  Synthetic routes of molecules 70 and 71. 
 Fig. 27  The photophysical properties of molecules 70 and 71. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 (Copyright©2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In order to achieve MCL and TADF performance for a single molecule, in 2017 Takeda and co-workers169 introduced phenothiazine into dibenzo[a,j]phenazine cores 72 and 73 to explore the optical properties. Meanwhile, using a similar method carbon-bridging molecule 74 and non-bridging molecule 75 were furnished to understand the effectiveness of sulfur-bridging in donor units (Scheme 28). According to the relevant literature studies, phenothiazine-substituted molecules existed in two distinct conformers (“eq” and “ax”). Impressively, the phenothiazine structure has always played a significant role in thermodynamics by the conformational transitions. The experimental results indicated that molecules 72 and 73 clearly exhibited obvious multi-color changing MCL behavior under external stimulus (Fig. 28). In contrast, molecules 74 and 75 showed no such distinct change under the same conditions, further confirming the necessity of the existing sulfur-bridging in donor units. Besides that, all D–A–D molecules 72–75 showed fluorescence quenching for acids in the solid state. Dynamic photophysical tests demonstrated that they displayed highly efficient TADF properties. Very interestingly, the TADF emitter 72 exhibited a high EQE of 16.8%.
 Scheme 28  Synthetic routes of molecules 72–75. 
 Fig. 28  Schematic diagrams of the multi-color-changing MCL behavior of 72 and 73. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169 (Copyright©2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
A myriad of TADF emitters for OLEDs have been developed on the basis of linear π-conjugated molecules. In sharp contrast, few organic conjugated macrocycles as TADF emitters have been reported due to their unique characteristics, such as specific structural motifs. In 2020, Takeda and co-workers170 successfully furnished a novel donor–acceptor repeating π-conjugated macrocycle 76, which exhibited excellent TADF emission, in which, two p-phenylenediamine derivatives were regarded as the donors and two dibenzo[a,j]phenazines were used as the acceptors. As shown in Scheme 29, in this synthetic strategy, introducing tetraphenylene-1,4-diamine into the macrocyclic structure could efficiently adjust the conformational flexibility of the key intermediates and feasibly promoted the cyclization process, avoiding the formation of polymers. Meanwhile, using this methodology, they also synthesized linear molecule 77, comparing it with the conjugated macrocycle. As expected, developing π-conjugated macrocyclic molecule 76 as the TADF emitter for OLEDs displayed excellent performance, which achieved a high EQE of 11.6% far from that of the reported emitters based on macrocyclic compounds and linear molecule 77 (6.9%) (Fig. 29). This work would open an avenue for developing π-conjugated macrocyclic molecules as TADF emitters.
 Scheme 29  Synthetic routes of molecules 76 and 77. 
 Fig. 29  The fluorescence properties of molecules 76 and 77. 
5. Organic framework materials
2D-conjugated polymers with specific repeating units have aroused extreme interest due to their precise and predictable structures, satisfying different particular requirements through ingenious and innovative designs.171–175 In particular, stable 2D-conjugated polymer frameworks also provide extensive applications in materials.176–182 So far, the construction of 2D-conjugated polymer frameworks has mainly required covalent organic frameworks (COFs), π-conjugated metal organic frameworks (MOFs), hydrogen-bonded organic frameworks (HOFs) and supramolecular organic frameworks (SOFs). As early as 2016, Feng and co-workers183 revealed the first construction of a 2D sp2-carbon-linked conjugated polymer framework. Similarly, Jiang et al.184 found that this 2D sp2-carbon-linked conjugated polymer framework showed high chemical stability and enhanced delocalized electronic structures. Recently, 2D conjugated polymers have gained much importance in photoelectrochemical (PEC) applications, and might be used as photocathodes for water reduction. PEC water reduction is a power technology that might transform solar energy into environmentally friendly, storable hydrogen energy. A water splitting battery based on the PEC technology has the potential to alleviate both energy and environmental issues.185–190 Nonetheless, previous reports on 2D conjugated polymers were unsuitable for PEC application owing to their ineffective light harvesting and wide optical energy gap.191–194 In view of this, Feng and co-workers195 described a variety of novel sp2-carbon-linked 2D conjugated polymers 78–80 with excellent optoelectronic performance. The synthetic strategy involved the Knoevenagel polymerization reaction to generate 2D conjugated polymers (Scheme 30). Biphenyl and bithiophene bridges were used to obtain 2D conjugated polymers that exhibited excellent performance due to the extended π-conjugation, which was superior to that of common imine-linked 2D conjugated polymers. Very surprisingly, the bithiophene-bridged 2D conjugated polymer 78 greatly displayed a much narrower optical energy gap and higher LUMO energy level, improving charge separation and transport capacity compared with biphenylene-bridged 2D conjugated polymers 89 and 90 (Fig. 30). This study enriched the applicability of PEC based on 2D conjugated polymers and also provided a valuable organic material as a photocathode for water reduction.
 Scheme 30  Synthetic routes of molecules 78–80. 
 Fig. 30  Schematic representation of the band positions of 78–80 along with the H2O/H2 (hydrogen evolution reaction, HER) and O2/H2O (oxygen evolution reaction, OER) redox couples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Besides that, in 2019, Feng et al.196 employed the same synthetic strategy to create a novel nitrogen-rich 2D sp2-carbon-linked conjugated polymer framework 81, which could serve as a high-performance cathode for lithium-ion batteries again. Because of its exceptional conjugated aromatic structure and multiple redox-active features, the nitrogen-rich heterocycle derivative might function as a rigid planar monomer (Scheme 31). Additionally, utilizing the stable framework of the 2D conjugated polymer combined with the electrochemical redox-active heterocycle derivative by sp2-carbon linkage, may lead to the achievement of excellent chemical and electrochemical stability. Moreover, framework 81 by in situ growth on carbon nanotubes exhibited high utilization of redox-active sites, cycling-stability and rate capability, making it an excellent cathode material for lithium-ion batteries (Fig. 31). The cycling-stability of 81 still remained at 91% under 1000 cycles. This work not only provides a facile strategy for designing and synthesizing 2D sp2-carbon-linked conjugated polymer frameworks, but also expands their application possibilities in the area of organic electrochemistry.
 Scheme 31  Synthetic route of molecule 81. 
 Fig. 31  The physical properties of molecule 81 as a high-performance cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 (Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Meanwhile, Wang and Zhang et al.197 developed and manufactured two new porous organic polymers 82 and 83 as cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries. The appropriate polymers 82 and 83 were produced under mild conditions utilizing readily available basic ingredients (Scheme 32). Molecule 82 was rigid and had a π-conjugated structure. The other molecule 83 was flexible and had a non-conjugated structure. The electronic stability of the new polymer as an electrode material was investigated. The experimental results indicated that they exhibited excellent electrochemical performance in terms of cycling stability and specific capacity. Polymer 82 clearly showed long cyclic stability of up to 92% capacity retention after the 1200th cycle and a specific capacity of 309 mA h g−1. In contrast, polymer 83 demonstrated relatively low cyclic stability of up to 66% capacity retention after the 1200th cycle owing to its different degrees of flexibility and conjugation, which might be illustrated in HOMO–LUMO gaps by density functional theory calculations (Fig. 32).
 Scheme 32  Synthetic routes of molecules 82 and 83. 
 Fig. 32  Porous organic polymers 82 and 83 as organic cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197 (Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society). 
In addition to the fabrication of composite materials to reduce the solubility of small molecules in organic electrolytes and improve the cycling stability of electrode materials, Jiang et al.198 prepared a new conjugated microporous polymer 84 with redox-active units and permanent nanopores using Sonogashira cross-coupling polycondensation between 1,4-diethynylbenzene and the phenazine derivative in the presence of palladium and copper iodide as catalysts (Scheme 33). The conjugated microporous polymers with structural characteristics worked cooperatively with lithium ion batteries in energy storage. Polymer 84 had permanent open nanopores that enabled these redox-active sites to fully bind with lithium ions, and the high surface area facilitated charge dynamics. The performance stability of the conjugated microporous polymers for batteries was measured by cycling experiments. As a result, it showed reversible charge–discharge curves and still achieved 62% retention of the original capacity by 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1. Meanwhile, the conjugated microporous polymers had a reversible capacity of 147 mA h g−1, which was 71% of the theoretical capacity (Fig. 33).
 Scheme 33  Synthetic route of molecule 84. 
 Fig. 33  The energy storage and power supply of conjugated microporous polymer 84. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198 (Copyright©2014 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Although using organic porous polymers and composites have given electrode materials with long-term stable cycling performance, they still have the problems of low electronic and ionic conductivity. The conductivity is usually related to the material's HOMO–LUMO gap. Zhang et al.199 created a unique nanoporous sulfur-bridged organic framework 85 as a cathode material for lithium ion batteries. It featured a narrow HOMO–LUMO gap and a homogeneous nanopore structure of 1.26 nm through density functional theory calculations. Additionally, the cycling performance and charge–discharge profiles of 85 revealed that it still had a specific capacity of 234 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles (initial charge capacity of 337 mA h g−1) at a current density of 0.05 A g−1. Upon increasing the current density of 0.5 A g−1, the specific capacity remained at 152 mA h g−1 after 1500 cycles, 83% of the initial capacity. Moreover, the coulombic efficiency remained relatively stable at nearly 100% in this process. According to these results, polymer 85 as a cathode material displayed superior electrochemical performance in terms of capacity, rate capacity and long-term cycle stability (Fig. 34). Similarly, in 2020, they200 also developed a nitrogen-linked polymer 86 as an organic cathode material in lithium-ion batteries.4186 was synthesized using the intermediate and cyclohexanehexone octahydrate under an argon atmosphere (Scheme 34). Interestingly, the pre-treated polymer and graphene oxide bore good structure compatibility. The combination as an electrode material might show an abnormal and rapid increase in capacity during the cycle owing to the π–π interactions between the aromatic structure of the nitrogen-bridged polymer and the graphene skeleton.
 Fig. 34  The properties of molecule 85 and aggregated 86 particles migrate on the pRGO surface to form a homogenous layer of 86 during cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199 (Copyright©2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry) and ref. 200 (Copyright©2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
 Scheme 34  Synthetic routes of molecules 85 and 86. 
Compared with 2D conjugated polymer frameworks, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have superior thermal and chemical stability due to the addition of relatively covalent bonds. Such framework structures as a membrane material can show excellent processability and lower mass density. In 2019, Mirica et al.201 developed two novel 2D aza-fused COFs 87 and 88, achieving highly efficient proton conduction. 87 and 88 were constructed by the condensation reaction between hexaketocyclohexane and different amines (Scheme 35). This molecular design for proton condustion had unique feature. Through thermally and chemical stable pyrazine linkages could acquire rigid porous scaffolds. Most importantly, in this polyaza environment, the absorption of water molecules could be mostly promoted and an orderly pathway could be provided for proton transport (Fig. 35). Furthermore, acidification of this nitrogen hybrid structure enriched the design strategies for proton transport. The experimental results indicated objectively that the existence of humidity and acidification played a significant role in the establishment and enhancement of stable and ordered proton conducting materials.
 Scheme 35  Synthetic routes of molecules 87 and 88. 
 Fig. 35  The proposed proton conduction mechanism in aza-fused COFs (87 and 88). Reproduced with permission from ref. 201 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society). 
Introducing reversible redox-active functional groups into a rigid and conjugated framework could enable COFs to possess distinct reversible electronic properties, which were used for rechargeable ion batteries and energy storage. Phenazine and its derivatives possess multiple redox-active centers, thereby being promising materials as electrodes in batteries. Dichtel et al.202,203 designed and synthesized a novel 2D COF and its composites 89 and 90. Through a two-electron process, the phenazine portion was reversibly reduced to 5,10-dihydrophenazine. The synthetic strategy involved imine condensation of both 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol and 2,7-diaminophenazine (Scheme 36). Similarly, 89 was obtained by the same method. Phenazine is a rigid planar, redox-active aromatic compound. A phenazine unit is reversibly reduced to 5,10-dihydrophenazine by a two-electron process. The introduction of a phenazine unit could affect electron or ion transport. The electrochemical properties of 89 and 90 were measured. The electrode based on the 89 film by electropolymerization had a specific surface area of 1140 m2 g−1 and conductivity of 4.4 × 10−5 S cm−1. By contrast, electrode 90 showed a specific surface area of 1150 m2 g−1 and conductivity of 4.8 × 10−5 S cm−1. Most importantly, the ionic diffusion coefficient of 90 (1.1 × 10−9 F g−1) was superior to that of 89 (1.6 × 10−10 F g−1). As a result, COF 89 seems to be restricted by electron transport, resulting in low reversible capacity. By the addition of electropolymerizing 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene, electron transport of the device was improved and its specific capacity also increased. Very surprisingly, the device based on COF 90 showed excellent performance improvement, even without requiring the modification of the conductive polymer. Meanwhile, the framework material 90 without functionalization still exhibited excellent performance of highest energy and power densities. This excellent performance is largely due to the increase in the ion diffusion coefficient. This strategic design of redox-active COFs makes the development of battery materials with high-energy and high-power densities possible, without modifying conductive polymers in electrochemistry (Fig. 36).
 Scheme 36  Synthetic routes of molecules 89 and 90. 
 Fig. 36  The graphical representation of two redox-active covalent organic frameworks 89 and 90. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202 and 203 (Copyright©2016 and 2020 American Chemical Society). 
Indeed, COFs, an ordered crystalline material with regular pores and layered structure, are connected by covalent bonds. Chen et al.204 developed a COF 91 with a high π–π conjugated plane by the polycondensation reaction between tetramine-benzoquinone and hexaketocyclohexane (Scheme 37). This framework material had a relatively stable structure, clearly visible lattice fringe and a homogeneous channel. It was composed of the largest active group and the smallest inert unit. Moreover, each repeating molecular unit provided a theoretical redox-active capacity of 18 electrons and a theoretical specific capacity of 773 mA h g−1. The electrochemical behavior of 91 was measured. Significantly, it achieved 81% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at a current density of 1.54 A g−1 and the coulomb efficiency reached nearly 100% during the whole cycle. Most impressively, the rate performance of 170.7 mA h g−1 at 7.73 A g−1 was far superior to those reported in previous reports. This was because the well-defined pore structure and extended π–π conjugated system facilitated rapid diffusion and electron transport of Li+ (Fig. 37).
 Scheme 37  Synthetic route of molecule 91. 
 Fig. 37  The circuit diagram of 2D covalent organic framework 91 as an organic cathode for LiBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204 (Copyright© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved). 
Pawlak and co-workers205 just published an intriguing case of graphene. To the best of our knowledge, developing and fabricating a Kagome lattice in nanographene, as well as identifying flat bands, have never been explored. In this work, a 2D graphene sheet 92 with a long-range honeycomb Kagome lattice was obtained (Scheme 38). Utilizing the substrate-assisted Ullmann coupling reaction on Ag(111) the nitrogen-doped Kagome graphene 92 was obtained, where the Kagome graphene possessed good thermal stability and a substantial mechanical stress. Owing to nitrogen doping and the emerging flat bands it exhibited semiconducting characteristic (Fig. 38). This would pave the way for the development of novel superconducting materials.
 Scheme 38  Synthetic route of molecule 92. T2 = 160 °C, T3 = 220 °C. 
 Fig. 38  (a) Top view (left panel) of the structure of 92 in the gas phase calculated by DFT. The right panel shows a lateral view of the twisted Kagome lattice as well as measured torsion angles in the trigonal nodes. (b) The structure of nitrogen-doped Kagome graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Additionally, a porous graphitic framework, which is an aromatic 2D material with completely conjugated carbons, has gained popularity in energy storage and electronics. In 2020, Zhang and Liu et al.206 described a porous graphitic framework 93, clearly exhibiting excellent performance as a cathode material for lithium-ion cells. In this approach, the required material was formed by the condensation of 1,2,4,5-benzenetetramine tetrahydrochloride and hexaketocyclohexane octahydrate in an alkaline solution (Scheme 39). It was observed that the essential reaction should provide excellent reversible properties of CN bonds, which further facilitated the construction of the porous framework. Notably, this porous graphitic framework was applied in cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries, displaying remarkable rate capability and cycle stability superior to those of the amorphous counterparts (Fig. 39).
 Scheme 39  Synthetic route of molecule 93. 
 Fig. 39  Space-filling model of 93 with layers arranged in an eclipsed stacking mode and the application of the framework as a cathode for lithium-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 (Copyright©2020 Springer Science Business Media New York). 
Compared with COFs, HOFs could be renewable and flexible. This might be separated as high-crystalline materials like single crystals. Unfortunately, the structures frequently disintegrate when solvent molecules are released from the pores of the solvated frameworks. Besides that, although molecular structures and hydrogen-bonding methods are greatly designed, the molecules always result in unexpected nonporous materials rather than the desired porous frameworks. In light of this, in 2019, Hisaki and co-workers207 rationally designed and successfully synthesized a particularly thermostable porous HOF material 94, achieving stimuli responsiveness for acids. In this functionalization strategy, the reaction involved was the cross-coupling reaction of boronic acid derivatives and 4,5-dibromo-1,2-diaminobenzene to obtain an intermediate. An ester functionalized phenazine derivative could be derived from the intermediate and cyclohexanehexone, and the ester underwent hydrolysis to furnish precursor 94. Finally, through self-assembly, it could be a layered structure of HOF material 94 (Scheme 40). Moreover, this hydrogen-bonded organic framework showed high stability and permanent porosity. Very interestingly, it also exhibited efficient sensitivity to acids (Fig. 40). When it was exposed to acids, the solid colors of 94 changed reversibly from yellow to reddish-brown. Meanwhile, the fluorescence emission presented OFF or ON conversion. To our knowledge, this work first developed a hydrogen-bonded organic framework with stimuli responsiveness in visible light and fluorescence. This new exciting strategy could open up a new avenue for constructing organic frameworks.
 Scheme 40  Synthetic route of molecule 94. 
 Fig. 40  The form of HOF 94 and its color changes upon exposure to HCl vapor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society). 
6. Other phenazine derivatives
Multipurpose, switchable molecules are intriguing and promising for use as molecular sensors. Weber and co-workers208 developed four nickel(II) complexes with phenazine derivatives 95–98, achieving highly sensitive detection of the coordination-induced spin state switch (CISSS) by means of fluorescence spectroscopy. This method involved two steps (Scheme 41). Firstly, the condensation reaction between 2,3-diaminophenazine and the corresponding keto-enol ether gave intermediates as ligands. Afterwards, coordination of nickel(II) with the ligands afforded nickel(II) complexes. Most importantly, the result indicated that CISSS could greatly connect with the basicity of the axial ligands and the substitution-dependent acidity of the nickel(II) coordination position (Fig. 41). Remarkably, the fluorescence quenching after adding ligands displayed a “black or white” color, achieving digital sensing of spin state alteration.
 Scheme 41  Synthetic routes of molecules 95–98. 
 Fig. 41  Two different schematic illustrations of the CISSS in the ground state and the CISSS in the excited state detected via fluorescence (FD-CISSS). Reproduced with permission from ref. 208 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society). 
Hua and Liu et al.209 developed near-infrared organic dyes 99 and 100 based on phenazine-cyanine, which could be used for photoacoustic imaging and photothermal therapy. Firstly, the n-butyl group connected with the nitrogen atoms of phenazine under alkaline conditions. Afterwards, the desired target molecules 99 and 100 were furnished in lower yields by the reaction of both iodide salt and the phenazine aldehyde (Scheme 42). Observably, the phenazine group could change from electron-deficient to electron-rich through connection between n-butyl groups and nitrogen atoms. In light of this, the optical properties of molecules 99 and 100 were studied and the two dyes could be self-assembled with human serum albumin (HSA) to form nanoparticles. Moreover, the two types of nanoparticles exhibited certain stabilities in both weakly basic and weakly acidic environments (Fig. 42). Furthermore, they could absorb light and convert light energy into heat energy. Meanwhile, using a nude mouse experiment photoacoustic imaging and photothermal effects of the nanoparticles were successfully verified.
 Scheme 42  Synthetic routes of molecules 99 and 100. 
 Fig. 42  (a) PA images of subcutaneous tissue with different concentrations of 99@HSA and 100@HSA. (b) Thermal image of a nude mouse in the control group and experimental group at different illuminating times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209 (Copyright©2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Most surprisingly, phenazine might be employed as a photosensitizer. Ooyama et al.210 introduced hydroxyl groups and thiophene rings into the phenazine structure to obtain new molecules 101 and 102 as photosensitizers (Scheme 43). The phenazine structure generally contains an aromatic ring system and is replaced by two nitrogen atoms at the 9,10-positions, and has potential as a next-generation photosensitizer. The appropriate modification of multiple functional groups greatly facilitates their photophysical characteristics and photosensitizing ability. The addition of a nitro group could broaden the photoabsorption range into the near-infrared (NIR) region, whereas the quick nonradiative decay of excited states prevented photosensitized 1O2 production. Interestingly, the modification of the formyl group made phenazine derivatives acquire excellent photosensitizing ability (Fig. 43). Such favorable photosensitizers based on phenazine derivatives had a wide range of applications, including photocatalytic synthesis and water purification.
 Scheme 43  Synthetic routes of molecules 101 and 102. 
 Fig. 43  The production of reactive oxygen for molecules 101 and 102. 
In 2015, Zhang et al.211 described a novel phenazine derivative with six-membered rings and long alkyl chains 103, exhibiting various photometric characteristics (Scheme 44). Remarkably, 103 showed blue fluorescence emission in toluene solution and simultaneously had a dynamic color of green in the powder and film state. Furthermore, in the 103/trifluoroacetic acid state, it displayed red fluorescence color. Most importantly, the OLED based on 103 could exhibit a strong green emission and a maximum luminance of about 8600 cd m−2, presenting potential application in the OLED field (Fig. 44).
 Scheme 44  Synthetic route of molecule 103. 
 Fig. 44  The various luminescence colors of molecule 103 in different states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211 (Copyright©2015 American Chemical Society). 
Besides that, Sergeeva and co-workers212 reported a photoactive dye 104 to obtain a novel 3D functional graphene nanophase material through covalent modification under white light. In this strategy, firstly, neutral red, as a non-toxic available dye, underwent diazotization to furnish a phenazine diazonium salt. Subsequently, phenazine radicals were generated from the phenazine diazonium salt by white light activation, achieving covalent modification of graphene. This strategy could be not only first successful and facile technology, but also an environmentally friendly photochemical approach. Most importantly, this 3D graphene hybrid material by modification enhanced its solubility and exhibited an optical band gap of 1.95 eV. Moreover, in the visible wavelength area, this material displayed high emission (Fig. 45). Furthermore, the modified material showed a bright orange emission in DMF. These results indicated that this 3D functional graphene nanocomposite would have the potential for photochemical and energy application.
 Fig. 45  Schematic presentation of covalent bonding of dye 104 to graphene. Inset: Photograph of the samples of graphene and modified graphene suspension in DMSO and DMF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212 (Copyright©2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Solar energy and wind energy are the renewable resources applied in many fields. Redox flow batteries and water splitting cell are innovative and promising technologies, which exhibit cost-effective and long-duration performances. Wang and Ji et al.213 designed and synthesized a series of amino acid functionalized phenazine derivatives 105–113, which could be applied in aqueous organic redox flow batteries (AORFBs) in almost neutral environments. In this method, the coupling reaction between brominated phenazine derivatives and various amino acids occurred to furnish the target molecules with good to excellent yields in Pd as catalyst (Scheme 45). This synthesis method possessed a wide substrate range. Due to their lower redox potentials and ability to adapt to double electron transfers, the phenazine derivatives have excellent potential for use as negolyts in AORFBs. Previous literature reports on AORFBs based on phenazine higlighted some drawbacks, such as weak solubility in aqueous solution and short working life. In light of this, the effects of the electrochemical redox characteristics and battery performance by various functional groups at different substituent positions of 105–113 were studied. The batteries based on amino acid functionalized phenazine derivatives 105–113 displayed open-circuit voltages of 1 V and excellent circulation performance, which achieved super high stability (Fig. 46).
 Scheme 45  Synthetic routes of molecules 105–113. 
 Fig. 46  A flow battery assembled with 105–113 negolyte paired with ferrocyanide posolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Triptycene possesses a particular molecular structure comprising of polyhedral π-conjugated planes. According to the relevant literature, its derivatives could form honeycomb lattices owing to the intermolecular face-to-face overlaps of π places. It is noteworthy that this unique characteristic could greatly lead to the sorption and separation of gas molecules. In 2020, Awaga and co-workers214 reported a phenazine derivative based on triptycene acceptor 114. The synthetic strategy involved the condensation reaction between 2,3,6,7,14,15-triptycenehexaone and o-phenylenediamine to furnish the desired molecule with 31% yield (Scheme 46). Meanwhile, through the vapor diffusion method orange crystals of acceptor 114 were obtained in THF solution. Moreover, the experimental results demonstrated that 114 formed a honeycomb network owing to the π–π overlaps of the intermolecules, and that the ability of phenazine parties to accept hydrogen bonds enabled this honeycomb network to form a wide 1D channel with a diameter of 10 A. Very surprisingly, these honeycomb crystals of acceptor 114 greatly showed a strong reversible host–guest charge-transfer interaction with tetrathiafulvalene as an organic donor, achieving the adsorption/desorption of tetrathiafulvalene on/from these honeycomb lattice surfaces. Meanwhile, this phenomenon also appeared/disappeared with the host–guest charge-transfer interaction (Fig. 47).
 Scheme 46  Synthetic route of molecule 114. 
 Fig. 47  The adsorption/desorption of phenazine analogue 114 for TTP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society). 
Notably, Saito et al.215 developed a flapping fluorescent probe based on phenazine derivative 115, achieving the real-time monitoring of dynamic free volume in polymers (Scheme 47). 115 showed stronger green fluorescence in CH2Cl2 than FLAP. In the meanwhile, this probe 115 also exhibited a remarkable fluorescence spectrum in polystyrene that continually changed to the long-wavelength mode owing to the excited-state planarization. Most importantly, only when the polymer free volume is at least 280 Å3, the flapping probe could achieve excited-state planarization and simultaneously this volume lasted for 1.2 s on average (Fig. 48).
 Scheme 47  Synthetic route of molecule 115. 
 Fig. 48  The nitrogen-embedded flapping fluorophore 115 as a bright dual-fluorescent probe and real-time analysis of polystyrene free volume using the 115 dopant. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society). 
In 2021, Woo et al.216 designed and synthesized three different naphtha[2,3-i]phenazine derivatives 116–118 by introducing nitrile substituents at various positions, showing green-light fluorescence emission (Scheme 48). It was discovered that the substitution of N and CN reduced the intramolecular charge-transfer properties and Huang–Rhys factors. Meanwhile, the relationship between the molecular structure and luminescence properties was studied. In chloroform, the photoluminescence spectra of 116 and 117 exhibited red-shift and broadness compared to that in hexane owing to the line-broadening effect. However, 118 showed a narrow spectrum under the same conditions. Furthermore, the OLEDs based on 118 exhibited narrow electroluminescence spectra with an fwhm value of 50 nm, particularly the fwhm of the main emission peak was 27 nm, which was obviously less than those of other devices 116 and 117 of 81 nm and 99 nm, respectively (Fig. 49). This work indicated that adjusting the molecular structures of fluorophores could reduce the V0–n vibronic transitions of narrowband emission through changing the structures and positions of the substitutes (Scheme 48).
 Fig. 49  The dominant vibronic transitions and photographs of the emitting OLEDs 116–118. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society). 
 Scheme 48  Synthetic routes of molecules 116–118. 
7. Conclusions and perspective
This review summarizes the research progress of functionalized phenazine derivatives from synthetic strategies, to property studies, and application explorations in recent years. Meanwhile, we showed that particular groups of these molecules greatly affected their properties and applications owing to their diverse photophysical and chemical characteristics. In spite of achieving significant progress in these various fields, there is still a huge challenge of practical application in pure water and biological cells due to their toxicity. Moreover, it could be difficult to use some acquired materials for practical application in a large scale and highly efficient method. Furthermore, few materials could even lack long-term stability and durability in electrochemistry, limiting their valid value in real application owing to the poor solubility of large nitrogenous heterocyclic compounds. Therefore, there is imperious demand to solve these drawbacks. For all this, the exploration of these smart materials based on functionalized phenazine derivatives has still many opportunities owing to their excellent properties, which could need tremendous efforts to explore. Furthermore, phenazine derivatives possess excellent structural flexibility and redox-active activity, and we anticipate that phenazine derivatives will have a bright future in chiral catalysis, supramolecular catalysis and organic adsorption.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22001214; 22165027; and 22061039) and the Key R & D program of Gansu Province (No. 21YF5GA066).
References
J. B. Li and Q. C. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28049–28062 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Zhang and Q. C. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3419 RSC .
R. Kumar, A. Sharma, H. Singh, P. Suating, H. S. Kim, K. Sunwoo, I. Shim, B. C. Gibb and J. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9657–9721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. N. Qi, L. R. Dang, W. J. Qu, Y. M. Zhang, H. Yao, Q. Lin and T. B. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11308–11339 RSC .
T. R. Cook, Y. R. Zheng and P. J. Stang, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 734–777 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Yao, L. Ye, H. Zhang, S. S. Li, S. Q. Zhang and J. H. Hou, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7397–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. C. Kuehne and M. C. Gather, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12823–12864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Clifford, R. W. Bradley, L. T. Wey, J. M. Lawrence, X. L. Chen, C. J. Howe and J. Z. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 3328–3338 RSC .
B. B. Shi, Y. M. Zhang, T. B. Wei, Q. Lin, H. Yao, P. Zhang and X. M. You, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 190, 555 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Bhosale, M. A. Kobaisi, R. W. Jadhav, P. P. Morajkar, L. A. Jones and S. George, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 9845–9998 RSC .
F. Li, Z. J. Huang, Q. H. Zhou, M. Y. Pan, Q. Tang and C. B. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 10031–10038 RSC .
I. Degano, F. Modugno, I. Bonaduce, E. Ribechini and M. P. Colombini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7313–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, C. K. Zhang, L. Y. Zhang, Y. G. Zhou and G. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 69–103 RSC .
P. Bolle, T. Benali, C. Menet, M. Puget, E. Faulques, J. Marrot, P. Mialane, A. Dolbecq, H. Serier-Brault, O. Oms and R. Dessapt, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 12602–12609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Lifshits, J. A. Roque, P. Konda, S. Monro, H. D. Cole, D. von Dohlen, S. Kim, G. Deep, R. P. Thummel, C. G. Cameron, S. Gujar and S. A. McFarland, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 11740–11762 RSC .
J. M. Andjaba, C. J. Rybak, Z. Y. Wang, J. H. Ling, J. G. Mei and C. Uyeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 3975–3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Figueira-Duarte and K. Mullen, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 7260–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Chen, W. X. Zhang, B. Li, W. B. Huang, C. H. Lin, Y. Wu, S. H. Chen and H. P. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 56385–56392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. McKinley, P. Lincoln and E. M. Tuite, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2676–2692 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Qi, Y. Q. Xie, Y. M. Zhang, H. Yao, Q. Lin and T. B. Wei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 329, 129170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Leliege, P. Blanchard, T. Rousseau and J. Roncali, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 3098–3101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kothavale, W. J. Chung and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 6043–6049 RSC .
R. E. Martin and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1350–1377 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Soni, S. Singh, S. Sharma, G. Batra, K. Kaushik, C. Rao, N. C. Verma, B. Mondal, A. Yadav and C. K. Nandi, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 3615–3626 RSC .
M. R. Gill, M. G. Walker, S. Able, O. Tietz, A. Lakshminarayanan, R. Anderson, R. Chalk, A. H. EI-Sagheer, T. Brown, J. A. Thomas and K. A. Vallis, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8936–8944 RSC .
K. Ohira, K. Imato and Y. Ooyama, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 5298–5304 RSC .
J. Yang, Y. T. Gao, T. Jiang, W. Liu, C. C. Liu, N. N. Lu, B. Li, J. Mei, Q. Peng and J. L. Hua, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1396–1405 RSC .
H. L. Zhang, T. B. Wei, W. T. Li, W. J. Qu, Y. L. Leng, J. H. Zhang, Q. Lin, Y. M. Zhang and H. Yao, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2017, 175, 117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Zhang, H. Fang, W. Zhu, J. X. He, H. Yao, T. B. Wei, Q. Lin and W. J. Qu, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 172, 107765 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, W. X. Ren, J. T. Hou, M. Won, J. S. An, X. Y. Chen, J. Shu and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8887–8902 RSC .
N. Y. Edwards, D. M. Schnable, I. R. Gearba-Dolocan and J. L. Strubhar, Molecules, 2021, 26, 87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Li, J. B. Yang, Y. Qu and J. L. Hua, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1317–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, A. C. Sedgwick, T. Hirao and J. L. Sessler, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 427, 213560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Li, Y. Q. Shen, J. Q. Wan, X. L. Yu and Q. C. Zhang, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2018, 3375–3390 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Shi, W. C. Li, P. Qin, X. X. Zhao, X. N. Qi, Y. P. Chai, H. H. Yang, W. J. Qu, H. Yao, Y. M. Zhang, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, Dyes Pigm., 2022, 197, 109885 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Lefebvre, J. Schindler, P. Traber, Y. Zhang, S. Kupfer, S. Grafe, I. Baussanne, M. Demeunynck, J. M. Mouesca, S. Gambarelli, V. Artero, B. Dietzek and M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4152–4159 RSC .
A. T. Garrison, Y. Abouelhassan, D. Kallifidas, F. Bai, M. Ukhanova, V. Mai, S. G. Jin, H. Luesch and R. W. Huigens, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14819–14823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Senapati, Org. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 2608–2642 RSC .
H. Q. Wang, B. J. Zhao, P. Ma, Z. Li, X. Y. Wang, C. X. Zhao, X. T. Fan, L. L. Tao, C. B. Duan, J. Zhang, C. M. Han, G. Y. Chen and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7525–7530 RSC .
J. B. Laursen and J. Nielsen, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 1663–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Keohane, A. D. Steele and W. M. Wuest, Synlett, 2015, 2739–2744 CAS .
T. Hosono, N. O. Decarli, P. Z. Crocomo, T. Goya, L. E. de Sousa, N. Tohnai, S. Minakata, P. de Silva, P. Data and Y. Takeda, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 4905–4913 RSC .
Y. Y. Zhao, G. L. Qian, Y. H. Ye, S. Wright, H. T. Chen, Y. M. Shen, F. Q. Liu and L. C. Du, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2495–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Yang, S. Kundra, M. Chojnacki, K. Liu, Y. Abouelhassan, D. Kallifidas, P. L. Zhang, G. T. Huang, S. G. Jin, Y. S. Ding, H. Luesch, K. H. Rohde, P. M. Dunman, J. A. Lemos and R. W. Huigens, J. Med. Chem., 2021, 64, 7275–7295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Abouelhassan, A. T. Garrison, H. F. Yang, A. Chavez-Riveros, G. M. Burch and R. W. Huigens, J. Med. Chem., 2019, 62, 7618–7642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Liu, Z. C. Yang, W. B. Xu, Y. M. Chu, J. Yang, Y. C. Yan, Y. Hu, Y. Wang and J. L. Hua, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12509–12517 RSC .
L. L. Ling, T. Schneider, A. J. Peoples, A. L. Spoering, I. Engels, B. P. Conlon, A. Mueller, T. F. Schaberle, D. E. Hughes, S. Epstein, M. Jones, L. Lazarides, V. A. Steadman, D. R. Cohen, C. R. Felix, K. A. Fetterman, W. P. Millett, A. G. Nitti, A. M. Zullo, C. Chen and K. Lewis, Nature, 2015, 517, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. You, D. H. Liu, M. B. Zhu, J. T. Yu, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. F. Wang and W. G. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7079–7088 RSC .
J. M. Cameron, C. Holc, A. J. Kibler, C. L. Peake, D. A. Walsh, G. N. Newton and L. R. Johnson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 5863–5883 RSC .
H. L. Zhang, W. T. Li, W. J. Qu, T. B. Wei, Q. Lin, Y. M. Zhang and H. Yao, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 47547 RSC .
Y. J. Zhang, D. D. Jiang, Z. Fang, N. Zhu, N. X. Sun, W. He, C. K. Liu, L. L. Zhao and K. Guo, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 9432–9441 RSC .
J. K. Laha and M. K. Hunjan, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 8437–8440 RSC .
L. R. Dang, T. B. Wei, J. P. Hu, Y. Lia, Q. Lin, H. Yao, Y. M. Zhang and W. J. Qu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2022, 429, 113903 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Estrada and D. C. Neckers, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 3304–3307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. N. Qi, W. C. Li, B. B. Shi, Y. M. Zhang, H. Yao, Q. Lin and T. B. Wei, Chin. Chem. Lett. DOI:10.1016/j.cclet.2022.03.081 .
G. Shukla, A. Srivastava, D. Yadav and M. S. Singh, J. Org. Chem., 2018, 83, 2173–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sharafi, Z. J. Weinert, I. M. Cohen, C. Y. Liao, M. Ivancic, J. N. Li and S. T. Schneebel, Synlett, 2016, 2145–2149 CAS .
H. van der Salm, A. B. S. Elliott and K. C. Gordon, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 282, 33–49 CrossRef .
Y. Xiao, W. M. Hu, S. Sun, J. T. Yu and J. Cheng, Synlett, 2019, 2113–2122 CAS .
A. Chaudhary and J. M. Khurana, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44, 1045–1083 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cimmino, Z. Bahmani, S. Castaldi, M. Masi, R. Isticato, J. Abdollahzadeh, J. Amini and A. Evidente, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2021, 69, 12143–12147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Wei, H. Q. Dong, X. Q. Ma, Q. Y. Yang, Z. H. Wang, H. Yao and Q. Lin, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 5040 RSC .
T. W. Clark and J. Sperry, Synlett, 2012, 2827–2829 CAS .
T. Amanpour, P. Mirzaei and A. Bazgir, Synthesis, 2012, 235–240 CAS .
R. W. Huigens, B. R. Brummel, S. Tenneti, A. T. Garrison and T. Xiao, Molecules, 2022, 27, 1112 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Y. Gu, Z. L. Wang and Q. C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7060–7074 RSC .
A. Bhattacherjee, M. Sneha, L. Lewis-Borrell, G. Amoruso, T. A. A. Oliver, J. Tyler, I. P. Clark and A. J. Orr-Ewing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 3613–3627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Corbin, K. O. Puffer, K. A. Chism, J. P. Cole, J. C. Theriot, B. G. McCarthy, B. L. Buss, C. H. Lim, S. R. Lincoln, B. S. Newell and G. M. Miyake, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 4507–4516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lim, M. D. Ryan, B. G. McCarthy, J. C. Theriot, S. M. Sartor, N. H. Damrauer, C. B. Musgrave and G. M. Miyake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 348–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Song, W. Q. Ye, L. J. Shi, J. H. Huang, Z. Y. Zhang, J. Mei, J. J. Su and H. Tian, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 615–623 RSC .
Y. Aoki, H. M. O. Brien, H. Kawasaki, H. Takaya and M. Nakamura, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 461–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Pearson, C. H. Lim, B. G. McCarthy, C. B. Musgrave and G. M. Miyake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11399–11407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Li, C. X. Zhang, C. C. Wang, W. Q. Ye, Q. Zhang, Z. Y. Hang, J. H. Su, Y. F. Chen and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2260–2263 RSC .
W. P. Chen, S. P. Wang, G. C. Yang, S. Y. Chen, K. Q. Ye, Z. H. Hu, Z. L. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 587–597 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zhang, G. C. Sun, W. Chen, J. H. Su and H. Tian, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 7525–7537 RSC .
Y. H. Chen, Y. Fang, H. Gu, J. Qiang, H. D. Li, J. L. Fan, J. F. Cao, F. Wang, S. Lu and X. Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55094–55106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Wang, B. C. Zhou, N. Wang, C. M. Yu, N. D. Yang, J. Chen, Q. Wu, C. W. Zhang, L. Li and W. Huang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 2897–2902 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, L. Sun, Z. W. Zheng, J. H. Su and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4462–4464 RSC .
Z. Y. Zhang, Y. S. Wu, K. C. Tang, C. L. Chen, J. W. Ho, J. H. Su, H. Tian and P. T. Chou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8509–8520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Li, J. B. Lan, D. Wu and J. S. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14008–14012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Roushan, X. Zhang and J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 436–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang, W. X. Song, J. H. Su and H. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1902803 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Yang and J. M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4572–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. J. Yan, S. Yang, Y. Zhu, I. Murtaza, G. F. He, H. Meng and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 722–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Hu, X. Q. Liang, D. L. Wu, B. Yu, Y. J. Wang, Y. F. Mi, Z. H. Cao and Z. J. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 734 RSC .
F. Arcudi, L. Dordevic and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4170–4173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Ni, M. Li, J. Zheng, S. Z. Zhan, Y. M. Qiu, S. W. Ng and D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13472–13476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Yu, H. Y. Wang, G. L. Pozina, C. Y. Yin, X. K. Liu and F. Gao, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 11338–11343 RSC .
J. Q. Zhao, C. Sun, M. Yue, Y. Meng, X. M. Zhao, L. R. Zeng, G. Chen, C. Y. Yue and X. W. Lei, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 1218–1221 RSC .
M. Gon, S. Saotome, K. Tanaka and Y. Chujo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 12483–12490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Liu, J. Wang, F. Tang, N. Wang, L. Li, C. Yao and L. D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55269–55277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Sun, J. J. Pan, Y. F. Wu, Y. Liu, W. Chen, Z. Y. Zhang and J. H. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10875–10882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, W. X. Song, X. Y. Chen, J. Mei, Z. Y. Zhang and J. H. Su, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2294 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. R. Li, Y. Y. Zhang, J. Mei and J. H. Su, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1879 RSC .
X. Y. Chen, J. C. Chen, G. C. Sun, L. F. Guo, J. H. Su and Z. Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 38629–38636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wongkongkatep, Y. Miyahara, A. Ojida and I. Hamachi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 665–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Choi and A. D. Hamilton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 3912–3915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kubo, M. Yamamoto, M. Ikeda, M. Takeuchi, S. Shinkai, S. Yamaguchi and K. Tamao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2036–2040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Niu, F. F. Han, Q. Zhang, T. W. Xie, L. Lu, S. H. Li and H. P. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2036–2040 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Kim, D. T. McQuade, S. K. McHugh and T. M. Swager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2036–2040 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu, A. C. Sedgwick, T. Gunnlaugsson, E. U. Akkaya, J. Yoon and T. D. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7105–7123 RSC .
Z. Kowser, U. Rayhan, T. Akther, C. Redshaw and T. Yamato, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2173–2200 RSC .
X. Q. Chen, F. Wang, J. Y. Hyun, T. W. Wei, J. Qiang, X. T. Ren, I. Shin and J. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2976–3016 RSC .
H. Y. Yin, Y. N. Wu, X. J. Peng and F. L. Song, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 10549–10551 RSC .
P. Mini, M. A. Springer, M. R. Grace, G. H. Dennison and K. L. Tuck, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5605–5608 RSC .
M. K. Goshisht and N. Tripathi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 9820–9850 RSC .
S. Dhiman, M. Ahmad, G. Kumar, V. Luxami, P. Singh and S. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 1097–1106 RSC .
M. H. Chua, H. Zhou, Q. Zhu, B. Z. Tang and J. W. Xu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 659–708 RSC .
S. Panja, A. Panja and K. Ghosh, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 584–602 RSC .
W. Chen, C. X. Guo, Q. He, X. D. Chi, V. M. Lynch, Z. Y. Zhang, J. H. Su, H. Tian and J. L. Sessler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14798–14806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Zhou, J. Mei, Y. A. Chen, C. L. Chen, W. Chen, Z. Y. Zhang, J. H. Su, P. T. Chou and H. Tian, Small, 2016, 12, 6542–6546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ramos-Soriano, S. J. Beritez-Benitez, A. P. Davis and M. C. Galan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 16880–16884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Gong, W. J. Qin, P. Xiao, X. Wu, L. Li, G. B. Zhang, R. S. Zhang, J. P. Sun, S. Q. Yao and W. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 58 RSC .
Y. L. He, Y. Y. Li, H. F. Su, Y. Si, Y. Y. Liu, Q. C. Peng, J. He, H. W. Hou and K. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 50–56 RSC .
L. Li, X. G. Dong, Z. F. Liu, J. Wei, J. R. Li, H. Zhou, J. Zhu and X. W. Shi, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 195, 109676 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shuai, C. Xiang, L. Qian, F. Bin, L. X. Hui, D. J. Peng, Z. Chang, L. J. Hui and Z. W. Bin, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 195, 109676 CrossRef .
S. Subedi, L. N. Neupane, P. K. Mehta and K. H. Lee, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 191, 109374 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Xue, T. T. Liu and H. R. Liu, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 165, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aksuner, B. Basaran, E. Henden, I. Yilmaz and A. Cukurovali, Dyes Pigm., 2011, 88, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Soares-Paulino, L. Giroldo, G. Celante, C. Lodeiro and A. A. D. Santos, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 159, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Liu, Z. J. Shi, W. J. Xu, H. R. Yang, N. Xi, X. M. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 103, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Sun, H. T. Zhou, Y. Liu, Y. R. Li, Z. Y. Zhang and J. Mei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20205–20212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Huang, T. Jiang, J. Wang, X. Ma and H. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2855–2860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, Y. R. Li, H. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. L. Feng, Q. Tian, N. Li, J. Mei, J. H. Su and H. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39351–39358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gu, T. Jiang and X. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 43473–43479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, C. L. Chen, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. A. Chen, W. C. Chao, J. H. Su, H. Tian and P. T. Chou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Zhou, D. G. Chen, M. L. Saha, H. Wang, X. P. Li, P. T. Chou and P. J. Stang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5535–5543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang, C. L. Chen, Y. A. Chn, Y. C. Wei, J. H. Su, H. Tian and P. T. Chou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9880–9884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lim, M. D. Ryan, B. G. McCarthy, J. C. Theriot, S. M. Sartor, N. H. Damrauer, C. B. Musgrave and G. M. Miyake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 348–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Peterson, C. N. Gannett, L. Melecio-Zambrano, B. P. Fors and H. Abruna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7135–7141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Obrezkov, V. Ramezankhani, I. Zhidkov, V. F. Traven, E. Z. Kurmaev, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5440–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, D. Suemasa, K. Masuda, K. Aita and T. Endo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6346–6353 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Huang, Y. Y. Chen, Y. Liu, T. T. Wu, H. M. Li, J. Ye, G. L. Dai, X. H. Zhang and Y. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 17868–17875 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kothavale, W. J. Chung and J. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18730–18738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Balijapalli, R. Nagata, N. Yamada, H. Nakantotani, M. Tanaka, A. D. Aleo, V. Placide, M. Mamada, Y. Tsuchiya and C. Adachi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8477–8482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Balijapalli, Y. T. Lee, B. S. B. Karunathilaka, G. Tumen-Ulzii, M. Auffray, Y. Tsuchiya, H. Nakanotani and C. Adachi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19364–19373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Chen, Y. F. Xiao, K. Wang, D. M. Sun, X. C. Fan, X. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Z. Shi, J. Yu, F. X. Geng, C. S. Lee and X. H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2478–2484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Xie, H. Z. Li, G. L. Dai, Y. Q. Li, T. Cheng, M. Xie, J. X. Tang and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26144–26151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhou, W. C. Chen, H. Liu, X. S. Cao, N. Q. Li, Y. M. Zhang, C. S. Lee and C. L. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9639–9645 RSC .
Y. Yang, A. S. Li, Z. M. Ma, J. W. Liu, W. Q. Xu, Z. Y. Ma and X. R. Jia, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 181, 108575 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Wang, Q. Y. Wan and J. Z. Liu, Chin. J. Chem., 2021, 39, 2705–2710 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Takeda, M. Okazakib and S. Minakata, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10291–10294 RSC .
D. L. Zhou, W. P. To, G. S. M. Tong, G. Cheng, L. L. Du, D. L. Phillips and C. M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6375–6382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. W. Liu, R. H. Duan, X. F. Wei, Y. P. Yi, Y. Wang and C. F. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8818–8822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Long, X. J. Chen, H. Y. Wu, Z. X. Zhou, S. S. Babu, M. M. Wu, J. Zhao, M. P. Aldred, S. W. Liu, X. D. Chen, Z. G. Chi, J. R. Xu and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7220–7226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zalibera, D. S. Krylov, D. Karagiannis, P. A. Will, F. Ziegs, S. Schiemenz, W. Lubitz, S. Reineke, A. Savitsky and A. A. Popov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Chen, W. W. Tao, Y. F. Xiao, K. Wang, M. Zhang, X. C. Fan, W. C. Chen, J. Yu, S. L. Li, F. X. Geng, X. H. Zhang and C. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29086–29093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bhattacharjee, N. Acharya, H. Bhatia and D. Ray, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2733–2738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Wang, Y. C. Li, X. Y. Cai, D. C. Chen, G. Z. Xie, K. K. Liu, Y. C. Wu, C. C. Lo, A. Lien, Y. Cao and S. J. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8627–8636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Christopherson, D. M. Mayder, J. Poisson, N. R. Paisley, C. M. Tonge and Z. M. Hudson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20000–20011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Li, M. Z. Li, J. Z. Fan, Y. Z. Song, C. K. Wang and L. L. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 7526–7537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, K. Wang, C. Wang, X. C. Fan, Y. Z. Shi, X. Zhang, S. L. Zhang, J. Ye, C. J. Zheng, Y. Q. Li, J. Yu, X. M. Qu and X. H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 1495–1502 RSC .
F. Y. Li, G. Y. Jiang, M. Z. Li, J. Z. Fan, Y. Z. Song, C. K. Wang and L. L. Lin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 1313–1323 RSC .
Y. K. Wang, C. C. Huang, S. Kumar, S. H. Li, Z. L. Dong, M. K. Fung, Z. Q. Jiang and L. S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10030–10035 RSC .
M. C. Tang, M. Y. Chan and V. W. Yam, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 7249–7279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Xie, J. X. Zhou, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9476–9494 RSC .
A. S. Romanov, S. T. E. Jones, Q. Y. Gu, P. J. Conaghan, B. H. Drummond, J. L. Feng, F. Chotard, L. Buizza, M. Foley, M. Linnolahti, D. Credgington and M. Bochmann, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 435–446 RSC .
M. Godumala, S. Choi, M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2172–2198 RSC .
X. L. Li, X. Y. Cai, M. U. Ali, S. J. Su and H. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8063–8069 RSC .
Y. W. Xu, P. Xu, D. H. Hu and Y. G. Ma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1030–1069 RSC .
T. Y. Huang, W. Jiang and L. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5577–5596 RSC .
S. K. Pathak, H. Liu, C. J. Zhou, G. H. Xie and C. L. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 7363–7373 RSC .
I. Bala, R. A. K. Yadav, M. Devi, J. De, N. Singh, K. Kailasam, J. Jayakumar, J. H. Jou, C. H. Cheng and S. K. Pal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 17009–17015 RSC .
K. A. Thom, T. Forster, O. Weingart, S. Goto, Y. Takeda, S. Minakata and P. Gilch, ChemPhotoChem, 2021, 5, 335–347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takeda, T. Kaihara, M. Okzaki, H. Higginbotham, P. Data, N. Tohnai and S. Minakata, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6847–6850 Search PubMed .
P. Data, P. Pander, M. Okazaki, Y. Takeda, S. Minakata and A. P. Monkman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5739–5744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Z. Crocomo, T. Kaihara, S. Kawaguchi, P. Stachelek, S. Minakata, P. de Silva, P. Data and Y. Takeda, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 13390–13398 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Goto, Y. Nitta, N. O. Decarli, L. E. de Sousa, P. Stachelek, N. Tohnai, S. Minakata, P. de Silva, P. Data and Y. Takeda, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 13942–13953 RSC .
M. Okazaki, Y. Takeda, P. Data, P. Pander, H. Higginbotham, A. P. Monkman and S. Minakata, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2677 RSC .
S. Izumi, H. F. Higginbotham, A. Nyga, P. Stachelek, N. Tohnai, P. de Silva, P. Data, Y. Takeda and S. Minakata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1482–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. L. Qiu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1515–1563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Li, L. Sheng, H. C. Wang, X. L. Wang, M. Y. Li, Y. L. Xu, H. Cui, H. T. Zhang, H. M. Liang, H. Xu and X. M. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 92–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Ji, D. Y. Zhang, R. Liang, G. H. Kang, Q. Y. Zhu and D. S. Deng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2021, 21, 482–489 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chongboriboon, K. Samakun, W. Dungkaew, F. Kielar, M. Sukwattanasintt and K. Chainok, Crystals, 2021, 11, 198 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Yang, D. Streater, C. Fiankor, J. Zhang and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 1061–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Wang, W. B. Huang, T. Sun, W. X. Zhang, W. Tang, L. H. Yan, J. H. Si and H. P. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 46565–46570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schneemann, R. H. Dong, F. Schwotzer, H. X. Zhong, I. Senkovska, X. L. Feng and S. Kaskel, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 1600–1619 RSC .
S. Q. Xu, M. Richter and X. L. Feng, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 252–265 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cusin, H. J. Peng, A. Ciesielski and P. Samor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 14236–14250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Allendorf, R. H. Dong, X. L. Feng, S. Kaskel, D. Matoga and V. Stavila, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8581–8640 Search PubMed .
D. L. Pastoetter, S. Q. Xu, M. Borrelli, M. Addicoat, B. P. Biswal, S. Paasch, A. Dianat, H. Thomas, R. Berger, S. Reineke, E. Brunner, G. Cuniberti, M. Richter and X. L. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23620–23625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alrayyani and O. S. Miljanic, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11989 RSC .
X. Zhuang, W. Zhao, F. Zhang, Y. Cao, F. Liu, S. Bi and X. Feng, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 4176–4181 RSC .
E. Jin, M. Asada, Q. Xu, S. Dalapati, M. A. Addicoat, M. A. Brady, H. Xu, T. Nakamura, T. Heine, Q. Chen and D. Jiang, Science, 2017, 357, 673–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Dai, Y. He, Z. H. Niu, P. He, C. K. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. H. Zhang and H. S. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9902–9906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Li, H. Fan, M. Ravivarma, B. Hu, Y. Y. Feng and J. X. Song, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 13824–13827 RSC .
J. Qiao, M. Qin, Y. M. Shen, J. Y. Cao, Z. D. Chen and J. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4307–4310 RSC .
E. I. Romadina, D. S. Komarov, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 2986–2989 RSC .
G. Maddala, R. Gade, J. Ahemed, S. Kalvapalli, N. B. Simhachalam, P. Chetti, S. Pola and R. Mitty, Sol. Energy, 2021, 226, 501–512 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, S. Zhang, Y. Z. Zhu, Y. M. Qian, Z. H. Niu, J. Ye, Y. Zhao and X. H. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 18762–18770 RSC .
A. Hollas, X. L. Wei, V. Murugesan, Z. M. Nie, B. Li, D. Reed, J. Liu, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 508–514 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Xing, Q. H. Liu, W. Q. Xu, W. B. Liang, J. Q. Liu, B. G. Wang and J. P. Lemmon, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2364–2369 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. R. Wang, P. Y. Zhao, W. Yan, G. Y. Zhu, L. B. Ma, B. Yu, L. Wang, G. G. Li, J. Liu and Z. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2404–2409 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Wang, X. Li, B. Yu, Y. R. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Z. Wang, H. N. Lin, J. Ma, G. G. Li and Z. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 411–417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Xu, H. J. Sun, M. Addicoat, B. P. Biswal, F. He, S. Park, S. Paasch, T. Zhang, W. B. Sheng, E. Brunner, Y. Hou, M. Richter and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Xu, G. Wang, B. P. Biswal, M. Addicoat, S. Paasch, W. B. Sheng, X. D. Zhuang, E. Brunner, T. Heine, R. Berger and X. L. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 849–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Wang, C. S. Chen and Y. G. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1772–1779 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, X. Chen, Z. W. Tang, D. C. Wu, R. W. Fu and D. L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4788 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Lee, K. Tee, S. N. Riduan and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7681–7684 RSC .
J. Q. Wang, J. C. Z. En, S. N. Riduan and Y. G. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 2581–2585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Meng, A. Aykanat and K. A. Mirica, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 819–825 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mulzer, L. X. Shen, R. P. Bisbey, J. R. McKone, N. Zhang, H. D. Abrun and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 667–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Vitaku, C. N. Gannett, K. L. Carpenter, L. X. Shen, H. D. Abrun and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16–20 Search PubMed .
M. M. Wu, Y. Zhao, B. Q. Sun, Z. H. Sun, C. X. Li, Y. Han, L. Q. Xu, Z. Ge, Y. X. Ren, M. T. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lu, W. Wang, Y. F. Ma and Y. S. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104498 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pawlak, X. S. Liu, S. Ninova, P. D’Astolfo, C. Drechsel, J. C. Liu, R. Haner, S. Decurtins, U. Aschauer, S. X. Liu and E. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8370–8375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, H. X. Wang, H. Chen, Q. Zheng, Q. B. Zhang, H. Y. Mao, Y. W. Liu, S. L. Cai, B. Sun, C. C. Dun, M. P. Gordon, H. M. Zheng, J. A. Reimer, J. J. Urban, J. Ciston, T. W. Tan, E. M. Chan, J. Zhang and Y. Liu, Chem, 2020, 6, 933–944 CAS .
I. Hisaki, Y. Suzuki, E. Gomez, Q. Ji, N. Tohnai, T. Nakamura and A. Douhal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2111–2121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kurz, K. Schotz, I. Papadopoulos, F. W. Heinemann, H. Maid, D. M. Guldi, A. Kohler, G. Horner and B. Weber, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 3466–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Yan, J. W. Chen, Z. J. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Liu and J. N. Hua, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 7420 RSC .
K. Imato, K. Ohira, M. Yamaguchi, T. Enoki and Y. Ooyama, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 589–596 RSC .
P. Y. Gu, Y. B. Zhao, J. H. He, J. Zhang, C. Y. Wang, Q. F. Xu, J. M. Lu, X. W. Sun and Q. C. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 3030–3035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Martin, A. Tariq, B. D. O. Richards, G. Jose, S. A. Krasnikov, A. Kulak and N. N. Sergeeva, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10715–10718 RSC .
S. Pang, X. Y. Wang, P. Wang and Y. L. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5289–5298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ushiroguchi, Y. Shuku, R. Suizu and K. Awaga, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20, 7593–7597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Goto, S. Omagari, R. Sato, T. Yamakado, R. Achiwa, N. Dey, K. Suga, M. Vacha and S. Saito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 14306–14313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ha, H. B. Shin, J. F. Joung, W. J. Chung, J. E. Jeong, S. Kim, S. H. Hur, S. Y. Bae, J. Y. Kim, J. Y. Lee, S. Park and H. Y. Woo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 26227–26236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthetic routes of molecules 1–5.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration and application of a temperature-sensitive multi-fluorescent system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthetic route of molecule 6.	 

 	Fig. 2  The reversible supramolecular assembly process with molecule 6. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthetic routes of molecules 7–10.	 

 	Fig. 3  (1) Schematic illustration of temperature sensing of solvent-free luminescent dihydrophenazine derivatives based on the VIE mechanism. (2) Schematic representation of the influence of the alkyl chain length on the excited-stated configuration change of the solvent-free liquids 7–10 with temperature response. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 (Copyright©2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  The applications of molecules 7–10 with the temperature change. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 (Copyright©2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthetic routes of molecules 11 and 12.	 

 	Fig. 5  The fluorescence changes of molecule 11 in poly THF–toluene solution and molecule 12 in THF–water solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 (Copyright©2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  The construction of a tunable full-color system and practical applications of molecules 13–15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthetic routes of molecules 13–15.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis route of molecule 16.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Mechanism of proposed fluorescence tuning and dicarboxylate anion sensing. (b) Various guests with dicarboxylate dianions. (c) The photographs showing the fluorescence features of 16 with various guests under UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthetic route of molecule 17.	 

 	Fig. 8  Proposed recognizing mechanism of Hg2+ with 17 as a probe, in which a butterfly type planarization in 17 was prohibited due to the formation of nanoparticles of the 2:1 17/Hg2+ complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 (Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthetic route of molecule 18.	 

 	Fig. 9  The fluorescence emission of molecule 18 for D-glucose, D-galactose and D-fructose observed even by the naked eye (a), fluorescence titration of 18 with D-glucose associated with the photographs showing the fluorescence features of 18 with various amounts of D-glucose under irradiation with UV light (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthetic route of molecule 19.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the fluorescence change of molecule 19, which showed the VIE phenomenon before and after reacting with phosphatase in living cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113 (Copyright©2020 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthetic route of molecule 20.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the ratiometric visualization of the gelation process by the proposed self-indicating VIE-active gelator 20. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 (Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 11  Synthetic route of molecule 21.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process by the morphological transition of (R)/(S)-21. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthetic routes of molecules 22 and 23.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the structures of 1/22/3/23-incorporated polyurethanes. (b) Schematic illustration of internal space in films changed by temperature and fluorescence photographs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the preparation and exhibition of PCL-24, SBS-24 and PMMA-24 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 13  Synthetic routes of molecules 25–32.	 

 	Fig. 15  The fluorescence images of 25–32 (n = 1–8) in toluene under irradiation of a 365 nm UV light and the proposed excited-state planarization process of 25–32 (n = 1–8). Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 (Copyright©2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 14  The self-assembly of metallacycles 33(a)-37(e).	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration for the tunable fluorescence controlled by increasing steric hindrance from metallacycles 33(a) to 37(e) based on the proposed molecular design. Inset: Photographs of the metallacycles obtained under irradiation by a 365 nm UV lamp. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthetic routes of molecules 38–42.	 

 	Fig. 17  The fluorescence emission of molecules 38–42 and single-crystal as well as DFT-optimized structures along the view of the N–N axis, together with values for the bending angle (θb) of the dihydrodibenzo[a,c]phenazine skeleton. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128 (Copyright©2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 18  The fluorescence change of molecule 43 with a 365 nm light in various solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129 (Copyright©2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthetic route of molecule 44.	 

 	Fig. 19  Redox mechanism of 44 (a), calculated AICD plots of 44 with neutral, 3+, and 6+ valence states (b) and a picture corresponding to the top view of the molecule (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthetic routes of molecules 45 and 46.	 

 	Fig. 20  The properties of molecules 45 and 46 as TADF emitters for OLEDs.	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthetic route of molecule 47.	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthetic routes of molecules 48–50.	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthetic routes of molecules 51–53.	 

 	Scheme 21  Synthetic routes of molecules 54–56.	 

 	Fig. 21  The structures and properties of molecules 54–56 as TADF emitters for OLEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society).	 

45	Yellow	554	27.6	0.087
46	Red	597	23.8	0.047
47	Near-infrared	734	13.4	0.14
48	Yellow	554	23.7	0.04
49	Red	605	17.3	0.05
50	Orange-red	580	27.4	0.04
51	Red	608/612	8.0 (vacuum), 9.3 (solution)	0.23
52	Red	604/608	16.0 (vacuum), 14.4 (solution)	0.10
53	Red	604/612	20.1 (vacuum), 18.5 (solution)	0.04
54	Green	560	10.1	0.22
55	Red	576	11.8	0.21
56	Orange-red	606	22.0	0.05
58	Orange	588	23.8	0.112
59	Orange	624	8.3	0.075
60	Red	627	8.7	0.062
61	Red	655	0.8	0.057

 	Fig. 22  The structures and properties of two isomers 57–60 as TADF emitters for OLEDs.	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthetic route of molecule 61.	 

 	Fig. 23  The various properties of molecule 61. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 (Copyright© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).	 

 	Scheme 23  Synthetic routes of molecules 62 and 63.	 

 	Scheme 24  Synthetic route of molecule 64.	 

 	Fig. 24  The fluorescence properties of molecule 64. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165 (Copyright©2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 25  Synthetic routes of molecules 65–67.	 

 	Scheme 26  Synthetic routes of molecules 68 and 69.	 

 	Fig. 25  The fluorescence properties of molecules 65–67 as TADF emitters for OLEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166 (Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 26  The physicochemical properties and spin densities of 68 and 69 in different conformers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 27  Synthetic routes of molecules 70 and 71.	 

 	Fig. 27  The photophysical properties of molecules 70 and 71. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 (Copyright©2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 28  Synthetic routes of molecules 72–75.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic diagrams of the multi-color-changing MCL behavior of 72 and 73. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169 (Copyright©2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 29  Synthetic routes of molecules 76 and 77.	 

 	Fig. 29  The fluorescence properties of molecules 76 and 77.	 

 	Scheme 30  Synthetic routes of molecules 78–80.	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic representation of the band positions of 78–80 along with the H2O/H2 (hydrogen evolution reaction, HER) and O2/H2O (oxygen evolution reaction, OER) redox couples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 31  Synthetic route of molecule 81.	 

 	Fig. 31  The physical properties of molecule 81 as a high-performance cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 (Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 32  Synthetic routes of molecules 82 and 83.	 

 	Fig. 32  Porous organic polymers 82 and 83 as organic cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197 (Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 33  Synthetic route of molecule 84.	 

 	Fig. 33  The energy storage and power supply of conjugated microporous polymer 84. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198 (Copyright©2014 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 34  The properties of molecule 85 and aggregated 86 particles migrate on the pRGO surface to form a homogenous layer of 86 during cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199 (Copyright©2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry) and ref. 200 (Copyright©2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 34  Synthetic routes of molecules 85 and 86.	 

 	Scheme 35  Synthetic routes of molecules 87 and 88.	 

 	Fig. 35  The proposed proton conduction mechanism in aza-fused COFs (87 and 88). Reproduced with permission from ref. 201 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 36  Synthetic routes of molecules 89 and 90.	 

 	Fig. 36  The graphical representation of two redox-active covalent organic frameworks 89 and 90. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202 and 203 (Copyright©2016 and 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 37  Synthetic route of molecule 91.	 

 	Fig. 37  The circuit diagram of 2D covalent organic framework 91 as an organic cathode for LiBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204 (Copyright© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).	 

 	Scheme 38  Synthetic route of molecule 92. T2 = 160 °C, T3 = 220 °C.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Top view (left panel) of the structure of 92 in the gas phase calculated by DFT. The right panel shows a lateral view of the twisted Kagome lattice as well as measured torsion angles in the trigonal nodes. (b) The structure of nitrogen-doped Kagome graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 39  Synthetic route of molecule 93.	 

 	Fig. 39  Space-filling model of 93 with layers arranged in an eclipsed stacking mode and the application of the framework as a cathode for lithium-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 (Copyright©2020 Springer Science Business Media New York).	 

 	Scheme 40  Synthetic route of molecule 94.	 

 	Fig. 40  The form of HOF 94 and its color changes upon exposure to HCl vapor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 (Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 41  Synthetic routes of molecules 95–98.	 

 	Fig. 41  Two different schematic illustrations of the CISSS in the ground state and the CISSS in the excited state detected via fluorescence (FD-CISSS). Reproduced with permission from ref. 208 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 42  Synthetic routes of molecules 99 and 100.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) PA images of subcutaneous tissue with different concentrations of 99@HSA and 100@HSA. (b) Thermal image of a nude mouse in the control group and experimental group at different illuminating times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209 (Copyright©2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 43  Synthetic routes of molecules 101 and 102.	 

 	Fig. 43  The production of reactive oxygen for molecules 101 and 102.	 

 	Scheme 44  Synthetic route of molecule 103.	 

 	Fig. 44  The various luminescence colors of molecule 103 in different states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211 (Copyright©2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 45  Schematic presentation of covalent bonding of dye 104 to graphene. Inset: Photograph of the samples of graphene and modified graphene suspension in DMSO and DMF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212 (Copyright©2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 45  Synthetic routes of molecules 105–113.	 

 	Fig. 46  A flow battery assembled with 105–113 negolyte paired with ferrocyanide posolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213 (Copyright©2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Scheme 46  Synthetic route of molecule 114.	 

 	Fig. 47  The adsorption/desorption of phenazine analogue 114 for TTP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214 (Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 47  Synthetic route of molecule 115.	 

 	Fig. 48  The nitrogen-embedded flapping fluorophore 115 as a bright dual-fluorescent probe and real-time analysis of polystyrene free volume using the 115 dopant. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 49  The dominant vibronic transitions and photographs of the emitting OLEDs 116–118. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216 (Copyright©2021 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 48  Synthetic routes of molecules 116–118.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
