10th Anniversary Review: Applications of analytical techniques in laboratory studies of the chemical and climatic impacts of mineral dust aerosol in t ...  - Journal of Environmental Monitoring (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B805153D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B805153D
(Frontier)
J. Environ. Monit., 2008, 10, 919-934Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical Terms10th Anniversary Review: Applications of analytical techniques in laboratory studies of the chemical and climatic impacts of mineral dust aerosol in the Earth's atmosphere

        
          
            Courtney D. 
            Hatch
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Vicki H. 
            Grassian
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and the Center for Global and Regional Environmental Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. E-mail: Vicki-Grassian@uiowa.edu;  Fax: +1-(319) 335-1270;   Tel: +1-(319) 335-1392
Received 
      27th March 2008
    , Accepted 19th June 2008First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      11th July 2008
    AbstractIt is clear that mineral dust particles can impact a number of global processes including the Earth's climate through direct and indirect climate forcing, the chemical composition of the atmosphere through heterogeneous reactions, and the biogeochemistry of the oceans through dust deposition. Thus, mineral dust aerosol links land, air, and oceans in unique ways unlike any other type of atmospheric aerosol. Quantitative knowledge of how mineral dust aerosol impacts the Earth's climate, the chemical balance of the atmosphere, and the biogeochemistry of the oceans will provide a better understanding of these links and connections and the overall impact on the Earth system. Advances in the applications of analytical laboratory techniques have been critical for providing valuable information regarding these global processes. In this mini review article, we discuss examples of current and emerging techniques used in laboratory studies of mineral dust chemistry and climate and potential future directions.Courtney D. HatchCourtney Hatch attended Hendrix College in Conway, Arkansas, receiving a BA in chemistry (2000). She attended graduate school at the University of Colorado in Boulder, Colorado where she received her PhD in atmospheric chemistry (2006) under the direction of Margaret Tolbert and is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Iowa in Iowa City, working with Vicki Grassian and Gregory Carmichael.Vicki H. GrassianVicki H. Grassian is currently a professor in the Departments of Chemistry and Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at the University of Iowa. She has over 150 publications and has edited 3 books. Her research interests are in the areas of heterogeneous chemistry and climate impacts of mineral dust aerosol, environmental molecular surface science and environmental and health aspects of nanoscience and nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
Mineral dust aerosol originates from windblown soils with the largest amounts emitted from arid and semiarid desert regions that cover approximately 36% of the Earth's surface.1 From remote sensing analysis, a global dust belt, where much of the global burden of mineral dust aerosol originates, has been defined by Prospero et al.2 As shown in Fig. 1a, the dust belt consists of a broad region of the Earth's surface from low- to mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, extending from North Africa, across the Middle East, and through Central and Southern Asia and China. The global dust belt includes several of the Earth's largest desert regions, such as the Gobi and Sahara deserts. Mineral dust aerosol emitted into the atmosphere from these regions can be transported for days to weeks across this vast expanse of land and to the oceans beyond and deposited globally.3–6 Thus, the impact of mineral dust aerosol on the Earth system can be paramount.
 Fig. 1  (a) Pictorial representations of the global dust belt,2 the (b) global impacts of mineral dust aerosol illustrating the importance of heterogeneous chemistry in the Earth system, including links between land, air, and oceans, and (c) an illustration of water uptake by atmospheric aerosols over the full dynamic range. 
Mineral dust aerosol is an important component of the Earth’s atmosphere, relating atmospheric chemistry and climate with biogeochemical cycles,7 as illustrated in Fig. 1b. First, mineral dust affects the Earth's climate directly by scattering and absorbing radiation,8–10 and indirectly by modifying cloud properties and acting as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) or ice nuclei (IN).11–13 Second, mineral dust particles can undergo heterogeneous reactions while in transit through the atmosphere, altering the chemical balance of the atmosphere and the physiochemical properties of the mineral dust aerosol itself. Heterogeneous chemical transformations can potentially form dust particles that are more hygroscopic and more efficient CCN.14,15 The ability of mineral dust aerosol to form giant CCN16 will drive precipitation into the world's oceans during long-range transport. Finally, cloud processing and heterogeneous chemistry can alter the impact of mineral dust on ocean biogeochemical cycles.17–19 For example, Fe-containing mineral dust deposited into the Earth's oceans can modify bioproductivity and biogeochemical cycles.20 Heterogeneous processing of the dust aerosol can impact the degree to which Fe-containing dust is bioavailable upon deposition.18,19,21 Furthermore, heterogeneous reaction products, such as particulate nitrate,22,23 deposited into the oceans can alter the nitrogen cycle of ocean waters.24–26 Although knowledge of these intricate relationships is not new, recent advancements in applications of analytical techniques have begun to improve our understanding of these processes and their impacts on the regional and global environment.
Laboratory studies are essential to providing fundamental knowledge of the effects of mineral dust aerosol on the chemistry and climate of our atmosphere. Some of the questions laboratory studies attempt to address include: (i) What are the significant heterogeneous reactions on mineral dust surfaces that provide sinks for gas-phase species? (ii) Are these heterogeneous reactions catalytic or do the surfaces become saturated over time? (iii) Does heterogeneous uptake lead to permanent removal or reversible uptake of gas-phase reactants and how does this affect the lifetime of gaseous species in the atmosphere? (iv) What gas- and condensed-phase products are produced from these heterogeneous reactions? (v) How are heterogeneous reactions dependent on atmospheric conditions, including relative humidity (RH), pressure, and temperature? (vi) What is the effect of atmospheric aging processes, including chemical and photochemical processes that alter the physiochemical properties of the aerosol during atmospheric transport, on water uptake over the full dynamic range, illustrated in Fig. 1c, and optical properties of mineral dust aerosol? (vii) What analytical techniques or combination of techniques are most appropriate for studying atmospheric processing of mineral dust aerosol? (viii) Finally, how can this information be incorporated into global atmospheric chemistry models so the effects of mineral dust on the chemistry and climate of our atmosphere can be better understood?
This review explores applications of several different analytical techniques used to study the impact of mineral dust on the Earth system and to answer some of the questions posed above. This is a mini review article focused on a few recent select techniques and results and is not meant to be an exhaustive review of previous studies. Some examples are provided of how various laboratory methods have shed new light on the role of mineral dust aerosol in the atmosphere. First, a discussion of atmospheric dust mineralogy and the model systems and sample presentations typically used in laboratory studies to represent mineral dust aerosol is provided. Second, an overview of various applications analytical laboratory techniques for the study of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry and water uptake is presented. Third, analytical techniques designed to study the climatic effects of mineral dust aerosol are discussed. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of potential future directions for laboratory studies exploring the effects of mineral dust aerosol on the chemistry and climate of the Earth's atmosphere.
2. Samples for laboratory studies: mineralogy, mineral mixtures, and sample presentation
2.1 Mineralogy and the components of mineral dust aerosol
The mineralogical composition of soils on the Earth's surface, and therefore in the atmosphere, is quite diverse. In general, soils are classified according to their particle size. The silt fraction contains particles ranging from 2–50 μm in diameter, while the clay fraction contains particles less than 2 μm in diameter. The silt fraction is generally composed of quartz (SiO2), feldspar ((Na,Ca)AlSi3O8), calcite (CaCO3), iron oxides (Fe2O3), and gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O), listed in order of average global abundance.27,28 The clay fraction is mostly composed of illite ((K,H)Al2(Si,Al)4O10(OH)2·nH2O), kaolinite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4), and smectite clays, such as montmorillonite ((Al,Mg)8(Si4O10)4(OH)8·12H2O), with some amount of CaCO3 and SiO2.27 Once entrained in the atmosphere, the larger dust particles tend to be re-deposited near the source region, while the smaller particles have longer atmospheric lifetimes and can be transported globally.29,30 The specific composition of mineral dust aerosol will depend on the soil composition of the source region, the mobilization process, particle size, and any chemical modifications to the aerosol during transport. Previous studies have shown that well over half of the total atmospheric dust mass consists of layered silicates, such as illite, kaolinite, and montmorillonite clays.31 Since mineral dust is a complex mixture with particles of variable mineralogy, many laboratory studies use individual components, including clays, carbonates, and oxide minerals, as model systems for studying the effects of dust in the atmosphere. This approach is important for understanding mineralogical effects. For example, recent results from the Asian Pacific Regional Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-Asia) indicated that the uptake of secondary acids, such as nitric acid, on dust particles depends strongly on the mineralogy of the individual dust particle.32 Specifically, Sullivan et al.32 found that sulfates were more associated with aluminosilicate clays while nitrates were found to accumulate on calcium-rich dust particles. Thus, carefully constructed laboratory studies of individual mineral dust components are valuable for verifying and systematically quantifying mineralogical effects and can be quite useful in the interpretation of field data.
2.2 Well-characterized complex mixtures and authentic dust samples
Although individual minerals are typically used as mineral dust surrogates and provide an excellent way to study mineralogical variability, these individual-component systems do not represent the complexity observed in atmospheric dust particles. Thus, laboratory studies on authentic or complex dust mixtures are also important. A useful approach is to explore the chemistry and climate effects of single-component systems and complex mixtures for detailed comparative studies.
Studies of well-characterized complex mixtures can provide insights into mineral dust aerosol chemistry and represent important surrogates for atmospheric dust. For example, Krueger et al.33 used computer-controlled scanning electron microscopy coupled to energy dispersive X-ray (CCSEM/EDX) analysis to characterize the morphology and chemical composition of four authentic dust samples from different source regions. This study found clear differences in the reactivity of dust from different sources, suggesting that dust containing calcium-rich minerals is more reactive towards gaseous nitric acid (HNO3) than dust with lower calcium concentrations. However, analysis of individual components showed that not all calcium-containing minerals react to the same extent. As shown in the reaction equations below, CaCO3 and dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) readily form nitrate reaction products upon exposure to gas-phase HNO3, while CaSO4·2H2O is not reactive toward HNO3. CaCO3(s) + 2HNO3(g) → Ca(NO3)2(s,aq) + H2O(ads) + CO2(g)(1) CaMg(CO3)2(s) + 4HNO3(g) → CaMg(NO3)4(s, aq) + 2H2O(ads) + 2CO2(g)(2) CaSO4·H2O(s) HNO3(g) → No reaction(3)Eqn (1) has long been proposed as a pathway for effective removal of gas-phase HNO3 from the atmosphere34,35 and has been studied using a wide variety of laboratory techniques.22,36–39 The CCSEM/EDX study by Krueger et al.33 illustrates the importance of combining studies of well-characterized authentic dust samples and individual components for providing insights into the atmospheric effects of mineral dust aerosol.
The key factor in the study of authentic mineral dust samples is the characterization of the various mineral dust components within the mixture. Vlasenko et al.40 used complementary techniques, including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES), to compare the surface elemental composition of submicron dust particles to the bulk composition. Lafon et al.41 recently used a host of analytical techniques, including X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XFS) and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS), to characterize iron oxides in size-resolved authentic dust samples and Chinese and Nigerian soil samples for improved modeling studies of dust optical properties in the solar spectrum. These tools are extremely helpful for characterization of authentic and complex mineral mixtures and for elucidating the mineralogical influences of mineral dust aerosol in the chemistry and climate of the atmosphere.
2.3 Sample presentation: powders, thin films, atomically smooth surfaces, aerosols, and surface-functionalized dust samples
In addition to the types of mineral samples used, variability exists among laboratories and analytical techniques regarding the preparation and presentation of dust samples. Many studies use bulk dust samples either in the powder form or deposited as thin films on non-reactive substrates. Thin films and atomically smooth surfaces are generally easier to work with than aerosol particles and there are a number of excellent analytical tools available that use this sample presentation. However, difficulties arise when using bulk powders because diffusion into the bulk sample may be difficult to account for with respect to knowing the available surface area. Nevertheless, studies of the heterogeneous chemistry of bulk powders may provide sufficient sensitivity to study heterogeneous chemical mechanisms in studies where spectroscopic techniques, such as attenuated total refection Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) and diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform (DRIFT) spectroscopy, are used. Isolated particles deposited onto a substrate or flat surfaces may be more suitable for kinetic studies because diffusion through the bulk sample is limited and the surface area of the sample is better defined.37,42,43 Laboratory studies are moving towards the study of mineral dust in the aerosolized form.39,40 An advantage of studying the effects of mineral dust as aerosol particles is that aerosols are more representative of atmospheric mineral dust surfaces than thin films and substrate-deposited samples.
The nature of the surface of mineral dust aerosol is an additional issue that is of interest when studying the atmospheric and environmental impacts of mineral dust. Dust particles are often coated with organics44 and several studies have been attempted to mimic these organic coatings with self-assembled monolayers.45–48 These tailor-made dust surrogates represent model organic layers which can represent different functional groups that may be present on the surface of mineral dust aerosol. Geiger and co-workers have conceptualized this approach as illustrated in Fig. 2a.48 This figure shows the general idea for functionalizing the surface of SiO2-based substrates with atmospherically relevant moieties while Fig. 2b shows examples of the organic moieties and linkers used to synthesize the organic-functionalized SiO2 substrate.48 These functional groups can be characterized using a variety of well-established techniques. However, one question that arises, as always does for these types of studies, is how well do these model organics mimic the complexity of organic-coated mineral dust aerosol observed in the atmosphere?
 Fig. 2  (a) A conceptual illustration of the synthesis of organic-functionalized mineral dust substrates for studying the oxidative chemistry of atmospherically relevant organic moieties as coatings on mineral dust aerosols and (b) examples of organic moieties and linkers used for the synthesis of organic-functionalized mineral dust samples.48 These images were used with permission from the American Chemical Society. Copyright 2007. 
3. Laboratory studies of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry
There are a number of analytical techniques that have been developed for the study of heterogeneous chemistry of mineral dust, including mass spectrometry (Knudsen Cell flow reactors), infrared (IR), Raman and UV/Vis spectroscopy, ion chromatography, microscopy, and thermogravimetry. Below we review a few of these analytical techniques and some of the most recent contributions these methods have had on our understanding of the kinetics, mechanisms, and effects of mineral dust aerosol heterogeneous chemistry.
3.1. Laboratory techniques used to obtain kinetic information

Table 1 identifies many of the analytical methods designed to measure heterogeneous uptake kinetics of reactive trace gases on mineral dust aerosol and includes the sample preparation, advantages, limitations, and relevant references for each technique. As previously discussed, the heterogeneous chemistry of mineral dust is often studied using bulk powders or thin films. Thin films are easily prepared for kinetic studies using analytical techniques such as Knudsen cells and spectroscopic analysis. Knudsen cells are low pressure flow reactors operated under molecular flow conditions, of which the general design has been described in detail in the literature.49,50 In this low pressure regime, gas-surface collisions are strongly favored over gas-phase collisions, making the technique ideal for studying heterogeneous kinetics at atmospherically relevant concentrations. A useful kinetic parameter for atmospheric chemistry models is the uptake efficiency, γ, which has been derived previously in the literature51 and is defined as the number of gas-phase molecules lost to the surface per unit time divided by the total number of gas-surface collisions per unit time. In order to obtain an accurate γ value, the surface area available for reaction within the time scale of the initial uptake must be known. When using the geometric surface area of the sample, it is assumed that collisions of the gaseous reactant with only the top layer of a flat surface occur. However, in the case of a thin film or bulk powder sample of mineral dust, collisions may occur within the microstructure of the irregularly shaped, porous particles in addition to diffusion into underlying particle layers. As a result, assuming a perfectly flat surface can underestimate the true reactive surface area. Differences in how the reactive surface area is defined have lead to discrepancies in reported γ values between research groups.43,51–53 Additionally, Knudsen cells are limited by their design because many can only monitor the loss of gas-phase reactants at room temperature and under dry conditions.52,54,55 Finally, studying the heterogeneous uptake dependence on RH is restricted by pressure limitations of the Knudsen cell.
Table 1 Methods for measuring heterogeneous uptake kinetics of gaseous reactants on mineral dust aerosol




Method
Sample presentation
Advantages and limitations
References




Knudsen cell
Thin films/substrate-deposited
Capable of obtaining quantitative kinetics at relevant gas-phase concentrations, but difficulty discerning reactive surface area and obtaining relevant humidities

49–51,53



Isolated particles/substrate-deposited
Better suited for kinetic measurements than bulk thin films because diffusion through the bulk sample is limited and the reactive surface area is better defined

42,43



Infrared spectroscopy
Thin films/bulk powder
Easy sample preparation, provides mechanistic and kinetic data, albeit with a slow temporal response, from the evolution of adsorbed species and is capable of obtaining data under humid conditions and relatively high pressures

56,58,62,64



Static absorption cell
Thin films
Capable of obtaining kinetic data under humid conditions, but is typically limited to gases that absorb in the UV

67,68



Environmental aerosol reaction chamber
Suspended aerosol
Gas-phase detection using multiple techniques and capable of obtaining kinetic data under humid conditions, but often limited to high dust loadings, high gas-phase concentrations, and off-line surface characterization

60



Particle-on-substrate
Single particle/substrate-deposited
Capable of obtaining kinetic data for single particles under humid conditions, but the reactivity of the substrate limits the sensitivity of the kinetic measurement and knowledge of the reactive surface area depends on morphology of the particle

37,66



Atmospheric pressure aerosol flow reactor
Aerosol
Capable of obtaining kinetic data under humid conditions with accurate knowledge of the reactive surface area, but a constant aerosol output and a well-defined size distribution is necessary

39,70





Recently, it has become increasingly clear that heterogeneous reaction kinetics of mineral dust need to be measured as a function of RH.45 Several studies have shown that adsorbed water, which increases as a function of RH, can enhance the heterogeneous uptake of HNO3 on Arizona test dust (ATD)39 (a complex, well-characterized dust mixture), montmorillonite56 (a swellable clay mineral), CaCO337,43,57 (a reactive component of mineral dust), and metal oxides.58 Furthermore, the uptake of other trace gases, such as HCl, CO2, and SO2, can also increase in the presence of adsorbed water.59 In contrast, water vapor may compete for surface adsorption sites on mineral dust samples, reducing γ of trace gases, such as ozone (O3), as the RH is raised.60 These results indicate that increases in RH can either enhance or inhibit γ, making it clear that more studies are needed to fully understand the RH dependence of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry.
Currently, atmospheric chemical models do not account for the RH dependence of mineral dust heterogeneous reaction kinetics for a number of reasons, including the lack of laboratory data available under humid conditions. Since one of the major limitations of Knudsen cell measurements is that they are typically conducted under dry conditions, many investigators have begun to use different laboratory techniques, including IR spectroscopy, that allow for uptake measurements as a function of RH. Traditionally, IR studies have contributed to our understanding of how the chemical composition of the condensed phase and molecular nature of adsorbed species changes during heterogeneous reactions with trace atmospheric gases.38,61 However, time course IR measurements have recently been used to quantify the heterogeneous kinetic parameters.56,58,62 A γ can be determined from the temporal evolution of adsorbed species observed using IR spectroscopy. For IR studies, γ is obtained from the adsorption rate of surface-bound species, in units of molecules cm−2 s−1, divided by the flux of gas-phase molecules to the surface, in units of collisions cm−2 s−1, as shown below: (4) where the flux is calculated according to the kinetic theory of gases and is given by: (5) where P and Mw are the pressure and the molecular weight of the reactant gas, respectively, k is the Boltzman constant, and T is the temperature of the gas phase.
Unfortunately, many studies have shown that the measured heterogeneous uptake efficiency using IR spectroscopy is typically lower by more than an order of magnitude compared to values obtained using more traditional kinetic measurement techniques, such as the Knudsen cell.56,62 This result may be caused by inaccurate assessment of the results, but is more likely due to the different reaction properties measured by the two techniques. For example, Knudsen cell measurements monitor loss of gas-phase reactants while IR measurements monitor the evolution of adsorbed products with both techniques typically having different time resolution. Careful comparisons between kinetic results from IR and Knudsen cell studies are necessary and may provide important information regarding complex chemical mechanisms when accurately assessed. Combined IR and Knudsen cell measurements can significantly enhance the power of these kinetic measurements because changes in both the condensed- and gas-phases, respectively, can be monitored simultaneously.56,63,64
Recently, a novel technique previously used to study the heterogeneous kinetics of hydroxyl radicals65 and HNO366 on sodium chloride particles was employed to measure the γ for gas-phase HNO3 uptake on CaCO3 as a function of RH.37 This technique monitors compositional changes of individual particles using computer-controlled scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray (SEM/EDX) analysis before and after reaction of substrate-deposited, isolated mineral dust particles in a particle-on-substrate stagnation flow reactor (PS-SFR), shown schematically in Fig. 3a.37,66 The PS-SFR is designed so that a flow of HNO3 and water vapor impinges onto a transmission electron microscope (TEM) grid containing isolated mineral dust particles while HNO3 is monitored using a chemiluminescence NOy detector. Fig. 3b shows a typical EDX spectrum of CaCO3 particles before and after exposure to gaseous HNO3 in the PS-SFR. There is a clear enhancement in the oxygen and nitrogen content in the particles after exposure. The measured γ values, shown in Fig. 3c, were found to increase from 0.032 to 0.21 upon raising the RH from 10% to 80% RH, respectively, for HNO3 uptake on a 0.85 μm CaCO3 particle.37 For comparison, Fig. 3c also shows the measured γ values from previous measurements of HNO3 on ATD using an atmospheric pressure aerosol flow reactor.39 This result illustrates the significant effects RH on the heterogeneous reaction kinetics of mineral dust aerosol.
 Fig. 3  (a) A schematic diagram of the PS-SFR used in studies of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry.66 The design of the PS-SFR was based on a laminar jet of HNO3 diluted with moist nitrogen impinging onto a substrate-deposited sample. Also shown is (b) a typical EDX spectra of CaCO3 particles before and after reaction with gaseous HNO3 and the (c) experimental uptake efficiencies, γnet, for HNO3 uptake on CaCO3 as a function of RH.37 For comparison, literature data are also included.39 These images were adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. Copyright 2008. 
The heterogeneous uptake of O3 on thin films of authentic Saharan dust and alumina samples at atmospherically relevant RH values has previously been measured using a static absorption cell where O3 concentrations are monitored using UV absorption at 254 nm.67,68 This technique is not as sensitive (limit of detection is approximately 1012 cm−3) as Knudsen cell measurements and thus is limited to high concentrations of O3. Despite this limitation, this study showed that raising the RH had no significant effect on the initial O3 uptake kinetics. In contrast, a later study used an environmental aerosol reaction chamber, which is also limited to high reactant gas pressures, to study the heterogeneous uptake of O3 on aluminium and iron oxide aerosols and found a decrease in the γ value for O3 uptake as the RH was raised.60 The environmental aerosol reaction chamber studies add a degree of relevance as the O3 uptake is measured on suspended aerosol particles. An IR study by Roscoe and Abbatt69 monitored the condensed phase of an aluminium oxide film during exposure to O3 and observed slow growth of a surface feature resulting from the reaction under humid conditions. The rate of growth of the surface feature agreed well with results from the environmental aerosol reaction chamber60 and it was suggested that the γ for O3 uptake resulting in slowly formed reaction products does indeed decrease with increasing RH while the γ at faster time scales is not affected by the presence of water vapor. Thus, a complex heterogeneous reaction may be occurring and should be explored further. These studies illustrate the importance of using multiple laboratory techniques and detailed comparisons between the techniques to gain further understanding of atmospheric heterogeneous chemistry of mineral dust aerosol to help resolve potentially contradictory results.
Atmospheric pressure aerosol flow reactors are currently being developed to study heterogeneous uptake kinetics of gaseous reactants, such as HNO339 and N2O5,70 on mineral dust aerosol using various gas-phase detection methods, including isotopic labeling and detection and chemiluminescence detection. This technique has traditionally been used for the study of heterogeneous reactions on other atmospheric aerosols of interest.71–73 However, these systems may be ideal for studying the RH dependence of heterogeneous uptake reactions on mineral dust. When used in combination with particle sizing instrumentation, these studies can greatly reduce the uncertainty associated with the reactive surface area. Atmospheric pressure aerosol flow reactors are particularly useful for particles less than one micrometre in diameter as mass transfer is less affected by gas-phase diffusion and particles are not lost due to impaction within the flow system.74 Despite these advantages, a well-defined size distribution and a constant aerosol output are necessary for accurate measurements, but are often difficult to obtain with conventional particle generation techniques. Additionally, different particle generation methods may alter results. For example, atomization of mineral dust from a suspension in water may result in the presence of unwanted contaminants.75 Further development of analytical techniques for the measurement of mineral dust aerosol heterogeneous chemistry provides a promising future for understanding the chemical transformations and effects of mineral dust in the Earth's atmosphere. However, it is clear that as more heterogeneous studies using novel aerosol techniques emerge, additional focus should be placed on detailed comparisons between techniques.
3.2. Single-particle laboratory techniques used to obtain morphological, compositional, and mechanistic information
Single-particle analysis of aerosols using microscopic techniques, such as atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), have classically been used to study the morphology, particle size, and shape of atmospheric aerosols.76–79 Three-dimensional AFM structural information complements the two-dimensional information obtained from SEM and TEM analysis, providing a complete representation of particle shape. AFM has some advantages for studying heterogeneous chemistry occurring on single particles. For example, SEM and TEM techniques may not differentiate between agglomerates and single particles.79 Furthermore, AFM is performed under ambient conditions and can be done without contact with the particle, allowing problems encountered by electron beam techniques, including the effects of vacuum and particle heating and charging, to be avoided.77,78 These advantages make AFM an interesting avenue for observing the physical heterogeneous effects on surfaces and hygroscopic properties of atmospheric aerosols.76,78,80 One previous study used AFM to show the surface features of CaCO3(10 4) surfaces after processing with gas-phase HNO3 and water.36 The AFM images indicated formation of surface inhomogenieties and “micropuddles” on the surface of CaCO3 (10  4) upon exposure to gaseous HNO3 under humid conditions, indicating that phase transitions were occurring. The observed phase change was due to the formation of the nitrate salt, which deliquesces under humid conditions.
Pioneering studies of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry with electron microscopy of single particles was performed by Mamane and co-workers.81,82 Recently, environmental TEM (ETEM)83 and SEM (ESEM)84–86 techniques have been developed to monitor phase changes and hygroscopic growth of individual atmospheric aerosol particles, including mineral dust. Unfortunately, these techniques are limited to measurements of physical features and processes. Valuable information regarding the chemical mechanisms of heterogeneous interactions can be obtained when these analytical techniques are coupled with energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. These combined systems allow simultaneous measurements of the particle size, shape, morphology, and elemental analysis of individual particles.87,88 TEM/EDX and SEM/EDX are electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) techniques that have been discussed in more detail in a number of previous reviews.89–91 A laboratory study by Krueger et al.86 was the first to use SEM/EDX to measure morphological and compositional changes for the heterogeneous conversion of CaCO3 to Ca(NO3)2, shown in eqn (1), upon reaction with gas-phase HNO3 under humid conditions. SEM/EDX measurements showed the physical phase transformation of solid CaCO3 particles to aqueous solution droplets upon deliquescence of the Ca(NO3)2 reaction product.86 Soon after, field evidence of this transformation was observed using the same technique.85
Analytical techniques commonly used for off-line analysis of atmospheric aerosols collected in the field, such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS),84 electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS),92 and micro-Raman spectroscopy (MRS),93,94 can compliment electron microprobe techniques and provide insights into the extent of the chemical alterations in single particles. Additionally, single-particle mass spectrometric techniques, particularly secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), together with state-of-the-art electron microscopy can provide valuable information regarding both surface and bulk characteristics of mineral dust particles that have undergone heterogeneous reactions.92,95 For example, whereas SEM/EDX has high sensitivities toward heavier elements, SIMS is sensitive to lighter elements and supplies important information about chemical stratification (depth profiling) within individual particles.
Since mineral dust aerosol is compositionally and morphologically heterogeneous by nature, bulk analytical methods, such as proton-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) methods, for determination of the chemical composition are misleading.96,97 A recently developed micro-analysis technique called low-Z particle electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) allows for quantitative single-particle analysis of low- and high-Z elements. Thus, this technique can be used to directly measure nitrate and sulfate formation during heterogeneous processing of mineral dust particles.98 Although low-Z particle EPMA is ideal for single-particle analysis of mineral dust heterogeneous chemical reactions, very few laboratory studies have been performed.96 In addition to low-Z EPMA techniques, extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis99 can provide insight into local order for differing chemical species produced during heterogeneous reactions on mineral dust aerosol100 under controlled RH conditions, particularly for partial conversion studies.
It is clear that single-particle analysis of mineral dust aerosol heterogeneous chemistry will provide important compositional, morphological, and mechanistic information that is not accessible using conventional bulk techniques. However, only heterogeneous reactions with gas-phase HNO3 on a few model mineral species and authentic dust samples have been studied using the above mentioned single-particle techniques.33,84,86 Future studies should explore heterogeneous interactions with other important reactive gases and mineral types, such as clays.
4. Laboratory studies of mineral dust water uptake and hygroscopic growth
Recently, field studies have suggested that mineral dust aerosol can be hygroscopic, particularly after long-range transport where the particles may have been exposed to reactive gases and undergone heterogeneous reactions during transport.101 As a result of this observation, many laboratory studies have begun to explore water adsorption on model mineral dust samples. Water adsorption is typically measured on thin films or on substrate-deposited particles, rather than on suspended particles. Infrared studies at upper tropospheric temperatures have shown that montmorillonite clay can contain a significant quantity of adsorbed water102 which appears to be independent of temperature. Additional IR studies conducted at ambient temperatures have used complementary quantitative analytical techniques, such as thermogravimetric analysis103 and a quartz crystal microbalance(QCM),104,105 to enhance confidence in their water adsorption measurements.
Schuttlefield et al. combined ATR-FTIR spectroscopy with a QCM to investigate water adsorption on thin films of oxide104 and clay mineral105 surfaces. A schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus used in these studies is shown in Fig. 4a.104 Simultaneous QCM and ATR-FTIR measurements allow for quantification of the amount of water adsorbed to the dust sample with spectroscopic data, respectively, as a function of RH, making these measurements quite powerful. In a QCM measurement, the relationship between the change in frequency, Δf (Hz), measured by the QCM and the change in mass, Δm (μg cm−2), due to water adsorption is given by the Sauerbrey equation:106 Δf = −Cf × Δm(6)where Cf is the sensitivity factor of the quartz crystal. Fig. 4 shows results from an experiment in which a thin film of kaolinite was deposited onto the ATR internal reflection element and the quartz crystal and subsequently exposed to increasing RH values. The data shown in Fig. 4b illustrates the changes in IR absorption features occurring on the kaolinite sample as a function of RH while Fig. 4c shows changes in the relative mass of adsorbed water associated with the clay particles measured by the QCM, also as a function of RH.105 Results from studies using these combined techniques have shown that mineralogy influences the degree of water adsorption. More specifically, clay minerals105 adsorb significantly more water at 80% RH compared to metal oxides, such as Al2O3104 and CaCO3.103 However, few quantitative studies such as these have been conducted on authentic mineral dust samples.103
 Fig. 4  (a) The schematic diagram of a laboratory apparatus combining ATR-FTIR spectroscopy with QCM measurements to monitor water uptake on thin films of mineral dust particles as a function of RH.104 This image was adapted with permission from the Society for Applied Spectroscopy. Copyright 2007. This combined approach yields (b) spectroscopic data for water uptake on a kaolinite clay with (c) quantitative measurements of the relative amount of adsorbed water mass determined by the QCM.105 Images (b) and (c) were adapted with permission from the American Geophysical Union. Copyright 2007. 
In addition to quantifying the extent of water adsorption on mineral dust, a few studies have attempted to measure the heterogeneous uptake kinetics of water on authentic dust samples. Seisel et al.107,108 have used a Knudsen cell reactor to measure the γ for water uptake on Saharan dust, and have found that the heterogeneous uptake of water is more efficient on mineral dust than on soot surfaces, suggesting that mineral dust may be more hygroscopic and a better CCN than soot. Additionally, the uptake appears to be independent of temperature under tropospheric conditions.108 However, due to pressure limitations of the Knudsen cell, these studies have only been performed at RH values much less than 1%, making extrapolation of these results to atmospherically relevant humidities uncertain. Employment of alternative laboratory techniques should be considered for future studies of water adsorption on mineral dust to obtain kinetic measurements at realistic atmospheric humidities and temperatures.
Although the techniques discussed above are extremely valuable for quantification of water uptake on films representative of atmospheric aerosols, many laboratories are exploring techniques for measuring water adsorption and growth of single and suspended particles. These techniques add a degree of relevance compared to measurements done on powders, thin films, and substrate-deposited samples. Single-particle levitation combined with spectroscopy is particularly promising since it can measure phase changes from water adsorption and compositional changes in a single particle. Thus, this technique can provide very interesting information regarding mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry.109 Hygroscopicity tandem differential mobility analyzer (H-TDMA) instrumentation has recently been used to measure the hygroscopic growth of size-selected ATD40,96 and CaCO3103 aerosol as a function of RH. For these experiments, dry aerosol particles are first size-selected according to their mobility in an electric field using a differential mobility analyzer (DMA) to obtain a narrow size distribution of particles. The size-selected particles are then exposed to increasing humidities and the resulting diameter of the hydrated particle is subsequently measured using a scanning mobility particle sizer (SMPS), which combines a second DMA with a condensation particle counter (CPC). At each RH, the hygroscopic growth is reported in terms of the growth factor, g(RH), defined as the ratio of the humidified particle diameter, Dp, to the dry particle diameter, Do, as shown in eqn (7). (7)
This technique is limited by the uncertainty in the particle diameter due to the non-spherical nature of mineral dust particles. HTDMA measurements of the hygroscopic growth of ATD and CaCO3 suggest that the hygroscopicity of mineral aerosol is dependent on the chemical composition.103 However, despite the differences due to mineralogical composition and in contrast to field studies suggesting the presence of hygroscopic mineral dust in the atmosphere, these unprocessed suspended dust particles show non-hygroscopic behavior relative to other common atmospheric aerosols.40 It is believed that atmospheric processing of mineral dust aerosol may be key to explaining the observed hygroscopicity of these particles in the atmosphere.
Field101,110 and laboratory studies of thin films56,111 and single-particles33,36,84–86 show that heterogeneous interactions of mineral dust with trace gases, such as HNO3 and organics, can impact the hygroscopicity of atmospheric dust particles. For example, H-TDMA measurements have shown that as CaCO3 is converted to Ca(NO3)2, according to eqn (1), the hygroscopicity is enhanced,112 indicating that the hygroscopic growth of mineral dust can be facilitated by chemical reactions in the atmosphere. In addition, IR studies of water adsorption on thin films of montmorillonite clay show water adsorption increases above 30% RH when HNO3 is co-adsorbed to the clay compared to when gas-phase HNO3 is absent.56 In another study, Vlasenko et al.39 performed H-TDMA measurements on ATD that had been processed with HNO3 in an aerosol flow reactor and found that the hygroscopic growth of the processed ATD was enhanced above 30% RH compared to unprocessed ATD. It is interesting to note that these different techniques yield similar results. Laboratory studies involving a detailed comparison of the different analytical techniques and mineralogical effects, including model individual minerals and authentic dust samples, of these processes should be considered in the future. Since enhanced water adsorption on mineral dust aerosol can impact visibility and the dust single scattering albedo,40 complete understanding of the effects of chemical aging on water uptake over the full dynamic range, illustrated in Fig. 1c, is critical in assessing the impacts of mineral dust on the Earth's climate.113
5. Laboratory studies of the impact of mineral dust aerosol on climate: including ocean deposition, cloud formation, and radiative impacts
5.1. Deposition of mineral dust aerosol to the oceans
The intricate connection involving mineral dust aerosol between the Earth's land, air, and oceans must be considered when analyzing global effects on our climate.7 Ocean bioproductivity, particularly in high-nitrate low-chlorophyll (HNLC) regions,114 is potentially limited by iron supply.115,116 Areas of high iron (mineral dust) deposition are susceptible to enhanced bioproductivity and increased carbon dioxide uptake through photosynthesis.117,118 The iron component of mineral dust aerosol is predominantly found in the form of insoluble ferric iron (Fe(III)).20 However, only dissolved iron, also called bioavailable iron, is available for marine phytoplankton. Of the iron-containing components in mineral dust, the soluble iron content is on the order of ∼2% and is quite variable.20,119 Unfortunately, quantification of soluble iron is difficult and the causes of the variability are largely unknown. Currently, one of the largest uncertainties is the potential effects of mineral dust aerosol processing on iron solubility.18,19,119,120 Thus, laboratory studies are conducted to explore the effects of chemical and photochemical processing of mineral dust aerosol on the solubility of iron-containing dust components.17,21,121,122
A number of analytical techniques are currently being used in the laboratory and for analysis of field samples to determine total and soluble iron concentrations. Typically, the total iron content is determined by strong-acid digestion123 followed by analytical detection of iron using techniques such as graphite furnace-atomic absorption spectroscopy (GFAAS),124,125 inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES),124,126,127 or inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).127 These techniques can be used to determine the total amount of soluble iron,124,126,128 assumed to be equal to the combined soluble components of Fe(II) and Fe(III), in aqueous samples by first using an ammonium acetate leaching technique129 or other aqueous extraction method. Additionally, the concentration of soluble iron can be determined using analytical colorimetric techniques.21,125,130 Colorimetric assays131 and ion chromatography124,126,128 are commonly used to quantify major ions, including nitrite, nitrate, sulfate, and phosphate, in aerosol and seawater samples to help understand the role of other species in iron dissolution and reactivity studies. Although these techniques have been well established, very few studies have combined iron solubility measurements with detailed characterization studies.
It is becoming clear that comprehensive studies exploring iron dissolution concomitantly with iron speciation in both the soluble and insoluble fraction are needed.21,121 Unless speciation studies are conducted on the soluble and insoluble fractions of the sample, many studies are forced to assume that all of the soluble iron is ferrous (Fe(II)) in nature.127 Thus, many studies performed in the laboratory have begun to use well-characterized mineral dust samples that have been analyzed using techniques such as, X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry,41 SEM/EDX,21 and XPS,21 for elemental and surface characterization studies and analytical methods including, Mössbauer spectroscopy,21 synchrotron-based spectroscopic methods,130 diffuse reflectance spectroscopy,41 and flow injection analysis with chemiluminescence detection,131 for speciation studies. However, future studies should consider more detailed characterization beyond generalized classification schemes, such as iron oxide phases and iron-containing aluminosilicates.21 Advancement of these studies, particularly those considering the aging processes of mineral dust aerosol prior to ocean deposition, should provide valuable information regarding the mechanisms of dust processing and the details behind the effects of this processing on the Earth's biogeochemical cycles.
Another promising laboratory technique for determination of bioavailable iron is to monitor responses in growth rates of diatoms as bioindicators for soluble iron.132 These studies are more representative of the bioavailability of iron in mineral dust aerosol because they are not based on the assumption that all soluble iron is bioavailable. In fact, the first study of this kind showed that only a small fraction of dissolved iron is used by the diatoms.132 The use of living systems as bioindicators for bioavailable iron is very promising and future studies should focus on combing the conventional iron dissolution studies with bioindicator studies.
5.2. Indirect radiative forcing of mineral dust aerosol

5.2.1. Cloud condensation nuclei activity of mineral dust aerosol. 
Modification of cloud properties by mineral dust aerosol is an important aspect of indirect climate forcing that has received little attention in the laboratory yet has a large uncertainty in global climate predictions.133–136 Rudich and co-workers137 conducted the first field observations of the indirect radiative effects of mineral dust aerosol. Previous laboratory studies have shown that mineral dust can take up multiple layers of water under sub-saturated conditions, suggesting that these aerosols may promote the formation of cloud droplets under supersaturated conditions.102,103,105 Although theoretical studies have recently shown that fine, insoluble dust particles are poor cloud nuclei in the Earth's atmosphere, dust particles larger than 2 μm in diameter are believed to be CCN active.138 However, the situation may differ significantly if small amounts of minor soluble components are present on the particle surface.57,139 The physiochemical properties of mineral dust aerosol can change in response to atmospheric processing, such as heterogeneous reactions with trace gases or condensation and coagulation processes, and the CCN activity of processed mineral dust will depend on the composition of the products formed.138 Furthermore, indirect aerosol effects may also be important in the case where dust particles are mixed with light absorbing substances, such as black carbon. However, few laboratory studies have measured the variability of CCN activity and cloud albedo of fresh and chemically processed mineral dust aerosol.
With the development of the continuous flow stream-wise thermal-gradient cloud condensation nuclei counter,140 laboratory studies are beginning to explore the CCN activity of mineral dust in further detail. Recent studies have shown that CaCO3 has a relatively high critical supersaturation, defined as the supersaturation at which 50% of the sampled particles become CCN active, and thus does not easily activate under atmospheric conditions.23 However, the reaction product (Ca(NO3)2) of CaCO3 and HNO3 has a low critical supersaturation comparable to that of common CCN active aerosol, such as ammonium sulfate.23,112 This study initiated much interest in the impact of heterogeneous chemistry on the CCN activity of mineral dust aerosol. One such study found that CaCO3–Ca(NO3)2 aerosol, representing partially reacted CaCO3, is a more efficient CCN than pure CaCO3,57 in agreement with theoretical predictions.138 Similar results were found for a clay mineral, kaolinite, internally mixed with (NH4)2SO4.57 Another recent laboratory study showed that mineral dust aerosol containing organic coatings could significantly enhance the CCN activity of the aerosol.141 However, these studies are only beginning to explore the indirect climate effects of mineral dust aerosol and thus more laboratory studies, including combined laboratory and theoretical studies, are needed to fully understand the role of mineral dust aerosol in indirect climate forcing.


5.2.2. Ice nuclei activity of mineral dust aerosol. 
Cirrus clouds, which make up approximately one third of the Earth's cloud cover, are predominantly composed of ice particles.142,143 However, our understanding of the formation mechanisms of these ice clouds is lacking. Thus, quantification of the effects of these clouds on Earth's climate is highly uncertain.144,145 A great deal of effort has focused on elucidating the heterogeneous formation mechanisms of cirrus clouds.144,146,147 Many field studies have shown that mineral dust aerosol is a dominant component of ice nuclei.12,148–150
Laboratory studies are now beginning to unravel the role of mineral dust aerosol in the formation of cirrus clouds.145,151–153 Recent studies have shown that mineral dust aerosol is more efficient IN than carbonaceous particles.145 Additionally, heterogeneous ice nucleation from mineral dust particles appears to vary with mineralogical composition.151,154 Since chemical and physical processing of mineral dust aerosol could potentially alter the ice nuclei activity of the dust particles, laboratory studies are beginning to explore the effects of chemical aging of mineral dust on heterogeneous ice nucleation.151,155 Although Knopf and Koop151 found no difference in the IN activity of pure ATD and H2SO4-coated ATD, Salam et al.155 found that processing with gas-phase ammonia significantly enhanced the IN activity of montmorillonite clay. Thus, the effect of chemical processing of mineral dust aerosol on the ability of these aerosols to form IN may vary depending on how the aerosol is processed during transport through the atmosphere.
The effects of mineral dust chemistry on cirrus cloud formation are only beginning to be resolved. In these initial measurements, many experimental issues have surfaced that should be addressed in future studies. For example, many different laboratory techniques are used to observe ice nucleation of aerosol particles, including optical microscopy,151,153 cloud chambers,156 differential scanning calorimetry,157 digital photography,145 aerosol flow tubes coupled with IR spectroscopy,152 and the continuous flow diffusion chamber.154,155,158 The heterogeneity of analytical methods for detection of ice nucleation results in difficulty in comparing results between laboratories.151 Additionally, many different studies employ different model mineral species and different sample preparation methods which further complicate comparison between studies, particularly if IN activity depends on mineralogy and/or preactivation.151 Thus, detailed comparisons between techniques should be made in order to determine the most suitable experimental methods and future studies should consider dust mineralogy, sample preparation, and pre-activation when studying the IN activity of mineral dust aerosol. Many IN studies may also greatly benefit from the use of additional surface sensitive techniques, such as SEM/EDX.87,159 Finally, the effects of physical and chemical aging processes of mineral dust aerosol on IN activity must be addressed in further detail in future work. Systematic, unified laboratory studies will greatly enhance our current understanding of how mineral dust aerosol indirectly impacts the Earth's climate.

5.3. Direct radiative forcing of mineral dust aerosol
Mineral dust aerosol can directly impact the Earth's climate by scattering sunlight back to space, which leads to negative radiative forcing and atmospheric cooling, and by absorbing solar and IR radiation, which leads to a positive radiative forcing and a warming effect on the Earth's atmosphere.9,134,160 As mineral dust aerosol represents a large fraction of aerosol mass and exhibits large optical depths, the effects of dust can have both regional and global impacts and could rival the climate effects of sulfate and smoke aerosols.9,161 Current knowledge of mineral dust optical properties is limited and thus the ability to accurately assess direct climate forcing of mineral dust aerosol is lacking.162 Laboratory and theoretical studies of the optical properties of mineral dust aerosol are beginning to clarify the role of mineral dust aerosol in direct climate forcing by providing fundamental information for use in modeling studies.31,163,164 The controlled laboratory setting is ideal for these studies as the optical properties of mineral dust aerosol depend on many factors, including particle size, shape, chemical composition, and mixing state.31,164–166
Mie theory is currently the most widespread model used to describe light absorption and scattering properties of aerosol particles in both radiative transfer calculations for climate models9 and satellite retrieval algorithms.167,168 However, Mie theory is based on the assumption that aerosol particles are spherical in shape. One question that has received a great deal of attention lately is how well does Mie theory work for non-spherical mineral dust aerosol? A few initial experimental and theoretical studies have shown that the scattering phase function at large scattering angles calculated by Mie theory is highly uncertain for non-spherical particles.169–171
In order to investigate this issue further, new instrumentation is required for direct measurements of the scattering phase function.8 Previous light scattering measurements of irregularly shaped particles have been limited by uncertainties in particle composition, shape, and size distribution measurements as well as the accuracy of the refractive index172,173 used for comparison with model calculations. Curtis et al.163 recently developed an analytical technique, schematically depicted in Fig. 5, for simultaneous measurements of light scattering properties and the particle size distribution, allowing for direct comparison of theoretical calculations and measured light scattering properties. As shown in Fig. 5a, the design of the experimental apparatus includes a conditioning tube so that light scattering measurements of dry, unprocessed mineral dust can be compared to dust that has been exposed to reactive gases and/or humidified air to help understand changes in the optical properties of dust with atmospheric processing. The particles pass through a narrow diameter nozzle and are irradiated using monochromatic, polarized light from a Nd:YAG pumped tunable optical parametric oscillator (OPO) within the scattering region. Fig. 5b shows a detailed view of the scattering region from above. The irradiated particles are collected and directed into an aerodynamic particle sizer (APS) to obtain the real-time particle size distribution while an elliptical mirror collects scattered light at both near-forward and near-backward scattering angles and a charged coupled device (CCD) camera is used to detect and image the scattered light. Further details of this technique can be found in Curtis et al.163,174 The scattering phase function and linear polarization of a number of individual mineral dust components, including kaolinite, illite, and montmorillonite clays and some non-clay minerals, such as quartz (SiO2), CaCO3, CaSO4·2H2O and α-Fe2O3, have been measured.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of an experimental light scattering apparatus used to study mineral dust aerosol optical properties including a constant output atomizer to generate mineral dust aerosol and an APS.174 The 10 Hz pulsed Nd:YAG pumped OPO laser beam is operated at a wavelength of 550 nm. (b) A detailed view of the scattering region, as seen from above.174 The scattering angle is defined relative to the direction of the incident beam. Scattered light is reflected by the elliptical mirror and subsequently focused through an aperture onto the CCD camera. (c) Comparison of the experimentally determined synthetic phase function (top panel) and linear polarization plot (bottom panel) with results from Mie theory simulations for quartz.163,174 The procedure for determining the synthetic phase function is outlined in Liu et al.169 These images were reproduced with permission from the American Geophysical Union. Copyright 2008. 

Fig. 5c shows a comparison of the experimentally determined synthetic phase function (top panel) and linear polarization (bottom panel) with results from Mie theory simulations for quartz aerosol.163,174 These results, and results from other mineral species, show significant discrepancies between Mie theory calculations of the scattering phase function and experimentally derived values attributed to irregularity of the mineral dust aerosol shape. In addition, light scattering is found to be dependent on particle mineralogy. Thus, Mie theory-based radiative transfer calculations are highly uncertain and will impact the reliability of climate models and remote sensing retrievals. These studies illustrate that the irregularity of dust particle shapes must be taken into account when modeling aerosol light scattering properties. Thus, alternative approaches are needed to accurately represent light scattering of mineral dust. For example, synthetic phase functions, based on laboratory data may be used in radiative transfer calculations to improve climate change predictions.174 Additionally, more advanced and computationally rigorous modeling methods, such as T-matrix-based calculations or discrete dipole approximation methods may need to be employed to account for scattering by irregularly shaped dust particles.163,174,175
Other laboratory methods have also been used to further examine the radiative effects of mineral dust aerosol from the UV to the IR spectral regions by simultaneously measuring optical extinction spectra and the particle size distribution.176–178 These laboratory studies allow for direct comparison to Mie theory simulations over a broad spectral range to test the applicability of Mie theory to simulate extinction spectra of irregularly shaped dust particles. One such apparatus is the multi-analysis aerosol reactor system (MAARS) previously described in the literature176 and shown in Fig. 6a. MAARS optical measurements combine measured IR extinction spectra with aerosol size distributions obtained using an SMPS and an APS.176 Upon combining the SMPS and APS data according to Hudson et al.,176 the full size distribution is used in Mie theory simulations along with previously published optical constants according to the modeling protocol shown in Fig. 6b.179
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic diagram of the multi-analysis aerosol reaction system (MAARS), including a detailed view of the IR observation flow tube, designed to simultaneously measure the IR extinction spectra and size distribution of mineral dust aerosol as a function of mobility and aerodynamic diameter using an SMPS and an APS, respectively.176 Also shown is (b) an illustration of the modeling protocol used for Mie theory simulations179 and (c) a comparison of the experimental IR extinction spectrum for illite clay to the simulated IR spectrum using Mie theory.176 This figure was adapted with permission from the American Association for Aerosol Research. Copyright 2007, Mount Laurel, NJ. 
Assuming uniform spherical particles, Mie theory simulations yield the angle-integrated extinction (Cext), absorption (Cabs), and scattering cross-sections (Csca) as given by the following equations: (8) (9) Cabs = Cext + Csca(10)where an(X, m) and bn(X, m) are scattering coefficients expressed in terms of Ricatti-Bessel functions and m is the full complex index of refraction, m = n + ik. The Ricatti-Bessel functions depend on X which is equal to πND/λ, where N is the refractive index of the surrounding medium (N ∼ 1 for air), D is the particle diameter, and λ is the wavelength of the incident light. As shown in Fig. 6c, Hudson et al.176 found poor agreement between the experimental IR extinction spectrum and the Mie simulation for illite clay in the IR resonance region, where strong absorption from Si-O and Al-O stretching occurs and shape effects are significant. This study showed that alternative methods for simulating IR extinction spectra of irregularly shaped particles are needed.
In a more recent paper by Hudson et al.,177 previously derived180 analytical relationships in the small particle (Rayleigh) limit were used to account for absorption by irregularly shaped particles. The analytical solutions from Bohren and Huffman180 describing absorption from a continuous distribution of ellipsoids (CDE), disk-shaped, or needle-shaped particles are given below: (11) (12) (13) where ε is the complex dielectric constant and is equal to ε′ + iε″, k = 2π/λ, and ν is the volume of the particle. Hudson et al.177 found that Mie theory simulations based on the analytical solution for absorption by a disk-shaped particle gave the best overall agreement with the experimental data for clay minerals.
An environmental aerosol reaction chamber has also been used to study the accuracy of Mie theory in predicting aerosol extinction over a broader spectral range, including both IR and UV/Vis regions.178 This study found that Mie theory simulations assuming spherical particles generally reproduce the experimental extinction spectra accurately over the full range of wavelengths studied (250–15385 nm). However, in agreement with the MAARS IR extinction studies discussed above,176,177 Mie theory simulations did not accurately reproduce the IR resonance region.178 Once again, this study showed improved agreement between theoretical and experimental extinction spectra by accounting for the particle shape. Thus, radiative transfer calculations and remote sensing retrievals based on Mie theory calculations should account for the irregularity of mineral dust aerosol.
6. Conclusions and future directions
Many studies have shown that the impact of dust on the chemistry and climate of our atmosphere can change by orders of magnitude during atmospheric aging. It is vital to fully recognize the physiochemical evolution of these particles as they are transported through the atmosphere.45 Over the past decade, advances in analytical laboratory techniques have provided the means to develop fundamental knowledge of the role of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry in the Earth's atmosphere and its effects on the Earth system. In particular, the use of a variety of analytical methods has begun to expose the dependence of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry on the presence of water vapor and adsorbed water. Similarly, advances in applications of laboratory techniques are allowing for studies of the effects of atmospheric processing on the water adsorption properties of mineral dust aerosol over the entire dynamic range, from water adsorption to hygroscopic growth to CCN and IN activation. Additionally, advanced analytical techniques are adding value to the study of the climatic effects of mineral dust aerosol. For example, light scattering and absorption techniques are providing imperative information for accurate modeling of dust radiative effects and remote sensing retrievals.
It is clear from this review of the application of a wide-range of analytical techniques for the study of mineral dust aerosol in the laboratory that combining multiple analytical methods greatly enhances our ability to understand the chemical and physical processes of mineral dust aerosol on a molecular level. However, there are many important facets of mineral dust chemistry that are still unclear and are in need of further study. First, although many heterogeneous processes of mineral dust have been studied, there is still a great deal of uncertainty in the effects of variable mineralogy and atmospheric conditions, including RH, temperature, and pressure. For example, kinetic data are still needed for both individual mineral dust components and well-characterized authentic dust samples at relevant atmospheric concentrations and temperatures and over a wide range of humidities. Furthermore, very little is known about the heterogeneous reactivity of processed mineral dust aerosol. Studies of mineral dust heterogeneous reactions on previously processed dust components combined with surface characterization of heterogeneous reaction products will significantly improve our knowledge in this area. Second, the effects of competition on the heterogeneous chemistry of mineral dust aerosol have yet to be explored. Specifically, the competitive uptake of complex gas mixtures, including gases such as O3, organics, NOx, and SOx, and mixtures of various types of aerosols, such as mineral dust and sea salt or mineral dust and black carbon, should be studied. Third, the effects of mineral dust heterogeneous chemical reactions on water adsorption should be explored further over the entire dynamic range. In addition, it is still unclear as to how the heterogeneous reactivity of mineral dust alters ice nucleation. Fourth, although not discussed in this mini review, photochemical aging processes of mineral dust aerosol can impact atmospheric chemistry and is not fully understood. Thus, mineral dust aerosol photochemistry warrants further study. Finally, since many modeling studies use the optical properties of individual mineral dust aerosol, the effect of physiochemical processing of mineral dust aerosol on dust optical properties needs further exploration. Convergence of the applications of analytical techniques discussed in this review for laboratory measurements of heterogeneous chemistry, water uptake, and climatic impacts of mineral dust aerosol is essential for addressing the remaining issues and questions regarding the effects of mineral dust aerosol on the chemistry and climate of our atmosphere. Ultimately, these laboratory studies will play an important role in the interpretation of field data and provide important input for global atmospheric chemistry and climate models.
Acknowledgements
The expertise and efforts of many individuals are responsible for the research described herein. The authors would like to specifically acknowledge and thank Paul Kleiber, Mark Young, Kimberly Prather, Gregory Carmichael, Hashim Al-Hosney, David Cwiertny, and Elizabeth Gibson for their insights and Daniel Curtis, Paula Hudson, Alex Laskin, Franz Geiger, and Jennifer Schuttlefield for their kind contributions to this work. This work would not have been possible without support from the National Science Foundation through grant numbers CHE503854 and ATM0613124. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. CDH also received support from the University of Iowa Cardiovascular Center Institutional Research Fellowship.
References
F. Parungo, Z. Li, X. S. Li, D. Z. Yang and J. Harris, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1994, 21(11), 999–1002 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Prospero, P. Ginoux, O. Torres, S. E. Nicholson and T. E. Gill, Rev. Geophys., 2002, 40(1002) DOI:10.1029/2000RG000095 .
K. D. Perry, T. A. Cahill, R. A. Eldred and D. D. Dutcher, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1997, 102(D10), 11225–11238 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. DeBell, M. Vozzella, R. W. Talbot and J. E. Dibb, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2004, 109(D01304) DOI:10.1029/2003JD003733 .
R. B. Husar, D. M. Tratt, B. A. Schichtel, S. R. Falke, F. Li, D. Jaffe, S. Gasso, T. Gill, N. S. Laulainen, F. Lu, M. C. Reheis, Y. Chun, D. Westphal, B. N. Holben, C. Gueymard, I. McKendry, N. Kuring, G. C. Feldman, C. McClain, R. J. Frouin, J. Merrill, D. DuBois, F. Vignola, T. Murayama, S. Nickovic, W. E. Wilson, K. Sassen, N. Sugimoto and W. C. Malm, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2001, 106(D16), 18317–18330 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. VanCuren and T. A. Cahill, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2002, 107(D24) DOI:10.1029/2002JD002204 .
A. J. Ridgwell, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2002, 360, 2905–2924 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Sokolik, D. M. Winker, G. Bergametti, D. A. Gillette, G. R. Carmichael, Y. J. Kaufman, L. Gomes, L. Schuetz and J. E. Penner, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2001, 106(D16), 18015–18027 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Sokolik and O. B. Toon, Nature, 1996, 381(6584), 681–683 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tegan, P. Hollrig, M. Chin, I. Fung, D. Jacob and J. Penner, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1997, 102(D20), 23895–23916 CrossRef CAS .

          D. J. Jacob, Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry, Princeton University Press, New Jersey,  1999 Search PubMed .
D. J. Cziczo, D. M. Murphy, P. K. Hudson and D. S. Thomson, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2004, 109(D04201) DOI:10.1029/2003JD004032 .
Z. Levin, E. Ganor and V. Gladstein, J. Appl. Meteor., 1996, 35(9), 1511–1523 Search PubMed .
A. R. Ravishankara, Science, 1997, 276(5315), 1058–1065 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hanke, B. Umann, J. Uecker, F. Arnold and H. Bunz, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2003, 3, 417–436 CAS .
S. Wurzler, T. G. Reisin and Z. Levin, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2000, 105(D4), 4501–4512 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Desboeufs, R. Losno and J. L. Colin, Atmos. Environ., 2001, 35(20), 3529–3537 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meskhidze, W. L. Chameides and A. Nenes, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2005, 110(D03301) DOI:10.1029/2004JD005082 .
J. L. Hand, N. M. Mahowald, Y. Chen, R. L. Siefert, C. Luo, A. Subramaniam and I. Fung, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2004, 109(D172005) DOI:10.1029/2004JD004574 .
T. D. Jickells, Z. S. An, K. K. Andersen, A. R. Baker, G. Bergametti, N. Brooks, J. J. Cao, P. W. Boyd, R. A. Duce, K. A. Hunter, H. Kawahata, N. Kubilay, J. LaRoche, P. S. Liss, N. Mahowald, J. M. Prospero, A. J. Ridgwell, I. Tegen and R. Torres, Science, 2005, 308(5718), 67–71 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Cwiertny, J. Baltrusaitis, G. J. Hunter, A. Laskin, M. M. Scherer and V. H. Grassian, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2008, 113(D05202) DOI:10.1029/2007JD009332 .
A. P. Preszler-Prince, V. H. Grassian, P. Kleiber and M. A. Young, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9(5), 622–634 RSC .
E. R. Gibson, P. K. Hudson and V. H. Grassian, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2006, 33(L13811) DOI:10.1029/2006GL026386 .
B. Herut, R. Collier and M. D. Krom, Limmol. Oceanogr., 2002, 47(3), 870–878 Search PubMed .
S. Guerzoni, R. Chester, F. Dulac, B. Herut, M. Loÿe-Pilot, C. Measures, C. Migon, E. Molinaroli, C. Moulin, P. Rossini, C. Saydam, A. Soudine and P. Ziveri, Prog. Oceanogr., 1999, 44(1–3), 147–190 CrossRef .
N. R. Bates and D. A. Hansell, Mar. Chem., 2004, 84(3), 225–241 CrossRef CAS .
T. Claquin, M. Schulz and Y. J. Balkanski, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1999, 104(D18), 22243–22256 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Pye, Aeolian Dust and Dust Deposits, Academic, San Diego, California,  1987 Search PubMed .
S. E. Bauer, Y. Balkanski, M. Schulz, D. A. Hauglustaine and F. Dentener, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2004, 109(D2) DOI:10.1029/2003JD003868 .
J. M. Prospero, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1999, 104(D13), 15917–15927 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Sokolik and O. B. Toon, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1999, 104(D8), 9423–9444 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Sullivan, S. A. Guazzotti, D. A. Sodeman and K. A. Prather, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2007, 7, 1213–1236 CAS .
B. J. Krueger, V. H. Grassian, J. P. Cowin and A. Laskin, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(36), 6253–6261 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tabazadeh, M. Z. Jacobson, H. B. Singh, O. B. Toon, J. S. Lin, R. B. Chatfield, A. N. Thakur, R. W. Talbot and J. E. Dibb, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25(22), 4185–4188 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Dentener, G. R. Carmichael, Y. Zhang, J. Lelieveld and P. J. Crutzen, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1996, 101(D17), 22869–22889 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Krueger, J. L. Ross and V. H. Grassian, Langmuir, 2005, 21(19), 8793–8801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, E. R. Gibson, J. P. Cain, H. Wang, V. H. Grassian and A. Laskin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112(7), 1561–1571 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Al-Hosney and V. H. Grassian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7(6), 1266–1276 RSC .
A. Vlasenko, S. Sjogren, E. Weingartner, K. Stemmler, H. W. Gaggeler and M. Ammann, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2006, 6, 2147–2160 CAS .
A. Vlasenko, S. Sjogren, E. Weingartner, H. W. Gaggeler and M. Ammann, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(5), 452–460 CAS .
S. Lafon, I. N. Sokolik, J. L. Rajot, S. Caquineau and A. Gaudichet, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2006, 111(D21207) DOI:10.1029/2005JD007016 .
R. C. Hoffman, M. A. Kaleuati and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107(39), 7818–7826 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Johnson, J. Sciegienka, S. Carlos-Cuellar and V. H. Grassian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109(31), 6901–6911 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Falkovich, G. Schkolnik, E. Ganor and Y. Rudich, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2004, 109(D02208) DOI:10.1029/2003JD003919 .
C. R. Usher, A. E. Michel, D. Stec and V. H. Grassian, Atmos. Environ., 2003, 37(38), 5337–5347 CrossRef CAS .
T. Moise and Y. Rudich, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2000, 105(D11), 14667–14676 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. McIntire, S. R. Smalley, J. T. Newberg, A. S. Lea, J. C. Hemminger and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Langmuir, 2006, 22(13), 5617–5624 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Voges, G. Y. Stokes, J. M. Gibbs-Davis, R. B. Lettan II, P. A. Bertin, R. C. Pike, S. T. Nguyen, K. A. Scheidt and F. M. Geiger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(4), 1567–1578 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Golden, G. N. Spokes and S. W. Benson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1973, 12(7), 534–546 CrossRef .
F. Caloz, F. F. Fenter, K. D. Tabor and M. J. Rossi, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1997, 68(8), 3172–3179 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Grassian, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 20(3), 467–548 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hanisch and J. N. Crowley, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105(13), 3096–3106 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, H. Al-Abadleh and V. H. Grassian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106(7), 1210–1219 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Underwood, P. Li, H. Al-Abadleh and V. H. Grassian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105(27), 6609–6620 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seisel, T. Keil, Y. Lian and R. Zellner, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 2006, 38(4), 242–249 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Mashburn, E. K. Frinak and M. A. Tolbert, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2006, 111(D15213) DOI:10.1029/102005JD006525 .
E. R. Gibson, K. M. Gierlus, P. K. Hudson and V. H. Grassian, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(10), 914–924 CAS .
A. L. Goodman, E. T. Bernard and V. H. Grassian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105(26), 6443–6457 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santschi and M. J. Rossi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110(21), 6789–6802 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Mogili, P. D. Kleiber, M. A. Young and V. H. Grassian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110(51), 13799–13807 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baltrusaitis, J. D. Schuttlefield, J. H. Jensen and V. H. Grassian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9(41), 4970–4980 RSC .
M. M. Angelini, R. J. Garrard, S. J. Rosen and R. Z. Hinrichs, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111(17), 3326–3335 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Frinak, S. J. Wermeille, C. D. Mashburn, M. A. Tolbert and C. J. Pursell, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108(9), 1560–1566 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ullerstam, M. S. Johnson, R. Vogt and E. Ljungstrom, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2003, 3(6), 2043–2051 CAS .
A. Laskin, H. Wang, W. H. Robertson, J. P. Cowin, M. J. Ezell and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110(36), 10619–10627 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. P. Cain, H. Wang and A. Laskin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111(40), 10026–10043 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. W. Chang, R. C. Sullivan and J. P. D. Abbatt, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2005, 32(L14815) DOI:10.1029/2005GL023317 .
R. C. Sullivan, T. Thornberry and J. P. D. Abbatt, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2004, 4(5), 1301–1310 CAS .
J. M. Roscoe and J. P. D. Abbatt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109(40), 9028–9034 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wagner, F. Hanisch, N. Holmes, H. de Coninck, G. Schuster and J. N. Crowley, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2007, 8(1), 91–109 .
M. Ammann, M. Kalberer, D. T. Jost, L. Tobler, E. Rossler, D. Piguet, H. W. Gaggeler and U. Baltensperger, Nature, 1998, 395(6698), 157–160 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guimbaud, F. Arens, L. Gutzwiller, H. W. Gaggeler and M. Ammann, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2002, 2(4), 249–257 CAS .
M. Mozurkewich, P. H. McMurry, A. Gupta and J. G. Calvert, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1987, 92(D4), 4163–4170 CAS .
M. Kulmala and P. E. Wagner, J. Aerosol Sci., 2001, 32(7), 833–841 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Prather, Personal communication.
G. Kollensperger, G. Friedbacher, M. Grasserbauer and L. Dorffner, Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem., 1997, 358(1–2), 268–273 CrossRef .
Z. Barkay, A. Teller, E. Ganor, Z. Levin and Y. Shapira, Microsc. Res. Techniq., 2005, 68(2), 107–114 Search PubMed .
M. Posfai, H. F. Xu, J. R. Anderson and P. R. Buseck, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1998, 25(11), 1907–1910 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. P. Vaz, P. S. P. Herrmann and S. Crestana, Powder Technol., 2002, 126(1), 51–58 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kollensperger, G. Friedbacher, R. Kotzick, R. Niessner and M. Grasserbauer, Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364(4), 296–304 CrossRef .
Y. Mamane and J. Gottlieb, J. Aerosol Sci., 1990, 21(S1), S255–S228 .
Y. Mamane and J. Gottlieb, Atmos. Environ., 1992, 26A, 1763–1769 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Semeniuk, M. E. Wise, S. T. Martin, L. M. Russell and P. R. Buseck, Atmos. Environ., 2007, 41(29), 6225–6235 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laskin, T. W. Wietsma, B. J. Krueger and V. H. Grassian, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2005, 110(D10208) DOI:10.1029/2004JD005206 .
A. Laskin, M. J. Iedema, A. Ichkovich, E. R. Graber, I. Taraniuk and Y. Rudich, Faraday Discuss., 2005, 130, 453–468 RSC .
B. J. Krueger, V. H. Grassian, A. Laskin and J. P. Cowin, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2003, 30(3) DOI:10.1029/2002GL016563 .
A. H. Falkovich, E. Ganor, Z. Levin, P. Formenti and Y. Rudich, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2001, 106(D16), 18029–18036 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okada and K. Kai, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(40), 6927–6935 CrossRef CAS .

          P. R. Buseck and J. R. Anderson, Advanced Mineralogy, ed. A. S. Marfunin, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1998, vol. 3, pp. 292–312 Search PubMed .

          L. A. De Bock and R. E. Van Grieken, Analytical Chemistry of Aerosols, ed. K. R. Spruny, Lewis Publishers, New York,  1999, pp. 243–276 Search PubMed .

          R. A. Fletcher, J. A. Small, and J. H. J. Scott, Aerosol Measurement, ed. K. Willike and P. A. Baron, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2001, pp. 295–365 Search PubMed .
A. Laskin, J. P. Cowin and M. J. Iedema, J. Electron Microsc., 2006, 150, 260–274 CAS .
E. A. Stefaniak, A. Worobiec, S. Potgieter-Vermaak, A. Alsecz, S. Torok and R. Van Grieken, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61, 824–830 CrossRef .
Y. J. Liu, T. Zhu, D. F. Zhao and Z. F. Zhang, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 2008, 8, 10597–10625 .
R. E. Peterson and B. J. Tyler, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203–204, 751–756 CrossRef CAS .
C. U. Ro, K. Y. Oh, H. Kim, Y. S. Chun, J. Osan, J. de Hoog and R. Van Grieken, Atmos. Environ., 2001, 35(29), 4995–5005 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Silva, R. A. Carlin and K. A. Prather, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 1811–1820 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Hwang and C. U. Ro, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40(21), 3869–3880 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Rehr and R. C. Albers, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2000, 72(3), 621–654 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bramante, R. Z. Hinrichs, E. C. Brown and S. Calvin, Atmos. Environ., 2007, 41(35), 7649–7653 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Perry, S. S. Cliff and P. Jimenez-Cruz, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2004, 109(D23S28) DOI:10.1029/2004JD004979 .
E. K. Frinak, C. D. Mashburn, M. A. Tolbert and O. B. Toon, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2005, 110(D09308) DOI:10.1029/2004JD005647 .
R. J. Gustafsson, A. Orlov, C. L. Badger, P. T. Griffiths, R. A. Cox and R. M. Lambert, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2005, 5(12), 3415–3421 CAS .
J. D. Schuttlefield, H. Al-Hosney, A. Zachariah and V. H. Grassian, Appl. Spectrosc., 2007, 61(3), 283–292 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Schuttlefield, D. Cox and V. H. Grassian, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2007, 112(D21303) DOI:10.1029/2007JD008973 .
G. Sauerbrey, Zeit. Phys., 1959, 155, 206–222 Search PubMed .
S. Seisel, Y. Lian, T. Keil, M. E. Trukhin and R. Zellner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6(8), 1926–1932 RSC .
S. Seisel, A. Pashkova, Y. Lian and R. Zellner, Faraday Discuss., 2005, 130, 437–451 RSC .
J. P. Reid and L. Mitchem, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2006, 57, 245–271 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song-Miao, L. W. Horowitz, H. Levy and W. J. Moxim, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2004, 31(L02104) DOI:10.1029/2003GL018501 .
C. D. Hatch, R. V. Gough and M. A. Tolbert, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2007, 7(1), 1–14 .
E. R. Gibson, P. K. Hudson and V. H. Grassian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110(42), 11785–11799 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Seinfeld, G. R. Carmichael, R. Arimoto, W. C. Conant, F. J. Brechtel, T. S. Bates, T. A. Cahill, A. D. Clarke, S. J. Doherty, P. J. Flatau, B. J. Huebert, J. Kim, K. M. Markowicz, P. K. Quinn, L. M. Russell, P. B. Russell, A. Shimizu, Y. Shinozuka, C. H. Song, Y. H. Tang, I. Uno, A. M. Vogelmann, R. J. Weber, J. H. Woo and X. Y. Zhang, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 2004, 85(3), 367–380 Search PubMed .

          H. J. W. de Baar and P. W. Boyd, The Dynamic Ocean Carbon Cycle: A Midterm Synthesis of the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study, ed. R. B. Hanson, H. W. Ducklow, and J. G. Field, Cambridge University Press, New York,  2000, pp. 61–140 Search PubMed .
P. G. Falkowski, R. T. Barber and V. Smetacek, Science, 1998, 281(5374), 200–206 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Martin, K. H. Coale, K. S. Johnson, S. E. Fitzwater, R. M. Gordon, S. J. Tanner, C. N. Hunter, V. A. Elrod, J. L. Nowicki, T. L. Coley, R. T. Barber, S. Lindley, A. J. Watson, K. Vanscoy, C. S. Law, M. I. Liddicoat, R. Ling, T. Stanton, J. Stockel, C. Collins, A. Anderson, R. Bidigare, M. Ondrusek, M. Latasa, F. J. Millero, K. Lee, W. Yao, J. Z. Zhang, G. Friederich, C. Sakamoto, F. Chavez, K. Buck, Z. Kolber, R. Greene, P. Falkowski, S. W. Chisholm, F. Hoge, R. Swift, J. Yungel, S. Turner, P. Nightingale, A. Hatton, P. Liss and N. W. Tindale, Nature, 1994, 371(6493), 123–129 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Duce and N. W. Tindale, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1991, 36(8), 1715–1726 CAS .
A. Paytan, Nature, 2000, 406(6795), 468–469 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Mahowald, A. R. Baker, G. Bergametti, N. Brooks, R. A. Duce, T. D. Jickells, N. Kubilay, J. M. Prospero and I. Tegan, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 2005, 19(GB4025) DOI:10.1029/GB002402 .
A. R. Baker, M. French and K. L. Linge, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 2006, 33(L07805) DOI:10.1029/2005GL024764 .
L. J. Spokes, T. D. Jickells and B. Lim, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1994, 58(15), 3281–3287 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Siefert, S. O. Pehkonen, Y. Erel and M. R. Hoffman, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1994, 58(15), 3271–3279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and R. L. Siefert, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2004, 109(D09305) DOI:10.1029/2003JD003958 .
A. R. Baker, T. D. Jickells, M. Witt and K. L. Linge, Mar. Chem., 2006, 98(1), 43–58 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kieber, K. Williams, J. D. Willey, S. Skrabal and G. B. Avery, Mar. Chem., 2001, 73(2), 83–95 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, N. M. Mahowald, N. Meskhidze, Y. Chen, R. L. Siefert, A. R. Baker and A. M. Johansen, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2005, 110(D23307) DOI:10.1029/2005JD006059 .
P. Y. Chuang, R. M. Duvall, M. M. Shafer and J. J. Schauer, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2005, 32(L07813) DOI:10.1029/2004GL021946 .
Y. Chen, S. Mills, J. Street, D. Golan, A. Post, M. Jacobson and A. Paytan, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2007, 112(D04309) DOI:10.1029/2006JD007858 .
G. Sarthou, A. R. Baker, S. Blain, E. P. Achterberg, M. Boye, A. R. Bowie, P. Croot, P. Laan, H. J. W. de Baar, T. D. Jickells and P. J. Worsfold, Deep-Sea Res., Part I, 2003, 50(10–11), 1339–1352 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Majestic, J. J. Schauer and M. M. Shafer, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2007, 7(10), 2475–2487 CAS .
Z. Chase, A. Paytan, K. S. Johnson, J. Street and Y. Chen, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 2006, 20(GB3017) DOI:10.1029/2005GB002646 .
F. Visser, L. J. A. Gerringa, S. J. Van der Gaast, H. J. W. de Baar and K. R. Timmermans, J. Phycol., 2003, 39(6), 1085–1094 CrossRef CAS .
S. Twomey, Atmos. Environ., 1974, 8(12), 1251–1256 CrossRef .

          IPCC, Cambridge University Press,  2007 .
D. Rosenfeld, Y. Rudich and R. Lahav, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98(11), 5975–5980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rudich, D. Rosenfeld and O. Khersonsky, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2002, 29(21) DOI:10.1029/202GL016055 .
Y. J. Kaufman, I. Koren, L. A. Remer, D. Rosenfeld and Y. Rudich, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102(32), 11207–11212 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Kelly, C. C. Chuang and A. S. Wexler, Atmos. Environ., 2007, 41(14), 2904–2916 CrossRef CAS .
U. Dusek, G. P. Reischl and R. Hitzenberger, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(4), 1223–1230 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Roberts and A. Nenes, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(3), 206–221 CAS .
C. D. Hatch, K. M. Gierlus, J. D. Schuttlefield and V. H. Grassian, Atmos. Environ., 2008 Search PubMed  In press.

          S. G. Warren, C. H. Hahn, J. London, R. M. Chervin, and R. L. Pjenne, Tech. Note NCAR/TN-317 + STR,  1988, Natl. Cent. for Atmos. Res., Boulder Colo Search PubMed .

          S. G. Warren, C. H. Hahn, J. London, R. M. Chervin, and R. L. Pjenne, Tech. Note NCAR/TN-273 + STR,  1986, Natl. Cent. for Atmos. Res., Boulder, Colo Search PubMed .

          J. E. Penner, Climate change 2001: The scientific basis, Cambridge University Press, New York,  2001, pp. 289–348 Search PubMed .
Z. A. Kanji and J. P. D. Abbatt, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2006, 111(D16204) DOI:10.1029/2005JD006766 .
L. D. Fowler and D. A. Randall, J. Clim., 1996, 9(3), 530–560 CrossRef .
C. A. Senior and J. L. B. Mitchell, J. Clim., 1993, 6(3), 393–418 CrossRef .
K. Sassen, P. J. DeMott, J. M. Prospero and M. R. Poellot, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2003, 30(12), 1633,  DOI:10.1029/2003GL017371 .
P. J. DeMott, K. Sassen, M. R. Poellot, D. Baumgardner, D. C. Rogers, S. D. Brooks, A. J. Prenni and S. M. Kreidenweis, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2003, 30(14), 1732,  DOI:10.1029/2003GL017410 .
K. Sassen, Nature, 2005, 434(7032), 456 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Knopf and T. Koop, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2006, 111(D12201) DOI:10.1029/2005JD006894 .
H. M. Hung, A. Malinowski and S. T. Martin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107(9), 1296–1306 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zuberi, A. K. Bertram, C. A. Cassa, L. T. Molina and M. J. Molina, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2002, 29(10), 1504,  DOI:10.1029/2001GL014289 .
A. Salam, U. Lohmann, B. Crenna, G. Lesins, P. Klages, D. Rogers, R. Irani, A. MacGillivray and M. Coffin, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(2), 134–143 CAS .
A. Salam, U. Lohmann and G. Lesins, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2007, 7(14), 3923–3931 CAS .
A. Mangold, R. Wagner, H. Saathoff, U. Suchurath, C. Giesmann, V. Ebert, M. Kramer and O. Mohler, Meteorol. Zeitsch., 2005, 14(4), 485–497 Search PubMed .
C. Marcolli, S. Gedamke, T. Peter and B. Zobrist, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2007, 7(19), 5081–5091 CAS .
C. M. Archuleta, P. J. DeMott and S. M. Kreidenweis, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2005, 5(10), 2617–2634 CAS .
Z. B. Shi, L. T. Shao, T. P. Jones and S. L. Lu, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2005, 110(D01303) DOI:10.1029/2004JD005073 .
F. M. Breon, Science, 2006, 313(5787), 623–624 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Maring, D. Savoie, K. Voss and J. M. Prospero, Nature, 1996, 380(6573), 416–419 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Satheesh and K. K. Moorthy, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(11), 2089–2110 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Curtis, M. Aycibin, M. A. Young, V. H. Grassian and P. D. Kleiber, Atmos. Environ., 2007, 41(22), 4748–4758 CrossRef CAS .
H. Horvath, M. Kasahara, S. Tohno and M. Kocifaj, J. Aerosol Sci., 2006, 37(10), 1287–1302 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nousiainen, K. Muinonen and P. Raisanen, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2003, 108(D1), 4025,  DOI:10.1029/2001JD001277 .
C. Linke, O. Mohler, A. Veres, A. Mohacsi, Z. Bozoki, G. Szabo and M. Schnaiter, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2006, 6(11), 3315–3323 CAS .
C. Pierangelo, A. Chedin, S. Heilliette, N. Jaquinet-Husson and R. Armante, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2004, 4(7), 1813–1822 CAS .
J. Wang, R. C. Flagan, J. H. Seinfeld, H. H. Jonsson, D. R. Collins, P. B. Russell, B. Schmid, J. Redemann, J. M. Linvingston, S. Gao, D. A. Hegg, E. J. Welton and D. Bates, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2002, 107(D23), 4688,  DOI:10.1029/2002JD002465 .
L. Liu, M. I. Mishchenko, J. W. Hovenier, H. Volten and O. Munoz, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2003, 79(SI), 911–920 CrossRef .
O. V. Kalashnikova and I. N. Sokolik, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2004, 87(2), 137–166 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Mishchenko, L. D. Travis, R. A. Kahn and R. A. West, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 1997, 102(D14), 16831–16847 CrossRef .
H. Volten, O. Munoz, E. Rol, J. F. de Haan, W. Vassen, J. W. Hovenier, K. Muinonen and T. Nousiainen, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2001, 106(D15), 17375–17401 CrossRef .
D. L. Jaggard, C. Hill, R. W. Shorthill, D. Stuart, M. Glantz, F. Rosswog, B. Taggart and S. Hammond, Atmos. Environ., 1981, 15(12), 2511–2519 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Curtis, B. Meland, M. Aycibin, N. P. Arnold, V. H. Grassian, M. A. Young and P. D. Kleiber, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2008 DOI:10.1029/2007JD009387 .
O. V. Kalashnikova, R. Kahn, I. N. Sokolik and W. H. Li, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2005, 110(D18S14) DOI:10.1029/2004JD004550 .
P. K. Hudson, E. R. Gibson, M. A. Young, P. D. Kleiber and V. H. Grassian, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(7), 701–710 CAS .
P. K. Hudson, E. R. Gibson, M. A. Young, P. D. Kleiber and V. H. Grassian, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2008, 113(D01201) DOI:10.1029/2007JD008791 .
P. K. Mogili, K. H. Yang, M. A. Young, P. D. Kleiber and V. H. Grassian, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2007, 112(D21204) DOI:10.1029/2007JD008890 .

          P. K. Hudson, E. R. Gibson, M. A. Young, P. D. Kleiber, and V. H. Grassian, in American Chemical Society National Meeting and Exposition, Atlanta, GA,  March, 2006 Search PubMed .

          C. F. Bohren and D. Huffman, Adsorption and scattering of light by small particles, Wiley, New York,  1983, pp. 530 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
Courtney D. Hatch	Courtney Hatch attended Hendrix College in Conway, Arkansas, receiving a BA in chemistry (2000). She attended graduate school at the University of Colorado in Boulder, Colorado where she received her PhD in atmospheric chemistry (2006) under the direction of Margaret Tolbert and is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Iowa in Iowa City, working with Vicki Grassian and Gregory Carmichael.
Vicki H. Grassian	Vicki H. Grassian is currently a professor in the Departments of Chemistry and Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at the University of Iowa. She has over 150 publications and has edited 3 books. Her research interests are in the areas of heterogeneous chemistry and climate impacts of mineral dust aerosol, environmental molecular surface science and environmental and health aspects of nanoscience and nanotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Pictorial representations of the global dust belt,2 the (b) global impacts of mineral dust aerosol illustrating the importance of heterogeneous chemistry in the Earth system, including links between land, air, and oceans, and (c) an illustration of water uptake by atmospheric aerosols over the full dynamic range.	 
CaCO3(s) + 2HNO3(g) → Ca(NO3)2(s,aq) + H2O(ads) + CO2(g)	(1)
CaMg(CO3)2(s) + 4HNO3(g) → CaMg(NO3)4(s, aq) + 2H2O(ads) + 2CO2(g)	(2)
CaSO4·H2O(s) HNO3(g) → No reaction	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) A conceptual illustration of the synthesis of organic-functionalized mineral dust substrates for studying the oxidative chemistry of atmospherically relevant organic moieties as coatings on mineral dust aerosols and (b) examples of organic moieties and linkers used for the synthesis of organic-functionalized mineral dust samples.48 These images were used with permission from the American Chemical Society. Copyright 2007.	 

Knudsen cell	Thin films/substrate-deposited	Capable of obtaining quantitative kinetics at relevant gas-phase concentrations, but difficulty discerning reactive surface area and obtaining relevant humidities	
49–51,53

Isolated particles/substrate-deposited	Better suited for kinetic measurements than bulk thin films because diffusion through the bulk sample is limited and the reactive surface area is better defined	
42,43

Infrared spectroscopy	Thin films/bulk powder	Easy sample preparation, provides mechanistic and kinetic data, albeit with a slow temporal response, from the evolution of adsorbed species and is capable of obtaining data under humid conditions and relatively high pressures	
56,58,62,64

Static absorption cell	Thin films	Capable of obtaining kinetic data under humid conditions, but is typically limited to gases that absorb in the UV	
67,68

Environmental aerosol reaction chamber	Suspended aerosol	Gas-phase detection using multiple techniques and capable of obtaining kinetic data under humid conditions, but often limited to high dust loadings, high gas-phase concentrations, and off-line surface characterization	
60

Particle-on-substrate	Single particle/substrate-deposited	Capable of obtaining kinetic data for single particles under humid conditions, but the reactivity of the substrate limits the sensitivity of the kinetic measurement and knowledge of the reactive surface area depends on morphology of the particle	
37,66

Atmospheric pressure aerosol flow reactor	Aerosol	Capable of obtaining kinetic data under humid conditions with accurate knowledge of the reactive surface area, but a constant aerosol output and a well-defined size distribution is necessary	
39,70

	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  (a) A schematic diagram of the PS-SFR used in studies of mineral dust heterogeneous chemistry.66 The design of the PS-SFR was based on a laminar jet of HNO3 diluted with moist nitrogen impinging onto a substrate-deposited sample. Also shown is (b) a typical EDX spectra of CaCO3 particles before and after reaction with gaseous HNO3 and the (c) experimental uptake efficiencies, γnet, for HNO3 uptake on CaCO3 as a function of RH.37 For comparison, literature data are also included.39 These images were adapted with permission from the American Chemical Society. Copyright 2008.	 
Δf = −Cf × Δm	(6)

 	Fig. 4  (a) The schematic diagram of a laboratory apparatus combining ATR-FTIR spectroscopy with QCM measurements to monitor water uptake on thin films of mineral dust particles as a function of RH.104 This image was adapted with permission from the Society for Applied Spectroscopy. Copyright 2007. This combined approach yields (b) spectroscopic data for water uptake on a kaolinite clay with (c) quantitative measurements of the relative amount of adsorbed water mass determined by the QCM.105 Images (b) and (c) were adapted with permission from the American Geophysical Union. Copyright 2007.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of an experimental light scattering apparatus used to study mineral dust aerosol optical properties including a constant output atomizer to generate mineral dust aerosol and an APS.174 The 10 Hz pulsed Nd:YAG pumped OPO laser beam is operated at a wavelength of 550 nm. (b) A detailed view of the scattering region, as seen from above.174 The scattering angle is defined relative to the direction of the incident beam. Scattered light is reflected by the elliptical mirror and subsequently focused through an aperture onto the CCD camera. (c) Comparison of the experimentally determined synthetic phase function (top panel) and linear polarization plot (bottom panel) with results from Mie theory simulations for quartz.163,174 The procedure for determining the synthetic phase function is outlined in Liu et al.169 These images were reproduced with permission from the American Geophysical Union. Copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic diagram of the multi-analysis aerosol reaction system (MAARS), including a detailed view of the IR observation flow tube, designed to simultaneously measure the IR extinction spectra and size distribution of mineral dust aerosol as a function of mobility and aerodynamic diameter using an SMPS and an APS, respectively.176 Also shown is (b) an illustration of the modeling protocol used for Mie theory simulations179 and (c) a comparison of the experimental IR extinction spectrum for illite clay to the simulated IR spectrum using Mie theory.176 This figure was adapted with permission from the American Association for Aerosol Research. Copyright 2007, Mount Laurel, NJ.	 
	(8)
	(9)
Cabs = Cext + Csca	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
