A copper nickel mixed oxide hole selective layer for Au-free transparent cuprous oxide photocathodes   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE03613A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE03613A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 912-918A copper nickel mixed oxide hole selective layer for Au-free transparent cuprous oxide photocathodes†

        
          
            Min-Kyu 
            Son
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ludmilla 
            Steier‡
*, 
      
        
          
            Marcel 
            Schreier
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Matthew T. 
            Mayer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jingshan 
            Luo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      *
      Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015, Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: ludmilla.steier@epfl.ch; michael.graetzel@epfl.ch
Received 
      12th December 2016
    , Accepted 6th February 2017First published on 27th March 2017AbstractState-of-the-art cuprous oxide (Cu2O) photocathodes for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting have a long tradition of using gold (Au)-coated F-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrates for the improvement of Cu2O electrodeposition and overall PEC performance. Au is one of the best contact materials for Cu2O photocathodes due to its large work function enabling proper alignment with the valence band level of Cu2O. Due to its relatively large band gap (2.0 eV), Cu2O is preferentially used as the top-cell absorber in tandem with a photoanode or a photovoltaic (PV) cell for overall solar-driven water splitting. However, the Au contact poses a major issue due to its poor transparency. Moreover, Au is a precious metal, which increases the cost and can hinder the scalability of PEC devices. In this work, we propose an effective replacement of the Au layer with a transparent and cost-efficient copper-nickel mixed oxide (CuO/NiO) thin film, which is prepared by a facile sequential sputtering deposition combined with an annealing process in air. We successfully demonstrate that a thin layer of the CuO/NiO film shows better transparency as well as well-aligned energy levels for efficient hole collection leading to an improved PEC performance compared to the performance of a Au-contact based equivalent device in a pH 5 electrolyte biased at 0 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode. This new transparent and efficient CuO/NiO layer paves the way for the development of efficient, yet inexpensive PEC–PV or photocathode–photoanode stacked tandem devices for a hydrogen fuel based economy.

Broader context
Economically viable solar energy conversion into solar fuels is one of the biggest challenges of modern research, industry and society. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a promising strategy to address this challenge. Amongst the choice of earth-abundant and inexpensive materials, cuprous oxide (Cu2O) is currently one of the best candidates for efficient and economically feasible dual absorber tandem devices for standalone water splitting. With a band gap of 2 eV, Cu2O can be ideally coupled in tandem with a smaller band gap material that will absorb light transmitted through Cu2O. However, state-of-the-art electrodeposited Cu2O photocathodes struggle to provide sufficient transparency due to a gold back contact layer in the cathode design. Omitting this Au layer has systematically led to a poor photocurrent response. Hence, progress towards better transparency has only been made by an optimization of its thickness. We present a novel copper nickel mixed oxide (CuO/NiO) thin hole selective layer that is a transparent, inexpensive and earth-abundant alternative to the established gold contact in state-of-the-art Cu2O photocathodes. With superior transparency and photon-to-current conversion efficiencies, our CuO/NiO based Cu2O photocathodes outperform Au-based equivalents and are a cornerstone of highly efficient, low cost PEC water splitting tandem devices.

Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting has been spotlighted as a direct and efficient route for converting solar energy into chemical energy.1–4 Cuprous oxide (Cu2O) is a promising p-type semiconductor material for PEC photocathodes, especially because it has an appropriate conduction band position to reduce water to hydrogen.5,6 With a band gap of 2 eV, it is responsive to visible light, thereby enabling, theoretically, generation of a photocurrent of 14.7 mA cm−2 that corresponds to a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of 18% under one sun illumination.6,7 Besides, it is non-toxic, earth-abundant and can be produced by electrodeposition with high quality at low cost.
The state-of-the-art Cu2O photocathode has a multilayered structure consisting of the Cu2O absorber (deposited on a conductive substrate), oxide overlayers such as Al:ZnO (AZO) and TiO2, deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD) and a hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalyst. The ALD oxide overlayers include an n-type semiconductor thin film for effective charge separation (typically AZO)6,8,9 and a protection layer (typically TiO2) since bare Cu2O has been shown to corrode under water reduction conditions.10,11 Upon illumination, the photo-generated electrons in Cu2O are injected into the ALD oxide overlayers and transported to the HER catalyst on the surface that performs the proton reduction reaction more efficiently than the oxide layers themselves, resulting in improved photocurrent onset potentials.9,12,13 While the protection and catalyst layers have been the focus of several studies,8–13 relatively little attention has been paid to the nature of the contact between Cu2O and the substrate, although this contact is crucial for effective hole collection and homogeneous Cu2O electrodeposition.
So far, gold (Au) has been used as the back-contact material in Cu2O photocathodes for two reasons: first, to form an ohmic contact with Cu2O, as it has a large work function of 5.4 eV matching well with the valence band edge energy level of Cu2O;14,15 second, to improve the homogeneity of Cu2O electrodeposition as Cu2O does not deposit well on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates. However, Au is not suitable for large-scale applications because it is a precious metal. In addition, Au absorbs throughout the visible and IR region, making it difficult to use Cu2O as the semi-transparent top absorber (2 eV) in a stacked PEC/photovoltaic (PV) or photocathode–photoanode tandem water splitting device.16 A Cu2O photocathode/perovskite PV tandem device recently reached 2.5% STH efficiency using a transparent Au substrate.17 This limited efficiency is largely a result of the parasitic absorption of the Cu2O photocathode beyond its band gap energy (more than 60%), thereby, reducing the light intensity transmitted to the perovskite PV. Most of the absorption losses are attributable to the Au layer although it was optimized to a “semi-transparent” layer as thin as 3 nm. This demands a more transparent and efficient contact material than Au in Cu2O photocathodes.
Nickel oxide (NiO), which is well-known as a hole selective contact in organic and organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells,18–23 is a promising candidate because of its p-type conductivity, high transparency and suitable work function (∼5.0 eV).24,25 The addition of copper was shown to improve the conductivity of NiO and thus NiO:Cu has been successfully introduced as a hole selective contact in electrochromic devices and solar cells.26–28 Inspired by these results, in this work, we develop a copper–nickel mixed oxide (CuO/NiO) layer as a replacement for the Au contact in Cu2O photocathodes. The CuO/NiO layer is prepared by sputtering deposition followed by a post annealing process in air. As a result, we are able to reduce the optimal thickness of the Cu2O layer without sacrificing performance, compared to our best transparent-Au based Cu2O photocathode.17 Therefore, our new, efficient CuO/NiO based Cu2O photocathode is overall more transparent, which is advantageous for PEC/PV or photocathode–photoanode tandem water splitting devices.
Experimental details
Preparation of CuO/NiO deposited substrate
The FTO (F-doped SnO2)/glass substrate (TEC-15, G2E) was cleaned in piranha solution (3:1 H2SO4:H2O2) prior to the deposition of the CuO/NiO film. The CuO/NiO deposited substrate was prepared by sputtering deposition and post annealing. In detail, the metallic Cu–Ni film was deposited on FTO by DC sputtering (DP-650, Alliance-Concept) at room temperature. It had a sandwich structure consisting of Ni (2 nm)/Cu (0.4 nm)/Ni (2 nm) with a total thickness of 4.4 nm. The sputtering rates for Cu and Ni were 1.26 nm s−1 and 0.38 nm s−1, respectively. Unless otherwise stated, annealing treatment at 450 °C for 20 min in air with 1 °C min−1 ramping oxidized the metals to their oxide form. For comparison, pure NiO and transparent Au substrates were also prepared by DC sputtering Ni or Au on the FTO at room temperature. The metallic Ni film with a thickness of 4 nm was oxidized to NiO applying the same annealing conditions as those for the CuO/NiO. The metallic Au with a thickness of 3 nm was sputter-deposited under the same conditions described in our previous work.17 For XRD measurements that require thicker films for a better peak resolution, 66 nm thick films of CuO/NiO were prepared by sequential sputtering of 2 nm Ni/14 × (0.4 nm Cu/4 nm Ni)/0.4 nm Cu/2 nm Ni on an amorphous microscope glass followed by annealing at 450 °C for 6 h in air.
Fabrication of Cu2O photocathode
Cu2O films were deposited on prepared substrates by electrodeposition at 30 °C with varying deposition times. The electrodeposition was performed in a lactate-stabilized copper sulfate aqueous solution (pH 12) applying a constant current density of −0.1 mA cm−2 (galvanostatic mode) with a platinum mesh counter electrode, as described previously.5 After Cu2O electrodeposition, a 20 nm thick AZO overlayer and a 100 nm thick TiO2 layer were deposited by thermal ALD (Savannah 100, Cambridge Nanotech). In detail, the AZO layer was obtained by sequential depositions of diethyl zinc, trimethylaluminium and water at 120 °C. In the same deposition run, the TiO2 protection layer was deposited at 150 °C using tetrakis(dimethylamino)titanium (TDMAT) and hydrogen peroxide (50% stabilized in water), sequentially. The TDMAT precursor was preheated at 75 °C. A ruthenium oxide (RuOx) HER catalyst was deposited by galvanostatic photodeposition under 1 sun illumination holding a current density of −28.3 μA cm−2 for 15 min in 1.3 mM potassium perruthenate (KRuO4) solution, as described previously.12 Finally, a mask of opaque epoxy (Loctite Hysol) dried at 100 °C for 30 min determined the electrode active area.
Electrochemical characterization and Faradaic efficiency measurement
All electrochemical experiments were carried out in a standard three-electrode system, consisting of the working electrode, Pt wire as the counter electrode and the reference electrode of Ag/AgCl in saturated KCl. All data were acquired by a potentiostat (SP 200, BioLogic Science Instruments). The working electrode potential versus the Ag/AgCl reference electrode used in all experiments was converted into the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using the equation: VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197 V + 0.059 V pH.
The PEC performance of Cu2O photocathode was measured in 0.1 M KH2PO4 and 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH 5) under chopped light illumination from a 100 W ozone free Xenon lamp equipped with an AM 1.5 G filter (Oriel LCS-100, Newport). The light intensity was calibrated to 1 sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) using a silicon diode. The potential was scanned towards negative potentials with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. For cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements in the dark, an identical electrolyte solution and scan rate were used.
Incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were performed under monochromatic light illumination from a 300 W Xenon lamp through a monochromator in a tunable light source system (TLS-300XU, Newport) with white LED light bias. The photocurrent response was recorded as a function of the wavelength at a bias of 0 V versus RHE. This was compared to the response of a calibrated Si photodiode (FDS100-CAL, Thorlabs) to determine the IPCE values. The light was passed through an AZO/TiO2/RuOx/electrolyte for the frontside illumination measurement, while it entered from the FTO glass side for the backside illumination measurement.
For the Mott–Schottky analysis, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out in the dark in 0.1 M sodium acetate solution (pH 7.67). Impedance spectra were acquired at frequencies from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz for a range of potentials (0.38–0.68 V versus RHE) applying a sinusoidal potential perturbation of 25 mV. The data were fitted to a standard Randles circuit using ZView (Scribner Associates).
Gas chromatography measurements were carried out using an in-line gas chromatography system (Thermo TRACE Ultra) using a ShinCarbon Column (Restek) and a PDD Detector (Vici) coupled to a gastight PEC cell under continuous AM 1.5G illumination. Helium passed through the test cell with a flow rate of 10 mL min−1 before reaching the sample loop of the gas chromatograph. GC measurements were taken every 4 minutes. A pH 5 phosphate buffer was used as the electrolyte and the samples were biased at 0 V versus RHE.
Material characterization
The morphology and composition of the film were characterized using a high-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM, Zeiss Merlin) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX, Oxford Instruments) analyzer. Transmittance spectra were acquired using a spectrophotometer (UV-3600, Shimadzu) equipped with an integrating sphere. The samples were wetted with water and sandwiched between two quartz slides to approximate the optical behavior within the PEC cell. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were acquired by an X'Pert MPD PRO (Panalytical) X-ray diffractometer equipped with a ceramic tube (Cu anode, λ = 1.54060 Å), a secondary graphite (002) monochromator and a RTMS X'Celerator detector (1D-mode, Panalytical). The measurements were carried out in the Bragg–Brentano geometry from 2θ = 30° to 100° at a scan rate of 1° min−1 and a step width of 0.02°. The automatic divergence slit was adjusted to an irradiated length of sample of 5 mm. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out using a PHI VersaProbe II scanning XPS microprobe (Physical Instruments AG). Analysis was performed using a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source of 24.8 W power with a beam size of 100 μm. XPS fitting was performed using the PHI Multipak software. Raman spectra were obtained with a confocal Raman microscope XploRa Plus (Horiba) with a Nd:YAG doubled laser (532 nm). Hall Effect measurements were carried out using a HMS-3000 Hall Measurement System (Ecopia) at room temperature.
Results and discussion
Film characterization

Fig. 1 shows the compositional, morphological and optical properties of the CuO/NiO film. The XRD pattern in Fig. 1a exhibited two dominant structures: one is the cubic nickel oxide (NiO, JCPDS 47-1049) and the other is monoclinic cupric oxide (CuO, JCPDS 45-0937). No metallic Cu or Ni peaks were observed, indicating that the deposited film was fully oxidized. No Cu2O could be detected in agreement with the phase diagram of copper oxide, showing that CuO is a stable phase at the annealing temperature of 450 °C in air.29,30 The Raman spectrum of the 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO film on quartz (Fig. 1b) exhibits NiO peaks at 550 cm−1 (strong) and 1100 cm−1 (weak) as well as weak CuO peaks at 299 cm−1.31 This confirms that our CuO/NiO thin film is a mixture of NiO and CuO. Fig. S1 (ESI†) shows the XPS spectra of the 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO film on FTO with Ni 2p and Cu 2p spectra that are characteristic of Ni2+ in NiO and Cu2+ in CuO, respectively.32 Furthermore, the dominant peak at 529.3 eV in the O 1s spectrum is related to general metal–oxygen bonds.33 It is very likely that Cu and Ni hydroxides and carbonates are present at the surface leading to the signals for O 1s at 531.2 eV and for C 1s at 288.1 eV. From these XPS results, the ratio of O:Ni:Cu is 1:0.56:0.42, which also indicates that our CuO/NiO film is a mixed oxide with NiO and CuO in a ratio of 1:0.74 (±0.2). Further, Sn from the FTO was detected with a concentration of less than 0.3% as well as Si with a concentration of 1% that most likely come from contaminations on the sample during glass cutting because no signal was detected from an equivalent thin film on a microscope glass slide. This suggests that our thin CuO/NiO film is pinhole-free. This is also corroborated by the top-view SEM image in Fig. 1c showing a pinhole-free oxide film with well-connected crystal grains after annealing of the smooth metallic Ni–Cu–Ni film as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). In addition, it is clearly shown that CuO and NiO are well mixed and homogenously distributed in the CuO/NiO film by element mapping from top-view EDX characterization (Fig. S3, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD pattern of the 66 nm CuO/NiO film deposited on amorphous microscope glass. (b) Raman spectra of the 4.4 nm CuO/NiO film deposited on quartz and that of bare quartz. (c) Top-view SEM image of the 4.4 nm CuO/NiO film deposited on FTO. (d) Transmittance spectra of bare FTO (black) compared to FTO covered with the 3 nm Au (blue) or 4.4 nm CuO/NiO layer (red). 
The key advantage of our CuO/NiO layer compared to the thin Au is its transparency. Fig. 1d shows the transmittance spectra of 3 nm thick Au on FTO, 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO on FTO and the bare FTO substrate. In the measured wavelength region (300–800 nm), the Au film absorbs around 20% more light compared to the FTO substrate. Compared to the Au layer, the CuO/NiO film shows a transmittance improvement of around 10–15% for wavelengths longer than 500 nm, reaching almost the transparency of FTO for wavelengths exceeding 600 nm. This improved transmittance in the long wavelength region was still effective in the Cu2O photocathode with the AZO/TiO2 overlayers and RuOx catalyst (Fig. S4, ESI†). A better transparency in the wavelength region beyond the band gap of Cu2O is crucial for tandem configurations, especially with a small band gap bottom absorber that absorbs only the transmitted light from the Cu2O photocathode.
Photoelectrochemical analysis
We implemented our CuO/NiO layer as a back contact for the Cu2O photocathode for PEC water reduction to hydrogen and compared its PEC performance with Cu2O photocathodes based on a transparent NiO or a transparent Au layer. Fig. 2a shows the current density–potential (J–V) characteristics of 3 typical Cu2O photocathodes employing (i) a 4 nm thick NiO, (ii) a 3 nm thick Au or (iii) a 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO layer in a pH 5 electrolyte. Here, the Cu2O films were electrodeposited for 30 min, which was adopted from the experimental optimization (described in the ESI† text and Fig. S6). As shown in Fig. 2a, the photocurrent onset of the Cu2O photocathode on the NiO layer was rather resistive, compared to the CuO/NiO or Au-based Cu2O photocathodes. By carrying out Hall Effect measurements, we compared the resistivity of NiO and CuO/NiO films and found that the NiO film was indeed 10 times more resistive (Table S1, ESI†). Investigating the Cu2O film morphology, Fig. S5a (ESI†) shows a discontinuous structure with large and discrete Cu2O crystallites on the NiO resembling Cu2O film growth on bare FTO.17 Although the NiO film was almost fully covered by Cu2O when the deposition time was increased, the Cu2O film was still non-homogeneous (Fig. S5b, ESI†). This discontinuous and non-uniform Cu2O film allows for the formation of direct interfaces between the substrate and the ALD AZO layer. At these interfaces, strong recombination of charge carriers is expected34 which would explain the poor performance of the NiO-based Cu2O photocathode.
 Fig. 2  (a) J–V characteristics of Cu2O photocathodes on 4 nm thick NiO (black), 3 nm thick Au (blue) and 4.4 nm CuO/NiO (red) under chopped illumination in a pH 5 electrolyte. (b) Photocurrent density and Faradaic efficiency for hydrogen of a Cu2O photocathode based on the 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO layer biased at 0 V versus RHE during continuous illumination and simultaneous gas measurement. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of RuOx/TiO2/AZO/Cu2O photocathode on the CuO/NiO coated FTO. (d) IPCE spectra and integrated current densities (integrated over the AM 1.5 G spectrum) of Cu2O photocathode on 3 nm thick Au (blue) and 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO (red) measured at 0 V versus RHE in pH 5 electrolyte. Here, the Cu2O film was electrodeposited for 30 min in all cases. 
On the other hand, the Cu2O photocathode based on the CuO/NiO layer showed remarkably better PEC performance than the NiO or Au-based Cu2O photocathodes. Under optimum conditions (described in the ESI† and Fig. S6), we could achieve a photocurrent density of 5.2 mA cm−2 at 0 V versus RHE, which was an improvement of 26.8% compared to the transparent Au sample (4.1 mA cm−2). In addition, the sample showed a stable photocurrent density with an average Faradaic efficiency of 100% over 5 h (Fig. 2b), indicating that all photogenerated charges contributed to the generation of hydrogen without any side reaction (such as corrosion).35 The dispersed Faradaic efficiency during the operation was due to many attached bubbles on the photocathode surface, which were not easily released. This stable performance was enabled by the corrosion protection afforded by the TiO2 overlayer. While both Cu2O and CuO/NiO are susceptible to corrosive redox reactions when in contact with water, the presence of TiO2 completely suppresses these processes, as shown via the dark cyclic voltammetry measurements in Fig. S7 (ESI†). Fig. 2c shows a typical cross-sectional SEM image of the Cu2O photocathode based on the CuO/NiO layer. The Cu2O deposition on the CuO/NiO layer was as homogeneous as on a conventional, Au-based Cu2O photocathode and showed the same deposition rate, both producing films of 200 nm for 30 min depositions (Fig. S8, ESI†). Hence, we can exclude that the Cu2O thickness is responsible for differences in the PEC performance of the Cu2O photocathodes employing the Au contact compared to the ones based on CuO/NiO.

Fig. 2d represents the IPCE spectra of the Au and CuO/NiO based Cu2O photocathodes measured at 0 V versus RHE under front monochromatic illumination. In both cases, the integrated IPCE values were in very good agreement with the photocurrent densities at the same potential (Fig. 2a). The IPCE of the Cu2O photocathode on the CuO/NiO was improved by around 10–20% in the visible wavelength region, compared to the one on transparent Au. This improvement is most probably due to more selective hole collection induced by the CuO/NiO layer because the light absorber (Cu2O with constant thickness), AZO/TiO2 overlayers and HER catalyst are not different in the devices based on CuO/NiO or Au.
This is clearly shown in the normalized IPCE spectra of the Cu2O photocathodes based on CuO/NiO or Au under front (Fig. 3a) and back (Fig. 3b) monochromatic illumination biased at 0 V versus RHE, which were normalized at their peak values. Under frontside illumination, the CuO/NiO based Cu2O photocathode showed an improved IPCE in the long wavelength region above 460 nm compared to the Au based Cu2O photocathode. Under backside illumination, the CuO/NiO based Cu2O photocathode exhibited a 10–20% higher IPCE in the short wavelength region below 460 nm compared to the Au based Cu2O photocathode. Both IPCE spectra suggest that hole collection is enhanced close to the (CuO/NiO)–Cu2O interface: red light that is absorbed deeper in the Cu2O layer is converted more efficiently at the (CuO/NiO)–Cu2O interface under frontside illumination, while under backside illumination blue light, with a shorter penetration depth into the Cu2O layer, is converted more efficiently at the (CuO/NiO)–Cu2O interface.
 Fig. 3  Normalized IPCE spectra of Cu2O photocathodes with a thickness of 200 nm on 3 nm thick Au (blue) and 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO (red) contacts biased at 0 V versus RHE in pH 5 electrolyte under (a) frontside and (b) backside monochromatic illumination. (c) Proposed mechanism for better hole extraction due to the suppression of electron–hole recombination in the CuO/NiO layer. 
We hypothesize that the semiconducting nature of the CuO/NiO film is beneficial to create a rectifying contact with the Cu2O absorber that could prevent electron injection into the contact layer and hence reduce electron–hole recombination. We estimated the conduction and valence band positions of the CuO/NiO and Cu2O layers from a Mott–Schottky analysis shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†). We determined a flatband potential of 0.62 V versus RHE (in pH 7.67) and a carrier concentration of NA = 3 × 1017 cm−3 for the Cu2O deposited on CuO/NiO layer, which is in good agreement with previous results.5 We also extracted a flatband potential of 0.57 V versus RHE (in pH 7.67) and a carrier concentration of NA = 5 × 1019 cm−3 for the CuO/NiO film. We note here that Hall measurements (Table S1, ESI†) proved to be more accurate for the determination of charge carrier concentration compared to Mott–Schottky analysis on films that are thinner than their space charge region. However, since the EIS measurement of the flatband potential is very slightly affected by the space charge region, we consider it to be correct for the CuO/NiO film. Furthermore, we estimated an optical band gap of 3.65 eV for the CuO/NiO film through diffused reflectance measurement (Fig. S10, ESI†) and found it to resemble the reported ones of pure NiO in the literature18,19,24 because of the prevalence of NiO on the CuO/NiO film. The optical band gap of our electrodeposited Cu2O was previously determined to be 2.0 eV.6 With these input values, we constructed a relative band alignment as shown in Fig. 3c. The semiconducting and, thus, rectifying nature of the CuO/NiO layer seems indeed to be beneficial compared to the metallic characteristic of Au. Since, in the blue wavelength region our CuO/NiO layer is less light-transmissive than the 3 nm thick Au layer (Fig. 1d), we can rule out that absorption of the contact layer would cause the observed photon-to-current conversion losses for backside illumination (Fig. 3b). Hence, our IPCE measurements strongly suggest that hole extraction is more efficient with the rectifying CuO/NiO contact due to the blocking of electron injection into the contact layer. In contrast, in a Au-based Cu2O photocathode, electrons are not blocked from recombining with injected holes in the Au and FTO layers. Thus, our CuO/NiO thin layer is more selective as a contact material for hole extraction from the Cu2O photocathode compared to metallic Au leading to an overall improvement in PEC performance of the Cu2O photocathode for water splitting.
In summary, there are three significant merits of our CuO/NiO layer in the Cu2O photocathode revealed by this work. First, it exhibits better transparency than even the thinnest and most transparent Au layer used in state-of-the-art Cu2O photocathodes. Second, it is a hole selective layer that shows improved hole collection by blocking electron–hole recombination. With this improved hole collection, we reached higher photocurrent densities and IPCE than the Au-contact based equivalent device with remarkably thinner Cu2O films than used in the state-of-the-art Cu2O photocathode.17 These two advantages pave the way for fabrication of more transparent and efficient Cu2O photocathodes, which are beneficial for tandem devices with a small band gap material that would absorb only transmitted light from the Cu2O photocathode. Third, it is a step towards low cost fabrication of Cu2O photocathodes by replacing the precious metal Au with inexpensive and earth-abundant materials based on Cu and Ni. Moreover, the fabrication process of the CuO/NiO thin film in this work is simple, reproducible and scalable. Therefore, this thin CuO/NiO layer represents a cornerstone of low cost and large scale Cu2O photocathode commercialization in the near future.
Conclusions
In this work, we developed a mixed CuO/NiO thin film fabricated by sputtering and post annealing processes as a replacement for the precious metal Au contact used conventionally in Cu2O photocathodes. Compared to the Au contact, our CuO/NiO thin film (1) significantly improves hole collection at the back contact and (2) enhances the transparency of Cu2O photocathodes, especially in the long wavelength region. As a result, our novel and thinner Cu2O photocathodes could reach excellent photocurrent densities of up to 5.2 mA cm−2 while offering an average transparency of 50% in the long wavelength range. These findings demonstrate the potential for further improvement of PEC performance of tandem devices based on Cu2O photocathodes as a top absorber coupled with a small band gap bottom absorber (PV or photoanode) for solar-driven hydrogen generation. Work on transparent earth-abundant HER catalysts is underway to further improve the transparency of Cu2O photocathodes.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the following financial sources: the PECDEMO project co-funded by Europe's Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH JU) (no. 621252); the PECHouse project funded by the Swiss Federal Office for Energy; the Nano-Tera NTF project (TANDEM); the PHOCS project supported under the Future and Emerging Technologies programme of the European Commission (no. 309223). The authors would like to thank to Prof. Kevin Sivula for use of the spectrophotometer.
Notes and references
J. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Prevot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 CAS .
A. Paracchino, J. C. Brauer, J.-E. Moser, E. Thimsen and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7341–7350 CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wick and S. D. Tilley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26243–26257 CAS .
P. Dai, W. Li, J. Xie, Y. He, J. Thorne, G. McMahon, J. Zhan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13493–13497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 CAS .
J. Azevedo, L. Steier, P. Dias, M. Stefik, C. T. Sousa, J. P. Araújo, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and S. D. Tilley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4044–4052 CAS .
J. Azevedo, S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, M. Stefik, C. Sousa, J. P. Araújo, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azvedo, M. Stefik and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guido, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 Search PubMed .
B. K. Meyer, A. Polity, D. Reppin, M. Becker, P. Hering, P. J. Klar, T. Sander, C. Reindl, J. Benz, M. Eickhoff, C. Heiliger, M. Heinemann, J. Blästing, A. Krost, S. Shokovets, C. Müller and C. Ronning, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2012, 249, 1487–1509 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. McShane and K.-S. Choi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 6112–6118 RSC .
J. Luo, Z. Li, S. Nishiwaki, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, P. Cendula, Y. H. Lee, K. Fu, A. Cao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler, S. D. Tilley, L. H. Wong, A. N. Tiwari and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501520 CrossRef .
P. Dias, M. Schreier, S. D. Tilley, J. Luo, J. Azevedo, L. Andrade, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501537 CrossRef .
K. X. Steirer, J. P. Chesin, N. E. Widjonarko, J. J. Berry, A. Miedaner, D. S. Ginley and D. C. Olson, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1414–1418 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ripolles-Sanchis, A. Guerrero, E. Azaceta, R. Tena-Zaera and G. Carcia-Belmonte, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 564–568 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, J. Peng, W. Wang, Z. Xia, J. Yuan, J. Lu, X. Huang, W. Ma, H. Song, W. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 547–553 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Long, Z. Wei, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12571–12575 CAS .
A. S. Subbiah, A. Halder, S. Ghosh, N. Mahuli, G. Hodes and S. K. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1748–1753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sato, T. Minami, S. Takata and T. Yamada, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 236, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
I.-M. Chan, T.-Y. Hsu and F. C. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1899–1901 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, Z. Ji, S. Zhao, C. Wang, K. Liu and Z. Ye, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 226–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jung, C.-C. Chueh and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7874–7880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, P.-W. Liang, S. T. Willams, N. Cho, C.-C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 695–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poulopoulos, S. Baskoutas, S. D. Pappas, C. S. Garoufalis, S. A. Droulias, A. Zamani and V. Kapaklis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14839–14843 CAS .
S. D. Pappas, S. Grammatikopoulos, P. Poulopoulos, D. Trachylis, M. J. Velgakis, E. I. Meletis, W. Schommers and C. Politis, J. Nano Res., 2013, 25, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, L. Brown, M. Levendorf, W. Cai, S.-Y. Ju, J. Edgeworth, X. Li, C. W. Magnuson, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner, J. Kang, J. Park and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1321–1327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. F. Moulder and J. Chastain, Handbook of X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy: A Reference Book of Standard Spectra for Identification and Interpretation of XPS Data, Physical Electronics Division, Perkin-Elmer Corporation, Connecticut,  1992 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Han, J. Cai, Y. Yang, M. Liu and K. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 186–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, L. Cai, M. Mai, X. Zheng and J. H. Park, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3192–3203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03613a‡ Current address: Imperial College London, Durrant Group, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, UK.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Economically viable solar energy conversion into solar fuels is one of the biggest challenges of modern research, industry and society. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a promising strategy to address this challenge. Amongst the choice of earth-abundant and inexpensive materials, cuprous oxide (Cu2O) is currently one of the best candidates for efficient and economically feasible dual absorber tandem devices for standalone water splitting. With a band gap of 2 eV, Cu2O can be ideally coupled in tandem with a smaller band gap material that will absorb light transmitted through Cu2O. However, state-of-the-art electrodeposited Cu2O photocathodes struggle to provide sufficient transparency due to a gold back contact layer in the cathode design. Omitting this Au layer has systematically led to a poor photocurrent response. Hence, progress towards better transparency has only been made by an optimization of its thickness. We present a novel copper nickel mixed oxide (CuO/NiO) thin hole selective layer that is a transparent, inexpensive and earth-abundant alternative to the established gold contact in state-of-the-art Cu2O photocathodes. With superior transparency and photon-to-current conversion efficiencies, our CuO/NiO based Cu2O photocathodes outperform Au-based equivalents and are a cornerstone of highly efficient, low cost PEC water splitting tandem devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD pattern of the 66 nm CuO/NiO film deposited on amorphous microscope glass. (b) Raman spectra of the 4.4 nm CuO/NiO film deposited on quartz and that of bare quartz. (c) Top-view SEM image of the 4.4 nm CuO/NiO film deposited on FTO. (d) Transmittance spectra of bare FTO (black) compared to FTO covered with the 3 nm Au (blue) or 4.4 nm CuO/NiO layer (red).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) J–V characteristics of Cu2O photocathodes on 4 nm thick NiO (black), 3 nm thick Au (blue) and 4.4 nm CuO/NiO (red) under chopped illumination in a pH 5 electrolyte. (b) Photocurrent density and Faradaic efficiency for hydrogen of a Cu2O photocathode based on the 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO layer biased at 0 V versus RHE during continuous illumination and simultaneous gas measurement. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of RuOx/TiO2/AZO/Cu2O photocathode on the CuO/NiO coated FTO. (d) IPCE spectra and integrated current densities (integrated over the AM 1.5 G spectrum) of Cu2O photocathode on 3 nm thick Au (blue) and 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO (red) measured at 0 V versus RHE in pH 5 electrolyte. Here, the Cu2O film was electrodeposited for 30 min in all cases.	 

 	Fig. 3  Normalized IPCE spectra of Cu2O photocathodes with a thickness of 200 nm on 3 nm thick Au (blue) and 4.4 nm thick CuO/NiO (red) contacts biased at 0 V versus RHE in pH 5 electrolyte under (a) frontside and (b) backside monochromatic illumination. (c) Proposed mechanism for better hole extraction due to the suppression of electron–hole recombination in the CuO/NiO layer.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03613a
‡ Current address: Imperial College London, Durrant Group, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, UK.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
