Advances in selective conversions by heterogeneous photocatalysis  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CC02087G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CC02087G
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7074-7089Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsAdvances in selective conversions by heterogeneous photocatalysis

        
          
            Giovanni 
            Palmisano
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Elisa 
            García-López
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Marcì
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vittorio 
            Loddo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sedat 
            Yurdakal
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Vincenzo 
            Augugliaro
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Leonardo 
            Palmisano
          
          
        
      *a
a“Schiavello-Grillone” Photocatalysis Group – Dipartimento di Ingegneria Chimica dei Processi e dei Materiali – Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, 90128 Palermo, Italy. E-mail: augugliaro@dicpm.unipa.it; palmisano@dicpm.unipa.it;  Fax: +39 091 7025020;   Tel: +39 091 23863746
bKimya Bölümü, Fen-Edebiyat Fakültesi, Afyon Kocatepe Üniversitesi, Ahmet Necdet Sezer Kampüsü, 03100 Afyon, Turkey
Received 
      25th June 2010
    , Accepted 4th August 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      2nd September 2010
    AbstractSelective photocatalytic conversions are offering an alternative green route for replacing environmentally hazardous processes with safe and energy efficient routes. This paper reports the most recent advances in the application of heterogeneous photocatalysis to synthesize valuable compounds by selective oxidation and reduction.
Giovanni Palmisano
Giovanni Palmisano got his PhD degree in Chemical and Materials Engineering at the University of Palermo in 2009. He currently works on photocatalysis and dye solar cells. He has co-authored ca. 35 research papers on these fields and in particular on advanced oxidation processes for environment remediation and for organic synthesis. He is also co-author of the book “Flexible solar cells” published by Wiley VCH.
Elisa García-López
Elisa García-López received her BS in Chemistry at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (Spain) and her PhD degree at the University of Palermo. She was a post-doctoral researcher at the Meisei University in Tokyo and she is currently Assistant Professor in Chemistry at the University of Palermo. The main focus of her work is heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Giuseppe Marcì
Giuseppe Marcì studied Chemical Engineering and received his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 1997. He is Assistant Professor in Chemistry at the University of Palermo where he teaches Chemistry and develops his work in the fields of Photocatalysis and Materials Chemistry. He is the co-author of 79 articles and 141 papers in proceedings of congress.
Vittorio Loddo
Vittorio Loddo received the degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Palermo in 1993 and the PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the “Federico II” University of Naples in 1998. From August 2000 he is Assistant Professor of Transport Phenomena at the University of Palermo. In the course of his scientific activity, he has contributed to the following fields: chemical kinetics of heterogeneous photocatalytic systems; modelling of heterogeneous photoreactors, radiation field modelling in absorbing–reacting media, advanced oxidation processes for environment remediation.
Sedat Yurdakal
Sedat Yurdakal received his high degree in Chemistry in 2000 at the University of Anadolu, Eskişehir, Turkey. He started to work as a research assistant at the University of Afyon Kocatepe in 2001. He performed his PhD Thesis work at the University of Palermo and University of Anadolu from 2003 to 2010. He has published several papers in international journals and books on selective photocatalytic oxidations in water, preparation of new materials containing TiO2 and photoadsorption determination.
Vincenzo Augugliaro
Vincenzo Augugliaro is Full Professor of Transport Phenomena at the University of Palermo. His investigation has concerned the fields of: chemical absorption kinetics, chemical kinetics of heterogeneous photocatalytic systems, modelling of heterogeneous photoreactors, radiation field modelling in absorbing–reacting media, advanced oxidation processes for environment remediation and for organic synthesis. He is author of hundreds of papers published in international journals and books and oral or poster communications in National and International Conferences.
Leonardo Palmisano
Leonardo Palmisano is Full Professor of Chemistry at the University of Palermo. His main field of interest is heterogeneous photocatalysis and he is author of hundreds of papers published in international journals and books and oral or poster communications in National and International Conferences. He has been invited as Visiting Researcher (Bradford University, UK), Visiting Professor (Hokkaido University, Japan) or Lecturer in many Universities all over the world. He is also the co-author of the didactic book “Fondamenti di Chimica” published in Italy by Edises and in Spain by Ariel Ciencia.
Heterogeneous photocatalysis is an advanced oxidation process which is the subject of a huge amount of studies related to environment recovery, such as air cleaning and water purification, in which organic and inorganic pollutants are totally degraded to innocuous substances over mainly TiO2 photocatalysts.1 Only recently studies have been conducted on the application of photocatalysis for product synthesis by selective oxidation and reduction.2 These studies demonstrate that high selectivities can be obtained in photooxidation and photoreduction processes as compared with conventional ones. As far as the irradiation sources are concerned, medium or high pressure Hg lamps have been often used, together with visible light lamps and solar radiation simulators. Literature studies using only sunlight are not very frequent because the reproducibility of the measurements is in this case a hard task. Nevertheless most of the syntheses reported can be virtually carried out under sunlight. The present paper illustrates the most recent advances in the application of heterogeneous photocatalysis to selective conversions.
1. Oxidation
Oxidation processes play an important role in the production of a wide range of chemicals. Many of them as aldehydes, ketones or epoxides, are precursors in the synthesis of added value organic compounds as drugs, vitamins or fragrances. Notwithstanding their importance, very few green chemistry oxidation processes obtain these substances. In this framework, photocatalytic method can be cogitated as a possible alternative approach to traditional industrial oxidation processes which need stringent reaction conditions and oxidants as mineral acids, chromates, permanganate, hydrogen peroxide, etc. questionable from the points of view of toxicity and corrosiveness.
1.1 Partial oxidation of alcohols
Methanol, produced from natural gas, coal and biomass is an attractive starting material to obtain various important industrial chemicals. Photocatalytic oxidation of methanol in a continuous gas–solid reactor in the presence of commercial anatase TiO2 particles3 has yielded different products such as methyl formate, one of the precursors of formamide, ethyleneglycol, formic acid and acetic acid. Methyl formate was obtained at room temperature with a selectivity of 87–91%, whereas formaldehyde, CO and CO2 were detected as minor products. The Authors claim that contact time of the gas mixture with TiO2 is one of the key factors to obtain a good selectivity, avoiding the deep oxidation of the desired product; in fact at low flow rate the selectivity decreases by increasing the CO2 amount. Another parameter influencing the selectivity is the reaction temperature: at 523 K the conversion is three times higher than at room temperature but the selectivity decreases. FTIR spectra of the adsorbed species before and after the irradiation suggest that the oxidation reaction proceeds through the dimerization of the formaldehyde produced during the reaction.
Selective and efficient photocatalytic oxidation of alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes and ketones in liquid–solid regime is one of the most important reactions both in industrial and laboratory synthesis. The detailed mechanism for this selective oxidation is still unclear due to the non selectivity of OH radical attack. Moreover, the slow reaction rates still remain one of the obstacles in the application of these selective photocatalytic reactions.
Zhang et al.4 have studied the mechanism of the photocatalytically oxidative transformation of alcohols performed in benzotrifluoride (BTF) by using bare TiO2 anatase. They have found an oxygen transfer from molecular O2 to the alcohol. The oxygen atom of the alcohol is completely replaced by one of the oxygen atoms of the dioxygen molecule, i.e. the process occurs by the selective cleavage of the C–OH bond with the concomitant formation of a CO bond to form the final product, where the O comes from O2.
The mechanism proposed by the Authors (Fig. 1) is the following one. The alcohol molecule is adsorbed onto the surface of TiO2 by a deprotonation process, hence it reacts with the photogenerated hole on the TiO2 surface forming a carbon radical whereas the electron transforms Ti(IV) in Ti(III). Both the carbon radical and Ti(III) easily react with O2 and a Ti peroxide intermediate is formed. The cleavage of this species gives rise to carbonylic species, coming from the partial oxidation of the alcohol. The same Authors carried out the same reaction in the presence of Brønsted acids and they observed an enhancement of both reaction rate and selectivity.5 The effect is related to the decomposition of the relatively stable side-on peroxide intermediate by the protons of the Brønsted acids, which can clean the catalytic Ti–OH2 sites. This finding opens a new path to obtain high selectivity and conversion by TiO2 photocatalysis.
 Fig. 1  Proposed mechanism4 in the photocatalytic partial oxidation of alcohols in BTF. 
It is accepted that adsorption of the alcohol onto the photocatalysts surface is a mandatory requirement for its oxidation. Indeed, some Authors propose the dissociative adsorption forming an alkoxide intermediate. There is an agreement in the literature about the relevance of this point. For instance, it has been demonstrated that primary alcohols, as 1,n-diols, show an increased reactivity with respect to secondary ones due to the site selective adsorption. Molinari et al.6 report the partial photooxidation of diols as 1,3-butanediol and 1,4-pentanediol and vic-diols as 1,2 propanediol by using TiO2 in dichloromethane. CO2 is not revealed as a reaction product but for each 1,n-diol the main reaction products are two hydroxy-carbonyl compounds. 1,2-propanediol gives rise mainly to hydroxyacetone (2k) with a selectivity of 90% with traces of pyruvic acid (2ac), 1,3-butanediol to 3-hydroxybutirraldehyde (3a) and 4-hydroxy-2-butanone (3k) and 1,4-pentanediol to 4-hydroxypentanal (4a) with a selectivity of 75% and 3-acetyl 1-propanol (4k). Table 1 reports qualitatively and quantitatively these results.  
Table 1 Carbonyl compounds distribution in the photocatalytic oxidation of 1,n-diols by TiO2.6nk represents the ketone, na the aldehyde and nac the acid




Diol

n
k/μmol

n
a/μmol

n
ac/μmol
Aldehyde/ketone





n = 2
0.5
Not formed
0.07
0



n = 3
2.4
2.7
Not formed
1.1



n = 4
1.9
6.5
Not formed
3.4




Besides the oxidation mechanism of the alkoxide by means of the OH radicals photogenerated by hole trapping, the possibility of direct oxidation of the adsorbed alkoxide by the holes is also invoked6 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Mechanism for the direct oxidation of alcohols.6 
Molinari et al.7 have investigated also the photocatalytic partial oxidation of some allylic alcohols (shown in Fig. 3) as geraniol (1) and trans-2-penten-1-ol (3) along with primary alcohols as citronellol (2) and 1-pentanol (4).
 Fig. 3  Allylic alcohols photocatalytically oxidised.7 
The study of the reaction mechanism by EPR revealed that not only the photogenerated hole but also the OH radical are involved in the oxidation of the substrate. In the absence of water the photocatalytic partial oxidation of geraniol produces only citral; however in the presence of water, OH radical can attack geraniol not selectively giving rise to the total and not selective degradation of the substrate. Moreover the Authors indicate that the presence of water inhibits the adsorption of geraniol and so it has a negative effect on the formation of citral abating the selectivity. Already a 2% of water increases significantly the polarity of the medium thus decreasing the adsorption of the substrate that competes with water for the adsorption sites.
As far as the two primary alcohols (geraniol and citronellol) are concerned, their great hydrophobic tails hinder the adsorption of these molecules in the presence of water that displaces easily these substrates from the surface of the photocatalyst. On the contrary, 1-pentanol and trans-2-penten-1-ol are less influenced by the presence of water; consequently they are able to interact with the surface of the photocatalyst even when the surface is partially polar. Short alcohols such as methanol and 2-propanol8 are degraded even in a water medium.
The photocatalytic oxidation of aromatic alcohols into the corresponding aldehydes proceeds also at high conversion and selectivity by using TiO2 under oxygen atmosphere, in acetonitrile medium, according to Higashimoto et al.9 The distinctiveness is that the reaction proceeds not only under UV, but also under visible irradiation due to the formation of surface complex species by the adsorbed aromatic alcohol. In order to clarify this point, the Authors carried out the reaction by using fluorinated TiO2, as reported by Minero et al.10 They observed a dramatic decrease of photocatalytic activity under visible irradiation. This achievement obviously suggests a significant role played by the adsorption of the aromatic alcohol species on the surface of the solid involving the surface OH species.
Benzyl alcohol and some of its derivatives (para- structures) were transformed into the corresponding aldehydes with a conversion and selectivity of ca. 99% both under UV and visible irradiation. The only exception to this behaviour was the 4-hydroxybenzyl alcohol that was oxidized to 4-hydroxy benzaldehyde (selectivity of ca. 23% with a conversion of ca. 85%) along with some unidentified products.
The Authors claim that the OH groups of the TiO2 surface react with the aromatic compound to form Ti–O–Ph species, exhibiting strong absorption in the visible region by ligand to metal charge transfer. This insight confirms the results reported by Choi et al.11 which proposed a direct electron transfer from the surface-complexes to the conduction band of the TiO2 upon absorbing visible light evidencing that visible light can induce reactions by substrate–surface complexation enabling the visible light absorption.

Fig. 4 summarizes the reaction pathway proposed by Higashimoto et al.9 for the selective photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol in the presence of O2 and TiO2. The surface complexes formed by the interaction of the alcohol group or the aromatic ring with the OH surface group are able to absorb in the visible region, hence the photoexcited complex undergoes a H abstraction in the CH2OH group by the photoproduced holes forming a water molecule. The organic radical also releases one electron to form benzaldehyde. At the same time the photoinduced electrons are trapped by the O2 in the reacting medium.
 Fig. 4  Proposed reaction mechanism for the photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol under visible light irradiation.9 
The oxidation of some aromatic alcohols by using aqueous suspensions of home-prepared TiO2 samples has been the object of a sound investigation12–14 by our research group; the main findings obtained with methoxybenzyl alcohol (MBA) are summarized in the following. Partial oxidation occurs to 4-methoxybenzaldehyde (p-anisaldehyde, PAA) by all the home-prepared samples that showed selectivity far higher than those observed with commercial specimens. In all cases the photocatalytic oxidation of MBA proceeds through two parallel reaction routes effective from the start of irradiation: the first one determines the MBA partial oxidation to PAA while the second one eventually causes the MBA mineralization to CO2 without the formation of volatile organic compounds. Selectivities as high as 74% with alcohol conversions up to 80% have been interestingly found by using some home-prepared TiO2 samples obtained by low temperature treatments.15
Besides TiO2, other solid semiconductors or substances have been tested. Heteropoly acid solids (HPAs), also called polyoxometallates (POM), are ionic crystals consisting of large polyanions (primary structure) along with cations, water of crystallization and other molecules (secondary structure). They are used in solution as well as in the solid state as acid and oxidation catalysts.16 POMs share photochemical characteristics with semiconductor photocatalysts; indeed, both classes of materials are constituted by d0 transition metal and oxide ions and exhibit similar electronic characteristics (HOMO–LUMO transition for the POMs and band-gap transition for semiconductors). Hence, POMs not only are bifunctional acid–base and redox catalysts but also they can be activated by light. The irradiation in the UV-Vis region results in an oxygen to metal charge transfer excited state which is able to draw oxidation reactions. The photoexcited POM is then reduced but its regeneration is easily obtained by oxidation with the O2 present in the reacting medium. POMs have been extensively used in photocatalytic reactions in homogeneous systems due to their solubility, particularly in water, however the heterogeneization of these inorganic salts can provide improvements in the photocatalytic features of the semiconductor.17 Acidic or neutral substances such SiO2, activated carbon, or resins are suitable supports for HPAs whereas basic solids tend to decompose them by the hydrolysis of the heteropolyanion.
Farhadi et al.18a report the partial oxidation of benzylic alcohols using sol–gel silica-encapsulated H3PW12O40 as a heterogeneous photocatalyst. They optimize the reaction conditions for the partial oxidation of 1-phenyl ethanol to acetophenone with yield of 84% within 2 h (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Photocatalytic oxidation of 1-phenyl ethanol18 (1) to acetophenone (2) by using heterogeneized POM. 
Previously18b acetophenone had been obtained starting from cumene in liquid acetonitrile-oxygenated dispersions in the presence of TiO2 catalyst irradiated by near UV light.

Table 2 reports the results in the photocatalytic partial oxidation of different aromatic alcohols. An ionic solvent can increase the conversion of ca. 5% in comparison to acetonitrile.19
Table 2 Photocatalytic oxidation of benzylic alcohols18 with O2 catalyzed by H3PW12O40/SiO2




Ar(CHOH)R → Ar(CO)R


Ar
R
Irradiation time/h
Yield [%]




C6H5
H
2.5
75



p-MeC6H4
H
1
92



o-MeC6H4
H
1
90



p-ButC6H4
H
1.5
82



p-MeOC6H4
H
1.5
85



o-MeOC6H4
H
2
70



p-ClC6H4
H
1.5
80



p-BrC6H4
H
2
82


C6H5
CH3
2
84



p-MeC6H4
CH3
1
97



p-NO2C6H4
CH3
3
76


C6H5
C2H5
1.5
90


C6H5
C6H5
2
84



p-ClC6H4
C6H5
1.5
88



p-MeOC6H4
C6H5
1.25
90



p-NO2C6H4
C6H5
3
72


C6H5
–CH2OH
2
75




By using POM/ZrO2 nanocomposites, aliphatic alcohols have been also partially oxidized in good yields albeit after longer reaction times.20Fig. 6 shows the photocatalytic cycle for the partial oxidation of alcohols with this catalyst.
 Fig. 6  The photocatalytic cycle for aerobic oxidation of alcohols by using POM/ZrO2 as photocatalyst.20 
Primary and secondary benzylic alcohols have been oxidized to the corresponding aldehydes and ketones in high yields when H3PW12O40 entrapped into a ZrO2 matrix is used.20 The reaction proceeds with a selectivity of ca. 90% after 3 h of reaction. Acetonitrile, used as reacting medium, increases the reaction yield up to 93% while other organic solvents give only a yield of 60%.
It is worth noting that this reaction is highly selective in partial oxidation of vic-diols, obtaining the oxidation of the secondary OH group of benzene ring.20
The presence of the POM/ZrO2 gave rise to an enhanced activity of the POM due to an alternative mechanism where an electron transfer occurred from the conduction band of the zirconia to the UV activated POM affording the reduced POM species (Fig. 7). Such electron transfer can inhibit the electron-hole recombination and the hole on ZrO2 has sufficient time to oxidize organic substrates. On the other hand POM/semiconductor binary material shows a synergistic effect between the two components.
 Fig. 7  Synergistic effect between the POM molecule and the semiconductor in the nanocomposite.20 
W10O324− is a polyanion able to induce the photocatalytic oxidation of alcohols in homogeneous regime but also supported on polymeric membranes or mesoporous silica. When the substrate is a diol, a preferential partial oxidation of one of the alcoholic functionalities occurs giving rise to hydroxyaldehydes or hydroxyketones.21 Analogously to PW12O403−, W10O324− produces, when irradiated, an excited state species which decays rapidly to a reactive transient designed as wO, that reacts with an aliphatic or aromatic alcohols through hydrogen abstraction leading to the reduced HW10O324− species and to an organic radical that reacts with dioxygen giving rise to the carbonylic final product (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Photocatalytic behaviour of W10O324−.21 
The site selective adsorption of the substrate on the polyanion surface is the basic requirement for a good regioselectivity; this feature can be tuned by controlling the polarity of the environment. The inset of Fig. 9 reports the anchoring of the POM onto the SiO2 surface by an ionic bond with alkylammonium cations. The photocatalytic oxidation of 1,3-butanediol and 1,4-pentanediol with SiO2-bound W10O324− (Fig. 9) gives rise mainly to 4-hydroxy-2-butanone (1b) and 4-hydropentanal (2a) in equilibrium with its emiacetalic form (2c), respectively, with selectivities of 90 and 80%. 3-Hydroxybutanale (1a) and 5-hydroxy-2-pentanone (2b) were obtained as minor products. It is worth noting that no formation of ketoacids or CO2 was observed.21a
 Fig. 9  Products obtained in the partial oxidation of diols by using W10O324−/SiO2 in CH2Cl2 medium.21a 
The photocatalytic oxidation of 1,4-pentanediol has been also investigated in UV-illuminated acetonitrile suspensions of ZrTiO4 powder under oxygenated conditions.21b A virtually total regiochemical preference for oxidation of the primary hydroxyl group in 1,4-pentane diol was found and 4-hydroxypentanoic acid and its γ-lactone derivative were the sole products.
1.2 Partial oxidation of alkenes
Epoxidation of olefins is one of the most important functional group transformations in organic synthesis. Photocatalytic epoxidation processes have been studied extensively, especially by using TiO2, however the process exhibits a low epoxide selectivity.
Partial oxidation of cyclopentene was carried out by using a series of commercial and sol–gel home prepared TiO2 samples.22 The reaction pathway is reported in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Reaction pathway of the partial oxidation of cyclopentene.22 
Cyclopentenylhydroperoxide (A) is found to be the initial intermediate for all the reaction pathways: 6-oxabicyclo[3.1.0]hexane (C) and cyclopent-2-en-1-one (B) are the main products along with penta-1,5-dial (glutaraldehyde) (D), that represents only ca. 9% of the total amount of products. The total oxidation of the alkene to CO2 also occurs in a 17–27 wt%. Similar results were obtained by using cyclohexane.23 Cyclohexenhydroperoxide is the common initial intermediate which gives rise mainly to two parallel reaction pathways, generating the epoxide and the aldehyde, similarly to the products formed by cyclopentene.
The use of commercial or home prepared TiO2 samples has a strong influence on the yield and selectivity of this process. Kluson et al.22 report that, when commercial powders were used, the main product obtained was the ketone (selectivity in the range 35 to 49%), on the contrary with the sol–gel prepared powders the epoxide was mainly obtained (selectivity 26 to 49%). The commercial samples showed, in general, lower photoactivity than the home prepared ones. A plausible explanation of these features invokes two mechanisms of surface reaction: (i) the first one involves the formation of hydroxyl radicals through the contact of positively charged electron vacancies with adsorbed surface water and it is responsible for the mineralization reaction; (ii) the second mechanism involves a series of transformations started by reaction of O2 with photogenerated electrons. This reductive mechanism, producing a number of active species such as surface hydroperoxide or singlet oxygen, would be responsible for the epoxidation reaction.
Epoxidation of propene is a reaction of paramount importance in the chemical industry. It has been reported that metal oxide species, when they are highly dispersed on silica, alumina, mesoporous silica or zeolites, exhibit photocatalytic activity for partial oxidation reactions.24 TiO2–SiO2 with low TiO2 content is active in yielding propylene oxide from propene by molecular oxygen (Fig. 11) at room temperature with a selectivity of 60%.25 When the highly dispersed active sites are quantum sized isolated metal oxide species, as isolated tetrahedral TiO4 on silica, these species could promote selective oxidations.26 The excited state is localized at the isolated quantum sized metal oxides, well characterized by their phosphorescence emission.27 The quantum photocatalysts can induce epoxidation of propene by molecular oxygen but also direct methane coupling or photomethatesis of olefines.
 Fig. 11  Photocatalytic oxidation of propene over TiO2–SiO2 catalysts.27 
Many species dispersed on silica are able to produce propylene oxide from propene.28 The highly dispersed (isolated) tetrahedral species of TiO225 or ZnO28 quantum sized on SiO2 show a 60% selectivity with a 4.4% conversion and a 33.7% selectivity with a 8.6% conversion, respectively. In both cases the active phases are atomically dispersed tetrahedral metal oxide species. Visible light photocatalytic production of propylene oxide has been also reported by using Cr2O3–SiO2 system29 where highly dispersed Cr species acted as active sites giving rise to a selectivity of 32% at 7% conversion.
1.3 Cyclohexane partial oxidation and dehydrogenation
Partial oxidation of cyclohexane is an important reaction particularly in its conversion to cyclohexanone and then to caprolactam, monomer for the nylon-6 production. The other possibility is cyclohexanol dehydration to cyclohexanone, but this is a costly and consuming energy process so the first way is preferred.
Du et al.30 have studied the cyclohexane partial oxidation by photolysis and photocatalysis. The photolysis reaction occurs only by irradiating the homogeneous system with UVC light (λ < 280 nm) and cyclohexanol is mainly obtained with small amounts of cyclohexanone and 1,1′-oxybis(cyclohexane), which is produced by the etherification reaction of two cyclohexanol molecules. The addition of TiO2 Degussa P25 under the same UV irradiation decreases the amounts of products of ca. one order of magnitude and moreover it changes the product distribution, cyclohexanone being the main product and cyclohexanol the minor one. When the TiO2 suspension is irradiated with near-UV light (λ > 280 nm), an almost complete selectivity to cyclohexanone was obtained (>95%).
The mechanism invoked by Du et al.30 for explaining the parallel formation of cyclohexanol and cyclohexanone is reported in Fig. 12. In this mechanism the hydroxyl groups on the photocatalyst surface play an important role as they are directly involved in the photooxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanol.
 Fig. 12  Reaction mechanism proposed30 for the photocatalytic production of cyclohexanone over TiO2 catalysts. 
The conversion and selectivity of cyclohexane oxidation are dependent on the solvent medium and the oxygen flow. Vinu et al.31 have conducted the reaction in a chloroform medium obtaining a selectivity to cyclohexanone of 63% with a 9% conversion by using a combustion synthesized Ti0.99Ag0.01O2−δ.
Maldotti et al.32 have used a mesoporous TiO2 material (MCM type). This innovative kind of TiO2 samples was prepared by preformed nanoparticles that, after adequate stabilization by ligands and templation with surfactants,33 produce mesoporous TiO2 more robust than those prepared by titanium isopropoxide. The products obtained in pure cyclohexane are cyclohexanol and cyclohexanone, both the alcohol and ketone concentrations increase by increasing the TiO2 amount in the framework that contains also SiO2. The oxidation of cyclohexane in the presence of TiO2 Degussa P25 is faster but less selective than by using the mesoporous material.
Recently Ciambelli et al. have studied the photocatalytic reaction of cyclohexane in gas–solid regime in the presence of O2, obtaining cyclohexene and benzene by oxidative dehydrogenation.34,35 These products are very different from those obtained in aerobic liquid–solid regime.
2. Reduction
While the total or partial oxidation of organic compounds is largely studied because the most common semiconductor photocatalysts have valence band edges that are more positive than oxidation potentials of most organic functional groups, photocatalytic reductions are less frequently found because the reducing power of a conduction band electron is significantly lower than the oxidizing power of a valence band.36
Photocatalytic reduction of organic acceptors can be carried out in the presence of a large excess of an electron donor, such as methanol, and in the absence of O2.37–39 The purpose of the electron donor is to scavenge holes, thereby reducing the degree of recombination within the particle. As oxygen is a competitive electron scavenger, de-oxygenation of the system is necessary to improve reduction efficiency. From the point of view of eco-friendly production of chemicals, attention must be paid to the choice of solvent and sacrificial reagents for photocatalytic reduction of organic compounds. Methanol has been used as both a solvent and a sacrificial reagent; however, since formaldehyde is formed as the oxidized species of methanol, a sacrificial reagent converting to a non-toxic compound is preferable.
2.1 CO2 reduction
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction has been receiving much attention because of the environmental problems caused by the continuously increasing CO2 concentration in the atmosphere. Therefore the efficient photoreduction of CO2 is one of the most challenging tasks of environmental catalysis. It must be considered also that CO2 is an inexpensive, non-flammable and non-toxic carbon source so it is highly desirable to be able to convert it into useful carbon products.40 After the first report on photocatalytic reduction of CO2 in water,41 the light induced reduction of CO2 has been performed under UV irradiation using TiO242,43 in the presence of a hole scavenger or with silica containing highly dispersed Ti-oxide species. A number of zeolites and mesoporous molecular sieves have been also employed and TiO2/SiO2 mixed mesoporous thin films showed higher reduction yields and quantum yields than the powdered catalysts.
Besides the usual TiO2 material, colloidal particles of ZnS have been used44 to reduce aqueous CO2 under ultraviolet irradiation in the absence or presence of a Na2S solution (containing both aqueous H2S and HS−) which served as a valence-band hole scavenger. Inorganic carbon was introduced into the reaction mixture or by bubbling CO2 or in some cases by adding NaHCO3. Formate ion was the main photoproduct but also acetate and propionate ions were formed, a finding which demonstrated the formation of carbon–carbon coupling products. The CO2 photoreduction rate increased by increasing the pH of the solution in the 5–9 range. The initial rate of formate production was proportional to the concentration of aqueous inorganic carbon suggesting an absence of surface saturation. In the absence of hole scavenger but in the presence of the ZnS colloid, the formate production rate drastically decreased.
It still remains a challenge, however, to find how CO2 photoreduction can be efficiently carried out using the visible-light. TiO2 semiconductor, in its anatase form, has a relatively large band gap of 3.2 eV, corresponding to wavelengths shorter than 388 nm and thus it makes use of only 3–4% of the solar energy that reaches the earth, demanding a UV light source to be used as a photocatalyst. Consequently the width of absorption wavelengths of TiO2 has been obtained by preparing nano-sized TiO2 particles, TiO2 thin films, highly dispersed titanium oxide species within the zeolite cavities, titanium oxide-based binary catalysts, by loading metal ions on the surface of TiO2 particles or with other methods.45–49
Phthalocyanines (Pc-s) are a class of organic compounds which have received considerable attention from scientists because of their excellent properties of semi-conductivity, photoconductivity, chemical stability and optical absorption in the UV and visible region.50,51 Most of the studies conducted so far on Pc-s are either in film, vapor or in any solvent medium, whereas only a limited amount of work has been reported in solid matrices.52,53 Anchoring of the dye complex to the nanocrystalline semiconductors enables ultrafast injection of electrons from the excited state into the conduction band of semiconductors and the efficiency of photon-to-current conversion improves.
The photoreduction of CO2 using sol–gel derived TiO2-supported zinc or cobalt-phthalocyanine has been reported;54 these catalysts can reduce CO2 under visible light but the yield of product is low.
In order to increase the yield, transition-metal complexes are used as catalysts since they can absorb a significant part of the solar spectrum and have long-lived excited states. Supported ZnPc–TiO2 catalysts have been tested55 for the photo-reduction of CO2 under visible light illumination. The catalysts were prepared by an improved sol–gel technique illustrated in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Procedure for catalyst preparation.55 
The BH-1 TiO2 powder is a commercial one and was tested for comparison aims. ZnPc-loaded TiO2 (ZnPc/TiO2 and ZnPc/BH-1) have been impregnated by adding ZnPc during the sol–gel process. An in situ chemical synthesis technique was successfully used to synthesize ZnPc in a sol–gel matrix (in situ ZnPc/TiO2).
The photo-catalytic reduction was carried out in a Pyrex glass cell containing the catalyst powder suspended in NaOH aqueous solution in which CO2 was continuously bubbled. Illuminations were performed with a 500-W tungsten-halogen lamp. The optimal CO2 conversion in this system is 0.37%; HCOOH, CO and CH4 were produced, the formation of formic acid being more effective on supported ZnPc/TiO2 catalyst than on TiO2 catalyst.
The Authors report that the activity of the catalysts followed the order: in situ ZnPc/TiO2 >1.0 wt% ZnPc/TiO2 > ZnPc/BH-1 >3.0 wt% ZnPc/TiO2 >5.0 wt% ZnPc/TiO2 >TiO2. The results indicate that ZnPc is an effective photo-sensitizer, able to produce electrons and to effectively absorb visible light. The electrons excited are transferred to TiO2 and reduce CO2, at the same time the recombination of electron-hole pairs is reduced.
Cobalt-phthalocyanine (CoPc) has been also supported on TiO256 by an in situ method and the CO2 photoreduction has been studied in NaOH aqueous solution by achieving the formation of HCOOH, HCHO and CH3OH under visible light. In situ CoPc/TiO2 is prepared with the advanced sol–gel procedure illustrated in Fig. 14. For comparison, the CoPc/TiO2 catalysts are prepared by equilibrium adsorption of CoPc on TiO2 from a solution of dimethylformamide.
 Fig. 14  Procedure for catalyst preparation.56 
Formic acid, methanol and formaldehyde are produced on CoPc/TiO2 catalyst; their yields, reported in Table 3, demonstrate that an optimal in situ synthesized CoPc/TiO2 is a highly efficient photocatalyst for CO2 reduction.
Table 3 Yield of various catalysts56






Production yield [μmol (gcat)−1]




HCOOH
CH3OH
HCHO
TOC




TiO2
221.0
—
—
221.0


1.0 wt% CoPc/TiO2
450.6
12.1
38.5
501.2


0.7 wt% in situ CoPc/TiO2
1487.6
93.0
134.3
1714.9




The location of CoPc on TiO2 plays an important role in the photoreduction of CO2. Isolated CoPc is regarded as the primary active site for photoreduction. The distribution of CoPc on TiO2 particles is critical to maximize the yield of reduction products. CoPc under visible light irradiation produces electron-hole pairs and TiO2 serves as an electron trapper then hindering the electron-hole recombination. At the same time, CO2 can accept an electron on TiO2 surface and be reduced to HCOOH, HCHO and CH3OH.
Another way for widening the TiO2 absorption towards the visible region is the use of dye sensitizers. A recent study57 provides evidence that dye sensitized, Pt promoted TiO2 films are capable of CO2 reduction under visible light excitation and in the presence of water vapour. In order to induce dye sensitization, perylene diimide derivatives and a commercial reference compound were used.
TiO2 films were coated on regular borosilicate glass beads via a sol–gel procedure. A flow diagram is given in Fig. 15 summarizing the steps and the ingredients used in the film coating procedure.
 Fig. 15  Flow chart for the TiO2 film coating procedure.57 
Two types of Pt promoted films, Pt(on) and Pt(in) films, were prepared to see the effect of Pt addition procedure on the photocatalytic performance of the films. Pt(on) catalysts were prepared using aqueous solutions of Pt containing salt and Pt was added on a TiO2 support via wet impregnation technique. On the other hand for Pt(in) catalysts, Pt salt was added to the TiO2 coating sol, so that Pt was added to TiO2 framework.
Three different light harvesting molecules (LHM) were used: Tris(2,2′-bipyridyl) ruthenium(II) chloride (RuBpy), 1,7-dibromo-N,N′-(carboxymethyl)-3,4:9,10-perylene-diimide (BrGly) and 1,7-dibromo-N,N′-(1S,2-dicarboxyethyl)- 3,4:9,10-perylenediimide (BrAsp). The reaction tests are carried out in a batch photoreactor irradiated by a daylight lamp.
The aim of synthesizing LHM promoted TiO2 films was to combine the visible light excitation potential of the organic dyes with the catalytic performance of TiO2. The excited state electrons on the dye molecule can be injected to the TiO2 structure thus determining photocatalytic activity in the visible region. The reaction tests of RuBpy–TiO2, BrGly–TiO2 and BrAsp–TiO2 thick film catalysts showed that the excitation–injection mechanism is working successfully. Methane production is observed, the activities being in the order of BrAsp–TiO2>RuBpy–TiO2>BrGly–TiO2.
In the presence of Pt, all three sensitizers showed photocatalytic activity in the visible region. Addition of Pt via aqueous solution resulted in the catalysts with highest methane yields while addition of Pt via Pt containing sol resulted in either no significant change or even decrease in photocatalytic activity. The presence of Pt in the bulk of TiO2 may modify the band gap and indeed improve the TiO2 activity.57 The electron transfer efficiencies from the dye sensitizer to the TiO2 can increase in the presence of Pt; furthermore, the dye compounds can bind better to the structure in the presence of Pt and it is highly possible that more dye sensitizers could have been incorporated on the films in the presence of Pt.
Inspired by the photosynthesis of plants, Ozcan et al.58 studied the effect of an organic dye adsorbed on photocatalyst on the CO2 photoreduction with H2O to fuels under artificial light. However, the employment of organic dye limited the efficiency of the system.
On these grounds the CO2 reduction has been investigated59 over Ruthenium dye-sensitized TiO2-based catalysts under artificial light and concentrated natural sunlight. The photocatalytic runs were carried out in a continuous circular Pyrex glass reactor containing catalyst-coated optical fibres on whose surface the photocatalytic reaction is conducted. Optical fibres allow to overcome the several drawbacks presented by the liquid-phase photoreactor, such as low light utilization efficiencies due to absorption and scattering of the light by the reaction medium and in some cases the rates are low due to limitations by mass transport resistances. Packed-bed photoreactor irradiated either from side or center always projects shadow on the other side of catalyst particle and thus an aliquot of photocatalyst surface is not active. In order to solve these problems, Marinangeli and Ollis60,61 proposed to use optical fibers as a means of light transmission and distribution to solid-supported photocatalysts. An optical fiber provides a very high exposure surface and allows to deliver photons uniformly in a large volume.
P25 titanium dioxide was used as a TiO2 source. Cu(NO3)2·3H2O and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O were employed as precursors of metal dopants and RuII(2,20-bipyridyl-4,40-dicarboxylate)2-(NCS)2 (hereafter indicated as N3) was used as dye sensitizer. The optical fibers were coated with TiO2 slurry containing the corresponding metal salts by dip coating method. For comparison aims the catalysts were also supported on glass plates. The photocatalytic reaction was carried out in a continuous circular Pyrex glass reactor. The products of CO2 reduction were methane and ethylene; their rates of production under artificial light are reported in Table 4.
Table 4 Production rate of methane and ethylene over TiO2-based catalysts under artificial light59






Production ratea [μmol (gcat)−1 h−1]


Ethylene
Methane





a Production rates were determined on the basis of the average value after 4 h of irradiation. The artificial light was in the wavelength range of 320–500 nm with intensity of 225 mW cm−2.





Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/glass plate
0.049
0.060


Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/optical fiber
0.575
0.914


N3-dye–Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/glass plate
0.033
0.148


N3-dye–Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/optical fiber
0.562
0.847




N3 dye adsorbed on TiO2 catalyst was found to be stable under UV irradiation and therefore the CO2 photoreduction proceeds without any loss of activity during irradiation time. This finding indicates that the charge transfer from N3 dye to TiO2 is very efficient and N3 results to properly work as a sensitizer.
It is found that production rates of methane and ethylene with catalysts supported on optical fibers are higher than those with glass plates while those rates are similar over both Cu–Fe/TiO2 and N3-dye–Cu–Fe/TiO2 catalysts thus showing that N3 dye is not effective for the improvement of methane and ethylene production.
For the experiments using concentrated natural sunlight as the irradiation source, only the catalysts supported on optical fibers were tested. Although both methane and ethylene were produced under artificial light, under concentrated natural sunlight only methane production was observed. The methane production rates with Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2 and with N3-dye–Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2 were 0.281 and 0.617 μmol (gcat)−1 h−1, respectively. N3 dye is observed to increase the photoactivity of Cu–Fe/TiO2 catalyst up to over 100% under concentrated natural sunlight. The superior photoproduction of dye adsorbed catalyst could be ascribed to the strong absorption of N3 dye in the visible range.
Catalysts different from the TiO2-based ones have been also tested. Pan and Chen62 tested InTaO4 and NiO/InTaO4 as catalysts for CO2 photoreduction in liquid water under visible light irradiation. The polycrystalline InTaO4 was synthesized by solid state reaction at high temperature with In2O3 and Ta2O5 as the starting materials. In order to improve the photogenerated electrons trapping and so to obtain high photocatalytic activity, a metal oxide acceptor, NiO, was loaded at different percentages on the surface of the photocatalyst by incipient-wetness impregnation. It is believed that the co-catalyst works as an electron trap, and the surface becomes a Schottky barrier able to suppress the electron-hole recombination.
The InTaO4 compound shows absorption in visible light region up to 465 nm, thus showing that InTaO4 has the ability to respond to the visible light irradiation. The band gap of InTaO4 is 2.6 eV and it does not change for the addition of NiO cocatalyst; on the contrary the absorbance of InTaO4 increases with the addition of cocatalyst. The band structure of InTaO4 (Fig. 16) reveals that InTaO4 can reduce CO2 under the visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 16  Band structure of InTaO4. 
Photocatalytic reactions were carried out in a semi-continuous reactor. The catalyst powder was dispersed in KHCO3 aqueous solution employed as CO2 absorbent and the ultra pure CO2 was continuously bubbled to remove oxygen and to saturate the solution.
Methanol was the only product detected from CO2 photoreduction. The highest methanol yield was obtained with 1.0 wt% NiO–InTaO4. The performance of the system was evaluated by determining the quantum and energy efficiencies. By considering that 6 moles of electrons are required to produce 1 mole of methanol from CO2, the quantum efficiency is defined as: (1) The energy efficiency, which evaluates the transformation of the photon energy into chemical energy, is defined as: (2) The quantum efficiency and energy efficiency were 2.45% and 1.158%, respectively.
Liu et al.63 studied the selective ethanol formation from CO2 photocatalytic reduction in water with BiVO4 photocatalyst. Monoclinic bismuth vanadate is a photocatalyst for O2 production from water under visible light irradiation. This reaction suggests that the photogenerated holes of BiVO4 are consumed by water to produce O2. The byproducts of this reaction are photogenerated electrons and protons. Since the photogenerated electrons are not able to capture the protons in water to form H2, the possibility of using the photogenerated electrons and protons for converting CO2 to organic compounds has been tested. Liu et al.63 demonstrated the feasibility of this process in aqueous dispersions of BiVO4 (tetragonal or monoclinic) powder and they found that CO2 photoreduction leads selectively to ethanol. BiVO4 powder, prepared by microwave assisted hydrothermal method,64,65 was dispersed in water and CO2 was continuously bubbled through the solution. 300W Xe arc lamp with and without UV cut off filter were used for the irradiation.
Monoclinic BiVO4 exhibits a much higher photocatalytic activity than tetragonal BiVO4. The reactivity data, reported in Table 5, indicate that, when the irradiation light is extended into the UV region, the rate of the ethanol production strongly increases for monoclinic BiVO4. Moreover the intensity of the light irradiation plays an important role in the ethanol formation because both methanol and ethanol are formed with comparable rates when a 36 W fluorescent lamp is used.
Table 5 Rates of ethanol and methanol production under three different light-irradiation conditions65




BiVO4
Production ratea/μmolh−1
300 W Xe arc lamp with UV cutoff filter
300 W Xe arc lamp without UV cutoff filter
36 W fluorescent lamp





a The rate was determined on the basis of the average production rate after 80 min of irradiation.





Monoclinic
Ethanol
21.6
406.6
2.3


Methanol
0
0
1.8


Tetragonal
Ethanol
1.1
4.9
0.6


Methanol
0
0
0.6




The CO2 photoreduction to hydrocarbons in gaseous phase has been carried out by using optical fibres coated with Cu–Fe/TiO2 catalyst.66
P25 was used as a TiO2 source. Cu(NO3)2·3H2O and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O were employed as precursors of metal dopants on TiO2 support. Photocatalytic runs were carried out in a continuous circular Pyrex glass reactor shown in Fig. 17. Catalyst coated optical fibres were irradiated by UVA (320–500 nm) and UVC (250–450 nm) light obtained by using appropriate filters on the Hg high pressure lamp. For comparison, the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into hydrocarbons was also studied on glass plates coated with the same catalysts.
 Fig. 17  Continuous circular Pyrex glass reactor. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 66). 
Cu–Fe/TiO2 catalysts were able to photoreduce CO2 with H2O vapour to ethylene and methane; traces of ethane and methanol were also found. Table 6 presents the production rate of ethylene over different photocatalysts and supports under UVC (250–450 nm).
Table 6 Production rate of ethylene over different photocatalysts and carriers under UVC66






Ethylene production ratea [μmol (gcat)−1 h−1


Over glass plate
Over optical fiber





a Production rates were determined on the basis of the average value after 4 h of irradiation. The artificial light was in the wavelength range of 250–450 nm with intensity of 225 mW cm−2.





TiO2-P25
0.00
0.00


Cu(1wt%)/TiO2
0.01
0.24


Fe(1wt%)/TiO2
0.02
0.08


Cu(1 wt%)–Fe(1 wt%)/TiO2
0.04
0.35


Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2
0.05
0.58


Cu(0.25 wt%)–Fe(0.25 wt%)/TiO2
0.03
0.53




Pure TiO2 shows negligible photocatalytic activity towards ethylene production while, when either Cu or Fe is loaded, the derived catalysts are able to reduce CO2 to ethylene. Moreover, as Cu and Fe are employed as co-dopants on the TiO2 support, a synergistic effect appears; the optimum amount of Cu and Fe loading on TiO2 are 0.5% wt for each. However, the production rate of ethylene on optical fibres is one order of magnitude higher than that on glass plate. This result is ascribed to the efficient charge transfer mechanism between TiO2 as a support and Cu as well as Fe as co-dopants.
When the catalysts were irradiated by UVA light, the CO2 photoreduction products were ethylene and methane; the corresponding production rates are shown in Table 7.
Table 7 Ethylene production rate over different catalysts under UVA66






Production ratea over glass plate [μmol(gcat)−1 h−1]


Ethylene
Methane





a Production rates were determined on the basis of the average value after 4 h of irradiation. The artificial light was in the wavelength range of 320–500 nm with intensity of 225 mW cm−2.





TiO2-P25
0.00
Trace


Cu(1wt%)/TiO2
0.01
0.09


Fe(1wt%)/TiO2
0.02
0.06


Cu(1 wt%)–Fe(1 wt%)/TiO2
0.04
0.06


Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2
0.05
0.06


Cu(0.25 wt%)–Fe(0.25 wt%)/TiO2
0.01
0.19




From the results reported in Tables 6 and 7, the light source does not substantially affect the production rate of ethylene over the catalyst coated on glass plate.
2.2 Nitro-compounds reductions
Heterogeneous photocatalysis has proven to be effective also for reduction reactions concerning nitrogen compounds, from nitrate ion to nitro-compounds. In the first case the benefits have been for the environment while in the case of nitro-compounds a new successful route has been furnished to green chemistry.
The intensive agricultural activities and the massive use of man-made fertilizers have increased the nitrate concentration in water supply sources. High concentration of nitrate in drinking water is fatal to infants in whose bodies nitrate is reduced to nitrite, which combines with hemoglobin in the blood to form methaemoglobin, and leads to a condition commonly known as “blue baby syndrome”. Furthermore, nitrate can be converted into nitrosamine, which can cause cancer and hypertension.
TiO2-based catalysts are effective for nitrate reduction. It is known that metal-loaded TiO2 catalysts with the addition of hole scavengers are essential for the effective reduction of NO3− to NH3 and traces of NO2− (during the first minutes of irradiation).67 Many metals, such as Pd, Pt, and Rh, and sacrificial electron donors, such as methanol, ethanol and EDTA, oxalic acid, sodium oxalate, formic acid, sucrose, and humic acid have been commonly used to improve photocatalytic efficiency.
A recent work68 focuses on the preparation, characterization and application of Bi3+-doped TiO2 photocatalysts for the reductive decomposition of nitrate to form nitrogen in water in the presence of formic acid as hole scavenger. The Bi3+-doped TiO2 samples were prepared by a sol–gel method; the photoreduction runs were carried out in a batch photoreactor of borosilicate glass irradiated by a medium-pressure mercury lamp as a near-UV light source.
Compared to pure TiO2, the Bi3+-doped catalyst exhibited a faster rate of nitrate reduction. The optimal amount of Bi3+ was 1.5 wt%; a higher bismuth content on TiO2 was detrimental to the efficiency of photocatalytic reduction of nitrate. In this study68 formic acid was chosen as a hole scavenger owing to the fact that its oxidation to carbon dioxide is straightforward and involves minimal intermediate products.69 Moreover formic acid is capable of forming reducing radicals, which could help in the nitrate reduction reaction. In the presence of formic acid, the reduction of nitrate occurs via nitrite and ammonia, and eventually releases nitrogen gas: NO3− + 2e− + H2O → NO2− + 2OH−(3) NO2− + 6e− + 7H+ → NH3 + 2H2O(4) 2NH3 → N2 + 3H2(5)This investigation confirms that the use of a hole scavenger such as formic acid is an essential condition to carry out this photocatalytic reduction reaction, since no catalytic activity of either TiO2 or Bi3+–TiO2 was observed in the nitrate solution without a hole scavenger. On the other hand, it was found that the further increase of formic acid did not increase the catalytic activity significantly, which may result from competition for adsorption between nitrate and formic anions.
The reductive decomposition of NO3− to N2 in water under UV-irradiation has been carried out in the presence of mesoporous hollandite,70 K1.8Ga1.8Sn6.2O16 (KGSO). Hollandites have a characteristic one dimensional tunnel structure with a stoichiometry of MIVO2 containing the rutile type MO6 octahedral linkage71,72 as illustrated in Fig. 18. The tunnels are usually occupied by alkaline or alkaline earth elements introduced in conjunction with the partial replacement of MIV with di- or trivalent cations.
 Fig. 18  Crystal structure of KGSO (Reproduced with permission from ref. 70). 
The aqueous suspension of the catalyst is irradiated by UV light as the absorption edge of KGSO is at the wavelength of 340 nm. H15NO3 and CH3OH as a reducing agent are the reagents introduced into the photoreactor. HNO3 labeled for N is used for the reliable detection of nitrogen gas evolved in the course of the photoreaction.
The hollandite reduces NO3− to N2via nitrite formation; the photocatalytic reduction is accompanied by the partial oxidation of CH3OH to HCOOH, according to:  4HNO3 + 5CH3OH → 5HCOOH + 2N2 + 7H2O(6)By increasing the irradiation intensity, the formation of nitrite ions is depressed and that of N2 enhanced, while the conversion rates of NO3− and HCOOH are not effectively enhanced. Only formic acid is detected as the carbon component derived from CH3OH conversion. Therefore the partial oxidation of CH3OH without CO2 evolution can be regarded to proceed in conjunction with the reduction of nitrate ion to N2.
In the case of a photocatalytic reduction of nitrate ion without hole scavenger, NO3− was slightly converted to NO2−, N2 molecule being under detectable level.
The photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline73 has been carried out using a large excess of ethanol as a sacrificial electron donor, titanium dioxide and a lamp emitting a broad range of UVA light from 320 to 390 nm with the highest emission at 355 nm.
As shown in eqn (7), the theoretical reaction scheme implies the formation of aniline, acetaldehyde and water as the main products. From a thermodynamic point of view, nitrobenzene reduction is feasible as the reduction potential of nitrobenzene is lower than that of the TiO2. Moreover the photogenerated holes can induce easily the photooxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde39 considering the suitable position of oxidation potential of ethanol with respect to that of TiO2. Aniline and acetaldehyde and a small amount of acetic acid were the expected products according to eqn (7), however the intermediates of the photoreduction of nitrobenzene (i.e., nitrosobenzene and N-hydroxylaniline) were also clearly detected.39,73–75 (7)The photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene dissolved in an acidic aqueous suspension of P25 TiO2 was carried out in the presence of oxalic acid as a hole scavenger;76 the yield of produced aniline was improved in the presence of a small amount of dioxygen. Oxalic acid is a green sacrificial reagent because it is easily oxidized and converts into carbon dioxide which is separated from the solvent under acidic conditions.
After short photoirradiation nitrobenzene was almost completely consumed and aniline was obtained in a high yield, this result indicating that photocatalytic reduction occurred even in the presence of O2. Reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline consists of several steps:37 C6H5–NO2 → C6H5–NO → C6H5–NHOH → C6H5–NH2(8)and the likely stoichiometry of the reaction in the presence of oxalic acid76 is: C6H5–NO2 + 3(COOH)2 → C6H5–NH2 + 6CO2 + 2H2O(9) It is interesting that the yield of aniline in the presence of 2% and 5% O2 in the gas phase was larger than that in the absence of O2; however a further increase in O2 content in the gas phase decreased the aniline yield: indeed a reoxidation of aniline probably occurred owing to large consumption of oxalic acid in the presence of a high O2 content.
The production of aromatic amines by photocatalytic reduction emerges as a cost-effective, highly selective, rapid and environmentally friendly process.77–79
The N-doped TiO2 catalyst,80 which shows good activity under visible light, has been used for the synthesis of amines from nitro compounds. The reduction of aromatic nitro compounds was carried out in the presence of N–TiO2 and KI in solution of methanol.81 Photocatalytic runs were carried out in a batch photo-reactor irradiated using high pressure mercury lamp or solar light. The photocatalytic activity of home-prepared (hp) N-doped TiO2, undoped hp TiO2 and TiO2 Degussa P25 was investigated by the reduction of o-nitrophenol as a model reaction; results under UV light, solar light and UV-filtered solar light are shown in Fig. 19. Under UV-filtered solar light only the N-doped TiO2 showed catalytic activity among the catalysts; under solar and UV irradiation the yield with N-doped TiO2 was the highest one comparing with hp TiO2 and P25 TiO2.
 Fig. 19  The effect of different catalysts: (1) P25; (2) home-prepared TiO2; (3) home-prepared N–TiO2.81 
The reduction of different aromatic nitro compounds has been carried out under UV irradiation because of the long reaction time needed under solar light. The results are listed in Table 8. The data clearly show the efficiency of N-doped TiO2 in the reduction of several nitro compounds in the presence of KI; it may be noticed that the reduction of nitroarenes gives corresponding amines in excellent yield (above 90%).
Table 8 Reduction of functionalized nitroarenes with N-doped TiO2 and KI81




Substrate
Product
Irr. Time/min
Yield(mean ± SD) [%]










10
99.27 ± 0.21








12.5
97.77 ± 0.40








7
99.37 ± 0.35








10
96.50 ± 0.46








8.5
97.33 ± 0.47








7.5
98.07 ± 0.27








8
95.30 ± 0.75








11.5
91.95 ± 0.18








14
98.15 ± 0.71








7.5
92.06 ± 0.36








7.5
95.48 ± 0.42








7.5
97.96 ± 0.27








7
99.39 ± 0.21








6
99.47 ± 0.15








6
91.43 ± 0.29








19
90.76 ± 0.54




The catalytic system is also efficient in the reduction of aromatic nitro compounds bearing additional substituents in the aromatic ring. With regard to the reactivity of the different nitroarenes tested, it is worth noting that the electronic properties of substituents attached to the aromatic ring do not have any effect on the reduction of nitro groups. Nitro compounds bearing electron-withdrawing groups, which have been reported as more reactive or active when reacted, produce the corresponding amines in better yields and in shorter reaction time with respect to the aromatic nitro compounds substituted with strong-electron releasing groups.
3. Other reactions
3.1 Photomethatesis of olefins
The metathesis reaction, consisting of an interchange of carbon atoms between two alkene molecules, is a useful reaction for obtaining alkenes and for their polymerization that is usually performed in the presence of metal catalysts or transition-metal compounds, including various metal carbenes. In this reaction olefins exchange the groups around the double bond, resulting in several outcomes: (i) straight swapping of groups between two acyclic olefins (cross-metathesis); (ii) closure of large rings (ring-closing metathesis); (iii) formation of dienes from cyclic and acyclic olefins (ring-opening metathesis); (iv) polymerization of cyclic olefins (ring-opening metathesis polymerization); and (v) polymerization of acyclic dienes (acyclic diene metathesis polymerization).82
Silica materials, both mesoporous (FSM-16 and MCM-41) and amorphous,83 show a moderate photocatalytic activity in the propene metathesis reaction when active sites are generated on its surface by dehydroxylation at 673 K. (10) The reaction produces ethene, trans-2-butene, cis-2-butene and a small amount of l-butene. The metathesis reaction seems to be characteristic for the silica surface; in fact, MgO, A12O3, SiO2–A12O3 were also tested but, although other reactions occurred to a small extent, the distribution of products was quite different from that for the metathesis reaction.84
3.2 Methane coupling
Many studies have been devoted to the appraisal of methane to obtain higher hydrocarbons from this important natural resource. The direct methane coupling producing ethane and hydrogen is a thermodynamically difficult reaction; however it has been carried out photocatalytically by using Al2O3–SiO285 alone or with the addition of ca. 0.5% molar of Ti.86 2CH4 → C2H6 + H2 ΔG(298 K) = 68.6 kJ mol−1(11)Highly dispersed tetrahedral AlO4 species were responsible for the important selectivity to ethane, reaching even 90% even if in limited yields (<3%), where Al–O–Si and Al–O–Ti bonds were considered to be the active species. In the case of highly dispersed Zr species on SiO2 also the phosphorescence emission band of Zn–O–Si was directly related to the photocatalytic production of ethane from methane. Zeolites87 also showed a good photocatalytic activity for this reaction.
3.3 N-containing compounds: C–N formation
Azides compounds are commonly used in organic chemistry to introduce an amine group. These atoxic molecules in irradiated homogeneous systems give rise to a mixture of products. The photocatalytic reaction of aromatic azides allows to obtain 2-alkylbenzimidazoles and indole with high yield and under mild conditions.
Selvam et al.88 studied the formation of 2-methylbenzimidazole from 2-nitrophenyl azide; this cyclization reaction was carried out under a N2 atmosphere in alcoholic medium and under solar irradiation in the presence of TiO2 Degussa P25. It is worth noting that the Authors have used different alcohols (methanol, ethanol, propanol and isopropanol) and the reaction yield and selectivity are sensitive to the alcohol used. A maximum yield of 93% after 4 h of reaction in an ethanolic medium was obtained. The reaction mechanism is reported in Fig. 20. Similarly for the formation of indazole from 2-nitrobenzyl azide, the azide is reduced to 2-nitrobenzylamine and then to diamine which undergoes cyclization leading to indazole as shown in Fig. 21.
 Fig. 20  Formation of 2-methylbenzimidazole from 2-nitrophenyl azide in ethanol.88 
 Fig. 21  Photocatalytic formation of indazole.88 
The Authors report a further improvement in the conversion for the solar-mediated photocatalytic reaction by using Ag and Pt loaded TiO2 Degussa P25.
The semiconductor photocatalysed addition of cyclopentene or cyclohexene to various novel electron-poor imines of type p-XC6H4(CN)CN(COPh) (X = H, F, Cl, Br, Me, MeO) was investigated on cadmium sulfide photocatalyst.89 Irradiation (λ > 350 nm) of silica supported cadmium sulfide surprisingly did not afford the expected olefin–imine adducts but an imine hydrocyanation product via an unprecedented dark reaction. However, when silica was replaced by zinc sulfide as the support, the expected homoallylic N-benzoyl-α-amino cyanides were isolated in yields of 65–84%. Thus, chemoselectivity is introduced through replacing an insulating with a semiconducting support, a hitherto unknown effect in semiconductor photocatalysis. A tentative explanation provided by the Authors is related to the sign of the time resolved photovoltage. It was found that the CdS/ZnS interface increases the lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs by about one order of magnitude as compared to the SiO2/CdS system. The reaction rate increases with increasing imine σ-Hammett constants and decreasing stability of intermediate benzyl radicals.89
3.4 Funzionalization: C–C formation
The synthesis of organofluorine compounds has been carried out photocatalytically by using TiO2. The photogenerated electrons in the conduction band of the semiconductor reduce perfluoroalkyl iodide (the most common source for introducing perfluoroalkyl groups in organic molecules) to give perfluoroalkyl radical and iodide ion.90 The radical species reacts with an organic molecule to give new radical species successively oxidized to the corresponding cationic intermediate, as reported in Fig. 22, where H-Do indicates an electron-rich compound:
 Fig. 22  Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of organofluorine compounds.90 
In this way Iizuka et al.90 have carried out the perfluoroalkylation of three aromatic rings (p-xylene, naphthalene and benzofuran) along with α-methylstirene and its related compounds 2-phenyl-2-butene and 3,4-dihydro-1-methylnaphtalene (Fig. 23):
 Fig. 23  Perfluoroalkylation of aromatic and aliphatic compounds.90 
4 Conclusions
This article summarizes some of the several recent investigations on selective organic transformations carried out by photocatalysis. Until a few years ago photocatalytic processes were considered to be only unselective. In these last years, however, photocatalysis is being demonstrated to be an alternative synthetic route in organic chemistry. The reacting systems here described are capable of carrying out selective oxidation and reduction processes that at proper reaction conditions may reach high conversions and yields. This is a very relevant result especially in the case of selective alcohol oxidation since it is quite difficult to avoid overoxidation of the formed aldehyde to the corresponding acid and other products.
Photocatalytic reactions do not use dangerous chemical reagents and solvents and they do not release harmful wastes into the environment. These significant advantages imply that photocatalysis may be an alternative “green” synthetic route.
In order to find wider application, photocatalytic processes need to be made faster and cheaper. In order to increase reaction rates, several studies devoted to elucidate the mechanistic details of photocatalytic reactions are essential and they are giving important information. As to concern the process economy, employment of sunlight is of course the ideal option even if solar photons need to be concentrated, especially in scaled up processes. Yet, mimicking Nature's photosynthesis as a route to harness solar photons for use in conventional synthesis seems most promising. The Authors think that, when these two goals will be accomplished, rapid global spread of photocatalytic synthesis will take place.
Notes and references

  (a) A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS ; 
  (b) 
            V. Augugliaro, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano and M. Pagliaro, Clean by Light Irradiation. Practical Applications of Supported TiO2, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2010 Search PubMed .

  (a) G. Palmisano, V. Augugliaro, M. Pagliaro and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3425 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 157 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kominami, H. Sugahara and K. Hashimoto, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 426 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Wang, C. Chen, L. Zhang, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6081 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2010 DOI:10.1002/anie.201003621 .
A. Molinari, M. Bruni and A. Maldotti, J. Adv. Ox. Tech., 2008, 11, 143 Search PubMed .
A. Molinari, M. Montoncello, H. Rezala and A. Maldotti, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 613 RSC .
G. Marcì, E. García-López, G. Mele, L. Palmisano, G. Dyrda and R. Słota, Catal. Today, 2009, 143, 203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Higashimoto, N. Kitao, N. Yohida, T. Sakura, M. Azuma, H. Ohue and Y. Sakata, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 279 CrossRef CAS .
C. Minero, G. Mariella, V. Maurino and E. Pelizzetti, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2632 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5143 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Palmisano, S. Yurdakal, V. Augugliaro, V. Loddo and L. Palmisano, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 964 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) V. Loddo, S. Yurdakal, G. Palmisano, G. E. Imoberdorf, H. A. Irazoqui, O. M. Alfano, V. Augugliaro, H. Berber and L. Palmisano, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2007, 5, A57 Search PubMed .

  (a) S. Yurdakal, G. Palmisano, V. Loddo, V. Augugliaro and L. Palmisano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1568 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Addamo, V. Augugliaro, M. Bellardita, A. Di Paola, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano and S. Yurdakal, Catal. Lett., 2008, 126, 58 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) V. Augugliaro, T. Caronna, V. Loddo, G. Marcì, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano and S. Yurdakal, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4640 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Yurdakal, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, V. Augugliaro, H. Berber and L. Palmisano, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 6699 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yurdakal, G. Palmisano, V. Loddo, O. Alagöz, V. Augugliaro and L. Palmisano, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 510 RSC .
N. Mizuno and M. Misono, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 199 CrossRef CAS .
G. Marcì, E. García-López, L. Palmisano, D. Carriazo, C. Martín and V. Rives, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 497 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Farhadi, M. Afshari, M. Maleki and Z. Babazadeh, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 8483 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Wittenberg, M. A. Pradera and J. A. Navio, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 2373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, H. Mao, L. Ying and Q. Xia, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 276, 73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhadi and M. Zaidi, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 354, 119 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Maldotti, A. Molinari and F. Bigi, J. Catal., 2008, 253, 312 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            J. A. Navio, M. Garcia Gomez, M. A. Pradera Adrian and J. Fuentes Mota, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. M. Guisnet, J. Barbier and J. Barrault, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1993, vol. 78, p. 431 Search PubMed .
P. Kluson, H. Luskova, L. Cerveny, J. Klisakova and T. Cajtham, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 242, 62 CrossRef CAS .
J. Klisakova, P. Kluson and L. Cerveny, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 2003, 68, 1985 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari and R. Amadelli, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3811 CrossRef CAS .
C. Murata, H. Yoshida, J. Kumagai and T. Hattori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4364 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2003, 7, 435 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, M. G. Chaskar, Y. Kato and T. Hattori, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 160, 47 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, C. Murata and T. Hattori, J. Catal., 2000, 194, 364 CrossRef CAS .
C. Murata, H. Yoshida and T. Hattori, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2412 RSC .
P. Du, J. A. Moulijn and G. Mul, J. Catal., 2006, 238, 342 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vinu and G. Madras, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 366, 130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari, R. Amadelli, E. Carbonell and H. García, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 819 RSC .
M. Alvaro, C. Aprile, E. Benitez, E. Carbonell and H. García, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6661 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ciambelli, D. Sannino, V. Palma, V. Vaiano, R. S. Mazzei, P. Eloy and E. M. Gaigneaux, Catal. Today, 2009, 141, 367 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ciambelli, D. Sannino, V. Palma, V. Vaiano and R. I. Bickley, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 349, 140 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aurian-Blajeni, M. Halmann and J. Manassen, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25, 165 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Ferry and W. H. Glaze, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3551 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Makarova, T. Rajh, M. C. Thurnauer, A. Martin, P. A. Kemme and D. Cropek, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 4797 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, T. Ishida, A. Takao and S. Ito, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7898 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shi and Y. M. Shen, Curr. Org. Chem., 2003, 7, 737 CAS .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637 .
Y. Shioya, K. Ikeue, M. Ogawa and M. Anpo, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 254, 251 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Tan, L. Zou and E. Hu, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 269 CrossRef CAS .
X. V. Zhang, S. P. Ellery, C. M. Friend, H. D. Holland, F. M. Michel, M. A. A. Schoonen and S. T. Martin, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 185, 301 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Tseng, J. C. S. Wu and H. Y. Chou, J. Catal., 2004, 221, 432 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ling, C. Y. Jimmy, W. Xinchen, Z. Lizhi and Y. Jiaguo, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 321 CrossRef .
Y. Jiaguo, Y. Huogen, C. H. Ao, S. C. Lee, C. Y. Jimmy and H. Wingkei, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 273 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ling, C. Y. Jimmy and F. Xianzhi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 244, 25 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sanbing, W. Jiankang, L. Haitao and W. Xiaolai, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 995 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Thiago, A. Jacqueline, S. P. F. Maria and G. Yoshitaka, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 609, 61 CrossRef .
R. Seoudi, G. S. Elbahy and Z. A. E. Sayed, Opt. Mater., 2006, 29, 304 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Kumar, J. Thomas and N. V. Unnikrishnan, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 2539 CrossRef CAS .
G. Raed, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 72, 455 CrossRef .
L. Shaohua, Z. Zhihuan and W. Zhizhong, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 695 RSC .
Z. Zhao, J. Fan and Z. Wang, J. Clean. Prod., 2007, 15, 1894 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, J. Fan, M. Xie and Z. Wang, J. Clean. Prod., 2009, 17, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ozcan, F. Yukruk, E. U. Akkaya and D. Unera, Top. Catal., 2007, 44, 523 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ozcan, F. Yukruk, E. U. Akkaya and D. Uner, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 71, 291 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen, J. C. S. Wu and C. Chiou, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 2073 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Marinangeli and D. F. Ollis, AIChE J., 1977, 23, 415 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Marinangeli and D. F. Ollis, AIChE J., 1980, 26, 1000 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pan and Y. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 1546 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Huang, Y. Dai, X. Zhang, X. Qin, M. Jiang and M. Whangbo, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 210 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Omori and H. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oshikiri and M. Boero, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9188 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen and J. C. S. Wu, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 335, 112 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, R. L. Jin, J. X. Chen, C. Shao, W. L. Gao, L. Li and N. J. Guan, J. Catal., 2005, 232, 424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rengaraj and X. Z. Li, Chemosphere, 2007, 66, 930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sanuki, T. Kojima, K. Arai, S. Nagaoka and H. Majima, Metall. Mater. Trans. B, 1999, 30, 15 CrossRef .
T. Mori, J. Suzuki, K. Fujimoto, M. Watanabe and Y. Hasegawa, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2000, 19, 505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bystrom and A. M. Bystrom, Acta Crystallogr., 1950, 3, 146 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fujiki, S. Takenouchi, Y. Onoda, M. Watanabe, S. Yoshikado, T. Ohachi and I. Taniguchi, Solid State Ionics, 1987, 25, 131 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Flores, O. Rios-Bernij, M. A. Valenzuela, I. Córdova, R. Gómez and R. Gutiérrez, Top. Catal., 2007, 44, 507 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, L. Andreotti, A. Molinari, S. Tollari, A. Penoni and S. Cenini, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 133, 129 CrossRef CAS .
V. Brezova, P. Tarabek, D. Dvoranova, A. Stasko and S. Biskupic, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 155, 179 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kominami, S. Iwasaki, T. Maeda, K. Imamura, K. Hashimoto, Y. Kera and B. Ohtani, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 410 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. D. Kumar, M. H. Mankit and T. Toyokuni, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 5601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Moglie, C. Vitale and G. Radivoy, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 1828 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathish, B. Viswanathan and R. P. Viswanath, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 307 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Jagadale, S. P. Takale, R. S. Sonawane, H. M. Joshi, S. I. Patil, B. B. Kale and S. B. Ogale, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14595 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Yan, W. Chang and Z. Zhang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 989 CrossRef CAS .
D. Astruc, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 42 RSC .
Y. Inaki, H. Yoshida and T. Hattori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 9098 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, S. Matsuo, T. M. Kaeda, H. Yoshida, T. Funabiki and S. Yoshida, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1997, 121–122, 296 CrossRef .
H. Yoshida, N. Matsushita, Y. Kato and T. Hattori, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 2459 RSC .
H. Yoshida, N. Matsushita, Y. Kato and T. Hattori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, H. Yoshida and T. Hattori, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2002, 51, 223 CrossRef CAS .
K. Selvam, B. Krishnakumar, R. Velmurugan and M. Swaminathan, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gartner, J. Ballmann, C. Damm, F. K. Heinemann and H. Kisch, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 159 RSC .
M. Iizuka and M. Yoshida, J. Fluorine Chem., 2009, 130, 926 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Giovanni Palmisano
	Giovanni Palmisano got his PhD degree in Chemical and Materials Engineering at the University of Palermo in 2009. He currently works on photocatalysis and dye solar cells. He has co-authored ca. 35 research papers on these fields and in particular on advanced oxidation processes for environment remediation and for organic synthesis. He is also co-author of the book “Flexible solar cells” published by Wiley VCH.

Elisa García-López
	Elisa García-López received her BS in Chemistry at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (Spain) and her PhD degree at the University of Palermo. She was a post-doctoral researcher at the Meisei University in Tokyo and she is currently Assistant Professor in Chemistry at the University of Palermo. The main focus of her work is heterogeneous photocatalysis.

Giuseppe Marcì
	Giuseppe Marcì studied Chemical Engineering and received his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 1997. He is Assistant Professor in Chemistry at the University of Palermo where he teaches Chemistry and develops his work in the fields of Photocatalysis and Materials Chemistry. He is the co-author of 79 articles and 141 papers in proceedings of congress.

Vittorio Loddo
	Vittorio Loddo received the degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Palermo in 1993 and the PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the “Federico II” University of Naples in 1998. From August 2000 he is Assistant Professor of Transport Phenomena at the University of Palermo. In the course of his scientific activity, he has contributed to the following fields: chemical kinetics of heterogeneous photocatalytic systems; modelling of heterogeneous photoreactors, radiation field modelling in absorbing–reacting media, advanced oxidation processes for environment remediation.

Sedat Yurdakal
	Sedat Yurdakal received his high degree in Chemistry in 2000 at the University of Anadolu, Eskişehir, Turkey. He started to work as a research assistant at the University of Afyon Kocatepe in 2001. He performed his PhD Thesis work at the University of Palermo and University of Anadolu from 2003 to 2010. He has published several papers in international journals and books on selective photocatalytic oxidations in water, preparation of new materials containing TiO2 and photoadsorption determination.

Vincenzo Augugliaro
	Vincenzo Augugliaro is Full Professor of Transport Phenomena at the University of Palermo. His investigation has concerned the fields of: chemical absorption kinetics, chemical kinetics of heterogeneous photocatalytic systems, modelling of heterogeneous photoreactors, radiation field modelling in absorbing–reacting media, advanced oxidation processes for environment remediation and for organic synthesis. He is author of hundreds of papers published in international journals and books and oral or poster communications in National and International Conferences.

Leonardo Palmisano
	Leonardo Palmisano is Full Professor of Chemistry at the University of Palermo. His main field of interest is heterogeneous photocatalysis and he is author of hundreds of papers published in international journals and books and oral or poster communications in National and International Conferences. He has been invited as Visiting Researcher (Bradford University, UK), Visiting Professor (Hokkaido University, Japan) or Lecturer in many Universities all over the world. He is also the co-author of the didactic book “Fondamenti di Chimica” published in Italy by Edises and in Spain by Ariel Ciencia.

 	Fig. 1  Proposed mechanism4 in the photocatalytic partial oxidation of alcohols in BTF.	 

 		 


n = 2	0.5	Not formed	0.07	0

n = 3	2.4	2.7	Not formed	1.1

n = 4	1.9	6.5	Not formed	3.4

 	Fig. 2  Mechanism for the direct oxidation of alcohols.6	 

 	Fig. 3  Allylic alcohols photocatalytically oxidised.7	 

 	Fig. 4  Proposed reaction mechanism for the photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol under visible light irradiation.9	 

 	Fig. 5  Photocatalytic oxidation of 1-phenyl ethanol18 (1) to acetophenone (2) by using heterogeneized POM.	 


C6H5	H	2.5	75

p-MeC6H4	H	1	92

o-MeC6H4	H	1	90

p-ButC6H4	H	1.5	82

p-MeOC6H4	H	1.5	85

o-MeOC6H4	H	2	70

p-ClC6H4	H	1.5	80

p-BrC6H4	H	2	82
C6H5	CH3	2	84

p-MeC6H4	CH3	1	97

p-NO2C6H4	CH3	3	76
C6H5	C2H5	1.5	90
C6H5	C6H5	2	84

p-ClC6H4	C6H5	1.5	88

p-MeOC6H4	C6H5	1.25	90

p-NO2C6H4	C6H5	3	72
C6H5	–CH2OH	2	75

 	Fig. 6  The photocatalytic cycle for aerobic oxidation of alcohols by using POM/ZrO2 as photocatalyst.20	 

 	Fig. 7  Synergistic effect between the POM molecule and the semiconductor in the nanocomposite.20	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocatalytic behaviour of W10O324−.21	 

 	Fig. 9  Products obtained in the partial oxidation of diols by using W10O324−/SiO2 in CH2Cl2 medium.21a	 

 	Fig. 10  Reaction pathway of the partial oxidation of cyclopentene.22	 

 	Fig. 11  Photocatalytic oxidation of propene over TiO2–SiO2 catalysts.27	 

 	Fig. 12  Reaction mechanism proposed30 for the photocatalytic production of cyclohexanone over TiO2 catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 13  Procedure for catalyst preparation.55	 

 	Fig. 14  Procedure for catalyst preparation.56	 


TiO2	221.0	—	—	221.0
1.0 wt% CoPc/TiO2	450.6	12.1	38.5	501.2
0.7 wt% in situ CoPc/TiO2	1487.6	93.0	134.3	1714.9

 	Fig. 15  Flow chart for the TiO2 film coating procedure.57	 



Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/glass plate	0.049	0.060
Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/optical fiber	0.575	0.914
N3-dye–Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/glass plate	0.033	0.148
N3-dye–Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2/optical fiber	0.562	0.847

 	Fig. 16  Band structure of InTaO4.	 
	(1)
	(2)


Monoclinic	Ethanol	21.6	406.6	2.3
Methanol	0	0	1.8
Tetragonal	Ethanol	1.1	4.9	0.6
Methanol	0	0	0.6

 	Fig. 17  Continuous circular Pyrex glass reactor. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 66).	 



TiO2-P25	0.00	0.00
Cu(1wt%)/TiO2	0.01	0.24
Fe(1wt%)/TiO2	0.02	0.08
Cu(1 wt%)–Fe(1 wt%)/TiO2	0.04	0.35
Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2	0.05	0.58
Cu(0.25 wt%)–Fe(0.25 wt%)/TiO2	0.03	0.53



TiO2-P25	0.00	Trace
Cu(1wt%)/TiO2	0.01	0.09
Fe(1wt%)/TiO2	0.02	0.06
Cu(1 wt%)–Fe(1 wt%)/TiO2	0.04	0.06
Cu(0.5 wt%)–Fe(0.5 wt%)/TiO2	0.05	0.06
Cu(0.25 wt%)–Fe(0.25 wt%)/TiO2	0.01	0.19
NO3− + 2e− + H2O → NO2− + 2OH−	(3)
NO2− + 6e− + 7H+ → NH3 + 2H2O	(4)
2NH3 → N2 + 3H2	(5)

 	Fig. 18  Crystal structure of KGSO (Reproduced with permission from ref. 70).	 
4HNO3 + 5CH3OH → 5HCOOH + 2N2 + 7H2O	(6)
	(7)
C6H5–NO2 → C6H5–NO → C6H5–NHOH → C6H5–NH2	(8)
C6H5–NO2 + 3(COOH)2 → C6H5–NH2 + 6CO2 + 2H2O	(9)

 	Fig. 19  The effect of different catalysts: (1) P25; (2) home-prepared TiO2; (3) home-prepared N–TiO2.81	 



	

	10	99.27 ± 0.21


	

	12.5	97.77 ± 0.40


	

	7	99.37 ± 0.35


	

	10	96.50 ± 0.46


	

	8.5	97.33 ± 0.47


	

	7.5	98.07 ± 0.27


	

	8	95.30 ± 0.75


	

	11.5	91.95 ± 0.18


	

	14	98.15 ± 0.71


	

	7.5	92.06 ± 0.36


	

	7.5	95.48 ± 0.42


	

	7.5	97.96 ± 0.27


	

	7	99.39 ± 0.21


	

	6	99.47 ± 0.15


	

	6	91.43 ± 0.29


	

	19	90.76 ± 0.54
	(10)
2CH4 → C2H6 + H2 ΔG(298 K) = 68.6 kJ mol−1	(11)

 	Fig. 20  Formation of 2-methylbenzimidazole from 2-nitrophenyl azide in ethanol.88	 

 	Fig. 21  Photocatalytic formation of indazole.88	 

 	Fig. 22  Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of organofluorine compounds.90	 

 	Fig. 23  Perfluoroalkylation of aromatic and aliphatic compounds.90	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
