Model-based design of the polymer microstructure: bridging the gap between polymer chemistry and engineering  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5PY01069A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5PY01069A
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 7081-7096Model-based design of the polymer microstructure: bridging the gap between polymer chemistry and engineering

        
          
            Dagmar R. 
            D'hooge
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Paul H. M. 
            Van Steenberge
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pieter 
            Derboven
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marie-Françoise 
            Reyniers
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Guy B. 
            Marin
          
          
        
      a
aLaboratory for Chemical Technology (LCT), Ghent University, Technologiepark 914, B-9052 Zwijnaarde (Gent), Belgium. E-mail: Dagmar.Dhooge@UGent.be
bDepartment of Textiles, Ghent University, Technologiepark 914, B-9052 Zwijnaarde (Gent), Belgium
Received 
      9th July 2015
    , Accepted 18th August 2015First published on 20th August 2015AbstractThe performance of polymeric materials depends strongly on the control over the polymer microstructure during the synthesis step. In this review, attention is paid to the potential of microkinetic modelling to facilitate the identification of optimal reactants and reaction conditions to design the polymer microstructure in bulk and solution (post)polymerisation processes. Focus is on living polymerization, reversible deactivation radical polymerization (RDRP) and “click” chemistry techniques, covering both batch and continuous synthesis approaches. A description according to the increasing level of macromolecular detail and thus modelling complexity is provided, including not only the characterization of the polymer microstructure via a finite number of variates (e.g. chain length, overall composition and branching content) but also its explicit visualisation by the simulation of the architecture and monomer sequences of a representative number of individual polymer chains. Several complementary case studies are included to demonstrate the high relevance of model-based design for the development of improved and novel synthetic protocols for precision control.Dagmar R. D'hoogeDagmar R. D'hooge is an assistant professor in Polymer Reaction Engineering and Industrial Processing of Polymers at Ghent University. He is a member of the LCT and associated member of the Department of Textiles. In 2006, he received his chemical engineering degree from Ghent University where he also obtained his PhD in 2010. From October 2012 onwards, he became a postdoctoral researcher at the Fund for Scientific Research Flanders. He was a visiting researcher in the Matyjaszewski Polymer Group (CMU) in 2011 and the Macromolecular Architectures Research Team (KIT) in 2013. His research focuses on model-based design of (post)polymerization and polymer processing.Paul H.M. Van SteenbergePaul H.M. Van Steenberge is a postdoctoral research assistant at Ghent University and a member of the LCT. He received his chemical engineering degree from Ghent University in 2007, where he also obtained his PhD in 2012. He was a visiting researcher in the Chemical Engineering Department of Queen's University (Ontario, Canada) in 2013 and 2014. His research activities relate to the development of advanced mathematical techniques for the design of polymerization processes in homogeneous and heterogeneous media. Both deterministic and stochastic approaches are covered.Pieter DerbovenPieter Derboven is a senior PhD student at Ghent University and a member of the LCT. His PhD research focuses on the multi-scale modelling of reversible deactivation radical polymerization (RDRP) in general and reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization and flow chemistry in particular. He was a visiting researcher at the Macromolecular Architectures Research Team at Karlsruhe Institute for Technology (KIT) in 2013 and 2014.Marie-Françoise ReyniersMarie-Françoise Reyniers is a full professor in Fundamental Modelling of Radical and Catalytic Processes at Ghent University and a member of the LCT. She develops microkinetic models, taking into account explicitly the chemical reactions involved in further understanding mature processes such as the conversion of heavy oil fractions, provides guidelines for innovation in e.g. RDRP and computer assisted development of new catalysts and materials, and applies ab initio techniques systematically both in radical and catalytic processes.Guy B. MarinGuy B. Marin is a full professor in Chemical Reaction Engineering at Ghent University and director of the LCT. He received his chemical engineering degree from Ghent University in 1976 where he also obtained his PhD in 1980. He previously held a Fulbright fellowship at Stanford University and Catalytica Associates (USA). The investigation of chemical kinetics, aimed at the modelling and design of chemical processes and products all the way from molecule up to full scale, constitutes the core of his research.
Introduction
Polymeric materials are indispensable in everyday life, as can be derived from the numerous application sectors in which they play a dominant role (e.g. the construction, clothing and pharmaceutical sector).1 Their great success can be attributed to the inherent flexibility of polymerization processes to allow for the industrial synthesis of different product grades, including a wide range of hydrophilic and hydrophobic (co)monomers which can be polymerized with different polymerization techniques (e.g. coordination,2 condensation,3 ionic,4 and radical polymerization5) under both homogeneous (e.g. bulk/solution polymerization) and heterogeneous (e.g. emulsion/suspension polymerization) conditions.6
Further intensification of polymerization processes is although required, taking into account the continuous desire to minimize the overall production costs,7 to limit environmental pollution during the polymer synthesis step,8 and to replace the traditional oil-based monomers by the renewable ones.9 Hence, in the last few decades, polymer chemists, physicists and reaction engineers have strongly interacted to optimize existing polymerization processes, resulting in the identification and application of more energy-efficient and environmentally friendly synthetic protocols. In parallel, the synthesis of advanced functional polymers targeting novel applications, such as high-performance coatings, cosmetics, and encapsulants for active ingredients, has been intensively explored. For these high-tech applications, it is crucial that the microstructure of each chain closely matches with a targeted or ideal one so that enhanced supramolecular characteristics result. A major breakthrough was realized by the development of polymerization techniques which aim at a detailed tailoring of the microstructure of individual polymer molecules during their growth.10–16 This implies not only a control over the macromolecular architecture but also over the number and type of monomer units incorporated, with even the regulated build-in of predefined monomer sequences along each polymer chain.
Well-defined block, gradient, graft and star copolymers emerged specifically from the development of so-called reversible deactivation or controlled radical polymerization (RDRP/CRP) techniques17–24 and with the improvement of polymer (post)modifications via “click” chemistry, i.e. polymer–polymer conjugation.25–28 In RDRP, (macro)radicals can be temporarily deactivated due to the presence of a mediating agent X (e.g. a nitroxide), as illustrated in Fig. 1.29 Upon deactivation end-group functionality (EGF; X) is incorporated into the polymer chains and, for a fast CRP initiation, a polymer characterized by a low dispersity (<1.3) is obtained.
 Fig. 1  Principle of RDRP, considering nitroxide mediated polymerization (NMP) as technique; X: functionality. 
For sufficiently high RDRP deactivation rates and reasonable targeted chain lengths (TCLs < 1000), EGF is preserved, allowing further chemical modification.30 Within the limits, the design capabilities of living polymerization (LP)31 can be obtained but under less stringent reaction conditions, implying a higher tolerance toward water and impurities and the possibility to select more convenient polymerization temperatures.32 More complex macromolecular topologies can even be obtained in case a multifunctional RDRP initiator or a precursor polymer backbone is used.33
Alternatively, the inherent versatility of so-called “click” chemistry techniques conforms with the high synthetic demands for well-defined macromolecular architectures.34–36 Their high yield, orthogonality, robustness and compatibility with sensitive functional groups and atmospheric contaminants provide an excellent synthetic platform to meet the requirements of the increased sophistication in the structure and composition of macromolecular (bio)systems.26,37,38Via discrete modular transformations block copolymers, stars, dendrimers, uniform networks and functionalized surfaces (cf.Fig. 2) are readily accessed, often in a synergetic combination with RDRP techniques to introduce the desired functionality.39,40 Initially, copper(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition reactions arose as the benchmark coupling technique, leading to the synthesis of unprecedented macromolecular architectures.41–43 However, the strive for biocompatibility has caused a shift towards metal-free “click” reactions44–46 such as thiol–ene/yne47–49 and Diels–Alder reactions.50,51 Currently, a vast diversity of “click”-inspired techniques is available to match the needs of the synthetic (bio)chemist.27,52
 Fig. 2  Potential of “click” chemistry as an efficient tool for dendrimer formation (top left), polymer–polymer conjugation (top right) and surface modification (bottom). 
It should be stressed that to allow for further optimization and design of polymerization processes and to fully exploit the potential of LP, RDRP and “click” chemistry techniques it is of paramount importance to obtain (i) a thorough understanding of the impact of the chemical structure of the reactants on the occurring chemistry; (ii) a clear notion of the effect of reaction conditions on the evolution of the polymer microstructure; and (iii) a detailed insight into the effect of the polymer microstructure on the macroscopic properties and processability. For example, the chain length distribution (CLD) and the type and amount of branches for poly(ethylene) (PE) strongly determine the polymer strength and rheological behaviour.53 Long PE chains are needed for polymer strength while a sufficiently high amount of long chain branches (LCBs) leads to a lower power consumption in extrusion processes and a lower neck-in for PE based coating applications.54 Another example relates to the presence of microstructural defects for conjugated polymers, which exhibit opto-electronic properties.55–57 Structural defects interrupt the conjugation and are known to affect the device performance. Hence, minimizing the formation of defects during synthesis is important for the fabrication of organic solar cells and light emitting diodes.58–60 Another example is the negative impact of structural defects on the thermal stability of poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) made by conventional free radical polymerization (FRP).61–63 The PVC stability is negatively affected by the presence of internal allylic and tertiary chlorine groups, which are formed via specific secondary reactions.64 For the improvement of PVC materials, process conditions that prohibit the occurrence of these side reactions should thus be identified. Similarly, the success of a LP/RDRP or “click” chemistry technique is strongly determined by its capability to suppress side reactions. For example, Derboven et al.65 demonstrated that thiol–ene coupling cannot be seen as a true example of “click” chemistry, since under polymer–polymer conjugation reaction conditions too many side reactions take place, in agreement with earlier postulations of Koo et al.66
It can be expected that with the recent advent of more powerful modelling and experimental techniques the identification of optimal synthesis protocols for precision design will become more straightforward, ultimately leading to the more intense industrial application of LP/RDRP and “click” chemistry. From a computational point of view, a significant step forward has been made with microkinetic model developments aiming at the explicit representation of the microstructure of individual macromolecules,67–69 including the detailed simulation of all compositional and topological characteristics for each chain. Depending on the monomer sequences a block, alternating, random or gradient copolymer chain may result and different overall properties can therefore be obtained, highlighting the complexity of macromolecular engineering. Gradient copolymer chains possess for instance a broad glass transition temperature range and, hence, are better candidates for damping and shock absorbing materials than other types of copolymers with the same overall copolymer composition.70 In particular, Van Steenberge et al.67 developed, based on the studies of Szymanski71 and of Wang and Broadbelt,72 kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) modelling tools to visualize all monomer sequences for linear macrospecies by efficiently storing the propagation events in a matrix format. In a subsequent step, the unambiguous evaluation of the block and gradient quality of copolymers could be performed, focusing on atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), one of the most important RDRP techniques.67,73–76 This was realized via the introduction of respectively a gradient and block deviation index, which can be seen as novel polymer properties next to the conventional number/mass average chain length (xn/m) and the dispersity. For indices close to zero the deviation with the ideal targeted structure is almost absent and the quality of the polymer products can be rated as excellent, facilitating the comparison of different synthetic approaches. Shortly afterwards, Ali Parsa et al.77 further demonstrated the necessity to study the synthesis of functional polymers for each individual macrospecies. These authors theoretically highlighted that the industrial synthesis of dispersants by radical copolymerization involving functional comonomers is far from perfect on an individual molecule basis, despite that the overall copolymer composition meets the desired specifications. Hence, the efficiency of the polymer product can still be tremendously improved in case a more regulated build-in of the functional monomer unit would be achieved.
Besides this significant progress in the modelling research field, experimentalists have also improved their analytical techniques.78–83 For instance, the improvement of two-dimensional chromatography81,84,85 allows now the retrieval of reliable structural information on two levels, i.e. chain length and overall chemical composition or functionality. Interestingly, recent experimental efforts have led to a better visualization of individual macromolecules bridging the gap with the aforementioned advanced computer simulations. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been specifically used to visualize RDRP bottlebrushes starting from a gradient backbone, allowing an indirect assessment of the gradient quality based on the average height profile of these bottlebrushes.86 AFM measurements also allowed the confirmation of the reduced amount of short chain branches (SCBs)87 under well-chosen RDRP conditions compared to conventional FRP conditions, in agreement with kinetic modelling88–90 and nuclear magnetic resonance results.91,92 Very recently Vandenbergh and Junkers combined electrospray ionization-mass spectroscopy with flow chemistry to identify the wide spectrum of end-groups and product types encountered during polymer synthesis and modification.93,94 This dedicated experimental approach was also successfully applied to optimize monomer sequence control, following single unit monomer insertion (SUMI).95
In addition to the advances made in microkinetic modelling and experimental characterization, the accuracy of quantum chemical calculations to retrieve intrinsic rate coefficients and to define structure–reactivity relationships has increased significantly.96–99 For example, Lin et al.96 highlighted the utility of ab initio calculations to obtain detailed mechanistic insight into the activation/deactivation process in reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization, an important RDRP technique.100–103 Similarly, ab initio calculations have been used to retrieve insight into the reaction mechanism of polymer–polymer conjugation.104–106 Moreover, Lin et al.107 performed ab initio calculations to determine linear free energy relationships for bond dissociation free energies (BDFEs) for a broad range of RDRP initiators/mediating agents.107 These BDFE relationships can be used to determine the appropriate mediating chemical structure for a given monomer environment and to assess the most efficient order of monomers for the synthesis of block copolymers. Alternatively, dedicated experimental techniques (e.g. pulsed laser polymerization108) can be used to study the effect of the chemical structure on the reactivity. In particular, attention can be focused on the relevance of chain length dependency for a correct description of the polymerization kinetics. It should however be stressed that this dependency can be apparent, as is the case of termination reactions in radical polymerization, requiring specific measurements under well-defined conditions.109–111
To further highlight and enhance the important interaction between experimental and modelling activities for next-generation polymer synthesis, in this contribution, a concise review is presented on the different microkinetic modelling techniques to simulate and design the polymer microstructure. The discussion is restricted to homogeneous media and aims at a broad audience including both researchers from academia and industry active in the field of polymer chemistry and polymer reaction engineering. Attention is particularly focused on the selection of the most suited reactants and reaction conditions for a targeted macromolecular architecture.
Along the review the complexity of the model approaches is increased, starting from univariate descriptions focusing only on the variation of the chain length, switching subsequently to multivariate descriptions in which additional characteristics (e.g. the overall copolymer composition and branching amount) are also tracked, and ending with the explicit simulation of the detailed microstructure of individual linear or branched macromolecules. It is demonstrated that microkinetic modelling is a valuable and important tool to map efficiently the complete spectrum of synthetic possibilities, provided that the appropriate modelling approach, i.e. univariate, multivariate or explicit, is selected with respect to the required level of microstructural information and/or anticipated experimental resolution.
For each of the three approaches covered, the discussion is started by an elaboration of the key advantages and main computational limitations or challenges. Next, the potential of the considered approach for model-based design is highlighted by several literature examples complemented by a more in-depth case study on batch solution activators regenerated by electron transfer radical (ARGET) ATRP, considering n-butyl methacrylate (BMA) and n-butyl acrylate (BA) as comonomers, anisole as a solvent and ethyl 2-bromo isobutyrate (EBiB) as an ATRP initiator. The corresponding model including its intrinsic kinetic and diffusion parameters is the same as the one used by the authors for the recent work of Payne et al.112,113
The principle of the ARGET ATRP technique is presented in Fig. 3.114–116 Initially, the redox reaction between the reducing agent (RA) and the oxygen-insensitive deactivator (CuIIX2/L; X: halogen atom; L: ligand) species (kred) generates activator species (CuIX/L), which can create ATRP initiator radicals (R0) via activation of the ATRP initiator (R0X; ka). These R0 species can take up the monomer (M; kp) until they are quickly deactivated (kda) into dormant species (RiX; i: chain length). Additional activation–growth–deactivation cycles take place until the TCL, i.e. the initial molar ratio of M to R0X or targeted degree of polymerization, is reached at complete monomer depletion. Importantly, activator species can be regenerated during this regulated growth by further reduction of the deactivator via the remaining reducing agent species to compensate for their loss to the deactivator species formed by inevitable termination reactions.
 Fig. 3  Principle of ARGET ATRP, the selected technique for the complementary case studies to illustrate the potential of model-guided design; ka,da,p,red,t: rate coefficients for activation, deactivation, propagation, reduction, termination; initial compounds are highlighted (with i = 0 for RiX; ATRP initiator). 
Clearly, the success of ARGET ATRP is influenced by many factors such as the ATRP initiator, catalyst and reducing agent chemical structure, the initial concentrations and the polymerization temperature, explaining why this polymerization technique was chosen for the complementary case studies to highlight the potential of model-based design for each of the three modelling approaches covered below.
Univariate design of polymer microstructure
To perform highly accurate model-based design of the polymer microstructure the growth of each individual macromolecule has to be ideally followed during the synthesis. This implies tracking of the number of monomer units, the different monomer sequences, the branching points and lengths, and the functional groups for each macrospecies formed. Such a detailed description implies unfortunately a very high computational cost, explaining the original development of more simplified microkinetic models in which only a part of the polymer microstructure is simulated.
In the simplest situation, a univariate description is selected which corresponds in practice to the consideration of the chain length as the only variate in the microkinetic model.117–134 In many cases, this univariate approach is even limited to the calculation of the average chain lengths of the CLD (e.g. xn and xm). Despite its low level of microstructural detail, this on averages based univariate approach is still popular for two reasons. Firstly, a relatively straightforward numerical method, i.e. the so-called method of moments,135–137 is available to calculate the averages and, secondly, certain polymer properties such as the dynamic viscosity and elasticity can be obtained via empirical correlations in which these averages are the main parameters.121,138
For RDRP processes, average chain length simulations have been mainly applied under batch conditions to better grasp the relevance of the activation/deactivation reactivity for overall microstructural control. For example, Chauvin et al.139 highlighted the pivotal role of the activation/deactivation reactivity (ka/da) in batch NMP. In agreement with the pioneering semi-analytical work of Fischer, different (ka, kda) regions could be identified. Some regions allow only an excellent control over chain length or livingness, whereas other regions guarantee control over both or correspond to no control at all.
It should be emphasized that average chain length characteristics such as xn and xm only reflect general trends, which can be biased for highly dynamic (post)polymerization processes. This is particularly true if the observed CLD is a superposition of individual CLDs stemming from different active centres (e.g. different radical types or catalyst sites).1 Hence, from an application point of view it is strongly desired to simulate the entire CLD instead of only its averages. Note that a qualitative comparison with the experimental chain length data is not always directly possible, taking into account experimental constraints with respect to calibration and CLD broadening during analysis.53,140
To calculate the entire CLD both deterministic and stochastic methods have been developed. Importantly, the aforementioned averages can always be retrieved upon post-processing of these dedicated CLD simulations. In the deterministic methods, differential equations are integrated to describe the temporal evolution of the concentration of each species in the reaction mixture. On the other hand, in the stochastic methods, reaction events and times are sampled, based on the instantaneous reaction rates and probabilities, following typically the kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) algorithm as developed by Gillespie.141,142
A major deterministic method for CLD calculations is the h-p Galerkin method, as implemented in the commercial software package Predici.143 For example, Gigmes et al.144 theoretically demonstrated the negative impact of side reactions such as chain transfer to solvent and disproportionation on the CLD evolution. Similarly, Bentein et al.136 showed that in batch NMP of styrene at 396 K fronting of the CLD occurs due to chain transfer to a dimer, consistent with measurements of Lutz et al.145 and Fierens et al.146 and the theoretical analysis of Woloszyn et al.126 on radical polymerization of styrene in general. In addition, the synthesis of more advanced macromolecular architectures has been studied. For example, Chaffey-Millar et al.147 simulated with Predici the arm growth of star polymers during RAFT polymerization, again with styrene as the reference monomer. Post-processing was applied to construct the CLD of the star polymer and to study the relevance of undesired termination reactions, including star–star coupling.
Alternatively, several research groups have applied univariate kMC simulations to simulate CLDs, to fundamentally understand polymerization kinetics and to improve the control over the polymer microstructure. For more details on the technical implementation, the reader is referred to the following references.59,67,68,71,148–157 In particular, Chaffey-Millar et al.156 demonstrated that kMC models are ideally suited in case multiple chain length dependent populations need to be tracked, as is for instance the case in copolymerization processes in which macrospecies with different terminal units need to be distinguished. These authors also showed that the selection of the most appropriate kMC algorithm significantly reduces the computational costs. A fast screening of different combinations of reactant concentrations and reactivities can therefore be obtained, even for very complex reaction schemes including many side reactions.
This strength of the kMC method to select the most suitable reactants for complex reaction schemes is further highlighted in Fig. 4, in which univariate kMC simulation results are presented for a first complementary case study on batch solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA, aiming at an overall conversion Xm of 0.75. In this figure, the effect of the activation and deactivation reactivity of the ATRP catalyst on the main ARGET ATRP characteristics is theoretically displayed for the following fixed initial conditions: 343 K; [M]0:[EBiB]0 = 50; [BA]0:[BMA]0 = 0.4; 30 m% anisole; 50 ppm (with respect to monomer) deactivator; and 500 ppm reducing agent.
 Fig. 4  Complementary univariate kinetic Monte Carlo case study: importance of (de)activation reactivity for a successful batch solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA; initial conditions: 343 K; [M]0:[EBiB]0 = 50; [BA]0:[BMA]0 = 0.4; 30 m% anisole; 50 ppm deactivator; 500 ppm reducing agent; white circles: reference catalyst from Payne et al.112,113 RA: reducing agent; Xm: overall conversion (aim: 0.75); EGF: end-group functionality; xn: number average chain length; f: final. 
For visualization purposes, the plot is restricted to the theoretical variation of the (de)activation reactivity of macrospecies with a terminal BMA unit (k(d)a,BMA). Typical ranges are considered for both reactivities to capture as good as possible the currently applied ATRP catalysts and those that could be realistically achieved by further catalyst design.73,96,158,159 For simplicity, diffusional limitations on the activation/deactivation process are neglected, which is an acceptable assumption in particular for the less active virtual catalyst candidates. It should however be stressed that in the kMC simulations, for consistency reasons, the (de)activation reactivity for the ATRP initiator species (k(d)a,0), the (de)activation reactivity for the macrospecies with a terminal BA unit (k(d)a,BA) and the reducing reactivity (kred) also vary upon the alternation of k(d)a,BMA. For simplicity and bearing in mind the illustrative nature of these simulations, fixed reactivity ratios are considered that are taken from the work of Payne et al.112,113 for the reference catalyst Cu(II)Br2/TPMA (TPMA: tris[(2-pyridyl)methyl]amine). This simulation strategy thus inherently reflects a higher regeneration reactivity (kred) for an ATRP catalyst with a higher deactivation reactivity (kda). For the sake of comparison, the results for the reference catalyst (ka,MMA = 2.4 × 102 L mol−1 s−1 and kda,MMA = 1.2 × 107 L mol−1 s−1) are represented by the white circles in Fig. 4 and are fully consistent with the work of Payne et al.112,113
In agreement with literature reports5,32,73 on RDRP in general, it follows that the (de)activation reactivity has a tremendous impact on the overall performance. Strong colour gradients (blue: good; green: reasonable; red: bad) are obtained which can vary in intensity and variation angle per subplot, implying that compromises need to be made with respect to the desired objectives. For example, very high EGF and very low dispersity values cannot be simultaneously reached, since no overlapping blue regions can be identified in Fig. 4d and f. On the other hand, in most cases industrially relevant polymerization times do result (Fig. 4a; green region; <ca. 10 hours, taking into account the high added value of the polymer product). A close inspection of Fig. 4c shows that for the range of virtual catalyst candidates with very high activation and deactivation reactivities (upper right red region) the targeted Xm of 0.75 cannot be achieved, which is mainly related to the complete consumption of the reducing agent (Fig. 4b). Under such conditions already from low Xm onwards activator regeneration is impossible, leading to a stagnation of the polymerization rate. Furthermore, in combination with Fig. 4f it follows that for all virtual catalyst candidates, a slow ATRP initiation is obtained. Clearly, xn values much higher than the targeted ones, i.e. 50 multiplied by Xm, are always obtained, indicative of the presence of ATRP initiator species even at high Xm. The latter observation thus demonstrates the limitations of the RDRP system under investigation. Overall it can be concluded that the reference catalyst (white circles) is well-chosen, since relatively low dispersity values and relatively high EGF values are obtained within realistic polymerization times and with a limited disturbance of slow ATRP initiation.
Hence, it is clear that grid simulations as presented in Fig. 4 are a valuable tool to explore in silico the potential and limitations of a given polymerization technique and to support future design of RDRP mediating agents, aiming at the optimal trade-off between control over chain length, functionality and polymerization time. Similarly, for a given RDRP mediating agent, grid simulations can be performed with reaction conditions such as the temperature and the initial concentrations as variables. Again the strength is a fast a priori screening of a broad range of conditions, allowing a complete mapping for given constraints (e.g. a given temperature or TCL range). For example, Zhong and Matyjaszewski160 studied the effect of TCL on the livingness in batch ATRP systems for different monomer types. Toloza Porras et al.69 performed similar grid simulations, adding the catalyst concentration as a variable. Consequently, batch ATRP systems could be evaluated taking into account the constraint of a maximally allowed catalyst molar amount, which is important from an industrial or environmental point of view.161,162
More recently, univariate simulations have also been applied to identify optimal dynamic RDRP conditions, such as the selection of the ideal fed-batch addition76,139,163,164 or temperature programme, leading to better polymer properties compared to the classical batch and isothermal conditions, as discussed above. For instance, Wang et al.163 determined optimal monomer feed strategies to synthesize improved gradient copolymers via RAFT polymerization, whereas Chauvin et al.139 indicated the potential of a heating ramp at low conversions for an improved NMP initiation.
Very recently, Fierens et al.164 used the concept of Pareto-optimal fronts to evaluate the full potential of a given RDRP system. For a given TCL, an efficient and fast screening of a wide but predefined range of dynamic reaction conditions allowed to rank these conditions for ARGET ATRP and NMP, according to the minimization of a set of user-defined characteristics (e.g. polymerization time, loss of functionality and dispersity). The resulting Pareto-optimal front can be seen as the border line between characteristics that can be jointly achieved and those that are impossible to reach in the investigated domain of polymerization conditions. For example, in Fig. 5 the grey zone cannot be achieved with NMP of styrene (TCL = 100; 120 °C; Xm: 0.75) as a further decrease in the dispersity is always accompanied by a penalty on the polymerization time.
 Fig. 5  Example of a Pareto-optimal front to map the full potential of a RDRP technique; generated with the univariate deterministic model developed by Fierens et al.;164 selected RDRP technique: nitroxide mediated polymerization (NMP); monomer: styrene; NMP initiator: N-(2-methyl-2-propyl)-N-(1-diethylphosphono-2,2-dimethylpropyl)-N-oxyl; 120 °C; targeted chain length: 1000; overall conversion Xm of 0.75; each point on the Pareto-optimal front corresponds to a well-defined dynamic monomer fed-batch addition programme. For comparison, the batch case is also presented. 
Next to RDRP, albeit less intensively, for ionic LP univariate kinetic models have also been developed with main applicability in the synthetic rubber industry. Deterministic as well as stochastic modelling techniques have been applied in combination with extensive experimental kinetic studies to obtain improved mechanistic insights, both at the laboratory and industrial scale.165–175 Regression analysis was performed to retrieve the key rate coefficients and Arrhenius parameters, allowing a clear mapping of the effect of the monomer type and its substituents on the overall performance. For example, Wiesbrock et al.176 highlighted the importance of the selection of the correct substituent for the fast and controlled cationic ring opening polymerization (CROP) of 2-oxazolines via a classification of the propagation reactivities.
The structural specificity of “click” chemistry techniques has also been explored theoretically. Despite a plethora of literature examples describing their use in a wide range of application fields, only a few batch modelling studies have been currently performed. The main contribution in this field has been made by Bowman and co-workers, who used the classical method of moments to simulate and understand thiol–ene/yne photopolymerizations.177–185 In particular, their kinetic investigations address the formation of polymer networks in relation to the prediction of mechanical properties such as the glass transition temperature, the rubbery modulus, stress relaxation, and shrinkage stress.177,180,186 More recent kinetic studies by Northrop and co-workers104,106 and Derboven et al.65 also focused on the modelling of thiol–ene/yne chemistry. With the aid of ab initio calculations Northrop and co-workers104 determined reactivity ratios for several ene functionalities and elucidated the underlying mechanism for the experimentally observed orthogonality between thiol–Michael and radical thiol–ene/yne reactions involving maleimides.106 On the other hand, Derboven et al. performed a microkinetic modeling study for radical thiol–ene chemistry to explain its inherent constraints when moving from small molecule reactions toward polymer–polymer conjugation.65 Due to solubility limits of the latter, different kinetics are obtained with a higher relevance of side reactions, explaining the lower recorded coupling efficiencies. Moreover, the effect of diffusional limitations could be ruled out upon model analysis. The previous two examples clearly illustrate the strength of theoretical modelling tools to formulate detailed answers to unresolved questions as obtained during experimental screening.
Finally, the realization of chemical reactions in continuous flow is another recent trend in synthetic polymer chemistry187,188 for which proof of concept by computer simulations can be a valuable tool to optimize and/or screen different reactor configurations.128,189,190 Although a continuous operation has already been successfully applied for many chemical processes, the transition from batch to continuous is still challenging for the more advanced synthesis approaches as covered in this review. Apart from the intrinsic kinetics and the impact of diffusional limitations, it is important to realize that also the reactor geometry affects the final polymer microstructure. In particular, the transition towards continuous flow at lab scale via microreactor technology (MRT) has been shown to be beneficial for a great span of advanced polymerization reactions, typically in solution.188,191–194 For example, Cortese et al.189 performed detailed simulations of the flow behavior in a microreactor for anionic polymerization of styrene. These authors demonstrated that the low observed dispersities are due to a fully segregated flow in the microreactor. Moreover, very recently the potential of MRT for macromolecular design with solution RAFT polymerization of BA was evaluated by Derboven et al.195 Following a univariate modeling approach combined with experimental data, the potential of microreactors for the improved control over the branching level and the RAFT chain transfer agent functionality was illustrated, considering a rigorous implementation of the acrylate specific intra- and intermolecular transfer reactions. The better microstructural control is directly related to the isothermicity as achievable under microflow conditions. In contrast, under batch conditions non-isothermicity is measured, leading to a much higher loss of EGF via β-scission reactions, prohibiting the synthesis of well-defined complex molecular architectures, consisting of polyacrylate segments.
Multivariate design of polymer microstructure
For many polymerization processes, it does not suffice to restrict model-based design to polymer characteristics which are solely related to one variate, namely the chain length. In particular, in copolymerization processes, it is strongly desirable to have additional information on the comonomer incorporation. In the simplest case involving two comonomers A1 and A2, this compositional information is limited to the overall copolymer composition F1, which is defined as the average amount of A1 units incorporated in all copolymer chains. This overall copolymer composition F1 is related to the corresponding instantaneous overall copolymer composition F1,inst, which reflects the monomer incorporation kinetics at a certain feed composition. The latter can be approximated by the well-known Mayo–Lewis equation:1,196 (1)in which f1 is the molar fraction of A1 in the feed and r1 and r2 are the corresponding monomer reactivity ratios, which are defined based on the monomer unit with the reactive centre, i.e. the terminal monomer unit. For completeness it is mentioned here that penultimate effects for the intrinsic propagation reactivities can also influence F1. In case such effects are relevant eqn (1) needs to be extended, including monomer reactivity ratios which are defined based on the last two monomer units with respect to the radical centre.1
It has been indicated that in RDRP the conversion dependency of F1 changes compared to conventional FRP. For example, Feldermann et al.197 highlighted that F1 can alter in RAFT polymerization compared to the conventional FRP process. In particular, these authors demonstrated that exchange reactions involving the small RAFT chain transfer agent species influence F1 and, hence, reliable rate coefficients for these steps are needed to accurately optimize the RAFT copolymer characteristics. In addition, for NMP, Zapata et al.198 highlighted the validity of the Mayo–Lewis equation, except at very low conversions at which no pseudo-equilibrium with respect to activation/deactivation has yet been reached.
It should be stressed that eqn (1) or its extended versions cannot be used to obtain any indication to which copolymer chains the A1 units belong or to retrieve a specification of their actual position in the chains, complicating a clear mapping between the polymer microstructure and the end-use properties. This can be partially resolved by so-called bivariate microkinetic modelling approaches which allow the simulation of the average copolymer composition per chain length present.199–202 The corresponding distribution is denoted as a copolymer composition-CLD (CoC-CLD). In general, a chemical composition-CLD (CC-CLD) can be calculated, in which CC can refer to for instance the amount of short/long chain branches and unsaturations or thus a copolymer composition.
For the CoC-CLD, an important synthetic aspect is the capability to accurately know and control the effect of polymerization conditions on its evolution. To ensure a high quality of the copolymer product either a targeted CoC-CLD has to be obtained throughout the entire synthesis with a limited contribution of the off-spec polymeric material (<3%) or instead a well-defined path has to be followed by this bivariate distribution with increasing Xm.1 To ensure such a predefined CoC-CLD evolution, it is crucial that a bivariate kinetic model is available in which a complete reaction scheme is combined with an accurate description of the effect of diffusional limitations on the reactions involved. For example, both under FRP and RDRP conditions bivariate simulations showed that diffusional limitations on termination result in more narrow CoC-CLDs.202 The gel-effect caused by diffusional limitations on termination leads to the formation of longer polymer chains and, hence, in agreement with the pioneering work of Stockmayer,203 structural deviations in the copolymer composition can be averaged out more easily.
The impact of the RDRP mediating reactivity on the CoC-CLD is illustrated in Fig. 6 by a second complementary case study, focusing again on the solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA under identical initial conditions as shown in Fig. 4. For Xm equal to 0.6, in the subplot b of Fig. 6, the CoC-CLD for the reference catalyst Cu(II)Br2/TPMA is provided, whereas in subplots a and c the theoretical CoC-CLD is depicted if kda,BMA is respectively decreased and increased by a factor of 10, keeping for simplicity the other intrinsic rate coefficients constant. It can be seen that for a faster deactivation a more narrow and thus better shaped CoC-CLD is obtained. Only for a sufficiently high deactivation reactivity the synthesis of the too long polymer chains can be minimized, as can be clearly deduced from the larger dark blue region shown in Fig. 6a–c.
 Fig. 6  Complementary bivariate kinetic Monte Carlo case study: importance of the deactivation reactivity for the copolymer composition-chain length distribution (CoC-CLD) in solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA using bivariate kinetic Monte Carlo simulations; colour scale: number fractions; initial conditions: caption of Fig. 4; (b) reference catalyst from Payne et al.112,113 (a) and (c/d) kda,BMA respectively 10 times lower and higher; F1: overall copolymer composition; i: chain length. 
It can thus be again deduced that the appropriate mediating agent needs to be selected to obtain a targeted degree of control. A close inspection of Fig. 4d, which is the 3D representation of Fig. 4c, shows however that even for the fastest deactivation still no perfect control over the polymer microstructure is obtained. Clearly, several distinct purple peaks can be identified in the upper right region. These peaks relate to the presence of oligomeric species, which are formed due to a slow ATRP initiation, in agreement with previous literature reports.112,204 Note that the bivariate simulations can provide the complete spectrum of absolute contributions, including those of the non-abundant species without any significant increase in computational time compared to a univariate approach. In contrast, measurements typically allow one only to obtain relative bivariate data using advanced and intensive 2D-chromatography.
Overall it can be concluded that bivariate simulations are a powerful tool to understand specifically the copolymerization processes with a higher level of macromolecular structural detail compared to univariate approaches. On the other hand, in case information not only on the copolymer composition but also on other microstructural characteristics is needed a bivariate modelling approach does not offer enough detail.205–207 For complex microstructures such as gradient copolymers, (hyper)branched polymers, polymer brushes, and polymer networks, a larger number of variates is needed, i.e. a multivariate approach has to be followed. In particular, for gradient copolymers not only the chain length, but also the local segment length or local copolymer composition have to be included as additional variates.
For example, Reddy Regatte et al.208 developed in silico copolymerization protocols for targeted equal amounts of dyads, triads, and tetrads for FRP of methyl acrylate and methyl methacrylate in which for a given number average molar mass and initial initiator concentration the required Xm and initial feed composition are predicted. Very recently, Kryven and Iedema209 demonstrated the strength of multivariate simulations via the detailed deterministic simulation of FRP of acetonitrile and styrene. The formation of a bimodal CLD for certain asymmetric feed compositions could be linked to a dominant formation of alternating copolymer molecules at short polymerization times and to the presence of pure polyacrylonitrile polymer molecules at longer polymerization times. In the transition stage, gradient copolymer molecules are produced with a broad sequence distribution and a high number of sequences. Importantly, it has been indicated that these gradient chains can significantly influence the overall polymer properties, again highlighting the necessity of the detailed simulation of compositional characteristics.
It should however be stressed that multivariate methods become memory inefficient if the number of variates and/or their maximal value become too large, explaining the very recent research efforts to develop numerical methods in which the microstructure of individual polymer chains is tracked throughout the whole polymerization, as explained in the next section.
Explicit design of each individual macromolecule
In case the explicit simulation of the microstructure of individual macrospecies is envisaged, the reaction event history of these species has to be tracked during the polymerization, taking into account the possible presence of multiple reactive centres per macrospecies. Pioneering work in this respect was performed by Meimaroglou et al.,210 who developed a stochastic algorithm to calculate the microstructure of highly branched chains. For example, in this algorithm, the chain in Fig. 7 is stored in vector notation as [16,6,3,4,2,3,8,3,4], allowing an easy identification of the locations and lengths of all branches. Each time a reaction takes place involving this macrospecies the vector has to be updated and by a simple decoding the evolution of the microstructure can be visualized per chain.
 Fig. 7  Representation of a highly branched chain, as introduced by Meimaroglou et al.210 
These authors successfully applied their algorithm to showcase that the number and length of LCBs in the production of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) can be controlled by the temperature.211 In addition, based on this representation of the LDPE microstructure, the mean radius of gyration and the branching factor were calculated using a random-walk molecular simulator.211 This post-processing of microstructural data of individual chains links the polymer microstructure at the synthetic chemistry level to the polymer dynamics at the physical chemistry level, a unique advantage of these explicit simulation tools.
The potential of the individual tracking of macromolecules can also be illustrated by its possibility to track monomer sequences. For example, Wang and Broadbelt212 calculated the segment length distribution in NMP gradient copolymers. A copolymer chain fragment “AABBBBABB” was stored in the vector notation [2,4,1,2]. Such an approach for the calculation of the segment lengths for each position on the chain and for every chain length, allows one to obtain the number average segment lengths and segment dispersities as a function of Xm. This example thus illustrates that with explicit approaches the information accessible by univariate and multivariate approaches can always be obtained, demonstrating their high flexibility toward a targeted objective for subsequent model-based design.
Moreover, based on these explicit representations additional properties can be defined to facilitate the comparison of different polymer architectures with respect to their macroscopic behaviour and to support the synthesis of novel functional polymeric materials. For example, Van Steenberge et al.67 introduced the gradient deviation index (<GD>) to quantify the linear gradient quality of copolymers made by batch RDRP. These authors developed an advanced Gillespie algorithm to visualize the monomer sequences along each individual chain of a representative polymer sample (e.g.Fig. 5a). Such a representative polymer sample consists of a sufficiently high number of macrospecies so that the correct average properties are obtained. In a next step, a comparison per chain with the corresponding ideal chain is made, which in this case is a perfect linear gradient chain (see chains in Fig. 8b). The individual deviations per chain are averaged and normalized, allowing a unique classification in which a zero <GD> implies a perfect match and in which a <GD> of 1 is a complete mismatch, being the worst case scenario of a homopolymer.
 Fig. 8  (a) Typical explicit visualization of the monomer sequences of a representative number of chains in a RDRP process aiming at linear gradient copolymers, using the kMC model strategy as developed by Van Steenberge et al.67 (b) corresponding targeted polymer, i.e. a perfect linear gradient copolymer. 
Very recently, the explicit visualization of monomer sequences as depicted in Fig. 8 has also been applied for continuous processes. For example, based on the kMC developments of Van Steenberge et al.,68 Lemos et al.68 studied the NMP synthesis of gradient polymers in tubular and continuous stirred tank reactors and highlighted that the existence of a residence time distribution can result in bimodal CLDs and compositional drift. Model-guided design is again requested to identify the optimal operation conditions and thus to enhance the scale-up potential of RDRP processes in general.
In addition, recent research activities have focused on the combination of the explicit tracking of monomer sequences and branches. For example, in CROP of 2-oxazilines explicit kMC simulations were used to demonstrate that chain transfer and macropropagation leading to branching cannot be ignored.207 Simulations could be used to determine the average number of branches per chain, which is a tedious experimental task requiring dedicated deconvolution procedures. For illustration purposes, in Fig. 9, the typical outcome of such combined compositional and topological simulation is provided for a third complementary case study related to solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA. Post-processing is applied to depict the contribution of short chain branches (SCBs) for a limited set of polymerization chains randomly selected from a representative polymer sample. For simplicity, the effect of the nature of the penultimate and pen-penultimate monomer unit for the backbiting reactivity involving macrospecies with a BA terminal unit is ignored. In agreement with previous experimental and univariate modeling studies, a limited amount of SCBs is present under RDRP conditions.88,90,91,150,214 More SCBs can also be identified at the highest chain positions. These positions are only reached at high polymerization times at which the monomer concentrations are lower and backbiting is favoured, which is thus beneficial for branch formation.215
 Fig. 9  Complementary explicit case study on solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA: simulation of the detailed microstructure of copolymer chains at final conversion; generated based on previously reported model developments.67,69,113,213 
Overall it can be concluded based on the colour codes in Fig. 9 that the explicit modelling of the polymer microstructure allows the retrieval of information on all important structural aspects for each individual macrospecies. First of all, the presence of a red group at the end of a polymer chain indicates its living character whereas its absence implies a dead species, incapable of further controlled growth. Furthermore, the entire comonomer incorporation kinetics are captured by the yellow and green monomer units and the location of the SCBs can be easily identified. In general, more complex branched structures can also be represented by this explicit and generic modelling approach, clearly demonstrating the unique strength of this model approach for future polymer synthesis and modifications.
Conclusions
Model-based design of the polymer microstructure is a powerful tool to support the synthesis of well-defined macromolecules synthesized by different reaction mechanisms and techniques, including for instance living polymerization, reversible deactivation radical polymerization, and “click” chemistry techniques.
The strength of model-based design can be illustrated with basic univariate approaches, in which the key variate is the chain length per macrospecies type present. For a given polymerization system, a fast screening of the complete range of experimental conditions is possible, provided that accurate kinetic, thermodynamic and diffusion parameters are available. In addition, improved mechanistic insights can be obtained by combining experimental and modelling research activities. Ideally, the model parameters are first tuned based on a sufficiently large set of experimental data and in a next step the univariate microkinetic model can be used to confirm or refute hypotheses formulated during experimental screening. Model-based design can be subsequently performed and the outcome can be experimentally verified in an iterative process, highlighting the synergetic nature of experimental and theoretical research efforts.
For copolymerization processes, a particular benefit is obtained with bivariate approaches in which not only the chain length but also the overall copolymer composition is obtained in an absolute manner, facilitating the interpretation of experimental data. Moreover, the most advanced modelling approaches allow even the tracking of the reaction event history and the chain growth for each macrospecies formed within a representative polymer sample, including a characterization with respect to monomer sequences and branch locations and lengths, beyond current experimental capabilities. It can be expected that supported by further experimental characterization research developments these advanced simulations will be of paramount importance to better understand the effect of the synthesis conditions on the polymer microstructure and to fundamentally grasp the impact of the polymer microstructure and its defects on the final macroscopic and thus material properties.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Long Term Structural Methusalem Funding by the Flemish Government, the Interuniversity Attraction Poles Programme-Belgian State-Belgian Science Policy, and the Fund for Scientific Research Flanders (FWO; G.0065.13N). D.R.D acknowledges the FWO through a postdoctoral fellowship.
Notes and references

          J. M. Asua, Polymer Reaction Engineering, Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. B. P. Soares, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2001, 56, 4131–4153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Harshe, G. Storti, M. Morbidelli, S. Gelosa and D. Moscatelli, Macromol. React. Eng., 2007, 1, 611–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Szwarc, Adv. Polym. Sci., 1983, 49, 1–177 CrossRef .

          K. Matyjaszewski and T. P. Davis, Handbook of Radical Polymerization, Wiley-Interscience, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .

          T. Meyer and J. T. F. Keurentjes, Handbook of Polymer Reaction Engineering, Wiley, Weinheim,  2005 Search PubMed .
C. Kiparissides, P. Seferlis, G. Mourikas and A. J. Morris, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2002, 41, 6120–6131 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. DeSimone, Science, 2002, 297, 799–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Wanamaker, L. E. O'Leary, N. A. Lynd, M. A. Hillmyer and W. B. Tolman, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 3634–3640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matyjaszewski and J. H. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2921–2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Badi and J. F. Lutz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 3383–3390 RSC .
L. Barner, T. P. Davis, M. H. Stenzel and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 539–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Delaittre and B. Charleux, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2361–2367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Perrier, S. P. Armes, X. S. Wang, F. Malet and D. M. Haddleton, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 1696–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Perrier and P. Takolpuckdee, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 5347–5393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Zetterlund, Y. Kagawa and M. Okubo, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3747–3794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matyjaszewski and N. V. Tsarevsky, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 276–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Whittaker, C. N. Urbani and M. J. Monteiro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11360–11361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ferreira, J. Syrett, M. Whittaker, D. Haddleton, T. P. Davis and C. Boyer, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1671–1677 RSC .
J. Vandenbergh, T. D. Ogawa and T. Junkers, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 2366–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bussels, C. Bergman-Gottgens, J. Meuldijk and C. Koning, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 9299–9301 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Wang and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 7901–7910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kato, M. Kamigaito, M. Sawamoto and T. Higashimura, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 1721–1723 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Hutchison, P. F. Stark, C. J. Hawker and K. S. Anseth, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4789–4797 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Lutz, H. G. Borner and K. Weichenhan, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 6376–6383 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fournier, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1369–1380 RSC .
C. Barner-Kowollik, F. E. Du Prez, P. Espeel, C. J. Hawker, T. Junkers, H. Schlaad and W. Van Camp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 60–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Espeel, F. Goethals and F. E. Du Prez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1678–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nicolas, Y. Guillaneuf, C. Lefay, D. Bertin, D. Gigmes and B. Charleux, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 63–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goto and T. Fukuda, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2004, 29, 329–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. W. Webster, Science, 1991, 251, 887–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Barner-Kowollik, Handbook of RAFT Polymerization, Wiley, New York,  2008 Search PubMed .
C. Boyer, V. Bulmus, T. P. Davis, V. Ladmiral, J. Q. Liu and S. Perrier, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5402–5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Kolb, M. G. Finn and K. B. Sharpless, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2004–2021 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Qin, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2522–2544 RSC .
G. Delaittre, N. K. Guimard and C. Barner-Kowollik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1296–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Kolb and K. B. Sharpless, Drug Discovery Today, 2003, 8, 1128–1137 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hawker and K. L. Wooley, Science, 2005, 309, 1200–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Binder and R. Sachsenhofer, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 15–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Moses and A. D. Moorhouse, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1249–1262 RSC .
V. D. Bock, H. Hiemstra and J. H. van Maarseveen, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 51–68 Search PubMed .
J.-F. Lutz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1018–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, A. K. Feldman, A. K. Nugent, C. J. Hawker, A. Scheel, B. Voit, J. Pyun, J. M. J. Frechet, K. B. Sharpless and V. V. Fokin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3928–3932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Becer, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4900–4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Jewett and C. R. Bertozzi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1272–1279 RSC .
B. Sandmann, B. Happ, J. Vitz, R. M. Paulus, M. D. Hager, P. Burtscher, N. Moszner and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2014, 215, 1603–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Hoyle and C. N. Bowman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1540–1573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Hoyle, A. B. Lowe and C. N. Bowman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1355–1387 RSC .
M. J. Kade, D. J. Burke and C. J. Hawker, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 743–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Inglis, S. Sinnwell, T. P. Davis, C. Barner-Kowollik and M. H. Stenzel, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 4120–4126 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Tasdelen, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2133–2145 RSC .
P. Espeel and F. E. Du Prez, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2–14 CrossRef CAS .

          L. H. Sperling, Introduction to Physical Polymer
Science,  2006 Search PubMed .

          Z. Tadmor and G. G. Costas, Principles of Polymer Processing, Wiley,  2006 Search PubMed .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burn and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Scherf and E. J. W. List, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 477–487 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zaquen, J. Vandenbergh, M. Schneider-Baumann, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and T. Junkers, Polymers, 2015, 7, 418–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. M. Van Steenberge, D. R. D'hooge, J. Vandenbergh, M. F. Reyniers, P. J. Adriaensens, D. J. M. Vanderzande and G. B. Marin, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2013, 22, 246–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Dupont, F. Novoa, E. Voroshazi and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1325–1332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Saeki and T. Emura, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 2055–2131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wieme, M. F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7797–7810 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jimenez, L. Torre and J. M. Kenny, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2001, 73, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Purmova, K. F. D. Pauwels, M. Agostini, M. Bruinsma, E. J. Vorenkamp, A. J. Schouten and M. L. Coote, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5527–5539 CrossRef CAS .
P. Derboven, D. R. D'hooge, M. M. Stamenovic, P. Espeel, G. B. Marin, F. E. Du Prez and M. F. Reyniers, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1732–1742 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. S. Koo, M. M. Stamenovic, R. A. Prasath, A. J. Inglis, F. E. Du Prez, C. Barner-Kowollik, W. Van Camp and T. Junkers, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 1699–1713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. M. Van Steenberge, D. R. D'hooge, Y. Wang, M. J. Zhong, M. F. Reyniers, D. Konkolewicz, K. Matyjaszewski and G. B. Marin, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 8519–8531 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lemos, P. A. Melo and J. C. Pinto, Macromol. React. Eng., 2015, 9, 259–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Toloza Porras, D. R. D'hooge, M. F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2013, 22, 136–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. O. Loutfy, A. M. Hor, C. K. Hsiao, G. Baranyi and P. Kazmaier, Pure Appl. Chem., 1988, 60, 1047–1054 CrossRef CAS .
R. Szymanski, E-Polymers, 2009, 9, 538–552 CrossRef .
L. Wang and L. J. Broadbelt, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7961–7968 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Braunecker and K. Matyjaszewski, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 93–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Tsarevsky, W. A. Braunecker, A. Vacca, P. Gans and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromol. Symp., 2007, 248, 60–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Toloza Porras, D. R. D'hooge, P. H. M. Van Steenberge, M. F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Macromol. React. Eng., 2013, 7, 311–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. D'hooge, P. H. M. Van Steenberge, M. F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Polymers, 2014, 6, 1074–1095 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ali Parsa, I. Kozhan, M. Wulkow and R. A. Hutchinson, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2014, 23, 207–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Baumgaertel, E. Altuntas and U. S. Schubert, J. Chromatogr., A, 2012, 1240, 1–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ginzburg, T. Macko, V. Dolle and R. Brull, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 1897–1906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Beaudoin, P. E. Dufils, D. Gigmes, S. Marque, C. Petit, P. Tordo and D. Bertin, Polymer, 2006, 47, 98–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Weidner, J. Falkenhagen and I. Bressler, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 2404–2411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mutlu and J. F. Lutz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13010–13019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Roy, A. Meszynska, C. Laure, L. Charles, C. Verchin and J. F. Lutz, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6 Search PubMed .
K. Izawa, T. Ogasawara, H. Masuda, H. Okabayashi, C. J. O'Connor and I. Noda, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 1053–1061 RSC .
Y. M. Jung and I. Noda, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41, 515–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Elsen, Y. C. Li, Q. X. Li, S. S. Sheiko and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 133–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yu-Su, F. C. Sun, S. S. Sheiko, D. Konkolewicz, H. I. Lee and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5928–5936 CrossRef CAS .
D. Konkolewicz, S. Sosnowski, D. R. D'Hooge, R. Szymanski, M. F. Reyniers, G. B. Marin and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 8361–8373 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ballard, M. Salsamendi, J. I. Santos, F. Ruiperez, J. R. Leiza and J. M. Asua, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 964–972 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. D'hooge, M. F. Reyniers, F. J. Stadler, B. Dervaux, C. Bailly, F. E. Du Prez and G. B. Marin, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8766–8781 CrossRef .
N. M. Ahmad, B. Charleux, C. Farcet, C. J. Ferguson, S. G. Gaynor, B. S. Hawkett, F. Heatley, B. Klumperman, D. Konkolewicz, P. A. Lovell, K. Matyjaszewski and R. Venkatesh, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 2002–2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Ahmad, F. Heatley and P. A. Lovell, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 2822–2827 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Haven, J. Vandenbergh and T. Junkers, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4611–4614 RSC .
J. Vandenbergh and T. Junkers, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6850–6856 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haven, J. Vandenbergh, R. Kurita, J. Gruber and T. Junkers, Polym. Chem., 2015, 5752–5765 RSC .
C. Y. Lin, M. L. Coote, A. Gennaro and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12762–12774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Coote, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 1230–1239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Noble and M. L. Coote, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2013, 32, 467–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lin, M. L. Coote, A. Petit, P. Richard, R. Poli and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 5985–5994 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Zetterlund and S. Perrier, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1340–1346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adamy, A. M. van Herk, M. Destarac and M. J. Monteiro, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 2293–2301 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chiefari, Y. K. Chong, F. Ercole, J. Krstina, J. Jeffery, T. P. T. Le, R. T. A. Mayadunne, G. F. Meijs, C. L. Moad, G. Moad, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5559–5562 CrossRef CAS .
G. Moad, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, Chem. – Asian J.l, 2013, 8, 1634–1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Northrop and R. N. Coffey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13804–13817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Desmet, D. D'hooge, G. Marin, F. Du Prez, E. Espeel and M. Reyniers, J. Org. Chem., 2015 DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.5b01446 .
R. M. Stolz and B. H. Northrop, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 8105–8116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lin, S. R. A. Marque, K. Matyjaszewski and M. L. Coote, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7568–7583 CrossRef CAS .
C. Barner-Kowollik, S. Beuermann, M. Buback, P. Castignolles, B. Charleux, M. L. Coote, R. A. Hutchinson, T. Junkers, I. Lacik, G. T. Russell, M. Stach and A. M. van Herk, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 204–212 RSC .
C. Barner-Kowollik and G. T. Russell, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 1211–1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Derboven, D. R. D'hooge, M. F. Reyniers, G. B. Marin and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 492–501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Beuermann and M. Buback, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 191–254 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Payne, D. R. D'hooge, P. H. M. van Steenberge, M. F. Reyniers, M. F. Cunningham, R. A. Hutchinson and G. B. Marin, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3828–3840 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Payne, P. H. M. Van Steenberge, D. R. D'hooge, M. F. Reyniers, G. B. Marin, R. A. Hutchinson and M. F. Cunningham, Polym. Int., 2014, 63, 848–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matyjaszewski, W. Jakubowski, K. Min, W. Tang, J. Y. Huang, W. A. Braunecker and N. V. Tsarevsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15309–15314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chan, J. Meuldijk, M. F. Cunningham and R. A. Hutchinson, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 11931–11942 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Li, W. J. Wang, B. G. Li and S. P. Zhu, Macromol. React. Eng., 2011, 5, 467–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Saldivar-Guerra, J. Bonilla, F. Becerril, G. Zacahua, M. Albores-Velasco, R. Alexander-Katz, L. Flores-Santos and L. Alexandrova, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2006, 15, 163–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zapata-Gonzalez, E. Saldivar-Guerra and J. Ortiz-Cisneros, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2011, 20, 370–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nicolas, L. Mueller, C. Dire, K. Matyjaszewski and B. Charleux, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4470–4478 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Reyes, G. Arzamendi, J. M. Asua and J. R. Leiza, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3674–3679 CrossRef CAS .
T. Junkers and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2009, 18, 421–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bertin, D. Gigmes, S. R. A. Marque and P. Tordo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2189–2198 RSC .
G. Johnston-Hall and M. J. Monteiro, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2010, 19, 387–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Zetterlund, G. Gody and S. Perrier, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2014, 23, 331–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hamzehlou, Y. Reyes, R. Hutchinson and J. R. Leiza, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2014, 215, 1668–1678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Woloszyn, P. Hesse, K. D. Hungenberg and K. B. McAuley, Macromol. React. Eng., 2013, 7, 293–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ma, M. F. Cunningham, K. B. McAuley, B. Keoshkerian and M. K. Georges, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2003, 12, 72–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bitsch, C. Barner-Kowollik and S. Zhu, Macromol. React. Eng., 2011, 5, 55–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Nikitin, D. A. Parkhomenko, M. V. Edeleva and E. G. Bagryanskaya, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015 DOI:10.1002/pola.27723 .
A. D. Peklak, A. Butte, G. Storti and M. Morbidelli, J. Polym Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 1071–1085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hlalele and B. Klumperman, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5554–5557 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Zhou and Z. H. Luo, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6218–6229 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y.-N. Zhou and Z.-H. Luo, Macromol. React. Eng., 2015 DOI:10.1002/mren.201400056 .
J. F. Lutz and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 897–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mastan and S. Zhu, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 68, 139–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bentein, D. R. D'Hooge, M. F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2011, 20, 238–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-N. Zhou and Z.-H. Luo, AIChE J., 2015, 6, 1947–1958 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gruendling, T. Junkers, M. Guilhaus and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 520–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chauvin, P. E. Dufils, D. Gigmes, Y. Guillaneuf, S. R. A. Marque, P. Tordo and D. Bertin, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5238–5250 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolpers, G. T. Russell and P. Vana, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2011, 20, 667–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Gillespie, J. Comput. Phys., 1976, 22, 403–434 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Gillespie, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 1716–1733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wulkow, Macromol. Theory Simul., 1996, 5, 393–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gigmes, D. Bertin, C. Lefay and Y. Guillaneuf, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2009, 18, 402–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Lutz, P. Lacroix-Desmazes and B. Boutevin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Fierens, D. R. D'hooge, P. H. M. Van Steenberge, M.-F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 278, 407–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chaffey-Millar, M. Busch, T. P. Davis, M. H. Stenzel and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2005, 14, 143–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Drache and G. Drache, Polymers, 2012, 4, 1416–1442 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang and L. J. Broadbelt, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8118–8128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Reyes and J. M. Asua, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 63–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Al-Harthi, J. B. R. Soares and L. C. Simon, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2006, 291, 993–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hamzehlou, Y. Reyes and J. R. Leiza, Macromol. React. Eng., 2012, 6, 319–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meimaroglou and C. Kiparissides, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 8963–8979 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. T. Brandão, J. B. P. Soares, J. C. Pinto and A. L. Alberton, Macromol. React. Eng., 2015, 9, 141–185 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Drache, B. Hosemann, T. Laba and S. Beuermann, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2015, 24, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chaffey-Millar, D. Stewart, M. M. T. Chakravarty, G. Keller and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2007, 16, 575–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. T. Brandao, J. B. P. Soares, J. C. Pinto and A. L. Alberton, Macromol. React. Eng., 2015, 9, 141–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4953–4959 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schroder, A. J. D. Magenau and K. Matyjaszewski, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 244 Search PubMed .
M. J. Zhong and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2668–2677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Ren, C. Wang and Z. Xu, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2015, 52, 609–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Nesvadba, Radical Polymerization in Industry, in Encyclopedia of Radicals in Chemistry, Biology and Materials, John Wiley & Sons,  2012 Search PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. W. Luo, B. G. Li and S. P. Zhu, AIChE J., 2007, 53, 174–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Fierens, D. R. D'hooge, P. H. M. Van Steenberge, M. F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Polymers, 2015, 7, 655–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Chang, J. W. Miller and G. R. Schorr, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1990, 39, 2395–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Chen, H. Gao, H. K. Zou, G. W. Chu, L. Zhang, L. Shao, Y. Xiang and Y. X. Wu, AIChE J., 2010, 56, 1053–1062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Cimini and D. C. Sundberg, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1986, 26, 560–568 CAS .
H. Fathi, K. Schittkowski and A. E. Hamielec, Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng., 2004, 43, 571–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Freyer, J. Manz and O. Nuyken, Macromol. Theory Simul., 1994, 3, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Freyer and O. Nuyken, Makromol. Chem., Macromol. Symp., 1988, 13–4, 319–335 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Goossens, S. Catak, M. Glassner, V. R. de la Rosa, B. D. Monnery, F. De Proft, V. Van Speybroeck and R. Hoogenboom, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 651–654 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hunkeler and A. E. Hamielec, Polymer, 1991, 32, 2626–2640 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pollet, T. Hamaide, M. Tayakout-Fayolle and C. Jallut, Polym. Int., 2004, 53, 550–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rached, S. Hoppe, C. Fonteix, C. Schrauwen and F. Pla, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 2715–2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tayakout-Fayolle, C. Jallut, E. Pollet and T. Hamaide, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2003, 58, 1509–1519 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wiesbrock, R. Hoogenboom, M. A. M. Leenen, M. A. R. Meier and U. S. Schubert, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5025–5034 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Bowman and C. J. Kloxin, AIChE J., 2008, 54, 2775–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Cramer, T. Davies, A. K. O'Brien and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 4631–4636 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Cramer, S. K. Reddy, A. K. O'Brien and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7964–7969 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Fairbanks, T. F. Scott, C. J. Kloxin, K. S. Anseth and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 211–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Fairbanks, E. A. Sims, K. S. Anseth and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4113–4119 CrossRef CAS .
O. Okay and C. N. Bowman, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2005, 14, 267–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Okay, S. K. Reddy and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4501–4511 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Reddy, N. B. Cramer and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 3681–3687 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Reddy, N. B. Cramer and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 3673–3680 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Reddy, O. Okay and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8832–8843 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Jensen, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2001, 56, 293–303 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bally, C. A. Serra, V. Hessel and G. Hadziioannou, Macromol. React. Eng., 2010, 4, 543–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cortese, T. Noel, M. H. J. M. de Croon, S. Schulze, E. Klemm and V. Hessel, Macromol. React. Eng., 2012, 6, 507–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao and J. He, Macromol. React. Eng., 2015 DOI:10.1002/mren.201400061 .
C. H. Hornung, C. Guerrero-Sanchez, M. Brasholz, S. Saubern, J. Chiefari, G. Moad, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2011, 15, 593–601 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iwasaki and J. Yoshida, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 1159–1163 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rosenfeld, C. Serra, C. Brochon and G. Hadziioannou, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2007, 62, 5245–5250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zargar and F. J. Schork, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 4245–4253 CrossRef CAS .
P. Derboven, P. H. M. Van Steenberge, J. Vandenbergh, M.-F. Reyniers, T. Junkers, D. R. D'hooge and G. B. Marin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015 Search PubMed  , submitted.
F. R. Mayo and F. M. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1944, 66, 1594–1601 CrossRef CAS .
A. Feldermann, A. A. Toy, H. Phan, M. H. Stenzel, T. P. Davis and C. Barner-Kowollik, Polymer, 2004, 45, 3997–4007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zapata-Gonzalez, R. A. Hutchinson, K. Matyjaszewski, E. Saldivar-Guerra and J. Ortiz-Cisneros, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2014, 23, 245–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meimaroglou, A. Krallis, V. Saliakas and C. Kiparissides, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 2224–2234 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krallis, D. Meimaroglou and C. Kiparissides, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2008, 63, 4342–4360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. P. Soares and A. E. Hamielec, Macromol. Theory Simul., 1996, 5, 547–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. M. Van Steenberge, D. R. D'hooge, M. F. Reyniers and G. B. Marin, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 110, 185–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Stockmayer, J. Chem. Phys., 1945, 13, 199–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wang, T. Grimaud and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 6507–6512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tobita, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2003, 12, 463–469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tobita and S. P. Zhu, E-Polymers, 2003, 025 Search PubMed .
H. Tobita, Polymer, 1998, 39, 2367–2372 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Regatte, H. Y. Gao, I. A. Konstantinov, S. G. Arturo and L. J. Broadbelt, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2014, 23, 564–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kryven and P. D. Iedema, Macromol. React. Eng., 2015, 9, 285–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meimaroglou and C. Kiparissides, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 5820–5832 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meimaroglou, P. Pladis, A. Baltsas and C. Kiparissides, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2011, 66, 1685–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and L. J. Broadbelt, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2228–2235 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. M. Van Steenberge, B. Verbraeken, M. F. Reyniers, R. Hoogenboom and D. R. D'hooge, Macromolecules, 2015 Search PubMed  , submitted.
N. Ballard, S. Rusconi, E. Akhmatskaya, D. Sokolovski, J. C. de la Cal and J. M. Asua, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6580–6590 CrossRef CAS .
G. Arzamendi, C. Plessis, J. R. Leiza and J. M. Asua, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2003, 12, 315–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Dagmar R. D'hooge	Dagmar R. D'hooge is an assistant professor in Polymer Reaction Engineering and Industrial Processing of Polymers at Ghent University. He is a member of the LCT and associated member of the Department of Textiles. In 2006, he received his chemical engineering degree from Ghent University where he also obtained his PhD in 2010. From October 2012 onwards, he became a postdoctoral researcher at the Fund for Scientific Research Flanders. He was a visiting researcher in the Matyjaszewski Polymer Group (CMU) in 2011 and the Macromolecular Architectures Research Team (KIT) in 2013. His research focuses on model-based design of (post)polymerization and polymer processing.
Paul H.M. Van Steenberge	Paul H.M. Van Steenberge is a postdoctoral research assistant at Ghent University and a member of the LCT. He received his chemical engineering degree from Ghent University in 2007, where he also obtained his PhD in 2012. He was a visiting researcher in the Chemical Engineering Department of Queen's University (Ontario, Canada) in 2013 and 2014. His research activities relate to the development of advanced mathematical techniques for the design of polymerization processes in homogeneous and heterogeneous media. Both deterministic and stochastic approaches are covered.
Pieter Derboven	Pieter Derboven is a senior PhD student at Ghent University and a member of the LCT. His PhD research focuses on the multi-scale modelling of reversible deactivation radical polymerization (RDRP) in general and reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization and flow chemistry in particular. He was a visiting researcher at the Macromolecular Architectures Research Team at Karlsruhe Institute for Technology (KIT) in 2013 and 2014.
Marie-Françoise Reyniers	Marie-Françoise Reyniers is a full professor in Fundamental Modelling of Radical and Catalytic Processes at Ghent University and a member of the LCT. She develops microkinetic models, taking into account explicitly the chemical reactions involved in further understanding mature processes such as the conversion of heavy oil fractions, provides guidelines for innovation in e.g. RDRP and computer assisted development of new catalysts and materials, and applies ab initio techniques systematically both in radical and catalytic processes.
Guy B. Marin	Guy B. Marin is a full professor in Chemical Reaction Engineering at Ghent University and director of the LCT. He received his chemical engineering degree from Ghent University in 1976 where he also obtained his PhD in 1980. He previously held a Fulbright fellowship at Stanford University and Catalytica Associates (USA). The investigation of chemical kinetics, aimed at the modelling and design of chemical processes and products all the way from molecule up to full scale, constitutes the core of his research.

 	Fig. 1  Principle of RDRP, considering nitroxide mediated polymerization (NMP) as technique; X: functionality.	 

 	Fig. 2  Potential of “click” chemistry as an efficient tool for dendrimer formation (top left), polymer–polymer conjugation (top right) and surface modification (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 3  Principle of ARGET ATRP, the selected technique for the complementary case studies to illustrate the potential of model-guided design; ka,da,p,red,t: rate coefficients for activation, deactivation, propagation, reduction, termination; initial compounds are highlighted (with i = 0 for RiX; ATRP initiator).	 

 	Fig. 4  Complementary univariate kinetic Monte Carlo case study: importance of (de)activation reactivity for a successful batch solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA; initial conditions: 343 K; [M]0:[EBiB]0 = 50; [BA]0:[BMA]0 = 0.4; 30 m% anisole; 50 ppm deactivator; 500 ppm reducing agent; white circles: reference catalyst from Payne et al.112,113 RA: reducing agent; Xm: overall conversion (aim: 0.75); EGF: end-group functionality; xn: number average chain length; f: final.	 

 	Fig. 5  Example of a Pareto-optimal front to map the full potential of a RDRP technique; generated with the univariate deterministic model developed by Fierens et al.;164 selected RDRP technique: nitroxide mediated polymerization (NMP); monomer: styrene; NMP initiator: N-(2-methyl-2-propyl)-N-(1-diethylphosphono-2,2-dimethylpropyl)-N-oxyl; 120 °C; targeted chain length: 1000; overall conversion Xm of 0.75; each point on the Pareto-optimal front corresponds to a well-defined dynamic monomer fed-batch addition programme. For comparison, the batch case is also presented.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Complementary bivariate kinetic Monte Carlo case study: importance of the deactivation reactivity for the copolymer composition-chain length distribution (CoC-CLD) in solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA using bivariate kinetic Monte Carlo simulations; colour scale: number fractions; initial conditions: caption of Fig. 4; (b) reference catalyst from Payne et al.112,113 (a) and (c/d) kda,BMA respectively 10 times lower and higher; F1: overall copolymer composition; i: chain length.	 

 	Fig. 7  Representation of a highly branched chain, as introduced by Meimaroglou et al.210	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Typical explicit visualization of the monomer sequences of a representative number of chains in a RDRP process aiming at linear gradient copolymers, using the kMC model strategy as developed by Van Steenberge et al.67 (b) corresponding targeted polymer, i.e. a perfect linear gradient copolymer.	 

 	Fig. 9  Complementary explicit case study on solution ARGET ATRP of BMA and BA: simulation of the detailed microstructure of copolymer chains at final conversion; generated based on previously reported model developments.67,69,113,213	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
