Facile synthesis of a Ag/MoS 2 nanocomposite photocatalyst for enhanced visible-light driven hydrogen gas evolution  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CY00464K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CY00464K
(Paper)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 4133-4143Facile synthesis of a Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite photocatalyst for enhanced visible-light driven hydrogen gas evolution

        
          
            A. J. 
            Cheah
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            W. S. 
            Chiu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            P. S. 
            Khiew
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            H. 
            Nakajima
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            T. 
            Saisopa
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Songsiriritthigul
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Radiman
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            M. A. A. 
            Hamid
          
        
      e
aLow Dimensional Materials Research Centre, Physics Department, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. E-mail: w.s.chiu@um.edu.my;   Tel: +6019 3292772
bDivision of Materials, Mechanics and Structures, Faculty of Engineering, University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus, 43500, Semenyih, Selangor, Malaysia
cSynchrotron Light Research Institute, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand
dNANOTEC-SUT Center of Excellence on Advanced Functional Nanomaterials and School of Physics, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand
eSchool of Applied Physics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia
Received 
      27th March 2015
    , Accepted 10th June 2015First published on 10th June 2015AbstractThe current study reports the facile synthesis of a Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite photocatalyst for visible-light driven hydrogen gas evolution. The MoS2 nanoflakes were hydrothermally prepared and then decorated with Ag nanoparticles (NPs) by a simple chemical reduction process at room temperature. Detailed characterizations were carried out to probe the physical structure and properties of the as-synthesized nanocomposite. The nanocomposite shows enhanced visible-light absorption and pronounced quenching of photoluminescence intensity as compared to that of pure MoS2. The photocatalytic hydrogen gas evolution experiments reveal that the Ag NPs can act as an efficient co-catalyst for the MoS2 nanoflakes and subsequently improve the hydrogen gas evolution rate. Ag-loading dependent photocatalytic tests indicate that the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity with a hydrogen gas evolution of 179.5 μmol H2 gcat−1, which is enhanced by 95% compared to that of commercial MoS2 nanopowder (92.0 μmol H2 gcat−1). The possible mechanisms that contribute to the improvement of the visible-light driven photocatalytic performance for the nanocomposite are proposed.
1 Introduction
For the last two decades, significant efforts have been devoted in the processing of photocatalyst nanomaterials, with the aim to be used for the heterogeneous photocatalytic process of producing hydrogen gas through the water splitting reaction. Although this field has been literally exploded, however, the process efficiencies remain unsatisfactory.1 Lately, 2D-MoS2 nanostructures have become the notion of research due to their anomalous electronic and catalytic performance.2–4 A recent advancement in hydrogen gas production through the water splitting reaction indicates the exceptional catalytic performance of MoS2 in disassociating water molecules due to its highly-exposed surface area and the abundance of active edges. Most of the findings show proof that the active edges are the main factors that dictate the overall photocatalytic performance.5
Despite this, the latest report lodged by Yu et al. has demonstrated that the electrocatalytic activity of MoS2 is strictly dependent on the thickness instead of the number of active edges.6 They counterpoint that the hydrogen gas evolution is reduced by a factor of ~4.47 with respect to the addition of every single layer because an additional potential barrier of 0.119 V is required for electron hopping along the vertical direction. For the moment, most of the approaches are realized through an electrocatalytic reaction, where the overpotential requires more energy than is thermodynamically expected to drive the water splitting reaction with the supply of electricity as an energy input to initialize the process. Hence, the process still remains a great challenge to be practiced since the efficiency would be lower than the stipulated standard after the electricity energy that being supplied is taken into account. On the other hand, for a suspension-based photocatalytic reaction, there is no electrical energy needed to be supplied to initialize the process. Instead, the excitons that form upon absorbing an incident photon can further split the water molecules into their constituents. Therefore, photocatalytic hydrogen generation through suspension remains attractive since it is well-complemented with the worldwide initiative towards the implementation of the technology, which is anticipated to fully harness the sunlight from Mother Nature as one of the highly abundant natural resources.
As part of the class of two-dimensional materials, graphene has also gained significant popularity for photocatalytic applications, where it has been greatly used as a matrix that is able to prolong the charge-carrier lifetimes.7 In contrast to the graphene, MoS2 appears to be a semiconductor by itself and has been repeatedly proved to exhibit a tunable bandgap energy that is strictly dependent on the atomic thickness. The bandgap values can be maneuvered from 1.9 eV (direct bandgap) for a single layer MoS2 nanosheet, down to 1.2 eV (indirect bandgap) for multilayer MoS2 nanoflakes, in which both of these bandgaps are well-corresponded to light absorption in the visible- (450–700 nm) and infrared-region (700–1400 nm), respectively.8 As a result, MoS2 would become one of the ideal candidates to be used as a visible- and infrared-active optical material for photo-energy engineering, including the photosplitting of water.
In terms of the structural characteristics, MoS2 generally exists in an expanded two-dimensional sheet-like structure.8,9 Such an expanded planar nature not only renders a highly-exposed surface area, but it is also propitious to be employed as a matrix in supporting other inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) to form a new class of nanocomposite with value added features that are highly suitable for specific applications, such as in the case of hybrid photocatalyst materials for photocatalytic hydrogen gas evolution. For the last few years, various creative designs of advanced photocatalyst nanocomposites have been reported. Among these include the coupling of various types of semiconductor materials with MoS2, such as in the case of impregnating MoS2 with graphitic carbon nitride3 and integrating CdS with MoS2.10 The motive lying behind the attempt is to enable an abundance of solar-light to be extracted, especially the visible-light spectrum that constitutes 43% of real solar-light.11 In addition to this, it has been elucidated recently that plasmonic NPs of noble metals (silver, gold and platinum) are also very promising to be used as co-catalysts.12 Upon integration of those co-catalysts onto the photocatalyst semiconductor, the potential barrier at the interface between MoS2 and the co-catalyst is largely altered, in which a space charge region is created to facilitate the efficient charge separation process that is highly beneficial for a photocatalytic performance with enhanced efficiency.13 Meanwhile, the capability of noble metals in absorbing visible-light through excitation of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) will create an intense and non-homogeneous electric field on the surface of nearby semiconductors. This so-called “plasmonic energy” can serve as an additional energy input to the photoexcited electrons for refraining charge recombination, while at the same time, it generates a plasmonic heating zone, promoting chemical transformation for breaking water molecules.14
In the current study, a Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite photocatalyst with different wt% of Ag-loading was prepared by the in situ reduction of Ag+ ions onto MoS2 nanoflakes at room temperature. To the best of our knowledge, to date, the investigation of a Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite has not been reported, especially in terms of suspension-based hydrogen gas evolution. The as-prepared Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite was systematically characterized to probe its structural and optical properties. An evaluation has been conducted on its efficiency to be used as a nanocomposite photocatalyst for visible-light driven hydrogen gas evolution through the water splitting reaction by comparing with the performance of commercialized MoS2 nanopowder. The result shows that the nanocomposite with 20 wt% Ag-loading exhibits the highest photocatalytic performance, in which 95% enhancement is observed compared to that of the commercial MoS2 nanopowder. The effects of Ag-loading on the light absorption, photoluminescence property and photocatalytic activity were investigated in detail, and the possible mechanisms that contribute to the improvement of visible-light driven photocatalytic performance for the nanocomposite are discussed. The current work exemplifies the potential in designing a nanocomposite photocatalyst material by integrating Ag NPs as co-catalyst onto MoS2 nanoflakes for improved visible-light driven photocatalytic hydrogen gas production, which can serve as one of the feasible approaches for the advancement of renewable energy research.
2 Experimental
2.1 Synthesis of the photocatalyst

2.1.1 Synthesis of the MoS2 nanoflakes. 
2.0 mmol Na2MoO5 and 10.0 mmol L-cysteine (HO2CCHCH2SH) solutions were prepared and transferred into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. The autoclave was heated in the oven at 200 °C for 24 hours and cooled to room temperature naturally. The as-obtained product was precipitated by centrifuge with a speed of 4000 rpm. The supernatant was decanted after centrifugation and the MoS2 nanoflakes in the form of precipitate were re-dispersed in ethanol. The precipitation and re-dispersion process was repeated twice. Finally, the resultant precipitate was ambient-dried overnight and ready to be used as a matrix for the deposition of Ag NPs.


2.1.2 Synthesis of the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites. 
The as-synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes were dispersed in 30.0 mL distilled water that had been loaded with 3.0 μL of hydrazine (1.0 × 10−4 mol). 1.0 M of a AgNO3 solution was added dropwise into the MoS2 suspension under vigorous stirring. The nominal weight ratios of Ag to MoS2 were 5, 10, 20 and 50 wt%, respectively. Hereafter, the resulting samples were named as 5 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 10 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 and 50 wt%-Ag/MoS2. The Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites were purified with the method similar to the nanoflakes. Finally, the precipitate was ambient-dried overnight and characterized.

2.2 Characterization of the photocatalyst
In order to determine the crystallinity and elemental compositions of the samples, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis were carried out, respectively. XPS analysis was performed with photoemission spectroscopy (PES) beam line (BL3.2a) at the Synchrotron Light Institute (Thailand). A thermo VG Scientific CLAM2 electron spectrometer with a maximum photon energy of 600 eV (energy step of 0.1 eV) was used during operation. The morphology and elemental mapping of the samples were analyzed using a high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) (JEOL JEM-2100F). Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area measurements were conducted using a Micromeritics ASAP-2020 analyzer. The ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer Lambda 750 UV-VIS-NIR) and photoluminescence (PL) spectrometer that was equipped with a 325 nm He–Cd laser were used to measure the optical properties of the samples.
2.3 Photocatalytic activity
The experimental setup for photocatalytic hydrogen gas production was adopted and modified from Wang et al.15 The reaction was conducted by mixing 0.0021 g of the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite with 4.5 mL of deionized water in a quartz cell, which had been loaded with 0.3 M Na2S and 0.3 M Na2SO3 as hole scavengers. A 300 W Xe arc lamp that served as a visible-light source was mounted with a beam turner (Newport 66245) that was equipped with a fin-like heat sink for dissipating excessive heat effectively. A dichroic beam turning mirror (Newport 66219) was placed inside the beam turner to reflect the visible light (420–630 nm) and an IR cut-off filter (Edmund Optics 54–516) was mounted on the filter holder (Newport 62020) to chop off the IR-light. The incident power that was contributed by visible-light was measured by a Thermal Power Sensor (C-Series, S310C) that was attached to a power meter (Thorlabs, PM100D-USD999 2/8/13). The average power was determined to be 0.310 W cm−2 for the visible-light that fell in the wavelengths between 400–800 nm. The quartz cell was placed 5.0 cm away from the edge of the filter holder. During the course of the photocatalytic reaction, the gases evolved were transferred into a sample loop by a peristaltic pump and were further quantified using gas chromatography (GC-Agilent 7890A) that was equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) gas chromatograph (MS-5A and HayeSep Q columns). The amount of hydrogen gas produced every hour was quantified by integrating with a calibration curve. The exact same experimental parameters were employed for the commercial MoS2 nanopowder (US Research Nanomaterials, Inc., US2180) and the as-synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Characterization of the MoS2 nanoflakes and the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites

Fig. 1 shows the XRD spectra of the as-synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes and the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite, respectively. It is observed that the spectrum for the MoS2 nanoflakes is partially resolved, where the most dominant peak of the (002) plane is clearly visible if compared to the standard pattern of MoS2 (JCPDS 00-037-1492). However, the other peaks appear to be broad and part of the peaks appreciably overlap with each other to form wide humps, as indicated in the 2θ range of 30° to 50° and 55° to 65°, respectively. Such broad and featureless humps can be attributed to the excessively small domain or the partially crystalline nature of the sample.
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the (a) as-synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes and (b) the 20 wt %-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite. (The dark violet and khaki-solid lines at the bottom refer to the standard patterns of MoS2 and Ag, respectively.) 
According to Liu et al., the nature of MoS2, that appears in a sheet-like structure, generally renders poor signal reflection due to a lower atomic packing density.16 Furthermore, if the sample appears to have a small crystal domain or a partially crystalline character, poor and unresolved diffraction will be obtained due to weak interferences of the reflected X-ray photon. In order to resolve this matter, they have conducted an in-plane XRD scan, where the detector moves in a parallel direction relative to the sample surface. Their result clearly reveals well-resolved peaks other than the (002) plane, which implies the truly two-dimensional growth with a low amount of stacking along the c-axis. Compared with their result, the MoS2 nanoflakes in Fig. 1(a) show an intense reflection for the plane of (002), which signifies that the sample tends to undergo stacking along the c-axis, resembling that of the bulk sample. Hence, it is deduced that the as-synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes appear to be in the form of a few layers in addition to the expanded two dimensional planar growth. Moreover, this observation is well-complemented with most of the earlier studies that adopt a hydrothermal approach in the synthesis of MoS2 nanostructures without post annealing, where partially resolved X-ray patterns are observed as well.17
On the other hand, the spectrum and relative intensities for the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite (Fig. 1(b)) indicate the presence of three obvious Ag peaks in addition to the characteristic peak of the (002) plane that belongs to MoS2. Upon the incorporation of the Ag NPs onto the MoS2 nanoflakes, there are no obvious changes in the MoS2 diffraction pattern and all the major peaks that belong to Ag are clearly observed. However, there are pronounced diffraction signals of the Ag NPs, owing to their high atomic packing density, which shows that they are capable of reflecting a very intense X-ray signal, compared to the MoS2 nanoflakes. There is a small hump at a 2θ value of 25°, which may be due to the systematic error arising from excessive X-ray noise that originates from the background of the reflected X-ray beam during the process of analysis. Nonetheless, this spectrum still implies that the nanocomposite indeed yields a heterostructure-crystalline, without the formation of an alloy, since it has been confirmed that homogeneous alloying can cause obvious shifts in the diffraction pattern.18

Fig. 2(a) depicts the wide scanning profile for the commercial MoS2 nanopowder, the MoS2 nanoflakes and the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite. There is no significant deviation observed between them, except for the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite, where the characteristic peaks that belong to the Ag 3d doublet are present after Ag NPs are decorated onto the MoS2 nanoflakes. For the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite, the chemical compositions remain identical even after it has been decorated with Ag NPs. It is worth noting that there is an absence of a BE peak around 236 eV that corresponds to Mo6+ 2d5/2 (Fig. 2(a)), which belongs to oxide-based compounds such as MoO3.19 This indicates that there is no oxidized Mo present for those three samples. Hence, it is further confirmed that all the compounds are indeed pure MoS2 and there is not any oxide, as well as other impurities, present in the samples.
 Fig. 2  (a) Wide scan for the commercial MoS2 nanopowder, the MoS2 nanoflakes and the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite (b) narrow scan for the Mo 3d, (c) S 2p and (d) Ag 3d (insets of Fig. 2(b) and (c) are the resolved spectra after deconvolution to its constituent state). 
The narrow scan is carried out to clearly elucidate the BE for each element as well as the purity of the compounds (Fig. 2(b–d)). According to Fig. 2(b), that corresponds to the binding energy of Mo, all the samples show a doublet of Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2 that fall at 229.0 eV and 231.9 eV (inset Fig. 2(b)), respectively. This doublet can be assigned to the Mo4+ ion that is contained in MoS2.20 Meanwhile, Fig. 2(c) also reveals that all the samples have S 2p spectra which are well-fitted with the doublet constituted of 165.0 eV (S 2p1/2) and 163.5 eV (S 2p3/2) (inset Fig. 2(c)), where both of these binding energies can be assigned to the bridging S2− and/or apical S2− ligands in MoS2.16 With respect to the Ag spectrum (Fig. 2(d)) in the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite, the Ag 4d BE can be assigned to the Ag in the zero valence state that is equal to 368.2 eV (Ag 3d5/2) and 374.3 eV (Ag 3d3/2).21 This demonstrates that the Ag NPs, that had been deposited onto the MoS2 nanoflakes, preserve their metallic nature without undergoing further oxidation. By integrating the peak area of the spectra with the assistance of X-ray photoemission software, the composition of the elements for Mo, S, and Ag in the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite is determined to be 26.1%, 54.6% and 19.3%, respectively.

Fig. 3(a) depicts the TEM micrograph of the free-standing MoS2 nanoflakes, which have a sheet-like morphology with a lateral size of ~500 nm. The partially transparent feature implies that the thin and isolated sheets are obtained in the current synthesis. Meanwhile, the HRTEM image along the side of the nanoflakes reveals the well-known active edges, which is the typical characteristic of this material. The interlayer spacing in between the active edges is measured to be 0.62 nm, which is well correlated with the d-spacing of the (002) plane of standard MoS2 (Fig. 3(b)). This reflects that the nanoflakes are stacked along the c-axis, which is in good agreement with the result of the diffractogram. Occasionally, it is found that part of these active edges appear to be discontinued (arrows in Fig. 3(b)), where concurrent distortion and dislocation are present along the edges. Such an observation is similar to the microstructures of vertically aligned MoS2 thin films that have been grown by a high temperature CVD method.22 Xie et al., who employed a hydrothermal method in producing MoS2 with similar characteristics, have ascribed these microstructures as defect-rich entities that can serve as additional active sites for enhanced electrocatalytic hydrogen gas evolution.23 In the current study, the formation of defect-rich sites is attributed to the binding effect by the sulfide ion of L-cysteine molecules which had been adopted as a sulfur precursor. It has been proven that sulfide ions can form a complex on the nanostructure’s surface through sulfur bridging.24 Hence, it is deduced that the sulfide ions are tightly anchored on the surface of the preform MoS2 nanoflakes. As a result, the planar growth is strictly promoted to form a two-dimensional flaky-like structure. Under a prolonged annealing process in hydrothermal conditions, the numbers of sulfide ions that anchor on the as-formed nanoflakes surface are increased with respect to the prolonged crystallization process. However, excessive high-density coverage of ion sulfides could restrict the growth of the crystal in long range order and cause strain within the lattice. Consequently, the cracking effect is triggered especially on the basal plane and renders the formation of defect-rich sites. Apparently, this cracking effect is not only observed in the study by Xie et al., who used thiourea as a sulfur source, but is also valid for the current study that adopts L-cysteine as a sulfur precursor.23
 Fig. 3  (a) Low magnification (30k×) TEM image of the MoS2 nanoflakes that were suspended on a lacey copper grid. (b) High resolution TEM image (800k×) of MoS2 nanoflakes that reveals the defect-rich active edges with discontinued microstructures. (c) Low magnification (30k×) TEM image of the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite depicts that the Ag NPs are randomly distributed onto the MoS2 nanoflakes. (d) High resolution TEM image (800k×) of the Ag NPs which are embedded in the MoS2 nanoflakes. 
The TEM images of the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite are depicted in Fig. 3(c) and (d). According to Fig. 3(c), the Ag NPs are randomly distributed throughout the surface of the MoS2 nanoflakes, where the pseudo-spherical Ag NPs are clearly observed along the edges due to the contrast difference. Upon Ag deposition, it is noticed that the MoS2 nanoflakes underwent slight structural changes, where it agglomerates with its neighboring sheets. This could be caused by partial removal of the sulfide ions by the reducing agent (hydrazine) during the decoration process. However, this agglomeration does not significantly diminish the MoS2 active edges as shown in the HRTEM images in Fig. 3(d). Meanwhile, the image also reveals that an Ag NP is embedded in the surface of the MoS2 nanoflakes without any sign of continuous film formation. This implies that the Ag NPs do not wet or even diffuse into the lattice of MoS2 to form an alloy, which is in good agreement with the XRD result (Fig. 1(a)). For the samples produced by varying the weight percentage of the Ag precursor, it is found that the average size of the Ag NPs strongly depends on the concentration of the Ag precursor used. Table 1 depicts the average size that corresponds to the different amount of Ag precursor used. By referring to the table, Ag NPs with a larger average size and a wide size distribution are produced when a higher concentration of Ag precursor is used. This may be due to the excessive agglomeration that has taken place as a result of a high reactant exchange rate with a high concentration of Ag precursor.25
Table 1 Average size of Ag NPs that were produced with different wt% of Ag precursor




Samples
Average size of Ag NPs (nm)




5 wt%-Ag/MoS2
12.7


10 wt%-Ag/MoS2
13.8


20 wt%-Ag/MoS2
18.9


50 wt%-Ag/MoS2
51.1





Fig. 4(a) shows the HRTEM image of the lattice fringes for both the Ag NPs and the active edges of the MoS2 nanoflakes, where the difference in the electron scattering has resulted in the distinguishable contrast in between them. As compared to the MoS2 nanoflakes, the Ag NPs that possess a high atomic packing density render a darker spot due to enhanced electron beam scattering. This is further confirmed by its d-spacing of 0.23 nm, which belongs to its (111) plane. At the same time, the interlayer spacing of 0.62 nm that belongs to the (002) plane of the MoS2 nanoflakes is also observed in the same image. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis was carried out to further elucidate the crystallinity of the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite (Fig. 4(b)). The ring diffraction pattern for MoS2 appears to be relatively broad and partially diffused, which could be due to the excessively small grain or lower crystallinity.26 After indexing with the standard JCPDS database for both of Ag and MoS2, the ring diffraction pattern on the selected area that corresponds to Fig. 4(a) further confirms the coexistence of both Ag NPs and MoS2 nanoflakes without the presence of other oxide or sulfide impurities.
 Fig. 4  (a) HRTEM image of the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite that depicts the coexistence of both MoS2 nanoflakes and Ag NPs and the corresponding lattice fringes, (b) ring diffraction pattern of the selected region (red line box) indicates the respective crystal plane of both MoS2 nanoflakes and Ag NPs, (c) FFT image that is projected along the [110] zone axis for Ag NPs that are embedded into the nanocomposite and (d) FFT image of the MoS2 nanoflakes of the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite. 
In order to resolve the constituents within the nanocomposite in a much more detailed manner, FFT analysis was carried out. Fig. 4(c) depicts the FFT pattern for the Ag NPs that can be well indexed to the standard pattern of Ag with a face center cubic phase, which is projected along the [110] direction. Additionally, Fig. 4(d) reveals the FFT pattern for MoS2, where six independent and discontinued diffraction arcs are clearly shown instead of an individual diffraction spot. This implies the MoS2 nanoflakes do not exist in the form of a single crystal with six diffraction spots that are discrete. Instead, the discontinued arcs are due to the formation of a quasiperiodic structure that arises from the high density of defects.23
The energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDXA) was conducted to estimate the chemical composition of the 20%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite. It is noticed that the elemental mapping images reveal the presence of Mo and S, which are distributed evenly throughout the sample with Ag alongside (Fig. 5(a)). Fig. 5(b) depicts the EDXA spectrum for quantitative analysis of the relative atomic percent for each element and the corresponding percentage is summarized in the table. The relative atomic ratio reflects the elemental compositions of the nanocomposite, in which the ratio of Mo:S:Ag is calculated to be 1.2:2.9:1.0. These values are well coincided with the resultant area ratio of the elements through XPS analysis.
 Fig. 5  (a) Combined signal of 3 elements (Mo, S, Ag) for the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite and (b) the corresponding EDXA spectrum. 
The optical absorption spectrum of the MoS2 nanoflakes (Fig. 6) shows that there is a broad absorption peak centered at about 635 nm. In contrast to other reports, there is no sign that separated A and B exciton peaks are observed.27,28 Such discrepancy can be ascribed to the defective nature of the nanoflakes, in which the spin orbit splitting that is caused by the interlayer interaction is weakened.29 Also, this sample shows relatively weak absorption beyond the wavelength of 850 nm that can be attributed to the effect of the thinner sheet as modelled by Li et al.2 According to their model (Generalized Gradient Approximation), the surface-state wave function and screening effect of thinner MoS2 are qualitatively different from that of the bulk. As a result, the excitation from the occupied Mo 4d orbital to the unoccupied Mo 4d orbital is symmetrically forbidden beyond 850 nm for the thinner MoS2 nanoflakes, whereas the transition from S 3p to Mo 4d or from Mo 4d to S 3p that makes the visible absorption dominant is allowed for this sample. In comparison, the commercial MoS2 with relatively bulky size exhibits prominent absorption in the near IR region but relatively weak absorption in the visible region. With such distinguishable differences in the absorption between both of these samples, it is therefore deduced that the enhancement of absorption in the visible region for the as-synthesized nanoflakes will greatly assist the visible-light driven photocatalytic hydrogen gas production.
 Fig. 6  UV-vis absorption spectra of commercial MoS2, MoS2 nanoflakes, Ag NPs, 5 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 10 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 and 50 wt%-Ag/MoS2. 
Since the photocatalytic performance has a direct relationship with the optical absorption characteristic, it is crucial to explore the appropriate wt% of Ag to be loaded onto the MoS2 nanoflakes. According to Fig. 6, the decoration of Ag NPs onto the MoS2 nanoflakes has enhanced the visible light absorption for all the nanocomposites, which reflects the unique co-catalyst function of Ag NPs. It is noticed that all the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites show an absorption peak centered at 606 nm, which is slightly blue-shifted as compared to that of the pure MoS2 nanoflakes. Moreover, all the nanocomposites also exhibit two small humps located at 400 nm and 438 nm, which are the characteristic peaks of the localized surface plasmon resonance from the Ag NPs. Both of these peaks are due to the collective oscillation of the conduction band electrons after the Ag NPs interact with incident visible-light.30,31 There is no significant variation on the absorption spectra for all the nanocomposites with different weight percentages of Ag-loading except a minor difference in terms of absorption intensity.
In general, the charge carrier dynamics, especially on the aspect of electron–hole separation efficiency, has a direct influence towards the overall photocatalytic performance. The electron–hole separation efficiency can be correlated with the photoluminescence (PL) emission intensity by taking consideration of the aspect of radiative recombination.3,32Fig. 7 depicts the PL emission for the samples that had been excited using a 325 nm He–Cd laser. By referring to the spectra, both of the commercial MoS2 and MoS2 nanoflakes exhibit a very intense peak centered at 1.81 eV in addition to two noticeable shoulders located at 1.43 eV and 2.15 eV. Both of the peaks (1.81 eV and 2.15 eV) can be assigned to the characteristic peaks of the direct-bandgap exciton transition for 2H-MoS2. According to Mak et al., both of these emissions are caused by a direct excitonic transition at the K point of the Brillouin zone (K4–K5 and K1–K5 optical transition, respectively), while the peak with lower energy (1.43 eV) corresponds to the indirect bandgap transition, which can be ascribed to the as-synthesized nanoflakes that own a thinner sheet in the current study.33
 Fig. 7  Photoluminescence spectra of commercial MoS2, MoS2 nanoflakes, 5 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 10 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 and 50 wt%-Ag/MoS2. 
On the other hand, for all the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites, the PL characteristics appear to be quite different if compared to the pure MoS2, where there are two obvious emissions observed at 1.81 eV and 1.52 eV in addition to the one that is located at 2.15 eV. Interestingly, upon progressive increment of Ag-loading, the intensities of the direct transition (1.81 eV and 2.15 eV) are suppressed while the peak at 1.52 eV is getting pronounced. It is hypothesized that the surface plasmon effect from the Ag NPs has led to the suppression of the emission at both of the peaks located at 1.81 eV and 2.15 eV; both of these peaks are generally assigned to be the direct transition for MoS2.34 This may be because the nonradiative decay from the localized plasmonic resonance effect that is contributed by metal NPs has enhanced the number of photoexcited electrons. Meanwhile, the enhancement of the latter PL peak at 1.52 eV is due to the mechanical strain according to Sun et al.,34 who had conducted the detailed PL analysis on noble metal decorated MoS2 nanostructures. This is consistent with the report by Pashley et al.,35 who had pointed out that noble metal NPs that partially bind onto MoS2 can create a stress at the interface between both of the compounds. In conjunction with this observation, the current study also shows that the peak at 1.52 eV seems to exhibit a stronger intensity as compared to pure MoS2 upon the formation of the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites. Such an increment is due to progressive agglomeration in between layers of MoS2 nanoflakes as a result of partial removal of the S2− ions that are anchored on the surface of the nanoflakes36 (by referring to Fig. 3(c)) that would also contribute to the strain as proven by the strong surface interaction.
It is noteworthy that the overall PL intensities decrease upon incorporation of the Ag NPs, which implies the enhancement in the separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs. According to Bhanu et al., who have studied the PL quenching in a gold-MoS2 hybrid nanocomposite, photoexcited electrons in a higher Fermi level showed a very high tendency to transfer to adjacent gold NPs with a lower Fermi level during illumination.32 Since gold and Ag are considered to be noble metals that have a relatively similar work function and electronic characteristics,37 in the current study, the photoexcited electron is expected to transfer to Ag and hence reduce the recombination rate by decaying back to the valence band of the MoS2 nanoflakes. With a higher loading of Ag NPs onto the surface of MoS2 nanoflakes, the recombination rate is greatly suppressed, in which the overall PL intensities are largely reduced. Hence, integrating a noble metal with a semiconductor offers a plausible pathway to promote efficient charge carrier generation.
3.2 Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity

Fig. 8(a) shows the result of visible-light driven photocatalytic hydrogen gas production of pure MoS2 and nanocomposites. The average hydrogen gas production of commercial MoS2 is determined to be 92.0 μmol H2 gcat−1 while that of the MoS2 nanoflakes is 122.5 μmol H2 gcat−1. The enhancement in the photocatalytic performance of the nanoflakes is ascribed to its higher surface area (30.59 m2 g−1) with an abundance of active sites along the edges compared to that of commercial MoS2 (3.96 m2 g−1). Moreover, the nanoflakes that appear to be in a thinner sheet are well-commensurated with its carrier-diffusion length due to the shorter charge transport pathways from the interior to the solid–water interface.38 The complement from both of these factors has strictly promoted the redox reaction at the interface between the nanoflakes and the water for a better hydrogen gas evolution rate.
 Fig. 8  (a) Time-dependent photocatalytic hydrogen gas production profile for Ag NPs, commercial MoS2, MoS2 nanoflakes, 5 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 10 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 and 50 wt%-Ag/MoS2. (b) Yield of hydrogen gas for different samples. 
Upon introducing Ag NPs onto the MoS2 nanoflakes, there is an obvious improvement in the hydrogen gas evolution rate for all the nanocomposites. The hydrogen gas evolution rates prevailed after the pure MoS2 nanoflakes were integrated with the co-catalyst Ag NPs. For the sake of clarification, the photocatalytic activity of Ag NPs was also measured under the same conditions and it was found that no trace amount of H2 gas was detected upon 5 hours of reaction. Therefore, the ability of Ag NPs to trigger the photosensitization process can be excluded and it is clear that the hydrogen gas evolution enhancement is indeed contributed by the Ag NPs that serve as a co-catalyst.
The enhancement is due to the electron sink effect,39 where Ag NPs can act as a “pool” to gather photoexcited electrons of the MoS2 nanoflakes and suppress the drawback of recombination. Thereafter, those photoexcited electrons can be used to trigger the photocatalytic reaction in improving the hydrogen gas evolution rate. Although UV-vis absorption spectroscopy results indicate that the absorption of Ag/MoS2 nanocomposites with different Ag-loading does not vary much, the hydrogen gas evolution rates appear to be quite different. By referring to Fig. 8(b), the increment of Ag-loading from 5 wt% to 20 wt% (where 20 wt% is identified to be the optimum condition) has boosted the H2 gas production rate by 29%. The result shows that 20 wt% of Ag-loading is the optimum wt% since further topping-up of Ag-loading beyond this level seems to degrade the photocatalytic performance. The reason that lies behind this is due to the formation of larger Ag NPs as a result of excessive agglomeration when a higher concentration of Ag precursor is used (Table 1). According to Spinelli et al., the large particles with the size exceeding 30 nm will induce a far-field scattering effect, where the incident photons will be scattered away in the form of heat rather than absorbed by the NPs.40 Moreover, the larger size Ag NPs also render an additional side effect, in which a large portion of the incoming photon is blocked along its pathway to reach the active sites of MoS2. When both of these factors exist, the photoexcited electrons will be reduced and subsequently the number of photoexcited electrons that transfer to the Ag NPs will be lowered. Hence, the overall hydrogen gas evolution rate is hampered.
For the sake of comparison, 20 wt% Ag/MoS2 is selected as a representative sample. It is observed that this sample exhibits almost a 46% increment in hydrogen gas production rate (179.5 μmol H2 gcat−1) if compared to that of the as-synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes (122.5 μmol H2 gcat−1), whereas a 95% enhancement is shown if compared to commercial MoS2 (92.0 μmol H2 gcat−1). The enhancement in the hydrogen gas evolution rate is due to the efficient transfer of photoexcited charges promoted by the Ag NPs co-catalyst. This deduction can be correlated with the PL spectrum (Fig. 7), where all of the nanocomposites exhibit a pronounced degradation in PL intensities. The phenomena of lower PL intensities imply that the electron–hole does not undergo recombination by heat dissipation or lattice distortion, which is generally observed.41 Instead, the photoexcited electrons manage to diffuse through the lattice up to its surface and participate in the redox reaction at the interface between the solid and the water.
3.3 Photocatalytic mechanism discussion
The mechanisms that contribute to the enhancement of the hydrogen gas evolution rate can be ascribed to the merit of the Ag NPs that serve as a co-catalyst. Such integration has encouraged the formation of a space charge region that will ease the efficient charge separation as illustrated in Fig. 9. It has been reported in the literature that the Fermi level of MoS2 is 4.7–4.0 eV,32 while the value for Ag NPs is 5.5 eV.42 Such a discrepancy results in 0.8–1.5 eV of an energy level offset, which subsequently causes band bending and the formation of a space charge region at the interface of the Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite system.32,43 This region is a charge free region but is occupied with a continuum of opposite charges, where the MoS2 side is occupied by negative charges, and the Ag co-catalyst side is occupied with positive charges alongside it.44 All the charges are distributed in a parallel manner and are separated by a gap.45 Under thermal equilibrium conditions, the dipole as-described above will prevent further movement of the charge carriers due to a high energy barrier which is resulting from the internal electric field. However, upon irradiation, the thermal equilibrium is perturbed by the incident photons and the electric field in the space charge region will strictly promote the photoexcited electrons to bypass the potential barrier. Thereafter, these electrons will tunnel through the space charge region and gather on the surface of the co-catalyst while holes are left at the MoS2 side. Hence, it is deduced that the formation of a space charge region can serve merit in assisting efficient electron–hole separation and preventing charge recombination.46 This can be evidenced by obvious PL quenching in the nanocomposites according to PL measurement in Fig. 7, where the integration of the Ag co-catalyst has greatly suppressed the intensity of PL emission.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representations for visible light hydrogen gas evolution over MoS2 in the presence of Ag NPs as co-catalyst. 
As a consequence, if compared to the pure MoS2, the reduction of water molecules is greatly eased at the surface of Ag NPs that serve as an “electron pool” in gathering the photoexcited electron for further conversion of the hydrogen ions to H2 molecules,47 while oxidation will take place on the active edges of the MoS2 nanoflakes. In order to prevent degradation on the nanocomposites, Na2S and Na2SO3 were adopted as hole sacrificial agents that are widely used in sulfide-based photocatalyst materials.48,49 It is believed that the sulfur ions (S2− and SO32−) from Na2S and Na2SO3 provide an extra sulfur source to enable surface reconstruction of the MoS2 as well as preventing further oxidation of the MoS2 nanoflakes.50–52 Other than that, the sacrificial agents also act as electron donors to react with the photo-generated holes,50 and hence increase the tendency of the photo-generated electrons to transfer to the conduction band of the MoS2 nanoflakes.
This is in good agreement with the reports that have been lodged by preceding studies,53,54 where incorporation of metal nanoparticles can indeed serve as an alternative route in further enhancing the hydrogen gas evolution in water due to fast transfer of the excited electrons generated by photon absorption from the semiconductor to the metal. As a result, undesired recombination by deexcitation to the ground state is strictly inhibited. Apparently, the contribution of the Ag NPs co-catalyst had strictly promoted efficient charge transfer within the nanocomposites if compared to the MoS2 nanoflakes alone.55 For the pure MoS2 nanoflakes alone, there is a high probability for the recombination of excitons to occur.45,56,57
Conclusions
In summary, a Ag/MoS2 photocatalyst nanocomposite has been successfully synthesized and characterized. The feasibility of the nanocomposite to be used as a photocatalyst for visible-light driven hydrogen gas evolution has been tested. The photocatalytic evaluation indicates that hydrogen gas production activities have Ag-loading dependence, where 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 shows optimum performance with a 95% enhancement in hydrogen gas evolution rate if compared to that of commercial MoS2 nanopowder. The possible mechanisms that contribute to the enhancement of hydrogen gas evolution rate are proposed, which consisted of a synergistic effect from the semiconductor and the Ag co-catalyst. The current study will serve as a platform to develop an efficient nanocomposite photocatalyst by incorporating a noble metal co-catalyst on a semiconductor for the advancement in renewable energy research.
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by the MOHE-ERGS (ER002-2013A). Additional sources of funding from UMRG (RP007B-13AFR), High Impact Research Program (UM.C/625/1/HIR/079), e-Sciencefund (13-02-03-3093), FRGS (FP038-2014B), HIR-MOHE (UM.C/625/1/HIR/MOHE/SC/06), and Flagship Project Grant (FL017-2011) are also highly appreciated. A. J. Cheah would like to acknowledge Postgraduate Research Fund (PG125-2014B) which is provided by the Institute of Research Management and Consultancy (IPPP) of University Malaya.
References
K. Rajeshwar, A. Thomas and C. Janáky, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 139 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y.-L. Li, C. M. Araujo, W. Luo and R. Ahuja, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2214 CAS .
L. Ge, C. Han, X. Xiao and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 6960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-K. Sun, F. Vallée, L. Acioli, E. Ippen and J. Fujimoto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 15337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, Z. Xu and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 1693–1705 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, S.-Y. Huang, Y. Li, S. N. Steinmann, W. Yang and L. Cao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Liu, L. Pan, W. Qin, T. Chen and Z. Sun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9647 RSC .
H. J. Conley, B. Wang, J. I. Ziegler, R. F. Haglund Jr, S. T. Pantelides and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang and A. F. Ismach, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, G. Wu, H. Yan, G. Ma, J. Shi, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1963 CAS .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. P. Jørgensen, Correlating Structure and Reactivity: MoS2 Nanoparticles for Hydrogen Evolution, PhD thesis,  2007, ch. 1, pp. 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R.-S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Liu, Q. Chen, K. Zhang, J. Chen, M. Wang, P. Guo and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 13091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi and H. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, Y. He and Y. Zhu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2004, 87, 87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chiu, S. Radiman, R. Abd-Shukor, M. Abdullah and P. Khiew, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 459, 291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Weber, J. Muijsers and J. Niemantsverdriet, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 9194 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, X. Zhao, W. Ye and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 142, 173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Asami, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1976, 9, 469 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, M. Pasta, K. J. Koski, J. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. D. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Wang, J. Mao, J. Deng, Q. Gao, Y. Tang and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Chi, H.-P. Lin and C.-Y. Mou, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 284, 199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Ryu, J.-W. Jung, K.-S. Park, S. Kim and I.-D. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 10975–10981 RSC .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Visic, R. Dominko, M. K. Gunde, N. Hauptman, S. D. Skapin and M. Remskar, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Frey, S. Elani, M. Homyonfer, Y. Feldman and R. Tenne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1998, 57, 6666 CrossRef CAS .
A. Slistan-Grijalva, R. Herrera-Urbina, J. F. Rivas-Silva, M. Ávalos-Borja, F. F. Castillón-Barraza and A. Posada-Amarillas, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Commun., 2001, 617 RSC .
U. Bhanu, M. R. Islam, L. Tetard and S. Khondaker, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5575 CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, K. Liu, X. Hong, M. Chen, J. Kim, S. Shi, J. Wu, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pashley, M. Stowell, M. Jacobs and T. Law, Philos. Mag., 1964, 10, 127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Krivosheeva, V. Shaposhnikov, V. Borisenko and J.-L. Lazzari, Anon, 2014 Search PubMed .
M. Uda, A. Nakamura, T. Yamamoto and Y. Fujimoto, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1998, 88–91, 643 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2510 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sangpour, F. Hashemi and A. Z. Moshfegh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13955 CAS .
P. Spinelli and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bhanu, M. R. Islam, L. Tetard and S. I. Khondaker, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4 Search PubMed .
L. Baia, M. Baia, W. Kiefer, J. Popp and S. Simon, Chem. Phys., 2006, 327, 63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Farmanbar and G. Brocks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2015, 161304 CrossRef .

          C. P. Poole Jr, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Condensed Matter Physics, Academic Press,  2004 Search PubMed .
T. Torimoto, H. Horibe, T. Kameyama, K.-i. Okazaki, S. Ikeda, M. Matsumura, A. Ishikawa and H. Ishihara, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2057 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bumajdad and M. Madkour, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7146 RSC .
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Q. Li and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Joo, R. Dillon, I. Lee, Y. Yin, C. J. Bardeen and F. Zaera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 7942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3479 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy and G. De, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 157, 87 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, M. Liu, Z. Zhou, J. Zhou, Y. Sun and L. Guo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9695 RSC .
I. Lee, J. B. Joo, Y. Yin and F. Zaera, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 10390 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, P. Stepanov, M. Gray and C. N. Lau, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 105709 CrossRef PubMed .

          E. A. Rozhkova and K. Ariga, From Molecules to Materials: Pathways to Artificial Photosynthesis, Springer,  2015 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the (a) as-synthesized MoS2 nanoflakes and (b) the 20 wt %-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite. (The dark violet and khaki-solid lines at the bottom refer to the standard patterns of MoS2 and Ag, respectively.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Wide scan for the commercial MoS2 nanopowder, the MoS2 nanoflakes and the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite (b) narrow scan for the Mo 3d, (c) S 2p and (d) Ag 3d (insets of Fig. 2(b) and (c) are the resolved spectra after deconvolution to its constituent state).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Low magnification (30k×) TEM image of the MoS2 nanoflakes that were suspended on a lacey copper grid. (b) High resolution TEM image (800k×) of MoS2 nanoflakes that reveals the defect-rich active edges with discontinued microstructures. (c) Low magnification (30k×) TEM image of the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite depicts that the Ag NPs are randomly distributed onto the MoS2 nanoflakes. (d) High resolution TEM image (800k×) of the Ag NPs which are embedded in the MoS2 nanoflakes.	 

5 wt%-Ag/MoS2	12.7
10 wt%-Ag/MoS2	13.8
20 wt%-Ag/MoS2	18.9
50 wt%-Ag/MoS2	51.1

 	Fig. 4  (a) HRTEM image of the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite that depicts the coexistence of both MoS2 nanoflakes and Ag NPs and the corresponding lattice fringes, (b) ring diffraction pattern of the selected region (red line box) indicates the respective crystal plane of both MoS2 nanoflakes and Ag NPs, (c) FFT image that is projected along the [110] zone axis for Ag NPs that are embedded into the nanocomposite and (d) FFT image of the MoS2 nanoflakes of the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Combined signal of 3 elements (Mo, S, Ag) for the 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 nanocomposite and (b) the corresponding EDXA spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 6  UV-vis absorption spectra of commercial MoS2, MoS2 nanoflakes, Ag NPs, 5 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 10 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 and 50 wt%-Ag/MoS2.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoluminescence spectra of commercial MoS2, MoS2 nanoflakes, 5 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 10 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 and 50 wt%-Ag/MoS2.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Time-dependent photocatalytic hydrogen gas production profile for Ag NPs, commercial MoS2, MoS2 nanoflakes, 5 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 10 wt%-Ag/MoS2, 20 wt%-Ag/MoS2 and 50 wt%-Ag/MoS2. (b) Yield of hydrogen gas for different samples.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representations for visible light hydrogen gas evolution over MoS2 in the presence of Ag NPs as co-catalyst.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
