Phosphorene quantum dots: synthesis, properties and catalytic applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR07340K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR07340K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 1037-1053Phosphorene quantum dots: synthesis, properties and catalytic applications

        
          
            Manila 
            Ozhukil Valappil
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Subbiah 
            Alwarappan
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Vijayamohanan K. 
            Pillai
          
          
        
      *b
aCSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 630003, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: alwarappan@cecri.res.in
bIndian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mangalam (P.O.), Tirupati 517507, Andhra Pradesh, India. E-mail: vijay@iisertirupati.ac.in
Received 
      5th November 2021
    , Accepted 7th December 2021First published on 7th January 2022AbstractPhosphorene quantum dots (PQDs) belong to a new class of zero-dimensional functional nanostructures with unique physicochemical and surface properties in comparison with few-layer phosphorene and other 2D analogues. Tunable band gap as a function of number of layers, ease of passivation and high carrier mobility of PQDs have attracted considerable attention in catalysis research due to which spectacular progress has been made in PQD research over the last few years. PQDs are now considered as promising catalytic materials for electrocatalytic water splitting and nitrogen reduction, lithium–sulfur batteries, solar light–driven energy devices and biocatalysis, either in pristine form or as an active component for constructing heterostructures with other 2D materials. In the light of these recent advances, it is worthwhile to review and consolidate PQD research in catalytic applications to understand the challenges ahead and suggest possible solutions. In this review, we systematically summarize various synthetic strategies including ultrasonic and electrochemical exfoliation, solvothermal treatment, blender breaking, milling, crushing and pulsed laser irradiation. Furthermore, the physiochemical properties of PQDs are discussed based on both experimental and theoretical perspectives. The potential applications of PQDs in catalysis with special emphasis on photocatalysis (solar light–driven energy devices) and electrocatalysis (oxygen evolution reactions and hydrogen evolution reactions) -are critically discussed along with the present status, challenges and future perspectivesManila Ozhukil ValappilDr. Manila Ozhukil Valappil received her MSc (Applied Chemistry) from Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kerala, India. She obtained her PhD in Chemical Sciences (2020) from CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Tamil Nadu, India. She is currently a postdoctoral research associate at the Department of Chemistry, University of Calgary, Canada. Her research interests revolve around materials electrochemistry.Subbiah AlwarappanDr Subbiah Alwarappan is now a Principal Scientist and Associate Professor at CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research institute. So far, he graduated over 25 researchers including PhD, MSc, MPhil and BTech students towards their thesis and mentored 6 Postdoctoral researchers. Prior to joining CSIR-CECRI, he worked in the United States (2006–2013) at various institutes (University of Iowa; Florida International University and University of South Florida). He graduated with a PhD degree from Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia (2003–2006) and was a recipient of IPRS fellowship from Australian Government. He published 92 research articles in the research area of electrochemical biosensors, photoelectrochemical sensors, biofuel cells, microelectrodes, electrocatalysts and electrosynthesis of quantum dots. He has also written 2 book chapters on biosensors and 1 book. He has 1 US patent to his credit. He is a Fellow of the Royal society of Chemistry and member of Indian National Young Academy of science (INYAS).Vijayamohanan K PillaiProf. Vijayamohanan K Pillai is now the Chair and Dean (Research) at IIER-Tirupathi, AP, India. Prior to this position, he was the director of CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu, India (2012–2018) and held additional director position at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory (2015–2016), Pune, Maharashtra, India. His research interests include electrocatalysis, electrochemical energy storage systems, bio-electrochemistry, electrosynthesis of nanomaterials and quantum dots. Prof. Pillai has more than 260 research papers and 20 patents to his credit. Under his guidance, 24 students have received PhD degrees. Prof. Pillai is a recipient of many prestigious awards including Medals of the MRSI and CRSI. He is a J C Bose National Fellow and Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences. He is also in the editorial boards of several prestigious journals.
1. Introduction
Phosphorus, which belongs to the pnictogen group (15th group) in the periodic table of elements, is often considered as one of the most earth-abundant elements (about 0.1% of the earth's crust).1 Due to high reactivity, direct access of elemental phosphorus is difficult and it often exists as phosphate rocks such as calcium phosphate in which, phosphorus has an oxidation state. Typically, phosphorus has four allotropes, namely, red, white, violet and black phosphorus. White and red phosphorus are the first two major allotropes discovered.2 White phosphorus discovered by Brand in 1669 has a tetrahedral structure of P4 molecules, while red phosphorus possesses a chain-like structure derived from P4 tetrahedron where a P–P bond (bond energy = 200 kJ mol−1) dissociates to form a new P–P bond with the nearest P4 tetrahedron. Violet phosphorus can be synthesized from red phosphorus by prolonged heating at 550 °C in the presence of molten Pb.3
Black phosphorus (BP) is thermodynamically the most stable allotrope of phosphorus. However, it was discovered long after white and red phosphorus. BP has a similar physical appearance to graphite (shiny black). It was first synthesized by Bridgman accidentally in early 1914 from white phosphorus by applying a high hydrostatic pressure up to 0.6 GPa at room temperature.4 The approximate transformation time was ∼30 min under these conditions. A small quantity of BP was found after cooling, and Bridgman noticed that this black material, which was later named as BP, showed a higher density (2.69 g cm−3) than that of white (1.83 g cm−3) and red analogues (2.34 g cm−3). Surprisingly, BP showed excellent thermal stability as it could sustain up to 400 °C in air without any spontaneous ignition. Later, several research groups started to modify BP synthesis by altering the reaction conditions including low pressure.5 During the late 1960s, the thrust towards superconductivity drew attention towards the phase diagram of phosphorus and it was found to exhibit superconductivity at a critical temperature (Tc) of 4–10 K, presumably in its high-pressure cubic and rhombohedral forms.6,7
Bulk BP has a layered structure with an interlayer spacing of 0.53 nm and van der Waals interactions between layers and an ideal monolayer (few layers in some cases) are referred to as phosphorene.2 Interestingly, this nomenclature has no known relation with the chemical nature of the material, as phosphorene has no P–P sp2 bond while it is purely based on its conceptual similarity to graphene and other 2D van der Waals materials. Though BP was discovered in 1914, in view of its 2D nature,4 phosphorene was only revisited in 2014 in continuation with graphene research.8 Unlike graphite, the in-plane P–P bonding in BP is sp3 hybridised, where each P atom is bonded to three adjacent P atoms. BP has an orthorhombic crystal structure.9 Due to the sp3 hybridization, each p orbital possesses a lone pair of electrons (they project out of plane of the layers at an angle of approximately 45°), and therefore unlike graphene, phosphorene does not exist as an atomically planar sheet. Instead, it has a puckered honeycomb structure (Fig. 1). As a result, each monolayer of phosphorene has two different types of P–P bonds, where the in-plane P–P bond length is 2.224 Å and the out-of-plane bond length is 2.244 Å.10 Apparently, these bond lengths are very close, as these are essentially covalent bonds between Phosphorus 3p orbitals.2 Similar to graphene, phosphorene also has zigzag and armchair edge sites (y and x axes respectively). However, BP is a direct band gap semiconductor with a tunable thickness or strain-dependent band gap (0.3 eV for BP to 2.0 eV for a monolayer of phosphorene). This is a unique advantage of phosphorene vs. other 2D materials, especially graphene. Band gap tunability offers a reasonable control over the field-effect mobility and on/off ratio, both of which are relevant for optoelectronic devices. For example, it typically exhibits an on–off ratio of 104–105 and a carrier mobility of up to 104 cm2 V−1 s−1.11 Phosphorene is highly anisotropic due to its asymmetric structure with different effective masses in x and y directions. It is expected that in the z-direction, it could be highly compressed and this variation in band gap with stress is important for developing strain sensors.12 Therefore, high carrier mobility along with an appropriate band gap in the visible region, layer-dependent optical properties and abundant lone-pairs to anchor metal ions (i.e., ease of surface functionalization) make phosphorene an excellent candidate for catalytic applications.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the crystalline structure of black phosphorus obtained from the relaxation of the structure using density functional theory calculations. The layered structure is composed of sheets with the phosphorus atoms arranged in a puckered honeycomb lattice. Adjacent layers interact via weak van der Waals forces, and are stacked following an ABA stacking order. (a) 3D representation. (b) Lateral view. (c) Top view. The distances and angles displayed were obtained by relaxing the crystal structure of a single-layer black phosphorus sheet. The distance value marked with (*) was obtained by relaxing the bulk structure. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from [IOP], Copyright [2014]. 
With the advent of phosphorene, its derivatives of lower dimensions such as quasi-0D phosphorene quantum dots (PQDs, often referred to as BPQDs in some reports in the literature) were much explored. This is particularly an interesting direction of 2D material research, as transforming a 2D phosphorene to 0-D PQDs of lateral sizes to less than 10 nm essentially results in size-dependent properties driven by quantum confinement and edge effects. Such beneficial effects have been studied extensively in the case of graphene quantum dots (GQDs).13,14 When the lateral size of the 2D material becomes less than the Bohr radius, the material starts to fluoresce because of modified electron distribution. Accordingly, the electronic properties start to become sensitive to the edge-structure, particle size and edge-type. Interestingly, some of these characteristics make QDs of a 2D material to overwhelmingly outperform traditional semiconductor quantum dots such as CdSe, ZnS and CdS. PQDs also share the same scenario as revealed by recent research on PQDs.15 The very first preparation of PQDs by a liquid-phase ultrasonic exfoliation from bulk BP crystals was reported in 2015, which interestingly exhibited an improved performance in flexible memory device.16 Later, it's photothermal conversion behavior was studied and recommended to be used for cancer therapy. Similarly, in succession, many 2D material research groups put extensive efforts on size-controlled PQD synthesis and found their widespread (and often flexible) applications in areas such as bio-imaging, fluorescence, energy storage, biosensing, photovoltaics, and optoelectronic devices.16 Being a new class of nanomaterials with a great potential for various applications due to tunable band gap as a function of the number of layers and high carrier mobility, spectacular progress has been made recently in PQD research. For these reasons, PQDs are considered as an emerging class of electrocatalytic materials for water splitting, photocatalysis and fabrication of lithium–sulfur batteries – all important for sustainable energy to meet world's energy demands.17–26 Maximizing active edge sites while narrowing down BP to PQDs is the key to achieve an improved electrocatalytic performance, and the band position and redox potential tunability are the keys for photocatalysis. PQDs allow natural surface passivation without any dangling bonds and do not have lattice mismatch issues for constructing vertical heterostructures with other 2D materials (electron donors or acceptors). These properties are highly desirable in photocatalytic applications. Therefore, it is important to review and consolidate PQD research to understand the challenges ahead and their possible solutions. Despite several reviews on 2D BP, a majority of them focus exclusively on the preparation without extensive attention towards specific applications except one review in 2018, which covered a few reports available at that point of time.27 However, a reasonably high number of reports appeared in the last two years on PQDs, and therefore, we believe that it is worth at this time to provide an updated review.
2. Synthesis of PQDs
In general, QDs of 2D materials can be prepared via two approaches: a top-down approach, which involves exfoliation of 2D materials to obtain their QDs (by chemical, mechanical, mechanochemical or electrochemical methods), and a bottom-up approach, which involves a step-wise synthesis of a QD starting from an atomic or molecular precursor (wet chemical synthesis and chemical vapor deposition).28 Both methods have their own advantages and disadvantages. For example, top-down methods such as liquid-phase and mechanical exfoliation are quite straightforward, and the starting materials are readily available. However, achieving an exact control on the size and number of layers in top-down methods is still challenging. Certain top-down synthetic approaches involve multiple steps, usage of strong acids and oxidising agents and demand high temperature requirements. Alternatively, bottom-up methods offer better size and morphological control, though the preparative yield is usually low and choices of atomic/molecular precursors are limited.
Following the past success in synthesizing QDs from other 2D materials, most of the reports on PQD synthesis involve top-down approaches such as liquid-phase exfoliation, electrochemical exfoliation, laser ablation, microwave irradiation and solvothermal exfoliation. Advantages include the inheritance of atom-thick layer and electronic anisotropy, emergence of quantum confinement (hence, size-dependent electronic properties), layer-dependent band gap and, hence, tunable physiochemical properties. However, BP degradation gets accelerated upon exfoliation to a nanoscale causing changes to its semiconducting properties. Hence, synthesis/processing of PQDs demands a post-synthetic/in situ protection strategy (surface functionalization or encapsulation) for vulnerable P edges from oxidative degradation.
Unlike other 2D material-derived QDs, an alternative bottom-up synthesis of atomic-scale PQDs has not been explored due to intrinsic complex chemistries involved and the unstable nature of phosphorus in general. However, there are reports on the preparation of gram-scale quantities of few-layer BP nanosheets by direct wet-chemical synthesis, which are stabilised by partial surface oxidation and thin film preparation at the wafer scale.29,30 Considering these observations, we restrict our focus on elaborating only the important state-of-the-art top-down synthesis of PQDs below.
2.1 Liquid phase exfoliation (LPE)
Liquid-phase exfoliation was adopted in the first report on PQD synthesis, involving ultrasonic exfoliation of BP crystals to yield PQDs, which were later employed for memory devices.31 Essentially, for an efficient LPE to prepare PQDs, reasonably good insertion of solvents into BP, and a mutual matching of surface tension components of BP and the solvents are required to avoid restacking of PQDs. Therefore, a good solvent for BP exfoliation must realise good wetting, insertion, exfoliation and, importantly, stabilisation of PQDs. To this end, the first report on LPE indicates that the preparation of PQDs involves BP powder being exfoliated using N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). Briefly, BP and NMP were ground into a slurry, which was then subjected to ultrasonication in an ice bath for 3 h followed by centrifugation at 7000 rpm for 20 min. The supernatant yielded PQDs of average diameter 4.9 nm with 3–5 layers. However, the extent of agglomeration or restacking of these PQDs during the evaporation of the high-boiling point solvent such as NMP, and product yield are difficult to control. Nevertheless, plenty of reports appeared in the last two years following the same method.32–40 A slightly modified approach involving the combination of bath and probe sonication was also attempted with an objective to increase the product yield, where BP was semi-exfoliated by sonication probes into BP nanosheets, followed by ice-bath sonication into PQDs (Fig. 2).41 Furthermore, the photo-thermal performance of the as-obtained PQDs was also explored. One of the advantages of probe sonication of BP is that it allows BP powder to be used as such without any grinding. Nevertheless, complete solvent removal issues remain, and substantial discussions of the extent of defects of PQDs were also missed in many reports. In addition, NMP itself exhibits PL emission, and many reports ignore to prove if this emission is only from PQDs or adsorbed fragments of NMP.42
 Fig. 2  Illustration of PQD synthesis by probe sonication of BP powder in NMP followed by bath sonication. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from [Wiley], Copyright [2015]. 
The lateral size and thickness of PQDs are difficult to be controlled, especially by the much-reported methods such as liquid-phase exfoliation. However, there are few liquid-phase-assisted methods such as an additive-assisted technique that could achieve accurate lateral size and thickness control. For example, a recent report has demonstrated the preparation of band gap-tunable PQDs by a liquid exfoliation method in a mixture solvent of NMP and oleic acid.43 A control sample of PQDs in NMP without oleic acid was also prepared. The lateral size/thickness of PQDs prepared in the presence and absence of oleic acid was 2.6/1.9 nm and 3/2.6 nm respectively. For this reason, the optical properties of these two PQDs are significantly different from each other.
Though most of the studies used NMP, few groups explored the use of low-boiling solvents such as ethanol, methanol, isopropanol (IPA), chloroform and de-aerated water.44–49 Some of these solvents could realise only weak exfoliation though the solvent removal issues were minimized via these approaches. Polar solvents also involve the chemical interaction with PQDs, which may affectphotoluminescence. Alternatively, usage of additives is also important for obtaining stable PQDs. Beneficial effects of this strategy over using a single solvent include optimising the LPE of BP by varying the ratios of the solvents and additives, suppression of Ostwald ripening and restacking during solvent boil-off and the possible expansion of library of LPE solvents with a new set of theoretically possible combination of additives. To this end, few groups attempted to obtain PQDs using a combination of NMP and NaOH.40,50,51 However, all of these reports ignored to substantiate the role of NaOH in BP exfoliation. Apparently, it is conceivable that in the last two years, comparatively less efforts have been made towards PQD synthesis using LPE.
2.2 Solvothermal synthesis
PQDs can also be prepared by solvothermal methods. For example, recently, solvothermal synthesis using BP and alkaline NMP at 140 °C for 6 h in a N2 atmosphere was demonstrated to yield PQDs of average size 1.8 nm.52 These PQDs were then used as oxidase mimics to detect biothiols. Furthermore, many groups followed a solvothermal method using NMP to produce PQDs of average diameter ranging from 2 to 4 nm with few layers, which found widespread applications.53–56 Some of these solvothermal methods were also assisted by a pre-ultrasonic exfoliation step to increase the yield while some involved only NMP as the solvent without any additive such as NaOH. Nevertheless, the long-term stability of PQDs under basic conditions and the effect of by-products during the synthesis continued to remain unaddressed.
2.3 Microwave synthesis
Among all 2D materials, microwave absorption of BP has been rarely studied despite the advantage of a strong microwave absorption to realise a more efficient microwave-assisted exfoliation. To our knowledge, only one report is available on the electromagnetic absorption properties of BP, which provides few-layer BP prepared by LPE.57 The advantages of this method include quick exfoliation (typically in the order of few minutes) with rapid and volumetric heating, ease of scale-up using microwave reactors, flexibility, and side products issues. A recent report has discussed BP exfoliation as a two-step microwave process using two different types of microwave generating instruments.58 The idea was to use the first microwave step (10 min, 50 °C) to weaken the van der Waals interaction between the BP layers to form few-layer BP, followed by a prolonged second step for 30 min at 120 °C to further exfoliate and separate BP into PQDs (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the controllable synthesis of 2D few-layer BP (FL-BP) nanosheets and 0D PQDs in NMP using a microwave-assisted technique. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from [RSC], Copyright [2019]. 
The supernatant was then subjected to centrifugation at 6000 rpm for 30 min and a stable dispersion of PQDs (with lateral size no more than 5 nm) in NMP was obtained. Again, the aforementioned issues associated with NMP remain. Alternatively, there is another report of microwave synthesis using ethanol.59 Briefly, the process is a replica of the first report, involving a two-step microwaving process with slightly modified temperatures (1st step at 70 °C for 11 min and 2nd step at 80 °C for 30 min). Exfoliation to PQDs was realised upon heating at 80 °C in the second step, as the vaporisation of intercalated ethanol could exert a bursting pressure to further weaken the interlayer interactions. Moreover, the rotor shear force in the equipment also reinforced the exfoliation by weakening the interlayer forces. The average size of PQDs with a thickness of 2.2 ± 1.3 nm prepared via this green process is slightly less than that (2.4 ± 0.85 nm) reported in the previous study. However, the report discusses neither the yield nor the optical properties such as quantum yield. Overall, these questions generate various future research directions to regulate the size and number of layers, heteroatom doping and properties such as photoluminescence by varying the exfoliation parameters such as microwave power, temperature-programmed approaches, choice of solvents and their polarity effects, and exfoliation time.
2.4 Pulsed laser ablation
Pulsed lasers with high peak power densities (typically >1013 W cm−2) and ultra-short durations (femto- and nanosecond) were employed for the exfoliation of 2D materials to form their low-dimensional structures.60–62 The ablation mechanism of these pulsed lasers can involve distinct steps due to their different pulse times.63–65 Irradiation of a single femtosecond pulse on bulk 2D materials can induce a localized transient free-electron density possibly leading to thermal phase-changes such as melting and evaporation and, consequently, result in large-sized nanosheets/QDs. In line with previous reports on pulsed laser irradiation to synthesize graphene and MoS2 quantum dots, BP exfoliation to PQDs has also been attempted by few groups. For example, recently, PQDs with an average diameter of 6 nm and a thickness of 1 nm were prepared using pulsed laser ablation of BP target in an isopropyl ether solvent within 30 min.66 A neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) pulsed laser with a repetition rate of 10 Hz, a wavelength of 1064 nm, a power density of approximately 140 mW cm−2 and a pulse duration of 3–6 ns was used to generate PQDs with a quantum yield of ∼21% having excellent biocompatibility for imaging.
The choice of solvent in a laser ablation process is one of the important experimental variables in view of tuning the surface properties of PQDs, especially photoluminescence. In this direction, a group studied the effect of solvents in pulsed laser ablation of BP to PQDs (7 nm size) using three different solvents such as tetrahydrofuran, ethylene glycol and polyethylene glycol.67 The laser, target and wavelength were the same as discussed above, while the repetition rate, power and pulse width were 5 Hz, 30 mJ and 6 ns respectively. The study concludes that the solvents affect the passivation features of PQDs, and hence, control the photoluminescence emission. Increase in the molecular chain lengths of the solvents resulted in increasing red-shift in photoluminescence emission, while the photoluminescence emission was excitation independent. The longer the molecular chain of the solvent, the longer the chain length of the passivation layer containing oxygen groups, and hence, the larger the size of the PQDs.67
The laser ablation approach offers size tunability as a function of laser intensity, cooling rate and gas reactivity. However, there are certain drawbacks for this approach such as high investment costs owing to the procurement of a sophisticated laser system, high energy consumption demand for high ablation efficiency (though applicable to many other routes) and inability of laser sources to scale-up. Ablation efficiency generally has an inverse relationship with ablation time as the synthesized particles stay in the path of laser beam.68 To some extent, it can be solved using a flow-through system.
2.5 Electrochemical methods
Electrochemical methods for material synthesis have been well established for nanoparticle synthesis.69–71 Compared to conventional methods, electrochemical methods are performed under milder conditions at ambient temperatures and, more importantly, doping of heteroatoms can be carried out even at room temperature. In view of exfoliation of 2D materials to synthesize 0D QDs, electrochemical methods are versatile as they allow oxidative or reductive exfoliation when an appropriate applied potential and electrolyte are used. The applied electric field facilitates the structural expansion of bulk 2D material by weakening the interlayer van der Waals forces. The activation energy requirements for a particular 2D to quasi-0D QD transformation can be met by the applied electric field. Therefore, most of the electrochemical exfoliations can be carried out at room temperature. Experimental variables such as choice of appropriate solvent, supporting electrolyte and applied potential are critical to dictate the size, oxygen content and defects of QDs.
Electrochemical exfoliation can be performed using either a two- or three-electrode (a working electrode, a reference electrode and a counter electrode) configuration. However, in both these cases, for a top-down approach, the bulk material to be transformed as QDs is generally used as the working electrode. Alternatively, electrolysis of dispersions of the starting material, (for example, electrolysis of a BP dispersion) in a suitable electrolyte using Pt sheets as electrodes is also possible especially via electrophoretic deposition, as seen for graphene-based QD synthesis.72 The solvated anions/cations or radicals generated upon applying a potential intercalate into bulk layered structure with charge compensating counter ions. Electrochemical methods necessitate the bulk layered materials to be good conductors so as to be used as working electrodes. The working electrode can be a pellet/rod of bulk material, and a thin film or the bulk material can be physisorbed onto a conducting substrate such as a glassy carbon electrode.
Electrochemical exfoliation can be either anodic or cathodic. In anodic exfoliation, a positive bias is applied so that the mechanism of exfoliation will be anionic intercalation from the supporting electrolyte or the anions produced from the solvent. During cathodic exfoliation, a negative bias is applied to the bulk 2D material, which drives the cations to intercalate. The cations are usually solvated cations in effect. Both types of exfoliation can be performed in aqueous, ionic liquids or non-aqueous electrolytes such as propylene carbonate and acetonitrile using appropriate supporting electrolytes. As the product yield of electrochemical exfoliation is significantly dictated by the efficiency of ion intercalations towards the bulk 2D layers to expand their interlayer spacing, anodic exfoliation is found to be better.73 This is because anionic insertion is found to be effective than cationic insertion, which has been well validated by the studies on graphite electrochemical exfoliation in both aqueous and non-aqueous systems.74,75 However, in terms of defects, cathodic exfoliation is better due to minimal detrimental defects caused by oxidation. Therefore, reductive exfoliation has advantages such as large size and high crystallinity while anodic exfoliation via anion intercalation allows surface modifications and (or) oxidations in the presence of oxidative radicals, thereby producing 2D nanomaterials with diverse functionalities. Since phosphorene is highly vulnerable towards oxidative degradation, for PQD synthesis, cathodic exfoliation, which is milder than anodic exfoliation is therefore recommended, though product yield is usually expected to be poor. However, recent reports on cathodic electrochemical exfoliation to phosphorene flakes with 78% yield are encouraging. To date, there are only a few reports on the anodic exfoliation of BP specifically to PQDs, while most of the early reports discuss BP exfoliation to few-layer-thick phosphorene sheets, not PQDs.76 A recent report has demonstrated the synthesis of functionalised PQDs (average size of 2–3 nm) by oxidation (+2.0 V) of BP in formamide and pristine PQDs in propylene carbonate containing a supporting electrolyte.77 These PQDs were intrinsically functionalised with nitrogen-containing functional groups or generated from the electrolyte. In another work, electrochemical exfoliation of BP and synchronous fluorination of PQDs (size 5.0 ± 2.0 nm) were demonstrated using an ionic liquid electrolyte.78 Typically, BP chunk was used as the working electrode in a sealed three-electrode electrochemical cell containing 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate [EMIM][BF4] (0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, or 1.0 M) in acetonitrile as the electrolyte. A Pt wire and an Ag wire were used as the counter and pseudo reference electrodes, respectively. With an anodic potential of 8 V versus Ag wire, BP was exfoliated initially and then synchronously fluorinated by the electrolyzed anions. The “as obtained” exfoliates/electrolyte dispersions were then used as fluorinated PQDs. The generation of F− anions and BF3 molecules from BF4− is activated by the applied anodic voltage and the exfoliated PQD edges as instantaneously fluorinated by F− anions. Therefore, the F/P ratio followed a direct proportion with the concentration of the ionic liquid. F functionalization protected PQDs from surface oxidation and degradation.
Surface oxidation could be in one way minimized by cathodic exfoliation. The efficiency or yield of a cathodic exfoliation is mainly decided by the size of the cations of the supporting electrolyte along with other factors such as physical properties of the solvents, the applied voltage and the current density.80 These factors also contribute to the quality of the products. Towards this direction, we reported a cathodic exfoliation of BP in a non-aqueous electrolyte to generate (7 nm) PQDs.81 Briefly, a dispersion of BP in ethanol was physisorbed on a glassy carbon electrode, which was then used as the working electrode. Propylene carbonate containing 0.1 wt% LiClO4 was used as the electrolyte and a cathodic potential of 2.0 V (an electric field of strength 5.2 × 108 V m−1) was applied for 24 h (Fig. 4). Electrosynthesis was also carried out using various solvent–supporting electrolyte combinations and potentials to check the control on the size tunability of the method. Interestingly, we could obtain size-tuned PQDs, though the yield was poor (<50%). This size tunability is mainly attributed to the size of the intercalating cations and anions from the supporting electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the electrosynthesis of PQDs and nitrogen-doped PQDs from BP. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from [IOP], Copyright [2019]. 
Band gap variants of PQDs can also be prepared electrochemically by in situ doping of heteroatoms in a phosphorene lattice or by appropriate surface functionalization. To this end, we have recently reported room-temperature cathodic exfoliation to obtain nitrogen-doped PQDs (NPQDs) using heteroatoms containing the solvent and supporting electrolyte such as acetonitrile and tetraethylammonium tetrafluorophosphate realising simultaneous exfoliation and nitrogen doping (Fig. 4).82 By choice of appropriate solvent and supporting electrolyte, the nitrogen content could be tuned, and PQDs clearly exhibited unique properties upon nitrogen doping.79 All these electrochemical approaches underscore their potential as a facile exfoliation technique offering a high degree of flexibility to synthesize PQDs from BP, despite poor yield that could be addressed by employing large-area electrodes (Table 1).
Table 1 Various methods for PQD synthesis




Method
Solvent
Lateral size (nm)
Advantage(s)
Disadvantage(s)
Ref.




Ultrasonication
NMP
4.9
Monodisperse PQDs
Tedious separation/chances for agglomeration

31



Probe and bath sonication
NMP
2.6
Increased product yield
Tedious separation and low PL quantum yield

41



Ultrasonication
Oleic acid in NMP
2.6/3
Size-tunable PQDs
Tedious separation

43



Ultrasonication
Isopropanol
5.2
Narrow size distribution
Weak exfoliation yield

44



Ultrasonication

N,N Dimethyl formamide
2–10
Increased product yield
Wide size distribution

45



Microwave
NMP
3
Rapid synthesis
Scaling up of reactor

58



Ultrasonication
Isopropanol
10
Easy removal of low boiling point solvent
Polarity of the solvent may adversely affect the photoluminescence of PQDs

47



Laser ablation
Diethyl ether
7
Clean approach
Low PL quantum yield (11%)

83



Electrochemical methods
Organic electrolytes such as propylene carbonate, formamide, acetonitrile, DMSO and the 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([EMIM][BF4])/acetonitrile
6–8
Size tunability using potentiostatic methods
Low product yield

77, 78, 81 and 82




The current scenario of synthetic protocols for 2D material-based QDs gives a perception that the synthesis of PQDs from BP has not been explored much beyond liquid-phase exfoliation. Considering the challenges associated with PQDs due to its degradation under ambient conditions, immediate attention should be paid to newer synthetic strategies for PQDs with ambient air stability, without which this unique material cannot be realized for practical applications.
3. Properties of PQDs
Upon transforming BP to PQDs, several intriguing electronic and photophysical properties emerge due to the quantum confinement and edge effects. Consequently, PQDs have been identified as prospective candidates owing to their excellent stability when adequately passivated, low toxicity and fair optical properties. Compared to the BP, the edge-to-volume ratios and in-plane electronic mobilities are higher in PQDs. This enables them to exhibit size-dependent properties (for example, optical and electronic properties). Such properties of PQDs have been realized in several applications such as hydrogen evolution reactions (HERs), bio-imaging, sensing and photocatalysis. The following section will briefly account some of the important properties of PQDs.
3.1 Optical properties
Most striking features of PQDs are their optical absorption and photoluminescence (PL) emission properties based on their chemical, structural and edge site configurations. Essentially, like other QDs, PQDs also exhibit size-dependent optical properties due to quantum confinement and edge effects which are realised when the size and thickness are modulated by the band gap. Surface passivation effects (surface states) are also known to have a strong influence on optical properties. The optical band gap of PQDs can be calculated by recording a UV-visible spectrum and transforming the absorption data to the Tauc plot.43 Generally, the band gap of PQD varies between 2.8 and 3.3 eV depending upon the size and layer thickness.43 PL emission properties of PQDs and carrier dynamics were also studied extensively during the last two years in order to be used as bio-imaging and fluorescence probes to detect metal ions.39,50,51,66,84,85
In order to employ PQDs as fluorescent probes for in vitro detection and in vivo imaging, the fluorescence intensity of PQDs must be stable over prolonged excitation for hours. Therefore, the photostability of PQDs under ambient conditions is crucial. Light-induced structural degradation of phosphorene by photo-oxidation has been studied by several groups.86–88 The main take-home messages from all these studies are that, photo-oxidation occurs only in the presence of air (oxygen), water or both, and that the ultraviolet component of light is the main contributor. However, theoretical studies have shown that the formation of P–O–P bonds upon phosphorene oxidation can have a beneficial effect. A fully oxidized phosphorene layer of nominal thickness can act as a native capping agent resisting its further degradation from water, concomitantly leaving the underlying phosphorene structure of high hole mobility intact.87 Alternatively, other surface passivation techniques could also be employed to achieve higher photostability. A recent study that involved PQDs of lateral diameter 3.5 nm prepared by liquid-phase exfoliation showed a superior photostability under continuous irradiation of 808 and 980 nm laser, whereas the same PQDs were not photostable under 660 nm laser excitation.89 Such an observation was attributed to the complete photo-oxidation of PQDs by superoxide ions generated on the surface under laser irradiation to their oxides. In another work, photostable PQDs were prepared by liquid-phase exfoliation followed by an additional heat treatment in ethanol.90 The photostability of the prepared PQDs was as high as conventional semiconductor nanostructures due to the introduction of two surface states related to P–OH and P–O–CH2CH3 by the ethanol treatment. It was also shown that the polar water molecules were responsible for the removal of non-radiative centers simultaneously increasing P-related radiative centres. This particular study therefore showed that surface passivation could improve the photostability of PQDs.
Liquid-phase exfoliation, especially using NMP as a solvent is one of the common approaches for PQD synthesis. PQDs prepared by this approach exhibit excitation-dependent blue-violet emission with a single peak due to size effects or polydispersity. However, care must be taken to confirm that this PL emission is only from PQDs and not from NMP as the latter has a strong emission in the visible range. Many reports ignore this solvent interaction. When the excitation wavelength is progressively increased from ultraviolet to visible range, PL emission from the solvent gets weaker. Therefore, it is recommended to record the PL emission of PQDs with a light of excitation wavelength higher than 400 nm in the case of PQDs in polar organic solvents. Alternatively, it is also possible to carry out LPE in a non-polar/hydrophobic/non-fluorescent solvent to study the photoluminescence mechanism and other aspects of PQDs.90,91 For example, a recent report has shown that the use of ethanol to both exfoliate and passivate PQDs has been found to enhance the PL emission. The electronegative –OH groups were capable of immediately passivating the defects on the PQD edges after exfoliation. Introduction of –OH surface functional groups has been reported to decrease the number of non-radiative defects or extend the π conjugation to enhance PL emission.92 The effect of –OH surface functional groups on PL emission was further compared with PQDs exfoliated in ethanol being transferred to water via solvent exchange. Interestingly, the PL spectra of PQDs in ethanol and water exhibit two emission bands at 370 and 450 nm in which emission was more intense (about ten times) in water than in ethanol under the same PQD concentration. Essentially, the 450 nm PL band was stronger than the 370 nm one for PQDs in water and the two PL bands were excitation wavelength independent. Hence, the study alludes that such PL behavior should originate from optical transitions of the surface states due to surface passivation by ethanol, which has been observed in an analogous 0D system such as graphene quantum dots.14,90,93,94 Photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectral analysis showed that for the 450 nm PL excited by 360 nm, the absolute quantum yield (a direct measure for the efficiency of the conversion of absorbed photons into emitted photons) of PQDs in ethanol was 23% while in water, it could reach even 70%, indicating that the 450 nm emission is more sensitive to the polar solvent.
Multiple banded blue-violet PL emissions (generally three to four bands) are also observed for PQDs, prominently for PQDs synthesized by pulsed irradiation methods and electrochemical methods.66,67,81–83 An example for such a multifrequency PL emission is shown in Fig. 5a for PQDs specifically synthesised using pulsed laser ablation in tetrahydrofuran.67 In phosphorene, each P atom is bonded with three neighboring P atoms by sp3 hybridization creating three σ bonds and a lone pair. The three σ bonds of each P atom consist of two inner σ bonds (σinner) and one outer σ bond (σouter) bond with bond lengths of 2.164 Å and 2.207 Å (Fig. 5b).10 However, unequal and asymmetrical sp3 hybridization cause the electron energy levels of these two types of σ bonds (with different bond lengths) to be different. Longer bond length has less bond energy, and therefore, a higher energy level and consequently, the energy of σouter is also higher than the σinner state as shown in Fig. 5b. Therefore, two intrinsic PL emissions were accounted for transitions from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) to the σinner and σouter. Another type of transition reasonable for multiple PL emissions is due to the existence of surface states. Upon exfoliation, the vulnerable P atoms at the PQD edges are instantaneously passivated with oxygen-containing groups such as PO and P–OR derived from the decomposed solvents. Such functional groups create their own surface states of distinct energy levels, viz., SPO and SP–OR. These energy levels stay higher than σinner and σouter and, therefore, the transitions from LUMO to σinner and σouter are lower energy transitions, which appear at higher wavelengths.
 Fig. 5  (a) PL emission spectra of the PQDs in tetrahydrofuran excited with various wavelengths from 320 nm to 380 nm. The inset shows the molecular structure of tetrahydrofuran. (b) Structural diagram of the PQDs with schematically drawn σinner (red) and σouter (blue) bonds and functional groups; and schematic diagram of the PL emission transitions of the PQDs. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from [AIP], Copyright [2019]. 
Interestingly, multiple PL emissions are also characterised by excitation independence. Passivation with functional groups such as PO and P–OR cause inductive effect to the phosphorene skeleton of PQDs, causing a significant increase in electron density on its periphery and surfaces. As a result, the ground-state energy levels (highest occupied molecular orbitals – HOMO) of the PQDs are elevated, narrowing the band gap due to the increasing number of functional groups and electron density. This is an equivalent effect of increasing the size of the PQDs, thereby narrowing the band gap. Once passivation is saturated, the band gap becomes independent of the quantum confinement effect. Consequently, the PL emission peaks become invariant with the excitation wavelength or size.
Several groups have studied similar PL emissions of PQDs to conclude that PQDs with high quantum yield generate intense and stable PL emission, which is beneficial for biomedical applications such as labeling, imaging, sensing of pH and other bio analytes and targeted drug delivery.39,51,84,95–97 However, more studies focusing on long-term toxicity effects and validation protocols are needed before successful deployment for clinical applications.
3.2 Catalytic properties
PQDs are an emerging class of electrode materials for electrocatalytic water splitting, photocatalysis, biocatalysis and lithium–sulfur batteries, which are well supported not only from recent experimental results but by several computational calculations as well.17–26 Maximizing the number of active edge sites (zig-zag, arm-chair or chiral) while narrowing down BP to PQDs is the key to achieve an improved electrocatalytic performance, while band gap/position tunability is an essential prerequisite for photocatalysis. Various types of phosphorene with native defects and varied oxidation degrees have been studied for electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reactions (OERs).98 To obtain a reasonable OER performance, a moderate adsorption strength of intermediate O* is critical. Very strong adsorption of O* on the PQD skeleton and defects result in poor OER performance. Controlled oxidation can however effectively weaken the adsorption strength of O* and control the electrocatalytic activities. Therefore, one experimental variable to tune the catalytic performance becomes the local oxidation degree of phosphorene. Accordingly, a recent study which explored the relationship between local oxidation degree and OER performance has shown that for OERs, the catalytic activity improves with the increase in local oxidation degrees of phosphorene.98 Therefore, the OER catalytic activity could be maximized on a local P2O5-like surface. In another study, a significantly higher electrochemical activity of edge sites compared to the basal plane was experimentally and theoretically explained by the metallic character of the edges.99 This observation is also further confirmed by various reports on PQDs and electrocatalytic OER activity.21,58 However, electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions (HERs) are also catalysed by PQDs.24 For example, when PQDs are made to a hybrid with Ti3C2Tx MXenes, the Gibbs free energy of the intermediate state of adsorbed H* (|ΔGH*|) decreased significantly resulting in a moderate adsorption–desorption characteristic favourable for HERs. Adsorption energy of water was also decreased significantly favouring activation of water to exhibit enhanced OERs. However, enhanced conductivity and stability of PQDs is a challenge in developing a stand-alone OER/HER catalyst, despite few reports on the usage of a conducting catalyst support such as carbon cloths and glassy carbon to circumvent this issue.58,77
Solar driven-hydrogen production from water can also be catalysed by PQDs. A band gap in the range of 2–3 eV is necessary for a photocatalyst to harness the maximum visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. BP has an appropriate band gap for solar water splitting (however not an appropriate band edge position), which can be further modulated by transforming to PQDs. Many calculations show that the energy levels of the frontier molecular orbitals of monolayer PQDs of specific sizes (optimised by the number of P atoms, N) can satisfy the criteria for photocatalysis of water oxidation and reduction reactions (Fig. 6), while for BP the valence band maximum is above the water oxidation potential, hence unable to promote water oxidation.100 PQDs have an additional advantage of large surface area apart from their capability to harvest the full spectrum of visible light, and therefore, can exhibit higher catalytic activity. The role of a photocatalyst is to produce electron–hole pairs to subsequently participate in the reduction and oxidation reactions for the formation of H2 and O2 gases upon solar radiation. For total water splitting, the conduction band minimum of the photocatalyst must be higher than the redox potential of H+ to H2 and the valence band maximum should be lower than the redox potential of H2O to O2.101,102 Nanostructuring of BP into PQDs has therefore beneficial effects not only on band gap engineering but also on shifting the band edge positions.
 Fig. 6  HOMO and LUMO energy levels of black-PQDs with the number of P atoms, N = 22, 30 and 46, calculated by hybrid B3LYP functional. The dashed lines indicate the standard redox potentials for water splitting. The blue colored numbers show the HOMO–LUMO gap (in unit of eV) for each system. The energy differences (expressed in eV) between HOMO (LUMO) and the water oxidation (reduction) potential are indicated below (above) each HOMO (LUMO) level. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from [Elsevier], Copyright [2017]. 
Apart from electrocatalysis and photocatalysis, PQDs are also capable of effectively adsorbing and catalyzing polysulfide conversion in lithium–sulfur batteries due to the fecundity of catalytically active edge sites.103 For example, the utilization of a minimal amount of PQDs as additives to sulfur cathode has been found to promote reaction kinetics with trapping of polysulfides and low capacity fading rate for several cycles.
3.3 Chemical properties
Phosphorene is infamous for its chemical stability as it is susceptible to degradation upon light, water and oxygen exposure, which makes its practical applications challenging.88,104 Compared to phosphorene nanoflakes, the long-term stability of pristine PQDs is harder to achieve due to more exposed edges. Despite this shortcoming, the striking advantage will be the more exposed coordinated edge sites facilitating easy functionalization especially using selected ligands. Degradation of BP essentially originates from its surface oxide formation, PxOy, which over a period of time further reacts with water/moisture, thereby transforming to orthophosphoric acid (H3PO4). Several mechanisms are proposed for this process. Some research groups attribute the degradation to intrinsic hydrophilicity of the BP surface, while some groups argue that oxygen is the main driver as triple-to singlet oxygen conversion is feasible on phosphorene.10,105 The detrimental effects of a photo-assisted oxidative degradation mechanism in the presence of oxygen and water were also demonstrated, and interestingly, some studies showed that water does not have a role in degradation at all.86,106 From all these, it is perceivable that the degradation mechanism of phosphorene under ambient conditions still remains unclear.
Being more vulnerable than BP due to undercoordinated edge sites, various protection strategies have been developed to alleviate degradation of PQDs. Surface modification is the key and by providing either an additional protective layer to block oxygen and water exposure or occupying the lone pair electrons of the phosphorus atom via covalent or noncovalent modifications, it is possible that the stability of PQDs can be retained to a great extent. Alternatively, heteroatom doping (preferably iso-valent) is also possible. Another strategy is to make use of empty orbitals of metal atoms to coordinate with lone pair electrons of PQDs. For example, an in situ method was developed to protect PQDs via Zn-ion coordination by liquid-phase exfoliation in NMP in the presence of zinc nitrate, followed by a solvothermal reaction.107 Zn-Ions adsorbed onto the PQD surface via cation–π interactions passivate lone pair electrons of edge P atoms from reacting with oxygen, imparting stability under ambient conditions. In another work of surface passivation strategy, polydopamine was used to functionalise PQDs via a self-polymerisation reaction.36 Unlike the zinc ion coordination strategy, polydopamine with enriched phenol groups works as a reactive oxygen scavenger and provides protection to PQDs. Direct covalent functionalization using organic reactions is an alternate strategy. For example, recently, using poly[(9,9-dioctyl-9H fluorene)-alt-(4-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)aniline)] (PFCz-NH2) as the synthetic precursor, a diazotated polymer, PFCzN2+BF4−-grafted PQD (via formation of a P–C bond between the polymer and PQDs), was prepared under aqueous conditions, as shown in the scheme in Fig. 7.108 Such a covalent-functionalised strategy enabled PQDs to sustain in memory devices.
 Fig. 7  Synthesis of PFCz-N2+BF4− and PFCz-g-PQDs: (a) HBF4, isoamyl nitrite, CH3COOH, −22 °C, 6 h; (b) NMP, ultrasonic radiation for 12 h (200 W), 5 °C; centrifugation for 2 h (8000 rpm); and (c) PFCz-N2+BF4−, tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate, dry and degassed acetonitrile, RT, 6 h. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from [RSC], Copyright [2019]. 
4. Applications in catalysis
4.1 Solar light-driven energy devices
As discussed in section 3.2, the tunability of both the band gap and the band edge position along with modifiable surface and long exciton lifetime makes PQDs strong candidates for photocatalytic applications.5 For example, theoretical predictions show that excitonic lifetimes of the PQDs vary between 2 and 8 ns on a Si (and 3–11 ns SiO2) substrate for a particle size less than 10 nm respectively.109 The combination of PQDs with various photocatalytic materials can therefore result in increased light absorption and interfacial charge separation. Towards this direction, several reports have appeared during the last couple of years. For instance, PQDs prepared by ultrasonic exfoliation were investigated to develop TiO2−x/PQD heterojunction photoanodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting.35 PQDs were decorated on the TiO2 nanotube by a spin-coating method. The TiO2−x/BP electrode exhibited around a two-fold increase in the photocurrent density compared to that of the bare TiO2 electrode (0.38 mA cm−2) under simulated solar light irradiation. The maximum photoconversion efficiency also increased from 0.13% for TiO2 nanotube arrays to 0.35% for the heterojunction electrode, verifying the synergistic effect of oxygen vacancies and PQD sensitization. Similarly, another study demonstrated the beneficial effects of PQDs doped into hexagonal ZnIn2S4 to form flower-like microspheres as 0D/2D heterostructures towards photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution.110 An optimum charge transfer was achieved by interfacial interactions within the heterostructure. A 30% higher H2 evolution rate compared to ZnIn2S4 was achieved even with a percentage as small as 0.2% PQD.
The role of PQDs in effecting the carrier separation to promote photocatalytic hydrogen production over binary Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 composites has been explored recently.40 PQDs were chosen based on their carrier separation capability and excellent visible and near-infrared light absorption capacity.26,111 In this work, hierarchical PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 of wrapping morphologies was constructed with ZnIn2S4 on the outer surface of the co-catalyst Cu7S4 nanocrystal and controlled doping of PQDs on ZnIn2S4 for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible light. The schematic band position and mechanism of photo-generated electron transfer of PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 are shown in Fig. 8. Apparently, efficient charge separation between Cu7S4 and ZnIn2S4 supplemented by the carrier transfer mediation of PQDs was responsible for 6.8 times higher H2 production rate (885 μmol g−1 h−1) than that of pristine ZnIn2S4.
 Fig. 8  Left: Schematic of the hierarchical PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst: (A) Cu2O, (B) Cu7S4, (C) binary Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4, (D) hierarchical PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4, (E) elaborate details of PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 photocatalysts, and process statements (I) sulfidation of polyhedral Cu2O to form Cu7S4, (II) formation of Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 samples, and (III) anchoring PQDs on Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 samples. Right: (a) Schematic band position and possible transfer pathways of photogenerated electrons and (b) multiple absorption of incident light for hydrogen production on PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from [RSC], Copyright [2020]. 
Apart from photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, PQDs have been recently utilized for photoreduction of CO2 to CO.26 PQDs were dispersed on a graphitic carbon nitride support to study the activity of PQD@g-C3N4 composites for photocatalytic CO2 reduction by monitoring superoxide and singlet oxygen. The higher the singlet oxygen generated in a photocatalytic process, the stronger the electron–hole interactions occurring in the bulk of the photocatalysts. Accordingly, exciton dissociation should be promoted to increase the photoreduction of CO2. Interestingly, a higher superoxide formation rate was observed for PQD@g-C3N4 than pristine g-C3N4, which confirmed the superiority of the composite for the photoreduction of CO2 to CO (6.54 μmol g−1 h−1 at the optimum PQD loading of 1 wt%) compared with pure g-C3N4 (2.65 μmol g−1 h−1).26
4.2 Electrocatalysis
Several PQD-based electrocatalysts have been recently demonstrated to have efficient electrochemical water splitting based on their size and edge state. In a recent work, PQDs of average size 4 nm synthesised by microwave technique without any supporting catalyst exhibited an impressive electrocatalytic activity for OERs with an overpotential of 450 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which upon integration with CoOx could achieve an enhanced electrocatalytic OER performance with an overpotential of 360 mV at 10 mA cm−2 with a low Tafel slope of 58.5 mV dec−1.58 In another work, electro-synthesized PQDs functionalised with nitrogen-containing groups were studied for electrocatalytic OER activities in an alkaline medium.77 Compared to pristine PQDs, functionalised PQDs exhibited an overpotential of 1.66 V at 10 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of 48 mV dec−1. Alternatively, overall water splitting (OERs and HERs) was achieved in an alkaline medium when PQDs were integrated with MoS2 sheets to form a heterostructure by electrochemically exfoliating a pellet comprising MoS2 and BP in 5:1 ratio.23 The beneficial effects of the heterostructure are evident from an improved catalytic activity with an overpotential of 1.60 and 0.6 V (all vs. RHE) at 10 mA cm−2 for OERs and HERs respectively, both with very low Tafel slopes than both individual counterparts in 0.1 M KOH solution. Recently, MXenes have also been employed to construct heterostructures with PQDs in order to explore their synergistic effects towards total water splitting.24 For example, PQDs/MXene nanohybrids were prepared by a van der Waals assembly of PQDs on freshly exfoliated Ti3C2Tx (MXenes). Electrochemical measurements showed significant synergy in HERs and OERs in an alkaline medium. An overpotential of 360 mV vs. RHE and a Tafel slope of 64.3 mV dec−1 were achieved for the OER, while an overpotential of 190 mV vs. RHE and a Tafel slope of 83.0 mV dec−1 were achieved for the HER in a 1.0 M KOH solution; however, a full-cell performance showed a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.78 V.
While much of the electrocatalytic studies focused on electrochemical water splitting, PQDs were also explored for electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction to form ammonia under ambient conditions.32 In this work, PQDs were prepared by a LPE method and then assembled on catalytically active MnO2 nanosheets via van der Waals interactions. This hybrid catalyst was subsequently studied for the electroreduction of dinitrogen in a 0.1 m Na2SO4 electrolyte using an H-cell with a Nafion 211 membrane. A higher NH3 yield rate of 25.3 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 with a faradaic efficiency of 6.7% was achieved at −0.5 V vs. RHE compared to individual components. The beneficial effects come from robust confinement of the monodisperse PQDs on the wrinkled MnO2 nanosheets and their synergistic effects.
4.3 Biocatalysis
Several unique features of PQDs explained in the introductory section, keeping mechanistic considerations of rapid biological transformations, indicate that PQDs are also suitable for bio-catalysis owing to their oxidase-mimicking property. Indeed, a recent study has shown that monodisperse PQDs with a lateral size of 1.8 nm possess an oxidase-mimicking activity.52 PQDs were shown to catalyze the oxidation of the substrate 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine in the absence of hydrogen peroxide. Interestingly, the oxidase-mimicking property of PQDs could be inactivated by antioxidants and radical scavenging biothiols including reduced glutathione and cysteine, which results in color fading of the solution. Therefore, this strategy provides a colorimetric method for the determination of glutathione and cysteine using the PQD as a catalytic platform (Table 2).
Table 2 Summary of the significant applications of PQDs reported over recent years in catalysis




Material
Synthetic route
Size (nm)
Catalytic application
Ref.




Porous carbon nanofiber/S/PQD composite
Liquid phase exfoliation
4.5
Electrocatalyst for polysulfide immobilization and conversion in lithium sulfur batteries.

103



(PQD/δ-MnO2)on carbon cloth
Solvothermal method
3–5
Electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions in Li–O2 cells.

112



BP QDs/MnO2
Liquid phase exfoliation
2–5
Electrocatalyst for nitrogen reduction reaction.

32



PQDs
Microwave exfoliation
3
Electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction.

113



PQDs/g-C3N4
Liquid phase exfoliation
4
Photocatalytic water splitting

25



PQDs-interspersed few layer MoS2 nanosheets
Electrochemical exfoliation
3
Electrocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen evolution reaction

23



PQD/WO3
Liquid phase exfoliation
3–4
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction

18



PQD/SnO2−x
Liquid phase exfoliation
5
Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation

114





5. Challenges and outlook
PQDs are a class of 2D nanomaterials with stupendous surface electronic effects that offer a tunable band gap and surface functionalization capability as a function of the number of atomic layers of black phosphorus. Moreover, they exhibit size-dependent optical and catalytic properties and higher surface-to-volume ratio and more exposed active edge sites. Ever since the idea of PQDs was conceived, inspired by the synthesis of other 2D nanostructures, several synthetic strategies belonging to top-down approaches have been widely reported. However, synthetic aspects of PQDs have not yet much expanded beyond conventional liquid-phase exfoliation. This is a significant gap to be addressed as synthetic methods also play an important role in controlling the passivation and related properties such as optical and catalytic properties. Accurate control over the size and the number of layers is quite difficult to achieve via any top-down method. In addition, obtaining monodisperse PQDs in high yields is critical for them to be used for catalytic and nanoelectronic applications. Therefore, the next immediate attention has to be paid to achieving a reliable size and layer-controlled synthetic route to obtain PQDs with accurate control of the edge states. Size tunability offers key advantages to precisely tailor the band edge positions, which is crucial for specific photocatalytic reactions. Alternatively, it is noteworthy that there is a whole arena of bottom-up methods to synthesize defect-free, size and layer-controlled PQDs, which remains untouched to date. Obtaining an ordered arrangement or a superlattice of PQDs on a well-defined surface is another forthcoming direction of PQD research, succeeding which could have tremendous impacts by generating fundamental knowledge on structure–property-catalytic activity correlations.
Electrochemical and layer-by-layer approaches could also be used under ambient conditions to prepare complex architectures (heterostructures) of new materials offering a tunable band gap and band position (also redox potentials) by size-tunability, light absorption range with high hole mobility and absorption coefficient, short and effective length of charge-transfer, multiple exciton generations, size-dependent photo responses and facile solubility, arising from their quantum confinement and edge effects. Such unique properties of PQDs enable them to be prospective candidates for both photocatalysis and electrocatalysis to achieve high yields, enhanced kinetics, and selectivity. Though the photocatalytic performance of pristine PQDs is inferior to conventional photocatalysts, the under coordinated edge sites of PQDs could be exploited to interact with functional materials (electron donors or acceptors) to facilitate the interfacial charge transfer and thereby photo reactivity in PQD-based hybrids. Another advantage here is that lattice mismatch could be minimized. More experimental studies on fluorescence, photoelectronic and electrocatalytic properties also provide scope for theoretical scientists to carry out DFT calculations to explore the band structure and density of states and elucidate the reaction mechanism to have an atomic-level understanding on the whole catalytic process.
However, there are several challenges that hamper PQDs from harnessing their unique properties. Detrimental effects caused by unwarranted oxidation are one of the most important challenges that need to be addressed when PQDs are used in devices. Though few protection strategies are available, still this domain remains yet to be explored due to increasing technology demands, especially for electrocatalytic, energy storage and molecular electronics perspectives. Overall, PQD-based catalytic materials find a great potential in the futuristic research when stability issues are appropriately addressed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Prof. VK Pillai is thankful to SERB (India) for the funding through J CBose Fellowship. CSIR-CECRI Manuscript Number - CECRI/PESVC/Pubs./2021-076.
References
K. Ashley, D. Cordell and D. Mavinic, Chemosphere, 2011, 84, 737–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carvalho, M. Wang, X. Zhu, A. S. Rodin, H. Su and A. H. Castro Neto, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16061 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, H. Huang, B. Zhang, M. Gu, D. Zhao, X. Zhao, L. Li, J. Zhou, K. Wu, Y. Cheng and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1074–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344–1363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .
H. Kawamura, I. Shirotani and K. Tachikawa, Solid State Commun., 1984, 49, 879–881 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wittig and B. T. Matthias, Science, 1968, 160, 994–995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Ye, H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, C. Engineering, W. Lafayette, U. States, E. Lansing, U. States, M. Engineering, W. Lafayette and U. States, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Brown and S. Rundqvist, Acta Crystallogr., 1965, 19, 684–685 CrossRef CAS .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, L. Vicarelli, E. Prada, J. O. Island, K. L. Narasimha-Acharya, S. I. Blanter, D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, J. V. Alvarez, H. W. Zandbergen, J. J. Palacios and H. S. J. van der Zant, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 025001 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, J. Wang, H. Wan, Y. Zhang, Y. Ning and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2017, 13, 10–14 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Yeh, W.-L. Huang, C.-J. Chung, I.-T. Chiang, L.-C. Chen, H.-Y. Chang, W.-C. Su, C. Cheng, S.-J. Chen and H. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2087–2092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Niu, Y. Li, H. Shu and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 370–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6795–6823 RSC .
R. Shi, F. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Weng and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12531–12534 RSC .
W. Gao, X. Bai, Y. Gao, J. Liu, H. He, Y. Yang, Q. Han, X. Wang, X. Wu, J. Wang, F. Fan, Y. Zhou, C. Li and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7777–7780 RSC .
T. Sakthivel, X. Huang, Y. Wu and S. Rtimi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, B. Lu, N. Wang, J. E. Lu, C. Li, Y. Ping and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24707–24714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, J. Zhou, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Ge, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, S. Wang, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700396 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, L. Xu, N. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Dai and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13849–13853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prasannachandran, T. V. Vineesh, M. B. Lithin, R. Nandakishore and M. M. Shaijumon, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8623–8626 RSC .
X.-D. Zhu, Y. Xie and Y.-T. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21255–21260 RSC .
W. Lei, Y. Mi, R. Feng, P. Liu, S. Hu, J. Yu, X. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, J. Wang, L. Zheng, K. Tang, S. Zhu, G. Liu and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 552–561 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, J. Li, Z. Ma, H. Xie, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Ye and T. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 1159–1166 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6795–6823 RSC .
M. Ozhukil Valappil, V. K. Pillai and S. Alwarappan, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 350–371 CrossRef .
X. Li, B. Deng, X. Wang, S. Chen, M. Vaisman, S. Karato, G. Pan, M. Larry Lee, J. Cha, H. Wang and F. Xia, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 031002 CrossRef .
B. Tian, B. Tian, B. Smith, M. C. Scott, Q. Lei, R. Hua, Y. Tian and Y. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 4345–4350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Xie, Z. Liu, C. Tan, Z. Luo, H. Li, J. Lin, L. Sun, W. Chen, Z. Xu, L. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chemie, 2015, 127, 3724–3728 CrossRef .
C. Wang, J. Gao, J. G. Zhao, D. J. Yan and X. D. Zhu, Small, 2020, 16, 1907091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiao, Z. Li, Z. Huang, X. Ren, J. Kang, M. Qiu, Y. Liu, X. Qi, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100765 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Fu, Z.-D. Chen, Y.-L. Zhang, D.-D. Han, J.-N. Ma, W. Wang, Z.-R. Zhang, H. Xia and H.-B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9133–9140 RSC .
L. Zheng, X. Ye, X. Deng, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Shi and H. Zheng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 15906–15914 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. Xu, J. Shao, C. Jiang, F. Zhang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, J. Li and P. Huang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 15, 297–304 CrossRef .
F. Lu, Z. Li, Y. Kang, Z. Su, R. Yu and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 10650–10661 RSC .
M. Luo, W. Cheng, X. Zeng, L. Mei, G. Liu and W. Deng, Pharmaceutics, 2019, 11, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. M. Amaral, D. C. Hall, R. Pai, J. E. Król, V. Kalra, G. D. Ehrlich and H.-F. Ji, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 752–759 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, F. Yang, L. Li and W. L. Dai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 1030–1039 RSC .
Z. Sun, H. Xie, S. Tang, X. F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11526–11530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Gan, L. Z. Liu, H. Y. Wu, Y. L. Hao, Y. Shan, X. L. Wu and P. K. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 233113 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Yuan, S. Yang, P. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Li, D. Chen, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 960–963 RSC .
W. Chen, K. Li, Y. Wang, X. Feng, Z. Liao, Q. Su, X. Lin and Z. He, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 591–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Meng, Z. Gan, J. Zhang, K. Liu, L. Wang, S. Li, Y. Yao, Y. Zhu and J. Li, Phys. Status Solidi, 2017, 254, 1700011 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Yang, W. Shao, S. Chen, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376–11382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Huang, R. Zhang, Y. Yan and Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 13379–13385 RSC .
M. Lee, Y. H. Park, E. B. Kang, A. Chae, Y. Choi, S. Jo, Y. J. Kim, S.-J. Park, B. Min, T. K. An, J. Lee, S.-I. In, S. Y. Kim, S. Y. Park and I. In, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 7096–7105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, L. Guan, Q. Li, Y. Li, T. Zhang, H. Pan, Q. Sun, Y. Shen, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay5661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, L. Hu, J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Guo, Z. Jin, F. Long, Y. Long, H. Liang, S. Ruan and Y. Zeng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1902075 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yue, Y. Hu, L. Tao, B. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Chen, J. Zhao and C.-Z. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186, 640 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ren, H. Li and J. Du, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wang and J. Du, Talanta, 2021, 223, 121712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Q. Wang, X. Liu, X. Chen, L. Wang and W. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4680–4683 RSC .
L. Ren, H. Li, M. Liu and J. Du, Analyst, 2020, 145, 8022–8029 RSC .
X. Tian, Y. Lang, D. Gao, X. Zhang, H. Dong, M. Gu, L. Yu and Z. Shang, Nano Sel., 2021, 2, 303–312 CrossRef .
F. Wu, A. Xie, M. Sun, W. Jiang and K. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 193, 30–33 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batmunkh, M. Myekhlai, A. S. R. Bati, S. Sahlos, A. D. Slattery, T. M. Benedetti, V. R. Gonçales, C. T. Gibson, J. J. Gooding, R. D. Tilley and J. G. Shapter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12974–12978 RSC .
K. Du, W. Yang, S. Deng, X. Li and P. Yang, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. O. Jeschke, M. E. Garcia and K. H. Bennemann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 015003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang and H.-L. Tsai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 151104 CrossRef .
M. Lenzner, J. Krüger, S. Sartania, Z. Cheng, C. Spielmann, G. Mourou, W. Kautek and F. Krausz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4076–4079 CrossRef CAS .
P. Russo, A. Hu, G. Compagnini, W. W. Duley and N. Y. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2381–2389 RSC .
A. Santagata, A. De Bonis, A. De Giacomo, M. Dell'Aglio, A. Laurita, G. S. Senesi, R. Gaudiuso, S. Orlando, R. Teghil and G. P. Parisi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5160–5164 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Chichkov, C. Momma, S. Nolte, F. Alvensleben and A. Tünnermann, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1996, 63, 109–115 CrossRef .
X. Ren, F. Zhang and X. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 1842–1846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ge, L. Zhang and Y. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 092107 CrossRef .
M. Sportelli, M. Izzi, A. Volpe, M. Clemente, R. Picca, A. Ancona, P. Lugarà, G. Palazzo and N. Cioffi, Antibiotics, 2018, 7, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, B. Yin, S. Wang, Y. Jiao, W. Pan, S. Huang, S. Chen and F. Meng, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 68–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rodríguez-Sánchez, M. C. Blanco and M. A. López-Quintela, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 9683–9688 CrossRef .
L. Cabrera, S. Gutierrez, N. Menendez, M. P. Morales and P. Herrasti, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3436–3441 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, Q. Lu, H. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Yao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 29704–29707 RSC .
Y. Fang, X. Li, J. Li, C. Yao, H. Y. Hoh, X. Hai, J. Lu and C. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25691–25711 RSC .
H. Hashimoto, Y. Muramatsu, Y. Nishina and H. Asoh, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 104, 106475 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, C. Wang, X. Sui, M. A. Riaz, M. Xu, L. Wei and Y. Chen, Carbon Energy, 2019, 1, 173–199 CrossRef .
J. Li, C. Chen, S. Liu, J. Lu, W. P. Goh, H. Fang, Z. Qiu, B. Tian, Z. Chen, C. Yao, W. Liu, H. Yan, Y. Yu, D. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Lin, C. Su and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2742–2749 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prasannachandran, T. V. Vineesh, A. Anil, B. M. Krishna and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11511–11519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, H. Chen, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan, Q. Xiao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800420 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ozhukil Valappil, J. Mohamed, S. Alwarappan and V. K. Pillai, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7, 014005 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, H. Hou, G. Zou, W. Shi, H. Shuai, J. Li and X. Ji, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16–33 RSC .
M. Ozhukil Valappil, K. Joshi, L. John, S. Krishnamurthy, B. Jana, A. Patra, V. K. Pillai and S. Alwarappan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 973–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ozhukil Valappil, M. Ahlawat, V. K. Pillai and S. Alwarappan, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11733–11736 RSC .
S. Ge, L. Zhang, P. Wang and Y. Fang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Hou, G. Yang, X. Fei, H. Zhao, Y. Guo, C. Su, Z. Wang, H. Zhong, Z. Zhuang and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25098–25106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, X. Wang, Z. Cheng, N. Tian, M. C. Lang, W. Yan, D. Liu, Y. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31136–31145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Favron, E. Gaufrès, F. Fossard, A.-L. Phaneuf-L'Heureux, N. Y. W. Tang, P. L. Lévesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Tong and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11437–11441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ahmed, S. Balendhran, M. N. Karim, E. L. H. Mayes, M. R. Field, R. Ramanathan, M. Singh, V. Bansal, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and S. Walia, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 18 CrossRef .
X. Ge, L. Su, L. Yang, Q. Fu, Q. Li, X. Zhang, N. Liao, H. Yang and J. Song, Anal. Chem., 2021, 93, 13893–13903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Long, X. Niu, K. Yan, G. Zhou, J. Wang, X. Wu and P. K. Chu, Small, 2018, 14, 1803132 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vishnoi, M. Mazumder, M. Barua, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 699, 223–228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, S. Tang, C. Qiao, L. Wang, H. Wang, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, W. Yu, X. Wang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4732–4740 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, X. Xiao, X. Zuo, Y. Liang and J. Nan, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 801–809 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, S.-B. Yu, J.-S. Wei and H.-M. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 484–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, H. Song and S. Yan, Opt. Commun., 2018, 406, 91–94 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, L. Zhu, H. Song, J. Wang and S. Yan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 5762–5768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gu, Y. Yan, X. Pei, C. Zhang, C. Ding and Y. Xian, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 250, 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Xue, S. Shen, X. Jiang, P. Sengdala, K. Chen and Y. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sofer, D. Sedmidubský, Š. Huber, J. Luxa, D. Bouša, C. Boothroyd and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3382–3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, N. Liu and J. Zhao, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2017, 130, 56–63 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arra, K. R. Ramya, R. Babar and M. Kabir, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(13), 7194–7202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 RSC .
Z. Xu, S. Lin, N. Onofrio, L. Zhou, F. Shi, W. Lu, K. Kang, Q. Zhang and S. P. Lau, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4164 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Qiao, K. He, S. Bliznakov, E. Sutter, X. Chen, D. Luo, F. Meng, D. Su, J. Decker, W. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and P. Sutter, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8330–8339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 046801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, W. J. Slough, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 025011 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, H. Jin and R. Gui, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 165, 112390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, B. Zhang, X. Tian, M. Gu and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3527–3533 RSC .
J. S. de Sousa, M. A. Lino, D. R. da Costa, A. Chaves, J. M. Pereira and G. A. Farias, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 035122 CrossRef .
X. Pan, C. Shang, Z. Chen, M. Jin, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and G. Zhou, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Elbanna, M. Zhu, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3618–3626 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, J. Xie, G. Cao, Y. Lu, D. Zheng, Y. Jin, K. Wang and X. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 684–692 CrossRef .
M. Batmunkh, M. Myekhlai, A. S. R. Bati, S. Sahlos, A. D. Slattery, T. M. Benedetti, V. R. Gonçales, C. T. Gibson, J. J. Gooding, R. D. Tilley and J. G. Shapter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12974–12978 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Li, J. Yu and B. Ding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16439–16444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Manila Ozhukil Valappil	Dr. Manila Ozhukil Valappil received her MSc (Applied Chemistry) from Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kerala, India. She obtained her PhD in Chemical Sciences (2020) from CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Tamil Nadu, India. She is currently a postdoctoral research associate at the Department of Chemistry, University of Calgary, Canada. Her research interests revolve around materials electrochemistry.
Subbiah Alwarappan	Dr Subbiah Alwarappan is now a Principal Scientist and Associate Professor at CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research institute. So far, he graduated over 25 researchers including PhD, MSc, MPhil and BTech students towards their thesis and mentored 6 Postdoctoral researchers. Prior to joining CSIR-CECRI, he worked in the United States (2006–2013) at various institutes (University of Iowa; Florida International University and University of South Florida). He graduated with a PhD degree from Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia (2003–2006) and was a recipient of IPRS fellowship from Australian Government. He published 92 research articles in the research area of electrochemical biosensors, photoelectrochemical sensors, biofuel cells, microelectrodes, electrocatalysts and electrosynthesis of quantum dots. He has also written 2 book chapters on biosensors and 1 book. He has 1 US patent to his credit. He is a Fellow of the Royal society of Chemistry and member of Indian National Young Academy of science (INYAS).
Vijayamohanan K Pillai	Prof. Vijayamohanan K Pillai is now the Chair and Dean (Research) at IIER-Tirupathi, AP, India. Prior to this position, he was the director of CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu, India (2012–2018) and held additional director position at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory (2015–2016), Pune, Maharashtra, India. His research interests include electrocatalysis, electrochemical energy storage systems, bio-electrochemistry, electrosynthesis of nanomaterials and quantum dots. Prof. Pillai has more than 260 research papers and 20 patents to his credit. Under his guidance, 24 students have received PhD degrees. Prof. Pillai is a recipient of many prestigious awards including Medals of the MRSI and CRSI. He is a J C Bose National Fellow and Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences. He is also in the editorial boards of several prestigious journals.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the crystalline structure of black phosphorus obtained from the relaxation of the structure using density functional theory calculations. The layered structure is composed of sheets with the phosphorus atoms arranged in a puckered honeycomb lattice. Adjacent layers interact via weak van der Waals forces, and are stacked following an ABA stacking order. (a) 3D representation. (b) Lateral view. (c) Top view. The distances and angles displayed were obtained by relaxing the crystal structure of a single-layer black phosphorus sheet. The distance value marked with (*) was obtained by relaxing the bulk structure. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from [IOP], Copyright [2014].	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of PQD synthesis by probe sonication of BP powder in NMP followed by bath sonication. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from [Wiley], Copyright [2015].	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the controllable synthesis of 2D few-layer BP (FL-BP) nanosheets and 0D PQDs in NMP using a microwave-assisted technique. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from [RSC], Copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the electrosynthesis of PQDs and nitrogen-doped PQDs from BP. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from [IOP], Copyright [2019].	 

Ultrasonication	NMP	4.9	Monodisperse PQDs	Tedious separation/chances for agglomeration	
31

Probe and bath sonication	NMP	2.6	Increased product yield	Tedious separation and low PL quantum yield	
41

Ultrasonication	Oleic acid in NMP	2.6/3	Size-tunable PQDs	Tedious separation	
43

Ultrasonication	Isopropanol	5.2	Narrow size distribution	Weak exfoliation yield	
44

Ultrasonication	
N,N Dimethyl formamide	2–10	Increased product yield	Wide size distribution	
45

Microwave	NMP	3	Rapid synthesis	Scaling up of reactor	
58

Ultrasonication	Isopropanol	10	Easy removal of low boiling point solvent	Polarity of the solvent may adversely affect the photoluminescence of PQDs	
47

Laser ablation	Diethyl ether	7	Clean approach	Low PL quantum yield (11%)	
83

Electrochemical methods	Organic electrolytes such as propylene carbonate, formamide, acetonitrile, DMSO and the 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([EMIM][BF4])/acetonitrile	6–8	Size tunability using potentiostatic methods	Low product yield	
77, 78, 81 and 82

 	Fig. 5  (a) PL emission spectra of the PQDs in tetrahydrofuran excited with various wavelengths from 320 nm to 380 nm. The inset shows the molecular structure of tetrahydrofuran. (b) Structural diagram of the PQDs with schematically drawn σinner (red) and σouter (blue) bonds and functional groups; and schematic diagram of the PL emission transitions of the PQDs. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from [AIP], Copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 6  HOMO and LUMO energy levels of black-PQDs with the number of P atoms, N = 22, 30 and 46, calculated by hybrid B3LYP functional. The dashed lines indicate the standard redox potentials for water splitting. The blue colored numbers show the HOMO–LUMO gap (in unit of eV) for each system. The energy differences (expressed in eV) between HOMO (LUMO) and the water oxidation (reduction) potential are indicated below (above) each HOMO (LUMO) level. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from [Elsevier], Copyright [2017].	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis of PFCz-N2+BF4− and PFCz-g-PQDs: (a) HBF4, isoamyl nitrite, CH3COOH, −22 °C, 6 h; (b) NMP, ultrasonic radiation for 12 h (200 W), 5 °C; centrifugation for 2 h (8000 rpm); and (c) PFCz-N2+BF4−, tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate, dry and degassed acetonitrile, RT, 6 h. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from [RSC], Copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 8  Left: Schematic of the hierarchical PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst: (A) Cu2O, (B) Cu7S4, (C) binary Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4, (D) hierarchical PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4, (E) elaborate details of PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 photocatalysts, and process statements (I) sulfidation of polyhedral Cu2O to form Cu7S4, (II) formation of Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 samples, and (III) anchoring PQDs on Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 samples. Right: (a) Schematic band position and possible transfer pathways of photogenerated electrons and (b) multiple absorption of incident light for hydrogen production on PQDs@Cu7S4/ZnIn2S4 photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from [RSC], Copyright [2020].	 

Porous carbon nanofiber/S/PQD composite	Liquid phase exfoliation	4.5	Electrocatalyst for polysulfide immobilization and conversion in lithium sulfur batteries.	
103

(PQD/δ-MnO2)on carbon cloth	Solvothermal method	3–5	Electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions in Li–O2 cells.	
112

BP QDs/MnO2	Liquid phase exfoliation	2–5	Electrocatalyst for nitrogen reduction reaction.	
32

PQDs	Microwave exfoliation	3	Electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction.	
113

PQDs/g-C3N4	Liquid phase exfoliation	4	Photocatalytic water splitting	
25

PQDs-interspersed few layer MoS2 nanosheets	Electrochemical exfoliation	3	Electrocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen evolution reaction	
23

PQD/WO3	Liquid phase exfoliation	3–4	Photocatalytic CO2 reduction	
18

PQD/SnO2−x	Liquid phase exfoliation	5	Electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation	
114


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
