Electrochemically reconstructed high-entropy amorphous FeCoNiCrVB as a highly active oxygen evolution catalyst   - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ00984F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ00984F
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 8398-8406Electrochemically reconstructed high-entropy amorphous FeCoNiCrVB as a highly active oxygen evolution catalyst†

        
          
            Xu 
            Zhong‡
, 
      
        
          
            Yin’an 
            Zhu‡
, 
      
        
          
            Weiji 
            Dai
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Yu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Lu
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Ye 
            Pan
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Metallic Materials, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China. E-mail: panye@seu.edu.cn; lutao@seu.edu.cn
Received 
      26th February 2022
    , Accepted 31st March 2022First published on 1st April 2022AbstractDesigning catalysts with high electrochemical activity and stability for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is a pivotal step for sustainable water splitting. Interface engineering can represent a practical approach to enhance catalytic performance. In this work, a cyclic voltammetry (CV) technique as an intentional surface reconstruction strategy is utilized to promote FeCoNiCrVB as a highly active OER catalyst. The activated electrocatalyst manifests enhanced catalytic activity with a low overpotential of 237 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 24.2 mV dec−1, compared with the pristine one (332 mV & 46.2 mV dec−1). The excellent activity and long-term stability make reconstructed FeCoNiCrVB a promising candidate to catalyze the OER process. The amorphous state, highly active sites and entropy engineering jointly contribute to its advanced OER performance. This work shows the great potential of multicomponent alloys as electrocatalysts, and provides new ideas for the enhancement of the OER activity by using an electrochemical surface reconstruction strategy.
1 Introduction
Increasing demands for energy and huge consumption of fossil fuels have given rise to environmental issues. Accordingly, the development of various types of clean and sustainable energy is attracting intense research to cope with the energy crisis. Hydrogen, as a sort of pollution-free and affordable energy source, is considered as a candidate to replace fossil fuels as an energy source.1 Currently, compared with versatile hydrogen generation methods, water splitting is expected to be a promising approach due to its high efficiency, low cost and sustainability.2 However, the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) largely hampers the overall efficiency of the water splitting process due to its relatively sluggish reaction kinetics, which involves a four-electron migration.3
Nowadays, noble metal oxides, such as RuO2 and IrO2, have been used as benchmark OER catalysts, however, their high cost and poor stability limit large-scale applications.4 Therefore, researchers have evaluated earth-abundant and promising transition-based-alloys and their phosphides,5 selenides,6 carbides,7 and borides8 for efficient water splitting. In fact, non-oxide catalysts would experience rapid in situ electrochemical transformation and form real OER active sites in alkaline solution.9 This inspired researchers to employ intentional electrochemical reconstruction as an efficient route for better catalytic activity.10 For electrocatalysts, the quantity and intrinsic activities of active sites are vital for improvement of the OER performance.11–13 Yongwen Tan's group prepared a nano-porous Cu–Ru alloy by a dealloying process, and found that incorporation of Ru atoms into the Cu matrix could improve the catalytic performance.14 Many reports have found that electrocatalysts exhibit higher performance during the OER process due to cation or anion leaching, because it is inevitable for surface layer atoms to dynamically change under acidic or alkaline conditions. The dissolution happening on the catalyst surface could induce reconstruction, change the adsorption and desorption behavior, further lead to the formation of nanoscale pores and core–shell structures, and subsequently enhance the OER process.15 Recently, some researchers have reported that element dissolution of spinel-, perovskite- and transition metal-based OER catalysts could significantly strengthen the electrocatalytic performance. Nong, H. N., et al. adopted a surface engineering strategy to synthesize an IrNi@IrOx core–shell structure, which is much better than a conventional IrOx electrocatalyst.16 Mullins's group found that selective dissolution forms a nano-porous Ni structure under the cyclic voltammetry method, thus inducing structural reconstruction.17 Seitz found that element Sr leached from an IrOx/SrIrO3 catalyst under applied potential and the remaining core–shell structure exhibited improved OER performance. Duan, Y., et al. reported that CoCr2O4 spinel exhibits ideal performance because Cr leached from the surface introduced oxygen vacancies and surface defects.18 The leaching behavior of the unstable metal surface could trigger the absorption of hydroxyl ions, create a nano-porous structure19 and contribute to association between the surface of the electrocatalyst and active sites.20,21 The self-reconstruction of active sites during the OER creates a reaction-favorable chemical environment and influences the catalytic activity.22,23 Creation of a nano-porous structure and high valence metal oxide species could benefit the catalytic activities.14,19 The metastable state of a high entropy structure can be beneficial for surface reconstruction, including element leaching.24 But until now, there are few reports about selective element leaching as a surface reconstruction engineering strategy in a controllable way to further boost the OER process in the field of high entropy alloys.
In this paper, we first report a high-entropy amorphous alloy FeCoNiCrVB as an OER catalyst. Then, we adopt an in situ electrochemical surface reconstruction strategy to strengthen its OER activity. During 1000 cycles of CV activation, elements of Cr and V are oxidized rapidly, and then mostly dissolved from the pristine catalyst at the atomic level, leaving a nano-porous structure on the surface. Meanwhile, the high potential as well as strong alkaline conditions decorated the newly etched catalyst with amorphous catalytic-active oxyhydroxide species. Moreover, the robust catalyst after activation with high structural stability and high catalytic activity could provide more effective active sites, guarantee rapid transfer of electrons and ions, and avoid structure damage during the OER process. These findings would inspire other researchers to further develop applications of high-entropy alloys as functional materials and intentional surface reconstruction for enhanced OER activity.
2 Experimental section
Material preparation
Elemental Fe, Co, Ni, Cr, V and B particles (>99.9%) as raw materials were purchased from ZhongNuo Advanced Material Technology Co. Ltd. KOH and RuO2 were brought from Aladdin Chemistry Co. Ltd.
Preparation of the pristine high-entropy amorphous ribbons
The pristine (FeCoNi)80B20, (FeCoNiCr)80B20 and (FeCoNiCrV)80B20 ribbons were fabricated via a conventional arc melting and the roller spinning method. The schematic shown in Fig. 1 illustrates the procedure for the fabrication of ribbons. In a typical procedure, after accurate weighing and smelting, mixed metal ingots were melted in a quartz tube filled with argon gas as the protective atmosphere. Then, the liquids were blown to the surface of the rotating copper roll. Subsequently, ribbons were synthesized successfully, and can be utilized as self-supported working electrodes directly (Fig. S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Schematic description of the fabrication process of p-FeCoNiCrVB ribbons and preparation of CV-FeCoNiCrVB. 
Electrochemical reconstruction of high-entropy amorphous ribbons
Electrochemical reconstruction of the ribbons was performed on a CHI 660E electrochemistry workstation, with a standard three-electrode system in alkaline solution (1 M KOH). The as-prepared ribbons, carbon rod and Ag/AgCl electrode were employed as the working electrode, counter electrode and reference electrode (Fig. 1), respectively. CV scans ranging from 1.0 V to 1.8 V (vs. RHE) with 1000 cycles at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 were performed to investigate the mechanism of the electrochemical reconstruction. To clearly differentiate pristine ribbons from ribbons after the CV activation process, we denote p-FeCoNiB, p-FeCoNiCrB and p-FeCoNiCrVB as pristine ribbons, and CV-FeCoNiB, CV-FeCoNiCrB and CV-FeCoNiCrVB as ribbons after the CV activation process.
Characterizations
The structures of the samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8-Discover) with CuKα radiation λ = 1.54 Å. The microstructures of the as-prepared ribbons were confirmed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI 3D), and the microstructures of the activated ribbons were investigated by SEM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM Tecnai G2 F30 S TWINZ). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo ESCALAB 250XI) was utilized to further analyze the chemical states for the ribbons. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, icap 6300) was performed to investigate the elemental concentration change for Cr and V. The existence of oxygen vacancies was confirmed by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, Bruker EMXPLUS). A confocal Raman microscope (WITec Project 5), using an excitation wavelength of 532 nm, was used to acquire Raman spectra at different circles.
Electrochemical measurements
A standard three-electrode system, with a carbon rod as the counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl standard electrode as the reference electrode, was used to conduct all of the electrochemical measurements at room temperature with a CHI 660E electrochemistry workstation in 1 M KOH. The OER potentials were calculated by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, and potential data were calibrated to the potential vs. reversible hydrogen electrode in accordance with the following equation: ERHE = EAg/AgCI + (0.0591 × pH) + 0.197 V. To better assess the intrinsic activity of the catalysts, all normalized LSV curves were compensated with 90% IR. Tafel slopes were derived from the linear region of the LSV polarization curves and can be fitted to the Tafel equation: η = b (logj) + a, where b is the Tafel slope and j is the current density. Cyclic voltammetry was used to estimate the double-layer capacitance (Cdl) in the range of 1.06–1.16 V (vs. RHE) at the chosen scan rates of 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, and 120 mV s−1. The Cdl values are obtained by plotting ΔJ = (Ja–Jc) at 1.11 V (vs. RHE) against the scan rate, and the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) is measured using the equation: ECSA = Cdl/Cs, where Cs is the specific capacitance 0.04 mF cm−2. The stability test of the ribbons was performed with a constant overpotential for 20 hours. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy spectra (EIS) were measured at the same potential (1.58 V vs. RHE) with the frequency range from 100 kHz to 0.001 Hz.
3 Results and discussion
Characterizations
XRD in Fig. 2a reveals generally broad peak patterns for p-FeCoNiCrVB. The HRTEM images and corresponding SAED pattern (Fig. S2, ESI†) also demonstrate the amorphous characteristic for p-FeCoNiCrVB. Amorphous p-FeCoNiB and p-FeCoNiCrB are synthesized successfully (Fig. S3, ESI†). The XRD pattern (Fig. 2a), HRTEM image and SAED pattern (Fig. S4, ESI†) disclose non-crystalline features for CV-FeCoNiCrVB. Generally, amorphous structures are likely beneficial towards the OER process, due to providing much more coordinatively unsaturated sites, surface layer defects and local disordered structures.25,26
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of p-FeCoNiCrVB and CV-FeCoNiCrVB, SEM images of (b) p-FeCoNiCrVB and (c) CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (d) EDX analysis of the nanoparticles formed on CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (e) TEM image of the nanoparticles (inset: selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern), (f) HRTEM image of the nanoparticles, and (g) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mappings of Fe, Co, Ni, Cr, V, B and O. 
The morphological changes of p-FeCoNiCrVB (Fig. 2b) and CV-FeCoNiCrVB (Fig. 2c) were further characterized by SEM. It should be noticed that, compared with the flat surface without special structures for p-FeCoNiCrVB, the nanoparticles on CV-FeCoNiCrVB show an even granular morphology with a particle size of 10∼50 nm, owing to the highly uniform composition of the amorphous ribbons (Fig. S5, ESI†). In particular, the inset map of Fig. 2c displays a nano-forest structure with abundant nanopores. Great distinction in its morphology implies the occurrence of surface reconstruction during CV activation. However, the SEM images (Fig. S6, ESI†) of CV-FeCoNiB and CV-FeCoNiCrB exhibit a difference from CV-FeCoNiCrVB, since nothing has changed on the surface of CV-FeCoNiB while a few nanoscale holes could be observed on CV-FeCoNiCrB. The differences in the microstructure apparently suggest that surface layers of three kinds of ribbons underwent utterly different processes during activation due to the composition difference. The EDX analysis of FeCoNiCrVB clearly shows the effect of electrochemical activation on the amorphous high-entropic catalyst. The EDX analysis of p-FeCoNiCrVB (inset Fig. 2b) demonstrates the co-existence of Fe, Co, Ni, Cr, V and B. While for CV-FeCoNiCrVB, the table in Fig. 2d illustrates that the content of Cr and V decreases largely for CV-FeCoNiCrVB. Meanwhile, the increase of element O implies that the oxidation reaction happened at the anode during the CV activation process. The SEM image of the CV-FeCoNiCrVB section (Fig. S7, ESI†) confirms the formation of a trilaminar sandwich structure through a simple fabrication process, which is highly advantageous for the OER process.
TEM (Fig. 2e and Fig S8, ESI†) of the nanoparticles reveals the particulate shape of CV-FeCoNiCrVB. The SAED pattern of the particles shows amorphous halo rings (inset Fig. 2e). Meanwhile, the HRTEM in Fig. 2f confirms no lattice fringes in the obtained nanoparticles, demonstrating the amorphous nature of the nanoparticles formed on the surface layer of CV-FeCoNiCrVB. Besides, a cotton-like surface can be observed on the surface of the nanoparticles in the HAADF-STEM image, suggesting the formation of an amorphous shell. TEM elemental mappings further reveal a uniform spatial distribution of Fe, Co, Ni, B and O. Of them, element Cr and V mostly vanished, matching well with EDX analysis. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that Cr and V as sacrificial elements mostly leach out from the surface and dissolve into the alkaline solution during the CV process.
Electrocatalytic OER activities
The systematic fabrication of FeCoNiB, FeCoNiCrB and FeCoNiCrVB offers a great opportunity to investigate the effect of the high entropy engineering on the OER performance. Furthermore, comparison between the pristine ribbons and the activated sample could show the role of surface reconstruction. Commercial noble metal oxide RuO2 was also tested as a benchmark electrode. Typically, the overpotentials to reach 10 mA cm−2 after 90% iR compensation (Fig. S9, ESI†) are often obtained to appraise the catalytic activity, because a greater potential to overcome the reaction barriers is one of the most well-established parameters to evaluate suitable OER catalysts. Fig. 3a shows the LSV curves of the ribbons and commercial RuO2. Among the pristine ribbons, the p-FeCoNiCrVB needs an overpotential of 324 mV to reach a current density at 10 mA cm−2, better than the quaternary FeCoNiB(356 mV) and quinary p-FeCoNiCrB (327 mV), and close to that of commercial RuO2 (305 mV). Benefiting from the high-entropy effect, the overpotentials of the three ribbons intuitively disclose monotonous enhancement in the OER activity. With increasing number of metal kinds in the catalyst, the additional metal elements could increase the mixing entropy, and tailor the electronic structure,27,28 thus resulting in the improvement of the catalytic performance. Interestingly, a clear enhancement of the OER activity could be observed upon CV-FeCoNiCrVB. The overpotentials of FeCoNiCrVB can be continually decreased from 324 mV to 237 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 after 1000 cycles of CV activation process, far surpassing the CV-FeCoNiB (366 mV), CV-FeCoNiCrB (278 mV) and commercial RuO2 (305 mV). Remarkably, CV-FeCoNiCrVB necessitates a small overpotential of 282 mV to reach 100 mA cm−2 (Fig. 3b), while higher overpotentials are required on CV-FeCoNiCrB (336 mV) and CV-FeCoNiB (450 mV) at the same current density. The overpotential on the CV-FeCoNiCrVB is also the smallest one among all these catalysts, regardless of the current density being 25, 50 or 100 mA cm−2. Compared to other highly active high-entropic OER catalysts reported to date, the CV-FeCoNiCrVB is definitely amongst the best catalysts (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical characterizations of the working electrodes in 1 M KOH: (a) LSV curves tested at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, (b) overpotentials to achieve 10 mA cm−2, 25 mA cm−2, 50 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2, (c) Tafel slopes derived from the LSV curves, (d) Nyquist plots measured at open circuit potential, (e) double-layer capacitance, and (f) LSV curves normalized by ECSA. 
The LSV curve of p-FeCoNiB ribbon (Fig. S10, ESI†) demonstrates a decrease in OER activity after CV activation, suggesting that CV-activation plays a negative role which is obviously different from FeCoNiCrB or FeCoNiCrVB, basically owing to leaching of element Cr or V which is crucial for surface reconstruction and improvement of the OER performance. These results are in good agreement with the SEM images of the three activated samples. The activity difference can be further corroborated from the Tafel slopes. Fig. 3c displays the Tafel slopes for these working electrodes which are acquired from the linear portion of the LSV curves. CV-FeCoNiCrVB presents a Tafel slope of 24.2 mV dec−1, which is much lower than that of p-FeCoNiCrV (49.1 mV dec−1), and other electrodes, including commercial RuO2 (91.5 mV dec−1). The Tafel slope implies that surface reconstruction indeed has a great influence on the improvement of the OER kinetics and charge transfer ability in the process of the OER.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is employed to gain further insight into the catalytic kinetics of the ribbons before and after CV activation (Fig. 3d). CV-FeCoNiCrVB exhibits the smallest charge transfer resistance among all the samples, confirming its highest charge-transfer ability and the most favorable intrinsic catalytic activity, and further indicating the modulation of the electrical conductivity rendered by surface reconstruction. This is possibly because the distinctive nanoparticles formed on the surface are desirable for exposing highly active catalytic sites or efficiently releasing the O2 gas bubbles. Fig. 3e depicts the double layer capacitances (Cdl) of the working electrodes, which are all obtained from detailed CV curves within a non-faradaic region (Fig. S11, ESI†). The Cdl for p-FeCoNiCrVB is 0.072 mF, and its electrochemical active surface area (ECSA) is 1.8 cm2. Meanwhile, for CV-FeCoNiCrVB, the Cdl and corresponding ECSA decrease to 0.044 mF and 1.1 cm2. To accurately reflect and compare the intrinsic catalytic properties for the working electrodes, current densities normalized by the ECSA are recommended which is better than those normalized by geometrical surface area (Fig. 3f). The overpotentials at normalized current densities of 5 mA cmECSA−2 are selected for evaluating the corresponding intrinsic activity. Impressively, the CV-FeCoNiCrVB has the best OER performance, only needing an overpotential of 259 mV, compared with p-FeCoNiCrVB and other ribbons, in good agreement with the results before. CV activation greatly enhances the intrinsic catalytic activity of p-FeCoNiCrVB, instead of providing more but inactive surface areas for the OER.
Electrocatalytic stability is another essential indicator for OER electrocatalysts in respect of practical applications. Chronoamperometry measurements are carried out to examine the stability for activated ribbons (Fig. 4a). Remarkably, CV-FeCoNiCrVB exhibits an excellent stability in the 20 hours range, without obvious degradation, better than CV-FeCoNiCrB and CV-FeCoNiB. The OER performances of FeCoNiCrVB after chronoamperometry measurement (denoted as it-FeCoNiCrVB) are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†). After 20 h chronoamperometry measurement, it-FeCoNiCrVB still exhibits excellent OER activity. Compared with p-FeCoNiCrVB, it-FeCoNiCrVB merely needs an overpotential of 247 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, it-FeCoNiCrVB presents a Tafel slope of 35.4 mV dec−1, the Cdl is 0.045 mF, and the corresponding ECSA is 1.125 cm2. EIS also indicates that it-FeCoNiCrVB exhibits a small charge transfer resistance. The OER performance of it-FeCoNiCrVB is very close to that of CV-FeCoNiCrVB, showing a preferable stability.
 Fig. 4  (a) Chronoamperometry curves of CV-FeCoNiB, CV-FeCoNiCrB and CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (b) comparison of overpotential@10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slopes between this work and other recently reported catalysts for the OER, and (c) the conclusive histogram of catalysts in this paper. 
Compared with other highly active OER catalysts in the previous work (Fig. 4b and Table S2, ESI†), a lower potential and smaller Tafel slope are observed, making CV-FeCoNiCrVB a suitable candidate for OER application. The superior and stable OER performance of CV-FeCoNiCrVB suggests that CV activation induces obvious improvement of the OER activity, compared with its pristine ribbons or quaternary/quinary counterparts.
The conclusive histogram for comprehensive comparison between electrocatalysts is given in Fig. 4c. The CV-FeCoNiCrVB has an ideal OER performance in terms of overall OER performance, including a faster charge transfer in the OER process, a remarkable OER activity and a promising OER stability compared to its pristine ribbon and other self-supported ribbons.
Correlation between dealloying and OER activity
High resolution XPS spectra show the dominant zero valence for Fe/Co/Ni/B in p-FeCoNiCrVB (Fig. S13, ESI†). After CV activation, these elements totally oxidized into the ionic state, which is commonly observed in previous work. But metallic phases for these elements totally vanished after CV activation. In p-FeCoNiCrVB, peaks of Cr 2p3/2 (Fig. 5a) at 573.87 eV and 576.77 eV correlate to Cr0 and Cr3+,29 respectively, and peaks of V 2p3/2 (Fig. 5b) at 512.61 eV, 515.02 eV, 516.02 eV and 517.08 eV can be assigned to V0, V3+ and V4+ and V5+, respectively.30 Of interest, only the high oxidation state of Cr3+ and V4+ remains with extremely low intensity in CV-FeCoNiCrVB. The sharp reduction of the peak area suggests the generation of Cr6+ and V5+ during CV activation, which are soluble in the KOH solution.31
 Fig. 5  XPS spectra of (a) Cr 2p and (b) V 2p, (c) element content of Cr and V in alkaline solution and the current density to reach 1.6 V (vs. RHE) at different cycles, and (d) redox peaks at different cycles. 
The leaching behavior are further confirmed by ICP-MS. In Fig. 5c, Cr and V species in KOH solution increase rapidly in 200 CV cycles and gradually increase to a stable concentration. The unequal change rate relies on their relative metal reduction potentials (Table S3, ESI†). V element with a lower reduction potential is more likely to be oxidized. In addition, Fig. 5c reveals the relationship between the CV activation cycles and the current density to reach a potential of 1.6 V (vs. RHE). The rate of performance improvement displays a particularly synchronous tendency with the content of Cr/V species in KOH. Therefore, the enhanced OER activities have a great correlation with the leaching process. CV profiles are often utilized to reflect the redox electrochemistry of metal species. As illustrated in Fig. 5d, the positions of the anodic and cathodic waves both shift positively with CV activation proceeding, demonstrating the generation of some oxidizable/reducible active compounds including metal hydroxides or oxyhydroxides. Meanwhile, the increasing areas of the redox peaks and color change of the CV-FeCoNiCrVB ribbons (Fig. S14, ESI†) confirm the dynamic growth of active sites with increasing cycles, which is in good agreement with the enhancement of the OER performances (Fig. 5c) for CV-FeCoNiCrVB.
Investigation of the OER active sites
Creating oxygen vacancies has proven to be an effective approach to optimize the OER behavior, due to their critical role in acting as active sites and lowering the reaction energy barrier.32 As shown in Fig. 6a, obviously, an EPR signal at g = 2.004 is detected in CV-FeCoNiCrVB, different from EPR for p-FeCoNiCrVB. This indicates that CV activation could introduce oxygen vacancies, which are beneficial for boosting the catalytic activity.18 Besides, CV activation introduces a high content of hydroxyl groups (OII, 532.1 eV) on CV-FeCoNiCrVB (Fig. 6b), which are considered as real sites for the OER process.33 Its existence could be further confirmed by the Raman spectra collected at different CV cycles.
 Fig. 6  (a) EPR spectra, (b) XPS spectra of O 1s (OI: metal oxides, OII: hydroxyl/surface oxygen, OIII: adsorbed oxygen and OIV: defect oxygen), (c) Raman spectra at different cycles, and (d) Raman spectra for CV-FeCoNiCrVB. 
As illustrated in Fig. 6c, there are no obvious feature peaks of electrochemical species for FeCoNiCrVB at 0 cycles. With aging CV cycles, the intensity of the characteristic peaks belonging to hydroxyl groups gradually becomes stronger. This illustrates gradual formation of active sites including FeOOH, CoOOH, NiOOH and Ni(OH)2 to catalyze the OER during the CV process. Gradual growth of hydroxyl groups has a correlation with the enhancement of the OER activity with aging CV cycles (Fig. 5d). The Raman spectra of CV-FeCoNiCrVB at 1000 cycles (Fig. 6d) can be deconvoluted into five constituent peaks,33 which are contributed by the presence of NiOOH (358 cm−1), Ni(OH)2 (494 & 589 cm−1), CoOOH (542 cm−1) and FeOOH (649 cm−1),34 the well-recognized active sites for the OER process. To our best knowledge, amorphous hydroxide and oxyhydroxide films with such chemical complexity are rarely reported and studied in the field of catalysts, and are known to be extremely active for the OER, due to hydroxides and oxyhydroxides possessing a large number of structural disorders, including oxygen vacancies, reducing the thermodynamic and kinetic barriers and lowering the Gibbs free energy of the reaction intermediate.23,35–38 Compared with pristine FeCoNiCrVB, the catalyst has a great improvement of the OER activity. This result further confirms the important role of surface reconstruction induced by CV activation.
In addition to the active sites on the surface, the surface structure of the electrocatalysts also influences the OER properties. Dynamic contact angle tests of the ribbons before and after activation were carried out, to illustrate the structural origin of the high catalytic performance (Fig. 7a and Fig. S15, ESI†). The contact angles of water drops are 77 ± 1° on the surface of p-FeCoNiCrVB. It quickly decreases to 0° within two seconds on CV-FeCoNiCrVB, which exhibits excellent hydrophilicity compared with p-FeCoNiCrB and the other ribbons (Fig. 7b). The extraordinarily hydrophilic surface originating from the surface roughness has a great influence on the OER process, since it is easier for water molecules to be absorbed on the active sites of the catalyst, thereby accelerating the four electron transfer process and guaranteeing that the ribbons are efficient electrocatalysts for the OER.39Fig. 7c and Fig. S16 (ESI†) display a water-splitting device powered by a solar cell using CV-FeCoNiCrVB. Under the irradiation of sunlight, the solar cell drives the device to undergo water splitting, and bubbles can be observed clearly on the surface of Pt and the working electrode CV-FeCoNiCrVB. The device merely needs a 1.589 V voltage to generate O2 and H2. Therefore, CV-FeCoNiCrVB is of great potential for industrial application due to its efficiency and low-cost in the conversion of a huge amount of solar energy into chemical energy.40
 Fig. 7  (a) Evolution of a water droplet on p-FeCoNiCrVB and CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (b) evolution of the contact angles versus time for the catalysts in this work, and (c) the water splitting device equipped with a solar cell. 
4 Conclusion
This work demonstrates the great potential of the in situ surface reconstruction engineering strategy for improving the OER performance of high-entropy amorphous FeCoNiCrVB. The surface reconstruction induced by CV activation, including selective element leaching, formation of oxyhydroxide catalytic active species, introduction of core–shell nanoparticles and trilaminar sandwich structure, facilitates efficient mass/electron transfer at the electrocatalyst interface. Hence, the catalyst exhibits an ultra-high catalytic performance for the OER with an exceptionally small overpotential (237 mV) to reach 10 mA cm−2, much lower than the pristine ribbon, its quaternary/quinary counterparts and commercial benchmark RuO2. The experiment results offer feasible guidance for adopting surface reconstruction as a rational strategy for advanced OER activity. Moreover, investigation of transition metal-based alloys to establish high-entropic catalysts would enlighten the following step of the research directions.
Author contributions
Xu Zhong: conceptualization, methodology, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft. Yin'an Zhu: methodology, data curation, investigation, writing – original draft. Weiji Dai: conceptualization, project administration. Jin Yu: supervision, review, project administration. Tao Lu: supervision, project administration, funding acquisition. Ye Pan: review and editing, supervision, project administration, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate the support from the National Science Foundation of China (No. 51671056), the research fund of Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Advanced Metallic Materials, Southeast University (No. AMM 2021A02), and the Scientific Research Foundation of Graduate School of Southeast University (YBPY2031).
References
K. Zhang and R. Zou, Small, 2021, 2100129, 1–40 Search PubMed .
G. Jerkiewicz, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8409–8417 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 RSC .
Q. Shi, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3181–3192 RSC .
L. Wu, L. Yu, B. McElhenny, X. Xing, D. Luo, F. Zhang, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 294, 120256 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. He, P. Y. Cheng, C. C. Cheng, C. L. Huang, C. T. Hsieh and S. Y. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 290, 120049 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, X. Hao, Z. Jiang, Q. Shen, B. Zhang, J. Fang, Y. Fang and Z. J. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 865, 158940 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Jiang, M. Tang, Q. Zheng, Y. Huo, F. Xie and D. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 28586–28597 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dai, Y. Pan, K. Ren, Y. An Zhu and T. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 355, 136821 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Q. H. Li, W. Yan, Z. G. Gu and J. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 401, 126149 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, Y. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7051–7055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Xiao, Y. B. Tian, Z. G. Gu and J. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2021, 3, 100065 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Li, Q. H. Li, Z. G. Gu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18519–18528 RSC .
Q. Wu, M. Luo, J. Han, W. Peng, Y. Zhao, D. Chen, M. Peng, J. Liu, F. M. F. De Groot and Y. Tan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Meng, J. Zhu, M. Huang, B. Wen, R. Guo and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2007344, 1–34 Search PubMed .
H. N. Nong, T. Reier, H. S. Oh, M. Gliech, P. Paciok, T. H. T. Vu, D. Teschner, M. Heggen, V. Petkov, R. Schlögl, T. Jones and P. Strasser, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 841–851 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, D. H. Youn, K. Kawashima, J. Lin, H. Lim and C. B. Mullins, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, J. Y. Lee, S. Xi, Y. Sun, J. Ge, S. J. H. Ong, Y. Chen, S. Dou, F. Meng, C. Diao, A. C. Fisher, X. Wang, G. G. Scherer, A. Grimaud and Z. J. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7418–7425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, M. Luo, S. Chu, M. Peng, B. Liu, Q. Wu, P. Liu, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. J. Kim, J. Liu, Y. Gao, S. Choi, J. Han, H. Shin, S. Jo, J. Kim, F. Ciucci, H. Kim, Q. Li, W. Yang, X. Long, S. Yang, S. P. Cho, K. H. Chae, M. G. Kim, H. Kim and J. Lim, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 212–222 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z. Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C. R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W. X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, K. Jiang, M. Luo, Y. Zhao, J. Lan, M. Peng, F. M. F. De Groot and Y. Tan, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5333–5340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, M. Luo, M. Peng, Y. Yu, Y. R. Lu, T. S. Chan, P. Liu, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Bo, Y. Li, R. K. Hocking and C. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41239–41245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Qin, J. Liu, H. Zhao, Z. Sun, G. Chen, D. Wu, Y. Su, S. Ding and C. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2107056, 2107056 Search PubMed .
Y. Duan, Z. Y. Yu, S. J. Hu, X. S. Zheng, C. T. Zhang, H. H. Ding, B. C. Hu, Q. Q. Fu, Z. L. Yu, X. Zheng, J. F. Zhu, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15772–15777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Cai and N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–10 Search PubMed .
D. Lai, Q. Kang, F. Gao and Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17913–17922 RSC .
T. Löffler, H. Meyer, A. Savan, P. Wilde, A. Garzón Manjón, Y. T. Chen, E. Ventosa, C. Scheu, A. Ludwig and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. C. Biesinger, L. W. M. Lau, A. R. Gerson and R. S. C. Smart, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 887–898 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, W. Zhang, R. Zheng and J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 11661–11672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Li, J. W. Zhao, L. J. Xie, J. Q. Wu and G. R. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 291, 119987 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7873–7889 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu, C. W. Tai, G. A. Niklasson and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 572–581 RSC .
A. Dutta and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 144–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ledendecker, S. Krickcalderõn, C. Papp, H. P. Steinrück, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12361–12365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Y. Tong, X. Li, S. Tao, Z. Fang, W. Chu, X. Wu and C. Wu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 236–242 RSC .
X. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Chen, J. Shi, J. Wang, A. Fan, W. Zan, S. Li, W. A. Goddard and X. M. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qiu, X. Zhang, H. Han, Z. Liu, J. Liu and X. Ji, J. Power Sources, 2021, 499, 229941 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Lu, F. Ye, R. Pang, Y. Liu, Z. Wu, Z. Shao, Z. Sun and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–11 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj00984f‡ Contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic description of the fabrication process of p-FeCoNiCrVB ribbons and preparation of CV-FeCoNiCrVB.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of p-FeCoNiCrVB and CV-FeCoNiCrVB, SEM images of (b) p-FeCoNiCrVB and (c) CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (d) EDX analysis of the nanoparticles formed on CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (e) TEM image of the nanoparticles (inset: selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern), (f) HRTEM image of the nanoparticles, and (g) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mappings of Fe, Co, Ni, Cr, V, B and O.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical characterizations of the working electrodes in 1 M KOH: (a) LSV curves tested at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, (b) overpotentials to achieve 10 mA cm−2, 25 mA cm−2, 50 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2, (c) Tafel slopes derived from the LSV curves, (d) Nyquist plots measured at open circuit potential, (e) double-layer capacitance, and (f) LSV curves normalized by ECSA.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Chronoamperometry curves of CV-FeCoNiB, CV-FeCoNiCrB and CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (b) comparison of overpotential@10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slopes between this work and other recently reported catalysts for the OER, and (c) the conclusive histogram of catalysts in this paper.	 

 	Fig. 5  XPS spectra of (a) Cr 2p and (b) V 2p, (c) element content of Cr and V in alkaline solution and the current density to reach 1.6 V (vs. RHE) at different cycles, and (d) redox peaks at different cycles.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) EPR spectra, (b) XPS spectra of O 1s (OI: metal oxides, OII: hydroxyl/surface oxygen, OIII: adsorbed oxygen and OIV: defect oxygen), (c) Raman spectra at different cycles, and (d) Raman spectra for CV-FeCoNiCrVB.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Evolution of a water droplet on p-FeCoNiCrVB and CV-FeCoNiCrVB, (b) evolution of the contact angles versus time for the catalysts in this work, and (c) the water splitting device equipped with a solar cell.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj00984f
‡ Contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
