Wearable electrochromic materials and devices: from visible to infrared modulation  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3TC01142A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3TC01142A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 7183-7210Wearable electrochromic materials and devices: from visible to infrared modulation

        
          
            Hongwei 
            Fan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wei
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Chengyi 
            Hou
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qinghong 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yaogang 
            Li
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Kerui 
            Li
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Hongzhi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *b
aInstrumental Analysis & Research Center, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, P. R. China
bState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibres and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China. E-mail: likr@dhu.edu.cn; wanghz@dhu.edu.cn
cCollege of fashion and design, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China
dEngineering Research Center of Advanced Glasses Manufacturing Technology, Ministry of Education, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China
Received 
      31st March 2023
    , Accepted 7th May 2023First published on 10th May 2023AbstractWearable electronics with optical modulation in the visible and infrared range attract great interest due to promising diverse applications in displays, camouflage, visual sensation, and thermal management. Among different optical modulation approaches, electrochromic (EC) technology, with high controllability, abundant colour species, and low energy consumption, can realize reversible visible and infrared modulation through electrochemical redox reactions of the EC materials under a low voltage. As a result, the wearable flexible EC devices have made significant progress in mechanical flexibility, device structure, and optical modulation range. In this Review, we systematically introduce and discuss the recent advances in wearable EC devices with optical modulation from the visible to infrared range. The structure features for planar and fibre EC devices are first introduced. The bendable, stretchable, and EC fibre devices are then discussed based on the choice of materials and structural design. The progress of EC devices with infrared modulation is summarized according to material classification. At last, their potential applications are demonstrated in wearable displays, camouflage, energy storage, visual sensation, and thermal comfort, which may promote the wide application of wearable electronics.
Hongwei Fan
Dr Hongwei Fan received her PhD degree in Material Science and Engineering from Donghua University in 2023. Then she worked as an experimentalist in Instrumental Analysis & Research Center at Shanghai University. Her research interests focus on the design and application of flexible electrochromic materials and devices.
Kerui Li
Dr Kerui Li is currently a Professor at the State Key Lab for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials (SKLFPM) and the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. He received his PhD degree in Material Science and Engineering from Donghua University. After that, he worked as a research fellow in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore for three years. Recently, his research interests mainly include light modulation/conversion from solar light to infrared radiation for smart clothing and soft robotics.
Hongzhi Wang
Prof. Hongzhi Wang obtained his PhD in 1998 from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and then worked as a postdoc at Micro-space Chemistry Lab, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) in Japan for 5 years. At present, he is a full professor in Material Science and Engineering and the Vice Dean of Institute of Science and Technology at Donghua University. His research area includes microstructure design of photoelectric functional materials, fibre device assembly and their smart wearable application in colour change and camouflage, physicochemical signal sensation, thermoelectric/triboelectric/solar cell-based energy conversion textile, and human–computer interaction clothing.
1. Introduction
Wearable electronics that integrate electronic functionality with mechanical flexibility have experienced a blooming development and advancement over the past few years.1–4 As an important function, the optical modulation of wearable devices has attracted wide attention,5–8 and enables smart colour change in the visible range and radiative regulation in the infrared range, promising diverse applications in displays, camouflage, visual sensation, and thermal management.9–13 For instance, colour-changing displays have eye-friendly features due to the subtractive colour mode (light-absorbing mode), which avoids the radiation damage from the blue light of typical lamination devices to human eyes and enables a comfortable reading experience.14 Simple sensing platforms are highly expected through the combination of the analytical performance of sensors with the colour changes read out by the naked eye, which provide speed, portability, low cost, and ease of use and are ideal candidates for point-of-care applications.15 Infrared radiation of the human body makes up more than 40% of heat exchange with the environment.16 The infrared modulation of wearable devices can realize thermal dissipation and insulation on-demand to maintain personal thermal comfort and reduce the energy consumption of indoor temperature regulation.17
Electrochromic technology can realize reversible visible and infrared modulation through electrochemical redox reactions of the EC materials under a low voltage and shows high controllability, abundant colour species, and low energy consumption.18,19 Since the 1990s, the flexible EC devices have been fabricated by using indium tin oxide/polyethylene terephthalate (ITO/PET) as the transparent conductive substrate,20–22 but they could be bent only slightly due to the brittle nature of ITO.23 Subsequently, emerging nanomaterials were introduced to improve the flexibility of the conductive and EC layers,24,25 and foldable and stretchable EC devices were gradually developed for wearable electronics.26–29 Fibres, as the basic unit of clothing and textiles, exhibit soft, deformable, breathable, durable, and washable features and are thus ideal platforms for wearable electronics.30 Therefore, the EC fibres were manufactured based on various one-dimensional structures, including helical, lateral, and parallel structures, to construct smart clothing by weaving or implanting them into textiles.31–33
Beyond visible modulation, with the emergence of advanced materials and EC technologies, infrared-variable EC devices have developed rapidly in recent years and show promising applications in thermal comfort and camouflage.34,35 The widely used infrared-variable EC materials include tungsten oxides (WO3) and conducting polymers, including polyaniline (PANI) and poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT).36–38 In recent years, carbon nanomaterials such as multilayer graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were discovered for dynamic infrared modulation and showed high mechanical flexibility.39 For instance, the EC devices with tunable infrared radiation based on flexible multilayer graphene thin films gated by a nonvolatile ionic liquid could achieve an 80% decrease of thermal emissivity from about 0.5 to a value below 0.1.40
So far, rapid development has been made in wearable EC technology. Although several works have reviewed the progress of EC materials and devices,19,23,41,42 they just focus on EC material classification or applications, and there is a lack of a detailed introduction to the wearable EC materials and devices from visible to infrared modulation. In this review, we focus on the recent advances and progress of wearable EC devices with optical modulation from visible to infrared regions (Fig. 1). The structures of wearable EC devices are first introduced from planar to fibre devices. The bendable and stretchable EC devices are then discussed based on respective applicable materials and structures, and fibre devices are described and compared for the optimization of fibre device designs. Next, wearable infrared-variable devices are summarized with different EC materials, followed by the promising applications of wearable EC devices. Finally, challenges and prospects are proposed for the future development of high-performance wearable EC devices. We expect that this review can provide new inspiration to promote the wide application of wearable electronics.
 Fig. 1  Wearable EC devices with visible and infrared modulation. 
2. Wearable electrochromic devices from planar to fibre architecture
The traditional EC devices are based on a multilayer structure, including the substrates, conductive layers, EC layers, electrolytes, and ion storage layers (also called counter electrodes). The substrate is used to support the internal structures of EC devices. The conductive layer is mainly used as a current collector to transmit electrons between active materials and electrodes. The EC layer is the most important component of EC devices to achieve optical modulation. The function of the electrolyte layer is mainly to provide and transport ions during the EC reaction. The ion storage layer is used primarily to store counter ions in the EC reaction process to achieve charge balance. For wearable applications, more strict requirements for the materials and structure design of EC devices were satisfied to ensure high EC performance and flexibility. The fibre devices are gradually developed to replace the planar EC devices to obtain better deformability, breathability, integration, and comfort. In this section, we have mainly introduced the planar and fibre device architectures and their characteristics and discussed the suitable conductive and EC materials for each device structure.
2.1 Electrochromic planar devices

2.1.1 Device architectures and their electrochromic materials. 
The planar EC devices are mainly constructed based on three device structures: multilayer, all-in-one, and lateral architectures. The multilayer structure is the typical structure of EC devices, including the conductive layer, EC layer, electrolyte, and ion storage layer (Fig. 2a).43 Because the EC layer compactly adheres to the conductive electrodes, the multilayer structure allows fast electron transport and a short transport pathway. Transition metal oxides (WO3, NiO, V2O5, etc.), metal complexes (Prussian blue (PB), etc.), and conjugated polymers (polythiophenes, polyaniline, etc.) are usually used for the EC layer.44–47 On applying a voltage to the EC devices, the anions and cations in the electrolyte diffuse towards the two electrodes and insert into the EC layer, leading to obviously visible colour or infrared emission changes. On applying an opposite voltage, the ions are extracted from the EC layer and the colour bleaches to the initial state.48 For EC devices with infrared modulation, the EC layer is usually coated on top of the porous conductive layer due to the ultra-low infrared transmittance of conductive materials (Fig. 2b).49 The metal coatings (e.g., Au) are usually deposited on flexible microporous membranes as conductive electrodes and reflective layers. The ions in the electrolyte can diffuse to the EC layer through micropores under the applied voltage.
 Fig. 2  Wearable planar EC devices with (a) multilayer structure for visible modulation, (b) multilayer structure for infrared modulation, (c) all-in-one structure, and (d) lateral structure and their corresponding conductive and EC materials. 
The all-in-one EC devices are constructed based on mixing the soluble EC materials, electrolyte, and redox mediator into one layer and sandwiching between two conductive substrates (Fig. 2c), significantly simplifying the device structure.50 To realize excellent and stable dissolution, small organic molecules (e.g., viologen) and metal ions (e.g., Ag) are used as the active EC materials.51,52 On applying a voltage to all-in-one EC devices, the small organic molecules or metal ions diffuse to the surface of the electrode or undergo the redox reaction with the redox mediator in the electrolyte to realize colour changes.43
For the lateral structure of planar EC devices, the two conductive and EC layers are prepared on the substrate side by side. The electrolyte is covered on the top of two electrodes (Fig. 2d). The lateral structure has a thinner thickness and a lower risk of short-circuit between two electrodes during mechanical deformation than the above two structures. However, it extends the ionic diffusion path and cannot realize uniform colour changes of the whole device.


2.1.2 Emerging conductive materials and electrodes. 
The flexible transparent conductive electrodes (TCEs) are the critical component for realizing the mechanical flexibility of wearable planar EC devices. Indium tin oxide/polyethylene terephthalate (ITO/PET) is the most widely used flexible TCE material due to its excellent conductivity and high transmittance. However, due to its brittle nature, ITO is not the ideal electrode material for flexible EC devices.53 Currently, a variety of conductive materials have emerged to replace ITO for flexible EC devices, such as carbon nanomaterials, conjugated polymers, metal materials (e.g., metal nanowires and grids), etc.54–60
Carbon nanomaterials (e.g., graphene and CNTs) have received increasing attention because of their excellent optoelectronic properties, mechanical flexibility, and environmental stability, thus showing great promise for transparent electrodes.61 The graphene films grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) could reach sheet resistance as low as ∼125 Ω sq−1 with 97.4% optical transmittance.62 The sheet resistance and transmission (at 550 nm) of CNT films deposited from superacids could reach 60 Ω sq−1 and 90.9%, respectively.63 Choi and colleagues fabricated flexible EC devices by using graphene synthesized via CVD as the transparent conductive layer and WO3 and NiO as the EC and ion storage layer, respectively.59 The transmittance and sheet resistance of three-layer graphene electrodes were 80.9% and 271.6 ± 20 Ω sq−1, respectively. The transmittance change (ΔT) of the EC device with graphene electrodes was 31.2% under the voltages of ±4 V. Hu and colleagues assembled EC devices by depositing PANI on the single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) film (150 Ω sq−1 sheet resistance and 80% transmittance at 550 nm).64 The EC device exhibited green colour at 0.8 V and yellow colour at −0.2 V. The highest electrochromic contrast was at 625 nm with a ΔT of 25%.
Conjugated polymers have been considered as a promising candidate for flexible transparent electrodes due to their mechanical flexibility and solution processability. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), in which PSS acts as both a counter-ion and a soluble template for PEDOT, is a successful conducting polymer due to its high electrical conductivity and excellent transparency in the visible range.65 PEDOT:PSS films with high electrical conductivity (>4000 S cm−1) were achieved via H2SO4 post-treatment and exhibited a sheet resistance of 46.1 Ω sq−1 with a transmittance of 90% at 550 nm.66 Singh and colleagues demonstrated the performance of PEDOT:PSS films coated on flexible substrates, treated with p-toluenesulfonic acid–dimethyl sulfoxide (PTSA–DMSO), as TCEs for EC devices. The PEDOT:PSS film with a sheet resistance of 80–85 Ω sq−1 showed a transmittance of 94%.54
Although the carbon nanomaterials and conjugated polymers have these advantages, the intrinsic colour of carbon nanomaterials (black) and conjugated polymers (e.g. blue of PEDOT) will decrease the transmittance of TCEs with the increase of conductivity and may affect the colour rendering of EC materials in EC devices. Moreover, the conductivity of carbon nanomaterials and conjugated polymers is lower than that of metal materials.
Metal-based TCEs are the most promising candidates due to their intrinsically high electrical conductivity (Ag is the best electrical conducting material with an electrical conductivity of 6.3 × 107 S m−1 at room temperature), high optical transparency and mechanical flexibility. While being transparent (with a transmittance of approximately 90%) owing to a large amount of empty space between the metallic pathways, these metallic nanostructures can exhibit sheet resistance as low as a few Ohms per square.67 However, the most used Ag-based TCEs have a significant disadvantage of poor electrochemical stability. Li and colleagues reported the silver nanowire (AgNW)-based TCEs used for EC devices by embedding AgNWs in a hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose film.68 The AgNW-based TCEs exhibited a transmittance of up to 85% at 550 nm and a sheet resistance of down to 15 Ω sq−1, and showed superior electromechanical stability due to the embedded structure.

2.2 Electrochromic fibre devices
Fibres, as the basic building units for textiles and clothing, are the desirable structure for wearable electronics. The fibre devices can be easily woven or integrated into clothes or textiles and keep the air/moisture permeability and mechanical stretchability of textiles. However, a series of problems are encountered in preparing EC fibres due to the complex structure of EC devices, including the design of electrodes for fibre devices, uniformity, diversity, and stability of colour changes in fibre devices, and scalable fabrication of fibre devices.
The EC fibre was first constructed by wrapping the slit PEDOT:PSS film on the rubber fibre coated with a gel electrolyte.69 Here, pixel PEDOT:PSS elements were patterned on a flexible substrate as the EC layer and electrodes. However, the device structure is relatively loose due to the difficulty in fixing the helical PEDOT film. Subsequently, EC fibres with a helical structure were designed using three conjugated polymers. The EC fibres were constructed by helically winding the counter electrode on the core fibres composed of the working electrode, EC layers, and electrolytes (Fig. 3a).31 The metal fibres are typically used as conductive electrodes due to their excellent electrical conductivity (more than 105 S cm−1) and thus also lead to relatively poor flexibility. This structure offers the possibility to achieve scalable preparation of EC fibres due to simple procedures.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of EC fibres with (a) helical structure, (b) lateral structure, (c) lateral–helical structure, and (d) parallel structure. 
For the lateral structure of EC fibres, the two conductive layers are prepared on both sides of the fibre substrate (Fig. 3b).70 Then, the EC layer and the electrolyte are successively prepared on the conductive layers. The fibre has a smaller diameter due to laterally arranged electrodes. However, this led to a longer ion diffusion path and non-uniform electric field distribution. Moreover, it cannot display single colour as a whole.
The lateral–helical structure combines lateral structure and helical structure, and is constructed by helically winding two lateral conductive layers on the fibre substrate and coating EC layers and the gel electrolyte subsequently (Fig. 3c).32 Compared to the lateral structure, the lateral–helical electrodes unify the electric field distribution and shorten the ion diffusion path. However, this type of EC fibre increases the difficulty of electrode preparation and can only show alternate colour changes under different voltages.
The parallel structure means that the working and counter electrodes are placed parallel and separated by the EC electrolyte (Fig. 3d).33 The simple structure makes it possible for scalable preparation of EC fibres. It also exhibits a relatively uniform electric field distribution. However, metal fibre electrodes also lead to relatively poor flexibility.
3. Wearable electrochromic devices with visible modulation
3.1 Bendable electrochromic devices
Besides the flexible conductive substrates, flexible EC materials are critical for the mechanical stability of bendable EC devices.

3.1.1 Organic electrochromic materials. 
Organic EC materials with intrinsic flexibility have the advantages of rich colours, fast switching speed, and easy processing. They are widely used for flexible EC devices, including conjugated polymers (PANI, polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene, and their derivatives) and small organic molecules (mainly viologens).71 The excellent flexibility of organic EC materials can be directly used to construct wearable EC devices. PEDOT and PANI are the most widely researched conjugated polymers. Lin and colleagues developed a roll-to-roll process for fabricating flexible, extra-large, and transparent silver nanofibre (AgNF)/PET electrodes with a sheet resistance of ∼15 Ω sq−1 and 95% transmittance.72 The network structure with a typical diameter of AgNF of ∼500 nm resulted in superior transmittance. The flexible AgNF-based EC device was assembled by using PEDOT:PSS as EC materials and electrode and could realize reversible colour changes from transparent to blue (Fig. 4a) and exhibited a shorter switching time (4.3 s and 5.4 s) and higher efficiency than that of the ITO-based EC device (Fig. 4b and c). The AgNF-based EC device could maintain EC stability even after thousand times bending cycles due to the ultra-high flexibility of the AgNF/PET electrode (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  (a) Structural schematic and photographs of a flexible AgNF-based EC device. (b) Transmittance responses during EC cycles of an AgNF-based EC device and an ITO-based EC device. (c) Colouration efficiency during the first 10 EC cycles. (d) EC stability of the AgNF-based EC device during 1000 bending cycles. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of flexible and patterned EC electrodes. (f) Optical transmittance spectra of the PANI EC devices under different potentials. (g) EC switching of the PANI EC device after 100 bending cycles. (h) EC switching of the patterned EC devices in the bending and unbending states (inset). Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Springer Nature. (i) Illustration of an electrolyte-free flexible MV2+-GQD EC device. (j) Photographs of reversible flexible MV2+-GQD EC device performance. (k) Transmittance changes of the MV2+-GQD EC device at 550 nm by voltage switching between 0 and −2.8 V. (l) Photographs of MV2+-GQD EC devices in the bending state. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Additionally, Huang and colleagues fabricated 2D lamellar PANI-based ink without any additives. PANI films with EC patterns were prepared by inkjet-printing PANI-based ink on ITO/PET with high printing efficiency and uniformity (Fig. 4e).73 The PANI EC devices based on the printable PANI film exhibited a high optical contrast of 67% at 750 nm under the voltages of ±1.5 V due to the sufficient contact between the stacked lamellae on the surface of the printed PANI film and electrolyte (Fig. 4f). The printed EC device displayed excellent EC performance even in the high bending state. The optical contrast remained at 96% after 100 bending cycles with a curvature radius of 4 cm (Fig. 4g and h).
The textile substrate has better flexibility and comfort than the polymer substrate, which is an excellent choice for constructing wearable EC devices. The EC textiles are usually reflective-type devices. Sotzing and colleagues assembled the EC devices with fast response (318 ± 33 ms) and good flexibility using woven stainless steel mesh as the electrode and PEDOT:PSS as the EC material, with gel electrolyte coating.74 Yu and colleagues constructed an EC textile with a lateral structure via an all-solution process. The ITO liquid precursor and EC polymer PG3 were spray-coated into strips with intervals on the textile substrate through a mask, respectively, followed by drop-coating gel electrolytes on the surface. The EC textile exhibited colour changes between vegetable green and soil brown and excellent flexibility and stability. Compared with multilayer reflective EC textiles, the lateral devices are thinner, more flexible, and easier to prepare.
For most EC textiles, the electrolyte of EC textiles is bare due to the porous structure of textiles. However, the toxicity of electrolytes may be harmful to the skin. Dubey and colleagues developed the EC textiles, which only have a three-layer structure with the PEDOT textile substrates and H3PO4 gel electrolyte. The H3PO4 gel electrolyte has inorganic H+ ions, and shows higher mobility and biocompatibility. EC textiles have a long life cycle as they can run up to 2500 cycles without degradation and are highly flexible and robust as they can function properly even after 1500 times bending cycles.75
Viologens (1,1′-substituted-4,4′-pygidium salt) are representative materials of organic small molecular EC materials, with the advantages of multicolour, high stability, and high optical modulation.50 The viologens exhibit various colours depending on the forms and chain lengths of the substituents.76 In terms of the chain length, the colour of alkyl-substituted viologens varies from blue to maroon, and aryl-substituents are applied particularly to yield a green colour. The viologen-based EC devices are constructed with an all-in-one structure by sandwiching the EC electrolyte between two electrodes. However, the electrolytes face the risk of decomposition at high voltages, leading to poor stability and eventual performance degradation of EC devices. Hwang and colleagues reported a new electrolyte-free flexible EC system in which the methyl viologen (MV2+) was combined with conductive graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and stabilized through strong intermolecular forces (Fig. 4i).77 The colour of the MV2+-GQD EC devices could be reversibly changed between colourless and purple by applying voltages of 0 and −2.8 V (Fig. 4j). The MV2+-GQD EC devices exhibited excellent EC stability during high-voltage charge injection as the GQDs could stably absorb electrons (Fig. 4k). This electrolyte-free EC system is also suitable for the fabrication of flexible EC devices (Fig. 4l).
The standard reduction potential of MV2+/MV˙+ is −0.7 V (vs. Fc+/Fc). The colour-changing voltage of MV2+-GQD EC devices reached −2.8 V due to the absence of both an anodic redox species and a supporting electrolyte. Therefore, Moon and colleagues added ferrocene as the anodic species to the high ion conductive gel due to their good solubility and more positive standard reduction potential than that of MV2+/MV˙+. The simple, solid-state, flexible EC device was fabricated based on EC ion gel and ITO/PET, which displayed a large transmittance change of ∼48% at only −0.9 V for 3 s.78 They also prepared multicoloured EC devices (red, green, blue) by controlling the chemical equilibrium between the monomer and dimer of a coloured viologen or by modifying the molecular structures of viologens.79,80


3.1.2 Inorganic electrochromic materials. 
Compared with organic EC materials, inorganic EC materials exhibit long-term durability, a wide working temperature, and good solar radiation stability, which mainly include transition metal oxides (WO3, NiO, V2O5, etc.) and metal complexes (PB, etc.).81 However, their intrinsic brittleness limits their flexible application. Therefore, the low dimensional nanomaterials are commonly used to achieve flexibility of inorganic EC materials. Moreover, nanostructures enhance the switching dynamics of the inorganic materials because the nanostructured surface provides numerous active sites and shortens the ion's diffusion paths.82
Yu and colleagues reported a new route for flexible Ag/W18O49 NW films by the Langmuir–Blodgett technique, resulting in the formation of multilayer ordered nanowire networks with tunable conductivity (7–40 Ω sq−1) and transmittance (58–86% at 550 nm) for large-area co-assembly of flexible transparent EC devices.83 They could be bent to a radius of 1.2 cm for more than 1000 bending cycles without apparent failure of conductivity (ΔR/R ≈ 8.3%) and EC performance (90% retention), indicating excellent mechanical flexibility. Our group constructed the lightweight, highly bendable and foldable EC films by designing the bilayer nanowire networks of AgNWs and W18O49 NWs (Fig. 5a).84 The highly flexible EC films exhibited good optical contrast (47.4%) and high colouration efficiency (up to 118.1 cm2 C−1) as the micro-/nano-tunnels and the high specific surface area of bilayer nanowire networks are advantageous for electrolyte penetration and Li+ diffusion and provide many active sites for ion insertion/extraction, respectively (Fig. 5b). The EC films also showed excellent structural stability after 500 bending or 100 folding (180° folding) cycles, even after crushing and then unfolding. This is because the gap between the nanowires releases the strain and stress along the direction that is parallel rather than perpendicular to the substrate during the deformation process (Fig. 5c–e).
 Fig. 5  (a) Structural schematic of EC films based on bilayer nanowire networks. (b) Photographs of the EC film measured in the original state, at −1 V and −2 V, respectively. (c) Optical contrast (at 632.8 nm) as a function of the bending cycle for the EC film during 500 cycles (the bending radius is 2.5 mm). (d) Schematic for the mechanism of excellent mechanical stability during the folding process. (e) Photographs and EC performance of the EC films after the crushing and unfolding process. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of flexible V2O5 NSs/GO@ITO/PET films. (g) Transmittance spectra of the V2O5 NSs/GO film. (h) Capacity retention of V2O5 NSs/GO films upon different bending angles and bending cycles. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Elsevier. (i) Schematic of electron conduction and ion diffusion pathways within the self-assembled TiO2 thin film. (j) Photographs of the EC device with an A4 paper size (about 20 × 30 cm2) in the bending state. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Springer Nature. 
The low conductivity of the transition metal oxides is a significant shortcoming, causing a high charge transport barrier. Consequently, EC devices have a long response time, low optical density, and low colouration efficiency.85 The incorporation of additional conductive materials into the EC layer can significantly decrease the charge transport barrier and enhance the EC performance.86,87 Nguyen and colleagues demonstrated that the introduction of two-dimensional titanium carbide (2D Ti3C2Tx), a member of the MXene family, with excellent electrical conductivity, leads to a significantly reduced charge transport barrier within WO3-based EC devices.88 The EC device based on the WO3/2D Ti3C2Tx hybrid film fabricated by the spray-coating method exhibited a significantly enhanced EC performance with an optical modulation of 57.61% and a colouration efficiency of 126 cm2 C−1. The switching time was 1.5 s for bleaching and 2.7 s for colouration and was 46.8% (for bleaching) and 62% (for colouration) shorter than that of the bare WO3-based EC device. Qi and colleagues introduced graphene oxide (GO) to enhance the electronic conductivity and decrease the agglomeration of V2O5 nanosheets (V2O5 NSs). They fabricated V2O5 NSs/GO films by the layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly method (Fig. 5f).89 The composite films exhibited an ultrafast colouring time (1.6 s) and bleaching time (2 s) attributed to the reduced charge transport distances of the 2D ultrathin structure. The LBL assembly structure accompanied by larger Li+ ion storage surface area facilitated the superior transmittance contrast of 57.5% at 425 nm and reversible yellow/green/blue-grey colour changes (Fig. 5g). Besides, the flexible V2O5 NSs/GO films on the ITO/PET substrate displayed a rapid response speed (2.7 s/4.3 s) after 100 bending cycles with a bending angle of 90°, which manifested their potential application for wearable EC devices (Fig. 5h).
The 2D nanosheets exhibit more advantages than 1D or 0D nanostructures for wearable devices. The much more extensive contact area between adjacent nanosheets than that between 1D or 0D nanostructures promotes the electron transfer of adjacent nanosheets. Moreover, 2D nanosheet networks also help to redistribute the induced strain evenly, which improves both the mechanical strength and the flexibility of the film. Our group assembled Ti3C2Tx (T = O, OH, or F) and TiO2 nanosheets into uniform nanometer-thick films by a liquid–liquid interface self-assembly (LLIA) technique, and fabricated EC devices based on the TiO2/Ti3C2Tx heterostructures on a flexible substrate, where the Ti3C2Tx layer served as the transparent electrode and the 2D TiO2 layer as the EC layer.90 Benefiting from the well-balanced porosity and connectivity of these assembled nanometer-thick heterostructures (Fig. 5i), the LLIA film with seven layers of TiO2 presented a fast switching speed (1.71/0.36 s), high colouration efficiency (243 cm2 C−1), superior electrochemical stability (ΔT maintained up to 95% of its original value after 500 EC cycles) and high flexibility (ΔT remained at 94% of its original value after 1000 bending cycles). The large-area EC device with a dimension of 30 × 20 cm2 presented a uniform colour distribution even in the bending state (Fig. 5j).

3.2 Stretchable electrochromic devices
Considering that the motion of human joints will cause large tensile deformation, wearable EC devices with stretchability are highly desired to adapt to the irregular and dynamic surfaces. The stretchable electrodes are the critical component for stretchable EC devices. Currently, stretchable conductive electrodes are fabricated by mixing conductive materials with elastomers or attaching a conductive material onto the elastic substrate.91,92 The most common structure is the ‘wavy’ structure. The wavy structures can be generally obtained by depositing conductive materials on pre-strained elastic substrates, which are subsequently released to allow those conductive films to form periodic wavy structures spontaneously. Common elastic substrates include poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), polyurethane (PU), thermoplastic polyurethane, styrene butadiene rubber, etc.93 Many different types of conductive materials can be used for the fabrication of stretchable electrodes, including conjugated polymers, carbon materials, and metal nanowires.94,95
Among the conductive materials, conductive polymers were usually used as active conductive additives due to their excellent flexibility. Kai and colleagues fabricated intrinsically stretchable EC electrodes based on PEDOT and PU composite films.96 The PEDOT/PU composite film showed reversible colour changes between light blue and dark blue even when the film was stretched (Fig. 6a). An EC device with a built-in electrolyte was fabricated by stacking the PEDOT/PU composite film on a double-network hydrogel, which could be wrapped around a glass rod (Fig. 6b) or mounted on a human finger (Fig. 6c). Kim and colleagues designed a stretchable EC electrode based on PEDOT. The electrode showed the highest electrical conductivity of 1406 S cm−1 at a 20% stretched state and maintained its initial electrical properties under a cyclic stretching/releasing process of over 50% strain.97 A stretchable EC device based on the stretchable EC electrode was fabricated and it showed an optical contrast of 47.7% at 590 nm and a high colouration efficiency of 434.1 cm2 C−1. The optical contrast remained at 45.2% under 50% strain. However, the inherent blue colour of PEDOT will lead to a decrease in electrode transmittance. Moreover, the conductivity of PEDOT is at least two orders of magnitude lower than that of metal materials.
 Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structures of PEDOT and photographs of the stretched electrochromic film of a PEDOT/PU composite in reduced and oxidized forms. (b) EC film/hydrogel hybrid wrapped around a glass rod and human finger. (c) Colour change of the EC film/hydrogel hybrid device placed on a human finger. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the stretchable EC electrodes. (e) Photographs of stretchable EC electrodes in bleached and coloured states at 0 and 50% strain. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Structure schematics of stretchable EC devices. (g) Photographs of stretchable EC devices under different stretching states. Scale bar: 1 cm. (h) Transmittance of the stretchable EC device as a function of time before and after 100 stretching/releasing cycles. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
AgNWs are the ideal electrode materials for stretchable devices due to their high conductivity, high transparency, excellent mechanical flexibility, and easy preparation process.98 The AgNW-based stretchable electrodes are usually fabricated by preparing AgNWs on the elastic substrates with structure designs. Thus, the mechanical stability of AgNW-based stretchable electrodes is critical for realizing stretchable EC devices. Lee and colleagues fabricated stretchable EC electrodes based on an embedded AgNW/PDMS elastic conductor with an electrochemically deposited WO3 active layer (Fig. 6d).99 The embedded structures of the AgNW/PDMS elastic conductor ensured durability and robustness against adhesive forces, surface scratching, and repeated stretching. The electrodeposited WO3 microstructures retained their structural integrity upon stretching due to the non-continuous film morphology. The stretchable EC electrodes exhibited a fast switching speed (colouring time of 1 s and bleaching time of 4 s) while retaining 81% of the initial contrast after 100 cycles in the relaxed state. They could be stretched, twisted, folded, and crumpled without performance degradation (Fig. 6e).
The electrochemical stability of stretchable electrodes is another crucial factor for realizing high-performance stretchable EC devices due to the rapid oxidation of AgNWs during the electrochemical redox reactions when AgNWs are used as positive electrodes. Therefore, various materials, including polymers, inert metals and graphene, were used as an anticorrosive layer to improve the stability of AgNWs.100–102 Our group fabricated transparent, stretchable, and electrochemically stable conductive electrodes based on the wrinkled semi-embedded Ag@Au core–shell nanowire (Ag@Au NW) network, which exhibited excellent electrochemical and mechanical stability due to the Au shell layer effectively inhibiting the oxidation of Ag NWs and the wrinkled semi-embedded structure highly reducing the fractures and slippage of Ag@Au NWs during the stretching process, respectively.103 The stretchable EC devices were assembled by using the semi-embedded Ag@Au NW network as transparent electrodes and the viologen-based gel film as the EC gel electrolyte (Fig. 6f). The stretchable EC devices exhibited stable colour changes between yellow and green even at 60% strain due to the Au protective layer effectively blocking the interaction between the ions in the electrolyte and the Ag NWs and maintained obvious colour change after 100 bending (at 180°) and stretching (40% strain) cycles (Fig. 6g and h).
Zhao and colleagues designed a flexible and stretchable WO3@AgNW-precured polydimethylsiloxane (WO3@AgNW-PrePDMS) electrode by embedding the WO3@AgNW core–shell structure into the PDMS substrate.104 WO3, as a shell structure, protected the AgNWs by preventing their oxidation and improved the stability of the conductive substrate. The WO3@AgNW-PrePDMS electrode displayed high conductivity (12 Ω sq−1) as the transparent conductive film and a wide optical modulation range (ΔT = 72% at 550 nm) as the EC electrode. It could maintain stable electrical conductivity (ΔR/R ≈ 8.3% and 14%) and electrochromic performance (90% and 92% retention) after 20000 bending cycles and 1000 stretching cycles at 70% strain. Stretchable devices fabricated with the WO3@AgNW-PrePDMS electrodes could exhibit excellent flexibility and EC behaviour even after 200 stretching cycles. The WO3@AgNW-PrePDMS electrodes can be a strong candidate for wearable electrochemical devices in the future.
3.3 Electrochromic fibres
Compared to planar EC devices, the EC fibres can be easily integrated with textiles or clothing by knitting or implanting approaches, guaranteeing the breathability and wearable comfort of clothing. However, the construction of EC fibres with a complex multilayer structure suffers from difficult miniaturization of electrodes, uneven distribution of the electric field, long-range preparation of EC fibres, etc. Therefore, various structures are designed to fabricate EC fibres, such as lateral, helical, and parallel structures.
Peng and colleagues assembled an EC fibre by winding CNTs next to each other onto a stretched elastic fibre to form sheet-like structures of aligned CNTs and electrodepositing PANI onto the sheets of aligned CNTs as CNT/PANI EC electrodes with further coating the poly(vinyl alcohol)/H3PO4 gel electrolyte (Fig. 7a).70 The EC fibres demonstrated rapid and reversible chromatic transitions between blue, green, and light yellow at different voltages. These EC fibres also showed high electrochemical performance under deformations such as bending and stretching, which can be woven into textiles and display different patterns (Fig. 7b). However, the electrodes laterally placed along the axial direction of the fibre will lead to lengthening of the ionic diffusion path as the electrode length increases.
 Fig. 7  (a) Structure schematic of CNT/PANI EC electrodes. (b) Photographs of textiles woven from EC fibres displaying different patterns. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Photographs of reversible colouration of EC fibres and 3D chromaticity of colours originated from the two states of WO3 and P3MT, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Structure diagram of the EC fibres and mechanism of the fibres with PEDOT as the EC layer. (e) Reflectance spectra and the corresponding photographs of three EC fibres under different voltages. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Structural scheme of the EC fibres. (g) Photograph of long (hundreds of meters) EC fibres wrapped on spools (scale bar: 10 cm). (h) Photographs of large-area smart textile knitted using long EC fibres (scale bar: 20 cm). (i) Photographs of large-area embroidery with a smart colour-changing flower composed of multiple EC petals (scale bar: 20 cm). Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Lin and colleagues used a template method to prepare EC fibres with a lateral–helical structure.32 The helical structure can shorten the distance between two laterally arranged electrodes. Two coil Au electrodes were generated on the fibre surface, followed by the electrochemical deposition of PEDOT as the EC layer. An overlay of solid electrolytes was applied to the whole fibre. The fibre device showed a reversible colour switching between blue and gold with a fast response time (<5 s) at a potential of 0.6 V. Furthermore, they fabricated multicolour EC fibres based on WO3 and poly(3-methylthiophene) (P3MT) with the same structure which showed dark red, green, and gold, depending on the voltage applied (Fig. 7c).105 Multicolour was realized due to the stack effect of the two EC electrodes, which showed different colours due to the difference in chemical components and electrical potentials.
The EC fibres based on laterally arranged electrodes cannot realize uniform colour changes throughout the whole fibres, which only display the alternating colour changes in different areas of the fibres. Our group fabricated three primary-colour (red, green, and blue) EC fibres based on the helical structure.31 Three EC materials, PEDOT, poly(3-methylthiophene) (P3HT), and poly(2,5-dimethoxyaniline), were deposited on stainless steel wires by electrochemical polymerization. A polymer gel electrolyte was then coated on the EC layer, with another finer stainless steel wire helically winded around as the counter electrode (Fig. 7d). The EC fibres presented obvious RGB colour changes (Fig. 7e), a fast response time (millisecond scale), excellent flexibility and structural stability even in the bending and folding state.
Despite these achievements, many shortcomings and difficulties still exist for the practical application of EC fibres: EC fibres have to be hand-made in the laboratory due to the complex device structures, which limits fibre lengths. The electrolytes and the other active layers in EC fibres lack effective protection leading to poor environmental stability. In long (e.g., meters in length) EC fibres, it is challenging to realize sufficiently fast electron transfer/ionic diffusion to guarantee colour change uniformity due to the long transfer/diffusion pathways. Our group continuously prepared EC fibres with long-range controllability and multi-environmental stability based on a parallel dual-counter-electrode structure by using custom-built equipment (Fig. 7f and g).33 Multiple colour changes were achieved by introducing various viologen materials, including blue, magenta, green, and dull red. Due to the more uniform electric field distribution, the parallel dual-counter-electrode structure highly enhanced colour-changing uniformity in long EC fibres. Furthermore, an electrochemical anticorrosive layer and an outer polymer protective layer were used to enhance the electrochemical, mechanical, washing, irradiation, and thermal stability of the EC fibres for long-term practical applications. These EC fibres could be knitted to form large-area, smart colour-changing textiles and implanted into textiles with complex patterns, demonstrating potential applications in adaptive camouflage and wearable displays (Fig. 7h and i).
4. Wearable electrochromic devices with infrared modulation
With the development of EC technology, the considerable interest in wearable EC devices has been extending from the visible to infrared range. Normally, thermal radiation mainly occurs between 2.5 and 25 μm, referred to as the mid-infrared (MIR) region. The wearable EC devices with MIR modulation (infrared EC devices) are exploitable for infrared camouflage and thermal comfort. The EC materials with infrared modulation behaviours are mainly transition metal oxides and conjugated polymers.106 The conjugated polymers are most used for wearable infrared EC devices due to excellent flexibility, easy processing, and low manufacturing cost. Recently, carbon nanomaterials have been experimentally proven as promising infrared EC materials with tunable thermal emissivity.81 In addition, the reversible metal electrodeposition device (RMED) is a novel type of EC device with infrared modulation that can modulate emissivity by reversible electrodeposition of a metal layer on the transparent electrode.107
4.1 Infrared electrochromic devices based on conjugated polymers
PEDOT and PANI are the most extensively explored conjugated polymers for infrared EC modulation. For the architecture of conjugated polymer-based infrared EC devices, the highly porous gold membranes are usually used as the substrate of the conjugated polymers to guarantee that the ions can easily migrate from the polymer through the porous membrane. Li and colleagues fabricated a highly flexible monolithic integrated infrared EC device by electrodeposition of PANI on both sides of the Au/nylon/Au porous membrane.108 The integrated device demonstrated an infrared emittance change (Δε) of 0.43 and 0.40 in the wavelength range of 8–14 μm and 2.5–25 μm and exhibited ultra-high flexibility and excellent structural stability. The Δε values of the integrated device remained at 93% after 100 bending cycles with a bending radius of about 10 mm.
The dopant is a pivotal factor in influencing the emissivity modulation of conjugated polymers. Li and colleagues studied the infrared modulation of sulfuric acid-doped PANI, which had a relatively low emissivity change of 0.24 in the wavelength range of 8–12 μm.109 Li and colleagues fabricated flexible infrared EC devices with HClO4 doped-PANI porous films which showed the modulation of emittance variation from 0.735 to 0.316 in the wavelength range of 2.5–25 μm and elucidated that the existence and elimination of polarons and bipolarons delocalized on PANI chains are the direct factors and the most critical factors for realizing the emissivity modulation (Fig. 8a–c).110 Han and colleagues demonstrated the influence of camphorsulfonic acid (CSA) doping concentration on the Δε of PANI-based devices.111 With the increase of CSA concentration, the effect of the doping concentration on the emittance of PANI/Au films can be attributed to two factors: (1) the change in emittance is mainly caused by the shortening of the optical penetration depth either in the dopant free state (non-doped) or at a low CSA doping concentration; (2) the change in emittance is mainly caused by the increase in the reflectance of the PANI layer under the increased doping (Fig. 8d). Due to the joint action of the two factors, the emittance of the PANI film first increases and then decreases with increasing concentration of CSA, and the maximum Δε of 0.45 was realized.
 Fig. 8  (a) Infrared thermal images of the PANI EC device. (b) Emittance curves of the PANI porous film at distinct conjugation states, corresponding dedoping states, and the Au/microporous membrane. (c) Illustration of the electrochemical oxidation/reduction process of PANI and the chemical reactions associated with the interconversion of different forms of PANI. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Mechanism of emittance variation at a negative voltage, positive voltage with a low doping concentration, and positive voltage with a high doping concentration. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Elsevier. (e) Infrared emissivity of oxidized and reduced PEDOT:Tos films of a lateral device. (f) Thermal images of a lateral (top) and vertical (bottom) PEDOT:Tos EC device. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The surface morphology of the conjugated polymers also affects the infrared modulation performance. Louet and colleagues proved that the infrared reflectance of the PEDOT film with smoother morphology could be enhanced by about 35–40%.112 Li and colleagues compared the performances of the PANI film with a non-directionally distributed nanowire-like morphology and a relatively smooth surface decorated by shallow voids.113 PANI films with nanowire morphology could realize the emissivity variations from 0.32 to 0.71, which were higher than those of the PANI film with shallow void morphology with values from 0.19 to 0.57. This is because the multiple reflections by non-directionally distributed nanowires on the surface suppressed the reflection of incident infrared light.
Most wearable infrared EC devices based on conjugated polymers need metal materials as electrodes. Benefitting from the high conductivity and EC features, the PEDOT material could serve as both the infrared EC layer and conductive layer instead of metal electrodes, which makes it possible to design flexible and robust conducting electrode-free infrared EC devices. Jonsson and colleagues reported two types of metal-free flexible infrared EC devices (lateral and multilayer devices) based on PEDOT:tosylate (PEDOT:Tos). The PEDOT:Tos film prepared by vapour phase polymerization exhibited high conductivity (above 1000 S cm−1).114 The lateral device exhibited a significant infrared modulation in the emissivity of about 15.3% (Fig. 8e), an effective temperature difference of about 10 °C between the two redox states (Fig. 8f), and good optical memory (∼10 hours). The vertical EC device produced slightly smaller temperature differences (over 6 °C) than the lateral device but showed a fast switching speed (1.9 s and 3.3 s) and good continuous cyclic stability (∼100 cycles).
4.2 Infrared electrochromic devices based on carbon nanomaterials
EC devices based on graphene and CNTs are promising candidates due to their ultrawide spectral range from visible to terahertz and structural flexibility. In addition, these carbon nanomaterials with high conductivity can be used as both conductive and EC layers (two functions in one layer), simplifying the device structure.
Optical absorption of graphene can be tuned by electrostatic gating owing to the Pauli blocking, which makes graphene capable of realizing infrared modulation.115 Coskun Kocabas and colleagues reported the ultra-flexible graphene-based infrared EC devices, consisting of a multilayer-graphene (MLG) electrode on a porous polyethylene (PE) membrane soaked with a nonvolatile ionic liquid and a back gold electrode (Fig. 9a).116 The ionic liquid intercalated and doped into the graphene layers under a voltage bias. As a result of doping, the charge density on graphene increased, and the Fermi level shifted to higher energies, which suppressed the infrared absorption and thus the emissivity of the graphene electrode. The emissivity of MLG could be controlled between 0.8 and 0.3 with a bias voltage of less than 4 V and the infrared  temperature of  MLG could be controlled between 38 and 25 °C at 40 °C background temperature (Fig. 9b and c). The devices were light (30 g m−2), thin (<50 μm), ultra-flexible, and can conformably coat the environment. On this basis, they introduced an infrared EC textile using conductive textile as the substrate.117 The emissivity modulation ranged from 0.7 to 0.35 under the voltage of 0 V and >4 V in the wavelength range of 8–13 μm. The infrared EC textile could be directly fabricated onto a T-shirt, which enabled long-wavelength infrared communication via modulation of the thermal radiation from the human body.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of graphene-based infrared EC devices. (b) Voltage dependence of the emitted thermal power (blue line) and extracted emissivity (red scattered data) at a wavelength of 10 μm. (c) Thermal images of the device placed on the author's hand under the voltage of 0 and 3 V, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Long-term stability test for a cycle period of 30 s. (e) Mechanism of emittance variation for the MWCNT-based EC film. (f) Thermal images of the MWCNT-based EC film with negative (−1.7 V) and positive voltages (4 V), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
With tunable Fermi energy levels and electrical conductivity, CNTs show infrared EC performance by adjusting free carrier concentration during the reversible ion-induced doping process. Haddon and colleagues reported a simple two-terminal semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotube (SC-SWCNT) thin film used for EC devices.118 In the presence of an ionic liquid, the SC-SWCNT thin film allowed the realization of an extremely high density of holes, inducing a strong position-dependent electromodulation of the interband and excitonic transitions, as a result of the position-dependent shift of the SWCNT Fermi level. The SC-SWCNT thin film could realize a broad spectral range of electro-optical modulation from the far infrared to the visible light.
Sun and colleagues manufactured large-scale infrared EC films based on multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) via a universal roll-to-roll process.39 The EC films exhibited tunable thermal emissivity from ≈0.15 to 0.7 by ionic liquid gating and excellent stability with 96% modulation retention over 3500 cycles (Fig. 9d). The infrared modulation behaviour was mainly ascribed to the change in free carrier concentration of few-walled carbon nanotubes in MWCNT films via a reversible ion-induced doping process (Fig. 9e). A large flexible EC thin film with a size of 28 × 14 cm2 was fabricated. The waist of the human body exhibited a state of high emissivity under a voltage of −1.7 V. When the voltage turned to 4 V, the human body could blend into the surrounding environment with low emissivity (Fig. 9f). The MWCNT-based EC film can act as an infrared cloak for human stealth.
4.3 Infrared electrochromic devices based on reversible metal deposition
The reversible metal electrodeposition device is a novel EC application that utilizes the appearance and disappearance of a metal layer to achieve spectrum control.107 Different from conventional EC devices whose optical modulation depends on the insertion/extraction of ions into EC films, RMEDs modulate optical states based on the reversible electrodeposition and dissolution of metal. Without a fixed EC layer, their structure would be much simpler than that of typical EC devices.119 Ag, Bi, and Cu are the most widely studied metals for reversible electrodeposition because of their high reversibility and the use of hazard-free electrolytes.120 Owing to its high extinction coefficient, a thin metal film with a few tens of nanometers thickness would be highly reflective like bulk metals. Metals are prominent for ultrahigh reflectance (∼100%) over the entire infrared spectrum in their bulk states, which makes them the perfect infrared reflectors to suppress thermal radiation.121 However, the commonly used transparent electrode in RMEDs is opaque in the infrared range. Finding an infrared transparent and highly conductive electrode is the most significant challenge hindering the development of RMEDs working in the infrared region.
Nanoscale metal particles can induce the localized surface plasmon resonance effect and absorb light of a specific wavelength. Li and colleagues utilized this property and demonstrated the nanoscopic platinum (Pt) films as infrared transparent electrodes used for RMEDs. Nanoscopic Pt films were highly infrared absorptive and partially transmissive in the 3–14 μm range, with only limited reflectance.122 Incorporated with a highly absorptive electrolyte, the device appeared highly absorptive (highly emissive) in its initial state. After the deposition voltage had been applied, Ag would be gradually electrodeposited on the nanoscopic Pt film surfaces and gradually convert the infrared absorption and infrared transmission of the nanoscopic Pt films to infrared reflection by forming Ag electrodeposited Pt films, thereby enabling the devices to achieve low-emittance states. This design bypassed the infrared transparent electrode and achieved a 0.77/0.71 emissivity change in the mid-wave infrared and long-wave infrared (LWIR) atmospheric transmittance windows, respectively. The flexible devices were fabricated based on the polypropylene (PP) film with a nominal Pt thickness of 7 nm (∼225 Ω sq−1) (Fig. 10a). The flexible device exhibited large and uniform apparent temperature changes in the LWIR (Fig. 10b). Furthermore, because of the broadband infrared transparency of the PP films, the PP-based devices exhibited infrared tunability over the entire infrared spectrum (Fig. 10c), showing their applications in both flexible and broadband infrared modulation.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of a flexible PP-based device. (b) LWIR images of the flexible PP-based device on a curved cup surface (left) before and (right) after electrodepositing for 25 s. (c) “Real-time” total infrared reflectance spectra of the flexible PP-based device. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of the proposed UWB-TCE. (e) Wideband transmittance spectra of the UW-TCE and other types of TCEs from 0.2 to 20 μm. (f) Cyclic bending test with a bending radius of 1 cm. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society. (g) Schematics and photographs of the RMED before (left) and after electrodeposition (right). (h) Real-time thermal images of the RMED during the first and the second electrodeposition processes. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Carbon-based electrodes possess high electron migration rates and low carrier concentrations, which endows them with high transparency in the infrared range. Hsu and colleagues designed a flexible ultra-wideband transparent conducting electrode (UWB-TCE) consisting of monolayer graphene, a gold microgrid, and a PE membrane to realize an EC device capable of synergistic solar and radiative heat management (Fig. 10d).123 The UWB-TCE exhibited low sheet resistance (Rs = 22.4 Ω sq−1), high optical transmittance (TUV-vis = 85.63%, Tnear-IR = 87.85%, and Tmid-IR = 84.87%), and excellent mechanical flexibility (the sheet resistance remained stable during 600 bending cycles at the radius of 1 cm) (Fig. 10e and f).123 Li and colleagues prepared graphene-based infrared transparent electrodes by wet-transfer of the CVD-grown graphene films onto the low-surface-energy PP films.124 The graphene-based electrodes possessed an average infrared transmittance of over 80% in the 3–14 μm range and sheet resistance less than 500 Ω sq−1 after stacking four graphene layers. The RMED was developed by reversible metal electrodeposition on graphene-based infrared transparent electrodes. After electrodeposition for 50 s, the apparent temperature of the graphene/PP-based RMED could decrease by ∼13.5 °C (at 45 °C) (Fig. 10g and h). However, the cycling stability of the electrodes needs to be improved urgently, as it can withstand only a few deposition/dissolution cycles.
5. Wearable applications of flexible electrochromic devices
5.1 Wearable displays
EC materials and devices have received remarkable attention and have shown attractive potential for use in emerging electronic papers/billboards, see-through displays, and other new-generation displays due to the advantages of low power consumption, easy viewing, flexibility, stretchability, etc. As the typical nonemissive (passive) display, EC devices have ideal outdoor readability and eye-friendly features. The observed content and information come from the colour change in related materials under electrochemically driven redox processes. This efficiently avoids the radiation damage of strong blue light to human eyes and enables a comfortable and pleasant reading experience under strong ambient light.14 The EC displays can be divided into segmented and pixel displays according to their different working principles and information capacities. The ideal EC displays have higher performance requirements, including faster response speed for the fast information displaying/switching capability, better stability and durability to support their lifetime, and higher optical contrast to ensure an enjoyable reading experience.

5.1.1 Segmented electrochromic displays. 
The segmented EC display is a relatively simple display mode used to display some fixed graphics, numbers, or letters. This display can also dynamically switch some contents through simple control of inputted electrical signals. A classic example is the segmented alphanumeric display.125 The critical point in fabricating EC segmented displays is to prepare EC patterns. Coating, digital printing, and template-assisted techniques are mainly used for EC pattern preparation.
The coating techniques mainly include blade coating, spray coating, spin coating, etc. Sotzing and colleagues fabricated a single-layer, hydrophobic, printed EC textile device by spray coating the copolymer of 3,4-bis(2-ethylhexyloxy) thiophene and 3,4-dimethoxythiophene onto the screen-printed PEDOT:PSS textile electrodes.126 The EC textile featuring a Yin-yang style design switched between red and blue at −1 and 2 V, respectively (Fig. 11a). The EC textile was integrated into an Arduino-powered Bluetooth receiver and switched using a simple phone app (Fig. 11b). Through a hole-through fabrication method, the flexible devices offer aesthetics to the display by concealing all electronic connections on their backsides while maintaining their “fabric” feel. The EC devices show promise for flexible display applications in textile-based markets, such as adaptive camouflage.
 Fig. 11  (a) EC patterns with back connections. (b) Switching of the patterned EC device from a Bluetooth-enabled phone app (top) and cross-sectional illustration of hole-through device construction (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram and demonstration of the operability of the OpDNA-Gel-based display. (d) Demonstration of feasibility and reusability of the OpDNA-Gel-based display. The alphabet-patterned OpDNA Gel was fabricated as the EC display itself and with the cut-and-stick method, it was reassembled to make the desired words. (e) Schematic illustration describing the encrypted quick response (QR) system with OpDNA Gel and recognition of the OpDNA-Gel-based QR system. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Photographs of pixelated and subpixelated EC displays with various patterns in the coloured state. (g) Photographs of bleached and coloured states before bending, and the coloured state after bending at a bending radius of 10 mm. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (h) Multi-array display device based on different types of the VTG showing colouring of letters (blue “D”, green “H”, and red “U”) under an ultralow voltage (±0.1 V) (pixel size: 1.0 × 1.0 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Elsevier. (i) Schematic diagram showing the structure of a fully printed AMECD and the photograph of a 6 × 6-pixel flexible AMECD laminated on human skin displaying the English letter “U”. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Digital printing techniques (e.g., inkjet printing, dispensing printing, and 3D printing) have the advantage of simple and efficient direct patterning. Moon and colleagues demonstrated electrostatic force-assisted dispensing-printed WO3-based EC devices displaying a dual image depending on the applied voltage. The colouration of the devices can alternatively appear due to the use of electrolyte-soluble anodic species (dimethyl ferrocene, dmFc), for which WO3 films were deposited on both electrodes, and a part of the electrodes was exposed to the electrolyte for the oxidation of dmFc.127
The template-assisted method is also widely used for fabricating patterned active materials. Various promising templates, such as photoresist templates, PDMS templates, and fine metal masks, have been developed.128,129 Photoresists are a class of organic materials with photopolymerizable/degradable functions which can form representative templates and are also very compatible with most existing EC materials for manufacturing-related patterns.130 Frisbie and colleagues fabricated ion-gel EC displays with commercial negative photoresist (SU-8) templates. With the help of SU-8 templates, the size of the as-prepared pixel could reach 1 × 1 mm2. The ECD with patterns of the Arabic numerals appeared in deep blue at −0.9 V. When we applied 0.0 V, the EC device returned to the bleached state, and the patterns disappeared.78
The customizable display is an important requirement for EC displays. Moon and colleagues prepared deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)-based gels (OpDNA Gel) through groove binding and ionic interactions of DNA and 1,1′-diheptyl-4,4′-bipyridinium.131 The OpDNA Gel exhibited a customizable shape, thermoplasticity and voltage-tunable EC behaviour, and could apply in on-demand information coding systems, user-customized EC displays, and microorganism monitoring systems (Fig. 11c–e). They also demonstrated user-customized, design-it-yourself EC displays that provide multicolour images with similar optical contrast at the same voltage by adjusting the oxidation activity of electrolyte-soluble anodic species, which displayed user-customized images when coloured and did not require printers or photolithography processes.132


5.1.2 Pixel electrochromic displays. 
Pixel EC displays can realize an arbitrary switching and dynamic adjustment of the displayed content and information by controlling the “on/off” state and ratio of EC pixels.14
The viologens have advantages in implementing pixel displays due to their simple device structure and multicolour display by changing the forms and chain lengths of substituents. Moreover, the colour expressed by the viologens can be modulated through the homogeneous mixing of different EC materials due to their similar basic chemical structure.133 Kim and colleagues demonstrated flexible and transparent EC displays with simultaneously implementable subpixelated EC gels by sequential multiple patterning.134 The multicolour of subpixelated EC displays, including magenta, blue, and green, was realized based on ionic liquid-based EC gels of monoheptyl-viologen, diheptyl-viologen (DHV), and diphenyl-viologen (DPV) respectively by applying a voltage of about −2.5 V. The subpixelation process for multicoloured-flexible EC displays is designed to facilitate easy fabrication and rapid operation with various patterns at low cost (Fig. 11f). The subpixelated EC gels using a film mask can be implemented to a minimum size of 200 μm. Furthermore, the subpixelated flexible EC displays exhibited high durability even after 1000 cycles of mechanical bending tests at a bending radius of 10 mm (Fig. 11g). These results open up the possibilities for realizing EC material-based active-matrix displays with high resolution by solving the problems of multicolour implementation and fine-pixelation.
When EC devices are integrated into large-scale or multi-array systems, the total consumption generally increases significantly. Our group developed the ultralow-energy consumption light-illuminated viologen/TiO2 gel-based EC device (VTGD), which achieved obvious colour change and high colouring efficiency (196.3 cm2 C−1) under an ultralow voltage (∼0.1 V) due to the viologen/TiO2 mixture showing blending surface chemistry and a matched energy level which accelerated charge transfer and achieve a lower electron transport barrier with the electrode.135 The driving voltage and working energy consumption (0.18 mJ cm−2 at 0.1 V) of the VTGD were at least one order of magnitude lower than those of reported EC devices and other display technologies. An array display device based on these three types of viologen/TiO2 gels was prepared, which displayed the patterns of multicolour letters, namely a blue “D”, a green “H”, and a red “U”, under an ultralow voltage (±0.1 V) (Fig. 11h), showing the application potential in low-energy RGB displays.
The EC displays require precise control circuits and suitable driving modes to ensure accurate electrical signal input. Unfortunately, image diffusion and signal crosstalk problems occur frequently, which affect the displayed image resolution. Since the applied voltage is limited to the targeted pixels, EC pixels controlled by thin-film diodes or transistors can effectively avoid signal crosstalk. Zhou and colleagues designed a flexible active-matrix-based EC display (AMECD) with fully screen-printed techniques (Fig. 11i).136 Silver nanoparticles, semiconductor SWCNTs, and barium titanate as conductors, conductive channels, and insulators were coated onto the PET substrate by step-by-step printing to prepare the desired thin-film transistors (TFTs). The fully screen-printed AMECD was prepared by combining the printed PEDOT:PSS-based EC pixel array with the printed TFTs. The fully screen-printed AMECD can be a desirable platform for large-area, low-cost, and flexible displays. Ha and colleagues fabricated a stretchable array of AMECDs.137 The EC device consisting of P3HT and Prussian blue electrodes with a mixed gel electrolyte could express RGB depending on the applied voltage and exhibited low power consumption levels of 331 and 378 μW cm−2 (10 s duration) at −1.0 and 1.0 V, respectively. The AMECD was integrated on a deformable Ecoflex substrate via a dry transfer method using patterned liquid metal interconnections and it showed mechanical stability under bending and biaxial stretching by 30%.

5.2 Adaptive camouflage
EC materials and devices for camouflage, including visible and infrared camouflage, have attracted growing attention and research interest due to their attractive properties, such as rapid response, controllable optical modulation, low energy consumption, and flexibility. EC camouflage is based on the electrochemically driven redox process of EC materials to produce colour/reflectivity/emissivity changes so that the objects exhibit adaptive changes to the surrounding environment and achieve perfect concealment from visual and infrared detection.138 The ideal EC camouflage devices require smaller chromatic aberration with the surrounding environment to ensure camouflage concealment, better flexibility to ensure comfort and practicality, and better stability and durability to support their life.

5.2.1 Visual camouflage. 
EC technologies have significant advantages for adaptive visual camouflage due to their rich colour and ease of control. Adaptive visual camouflage requires the EC device to adjust its colour to blend with the colour of the surroundings and achieve perfect concealment of the target.134
Single-colour variation is the greatest limitation in adaptive visual camouflage for inorganic materials. Unlike most inorganic EC materials, vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) with multicolour changes similar to camouflage colours (yellow and green) is suitable for visual camouflage. Zhang and colleagues presented a V2O5-methyl cellulose (VMC) composite EC film with remarkable cycling stability and a wide range of colour options.139 The VMC reflective EC devices possessed a low drive voltage (±1 V), a rapid switching response time (≤5.6 s), and an excellent working status after 1000 cycles. VMC reflective EC devices could have a wide range of colour modulation (yellow, green, blue, chartreuse, emerald, medium, and dark green) to simulate natural environmental conditions and were suitable for use in forests, grasslands, or deserts (Fig. 12a).
 Fig. 12  (a) Fully coloured VMC reflective EC devices that correspond to natural environments including deserts, grasslands, and sunsets. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates of the dual-responsive actuator in the 1931 colour space chromaticity diagram. (c) Respective bending displacements of the air-working dual-responsive actuators and pure SWCNT-based actuators measured between ±1.8 V bias. (d) Photographs of imitating the actuation of octopus limbs under ±1.8 V voltage. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Infrared adjustment mode and the principle of the PANI/Ce4+ films. (f) Infrared spectra curves of the PANI/Ce4+ films in the high emissivity state and low emissivity state, respectively. (g) Thermal images of the EED compared with reference objects stuck to the back of the hand in the high emission state and low emission state. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from Elsevier. (h) Demonstration of adaptive visual camouflage. The device blends into a spatially varying background by matching its visible appearance. The graph shows the change in RGB colour indices from the active region of the device as it blends in. The horizontal lines mark the background RGB indices. (i) Demonstration of adaptive infrared camouflage. The device can adapt its infrared emission to blend into cold (top) and hot (bottom) backgrounds. The graphs show the time traces of the apparent device temperature during adaptation. The shaded areas show the background temperature range. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Octopuses can control their skin texture and body shape to conceal them in the surrounding environment. Inspired by the dual-responsive behaviour of octopuses, our group designed a dual-responsive composite film by attaching a bilayer 1D network composed of V2O5 nanowires (V2O5 NWs) and SWCNTs on a porous polymer membrane to extend the dual-responsive mode.140 The composite film demonstrated synchronous colour changes (optical reflectance variation at 550 nm from 40.5% to 12.7%) and actuation (bending angle of 173°). Two composite films were stacked to assemble the air-working EC actuators, which showed colour changes between yellow and greyish green and a high actuation distance (about ±9.7 mm, ±28.4°) between ±1.8 V bias (Fig. 12b and c). The actuation behaviour was caused by the lattice expansion and recovery of V2O5 NWs during the EC de-/intercalation of Li ions. Two kinds of EC actuators were manufactured based on V2O5 NWs and W18O49 NWs, respectively, and used to assemble the “limbs” of a bionic octopus with multiple actuation directions and colour changes (Fig. 12d).
The excellent EC performances of the materials and devices are also required to achieve an efficient camouflage effect, such as fast switching time and robust stability. Kim and colleagues demonstrated a low-power, deformable, dynamic multicolour EC skin (DMECS) that mimics the multicolour patterning and active camouflage functionalities of the skins of cephalopods.141 The EC polymers such as P3HT, poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyl-oxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene], and P4a (green colour polymer) were used to create purple, orange, and green colours, respectively. An iontronic polymer pump composed of an ionic liquid incorporated in TPU was used as a deformable and transparent solid-state electrolyte that enabled the low-voltage (±3 V) operated DMECS with excellent cyclic colouration/bleaching stability (>35000 s), fast response (∼1.75 s), and high durability under repeated 10000 cycles of compressive force (with a bending radius of 8 mm) and tensile strains (∼100% up to 15000 s). The DMECS offers user-controlled selective colouration/bleaching of arbitrary display patterns, opening new avenues for futuristic adaptive camouflage technologies.


5.2.2 Infrared camouflage. 
Infrared camouflage can achieve infrared concealment of a target by tuning the thermal radiation to be the same as or similar to the background environment.142 Due to atmospheric windows, most infrared detectors operate in the mid-infrared range within two wavelength ranges, 3–5 μm and 8–13 μm. Thus, the modulation range of an expected camouflage material should encompass these wavelengths and exhibit the greatest modulation capability.
PANI exhibits excellent emissivity modulation capabilities in the mid-infrared range, showing significant promise in infrared camouflage. Li and colleagues fabricated flexible infrared EC devices by introducing the DBSA-doped PANI film as the active layer and a poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK) porous membrane with high liquid electrolyte loading as the electrolyte layer. By taking advantage of the porous structure of PEEK, continuous high-speed ion transfer channels could be obtained. The infrared EC devices exhibited an excellent infrared emittance adjustment ability (0.47 in 2.5–25 μm), a fast switching time (<10 s), and good cycling stability.143 Furthermore, they fabricated a biomimetic film with superb infrared thermal radiation regulation ability. PANI and the cerium ion (Ce4+) were used to simulate the skin receptor and the pigment capsule in chameleon's skin, respectively.144 In the wavelength range of 8–14 μm, the infrared emissivity change of the film was as high as 0.58 (Fig. 12e and f). By using an integrated rolling thermal packaging process, flexible electro-emissive devices (EEDs) were assembled based on the novel PANI/Ce4+ films with excellent cycle endurance (the activity of the EED did not decline after 60000 s cycle), flexibility, and infrared thermal radiation management capabilities (Δε = 0.418 in 8–14 μm). Taking the skin on the back of the human hand as the heat source, the adjustable temperature of the EED could be as high as 5.7 °C (Fig. 12g).
To break through the restriction that EC devices show modulation primarily for specific wavelength ranges, Kocabas and colleagues demonstrated graphene-based multispectral electro-optical devices operating over the electromagnetic spectrum from the visible to the microwave.145 This non-volatile and reversible tunability was achieved by electro-intercalating lithium into graphene layers in an optically accessible device structure. They demonstrated a camouflage system with a unique capability of dynamically modifying its visible and infrared appearance. The adaptive visibility was achieved by patterning the back electrode into a camouflage pattern. Then, specific parts of the device were activated to match the appearance to that of a spatially varying background (Fig. 12h). The device could also adapt its infrared emission to cold and hot backgrounds (Fig. 12i). The camouflage operation could be extended easily into the mid-wave (3–5 μm) and short-wave (1.4–3 μm) infrared regimes, as the emissivity modulation covered the entire infrared spectrum. The devices could operate for more than 11000, 2200, and 580 on/off cycles in the terahertz, infrared, and visible regions, respectively. These results provide realistic approaches for programmable smart optical surfaces with potential utility in many scientific and engineering fields.

5.3 Energy storage
In recent years, a large number of EC energy storage devices, such as EC supercapacitors and EC batteries, have attracted the attention of scientists.146,147 It is feasible to integrate EC and energy storage devices into one system since they are both based on redox reactions and possess similar device structures. The EC energy storage devices can monitor their energy levels through simple visual inspections, making energy storage devices more intelligent and providing much convenience for users.148,149 Various EC materials, including transition metal oxides (e.g., WO3, NiO, etc.), conjugated polymers (e.g., PANI, PEDOT, PPy), and PB, have shown an impressive capability for both EC and energy storage.150–152

5.3.1 Electrochromic supercapacitors. 
Compared with batteries, supercapacitors generally exhibit lower energy densities. However, they have faster charge/discharge rates and longer cycle life. Among conjugated polymers, PANI is most widely used in EC supercapacitors due to its identified transitions from the light yellow, the green emeraldine salt (partially oxidized), and the blue emeraldine base (partially oxidized) to the black pernigraniline (fully oxidized).153 Wei and colleagues designed EC supercapacitors based on the ordered PANI nanowire array electrode.154 EC supercapacitors delivered 17 mF cm2 (400 F cm3) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, maintaining 90% of their original capacitance after 1000 charge–discharge cycles. The device would change from light yellow–green to deep blue when charged from 0 V to 1 V. Besides, the device showed no obvious changes in EC and energy-storage performances after 200 bending cycles.
Real-time feedback of the state of charge (SOC) in the energy storage device is of great importance for efficient energy management, such as judging its healthy state, avoiding its abrupt failure, and preventing it from overcharging. Although the visualization of colour differences with the naked eye can help to determine the charged and discharged states, it cannot precisely and quantitatively determine the energy storage status, especially the intermediate status during charging and discharging. Zhang and colleagues fabricated an asymmetric flexible EC supercapacitor with high energy density and the capability of quantitatively monitoring the energy storage states via EC contrast based on a PPy-based flexible electrode (CNT/Au/PPy/PET) (Fig. 13a).155 The device exhibited a high EC contrast during the redox process, a high energy density of 4.03 μW h cm−2 (Fig. 13b), and high electrochemical stability under deformation. A linear dependence of real-time EC contrast on the SOC is established, enabling a quantitative, accurate, and on-site visualization of the energy level from digitized information (Fig. 13c). The strategy showed a high SOC detection sensitivity of 4.75 mC−1 and a resolution of 1 mC cm−2. The high-energy storage performance and good energy self-monitoring ability are attributed to the high capacitance and high colour-to-colour contrast inherently originating from PPy, as well as the synergistic interaction between different components in the PPy-based flexible composite electrode.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the configuration of the flexible asymmetric ECSC device. (b) Ragone plot of the flexible asymmetric ECSC and comparisons of its performance with reported ECSC devices. (c) Linear fit of the real-time EC contrast versus SOC of the flexible ECSC during the charging and discharging process at a current density of 1.5 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the all-TSES wearable patch device. (e) Demonstration of an all-TSES wearable patch device. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Photograph and schematic representation of the P-CQD graft-functionalization with a-WO3. (g) Transmittance retention and capacitance retention following 500 bending cycles. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier. (h) Schematic of the configuration and working principle of the flexible PB/Zn device. (i) Transmittance spectra and real-time specific capacity versus time curve of the PB/Zn device. (j) Photographs of the PB/Zn device powering an electronic watch and the colorimetric card displaying the remaining capacity in the device. (k) Photograph of the PB/Zn device serving as a power source in a flexible watchband. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Environment stability is a critical criterion for practical application. But the performance of EC supercapacitors with conventional designs deteriorates significantly due to electrode/electrolyte exposure to the atmosphere and mechanical deformations in the case of flexible systems. Yun and colleagues designed an all-transparent stretchable EC supercapacitor device (TSES) with ultra-stable performance, which consisted of Au/Ag core–shell nanowire-embedded PDMS, bis-tacked WO3 nanotube/PEDOT:PSS, and the polyacrylamide (PAAm)-based hydrogel electrolyte (Fig. 13d).156 Au/Ag core–shell nanowire-embedded PDMS integrated with the PAAm-based hydrogel electrolyte prevented Ag oxidation and dehydration while maintaining ionic and electrical conductivity at high voltage even after 16 days of exposure to ambient conditions and under the application of mechanical strains under both tensile and bending conditions. The maximum specific capacitance of 471.0 F g−1 of TSES was obtained with a 92.9% capacity retention even after 50000 charge–discharge cycles. The TSES wearable device was fixed onto the wrist, which showed reversible colouration at −1.5 V and a transparent state on returning to −0.1 V and demonstrated stable EC and electrochemical properties (Fig. 13e).


5.3.2 Electrochromic batteries. 
EC batteries are composed of electrochromic film electrodes and electroactive metal foils. Metal electrodes can serve as ion-storage layers as they can switch between their metallic and cationic states.
WO3 has been widely explored in capacitor-type EC devices as the first-studied inorganic EC material. Amorphous WO3 (a-WO3) induces a low energy barrier for Li ion transport due to the loosely packed amorphous structure, leading to excellent electrochemical capacity and kinetics. However, the intrinsic structural instability of a-WO3 following repeated Li ion insertion/extraction and bending hinders its application in stable and flexible EC energy-storage devices. To resolve this problem, Ahn and colleagues proposed a novel structure by introducing P-doped carbon quantum dots (P-CQDs) into a-WO3 through a low-temperature process to induce robust chemical linkages with a-WO3.157 The functional groups of P-CQDs form strong hydrogen bonds with a-WO3 in the form of quantum dot grafts, which effectively tolerate structural deformation following long, repetitive cycling electrochemical reactions and bending (Fig. 13f). Moreover, the functional groups and graphitic carbon of P-CQDs improve the Li-ion wettability and electrical conductivity, respectively, thereby enhancing the electrochemical activity and kinetics. A flexible EC energy-storage device fabricated with the P-CQD/a-WO3 electrode exhibited a remarkably improved long-term cycle stability (transmittance retention of 87.3% after 4000 cycles) and flexibility (transmittance retention of 84.1% and specific capacitance retention of 85.3% after 500 bending cycles) (Fig. 13g).
In recent years, multivalent metals, such as Al3+, Zn2+, and Ca2+, have come into the research spotlight because they carry more charges and can deliver higher energy density.158–160 Among the various multivalent metal based batteries, the Zn-ion battery (ZIB) has gained enormous attention owing to low cost, safety, low redox potential (−0.76 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode), fast kinetics, theoretically high specific capacity (820 mA h g−1), environmental friendliness, and outstanding stability in aqueous media.161 Li and colleagues constructed the flexible PB/Zn battery-type EC devices, which exhibited excellent properties with large optical contrast (ΔT700nm = 68.3%), high colouration efficiency (117.2 cm2 C−1), rapid switching (4.7 s/7.5 s for colouring/bleaching), and long-operation stability (>1000 cycles) (Fig. 13h and i).162 The discharge state of the battery could be monitored in real-time visually through EC changes (Fig. 13j). The PB/Zn device could serve as a flexible power source with a large capacity and good durability (Fig. 13k).
Jia and colleagues fabricated a EC-ZIB via convenient electrodeposition of the cathode (actiniae-like self-doped PANI) and anode (Zn nanoflakes) on the flexible current collector (Au/nylon 66).160 The special nanostructure morphology of the cathode and anode and the Au/nylon micron-sized voids were beneficial for electrolyte infiltration due to short ion diffusion pathways, fast electrochemical kinetics, and the contribution to the enhanced specific capacity. The EC-ZIB exhibited high energy and power densities (181.1 W h kg−1 @ 501.8 W kg−1 and 124.7 W h kg−1 @ 9148.6 W kg−1) and excellent EC properties (light yellow, green, and dark green) from 0.5 to 1.6 V.

5.4 Visual sensation
The traditional sensors also typically rely on wireless data transmissions, which require external devices (such as computers, smartphones, and receivers) for users to obtain the sensing results.163 Combining sensing technology with EC technology allows rapid visual recognition of sensing information, and the detection results can be read directly by the colour of EC devices with the naked eye, showing great promise for various applications in sensor analysis.42 The wearable EC sensors can monitor body temperature, pulse, and body motion and provide non-invasive health monitoring for precision medicine, personalized nutrition, and sports performance.

5.4.1 Electrochromic mechanical sensors. 
EC mechanical sensors are usually fabricated by integrating mechanical sensors and EC devices. They can realize the quantitative and precise detection of mechanical interactions (strain, tactile, pressure) by the colour of EC devices, which shows tremendous potential in smart electronic skin.42 Bao and colleagues fabricated an interactive and colour-changeable electronic skin by integrating a stretchable resistive pressure sensor and a stretchable organic EC device into one circuit (Fig. 14a).164 Its function was demonstrated by connecting the electronic skin to a commercial teddy bear. When a weak (∼50 kPa) and a strong (∼200 kPa) pressure were applied, the colour of the EC device changed from dark red to blue grey and pale blue, respectively (Fig. 14b and c). This demonstrated the feasibility of expressing information from tactile sensing into visible colour changes and the skin colour's tunability related to the various pressures.
 Fig. 14  (a) The schematic layout of the interactive colour-changeable electronic skin, the layout of the circuit and the photos of the integrated EC tactile sensor. (b) The absorption spectra related to the pressures. (c) Sequential images of a teddy bear showing the expression of tactile sensing into visible colour changes. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Schematic illustration of a skin-attachable ECD array and an integrated multi-sensor patch (left), bio-signal monitoring strain and temperature sensors (middle), and visual monitoring of bio-signals with ECD colour patterns (right). (e) Interactive display of wrist bending and skin temperature via changes of the colour pattern on the skin attached stretchable array of ECDs (top) and the corresponding optical images of the ECDs on a paper (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Elsevier. (f) Exploded view detailing the individual layers of the epidermal patch. Photographs demonstrating the mechanical performance and durability of the patch, including its bending (g) or stretching (h). (i) Number of pixels corresponding to different glucose concentrations. (j) Sweat glucose measured using the patch and the corresponding blood glucose level. The patch displays in the 0–0.5 mM concentration range. (k) On-body sweat glucose sensing on the subject's forearm and displaying 0.15 mM results by constant-load exercising. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Ha and colleagues demonstrated a skin-attached transparent and stretchable strain sensor with the integrated system of the strain sensor (poly(vinyl alcohol)/MWCNT/PEDOT:PSS/PDMS nanocomposite film), EC device based on PANI and V2O5, and Arduino circuit.165 The strain sensor exhibited a good gauge factor of 5.2 up to 50% strain, a high transmittance of 77%, a fast response time of 20 ms, and high durability over 10000 stretching/releasing cycles. The skin-attached strain sensor could detect bio-signals such as finger and wrist bending, swallowing, and wrist pulse. The applied strain induced by finger motion could be detected simultaneously as a colour change without electrical measurement of the strain, which enabled a real-time visual display of body motion. Moreover, they fabricated an interactive display system consisting of a stretchable array of EC devices, MWCNT/PANI-based temperature sensors, and graphene-based strain sensors to display skin temperature and wrist movement visually (Fig. 14d).166 Using patterned liquid metal Galinstan interconnections, a stretchable array of the EC devices was fabricated based on a strain-relieving mechanism with an island-bridge design, resulting in mechanical stability to repeated stretching of up to 30%. The interactive display system could measure the strain due to wrist bending and the skin temperature by the sensors and display changes in the colour pattern of the EC array aided by the Arduino circuit (Fig. 14e). This work demonstrates the high potential for application in wearable healthcare devices, providing a real-time visual display of varied bio-signals.


5.4.2 Electrochromic biosensors. 
Biosensors refer to analytical devices with biological sensing elements that detect pathogenic or physiologically relevant molecules in the body.167 EC biosensors enjoy significant advantages compared with traditional biosensors, benefiting from their visual detection, which can be divided into single-device and bipolar electrodes.42 In single-device-based EC biosensors, biomolecules directly affect the electric circuit of the electrochromic system. In bipolar electrode-based EC biosensors, analytical cells and reporter cells are isolated, and biomolecule stimulation in analytical cells is transmitted to EC reporter cells by connecting wires.
PB is the most widely used EC indicator material due to its reversible transformation between blue and nearly transparent, simple preparation method, suitable working voltage, and good biocompatibility.168,169 Liu and colleagues reported a paper-based EC biosensor system consisting of six parallel EC cells for visualised detection. Each unit used a PB spot as the EC indicator.170 The paper was preloaded with lactate oxidase and Fe(CN)63−, and the system was activated by introducing an increasing amount of the lactic acid sample, which acted as both the analyte and the electrolyte. Then, the concentration of lactic acid could be quantitatively detected by the number of PB spots, which faded from blue to colourless.
One major challenge to overcome for the practical adoption of EC biosensors is the integration of power sources. The lifetime of the power sources (e.g., coil cell battery) can limit the operational lifetime of the entire device, and their typical rigid characteristics do not match the skin's natural elasticity.171 Biofuel cells (BFCs) generate power by utilizing biomolecules in biofluids, with similar working principles as electrochemical biosensors, that convert biomolecules to electrical signals using biocatalytic reactions.172,173 Therefore, BFCs can easily be integrated into wearable electrochemical biosensors on a single platform.
Hartel and colleagues fabricated a reversible fully printed EC self-powered sensor (ESPS) for on-body sweat lactate monitoring by integrating a lactate-oxidizable BFC anode, an oxygen-reducible BFC cathode, and a reversible PB EC display on a single wearable patch.5 Through modification of the BFC electrodes, the formal potential of the PB display (0.14 V) could be positioned in between the potentials of the lactate oxidation (−0.05 V) and oxygen reduction (0.35 V). Based on this system, the ESPS enabled reversible and robust colour changes with distinct time- and concentration-dependent profiles. The results demonstrate that the self-powered device has practical on-body applications for continual lactate monitoring with several advantages, including facile reversibility, ease of fabrication, and naked-eye colorimetric read-out.
Wang and colleagues designed a stretchable epidermal sweat sensing patch by integrating electrochemical sensors, a stretchable Ag2O–Zn battery, ten individually addressable PEDOT:PSS-based EC pixels, and a low-power microcontroller unit (MCU) (Fig. 14f), which can operate as a standalone device to directly display the concentration of various electrolytes or metabolites in sweat without any wired or wireless connection to external devices.163 The epidermal patch exhibited excellent durability and mechanical robustness (Fig. 14g and h), demonstrating 10000 sensing sessions over five days and 1500 stretching cycles at 20% strain without any changes in its sensing or display capability. The MCU sampled the signal input from the electrochemical sensor via an analogue-to-digital converter (ADC), which converted the analytical data into digital outputs that control the on-and-off states of the ten EC pixels. As the sensor relied on potentiometric reading when in contact with the analyte and independently operated from the MCU, the sensing and data visualization occurred under 1 s once the switch was pressed. By using different sweat sensors, the patch could monitor glucose, lactate, sodium ions and pH and display the analyte concentrations on the EC display (Fig. 14i–k).

5.5 Thermal comfort
Thermal comfort has a substantial implication for human health. Achieving thermal comfort requires not only thermal regulation of the building's macroenvironment but also personal thermal management.174 The EC devices could realize dynamic radiation modulation on-demand to maintain thermal comfort and reduce the energy consumption of indoor temperature regulation.
Hsu and colleagues developed an aqueous flexible EC device for building envelopes based on a graphene ultra-wideband transparent conductive electrode and reversible copper electrodeposition, in which the thermal emissivity can be tailored to vary between 0.07 and 0.92 with excellent long-term durability (Fig. 15a and b).175 The large emissivity contrast can be maintained for 1000 cycles with only 21% degradation after 1800 cycles. Building energy simulations show that the EC device as building envelopes can save on year-round operational ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) energy consumption across the United States by up to 43.1 MBtu on average in specific zones. The flexible Cu-aqueous EC device could be attached to the human hands and knees and switched between cooling and heating modes when bent to different shapes, making it suitable for human skin thermal comfort (Fig. 15c and d). This work suggests a feasible pathway to radiative thermoregulation for more energy-efficient HVAC and personal thermal comfort.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic demonstration of the EC system. The device can be tuned between the heating mode (Cu-deposited, right) and the cooling mode (Cu-stripped, left). (b) FTIR spectra for the heating and cooling modes. The green shaded area is the atmospheric transparent window. (c) Scheme for the flexible electrochromic mid-infrared modulation device and its thermal management application. (d) Thermal images of the flexible devices attached to the human hand (left, scale bar: 2 cm) and human knee (right, scale bar: 5 cm) which could switch between cooling and heating modes under a bias. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) and (f) Tunable radiative cooling measurement for switching the applied voltage between two fixed levels (G1.5 V, see the dashed black line). The top panel shows the evolution of the device temperature (black, Tdevice) along with the ambient reference temperature (green, Treference). Raw data and locally weighted smoothed data (LOESS, points of window 30) are shown as lighter and darker colours, respectively. The bottom panel presents the corresponding difference in temperature between the device and the ambient. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the author(s). 
Jonsson and colleagues demonstrated the temperature regulation of EC devices at ambient pressure and temperature by electrically tuning their radiative cooling power.176 The EC device was fabricated by sandwiching an ionically conductive electrolyte-filled porous cellulose layer between two PEDOT:Tos films (Fig. 15e). Varying the electrical potential difference between the two PEDOT electrodes controlled the redox state of the top (and bottom) PEDOT layer, thereby forming a means to tune the capability of the device to emit thermal radiation. The device could be used to induce clear variations in device temperature that originate from the electrical modulation of the radiative cooling power of the device, which enabled reversible control of device temperature of around 0.25 °C under ambient conditions in a sky simulator (Fig. 15f). Besides tuneable radiative cooling by exposure to the sky, the concept could also contribute to reduced needs for indoor climate control by enabling dynamic control of thermal energy flows between indoor objects, such as between people and walls.
6. Conclusions and outlook
With the development of nanoscience and nanotechnology, significant progress has been made in wearable EC devices with visible and infrared optical modulation. In this review, the structure features for planar and fibre EC devices were systematically summarized, including planar multilayer, all-in-one, and lateral structures, as well as fibre helical, lateral, and parallel structures. The advancement of wearable infrared EC devices was introduced based on conductive polymer, carbon nanomaterial, and reversible metal deposition. The potential applications of wearable EC devices were demonstrated including displays, camouflage, energy storage, visual sensation, and thermal comfort.
Despite these achievements, there are still some challenges for the practical applications of high-performance wearable EC devices.
(1) EC materials with multicolour modulation: the diversity of colour is particularly important for wearable EC devices, especially in smart displays and adaptive camouflage. However, most EC materials show monotonous colour changes, especially for inorganic materials. Designing new materials and devices with multicolour modulation is a challenge for the application of wearable EC devices.
(2) Ultra-flexible conductive electrodes with high electrochemical stability: currently, the conductive electrodes with ultra-flexibility, high conductivity, and transparency are mainly constructed based on Ag nanostructures. However, the conductivity of Ag-based electrodes decreases rapidly during EC cycles due to oxidation and corrosion under positive voltages. Although a protective layer for Ag-based electrodes can improve electrochemical stability, it is still far from practical application. Moreover, stretchable electrodes are highly required for wearable EC devices. The conductivity of transparent stretchable electrodes is easily damaged under large deformation. Therefore, simultaneously maintaining the high transmittance, conductivity and electrochemical stability of stretchable conductive electrodes during the deformation process further increases the difficulty to realize ultra-flexible conductive electrodes.
(3) Flexible conductive electrodes with high infrared transmittance: for the EC devices with infrared modulation, the EC layer is usually coated on top of the porous conductive layer due to the ultra-low infrared transmittance of conductive materials, which has an adverse effect on ion diffusion. Moreover, this structure is unsuitable for reversible metal electrodeposition. Therefore, an infrared transparent and highly conductive electrode is significant for wearable infrared EC devices.
(4) Stretchable EC devices with high tensile stability: stretchable EC devices are highly required for wearable EC devices. However, the conductivity of transparent stretchable electrodes and interface adhesion between each layer are easily damaged under large deformation. Therefore, simultaneously maintaining the high transmittance and conductivity of stretchable electrodes and excellent interface bonding of each layer during the deformation process to realize high tensile stability is a prerequisite for achieving high-performance stretchable EC devices.
(5) Custom-designable multi-band modulation: with the continuous progress and development of wearable electronics, the wearable EC devices with custom-designable multi-band modulation are an inevitable trend, which can realize colour changes between specific colours or synergistic changes in the visible and infrared range. For instance, the EC devices turn to light colours and high emissivity to cool the body in summer and exhibit dark colours and low emissivity to warm the body in winter. However, custom-designable multi-band modulation is challenging due to the scarcity of multicolour-changing materials and asynchronous modulation of EC materials in the visible and infrared range.
(6) Ultra-thin flexible device structure: highly flexible EC devices can better adapt to large deformation for wearable applications. Reducing the thickness is necessary to achieve highly flexible EC devices. However, high flexibility is achieved only for EC electrodes instead of devices, due to the multilayer structure of devices and the high risk of short circuits during deformation.
(7) Multifunctional integration in one device: it is attractive and required to develop multifunctional electronic devices for future applications. However, the integration of multiple devices to achieve multifunctionality has disadvantages such as heavy weight, cumbersome circuitry, and large size. Integration of EC technology and other functions into a single device is needed. For instance, using a certain material or device can simultaneously achieve colour change, actuation, energy storage, and sensation.
(8) Designing a new EC fibre structure: reducing the diameter is an effective way to improve the flexibility of EC fibres and comfort for wearable applications. However, this will be accompanied by a decrease in the colour rendering effect and an increase in processing difficulty. Moreover, multicolour and multi-band modulation of the EC fibres will be a future development trend. Designing a new EC fibre structure may be a method to further optimize the EC fibres.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52103253 and 52131303) and the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (21ZR1400900).
References
X. Shi, Y. Zuo, P. Zhai, J. Shen, Y. Yang, Z. Gao, M. Liao, J. Wu, J. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Tong, B. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Sun, L. Zhang, Q. Pei, D. Jin, P. Chen and H. Peng, Nature, 2021, 591, 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, A. S. Campbell, B. E.-F. de Avila and J. Wang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 389–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D.-H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
J. C. Yang, J. Mun, S. Y. Kwon, S. Park, Z. Bao and S. Park, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Hartel, D. Lee, P. S. Weiss, J. Wang and J. Kim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 215, 114565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiao, J. Wang, Z. Yuan and C. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2023, 54, 254–265 CrossRef .
H. Kim, M. Seo, J.-W. Kim, D.-K. Kwon, S.-E. Choi, J. W. Kim and J.-M. Myoung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901061 CrossRef .
J. Zou, X. Xie, Z. Zhou, X. Dong, Y. Wu, D. Zhang, M. Wang, C. Chen, F. Xiu and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 12582–12587 RSC .
P. Andersson, R. Forchheimer, P. Tehrani and M. Berggren, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3074–3082 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Leung, M. Colorado Escobar, G. T. Stiubianu, S. R. Jim, A. L. Vyatskikh, Z. Feng, N. Garner, P. Patel, K. L. Naughton, M. Follador, E. Karshalev, M. D. Trexler and A. A. Gorodetsky, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1947 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, B. Li, X. Gai, N. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 3634–3643 RSC .
S. Hong, S. Shin and R. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909788 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, L. Yu, B. Zhao, Y. Ni, P. Gu, H. Qiu, W. Zhang and K. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 11, 285–298 RSC .
C. Gu, A. B. Jia, Y. M. Zhang and S. X. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 14679–14721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Farahmand Nejad, S. Ranjbar, C. Parolo, E. P. Nguyen, R. Álvarez-Diduk, M. R. Hormozi-Nezhad and A. Merkoçi, Mater. Today, 2021, 50, 476–498 CrossRef CAS .
X. A. Zhang, S. Yu, B. Xu, M. Li, Z. Peng, Y. Wang, S. Deng, X. Wu, Z. Wu, M. Ouyang and Y. Wang, Science, 2019, 363, 619–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Hsu, A.
Y. Song, P. B. Catrysse, C. Liu, Y. Peng, J. Xie, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Science, 2016, 353, 1019–1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Thakur, G. Ding, J. Ma, P. S. Lee and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4071–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gong, W. Li, G. Fu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Jin and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 6269–6290 RSC .
C. Rousselot, P. A. Gillet and O. Bohnke, Thin Solid Films, 1991, 204, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Vienneau, M. Jones, B. Subramanian, J. Robichaud and Y. Djaoued, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7804–7810 RSC .
Y. Guo, W. Li, H. Yu, D. F. Perepichka and H. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601623 CrossRef .
A. L.-S. Eh, A. W. M. Tan, X. Cheng, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Energy Technol.-GER, 2018, 6, 33–45 CrossRef .
D. Li, W.-Y. Lai, Y.-Z. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, L. Zhong, F. Xu, W. Song, J. Wang, J. Zhu and S. Chou, Small, 2019, 15, 1805094 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ma, H. Liu, C. Teng, L. Li, Y. Zhu, H. Yang and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55372–55381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Liu, B.-C. Pan and G.-S. Liou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2633–2639 RSC .
C. Yan, W. Kang, J. Wang, M. Cui, X. Wang, C. Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 316–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kang, M.-F. Lin, J. Chen and P. S. Lee, Small, 2016, 12, 6370–6377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shi, J. Sun, C. Hou, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2019, 1, 3–31 CrossRef .
K. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Wang and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13043–13050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhao, J. Fang and T. Lin, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 110164–110170 RSC .
H. Fan, K. Li, X. Liu, K. Xu, Y. Su, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28451–28460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, X. Zhang, S. Dou, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, L. Wang, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 170, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, G. Xia, X. Li, G. Xu, B. Wang, D. Li, A. Gavrilyuk, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Synth. Met., 2019, 248, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chein Sheng, Ly, H. Zhang, X. Liu, D. Tang, J. Xu, X. Fu, H. Zhou and T. Fan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2021, 104, 2143–2157 CrossRef .
J. Sun, X. Pu, C. Jiang, C. Du, M. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Zhai, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 795–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Verge, P.-H. Aubert, F. Vidal, L. Sauques, F. Tran-Van, S. Peralta, D. Teyssié and C. Chevrot, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4539–4547 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, H. Chang, J. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Weng, C. Zhang, S. Niu, L. Cao, Z. Chen, N. Guo, J. Liu, J. Chi, G. Li and L. Xiao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 9, 2001216 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, Y. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Chang, N. Guo, J. Liu, Y. Jia, L. Wang, Y. Weng, W. Zhao, K. Jiang and L. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13538–13544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, T. Bai, G. Fu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Sun and H. Yan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 240, 111709 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Wang, S. Cong, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100524 CrossRef .
V. Rai, R. S. Singh, D. J. Blackwood and D. Zhili, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 2000082 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, R. Deshpande, P. A. Parilla, K. M. Jones, B. To, A. H. Mahan and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 763–766 CrossRef CAS .
D. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1455–1459 CrossRef .
R. Yan, L. Liu, H. Zhao, Y. G. Zhu, C. Jia, M. Han and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8997–9002 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu, R. Li, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Hou, K. Li and H. Wang, J. Inorg. Mater., 2022, 37, 883–890 CrossRef .
Z. F. Huang, J. Song, L. Pan, X. Zhang, L. Wang and J. J. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5309–5327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Niu, Y. Wang, X. Zou, Y. Tan, C. Jia, X. Weng and L. Deng, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 24, 101073 CrossRef .
K. Madasamy, D. Velayutham, V. Suryanarayanan, M. Kathiresan and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4622–4637 RSC .
L. Yu, C. Shearer and J. Shapter, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13413–13453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. A. Alcaraz, J. S. Juarez-Rolon, N. A. Burpee and C. J. Barile, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2132–2138 RSC .
X.-Y. Zeng, Q.-K. Zhang, R.-M. Yu and C.-Z. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4484–4488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Singh, J. Tharion, S. Murugan and A. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19427–19435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aliprandi, T. Moreira, C. Anichini, M. A. Stoeckel, M. Eredia, U. Sassi, M. Bruna, C. Pinheiro, C. A. T. Laia, S. Bonacchi and P. Samori, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703225 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501882 CrossRef .
T. Qiu, B. Luo, M. Liang, J. Ning, B. Wang, X. Li and L. Zhi, Carbon, 2015, 81, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
M. Layani, P. Darmawan, W. L. Foo, L. Liu, A. Kamyshny, D. Mandler, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4572–4576 RSC .
D. Soo Choi, S. Ho Han, H. Kim, S. Hee Kang, Y. Kim, C. M. Yang, T. Y. Kim, D. Ho Yoon and W. Seok Yang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 395702 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yanagi, R. Moriya, Y. Yomogida, T. Takenobu, Y. Naitoh, T. Ishida, H. Kataura, K. Matsuda and Y. Maniwa, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2811–2814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Lee, D. H. Park, H. W. Baac and S. Han, Materials, 2018, 11, 1503 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Hecht, A. M. Heintz, R. Lee, L. Hu, B. Moore, C. Cucksey and S. Risser, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 169501 CrossRef .
L. Hu, G. Gruner, D. Li, R. B. Kaner and J. Cech, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 016102 CrossRef .
L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kim, S. Kee, S. H. Lee, B. H. Lee, Y. H. Kahng, Y. R. Jo, B. J. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2268–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. H. Nguyen, D. T. Papanastasiou, J. Resende, L. Bardet, T. Sannicolo, C. Jimenez, D. Munoz-Rojas, N. D. Nguyen and D. Bellet, Small, 2022, 18, 2106006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, L. Wang, W. Ji, H. Wang, X. Yue, Q. Sun, L. Li, C. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Lu, H. D. Yu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1735–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Takamatsu, K. Matsumoto and I. Shimoyama, presented in part at the 2009 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Sorrento, Italy, 25–29 January, 2009.
X. Chen, H. Lin, J. Deng, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, P. Chen, X. Fang, Z. Zhang, G. Guan and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8126–8132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Mortimer, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 241–268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, X. Bai, H. Wang, H. Wang, J. Song, K. Huang, C. Wang, N. Wang, B. Li, M. Lei and H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703238 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, J. Chen, H. Xie, F. Zhao, S. Fan and Y. Zhang, Sci. China: Mater., 2022, 65, 2217–2226 CAS .
M. A. Invernale, Y. Ding and G. A. Sotzing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 296–300 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dubey, X. Tao, C. Cochrane and V. Koncar, IEEE Access, 2020, 8, 182918 Search PubMed .
Y. Alesanco, A. Vinuales, G. Cabanero, J. Rodriguez and R. Tena-Zaera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29619–29627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hwang, S. Seo, S. Bak, H. Lee, M. Min and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5129–5136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Moon, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Moon, C. H. Kim, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6252–6260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oh, D. G. Seo, T. Y. Yun, C. Y. Kim and H. C. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7658–7665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, M. Wang, J. Ma, Y. Cao and Y. Deng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800185 CrossRef .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, X. Cheng and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602598 CrossRef .
J. L. Wang, Y. R. Lu, H. H. Li, J. W. Liu and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9921–9926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Wang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5849–5857 RSC .
W. Zhang, H. Li, E. Hopmann and A. Y. Elezzabi, Nanophotonics, 2020, 10, 825–850 CrossRef .
B. Gadgil, P. Damlin and C. Kvarnström, Carbon, 2016, 96, 377–381 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. McRae and A. Y. Elezzabi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10520–10527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V.-T. Nguyen, B. K. Min, S. K. Kim, Y. Yi and C.-G. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3183–3192 RSC .
Y. Qi, K. Qin, Y. Zou, L. Lin, Z. Jian and W. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 514, 145950 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Ma, J. Li, J. Cao, H. Gao, T. Li, X. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, G. Wang, C. Hou, Y. Li, T. Palacios, Y. Lin, H. Wang and X. Ling, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Li, X. Wang, Z. Zhou, K. Zhang, J. Zhou and B. Hu, Small, 2020, 16, 2000450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mou, J. Qi, L. Tang, R. Dong, Y. Xia, Y. Gao and X. Jiang, Small, 2020, 16, 2005336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 187–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Zhu, R. Pfattner, H. Yan, L. Jin, S. Chen, F. Molina-Lopez, F. Lissel, J. Liu, N. I. Rabiah, Z. Chen, J. W. Chung, C. Linder, M. F. Toney, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602076 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kim, J. Kim, B. G. Hyun, S. Ji, S. Y. Kim, S. Kim, B. W. An and J. U. Park, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14577–14594 RSC .
H. Kai, W. Suda, Y. Ogawa, K. Nagamine and M. Nishizawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19513–19518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, C. Park, S. Im and J. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 16488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, X. Duan, M. Zhang, L. Mei, J. Hu, W. Hu and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 193–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, W. Kang, J. Wang, M. Cui, X. Wang, C. Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 316–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, H. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Zheng, Y. Zhao, X. Kong, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Kong, P. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7167–7172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Eom, J. Lee, A. Pichitpajongkit, M. Amjadi, J.-H. Jeong, E. Lee, J.-Y. Lee and I. Park, Small, 2014, 10, 4171–4181 CAS .
Y. Li, S. Wang, Z.-C. Xiao, Y. Yang, B.-W. Deng, B. Yin, K. Ke and M.-B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4040–4048 RSC .
Q. Fan, H. Fan, K. Li, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, Small, 2023, 2208234 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hao, S. Wang, H. Xu, X. Zhang, J. Xue, S. Liu, Y. Song, Y. Li and J. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130840 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, J. Fang, H. Wang, H. Zhou, G. Yan, Y. Zhao, L. Dai and T. Lin, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800104 CrossRef .
H. Fan, K. Li, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, J. Inorg. Mater., 2021, 36, 115 CrossRef .
X. Tao, D. Liu, T. Liu, Z. Meng, J. Yu and H. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2202661 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, G. Xu, B. Wang, J. Gu, H. Wei, Z. Ren, L. Zhang, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Synth. Met., 2021, 278, 116822 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Xie, Y. Pan, M. Yao and C. Xin, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1386–1388 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Li, G. Xu, S. Dou, X. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Zhao, K. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9878–9891 RSC .
F. Lu, P. Tan, D. Ren and Y. Han, Dyes Pigm., 2022, 200, 110179 CrossRef CAS .
C. Louet, S. Cantin, J.-P. Dudon, P.-H. Aubert, F. Vidal and C. Chevrot, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 141–151 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, G. Xu, L. Wang, B. Wang, Z. Ren, S. Dou, S. Song, M. Pan, X. Li and Y. Li, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 187, 109084 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brooke, E. Mitraka, S. Sardar, M. Sandberg, A. Sawatdee, M. Berggren, X. Crispin and M. P. Jonsson, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5824–5830 RSC .
W. Bao, J. Wan, X. Han, X. Cai, H. Zhu, D. Kim, D. Ma, Y. Xu, J. N. Munday, H. D. Drew, M. S. Fuhrer and L. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Salihoglu, H. B. Uzlu, O. Yakar, S. Aas, O. Balci, N. Kakenov, S. Balci, S. Olcum, S. Suzer and C. Kocabas, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4541–4548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Ergoktas, G. Bakan, P. Steiner, C. Bartlam, Y. Malevich, E. Ozden-Yenigun, G. He, N. Karim, P. Cataldi, M. A. Bissett, I. A. Kinloch, K. S. Novoselov and C. Kocabas, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5346–5352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, M. E. Itkis, E. Bekyarova and R. C. Haddon, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 459–465 CrossRef CAS .
A. L.-S. Eh, J. Chen, X. Zhou, J.-H. Ciou and P. S. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 4328–4335 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tao, D. Liu, J. Yu and H. Cheng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2001847 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cai, A. Y. Song, P. Wu, P. C. Hsu, Y. Peng, J. Chen, C. Liu, P. B. Catrysse, Y. Liu, A. Yang, C. Zhou, C. Zhou, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 496 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, D. Liu, H. Cheng, L. Peng and M. Zu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba3494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rao, J. Dai, C. Sui, Y.-T. Lai, Z. Li, H. Fang, X. Li, W. Li and P.-C. Hsu, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3906–3915 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, D. Liu, H. Cheng, L. Peng and M. Zu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8538–8545 RSC .
H. Li, H. Liang, R. Li, Z. Lu, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Li and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 48037–48044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sinha, R. Daniels, O. Yassin, M. Baczkowski, M. Tefferi, A. Deshmukh, Y. Cao and G. Sotzing, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 7, 2100548 CrossRef .
X. Li, T. Y. Yun, K. W. Kim, S. H. Kim and H. C. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4022–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, Y. Kim, S. Kim and E. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5277–5284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brooke, J. Edberg, D. Iandolo, M. Berggren, X. Crispin and I. Engquist, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4663–4670 RSC .
P. Zhao, H. Chen, B. Li, H. Tian, D. Lai and Y. Gao, Opt. Mater., 2019, 94, 378–386 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jeon, Y. M. Kim, S. Han, H. C. Moon and J. B. Lee, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 241–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oh, J. K. Lee, Y. M. Kim, T. Y. Yun, U. Jeong and H. C. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45959–45968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Alesanco, A. Vinuales, J. Palenzuela, I. Odriozola, G. Cabanero, J. Rodriguez and R. Tena-Zaera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14795–14801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Kim and J. M. Myoung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808911 CrossRef .
Z. Bai, R. Li, L. Ping, Q. Fan, Z. Lu, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Li, X. Ling and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 139645 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, C. Lau, Y. Liu, F. Wu, H. Gui, Q. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Wan, M. R. Amer and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9816–9822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Kim, H. Park, S. Y. Hong, J. Yun, G. Lee, J. H. Lee, L. Sun, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 471, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, L. Zhang, Y. Dong, C. Zhang and W. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2023 10.1039/d3qm00121k .
S. Sun, S. Cui, F. Wang, M. Gao, W. Wei, J. Dong, X. Xia, Q. Zhu and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2022, 4, 4724–4732 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, H. Fan, K. Wang, Z. Lu, L. Wang, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Li and H. Wang, Small, 2022, 18, 2107778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Koo, V. Amoli, S. Y. Kim, C. Lee, J. Kim, S.-M. Park, J. Kim, J. M. Ahn, K. J. Jung and D. H. Kim, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105199 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, W. Xi, Y. Liu, K. Tang, J. Song, X. Luo, J. Wu and C.-W. Qiu, Mater. Today, 2021, 45, 120–141 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Zhang, B. Wang, G. Xu, S. Yu, M. Pan, S. Dou, Y. Li and J. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 332, 135357 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, G. Xu, S. Song, Z. Ren, D. Liu, L. Hao, F. Xing, H. Wei, L. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136819 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ergoktas, G. Bakan, E. Kovalska, L. W. Le Fevre, R. P. Fields, P. Steiner, X. Yu, O. Salihoglu, S. Balci, V. I. Fal'ko, K. Novoselov, R. A. W. Dryfe and C. Kocabas, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 493–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Jiao, H. Xie, X. W. Lou and X. W. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, P. Sun, Z. Chai, L. Huang, X. Cai, S. Tan, J. Song and W. Mai, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 12129–12133 CrossRef .
S. Y. Kim, Y. J. Jang, Y. M. Kim, J. K. Lee and H. C. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2200757 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang, S. Y. Kim, Y. M. Kim, J. K. Lee and H. C. Moon, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 43, 20–29 CrossRef .
T. G. Yun, D. Kim, Y. H. Kim, M. Park, S. Hyun and S. M. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606728 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lv, H. Xu, Y. Yang, M. Ouyang, M. Xia, C. Liu, D. S. Wright and C. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 458, 141453 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hassan, G. Abbas, Y. Lu, Z. Wang and Z. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4870–4880 RSC .
K. Zhou, H. Wang, J. Jiu, J. Liu, H. Yan and K. Suganuma, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 345, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8384–8389 RSC .
X. Jiao, G. Li, Z. Yuan and C. Zhang, ACS Appl. Engerg. Mater., 2021, 4, 14155–14168 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D. H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Jo, K.-H. Kim and H.-J. Ahn, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136826 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong, R. Lian, R. Yang, T. Kang, J. Feng, D. Shen, Y. Wu, X. Cui, H. Wang, Y. Tang and C.-S. Lee, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 44, 497–507 CrossRef .
Z. Tong, T. Kang, Y. Wan, R. Yang, Y. Wu, D. Shen, S. Liu, Y. Tang and C. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104639 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Jiang, R. Zheng, J. Pan, J. Niu, X. Zou and C. Jia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12799–12809 RSC .
T. T. A. Nguyen, B. S. Soram, D. T. Tran, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 139555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, H. Sun, Z. Li, C. Jia, X. Ding, C. Li, J.-G. Wang and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 2868–2875 RSC .
L. Yin, M. Cao, K. N. Kim, M. Lin, J.-M. Moon, J. R. Sempionatto, J. Yu, R. Liu, C. Wicker, A. Trifonov, F. Zhang, H. Hu, J. R. Moreto, J. Go, S. Xu and J. Wang, Nat. Electron., 2022, 5, 694–705 CrossRef .
H. H. Chou, A. Nguyen, A. Chortos, J. W. To, C. Lu, J. Mei, T. Kurosawa, W. G. Bae, J. B. Tok and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, D. S. Kim, S. Y. Hong, C. Kim, J. Y. Yun, S. Y. Oh, S. W. Jin, Y. R. Jeong, G. T. Kim and J. S. Ha, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7631–7640 RSC .
D. S. Kim, Y. H. Lee, J. W. Kim, H. Lee, G. Jung and J. S. Ha, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132289 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masturah binti Fakhruddin, K. Ino, K. Y. Inoue, Y. Nashimoto and H. Shiku, Electroanalysis, 2021, 34, 212–226 CrossRef .
H. Liu and R. M. Crooks, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 2528–2532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Jing, Q. Zhai, Y. Yu, H. Xing, J. Li and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 11780–11784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Cai, L. Ma, L. Zhan and H. Liu, Sensors, 2017, 17, 276 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bhide, K. C. Lin, S. Muthukumar and S. Prasad, Analyst, 2021, 146, 3482–3492 RSC .
L. Yin, J. M. Moon, J. R. Sempionatto, M. Lin, M. Cao, A. Trifonov, F. Zhang, Z. Lou, J. M. Jeong, S. J. Lee, S. Xu and J. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 1888–1904 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bandodkar and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2016, 28, 1188–1200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhai, D. Fan and Q. Li, Nano Energy, 2022, 100, 107435 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sui, J. Pu, T. Chen, J. Liang, Y. T. Lai, Y. Rao, R. Wu, Y. Han, K. Wang, X. Li, V. Viswanathan and P. Hsu, Nat. Sustain., 2023, 6, 428–437 CrossRef .
D. Banerjee, T. Hallberg, S. Chen, C. Kuang, M. Liao, H. Kariis and M. P. Jonsson, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2023, 4, 101274 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Hongwei Fan
	Dr Hongwei Fan received her PhD degree in Material Science and Engineering from Donghua University in 2023. Then she worked as an experimentalist in Instrumental Analysis & Research Center at Shanghai University. Her research interests focus on the design and application of flexible electrochromic materials and devices.

Kerui Li
	Dr Kerui Li is currently a Professor at the State Key Lab for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials (SKLFPM) and the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. He received his PhD degree in Material Science and Engineering from Donghua University. After that, he worked as a research fellow in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore for three years. Recently, his research interests mainly include light modulation/conversion from solar light to infrared radiation for smart clothing and soft robotics.

Hongzhi Wang
	Prof. Hongzhi Wang obtained his PhD in 1998 from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and then worked as a postdoc at Micro-space Chemistry Lab, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) in Japan for 5 years. At present, he is a full professor in Material Science and Engineering and the Vice Dean of Institute of Science and Technology at Donghua University. His research area includes microstructure design of photoelectric functional materials, fibre device assembly and their smart wearable application in colour change and camouflage, physicochemical signal sensation, thermoelectric/triboelectric/solar cell-based energy conversion textile, and human–computer interaction clothing.

 	Fig. 1  Wearable EC devices with visible and infrared modulation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Wearable planar EC devices with (a) multilayer structure for visible modulation, (b) multilayer structure for infrared modulation, (c) all-in-one structure, and (d) lateral structure and their corresponding conductive and EC materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of EC fibres with (a) helical structure, (b) lateral structure, (c) lateral–helical structure, and (d) parallel structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Structural schematic and photographs of a flexible AgNF-based EC device. (b) Transmittance responses during EC cycles of an AgNF-based EC device and an ITO-based EC device. (c) Colouration efficiency during the first 10 EC cycles. (d) EC stability of the AgNF-based EC device during 1000 bending cycles. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of flexible and patterned EC electrodes. (f) Optical transmittance spectra of the PANI EC devices under different potentials. (g) EC switching of the PANI EC device after 100 bending cycles. (h) EC switching of the patterned EC devices in the bending and unbending states (inset). Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Springer Nature. (i) Illustration of an electrolyte-free flexible MV2+-GQD EC device. (j) Photographs of reversible flexible MV2+-GQD EC device performance. (k) Transmittance changes of the MV2+-GQD EC device at 550 nm by voltage switching between 0 and −2.8 V. (l) Photographs of MV2+-GQD EC devices in the bending state. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Structural schematic of EC films based on bilayer nanowire networks. (b) Photographs of the EC film measured in the original state, at −1 V and −2 V, respectively. (c) Optical contrast (at 632.8 nm) as a function of the bending cycle for the EC film during 500 cycles (the bending radius is 2.5 mm). (d) Schematic for the mechanism of excellent mechanical stability during the folding process. (e) Photographs and EC performance of the EC films after the crushing and unfolding process. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of flexible V2O5 NSs/GO@ITO/PET films. (g) Transmittance spectra of the V2O5 NSs/GO film. (h) Capacity retention of V2O5 NSs/GO films upon different bending angles and bending cycles. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Elsevier. (i) Schematic of electron conduction and ion diffusion pathways within the self-assembled TiO2 thin film. (j) Photographs of the EC device with an A4 paper size (about 20 × 30 cm2) in the bending state. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structures of PEDOT and photographs of the stretched electrochromic film of a PEDOT/PU composite in reduced and oxidized forms. (b) EC film/hydrogel hybrid wrapped around a glass rod and human finger. (c) Colour change of the EC film/hydrogel hybrid device placed on a human finger. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the stretchable EC electrodes. (e) Photographs of stretchable EC electrodes in bleached and coloured states at 0 and 50% strain. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Structure schematics of stretchable EC devices. (g) Photographs of stretchable EC devices under different stretching states. Scale bar: 1 cm. (h) Transmittance of the stretchable EC device as a function of time before and after 100 stretching/releasing cycles. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structure schematic of CNT/PANI EC electrodes. (b) Photographs of textiles woven from EC fibres displaying different patterns. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Photographs of reversible colouration of EC fibres and 3D chromaticity of colours originated from the two states of WO3 and P3MT, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Structure diagram of the EC fibres and mechanism of the fibres with PEDOT as the EC layer. (e) Reflectance spectra and the corresponding photographs of three EC fibres under different voltages. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Structural scheme of the EC fibres. (g) Photograph of long (hundreds of meters) EC fibres wrapped on spools (scale bar: 10 cm). (h) Photographs of large-area smart textile knitted using long EC fibres (scale bar: 20 cm). (i) Photographs of large-area embroidery with a smart colour-changing flower composed of multiple EC petals (scale bar: 20 cm). Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Infrared thermal images of the PANI EC device. (b) Emittance curves of the PANI porous film at distinct conjugation states, corresponding dedoping states, and the Au/microporous membrane. (c) Illustration of the electrochemical oxidation/reduction process of PANI and the chemical reactions associated with the interconversion of different forms of PANI. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Mechanism of emittance variation at a negative voltage, positive voltage with a low doping concentration, and positive voltage with a high doping concentration. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Elsevier. (e) Infrared emissivity of oxidized and reduced PEDOT:Tos films of a lateral device. (f) Thermal images of a lateral (top) and vertical (bottom) PEDOT:Tos EC device. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of graphene-based infrared EC devices. (b) Voltage dependence of the emitted thermal power (blue line) and extracted emissivity (red scattered data) at a wavelength of 10 μm. (c) Thermal images of the device placed on the author's hand under the voltage of 0 and 3 V, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Long-term stability test for a cycle period of 30 s. (e) Mechanism of emittance variation for the MWCNT-based EC film. (f) Thermal images of the MWCNT-based EC film with negative (−1.7 V) and positive voltages (4 V), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of a flexible PP-based device. (b) LWIR images of the flexible PP-based device on a curved cup surface (left) before and (right) after electrodepositing for 25 s. (c) “Real-time” total infrared reflectance spectra of the flexible PP-based device. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of the proposed UWB-TCE. (e) Wideband transmittance spectra of the UW-TCE and other types of TCEs from 0.2 to 20 μm. (f) Cyclic bending test with a bending radius of 1 cm. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society. (g) Schematics and photographs of the RMED before (left) and after electrodeposition (right). (h) Real-time thermal images of the RMED during the first and the second electrodeposition processes. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) EC patterns with back connections. (b) Switching of the patterned EC device from a Bluetooth-enabled phone app (top) and cross-sectional illustration of hole-through device construction (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram and demonstration of the operability of the OpDNA-Gel-based display. (d) Demonstration of feasibility and reusability of the OpDNA-Gel-based display. The alphabet-patterned OpDNA Gel was fabricated as the EC display itself and with the cut-and-stick method, it was reassembled to make the desired words. (e) Schematic illustration describing the encrypted quick response (QR) system with OpDNA Gel and recognition of the OpDNA-Gel-based QR system. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Photographs of pixelated and subpixelated EC displays with various patterns in the coloured state. (g) Photographs of bleached and coloured states before bending, and the coloured state after bending at a bending radius of 10 mm. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (h) Multi-array display device based on different types of the VTG showing colouring of letters (blue “D”, green “H”, and red “U”) under an ultralow voltage (±0.1 V) (pixel size: 1.0 × 1.0 cm2). Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Elsevier. (i) Schematic diagram showing the structure of a fully printed AMECD and the photograph of a 6 × 6-pixel flexible AMECD laminated on human skin displaying the English letter “U”. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Fully coloured VMC reflective EC devices that correspond to natural environments including deserts, grasslands, and sunsets. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates of the dual-responsive actuator in the 1931 colour space chromaticity diagram. (c) Respective bending displacements of the air-working dual-responsive actuators and pure SWCNT-based actuators measured between ±1.8 V bias. (d) Photographs of imitating the actuation of octopus limbs under ±1.8 V voltage. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Infrared adjustment mode and the principle of the PANI/Ce4+ films. (f) Infrared spectra curves of the PANI/Ce4+ films in the high emissivity state and low emissivity state, respectively. (g) Thermal images of the EED compared with reference objects stuck to the back of the hand in the high emission state and low emission state. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from Elsevier. (h) Demonstration of adaptive visual camouflage. The device blends into a spatially varying background by matching its visible appearance. The graph shows the change in RGB colour indices from the active region of the device as it blends in. The horizontal lines mark the background RGB indices. (i) Demonstration of adaptive infrared camouflage. The device can adapt its infrared emission to blend into cold (top) and hot (bottom) backgrounds. The graphs show the time traces of the apparent device temperature during adaptation. The shaded areas show the background temperature range. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the configuration of the flexible asymmetric ECSC device. (b) Ragone plot of the flexible asymmetric ECSC and comparisons of its performance with reported ECSC devices. (c) Linear fit of the real-time EC contrast versus SOC of the flexible ECSC during the charging and discharging process at a current density of 1.5 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the all-TSES wearable patch device. (e) Demonstration of an all-TSES wearable patch device. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from American Chemical Society. (f) Photograph and schematic representation of the P-CQD graft-functionalization with a-WO3. (g) Transmittance retention and capacitance retention following 500 bending cycles. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier. (h) Schematic of the configuration and working principle of the flexible PB/Zn device. (i) Transmittance spectra and real-time specific capacity versus time curve of the PB/Zn device. (j) Photographs of the PB/Zn device powering an electronic watch and the colorimetric card displaying the remaining capacity in the device. (k) Photograph of the PB/Zn device serving as a power source in a flexible watchband. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The schematic layout of the interactive colour-changeable electronic skin, the layout of the circuit and the photos of the integrated EC tactile sensor. (b) The absorption spectra related to the pressures. (c) Sequential images of a teddy bear showing the expression of tactile sensing into visible colour changes. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Schematic illustration of a skin-attachable ECD array and an integrated multi-sensor patch (left), bio-signal monitoring strain and temperature sensors (middle), and visual monitoring of bio-signals with ECD colour patterns (right). (e) Interactive display of wrist bending and skin temperature via changes of the colour pattern on the skin attached stretchable array of ECDs (top) and the corresponding optical images of the ECDs on a paper (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Elsevier. (f) Exploded view detailing the individual layers of the epidermal patch. Photographs demonstrating the mechanical performance and durability of the patch, including its bending (g) or stretching (h). (i) Number of pixels corresponding to different glucose concentrations. (j) Sweat glucose measured using the patch and the corresponding blood glucose level. The patch displays in the 0–0.5 mM concentration range. (k) On-body sweat glucose sensing on the subject's forearm and displaying 0.15 mM results by constant-load exercising. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic demonstration of the EC system. The device can be tuned between the heating mode (Cu-deposited, right) and the cooling mode (Cu-stripped, left). (b) FTIR spectra for the heating and cooling modes. The green shaded area is the atmospheric transparent window. (c) Scheme for the flexible electrochromic mid-infrared modulation device and its thermal management application. (d) Thermal images of the flexible devices attached to the human hand (left, scale bar: 2 cm) and human knee (right, scale bar: 5 cm) which could switch between cooling and heating modes under a bias. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) and (f) Tunable radiative cooling measurement for switching the applied voltage between two fixed levels (G1.5 V, see the dashed black line). The top panel shows the evolution of the device temperature (black, Tdevice) along with the ambient reference temperature (green, Treference). Raw data and locally weighted smoothed data (LOESS, points of window 30) are shown as lighter and darker colours, respectively. The bottom panel presents the corresponding difference in temperature between the device and the ambient. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the author(s).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
