Atmospheric chemistry processes: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7FD90039B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7FD90039B
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 200, 353-378Atmospheric chemistry processes: general discussion

        
          
            Alexander 
            Archibald
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Stephen 
            Arnold
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thorsten 
            Bartels-Rausch
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Steven 
            Brown
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rebecca 
            Caravan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lucy J. 
            Carpenter
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rabi 
            Chhantyal-Pun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hugh 
            Coe
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Dou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jacinta 
            Edebeli
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mathew 
            Evans
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Barbara 
            Finlayson-Pitts
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christian 
            George
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jacqueline 
            Hamilton
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Colette 
            Heald
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dwayne 
            Heard
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            C. N. 
            Hewitt
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gabriel 
            Isaacman-VanWertz
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Roderic 
            Jones
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Markus 
            Kalberer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Kampf
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Veli-Matti 
            Kerminen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Astrid 
            Kiendler-Scharr
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Knopf
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jesse 
            Kroll
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jos 
            Lelieveld
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eloise 
            Marais
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Max 
            McGillen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Abdelwahid 
            Mellouki
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andreas 
            Petzold
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Ravishankara
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrew 
            Rickard
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Y. 
            Rudich
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Craig 
            Taatjes
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andreas 
            Wahner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jonathan 
            Williams
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Alla 
            Zelenyuk
          
        
      
First published on 9th August 2017

A. Ravishankara opened discussion of the paper by Andreas Petzold: Could you please clarify your definition of clear sky?

Andreas Petzold responded: In the IAGOS data set, clear sky is defined operationally by the lower detection limit of the backscatter cloud probe (BCP) for ice crystal number concentrations. We estimate the lower threshold for cloud particle detection as a count rate of 1 ice particle per second, i.e., 4 particles are sampled within the temporal resolution of 4 s. This sampling rate corresponds to a minimum detectable number concentration of 0.015 cm−3, but with a sampling uncertainty of 50% according to Poisson statistics. Given by the digital resolution of the instrument, we consider samples with Nice < 0.001 cm−3 as zero-count events, or clear-sky, respectively. Observations in the grey zone between the two concentration values of 0.001 cm−3 and 0.015 cm−3 are categorized as “indeterminate events”, which cannot be unambiguously identified as clouds, but neither can they be identified as cloud-free. However, it has to be noted that more sophisticated research-grade cloud physics instruments are capable of measuring ice particle number concentrations as low as 10−4 cm−3, which corresponds to 1 ice particle per 10 litres of air. In that sense, our “clear-sky” observations may likely contain samples of very thin ice clouds which, however, are very difficult to observe anyway.

Roderic Jones asked: You showed a region of measurements which showed high levels of supersaturation – what level of updraft velocity do you need to maintain that?

Andreas Petzold responded: High levels of ice supersaturation of the order of 140% and more require updraft velocities well above 1 m s−1. These observations are mainly associated with deep convective clouds over the subtropics and tropics, whereas we see these events only very rarely in the mid-latitudes.

Roderic Jones said: Following on from my previous question, have you tested a model of cloud formation with the updraft velocities you mentioned and produced those levels of supersaturation? You then showed a satellite image pointing out that the regions of supersaturation coincided with deep convection.

Andreas Petzold responded: Modelling studies for IAGOS observations of cirrus clouds have not been conducted yet, but are in preparation. Krämer and colleagues1 used the detailed microphysical box model MAID (Model for aerosol and ice dynamics), which can be operated along idealized or realistic atmospheric air parcel trajectories for simulating cirrus climatologies. In these model studies, RHice values above 140% are found for updraft velocities larger than 1 m s−1. We refer to these model studies when interpreting our observations. As you can see in this satellite image of an example flight of an IAGOS aircraft, regions of high supersaturation coincide with deep convection which is confirmed by the box model studies.
1 M. Krämer, C. Rolf, A. Luebke, A. Afchine, N. Spelten, A. Costa, J. Meyer, M. Zöger, J. Smith, R. L. Herman, B. Buchholz, V. Ebert, D. Baumgardner, S. Borrmann, M. Klingebiel and L. Avallone, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2016, 16, 3463–3483.

Hugh Coe commented: Andreas, it is great to see such a comprehensive dataset delivering some excellent results that simply couldn’t be obtained in any other way than utilising regular commercial flights. By their nature, the flights are taking place in fairly heavily used corridors, to what extent (in mid latitudes especially) does contrail-induced cirrus occur, how did you diagnose it and assess the size of any resulting bias?

Andreas Petzold answered: Contrail and contrail-induced cirrus are, of course, an inherent component of cirrus clouds, particularly in the mid-latitudes of the northern hemisphere, where most of the air traffic occurs. IAGOS does not allow the direct identification of contrails since due to the horizontal and vertical spacing of the aircraft by air traffic control, the instruments see mainly aged and diluted contrails. One outstanding feature of contrails compared to cirrus is the high concentration of ice particles, at least in young contrails. We used this criterion to search for patterns of contrails in our data set of the North Atlantic Flight Corridor. Looking only at dense cirrus with Nice > 1 cm−3, we found a bi-modal probability distribution of RHice, which is similar to results from dedicated contrail studies by research aircraft. For the cirrus clouds with Nice < 1 cm−3, the RHice distribution is almost similar to that of natural cirrus clouds. We conclude that dense cirrus over the mid-latitudes (2% over the North Atlantic, 3% over the North Pacific), are very likely associated with contrail-cirrus. The potential contribution of contrails to less dense cirrus (Nice < 1 cm−3), however, cannot be quantified since atmospheric ageing makes contrails indistinguishable from natural cirrus. Overall, aviation-induced cirrus has become an inherent part of global cloudiness and should not be seen as a bias but as one component among others.

Hugh Coe asked: What proportion of the North Atlantic troposhere is not influenced by contrails or contrail generated cirrus? Which region is least perturbed?

Andreas Petzold replied: Contrails are mainly found in the region of the North Atlantic Flight Corridor (40°N–60°N, 65°W–5°W). Whereas most of the westbound flights take routes north of the polar jet stream and fly in the dry lowermost stratosphere where contrails cannot form, the eastbound flights take more southern routes in the uppermost troposphere where contrails are very likely to form. Concerning the height range, contrails are observed from 9 km altitude upwards. In that respect, we consider the uppermost troposphere of the North Atlantic Flight Corridor to be influenced by contrails whereas there may be regions in the southern part of the North Atlantic which are affected by aviation only marginally. Finding an air mass over the North Atlantic which hasn’t seen an influence of aviation during a considerable period of time, however, might be almost impossible.

Daniel Knopf said: This is a very nice data set of ambient ice crystal numbers as a function of RHice. How do your measured ice crystal numbers relate to measured or parameterized/predicted concentrations of ice nuclei (IN) or ice nucleating particles (INPs) in, e.g., cirrus clouds? In other words, can the number of IN or INPs explain the measured ambient ice crystal concentration? Could this data set be applied to test the RHice dependent prediction of IN number concentrations?

Andreas Petzold responded: In our observations, there is no direct link between Nice and INP since the IAGOS aerosol instrument package is not yet in place. Referring to a very recent contribution to an AMS monograph on “Ice Formation and Evolution in Clouds and Precipitation: Measurement and Modeling Challenges”,1 the range of published INP concentrations and the range of observations of ice particles from research aircraft campaigns using the Jülich NIXE instrument and from IAGOS cirrus observations agree reasonably well. It has to be noted, however, that particularly for cirrus clouds it is difficult to establish a direct link between INP and Nice, since ice particles in cirrus may form by heterogeneous freezing on INP, or by homogeneous freezing of solution droplets. In case of liquid origin cirrus, the situation is even more complex since ice particles will form from previously liquid droplets during cloud glaciation processes. Testing the RHice-dependent prediction of INP may be a possibility for well-defined cases of which we know air mass history and INP concentration. However, it is probably not an option for the global data set because here we would have to work on a statistical basis.
1 Z. A. Kanji, L. A. Ladino, H. Wex, Y. Boose, M. Burkert-Kohn, D. J. Cziczo and M. Krämer, Meteorological Monographs, 2017, 58, 1.1–1.33.

Jonathan Williams added: Just as supporting information, an analysis of contrails from the CARIBIC project has revealed direct evidence for contrails about 4% of the time.

Andreas Petzold responded: Indeed, this is in close agreement with our estimates.

Jesse Kroll opened discussion of the paper by Manabu Shiraiwa†: You focused mostly on SOA from biogenic compounds, oxidized under NOx-free conditions. Do you have a sense of ROS production in a more anthropogenically-influenced SOA system, such as SOA formed in the presence of NO? While such products wouldn’t have peroxide functional groups, might other functional groups (such as aldehydes or nitrates) contribute to ROS as well?

Christopher Kampf answered: It is correct that we have so far mainly focused on ROS formation by biogenic SOA under NOx-free conditions. As pointed out, chemical composition of SOA would be different under NOx-present conditions. It is difficult for us currently to comment on whether functional groups such as aldehydes or nitrates could contribute to ROS formation and we plan to conduct experiments to measure ROS formation by SOA formed under high NOx conditions in follow-up studies.

Eloise Marais asked: How relevant is this globally? You show that the highest concentration of radicals is at low pH. I would expect dust to have high alkalinity and so increase aerosol pH.

Christopher Kampf responded: Indeed, we found an increased radical yield for the dissolution of mixed SOA/dust samples at lower pH values. In the atmosphere, the pH at the surface of dust particles might also be influenced by coagulation with more acidic SOA particles or condensation of acidic compounds onto the dust particles. Nevertheless, the global influence of pH on the radical formation of mixed SOA/dust particles is beyond the scope of this study and clearly needs further investigations of laboratory experiments and atmospheric modeling.

Thorsten Bartels-Rausch said: I have a question on the role of mineral dust. Does it only deliver the dissolved metals, or did you see any indication for some heterogeneous catalysis accelerating the chemistry?

Christopher Kampf answered: This is an excellent question. We think the major contribution to the observed radical formation was due to the dissolution of metal ions from the dust particles due to Fenton reactions, as the kinetic model can reproduce the observed ROS formation rates by considering this process (e.g., Fig. 5). However, we cannot exclude the possibility of the dust surface acting as a heterogeneous catalyst to accelerate the chemistry. This is a subject of future studies and different experimental techniques such as surface spectroscopy and modeling approaches (e.g., kinetic modeling, quantum chemical calculations) may need to be applied to address this question.

A. Ravishankara asked: Can you please define what is and what isn’t a reactive oxygen species, ROS? What constitutes an ROS?

Christopher Kampf answered: The term reactive oxygen species (ROS) is defined to describe reactive atoms, radicals, and molecules including singlet oxygen, hydroxyl radicals (OH), superoxide radicals (O2−), organic radicals, and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Generally, ROS are highly reactive and oxygen-bearing molecules.

A. Ravishankara remarked: You showed various interesting things that can happen when exposed to pollution. Can you let us know if you have observations of these influences? Or can you let us know if there is evidence for these influences in the human body or in test animals?

Christopher Kampf answered: Biomedical studies have shown that reactive oxygen species play an important role in biomedical effects such as oxidative stress and inflammation.1 Further studies are necessary to address the extent to which SOA and associated ROS release may influence the adverse health effects of particulate matter.
1 C. C. Winterbourn, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2008, 4, 278–286.

Dwayne Heard commented: In your proposed processes you are making a number of reactive intermediates, including HO2 radicals. HO2 is not particularly soluble, and although reaction with transition metal ions would be expected to be quite fast in the aqueous phase, some may partition to the gas phase, and perhaps less reactive radicals in your system (RO2) would also partition to the gas phase. Do you think this is likely to be a significant flux? Certainly it could be tested either by direct or indirect (via NO to NO2 conversion) methods.

Christopher Kampf responded: Thank you for raising this point. Even though we cannot completely exclude partitioning of some ROS species to the gas-phase, we think that most of the radicals should be directly trapped by high concentrations of spin-trapping agent in a closed vial. Nevertheless, it would be worthwhile to test the repartitioning of less soluble species into the gas-phase by the suggested methods. In real ambient conditions (e.g., cloud droplets, lung lining fluid), repartitioning of less soluble species might be indeed significant.

Dwayne Heard said: Following on from Professor Ravishankara’s point about the atmospheric evidence or impact of these processes, in addition to the possible production of radicals from the aerosol to the gaseous phase (my other question), I’d like to raise another point. In a recent paper, Mao et al.1 suggested that coupled Fe/Cu redox chemistry in the presence of HO2 radicals could be significantly different to just Fe being present (and in an earlier paper postulated that H2O is formed rather than H2O2). Have you looked at minerals containing copper ions as well as iron?
1 J. Mao et al., Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2017, 4, 98–104.

Christopher Kampf answered: We have not looked at minerals containing both iron and copper ions. As pointed out, the presence of both ions may influence ROS formation by coupled Fe/Cu redox chemistry. This is a very interesting point that would merit investigations in future studies.

Markus Kalberer said: A general comment – the field of reactive oxygen species (ROS) characterisation and quantification in atmospheric aerosol as a toxicity marker could profit a lot from thorough method comparison and a better characterisation of the various methods. Currently there are at least 5 techniques that quantify ROS or a “general oxidising capacity” of aerosol particles. We know that most of these techniques are sensitive to very different classes of oxidising particle components but in most studies so far these differences have not been addressed making a comparison of study results impossible.

Christopher Kampf responded: Thank you for this comment. We agree with this point very much and would recommend conducting method comparison studies to check the consistency of the results obtained using the different techniques available for ROS quantification and characterization, too. Different techniques may measure different types of ROS and we need to be very careful on comparing ROS measured by different techniques. While some techniques may agree due to similar measurement principles, others may be complementary and provide additional insights when used alongside with each other.

Y. Rudich remarked: About comparisons between biogenic and anthropogenic SOA, in terms of potency to have a biological effect, chamber studies suggest that anthropogenic SOA is more toxic and leads to more mortality than BSOA.1,2 Can you bridge the gap between your conclusions and these studies?
1 W. Y. Tuet et al., Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2017, 17, 839–853.
2 V. Verma et al., Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 3128–3137.

Christopher Kampf replied: This is a very good point. While both cited studies applied the dithiothreitol (DTT) assay to evaluate the oxidative potential and redox activity of different SOA extracts (or water-soluble PM2.5), we specifically investigated the formation of individual radical type ROS, such as hydroxyl radicals, superoxide radical ions, as well as oxygen- and carbon-centered organic radicals. We would like to point out that even though DTT decay rates are a good indicator of oxidative potential, the connection between DTT decay rates and toxicity and mortality is still unclear. There are many endpoints to investigate adverse health effects (oxidative potential, ROS formation, cellular response, inflammatory indicators, etc.) and it is not an easy task to bridge the gap between other studies. Therefore, as suggested by Markus Kalberer earlier, it would be very useful to compare different methods applied for the characterization and quantification of ROS from aerosol samples.

Barbara Finlayson-Pitts opened a discussion of the paper by Markku Kulmala‡: Your explanation that the efficiency of uptake (β) is less than one is quite reasonable. As I mentioned in my introductory lecture, we believe that the uptake coefficient for organics on SOA is likely to be determined by the structure and functional groups of both the incoming gas and of the species/functional groups available on the particle surface. The same principle would apply to the growth of particles from collisions with clusters. A β value of one would imply uptake on every collision which is highly unlikely to be the case for dissimilar functionalities on the gas and surface.

Veli-Matti Kerminen replied: Thank you for this supporting comment. While the reduced uptake of small clusters colliding with particles is theoretically feasible, concrete experimental evidence on this clearly is needed. We would very much welcome detailed laboratory experiments investigating this topic.

Steven Brown said: The condensational sink is easy to define, but to my understanding the growth rate would be more uncertain. Can you comment on uncertainty in these two parameters in making your curves as well as the method to calculate the growth rate? Is this defined by the observation of aerosol number itself, or by some gas phase process that you model?

Veli-Matti Kerminen replied: The condensation sink assumes, by definition, irreversible uptake of molecules colliding with particles. With good instrumentation the uncertainty in this parameter hardly exceeds 20–30%. However, the quantity used in our analysis is actually condensation sink times the sticking probability, and this product definitely has a much higher uncertainty. The uncertainty in growth rate has been estimated to be about 50% for particles of a few nm in diameter, but this uncertainly increases substantially for particles/clusters below 3 nm.

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr remarked: While boreal environments with homogeneous source conditions understandably provide conditions under which growth events can be observed for long enough time scales to derive growth rates and an understanding of the condensing vapour properties, this seems much more complex in mega-cities where sources are more unequally distributed and variable in time and source strength. Which fraction of the observed change in particle size distribution is attributable to source diversity and/or meteorological and transport processes? And which fraction is caused by condensable vapour production?

Veli-Matti Kerminen answered: A large fraction of the observed new particle formation and growth events last for several hours, indicating that this phenomenon is regional and covers distances of at least a few kilometres. Local sources are definitely expected to affect the dynamics of these regional new particle formation events, and even initial local events of their own. This is definitely a subject worth future studies.

Andreas Petzold asked: You showed that your model and the observations of new particle formation are close for measurements in European cities, but show a large difference for measurements in China. Do you attribute this differing behaviour to the higher level of pollution in the Chinese cities as a kind of a scaling phenomenon, or do you assume different chemical processes due to a different chemical compositon of urban air in the European and Chinese cities where the measurements have been conducted?

Veli-Matti Kerminen responded: In our analysis, the difference comes directly from the higher level of pollution in China. Our current analysis does not directly take into account chemical effects. However, as discussed in our paper, differences in chemical composition between the urban air and cleaner environments could well be a major explaining factor to our findings.

A. Ravishankara queried: As a follow up to Steven Brown’s question, may I ask if there is ion induced growth of aerosols?

Veli-Matti Kerminen answered: Theoretically, ions are expected to enhance the growth of the very smallest clusters.

Lucy Carpenter asked: Could synthetic (e.g. metal-containing) nanoparticles play a role in Chinese megacities?

Veli-Matti Kerminen answered: In principle they could, but at the moment we do not have any information on this. We would need new measurement tools to solve this, as with our current measurement it is very hard to distinguish metal nanoparticles from other nanoparticle types in air.

Markus Kalberer commented: The risk of inhalation of synthetic nanoparticles to which the general public could be exposed is probably small because most nanoparticles used in consumer products are embedded in a matrix and a release of individual nanoparticles into the air from such products is probably rather unlikely.

Dwayne Heard added: Would this be true also for TiO2 particles that may be released via spray-painting, or perhaps burning paper (TiO2 used as a white pigment)?

Andreas Petzold said: Carbonaceous nanoparticles emitted from the aircraft engine as a result of incomplete combustion, however, may give rise to adverse health effects, like e.g. diesel soot particles do. As all other carbonaceous nanoparticles from combustion, aviation soot particles are sufficiently small to be transported deep into the human respiratory system. Though, to my knowledge there are no scientific results available which point at a specific health impact of aviation soot, different from diesel soot. Nevertheless, the research area of air quality near and around airports is currently very active since air traffic is still growing while the available airport capacities are limited and may require an extension, which then is in conflict with the residential population around the airports.

A. Ravishankara remarked: Lucy Carpenter asked a very interesting question. Can emissions of synthetic man-made nanoparticles, for e.g., metal-containing particles, be important in megacities? Can we rule out what Lucy is asking?

Christopher Kampf responded: The emissions of metal-containing artifical nanoparticles could be important in (mega-)cities, as our study shows the impact of metal-containing particles on ROS generation upon dissolution of SOA particles. However, further experiments and modeling are required to fully address this question.

Veli-Matti Kerminen added: I think we have too little information at the moment to properly constrain the importance of synthetic man-made nanoparticles in megacities. The few review papers discussing ultrafine/nanoparticle sources in urban environments I am aware of do not provide any estimate of synthetic metal nanoparticle emissions. This, however, does not prove that we can rule out such particles, especially when it comes to particle health effects.

Dwayne Heard said: To follow up on the discussion theme on artificial nanoparticles, I would like to make a comment about TiO2 nanoparticles. These have been suggested as candidates to mitigate global warming via their injection into the stratosphere in order to scatter radiation back to space. TiO2 has also a number of tropospheric applications exploiting its photo-catalytic properties, namely for the removal of NOx and VOCs in applications including self-cleaning glass. We have shown recently that upon illumination by UV-A light, TiO2 nanoparticles generate HO2 radicals, and hence it might be expected that mixed phase aerosols composed of TiO2 and secondary organic aerosols would generate ROS species as you show in your paper for mineral dust/SOA. I wonder what the impact of this might be for applications using TiO2 nano-particles.

Christopher Kampf responded: This is a very interesting point. It would be interesting to investigate the impact of this process using EPR and kinetic modeling.

Y. Rudich noted: Not all NPs are dangerous and studies are needed to verify. For example, inorganic fullerenes and nanotubes used as lubricants/fuel additives are substantially less harmful than other NPs.1 I urge caution – some are harmful, some aren’t.
1 M. Pardo, T. Shuster-Meisels, A. Rudich and Y. Rudich, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 3457–3466.

Christopher Kampf replied: Thanks very much for pointing this out. We agree very much that toxicity or ROS formation ability by nanoparticles should be highly variable for different types of nanoparticles, and clearly more studies are needed in this area. A potential coating of airborne artificial nanoparticles with organic material might influence the properties of such particles, and thus may warrant investigations on biogenic/anthropogenic interactions in this context.

Christian George addressed Veli-Matti Kerminen: You were highlighting the fact that (nano)particles are facing a specific environment in China. How do you link such specificities to the different hypothesis you are making to explain the difference between modelling results and in situ measurements?

Veli-Matti Kerminen responded: The core of the problem identified in our discussion paper (i.e. the differences between theoretical expectations and in situ measurements) lies on a single specific feature of the Chinese environment: its very large particle concentration which is expected to act as a major sink for molecules and small molecular clusters. The factors/processes solving this problem may be related to the specific environment in China, but this is by no means necessary as the problem itself is only realized under highly polluted conditions. In summary: at the moment it is too early to link our explaining hypothesis to environmental specifics.

Andreas Petzold asked: Do you have observations of a similar kind for megacities in Africa or India available to compare your model with these data?

Veli-Matti Kerminen responded: We have some past measurements in both Africa and India. However, these measurements are probably not detailed enough to investigate this topic in sufficient detail. Performing a similar analysis as made in this paper would be very important in other polluted megacities.

Roderic Jones remarked: We made a series of measurements in China using low-cost pervasive sensors. In Europe with the same kind of sensors we see significant differences in PM (10 ≫ 2.5 ≫ 1) – however in China, near to emission sources virtually all the particle mass is below PM1 (we can’t detect 3 nm particles with these sensors – our limit is around 300nm, but it is clear the particle size distribution is very different from Europe). What is also interesting is that we see a rapid evolution in size distribution in a short space of time – by the time air masses reach the reference instruments some distance (100s of m) from the initial sources we see particles in the PM2.5 and PM10 range appearing. Is this consistent with your NPF events and subsequent particle growth/coagulation?

Veli-Matti Kerminen replied: Rapid formation of secondary particulate matter has been shown to affect PM2.5 (and even PM10) considerably in megacities (particularly in China). This latter process may, or may not, coincide with atmospheric new particle formation.

Jonathan Williams commented: It seems that the lifetime of the particles in the 3 nm bin is the key. If the lifetime of particles in this size range in all three locations is the same then it must mean that the incoming flux of new particles in Beijing is much higher than currently thought. You could examine this by analysing the variability of the particle number in the smallest bin. This will be inversely proportional to the concentration if it driven by coagulation (see Williams et al.1). Have you tried this?
1 J. Williams et al., Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2002, 2, 133–145.

Veli-Matti Kerminen responded: The lifetime of sub-3 nm particles/clusters is determined by their loss rate (which is proportional to the inverse of condensation sink) and their growth out of this size range. So definitely, this lifetime is substantially shorter in polluted megacities compared with cleaner environments. We have not systematically investigated the variability of particle number in the smallest size bins in megacities, but this is certainly a good idea.

Colette Heald addressed Christopher Kampf, Veli-Matti Kerminen and Andreas Petzold: Please comment on the instrumentation challenges in your work. Are there challenges or barriers in instrumentation that are holding you back in terms of the science questions you are investigating? How do you see this evolving in the next 5 years?

Christopher Kampf replied: While the EPR measurement itself for obtaining signals is relatively straightforward, the instrumental challenge may lie in the spin-trapping technique and associated detection limits. As described in the manuscript, EPR spectra are rather complicated and need to be fitted and simulated, so that concentrations of different radicals (e.g., OH, superoxide, organic radicals) can be quantified. While trapping efficiencies of OH and superoxide are relatively well understood, the trapping efficiency of organic radicals (e.g., RO2, RO, R radicals) may vary depending on their structure and remain uncertain. The detection and quantification of different types of organic radicals by combining different techniques (e.g., EPR, LC-MS, etc.) would be a subject of further studies in the coming five years.

Veli-Matti Kerminen responded: The main challenge is the size range from large molecular clusters to particles with diameters of about 2–4 nm, mainly because there are very limited means to determine their chemical composition at the moment. We foresee major developments in both chemical and physical characterization of this range during the next 5 years.

Andreas Petzold replied: In the case of IAGOS, we are focusing on the observation of essential climate variables for which mature measurement technologies are available. Our instrumentation challenges result more from the very strict safety requirements for the operation of instruments on board civil aircraft, and from the demand for autonomous and unattended operation over a period of at least two months. These two aspects determine the technologies applicable to our infrastructure. In case we decide for a new parameter to add to our portfolio, we review existing measurement technologies of sufficient maturity, select the most appropriate one and adapt the technology to our needs concerning safety, autonomous operation and available space and power supply. And then we have to enter the process of aeronautical certification, which can last quite a long time, depending on the instrument setup. The next challenge for IAGOS will be to respond to the increasing requests for global air quality data. Here, we currently prepare a new instrument for simultaneous observations of nitrogen oxides and particulate matter which are two key observables concerning air quality. Overall, IAGOS expects to benefit strongly from the rapidly growing field of instrument miniaturization.

Abdelwahid Mellouki queried Veli-Matti Kerminen: Have you tried to correlate the nucleation episodes you have observed in Nanjing with any gas phase reaction processes, e.g involving ozone or other oxidants? Is there any chance that it could simply be due to cooking?

Veli-Matti Kerminen replied: We have not yet studied in detailed the evolving gas-phase chemistry during new particle formation in Nanjing, or in other polluted megacities. This is definitely an area we are planning to concentrate on in more detail in the near future.
A large fraction of the observed new particle formation and growth events last for several hours, indicating that this phenomenon is regional and covers distances of at least a few kilometers. Furthermore, our findings definitely show that this phenomenon start from the sizes of small molecular clusters. These things together make it very unlikely that any single urban source (e.g. cooking) would be responsible for the observed new particle formation events.

Max McGillen opened discussion of the paper by Abdelwahid Mellouki: Did you encounter any problems using cyclohexane as your OH scavenger? Cyclohexane is known to have complicated chemistry leading to cyclohexanone formation, involving several reaction channels including peroxy radical self-reaction and cross-reaction with HO2 radicals. Furthermore, these reactions are expected to possess a temperature dependence that is not well characterised. Consequently, given that your chamber facility experiences a range of ambient temperatures, are the complications of OH yields derived from cyclohexanone exacerbated as the ambient temperature deviates further from room temperature where this chemistry is best characterised?

Abdelwahid Mellouki replied: No real problem in using cyclohexanone as OH scavenger. Yes, indeed its chemistry is not direct and is rather complex and this may lead to increase the uncertainties in the OH yield measurements. However, looking at the initial stage of the reaction where the radicals (i.e. RO2) concentrations are still low would not much impact the OH measurements. The temperature range in our measurement is not large enough to observe any temperature dependence of the chemical reactions occurring in the system.

Jesse Kroll asked: Do you have a sense of the fate of the organic peroxy (RO2) radicals in these experiments? Do they primarily react with other RO2 species?

Abdelwahid Mellouki replied: RO2 chemistry is complex; we have been considering the general schemes used in some models such as the MCM. Still a lot needs to be done with regards to the understanding of RO2 chemistry. Yes, they may react with RO2 (including HO2). Note that we are working with low reactant concentrations compared to previous studies.

Andrew Rickard remarked: Related to both previous comments on the use of cyclohexane to scavenge OH radicals, monitoring the formation of cyclohexanone in order to quantitatively assess OH yields from alkene ozonolysis, the peroxy radical chemistry involved is complex (see mechanism provided in Alam et al.1) and system dependent (both reactant and experimental condition dependent). A range of yields of cyclohexanone from the OH oxidation of cyclohexane have also been reported (0.26–0.53), owing to system dependent fluxes through the RO2 + HO2 channel (forming cyclohexyl-hydroperoxide) vs. competing RO2 + RO2 chemistry. Therefore, variations in derived OH yields may occur if applied to systems where the concentrations of HO2 and/or RO2 present differ greatly from those under which the cyclohexanone yields from cyclohexane + OH were originally determined – see Alam et al.1 for a more detailed discussion on this.
In your calculations of OH yields you use a yield of cyclohexanone of 50% from Atkinson and Aschmann.2 This has since been re-evaluated to 52.8% (see Berndt et al.,3 Malkin et al.4 and Alam et al.1). How does this affect your calculated OH yields?
In a related question, do you have a feel for any possible interference of any other OH sources under the conditions of your experiments, e.g. O3 + HO2 and/or other chamber dependent sources?
1 M. S. Alam, A. R. Rickard, M. Camredon, K. P. Wyche, T. Carr, K. E. Hornsby, P. S. Monks and W. J. Bloss, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11002–11015.
2 R. Atkinson and S. M. Aschmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1993, 27, 1357–1363.
3 T. Berndt, O. Boge and F. Stratmann, Atmos. Environ., 2003, 37 3933–3945.
4 T. L. Malkin, A. Goddard, D. E. Heard and P. W. Seakins, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2010, 10, 1441–1459.

Abdelwahid Mellouki answered: I agree with this statement. The use of 52.8% instead of 50% for the yield of cyclohexanone formation will not lead to an important change in the calculated OH yields (a few percent).
I do not see any other chamber dependent source of OH under our experimental conditions. However, O3 + HO2 has to be considered depending on the experimental conditions (i.e. initial reactants concentrations).

Nick Hewitt asked: Could you say something about what difference you anticipate the presence of SO2 will make to the products?

Abdelwahid Mellouki responded: I do not expect changes in the MVK or MACR formation yield changes. Changes could be observed for the products formed through the CI complex chemistry (e.g. OH radicals, CO, HCHO... as well as SOA). Addition of SO2 may lead to the formation of new particles with different chemical compositions, sulfate... etc.

Mathew Evans said: The isoprene + OH reaction has entertained the community for the last decade, opening up whole new areas of atmospheric chemistry. Do you think we’ll find something similar from isoprene + O3 chemistry?

Abdelwahid Mellouki replied: This is already happening considering the interest in the fate of Criegee intermediates, new particle formation, contribution to H2SO4 atmospheric burden, etc. In addition, looking at the HOMs (Highly Oxygenated Molecules) from this reaction is of great importance.

Alexander Archibald commented: Nice paper and nice fundamental work. One of the conclusions you talk about was that these simulations were a step forward over older simulation chambers as your new chamber operates under atmospheric conditions. I think this is a bold statement. The real atmosphere doesn’t sit still for the length that your experiments last. I was wondering if you think we need to change what we do in the lab to simulate the atmosphere better (i.e. come up with new experimental methodologies) or will instrument developments contribute more to this?

Abdelwahid Mellouki answered: My feeling is that in the future we should be able to directly connect lab measurement to field studies, which is being done nowadays in some ways but still needs to be developed further (reaction rate constants can be measured in the field!). The development of more specific and sensitive instruments (small and light ones) will certainly help.

Rabi Chhantyal-Pun said: The self reactions of Criegee intermediates are quite fast, around 10−10 cm3 s−1.1,2 They may need to be considered to make sure that they do not affect the yield measurements.
1 R. Chhantyal-Pun et al., J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121, 4–15.
2 R. Chhantyal-Pun et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 3617–3626.

Abdelwahid Mellouki replied: This is correct.

Max McGillen opened discussion of the paper by Rebecca Caravan: I have a comment about the interpretation of your results: I would argue that you are almost in complete agreement with Presto and Donahue.1 In their study, NO3 production (inferred indirectly from acetone production) only started to occur at pressures exceeding ∼200 Torr, which is outside the pressure range of your work, which has a maximum pressure of 40 Torr, therefore, in essence you agree in your observation. Furthermore, Presto and Donahue performed calculations for the analogous CH2OO + NO2 system, which suggested that an adduct (a nitrite-type peroxy radical, ONOCH2OO) may be important in the formation of NO3 in this system. This structure is analogous to Isomer #3 in Fig. 9 of your paper. This is notable because this is the isomer for which calculated and experimental values of adiabatic ionization energy at m/z 106 are closest and differ mainly in the detail that this ion is expected to fragment rather than be observed at the parent mass. As a consequence, my overall impression is that Presto and Donahue’s observations are not contradicted, but rather, are supported by your new results, and that you are providing important insights into the mechanism by which NO3 is produced in the atmosphere by these systems.
1 A. A. Presto and N. M. Donahue, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 9096–9104.

Rebecca Caravan responded: Thank you for your comment. In our lower pressure experiments (up to 40 Torr), we see a decrease in the acetaldehyde signal as a function of [NO2], which at 20 Torr, we utilize to give an upper limit to the yield of acetaldehyde + NO3 as 30%. However, over the whole pressure range of our experiments (4–40 Torr) we observe signal at the exact m/z consistent with the Criegee–NO2 adduct in both the formaldehyde oxide and acetaldehyde oxide + NO2 systems. Given this reaction appears to proceed via a simple reverse unimolecular mechanism, I would anticipate that higher pressures would favor increased stabilization of the Criegee–NO2 adduct, and therefore competing bimolecular channels would be suppressed with increasing pressure. With regards to the structure of the adduct – we are not in fact able to assign the observed adduct signal to isomer #3. As mentioned, the calculations predict dissociative ionization of isomer #3, meaning that little to no signal would be observed at the parent mass, which is in conflict with the present observations. The structure of the adduct may hold a clue to its ultimate fate (in other words, whether it will likely decompose to NO3). Dr Ewa Papajak and Dr Ivan Antonov have carried out further, higher level calculations on the potential adduct structures (see Fig. 1 here), and in fact observe significantly different predicted ionization energies at this level. Still, the calculations at the CCSD(T)-F12//DFT level find no isomers with ionization energies consistent with the observed experimental signal (and additionally, which do not fragment on ionization), therefore it is apparent that further work is needed to assign the structure(s) of the adduct. It may indeed be possible that more than one isomer of the adduct is formed, and these adducts may have different fates. Rate theory calculations on this system would be highly beneficial to assess whether more than one adduct isomer may be formed in the reaction, and to predict the pressure- and temperature-dependent fates of each of these adducts.
 Fig. 1  Possible isomers of CH3CHOONO2 adduct optimized at the ωB97XD/JUN-cc-pVTZ level along with their H(OK) energy [kcal mol−1] and their adiabatic ionization energy [eV] calculated at the CCSD(T)-F12/cc-pVDZ-F12//ωB97XD/JUN-cc-pVTZ level including ωB97XD/JUN-cc-pVTZ zero-point energy. Numbers in bold refer to ionization to the singlet cation, where more than one electronic state of the cation is shown. 

Alexander Archibald commented: Thanks for these exciting new results. I was just wondering what it is (if there is anything) that is unique about Criegee intermediates that means they form such stable adducts whereas it appears that other oxygenated intermediates (peroxy radicals) don’t? Do you think that these adducts will convert to products (e.g. HCHO + NO3) but just on a slower timescale than your experiments can probe?

Rebecca Caravan replied: I think the difference between Criegee intermediate and peroxy reactivity lies in the difference in their electronic structure – Criegee intermediates are mostly zwitterionic in nature and so can be expected to react differently to peroxy radicals. With regards to the conversion of the adduct to bimolecular products, this is an interesting question and one which requires further laboratory and theoretical investigations to unravel. It is possible that the adduct could undergo decomposition, but in the atmosphere other fates such as deposition, photolysis or further reaction may happen on a shorter timescale than unimolecular decomposition, and so these adducts may be intercepted before formation of NO3 can occur. Alternatively, if these adducts do decompose to aldehyde species + NO3 on a significantly longer timescale without further perturbation, then they may serve as a transport mechanism for NOx/NOy.

A. Ravishankara said: I wonder if we should not think about Criegee as a peroxide because of its zwitterionic nature. Also, if you were to think about it more as an ionic species, would it be more amenable to dealing with its reactions like an ion-molecule or dipole-molecule reaction?

Rebecca Caravan responded: Thanks for this very interesting question. Criegee intermediates have been shown to react in a number of ways. For example, in the reaction of formaldehyde oxide with SO2,1 it behaves as an oxidant whereby the terminal oxygen on the Criegee moiety is transferred to the co-reactant leading to SO3 and formaldehyde. However, for the same reaction with larger Criegee intermediates (such as acetone oxide), the observed pressure dependence of the rate coefficient by Huang et al.2 has led to postulation that the Criegee–SO2 addition complex may be an important product.3 Conversely, in other systems such as reactions with acids, evidence for an insertion-type mechanism has been observed,4 and addition mechanisms are postulated for the reaction of Criegee intermediates with peroxy radicals.5,6 These examples of the varied reactivity of the Criegee intermediate serve to illustrate that it is perhaps not too instructive at this stage to think of it as exhibiting ion-molecule or peroxy radical-like chemistry, and to be guided by continuing theoretical work and previous experimental observations.
1 C. A. Taatjes, O. Welz, A. J. Eskola, J. D. Savee, A. M. Scheer, D. E. Shallcross, B. Rotavera, E. P. F. Lee, J. M. Dyke, D. K. W. Mok, D. L. Osborn and C. J. Percival, Science, 2013, 340, 177–180.
2 H.-L. Huang, W. Chao and J. J.-M. Lin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 10857–10862.
3 C. A. Taatjes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2017, 68, 183–207.
4 O. Horie, P. Neeb, S. Limbach and G. K. Moortgat, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1994, 21, 1523–1526.
5 L. Vereecken, H. Harder and A. Novelli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14682–14695.
6 J. M. Anglada, S. Olivella and A. Solé, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18921–18933.

Craig Taatjes remarked: I point out that there are reasons to doubt that Criegee intermediates should react similarly to alkylperoxy radicals. The ground electronic configuration of the carbonyl oxides is dominantly a closed-shell singlet zwitterion, whereas the alkylperoxy species is a doublet radical. The reactions of Criegee intermediates with radical species like NO are not rapid as would be expected if they had substantial radical character (the reaction of CH2OO with NO is at least 100 times slower than the reaction of CH3OO with NO). It may seem somewhat surprising that a closed-shell singlet should react rapidly with other closed-shell species (but the Criegee intermediates do). Ravi just suggested that the Criegee intermediates’ zwitterionic character may be important; capture processes in reactions of Criegee intermediates with dipolar reaction partners are explored in more detail in one of the posters, presented by Rabi Chhantyal-Pun, where it is shown that long-range forces likely do contribute in Criegee intermediate reactions.

Steven Brown asked: The conclusion relies in part on not seeing the nitrate radical or N2O5. Did you try to add those compounds to see if your method was sensitive to these?

Rebecca Caravan answered: The conclusion is not reliant on the absence of NO3 or N2O5 signal, this is just further evidence which supports our main observations. The observation of time-and [NO2]-dependent signal at the exact mass corresponding to the Criegee–NO2 adducts, and the decrease in the corresponding aldehyde signal as a function of [NO2] provide the main body of evidence for the conclusions drawn in the paper. It is from the signal of the aldehyde (which is the co-product in the NO3 production channel) that we obtain our upper limit of NO3 production. The technique which we utilized for this work, multiplexed photoionization mass spectrometry, permits almost universal chemical detection when coupled to tunable VUV radiation. And so, although we did not test our sensitivity to NO3 or N2O5 , based on the photoionization spectrum of NO3 by Monks et al.,1 and even assuming a low absolute photoionization cross section, we predict this and N2O5 are species we should be sufficiently sensitive to.
1 P. S. Monks, L. Stief, M. Krauss, S. C. Kuo, Z. Zhang and R. B. Klemm, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 10017–10022.

Steven Brown asked: If the adduct thermally decomposes in a heated sample line, does that mean that the adduct would ultimately decompose to NO3 in the atmosphere anyway? What is the well depth?

Rebecca Caravan replied: The work you refer to here is that of Ouyang et al.1 who, using broadband cavity enhanced absorption spectroscopy, detect NO3 from the formaldehyde oxide + NO2 reaction. Due to the residence time in their photolysis cell (3.2 s), and excess NO2, Ouyang et al. postulate that a large proportion (∼95–99.8%) of NO3 would be titrated to N2O5. And so, to permit detection of NO3 they heat their sample line leading from their photolysis cell to their detection cell to between 358–413 K, with a view to re-dissociation of N2O5 back to NO3. We propose that it is possible that the adduct we observe in our experiments would have been present in the Ouyang work, but may have undergone thermal decomposition in the heated sample line to NO3, leading to enhanced NO3 signal. The temperatures utilized to convert N2O5 to NO3 are higher than would be pertinent atmospherically, and so it is not possible to deduce from this work alone that the adduct would thermally decompose under atmospheric conditions. Further experiments would be required to deduce this, however many other atmospheric fates of the adduct are indeed possible, which also require further investigation. The well depth of adduct in the acetaldehyde oxide system was calculated to be on the order of ∼30–40 kcal mol−1 with respect to the reactants.
1 B. Ouyang, M. W. McLeod, R. L. Jones and W. J. Bloss, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17070–17075.

Eloise Marais opened discussion of the paper by P. Schlag§: Are there specific organics that lead to an ammonia excess in Europe? Would you expect to also see this in the US where NOx and SO2 emissions have declined, but NH3 emissions have remained relatively constant? Silvern et al.1 see a decline in NH3 uptake in the Southeast US and explain suppression of uptake as due to a relative increase in the OA fraction.
1 R. F. Silvern et al., Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2017, 17, 5107–5118.

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr answered: From our observations we show that organic acids are a specific fraction of the organic aerosol that take up NH3. These organic acids are very likely secondary. The European PM1 composition differs from the conditions found in many US sites in that inorganic nitrate is found in much higher concentrations in Europe. This is indicative of higher NH3 availability for ammonium nitrate formation. We show that in the Netherlands conditions are found on the regional scale that even provide sufficient NH3 for organic salt formation.

Alla Zelenyuk asked: You discussed the significance of ammonia uptake by organic aerosol particles that results in formation of organic ammonium salts. Did you look at the effect of relative humidity (RH) and particle size on the measured ammonium excess? Laboratory studies indicate that ammonia uptake by secondary organic aerosol (SOA) particles strongly depends on RH. Our recent study also shows that these heterogeneous reactions are also depend on particle size.1
1 Bell et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 6497–6507.

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr responded: Our ambient data sets do not show significant correlations between excess ammonia and relative humidity. The highest correlation coefficient between both time series was seen in the Zeppelin data set measuring the height profile on 21st May (R2 = 0.34). Furthermore, we didn’t see a dependence between excess ammonia and the particle sizes during the ground based measurements. We used a constant diameter of 280 nm for all laboratory experiments, as a dependency of ammonia uptake to the particle size was not in the scope of these studies at that time. In terms of humidity laboratory experiments were performed at one humidity, and we see that the degree of neutralization seems to depend on particle phase state with solid particles showing a limited NH3 uptake.

Gabriel Isaacman-VanWertz queried: Did you look at correlations between excess ammonium and other components beside CO2+, such as total organic or other factors? I know correlations are shown in the ESI, but I ask to probe a bit whether the observed excess ammonium in ambient data can be explained in part by instrument operation assumptions, and correlations with other species may help explore this possibility.
Given the relatively small contribution of eNH4 to total NH4 (5%), how are these conclusions impacted by uncertainties in RIEs and composition dependence of CE, which could bias quantification of one species relative to others?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr responded: As shown in Table S2, we compared the excess ammonia time series also with a number of factors, such as aerosol species, PMF factors and gaseous compounds. Indeed, total organics show high correlations with excess ammonia for both the ground based and airborne data set (R2 = 0.64 and 0.75, respectively), where the LVOOA and HULIS fraction, respectively, had highest correlations. This is in agreement with the conclusion of the manuscript, that excess ammonium is mainly bound by the highly oxidized fraction of organics, the organic acids. In addition, the excess ammonia measured onboard the Zeppelin also showed correlations to inorganic aerosol components like NO3 and total NH4 with coefficients up to 0.94. Considering the far lower number of data points used for these correlations (187 and 85, respectively) compared to the ground based data set (11582), those values have higher uncertainties.
Please note that the composition dependent collection efficiency is applied for all AMS aerosol species, which means the CE does not have an impact on relative relations and correlations of these species within one data set. However, the calculation of the RIE’s do have an impact on the determination of excess ammonium. The RIE of NH4 was determined periodically with low variations and close to the reported Zeppelin flights, maximizing the accuracy of this value.
Note that the mentioned contribution of 5% to total ammonium represents an average over the whole ground based AMS campaign between May and July 2012. As seen in Fig. 1 in the manuscript, eNH4 concentrations of up to 0.4 μg m−3 could be measured e.g. during the Zeppelin flights and in the beginning of July. The height profile of eNH4 concentrations on 21st May (Fig. 4 left) showed contributions of 9 to 18% to total ammonium. Main uncertainties in the determination of eNH4 arise from accounting for organic nitrate. All assumptions impacting the determination of organic nitrate were made such that a lower limit estimate of organic nitrate concentration is achieved, thus also arriving at a lower limit for eNH4.

Jacqueline Hamilton asked: Can you explain the reason for the 2:1 ratio expected in Fig. 6?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr replied: We have to emphasize that this ratio is an AMS measurement specific one. As mentioned in the manuscript, carboxylic acid groups fragment within the AMS to equal amounts of CO+ and CO2+ ions.1 Note that CO2+ is also produced from gas phase CO2 in the AMS. This contribution was accounted for by periodical gas background measurements using a HEPA filter mounted inline in the AMS inlet. Assuming that each available carboxylic acid group combines with an excess-NH4 molecule via an acid–base reaction, a ratio of neNH4 to nOrgCO2 of 2 would be expected. This is because a carboxylic acid group is fragmented within the AMS either to a CO+ or a CO2+ ion, with a 50% chance for each case. The Org-CO2 concentrations shown here consider the signal of CO+ only. Therefore, the Org-CO2 concentrations given by the AMS data represent 50% of organic acids that can be measured by this instrument.
1 A. C. Aiken et al., Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4478–4485.

Jacqueline Hamilton questioned: Does the uptake of ammonia with organic acids relate to their pKa?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr answered: Some of the laboratory experiments indicate that the pKa values may positively correlate to the ammonia uptake ability. However, some generated particulate organic acids such as succinic, glutaric and adipic acid, which have relatively low pKa’s, did not uptake the expected amount of ammonia molecules. This is due to the fact that their deliquescence points were above the relative humidity achieved during the experiments (ca. 75%) which resulted most likely in mainly crystalline particles as described in the manuscript. Thus, additional studies are needed to determine the dependence between the pKa of the organic acids and the ammonia uptake.

Hugh Coe asked: You comment on vertical structure of organic nitrogen in the paper. Do you have evidence for this being controlled by thermodynamics or is the air mass aloft different to that below? Did you see any evidence of co-condensation of other aerosol components in the vertical profiles?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr responded: The vertical profile of all species show little dependence on the height above ground. This is in line with trace gases which were found to be relatively well mixed in the respective flights.

Colette Heald said: I would like to follow up on the previous question about vertical profiles. Can you comment on the shape of the NH3 residual shown in Fig. 4? Are there artefacts from stitching together these datasets or how would you explain the vertical profile?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr replied: The profile given in the manuscript does not show any “spikes” at higher altitudes, unfortunately the typesetting of the manuscript led to a wrong impression of the vertical profile for eNH4, this is corrected in the final version of the manuscript.

Christopher Kampf asked: Would the excess ammonia that you observe already affect aerosol pH and subsequent chemistry or is it not significant enough?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr responded: We do assume that through the formation of organic salts the pH of particles is affected. In addition to having potential effects on particle chemistry, we would like to emphasize that the physical state of particles is affected by salt formation with effects ranging from particle lifetime to water uptake and optical properties.

Jacinta Edebeli queried: What are the emissions from the Zeppelin airship? Do you see these emissions in the vertical profile data?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr responded: The flight tracks for vertical profiles were defined such that the Zeppelin avoids flying in its own exhaust plume. This is verified through e.g. CO measurements onboard the Zeppelin. In terms of the aerosol composition and mass we also see that the vertical profile is consistent with ground based measurements supporting the absence of an effect of the Zeppelin itself.

Jing Dou asked: We know that ammonia activity is dependent on size of the particle; how can you control particle size, or how do you normalize for this?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr responded: As mentioned before no size dependence was found in ambient data sets. For the laboratory experiments particle size was kept constant, size dependences would need to be explored in more depth in the future.

A. Ravishankara remarked: It seems that the organic acid-ammonia “salt” is more strongly bound in the aerosol. Am I right? This brings up a question: Would there be large differences in evaporation rates between organic acid-ammonia and ammonium nitrate? So, would you see more organic-ammonia in aerosols at warm temperatures, where ammonium nitrate is essentially not in the aerosol phase, e.g. Colorado in the summer?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr replied: Although our ambient data sets don’t show a significant correlation between the ambient temperatures and excess ammonium, the diurnal pattern of excess ammonium and the inorganic nitrate fraction (which is considered to be ammonium nitrate, see Fig. 2) indicate that during the day, the evaporation of ammonium nitrate dominates over its formation, while excess ammonium does not change substantially.
 Fig. 2  The diurnal pattern of excess ammonium and inorganic nitrate mass concentration. 

Steven Brown asked: How would the organic component change between winter and summer? There is probably a big difference in production of organic acids in summer to winter if they are secondary, but perhaps a smaller change in ammonia emissions. What do you predict the balance of factors to be?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr answered: Indeed, our data set acquired in November 2011 at the Cesar site showed an average SOA contribution of 53% of total organic concentration and 17% to total aerosol mass, respectively, while the ground based AMS data presented here showed 77% and 25% of SOA related to total organics and total aerosols, respectively, between May to July 2012. On the other hand, NH3 emissions can have high variation between the seasons, especially at rural sites in North-Western Europe like Cabauw. For example, NH3 concentrations around Cabauw were relatively low in winter between 6th January to 18th February 2008 (average: 3.1 μg m−3), followed by a period until 10th March with very high concentrations (average: 21.3 μg m−3) and peaks of up to 87 μg m−3 (EBAS database). In summer 2008, the NH3 concentrations were 12.1 μg m−3, averaged between May and July. In this context an estimation of the seasonal importance of organic salts in aerosol is not straightforward.

Jonathan Williams returned to the paper by Rebecca Caravan and asked: Have you seen any real world evidence of this reaction, for example in places where you would expect high Criegee radical concentrations, have you seen deviations in the NO3 and N2O5 relationship?

Steven Brown responded: We have only recently begun to look for evidence of NO3 production from Criegee radical oxidation of NO2. One place to look is areas with high biogenic VOC emissions that would lead to rapid Criegee radical chemistry. A recent model analysis suggests that the effect is rather small if the primary fate of Criegee radicals is reaction with water vapor, since regions with high biogenic emissions often coincide with high relative humidity. If the water vapor reaction is slower than current laboratory studies indicate, then the models would suggest a substantial (>10%) effect on NO3 radical production rates. There is no direct evidence from the field data that we have analyzed to date to support this additional source, however.

A. Ravishankara opened a general discussion of the papers by Abdelwahid Mellouki, Rebecca Caravan and Astrid Kiendler-Scharr: There have been lots of advances in technology since we used to use ‘smog’ chambers. Now it seems like chambers are coming back alongside other experiments e.g. on Zeppelins and reactions of isolated reactions. Could you comment on where you think the technology is going next?

Abdelwahid Mellouki replied: Designing field experiments where kinetic parameters and mechanistic schemes could be measured and assessed in the “real world”.

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr responded: With respect to strategies for process level studies, one emerging approach for chambers is the use of complex mixtures as a starting point for chemical mechanism exploration. Such approaches use e.g. direct emissions of plants, vehicles, or ambient air to study secondary pollutant formation under realistic conditions. These approaches imply high sensitivity and selectivity requirements for measurements and allow the exploration of interactions between mechanisms which cannot be studied, when single compounds are used in isolation.

Stephen Arnold added: In the real atmosphere, if we measure a time series sat in a given location we are often measuring variability driven by air mass origin, not local processing. Zeppelins following air masses could provide an exciting opportunity to follow single air masses and study their processing over time (i.e. a Lagrangian observational framework).

Barbara Finlayson-Pitts said: Looking back over decades at chamber studies, it has been clear that there are “chamber-specific effects” that undoubtedly involve reactions on the walls. The default position has been that these had to be removed when the chemistry probed in these studies is inserted into models (however, some of these reactions will also occur in air, albeit at different rates and perhaps with different mechanisms). As an example, it has been shown by Ziemann and coworkers that organics get taken up into Teflon and can come back out. We have seen this with halogens on halocarbon wax coatings, which is similar to Teflon. These materials absorb Br2; pumping on it, purging with air, water, even O3 gives no indication that Br2 is present. However, if Cl2 is added, Br2 appears in the gas phase, apparently due to a competitive displacement reaction. Since all chambers have walls, with the potential for such effects, I would be interested in hearing comments from anyone here about whether we are confident we know what chamber effects are and how to take them out?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr answered: One approach to minimize wall effects that has been successfully followed e.g. in SAPHIR in Jülich, is the concept of using high volume/surface ratios. Complementarily, the use of steady state reactors can explore wall losses when steady state is disturbed. The use of such combined approaches and dedicated studies of reference systems in multiple chamber studies are ways forward to disentangle chamber wall effects from gas phase reactions.

Andreas Wahner said: Following on from the discussion about chamber studies, a comment: there have been large improvements in the design and construction of present day atmosphere simulation chambers (e.g. SAPHIR in Jülich) compared to smog chambers. One important aspect is the wall material and the construction as a double wall with continuous 24/7 flushing of the space between the two foils, which prohibits diffusion from outside trace gases into the chamber and, maybe most important, it flushes out any deposit on the inner wall, products of experiments, as long as they have any vapor pressure and diffuse through the 120 micrometer thick FEP foil. Therefore contamination by outgassing is strongly reduced. Nevertheless, the wall is a surface and will have reactions on it and needs careful characterization experiments repeatedly done. What is impressive with these measurements is the consistency/reproducibility which is obtained. However, chambers need good calibration and characterization to ensure reproducibility and therefore quite a lot of additional work to operate.

Andrew Rickard added: The EUROCHAMP-2020 Project (http://www.eurochamp.org), which many of us here are involved with (either directly or indirectly), has recently started. EUROCHAMP-2020 aims at integrating the most advanced European atmospheric simulation chambers into a world-class infrastructure for research and innovation. One of EUROCHAMP2020’s main objectives is to set up a co-ordinated set of networking activities to deliver improved chamber operability across the infrastructure, as well as standard protocols for data generation and analysis. As part of these activities, sets of experiments are being designed and carried out in order to understand chamber specific auxiliary chemistry and photolysis characteristics across all chambers, to achieve better interpretation of experiments and data inter-comparability among different chambers, providing enhanced datasets for use by modellers and for a higher level of integration at the community scale.

Jonathan Williams said: Connecting two previous comments regarding chamber studies and Zeppelins – we know that chambers have important surface emission characteristics of species such as HONO due to surface reactions. If we consider the Zeppelin as an inverse chamber, can we not expect the same surface reactions on the skin of the Zeppelin? Would these impact the use of the Zeppelin in the pure motor-off Langrangian studies suggested by Stephen Arnold?

Astrid Kiendler-Scharr replied: As mentioned before the emissions of the Zeppelin engine would certainly be the dominant contamination in such an experiment. In our experiments we see no indication for the surface being a source of e.g. HONO. As you point out, the experiment would be an “inverse chamber” with an extremely high volume to surface ratio. So as long as sampling is conducted outside the surface boundary layer, the risk of contamination from the surface seems small.

A. Ravishankara posed a general question: I have a follow up on the question about chemistry on the balloon surface – there are major technological advances in this area. A key question from my perspective is: how do we deal with mixing in Lagrangian experiments?

Stephen Arnold commented: Regarding the idea of using a Lagrangian observational framework, mixing matters, but the amount it matters depends on the timescale you are interested in. We had an experiment in 2004 (ICARTT: https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/csd/projects/icartt/), where we were convinced we successfully made several linked Lagrangian air mass interceptions. Mixing was slow compared with the timescales for advection and chemical processing. This was in the upper troposphere. In the boundary layer, faster mixing would make.

Dwayne Heard said: I would like to make a general comment about Criegee radicals and their role in the atmosphere. As some of the papers at this meeting have shown, great advances in have been made in detecting Criegee radicals in the laboratory, in order to study their kinetics (rate coefficients and product branching ratios). When a new measurement of a rate coefficient or branching ratio is made, the values are then inputted into a model of the atmosphere, in order to look at the impact of mixing ratios of H2SO4 and perhaps the rate of new particle formation or other parameters. However, what we are missing are any quantitative measurements of Criegee radicals in the atmosphere to compare directly with the model calculations. At present we rely on model predictions for distributions of the mixing ratios of these species. There have been some advances recently, for example during OH measurements made with the Chemical Ionisation Mass Spectrometry (CIMS) technique, it was noticed that in forested areas, particularly in boreal forests, that the CIMS OH background is large, and thought to be due to Criegee radicals, which convert SO2 to SO3 inside the CIMS instrument (just like OH radicals do). Mauldin et al.1 reported a time-series of this background, thought to be from Criegee intermediates, in 2012. More recently, Novelli et al.2 have exploited a background signal in a laser-induced fluorescence instrument which is assigned to Criegee radicals to provide an estimate of their concentration. An estimate of ∼5–104 molecules cm−3 (with an order of magnitude uncertainty) was made for the concentration of Criegee intermediates. These are exciting advances, but the information about levels in the field is still very limited, and further technological innovations are needed in the future.
1 L. Mauldin et al., Nature, 2012, 488, 193–197.
2 A. Novelli et al., Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 2016, DOI: 10.5194/acp-2016-919.

Rebecca Caravan responded: Thank you for your comment. I agree that developments to enable field measurements of Criegee intermediates would be advantageous, and would like to point to two such developments presented at this meeting which are attempting to tackle this difficult problem: the paper by Giorio et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C7FD00025A) and a poster by Keutsch et al. entitled “Unambiguous detection of speciated stabilized Criegee intermediates via gas phase derivatization and detection using proton transfer mass spectrometry”.

A. Ravishankara addressed Abdelwahid Mellouki and Rebecca Caravan: Thank you for your interesting papers. Clearly, the studies on the reactivity of Criegee intermediates are very interesting and have been a new frontier in gas phase chemistry. In your views, what are the other new frontiers in gas phase chemistry?

Abdelwahid Mellouki replied: Many challenges still lie ahead to understand the atmospheric gas phase chemistry. For example:
While the chemistry of RO2 has been subject to decades of laboratory studies, the nature and the yields of the products from the reactions involving RO2 are still unclear at a certain level under atmospheric conditions. Alkoxy radicals chemistry, particularly for oxygenated molecules, needs more characterization.
The atmospheric radical budget is another issue, how to explain the differences between the models and the field measurements for OH radicals for example.
The formation processes of HOMs (Highly Oxygenated Molecules) and their atmospheric fate are of interest for both gas and particle phases.
Photolysis of many organic compounds is still not well characterized under atmospheric conditions (photolysis rates and quantum yields).
More generally, studies under realistic atmospheric conditions (initial concentrations, temperature, pressure, solar radiations) would enhance the ability to develop comprehensive and capable atmospheric models.

Rebecca Caravan responded: I think we still have a lot to learn about Criegee intermediate chemistry. For example, the reactivity of larger and functionalized Criegee intermediates, which are difficult to generate directly in the laboratory, still remains a question. In terms of other areas of gas phase chemistry, there has been a lot of nice work done on this already (see for example this perspective by Veronica Vaida1) but complexation to water has been demonstrated to perturb reaction rate coefficients, reaction products and photochemical properties in a variety of systems, but there could be more to learn there. Indeed, one might expect a similar impact of water on Criegee intermediate behavior, as shown for example, in the enhanced rate of reaction of formaldehyde oxide with water dimer, with respect to the monomer.2,3
1 V. Vaida, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 02090.
2 W. Chao, J.-T. Hsieh, C.-H. Chang and J.-J. M. Lin, Science, 2015, 347, 751–754.
3 T. R. Lewis, M. A. Blitz, D. E. Heard and P. W. Seakins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4859–4863.

Jos Lelieveld remarked: Regarding Professor Ravishankara’s question about new frontiers: it seems probable that the effects of Criegee intermediates are relatively smaller in a tropical compared to boreal forest, though important in localised areas. OH controls the oxidising capacity of most of the atmosphere, seemingly also over forests; Criegee intermediates are chemically highly interesting but we should probably not overestimate their influence on regional and global scales.

Rebecca Caravan communicated in reply: Whilst I agree that the hydroxyl radical is a highly important species in the atmosphere, I feel this does not negate the potential importance of Criegee intermediate chemistry, which, at present, is much less well studied than that of OH. Criegee intermediates have not only been implicated in the removal of important atmospheric pollutants (SO2 for example), but their reaction products may be an (as of yet) unaccounted for pathway towards particulate formation.

Christian George asked: During this session, a certain emphasis was given to the chemistry of the Criegee intermediates, but what about other oxidative pathways such as “auto-oxidation”? Are those still to be considered as a “hot-topic”? In other words, what would be possible future priorities in terms of research in gas phase homogeneous chemistry?

Abdelwahid Mellouki responded: The atmospheric chemistry of HOMs (Highly Oxygenated Molecules) is indeed a hot topic at present as they may be a sink to a number of organic radicals leading to new particle formation. Their formation processes and their atmospheric fate under different conditions still need to be studied using new state of the art instrumentation.

Andreas Wahner remarked: Further to this discussion about atmospheric chemistry processes and the question of which processes need to be further studied, or “what are the unknown unknowns”, I want to point out that the mentioned auto oxidation mechanisms are very important but we have to clarify what are the important overall issues or quantitative unresolved questions. Auto oxidation reactions are important for the pathway from gas phase to SOA and oxidizing emissions without NOx fueled radical recycling and therefore without, as far as we know, ozone production, but these mechanisms have minor importance in others. For example for those key questions: Do we really understand radical budgets in a global chemical regime? How much carbon leaves the atmosphere as CO2, partly oxidized, or as the organic phase of aerosols? Certainly also surface reactions play a role at least in the boundary layer.

Craig Taatjes noted: The issues that are being discussed here are similar to those being faced in other areas of complex chemical systems, such as combustion chemistry. One frontier is controlled experiments that can follow sequences of reactions and their connections in detail, including probing intermediate species. These investigations fall between elementary reaction kinetics and more global studies like chamber measurements. Another universal challenge for investigators of complex chemical processes is to deduce the scientifically important features from the overwhelming granularity of a fully elementary description.
Footnotes† Manabu Shiraiwa’s paper was presented by Christopher Kampf, Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, Mainz, Germany.‡ Markku Kulmala’s paper was presented by Veli-Matti Kerminen, University of Helsinki, Finland.§ P. Schlag’s paper was presented by Astrid Kiendler-Scharr, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Possible isomers of CH3CHOONO2 adduct optimized at the ωB97XD/JUN-cc-pVTZ level along with their H(OK) energy [kcal mol−1] and their adiabatic ionization energy [eV] calculated at the CCSD(T)-F12/cc-pVDZ-F12//ωB97XD/JUN-cc-pVTZ level including ωB97XD/JUN-cc-pVTZ zero-point energy. Numbers in bold refer to ionization to the singlet cation, where more than one electronic state of the cation is shown.	 

 	Fig. 2  The diurnal pattern of excess ammonium and inorganic nitrate mass concentration.	 
Footnotes
† Manabu Shiraiwa’s paper was presented by Christopher Kampf, Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, Mainz, Germany.
‡ Markku Kulmala’s paper was presented by Veli-Matti Kerminen, University of Helsinki, Finland.
§ P. Schlag’s paper was presented by Astrid Kiendler-Scharr, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
