Thermo-electrochemical cells for waste heat harvesting – progress and perspectives  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CC02160G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CC02160G
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6288-6302Thermo-electrochemical cells for waste heat harvesting – progress and perspectives

        
          
            M. F. 
            Dupont
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            D. R. 
            MacFarlane
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            J. M. 
            Pringle
          
          
        
      *a
aARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia. E-mail: j.pringle@deakin.edu.au
bARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, School of Chemistry, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
Received 
      22nd March 2017
    , Accepted 15th May 2017First published on 23rd May 2017AbstractThermo-electrochemical cells (also called thermocells) are promising devices for harvesting waste heat for the sustainable production of energy. Research into thermocells has increased significantly in recent years, driven by advantages such as their ability to continuously convert heat into electrical energy without producing emissions or consuming materials. Until relatively recently, the commercial viability of thermocells was limited by their low power output and conversion efficiency. However, there have lately been significant advances in thermocell performance as a result of improvements to the electrode materials, electrolyte and redox chemistry and various features of the cell design. This article overviews these recent developments in thermocell research, including the development of new redox couples, the optimisation of electrolytes for improved power output and high-temperature operation, the design of high surface area electrodes for increased current density and device flexibility, and the optimisation of cell design to further enhance performance.
M. F. Dupont
Dr Madeleine Dupont is an Associate Research Fellow in the Institute for Frontier Materials at Deakin University, Melbourne. She completed her BSc and PhD at the University of Newcastle, Australia. Her PhD research focused on electrochemical energy storage. Since moving to Deakin University in 2016, she has been conducting research into the development and optimization of thermoelectrochemical cells for thermal energy harvesting.
D. R. MacFarlane
Professor Doug MacFarlane leads the Monash Ionic Liquids Group at Monash University. He is currently an Australian Research Council Laureate Fellow. He is also the Program Leader of the Energy Program in the Australian Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science. His group focuses on a range of aspects of ionic liquids and their application in the energy sciences and sustainable chemistry. Professor MacFarlane graduated from Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand and then undertook his graduate work in the Angell group at Purdue University, Indiana. He has been a Professor of Chemistry at Monash since 1995.
J. M. Pringle
A/Prof. Jennifer Pringle is a Senior Research Fellow in the Institute for Frontier Materials at Deakin University and a chief investigator in the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science. She received her degree and PhD at The University of Edinburgh in Scotland before moving to Monash University in Melbourne, Australia in 2002. From 2008–2012 she held an ARC QEII Fellowship, investigating the use of ionic electrolytes for dye-sensitized solar cells. A/Prof. Pringle moved to Deakin University, Melbourne in 2013. There she leads research into the development and use of ionic electrolytes for applications including thermal energy harvesting and solid state lithium batteries.
1. Introduction
The accelerating consumption of non-renewable resources for the production of energy has led to an urgent need for increased energy production from renewable resources. Low-grade waste heat (i.e., at temperatures <200 °C), such as that produced via industrial or geothermal processes, is a particularly significant source of energy that has the potential to be harvested for the production of electricity. In parallel, there is increasing interest in the field of wearable devices, where the utilisation of body heat could power small portable electronics, such as medical devices or sensors.1
Until relatively recently, most research into thermal energy conversion was in the area of solid-state thermoelectrics. However these devices generally have limited efficiency at low temperatures, making them unsuitable for application in low-grade, waste heat harvesting.2 Thermoelectric devices consist of a p- and n-type semiconductors connected in series. When a thermal gradient is applied, the mobile charge carriers in the material (electrons and holes) diffuse towards the cold side and this build-up of charge creates a potential difference. This is known as the Seebeck effect and the potential difference generated per unit temperature difference is known as the Seebeck coefficient. Thermoelectric devices based on semiconductor materials generally produce potential differences in the order of μV K−1,1,3,4 which limits their efficiency at near-ambient temperatures.
Thermo-electrochemical cells, or thermocells, are an alternative device design showing increasing promise for the conversion of low-grade thermal energy. As for thermoelectrics, thermocells can continuously generate electrical energy when a temperature gradient is present, without producing emissions or consuming any materials. When based on a redox-active electrolyte, such thermocells can generate potential differences in the order of mV K−1. This makes them an interesting alternative to solid-state devices for low temperature thermal energy harvesting.
This article presents an overview of recent advances in the materials chemistry and electrochemistry of thermocells from our group and others, specifically the development of new redox couples, non-aqueous electrolytes and novel electrode materials. Additionally, advances in the optimisation of cell design are highlighted and some of the future avenues for improving the performance of thermocells are discussed.
2. Thermocell fundamentals – energetics and kinetics
A thermocell consists of two identical electrodes (Fig. 1) in contact with an electrolyte containing a redox couple and connected to an external circuit. When a temperature gradient is applied across the cell, the temperature dependence of the redox reaction causes oxidation of the redox couple at the anode and reduction at the cathode. The flow of current in a thermocell is continuous because the reduced species are transported through the electrolyte by convection, diffusion and migration to the anode, where they are oxidised, and the oxidised species are then transported back to the cathode, creating a continuous reaction. As long as there is no degradation of the cell components, this reaction can theoretically continue indefinitely.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a thermocell containing the aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide redox couple (Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−). This system has a negative Seebeck coefficient (−1.4 mV K−1) meaning that oxidation occurs at the hot electrode and reduction at the cold electrode. For a redox couple with a positive Seebeck coefficient, this would be reversed, with oxidation occurring at the cold electrode and reduction at the hot electrode. 
The magnitude of the potential difference generated for a given temperature gradient is an important factor determining the power output of a device. For the redox reaction: A + ne− → B(1)the Seebeck coefficient, Se is given by:5,6 (2)where n is the number of electrons transferred, F is Faraday's constant, SA and SB are the partial molar entropies of species A and B, ŜA and ŜB are their Eastman entropies and  is the transported entropy of the electrons in the external circuit. The Eastman entropy of transport is attributed to the interaction of an ion and its solvation shell with the solution. In most solutions this value is negligible compared to ŜA and ŜB; , being in the order of μV K−1, can also be considered negligible.5 As such, eqn (2) can be written as:6 nF(∂E/∂T)t=∞ = SB − SA(3)or (4)Increasing the Seebeck coefficient, and therefore the potential difference across the cell, will theoretically increase the current that can be generated. However, this potential difference represents an equilibrium property of the system; during cell operation (when current is drawn) the maximum power output is also limited by various overpotentials within the system.6 Therefore the performance of a given cell cannot be determined solely from the Seebeck coefficient. There are three primary sources of overpotential within a thermocell: ohmic overpotential, charge transfer overpotential and mass transport overpotential.6 Ohmic overpotential primarily describes the ohmic drop (IR drop) due to the internal electrical resistances in the cell, such as electrodes and connections. Charge transfer overpotential is associated with the kinetics of charge transfer of the redox couple at the electrode surface. Mass transport overpotential relates to the movement of the redox couple through the cell; this is particularly complex as it includes contributions from diffusion, migration and convection. A further complexity in the thermocell arises from the temperature dependence of each of these overpotentials.
The thermal gradient is an important factor in cell performance. An electrolyte with high thermal conductivity can limit the ΔT that can be maintained between the electrodes, and this reduced temperature gradient will decrease the cell potential. Given these additional factors, the performance of a thermocell is often defined by its figure of merit (ZT),6 a unit-less parameter which takes into account the effects of conductivity (σ) and thermal conductivity (κ) on performance, in addition to the Seebeck coefficient: (5)Generally, ZT values for solid state semiconductor devices are <1.7 This figure of merit is not immediately applicable to thermoelectrochemical cells as the conductivity of the electrolyte is not the only transport property that has an impact on their performance. A modified figure of merit that takes account of mass transport was introduced by Abraham et al.8 such that the figure of merit (now termed ZT*) is more appropriately written as: (6)where z is the charge on the ion, F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, Dlim is the limiting diffusion coefficient and c is the concentration of the redox couple.
Currently, the most significant factors limiting the application of thermocells are their low power output and conversion efficiency.9 Most reported thermocell devices have an energy conversion efficiency (relative to the Carnot engine) of <1%. However some recent studies have reported conversion efficiencies of up to 3.95% by using high surface area carbon electrodes.10,11 Although these efficiencies are low, as the primary intended application for thermocells is to harvest energy that is otherwise wasted, the efficiency requirements for commercial viability are relatively modest. Some estimates indicate that a conversion efficiency of 2–5% would be sufficient for a practical energy harvesting application.6 However, this clearly depends on the cost of manufacture and installation and the operational lifetime of the device.
For thermocells to become more efficient, there are two primary target areas of research: increasing the potential difference that can be generated in a cell, and increasing the current density at the electrodes. An increase in potential can be achieved through understanding and optimising the fundamental thermodynamics, i.e. developing redox couples and electrolyte combinations with high Seebeck coefficients. Further, increasing the maximum possible cell operating temperature by using high boiling point electrolytes or by optimised device design, such as using solid electrolytes or separators to maintain a large temperature gradient, can also increase cell potential. The current density can be improved through use of high surface area electrodes and electrolytes with good mass transport characteristics. As discussed below, all of these aspects are currently being investigated as potential strategies for improving the performance of thermocell devices.
3. Redox couples
As discussed, the maximum potential difference that can be generated in a thermocell is determined by the Seebeck coefficient of the redox couple, which represents the entropy change that occurs when the species is oxidised or reduced (eqn (2)). The entropy change is influenced by factors including the structural changes in the redox species and effects from their solvent shells and their interactions with the solvent.12 It has been observed in both aqueous and non-aqueous solvents that the sign of the entropy change (positive or negative) is related to the difference between the absolute charges of the oxidant and reductant, reflecting the strength of the, primarily Coulombic, interaction between the charged redox species and its solvation shell; if the absolute charge of the oxidant is larger than the reductant, the Seebeck coefficient is positive (and vice versa).12–14 Although Seebeck coefficients for a large range of redox couples have been either measured or calculated,15 the range of redox couples which can be used in a thermocell is relatively limited, due to practical requirements such as stability, electrochemical reversibility and availability. Aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide (Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−) illustrated above is one of the archetypical couples; it has a Seebeck coefficient of −1.4 mV K−1 that depends slightly on concentration.10,16 The Seebeck coefficient of other redox couples can exhibit a considerably greater concentration dependence than ferri/ferrocyanide. One example is the iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox couple, which has been studied in a range of aqueous and non-aqueous solvents.8,17,18 The Seebeck coefficient of this redox couple in ethylammonium nitrate (EAN) ionic liquid changes 3 fold between concentrations of 0.01 M and 2 M, with a maximum value of 0.97 mV K−1 measured in an 0.01 M solution.18 The Seebeck coefficient for iodide/triiodide is positive, attributed to the positive entropy change associated with the increase in the number of molecules upon reduction (eqn (7)). I3− + 2e− → 3I−(7)Some of the highest Seebeck coefficients ever observed were reported by our group in an investigation of cobalt-based redox couples. The Co2+/3+(bpy)3 (NTf2)2/3 redox couple (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridyl), NTf2 = bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide (Fig. 2) was tested in a variety of solvents and a maximum Seebeck coefficient of 2.19 mV K−1 for an 0.01 M solution in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN) was observed.19 This high Seebeck coefficient can be attributed to the change in spin state of Co2+/3+ when it is oxidised or reduced in most coordination complexes, which adds an additional electronic contribution to the total entropy change.14 In other metal ions that have been examined, such as Fe2+/3+, both of the ions have a low electronic spin state and so the entropy change in eqn (2) arises predominantly as a result of the solvent reorganisation entropy.17
 Fig. 2  The Co2+/3+(bpy)3 (NTf2)2/3 redox couple (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridyl) – one of a family of Co2+/3+ based redox couples that exhibit high Seebeck coefficient values due to spin state changes. 
While the majority of studies of redox couples focus on only a single redox species, one recent study has investigated the effects of using a mixture of redox couples.20 Solutions of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium ([C2mim]) [NTf2] containing either ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc/Fc+), iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) or a mixture of Fc and iodine (I2), which forms the ferrocene triiodide salt (FcI3), were examined. The Seebeck coefficients were measured for Fc/Fc+ (0.10 mV K−1) and I−/I3− (0.057 mV K−1) and compared to the FcI3 redox couple (0.81 mV K−1). However, the electrochemistry of FcI3 system is complex and displays a non-linear ΔV/ΔT relationship. The Seebeck coefficient for this electrolyte was estimated from the ΔV value at the maximum ΔT (30 K), therefore this value does not necessarily represent the potential that can be generated at other temperature differences. These authors also combined I2 with a range of substituted ferrocenes, the highest Seebeck coefficient being 1.67 mV K−1 for 1,1′-dibutanoylferrocene (DiBoylFc). This was attributed to its lower electron density, and therefore stronger interactions, compared to other ferrocene compounds.
To date, primarily inorganic redox couples have been tested in thermocells. However, some of these, such as I−/I3−, can cause corrosion depending on the absolute potential of the redox couple. Avoiding this corrosion is one of the possible advantages of organic redox couples, such as thiolate/disulphide (McMT−/BMT) which has a Seebeck coefficient of −0.6 mV K−1.21 This is an as-yet relatively unexplored area of thermocell research and deserves more intense investigation.
For a thermocell to generate energy continuously, it must contain both halves of the redox couple in solution and preferably at high concentrations (0.5 mol dm−3 or higher). However, there have been some reports of thermocells that generate a potential via the reaction between an aqueous ion and its solid species, such as the Cu2+/Cu(s) system.22,23 In this case the electrodes are solid copper, which is oxidised at the anode to form Cu2+. This is then transported though the electrolyte to be reduced at the cathode. The Seebeck coefficient for this system is 0.84 mV K−1 (for 0.7 M CuSO4). However, such cells cannot be operated continuously as the anode will eventually be consumed. This limits their range of applications compared to continuous cells.
Finally, there are also literature reports of Seebeck coefficients that far exceed the values reported above (up to 7 mV K−1) measured in electrolytes that do not contain a redox couple.24–26 Although these values are reported as “Seebeck coefficients”, the temperature dependent potential difference measured in these systems arises due to a different mechanism than that occurring in redox-active electrolytes. In the absence of a redox couple, it is no longer the change in the partial molar entropies of the species (eqn (2)) that determines the overall entropy change. Instead, the change in potential with temperature has been attributed to a combination of the difference in the Eastman entropies due to changes in solvation environment of the ions at different temperatures and the change in charge density at the electrode surface arising due to the Soret effect.25 The Soret effect (which is generally considered to be minor) refers to the gradual concentration gradient that arises in an electrolyte within a temperature gradient, due to the different mobility of ions at different temperatures.6 Although this mechanism can give rise to large potential differences under open circuit conditions, this will be dissipated upon connection of the electrodes via an external circuit. Therefore, such non-redox electrolytes cannot generate energy continuously; rather, they will behave more like a thermally chargeable capacitor, where the charge is stored in the double layer. As such, although these systems represent an interesting area of low-level energy storage through utilisation of thermal energy, it is important to note the operational difference between these devices and thermocells utilising a redox couple.
4. Electrolyte properties
4.1 Ionic liquid and molecular solvents
Most early research into thermocells focused on redox couples in aqueous electrolytes. Aqueous electrolytes generally exhibit higher power output due to the relatively fast diffusion of ions; the highest reported powers having been measured with aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide.10,11 Current research into aqueous electrolytes is focussed on optimising the performance of ferri/ferrocyanide through improvements in the electrodes and the cell design.9,10,27 This is discussed further in Section 5.
However, the low boiling point of water limits the operating temperature of such devices to <100 °C. Electrolytes with higher boiling points, such as organic solvents and ionic liquids, are being investigated by our group and others as alternatives in order to extend their operating temperature range. In addition to the higher operating temperatures, another benefit of non-aqueous electrolytes is that they can be used to solvate redox couples that are water insoluble, or to utilise redox couples with oxidation states that are unstable in aqueous environments.28,29
Ionic liquids (ILs) have some particularly advantageous properties in this regard; in addition to their high boiling points and low vapour pressure, they generally exhibit relatively high ionic conductivity combined with low thermal conductivity.30,31 Further, the unique solvation environment afforded by ILs may result in larger entropy changes upon oxidation/reduction of the redox couple, leading to higher Seebeck coefficients.32 This combination of properties is predicted to enable increases in the power values achievable for thermocells. Fig. 3 shows the structures and abbreviations for some ILs that have been studied for thermocell applications.
 Fig. 3  Ionic liquid structures studied in thermocell devices. 
One of the earliest investigations into ILs as thermocell electrolytes measured the Seebeck coefficients of a range of iron redox couples in 1-butyl-1-methylpyrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide ([C4mpyr][NTf2]).13 The measured Seebeck coefficients did not significantly exceed those reported for the same redox couples in aqueous electrolytes, for example Fe(CN)63−/4− in [C4mpyr][NTf2] was −1.49 mV K−1 compared with −1.4 mV K−1 in water. The effects of ionic liquids were further examined in a subsequent study,32 in which the Seebeck coefficients for a number of iron-based redox couples in different ILs were measured. Although none of the reported values exceeded the maximum values obtained in aqueous solutions, some of the effects of different ionic liquid properties on the Seebeck coefficient were identified. The results suggest that the redox reaction entropies are dominated by Coulombic interactions between the redox couple and electrolyte ions with the opposite charge to the redox couple. For example, the positively charged redox couple Fe(bpy)33+/2+ had a similar Seebeck coefficient in all ILs containing the [NTf2] anion ([C4mpyr][NTf2]: 0.45 mV K−1, [C2mim] [NTf2]: 0.5 mV K−1 and 1-methyl-1-propylpiperidinium (PP13) [NTf2]: 0.49 mV K−1), but had a significantly smaller Seebeck coefficient in [C4mpyr] bis(perfluoroethylsulfonyl)amide ([NPf2]) (0.33 mV K−1). The authors also observed that the Seebeck coefficient of the redox couple was affected by the charge density of the IL ions, where an increase in charge density led to an increase in the absolute magnitude of the Seebeck coefficient. Many further studies have demonstrated that the differences between individual ILs can significantly affect the Seebeck coefficient of a range of redox couples, as discussed further below.
Our own early research into practical IL electrolytes examined the iodide/triiodide redox couple in a range of ILs and found that the Seebeck coefficient and the maximum power output were determined by the nature of both the IL cation and anion.8,17 The best performance for an IL was achieved with 0.4 M I−/I3− in 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([C2mim][BF4]), with a measured Seebeck coefficient of 0.23 mV K−1 and a maximum power output of 29 mW m−2 (0.0029 mW m−2 K−2†). Whilst these values are not remarkably high, the cell was operated with the temperature of the hot electrode at 130 °C, demonstrating the suitability of IL electrolytes for high temperature energy harvesting.
A study by Sosnowska et al.,33 has recently demonstrated the use of modelling techniques to predict the Seebeck coefficient of I−/I3− in different ILs. Two modelling methods, the read-across approach and quantitative structure property relationship (QSPR) modelling, were used to predict the effect of both the structural features of IL ions and the redox couple concentration on the Seebeck coefficient. The results were compared with experimental data to validate the predictions. The variation in Seebeck coefficient with IL structure was accurately predicted, with the most significant determining factors being size, symmetry and branching of the IL cation and the vertical electron-binding energy of the anion. The highest Seebeck values were observed in ILs with smaller, less branched and relatively symmetric cations and anions with high vertical electron-binding energy. The predicted variation of the Seebeck coefficient as a function of the redox couple concentration was also in good agreement with experimental data, exhibiting a decrease in the Seebeck coefficient with increasing concentration. This work demonstrates the potential for using modelling techniques to identify ILs with high Seebeck coefficients without the need for extensive experimental testing.
The most significant challenge for achieving high thermocell performance with IL electrolytes is their high viscosity. In aqueous and molecular electrolytes, charge transfer and other resistance elements are the power limiting factors. However, in IL electrolytes mass transport is the limiting factor due the slower rates of the redox ion diffusion. To overcome this, we have investigated mixtures of ILs with molecular organic solvents;34,35 this reduces their viscosity whilst retaining many of their advantageous properties.
Some of the highest reported Seebeck coefficients to date have been measured in mixed solvent electrolytes. A recent study36 examined the Seebeck coefficients of ferri/ferrocyanide in a range of organic solvents mixed with water. The highest reported value of 2.9 mV K−1 was measured for a solution of 20% methanol in water. The authors attribute this high value to the greater rearrangement of the solvation shell in the mixed solvent compared to a pure aqueous solvent. However, the power performance of this system was only measured using a flow-cell, where the electrolyte is pumped through the cell, rather than a static cell. This makes it difficult to assess the stability of the system, which may be compromised by the presence of redox species precipitated from this particular solvent combination.
The effect of the ratio of mixed solvents on the Seebeck coefficient has been studied in various systems. The Seebeck coefficient of the thiolate/disulfide organic redox couple (McMT−/BMT) was measured in acetonitrile with varying concentrations of [C2mim][BF4].21 The Seebeck coefficient increased by a factor of 6 for an increase in IL concentration from 0 M to 5.5 M. This was attributed to the stronger interactions between the IL ions and the redox couple at higher concentrations. However, this trend will vary depending on the specific IL, the molecular solvent and the redox couple. For example, the Seebeck coefficient of 0.1 M Co2+/3+(bpy)3 (NTf2)2/3 in two mixed solvent systems (MPN/[C2mim][B(CN)4] and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/[C2mim][eFAP]) was found to decrease with increased concentration of IL.35 Additionally, for systems such as 0.1 M Co2+/3+(bpy)3 (NTf2)2/3 in trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium ([P6,6,6,1,4]) [BF4], the IL concentration has almost no effect on the Seebeck coefficient.34
The Co2+/3+(bpy)3 (NTf2)2/3 redox couple has been examined by our group in a range of ILs and molecular solvents19,34,37 and has the highest reported Seebeck coefficient for a non-aqueous electrolyte. A Seebeck coefficient of 2.19 mV K−1 was measured in MPN,19 which is slightly higher than the highest Seebeck value reported for the same redox couple in a pure IL: 2.13 mV K−1 in 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium methanesulfonate ([C2mim][MeSO3−]).34 Although the Seebeck coefficient may not vary significantly between molecular solvents and IL electrolytes, differences in the maximum power output can be large. Multiple studies have demonstrated that the combination of an IL with an organic solvent, such as dimethyl sulfoxide or propylene carbonate, can significantly improve the power output for a given redox couple.34,35 For example, Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the current and power output, respectively, for 0.1 M Co2+/3+(bpy)3 (NTf2)2/3 in different mixtures of MPN and [C2mim][B(CN)4], with the 3:1 mixture showing the optimum combination of properties.
 Fig. 4  (a) Current and (b) power performance for 0.1 M Co2+/3+(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3 in [C2mim][B(CN)4]/MPN mixtures and maximum power density and current vs. volume ratio (v/v) for (c) [C2mim][B(CN)4]/MPN and (d) [C2mim][eFAP]/DMSO mixtures. All at Thot = 130 °C and Tcold = 60 °C. Adapted from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The operation of the thermocell is assessed by applying a varying load across the cell, and measuring the cell current and potential. The current output as a function of potential (the I–V curve, Fig. 4(a)) provides insight into the limiting overpotentials. For an ideal thermocell (with no overpotentials), the I–V curve would be rectangular, i.e. the cell potential would remain at its equilibrium value even as increasing amounts of current is drawn; this would require completely reversible redox kinetics at both electrodes. Eventually the mass transport limited current density is reached, creating a plateau on current. However, in real cells when current is drawn, the cell potential will drop due to the increasing influence of various overpotentials in the cell.6 At low current densities, the drop in cell potential is primarily due to the activation overpotential of the redox reaction itself. At higher current densities, mass transport overpotential due to Fick's Laws and the Nernst equation becomes more significant and this produces a relatively linear potential decrease between these two regions, as shown in Fig. 4(a). From these plots, the current and power are calculated using Ohm's law and Joule's law, respectively. The power output reaches a maximum (Pmax) when the external resistance is equal to the overall internal resistance of the cell.
For the electrolytes shown in Fig. 4, the neat IL has the lowest power output (∼200 mW m−2; 0.04 mW m−2 K−2) due to its high viscosity. The neat MPN has a maximum power that is approximately double that of the neat IL (∼450 mW m−2; 0.09 mW m−2 K−2). However by combining these electrolytes in a 3:1 MPN:IL ratio, a maximum power of 780 mW m−2 was achieved. The addition of organic solvents, either MPN or DMSO, to the neat IL increases the electrolyte conductivity and the rate of ion diffusion, leading to enhanced power performance. The largest increase in power was observed for the 3:1 solvent:IL electrolyte for both solvents (Fig. 4(c) and (d)) as a result of the optimum combination of improved ionic conductivity and viscosity. The most significant increases in power performance upon molecular solvent addition were achieved for the ILs that originally had the greatest mass transport limitations.34
A recent addition to the field of non-aqueous thermocell electrolytes is the use of solvate ionic liquids by the group of Aldous and co-workers.38 Solvate ILs consist of a metal salt with a weakly bound anion, combined with a ligand molecule (such as a glyme) that can strongly solvate the salt anion or cation to form a complex ion.39 Solvate ILs were initially developed as electrolytes for lithium ion batteries,40,41 as they can exhibit the same favourable properties as ILs. For thermocells, a commonly used solvate IL, lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide (Li[NTf2]) dissolved in tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (tetraglyme, G4) was used, with solid lithium metal electrodes. Charge flow in this system occurs via the electrodissolution of the metallic lithium, forming lithium ions at the cold electrode, and the concurrent electrodeposition of metallic lithium at the hot electrode. The strong association between the tetraglyme and the solvated lithium ion is hypothesised to result in a significant entropy change upon solvation and desolvation of the lithium cation. The highest measured Seebeck coefficient for this system was 1.4 mV K−1 for Li[NTf2]:G4 molar ratios of <0.022 (equivalent to <0.9 M).38 The best power performance was recorded for an electrolyte consisting of a Li[NTf2]:G4 ratio of 0.25, with a power output of 135 mW m−2 (0.054 mW m−2 K−2). However, this value fluctuated significantly due to variations in the electrode surface. The mechanism of charge flow involves electrodissolution and electrodeposition of the solvated lithium ions at the cold and hot electrodes, respectively. Thus, if the cell is run continuously the cold electrode is consumed and the cell lifetime is limited. To address this, the temperature gradient can be periodically reversed by some mechanical means, i.e. the hot and cold electrodes are swapped, allowing more extended cycling of the cell.
4.2 Electrolyte additives
An alternative approach to improving mass transport involving the addition of other species to the electrolyte has also shown some promise. For example, the addition of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) to imidazolium based ILs decreases the ohmic resistance of the solution, which was attributed to factors such as the formation of percolated networks and increased ion pair dissociation.42 Thus, the power output increased by ∼30% for a thermocell containing 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide ([C3mim][I]) electrolyte, which was stirred during operation.43 However, when CNTs were added to the electrolyte containing Co2+/3+(bpy)3 in [C2mim][NTf2], the power output decreased. This was attributed to the 20% increase in viscosity upon addition of CNTs, which outweighed the effects of the increased conductivity. In another study from this group, an increase in thermocell power was achieved by the addition of both CNTs and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) to an aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide electrolyte in a static cell.44 In addition to lowering the interfacial charge transfer resistance, the addition of PEDOT:PSS increases the number of charge carriers in the electrolyte, improving the power output by ∼30%.
Another, fascinating approach has focussed on using additives to alter the thermodynamics of the system, rather than improving the mass transport properties.45 This work involved utilising a temperature dependent host–guest interaction to improve the Seebeck coefficient of aqueous I−/I3− by adding α-cyclodextrin to the electrolyte. At low temperatures, the I3− molecule is encapsulated by the α-cyclodextrin, effectively reducing the concentration of the redox-active I3− species, shifting the equilibrium to oxidise more I− to I3−. At the hot electrode, dissociation of the α-cyclodextrin-I3− complex occurs, and the reduction of I3− is promoted. Further, from the Nernst equation,46 by changing the equilibrium concentration of species via encapsulation, the potential difference across the cell can be increased. This host–guest interaction was found to increase the Seebeck coefficient from 0.86 to 1.45 mV K−1.
4.3 Quasi-solid-state electrolytes
There are a number of potential thermocell applications for which liquid electrolytes are not suitable, particularly those in which leakage of the electrolyte could occur e.g. flexible and wearable devices. Recent research into the development of quasi-solid-state electrolytes aims to address this. The term “quasi-solid-state” refers to the fact that these are generally a combination of a solid (e.g. polymer) and liquid component, with the mechanical properties of a solid, rather than the more brittle inorganic solid electrolytes such as AgI that were the focus of very early research.47
In addition to their flexibility and leakage-prevention, solid state electrolytes can be beneficial by maintaining a larger thermal gradient across the cell by eliminating convection. Quasi-solid-state electrolytes have been fabricated using a variety of different gelling agents, including cellulose,48 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),49 agar agar,50 or poly(sodium acrylate) beads.50 A quasi-solid state electrolyte consisting of a cellulose polymer matrix and a redox-active aqueous phase (ferri/ferrocyanide) has recently been developed by our group.48 A major consideration when using solidified electrolytes is to avoid restricting mass transport of the redox couple. In this case, higher cellulose concentrations resulted in more restricted channels through the gel, which decreased the power output (Fig. 5). However, for the optimal cellulose concentration (5 wt%), which maximised both mass transport and mechanical properties, the power output only decreased by ∼20%, to 14 mW m−2 (0.06 W m−2 K−2), compared to the aqueous electrolyte. Wearable thermocells utilising gelled electrolytes have also been demonstrated.49 Two different kinds of cells were used, with two different electrolytes (aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide and ferric/ferrous chloride) gelled using polyvinyl alcohol, sandwiched between flexible polyimide electrodes and connected in series with Au/Cr connections. The aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide and ferric/ferrous chloride couples have opposite Seebeck coefficients (−1.21 and 1.02 mV K−1, respectively) and by connecting them in series a larger potential difference can be generated. Using a device consisting of two ferri/ferrocyanide and two ferric/ferrous chloride units, a maximum power of 24 μW m−2 K−2 could be generated. Although the power output is relatively low, this study demonstrates that gelled electrolytes can be utilised for wearable applications. The use of redox couples with opposite Seebeck coefficients to maximise thermocell potential has been developed further in other systems, and is discussed in detail in Section 6.4.
 Fig. 5  (a) Thermocell power output using quasi-solid-state electrolytes with different wt% cellulose concentrations, (b) diffusion coefficients of Fe(CN)64− and Fe(CN)63− in solution and in the solid electrolytes at 22 °C inset: solid redox electrolyte with 5 wt% cellulose and (c) SEM images of the cross sections of the quasi-solid-state electrolytes after freeze-drying, with 5 and 20 wt% cellulose. Adapted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
5. Electrode materials
In most thermocell studies, platinum electrodes are used because the high catalytic activity minimises charge transfer overpotential, making it ideal for examining the fundamental behaviour of a given system. However, the prohibitively high cost of platinum has necessitated the development of more commercially viable electrode materials. Nearly all of the recent developments in new thermocell electrode materials have utilised aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide, because significant power increases can be achieved by using high surface area electrodes. There has been very little research into new electrode materials for non-aqueous systems because the dominant limitation is mass transport, rather than charge transfer at the electrodes.
Carbon-based electrodes are gaining prominence as a promising, lower-cost alternative to platinum. Nano-structured carbon materials, such as nanotubes and graphene, have high surface area which increases the number of reaction sites. They can also have fast electron transfer kinetics for the ferri/ferrocyanide redox couple. Both of these properties can increase the current density achievable from the thermocell.51,52 Additionally, the range of fabrication methods available for producing nanostructured carbons mean that electrodes can be produced in a wide range of useful forms. The majority of research in this area has focussed on composite materials that incorporate nano-structured materials such as nanotubes and graphene,10,16,53,54 and additional treatment of such materials via additives11 or doping.55 These high surface area materials can either play the role of both electrocatalysts and current collector, if they can be formed into free-standing and conductive films, or be used in combination with a separate current collector.
In the first study that utilised carbon nanotubes as electrode materials,10 electrodes consisting of multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) buckypaper and vertically aligned MWCNTs were fabricated. The measured power output of the MWNT-buckypaper was 33% higher than that of a platinum electrode tested under the same conditions. The performance of the MWNT-buckypaper was also tested in a range of electrode configurations. A coin cell electrode was fabricated by growing MWNTs directly onto buckypaper. The free-standing MWNT-buckypaper (without a current collector) could also be fabricated into a coil cell, in which the electrodes consisted of MWNT-buckypaper rolled into scrolls, and a flexible cell, which consisted of sheets of MWNT-buckypaper wrapped around a pipe and the whole cell sealed with a stainless steel sheet. The best performance was achieved for the coil cell, with a maximum power of 1800 mW m−2 (0.5 mW m−2 K−2). This configuration also had a Carnot efficiency of 1.4%, which is at least 3 times higher than previously measured efficiencies for cells with platinum electrodes.
The use of CNTs as electrodes was further examined by using single walled carbon nanotube–reduced graphene oxide (SWCNT–rGO) composite film electrodes in a stacked 10-film configuration, which resulted in a conversion efficiency of 2.6%.56 The maximum power of cells using electrodes with only a single (non-stacked) composite films, which was 460 mW m−2 (0.48 mW m−2 K−2), was increased to 1850 mW m−2 (1.9 mW m−2 K−2) when electrodes composed of stacked films were used.
The highest thermocell conversion efficiency achieved thus-far used a carbon-nanotube aerogel-based electrode in aqueous ferri–ferrocyanide electrolyte, with a conversion efficiency of 3.95%.11 These electrodes were fabricated using CNT-aerogel sheets cylindrically wound around a tungsten wire, which acts as the current collector, with platinum nano-particles deposited within the electrodes. The high power performance was attributed to fast ion diffusion to the electrode surface, arising from the wound nanotubes with aligned pores and low tortuosity, combined with the high surface area, and high catalytic activity contributed to by the Pt nanoparticles. However, while these electrodes are described as potentially low-cost, as a result of using less platinum than solid platinum electrodes, the relatively complex fabrication procedure may require simplification in order for these electrodes to become commercially viable.
In addition to their enhanced power performance, a further advantage of carbon materials is that they can be fabricated into flexible electrodes, which is ideal for applications that involve non-planar or moving surfaces. A number of studies have demonstrated that carbon-based electrodes can be used in flexible devices for harvesting body heat,57 or for wrapping around hot objects such as pipes.10 This versatility is essential for maximising the potential applications for thermal energy harvesting. However, one of the potential challenges associated with carbon-based electrodes is low thermal conductivity. Metal electrodes, such as platinum, can act as both the reactive electrode surface and the current collector, which helps to ensure that heat transfer across the electrode to the electrolyte is high. In contrast, carbon electrodes that rely on a second substrate as a current collector may suffer from thermal losses across the substrate/carbon interface and through the carbon electrode. Thermal resistance models have been developed by us and others to assist in deepening our understanding of the role of these thermal losses.27,58
The majority of research into alternative electrode materials has focussed on carbon-based materials in aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide due to the fast electron transfer kinetics and good mass transport for this redox electrolyte system. There has been comparatively little research into other systems, such as non-aqueous electrolytes and non-carbon based electrodes. The behaviour of Co2+/3+(bpy)3 in [C2mim][B(CN)4] has been examined on a range of electrode materials including platinum, modified platinum electrodes (platinum black or PEDOT coated), stainless steel and modified stainless steel (with PEDOT or Pt).59 All electrodes, with the exception of uncoated stainless steel, exhibited maximum power output values in the range of 180–240 mW m−2 (0.04–0.05 mW m−2 K−2). The significantly lower power output of the system utilising stainless steel electrodes (54 mW m−2, 0.01 mW m−2 K−2) was attributed to its higher charge transfer resistance: 136 ohms compared to <5 ohms for the other electrode materials. This work demonstrated that less expensive electrode materials can be used in non-aqueous electrolytes without sacrificing power output. However, the electrocatalytic performance of different electrodes will depend on the redox couple used and will require optimisation for each redox electrolyte system.
6. Cell design and optimisation
6.1 Cell modelling
A study from our group59 also reported the development of a theoretical model, based on the fundamental equations governing the electrochemical parameters, to quantitatively describe the relationship between the cell properties and the current and potential output during operation. The model can be used to simulate the current and power curves when given the relevant parameters, such as number of electrons in the redox reaction, the electrode temperatures, active electrode area, exchange currents, concentration and diffusion coefficients of the redox species, the solution resistance and the Seebeck coefficient. This model was used to illustrate how current output of the cell is affected by the ratio of exchange current to limiting current (io/ilim); for a ratio of ≥10, the current was primarily determined by mass transfer processes and the contributions from charge transfer were considered relatively small. For io/ilim values <10, the current density was significantly decreased due to the increased charge transfer resistance. Thus, even relatively simple theoretical models such as this are useful for identifying the key limitations in a cell and therefore the most important modifications required to improve the device performance, without the need for extensive experimentation. Further developments in such models are clearly needed to assist in understanding the complex interplay of factors in these cells; in particular the inclusion of thermal effects as discussed below are sorely needed.
6.2 Cell orientation and electrode spacing
Cell orientation and electrode spacing in the cell design can affect the performance largely due to the influence of convection. Mass transport of the redox species by diffusion is relatively slow, but it can be increased significantly by introducing convection into a system. Convection in a liquid occurs as a result of the temperature-dependent density of the electrolyte; the low density hot electrolyte rises to the top of the cell, and once it has cooled it flows back to the bottom, creating a flow of electrolyte around the cell. The extent of this convection can be optimised by adjusting certain cell parameters. However, this is a complex phenomenon that depends on parameters such as the temperature of each electrode, the thermal conductivity and electrolyte viscosity.
Natural convection (as opposed to forced convection) can be either suppressed or enhanced by the orientation of the cell. Generally, in studies of this parameter, three orientations are compared: hot-over-cold, cold over hot and vertical (Fig. 6). In the hot-over-cold orientation (Fig. 6(a)), the lower density hot electrolyte is at the top of the cell, so little to no convection occurs, whereas both the cold-over-hot and vertical arrangements (Fig. 6(b) and (c)) promote natural convection. In addition to the cell orientation, the electrode separation can influence the mass transport characteristics, so is often examined in conjunction with cell orientation.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagrams of convection occurring in cells with different orientations (a) hot-over-cold (minimal convection) (b) cold-over-hot and (c) vertical. 
Most studies examining the effects of cell parameters on performance have focussed on aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide, utilising both experimental16,23,60 and modelling approaches.61 For this system, enhancing natural convection via the cell orientation can increase the power output.16,60,61 Without convection, mass transport occurs via diffusion, migration (electrophoresis) and the Soret effect (thermophoresis). In this case, mass transport across the cell does not occur at an equivalent rate in both directions. In particular, the Soret effect causes ions to accumulate at the cold electrode, forming a significant concentration gradient within the cell, which leads to a large mass transport overpotential.60 Additionally, the slower rate of diffusion at the cold electrode will limit the current density. Studies have demonstrated that in such cells (without convection) the current output is significantly reduced.60,61 Quickenden et al.,60 observed a decay in current output over time, as the concentration gradient forms, until a steady-state current is reached.
Increasing natural convection homogenises the concentration, leading to lower resistance, increased rate of mass transport of species to the electrode and increased power output. In cells with convection, modelling studies by Salazar et al.,61 have shown that ∼88% of the power output can be attributed to mass transport via convection. Imbalances in the other forms of mass transport do not result in a significant decrease in the power or current output, as occurs in cells without convection. In these cells, the current density is still limited by the low ionic diffusion at the cold electrode. However, this does not result in a decrease in current or power output over time; rather it determines the limiting current density of the cell.
However, increasing convection also increases the rate of heat transfer across the cell. Therefore, a larger input energy is required to maintain the thermal gradient, which reduces the conversion efficiency. Nevertheless, quantitative studies indicate that increases in power due to enhanced mass transport significantly outweigh decreases in efficiency due to thermal transfer.61
The electrode spacing can also affect the power output of a device. In aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide electrolytes, the performance is commonly limited by mass transport effects, so increasing the electrode spacing leads to a decrease in the power output.16,61 However, in terms of electrode spacing there is a trade-off between power and efficiency; smaller electrode spacing increases the power output, but it can also decrease the efficiency due to the larger heat transfer between the two electrodes.61
The use of convection for improving the power output can be further enhanced by introducing forced convection, such as stirring.42,61 However, the increased energy input that is required to stir the electrolyte generally offsets the improvements in power and, as such, conversion efficiencies for forced convection cells cannot be readily compared to those with natural convection.
6.3 Separators and membranes
A significant source of inefficiency in thermocells is the transfer of heat between the electrodes, which reduces the temperature gradient and therefore the potential. This problem can be mitigated by incorporating a separator into the cell between the electrodes, which can reduce both thermal conduction and convection across the cell.10
The effects of using a 200 μm thick PVDF separator in a cell containing the iodide/triiodide redox couple in aqueous solution has been examined (Fig. 7).58 The highest power output was achieved for a membrane inserted equidistant from the hot and cold electrodes. This arrangement resulted in an increase in power from 0.54 mW m−2 (0.07 mW m−2 K−2 at ΔT = 2.7 K) to 2.45 mW m−2 (0.03 mW m−2 K−2 at ΔT = 8.8 K) and an increase in open circuit potential from 1.3 to 2.7 mV (for applied ΔT = 12 K) for the same applied temperature gradient, compared to a cell without a membrane. Infrared thermography of the cells (Fig. 7) revealed that the largest thermal gradient was achieved for the membrane positioned halfway between the hot and cold electrodes, correlating with the highest power performance. This is attributed to convection being minimised on both sides of the membrane (compared to the membrane being positioned closer to either the hot or cold electrode) which reduces the degree of heat transfer across the cell.
 Fig. 7  Thermal images of (I) a cell with no membrane, and membrane-containing thermoelectrochemical cells (MTEC) with (II) membrane closer to cold electrode, (III) membrane at the center between the electrodes, and (IV) membrane closer to hot electrode. Images taken after 24 and 38 minutes of heating. Derived from ref. 58 with permission. 
A recent study has further examined the effects of using a separator, including the effects of separator position, thickness and composition, on the performance of an aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide electrolyte with carbon-based electrodes.27 The maximum power output was achieved using a cotton membrane with a thickness <8% of the inter-electrode spacing (0.2 mm in a 2.6 mm cell) positioned closest to the cold electrode. The power output was 11 W m−2 (1.5 mW m−2 K−2 at ΔT = 86 K), which is the highest reported power for a thermocell device. This performance is a significant improvement compared to a cell without a membrane (5.4 W m−2; 1.3 mW m−2 K−2 at ΔT = 64 K) and a slight improvement on the cell containing a cellulose sponge separator (10.6 W m−2; 1.4 mW m−2 K−2 at ΔT = 86 K). The increase in power was once again attributed to the larger thermal gradient that can be maintained due to the increased thermal resistance of the separator. In this case the high power performance achieved when the separator is positioned closest to the cold electrode was attributed to the different temperature dependencies of the thermal and ionic conductivities of both the pure electrolyte and the electrolyte-filled separator. The thermal conductivity of the separator and the pure electrolyte does not change significantly with temperature, however the ionic conductivities for both increase linearly with temperature. These effects become more significant as ΔT becomes larger, as compared to the conclusions reached in ref. 58 discussed above. Placing the separator closest to the cold electrode means that the majority of the electrolyte in the cell is at a higher temperature, which facilitates fast ion diffusion, so the power output is maximised, while the separator still maintains a large thermal gradient overall. The effects of separator thickness also need to be considered; the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte-filled separator is 30% lower than that of the pure electrolyte, so increasing the separator thickness was found to decrease the power performance due to the increase in ion diffusion path length.
6.4 Series stacking of cells
The practical applications of thermocells are presently significantly limited by the low voltage that can be generated. Although the maximum potential of a single cell will be limited by the Seebeck coefficient and the temperature gradient, the potential difference can be increased significantly by connecting a number of cells in series. This is a similar concept to that used in solid state thermoelectrics, in which multiple thermoelectric couples are connected in series to maximise power output. In liquid thermocells, the equivalent to n- and p-type semiconductors are redox couples with negative and positive Seebeck coefficients, e.g. the pairing of aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide with, for example, aqueous FeSO4/Fe2(SO4)3.27
The fabrication of half-cells using a PVA-based hydrogel electrolyte containing either ferri/ferrocyanide or ferric/ferrous chloride has been reported, with Seebeck coefficients of −1.21 mV K−1 and +1.02 mV K−1, respectively.49 When the cells were connected in series, the total potential doubled to 23 mV at ΔT = 10 K, equivalent to 2.3 mV K−1, but the current remained the same. An array consisting of 59 of these cell pairs was connected in series and the maximum potential increased to 0.7 V for the same ΔT, i.e. 70 mV K−1.
Recent work has utilised this in-series arrangement to achieve unprecedentedly high cell potentials.27 The setup (Fig. 8(a)–(d)) consisted of an array of 28 alternating p- and n-type half cells (14 full cells), with aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide (Se = −1.43 mV K−1) and FeSO4/Fe2(SO4)3 (Se = 0.5 mV K−1) (the opposite sign for the Seebeck coefficients was used in that article to be consistent with semiconductor literature27). A maximum open circuit voltage of 2.18 V for ΔT = 21 K (104 mV K−1) was achieved by connecting four of the arrays in series, demonstrating that large potentials can be attained for these series connected cell designs. The charging of a capacitor using this array was also demonstrated (Fig. 8(e)).
 Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of two “z-” series-connected p-type half-cells that both use aqueous Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− as the redox mediator. (b) Illustration of a p-type half-cell (using aqueous Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− as the redox mediator) and an n-type half-cell (using aqueous Fe2+/Fe3+ as the redox mediator) that are connected in series. (c) A thermocell array with 14 n–p cells (28 half-cells). The green and orange colors are those of the Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− and Fe2+/Fe3+, redox couples, respectively. (d) Photograph of the sealed thermocell array for the redox couple array in (c). (e) The voltage–time curves of different capacitors when charged by four series-connected thermocell arrays, ΔT of 21 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 27. 
Uhl et al.,62 have proposed a method for the construction of a highly-integrated series construct, similar to that shown in Fig. 8, using ionic liquid electrolytes and copper electrodes. The individual cells were etched into a polyimide layer, which was sandwiched between copper electrodes, using isotropic plasma etching. The result was an array of cells of width ∼350 μm connected in series. However, the performance of this particular cell design has not yet been reported.
7. Future directions for thermocell research
The harvesting of low grade heat using thermoelectrochemical cells offers the promise of an inexpensive, continuous and sustainable method of generating energy. In recent years, research efforts have resulted in significantly improved power and conversion efficiencies for these devices. However, while these advances have made important in-roads towards commercial viability and a range of possible applications, considerable research is still needed to understand and overcome the key performance limitations. These insights require both fundamental studies and further development of cell design.
Fundamental properties that need to be further understood in order to improve performance include maximising the entropy change via new redox couples and electrolytes and improving electrode properties and solvents to enhance mass transport rates (diffusivities). However, the material requirements will vary depending on the intended application. For example, for wearable devices the use of non-toxic redox couples and electrolytes will be important, while higher temperature applications require more thermally stable electrolytes. Leak-free cell design, i.e. using solidified electrolytes, is uniformly desirable as long as it does not impact power output.
The aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide redox couple has been extensively investigated and the performance optimised through use of new electrode materials and improved device design. This has resulted in the highest power outputs and cell potentials reported. However, recent research into cobalt-based redox couples has demonstrated that Seebeck coefficients significantly higher than those of the aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide system can be attained. With further research and optimisation of alternative, high Seebeck coefficient redox couples there is the potential to develop redox electrolytes with much better performance than is presently possible. In particular, the Co2+/3+ family of couples offer tremendous further scope for development and study in both aqueous and non-aqueous solvents, the counter ion offering tunability in terms high solubility in various solvents.
In terms of improving the electrolyte properties, further investigation into non-aqueous electrolytes is vital for extending the maximum operating temperature range for thermocells, and therefore their range of possible applications. However, non-aqueous electrolytes – in particular ILs – are limited by their poor mass transport properties, which reduces the maximum achievable power outputs. So far, one of the most successful approaches to overcoming this has been to utilise mixed solvents, which increase mass transport whilst retaining some of the advantageous properties of ILs. It does, however, increase the volatility of the electrolyte. The investigation of strategies to overcome these limitations is an important area of ongoing research. There have, for example, been some promising initial investigations into the use of electrolyte additives to improve mass transport. In a related vein, the development of redox active quasi-solid-state electrolytes is a recent focus of research and this again requires us to overcome mass transport limitations. The use of solidified electrolytes is important for expanding the range of thermocell applications, particularly in the area of flexible, wearable devices, in addition to increasing device lifetime by eliminating leakage and reducing electrolyte volatility.
Recent work into improving the design of electrodes has resulted in the development of nanostructured carbon electrodes as an alternative to platinum. These offer a number of potential advantages, including low cost, high surface area, high current density, and the versatility required for fabrication into different electrode structures. A remaining challenge for these materials is their incorporation into flexible electrodes that possess both high thermal and electrical conductivity and good electrocatalytic performance.
Most thermocell research to date has focussed on experimental investigation and optimisation. The use of computational modelling to support these endeavours has been severely under-utilised. While quantitative theoretical relationships can be used to describe and predict the performance of thermocell systems,23,59 and some simulations have been carried out,61 research in this area is limited. Computational studies could, for example, elucidate important links between solvent structure and the Seebeck coefficient of redox couples by simulation of the different contributions to the redox reaction entropy change. Given current and emerging modelling and simulation capabilities, utilisation of such techniques has the potential to contribute significantly in the future to the design of more advanced thermocell concepts and we recommend the computational community to engage in this important area.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding from the Australian Research Council (ARC) through its Centre of Excellence program and through the Australian Laureate Fellowship scheme for D. R. M.
Notes and references
A. R. M. Siddique, S. Mahmud and B. V. Heyst, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 73, 730–744 CrossRef .
C. B. Vining, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 83–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Harman, M. P. Walsh, B. E. Laforge and G. W. Turner, J. Electron. Mater., 2005, 34, L19–L22 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114,  DOI:10.1038/nmat2090 .
J. N. Agar and W. G. Breck, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1957, 53, 167–178 RSC .
T. Quickenden and Y. Mua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3985–3994 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. DiSalvo, Science, 1999, 285, 703–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane, R. H. Baughman, L. Jin, N. Li and J. M. Pringle, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Romano, J. M. Razal, D. Antiohos, G. Wallace and J. Chen, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 1–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hu, B. A. Cola, N. Haram, J. N. Barisci, S. Lee, S. Stoughton, G. Wallace, C. Too, M. Thomas and A. Gestos, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 838–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Im, T. Kim, H. Song, J. Choi, J. S. Park, R. Ovalle-Robles, H. D. Yang, K. D. Kihm, R. H. Baughman and H. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Sahami and M. J. Weaver, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1981, 122, 171–181 CrossRef CAS .
T. Migita, N. Tachikawa, Y. Katayama and T. Miura, Electrochemistry, 2009, 77, 639–641 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Hupp and M. J. Weaver, Inorg. Chem., 1984, 23, 3639–3644 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. deBethune, T. S. Licht and N. Swendeman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1959, 106, 616–625 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Kang, S. Fang, M. E. Kozlov, C. S. Haines, N. Li, Y. H. Kim, Y. Chen and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 477–489 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6260–6262 RSC .
E. Laux, S. Uhl, T. Journot, J. Brossard, L. Jeandupeux and H. Keppner, J. Electron. Mater., 2016, 45, 3383–3389 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2639–2645 CAS .
E. H. B. Anari, M. Romano, W. Teh, J. Black, E. Jiang, J. Chen, T. To, J. Panchompoo and L. Aldous, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 745–748 RSC .
V. Zinovyeva, S. Nakamae, M. Bonetti and M. Roger, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 426–430 CrossRef .
A. Gunawan, C.-H. Lin, D. A. Buttry, V. Mujica, R. A. Taylor, R. S. Prasher and P. E. Phelan, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2013, 17, 304–323 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gunawan, H. Li, C.-H. Lin, D. A. Buttry, V. Mujica, R. A. Taylor, R. S. Prasher and P. E. Phelan, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2014, 78, 423–434 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonetti, S. Nakamae, B. T. Huang, T. J. Salez, C. Wiertel-Gasquet and M. Roger, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 244708 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bonetti, S. Nakamae, M. Roger and P. Guenoun, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 114513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Zhao, Z. U. Khan, S. Puzinas, M. P. Jonsson, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700013 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, T. Kim, N. Li, T. J. Kang, J. Chen, J. M. Pringle, M. Zhang, A. H. Kazim, S. Fang, C. Haines, D. Al-Masri, B. A. Cola, J. M. Razal, J. Di, S. Beirne, D. MacFarlane, A. Gonzales-Martin, S. Mathew, Y. H. Kim, G. Wallace and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1605652 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cabral, P. C. Howlett, J. M. Pringle, X. Zhang and D. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 419–426 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Cabral, P. C. Howlett and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 347–353 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, N. Tachikawa, M. Forsyth, J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett, G. D. Elliott, J. H. Davis, M. Watanabe, P. Simon and C. A. Angell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 232–250 CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, M. Kar, S. Passerini, J. M. Pringle, H. Ohno, M. Watanabe, F. Yan and W. Zheng, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15005 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamato, Y. Katayama and T. Miura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, H309–H314 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sosnowska, M. Barycki, A. Gajewicz, M. Bobrowski, S. Freza, P. Skurski, S. Uhl, E. Laux, T. Journot and L. Jeandupex, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 1591–1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, D. Al-Masri, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Faraday Discuss., 2016, 190, 205–218 RSC .
M. A. Lazar, D. Al-Masri, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 1404–1410 RSC .
T. Kim, J. S. Lee, G. Lee, H. Yoon, J. Yoon, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jiao, T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, D3061–D3065 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Black, T. Murphy, R. Atkin, A. Dolan and L. Aldous, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20768–20777 RSC .
K. Ueno, K. Yoshida, M. Tsuchiya, N. Tachikawa, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 11323–11331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seki, K. Takei, H. Miyashiro and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A769–A774 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshida, M. Nakamura, Y. Kazue, N. Tachikawa, S. Tsuzuki, S. Seki, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13121–13129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Salazar, K. J. Chan, S. T. Stephens and B. A. Cola, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, H481–H486 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Salazar, S. T. Stephens, A. H. Kazim, J. M. Pringle and B. A. Cola, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20676–20682 CAS .
A. H. Kazim and B. A. Cola, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F867–F871 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10502–10507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Bard and L. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2001 Search PubMed .
R. T. Foley, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 13C–22C CrossRef .
L. Jin, G. W. Greene, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 654–658 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Mo, Y. Zhou, S. Li, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 12229–12232 CrossRef .
J. Wu, J. J. Black and L. Aldous, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 225, 482–492 CrossRef .
J. Nugent, K. Santhanam, A. Rubio and P. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Li, H. Feng, J. Lu and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2782–2789 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Yang, L. T. Tufa, K. M. Bae and T. J. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 86, 118–123 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Bae, H. D. Yang, L. T. Tufa and T. J. Kang, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf., 2015, 16, 1245–1250 CrossRef .
P. F. Salazar, S. Kumar and B. A. Cola, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B483–B488 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Romano, N. Li, D. Antiohos, J. M. Razal, A. Nattestad, S. Beirne, S. Fang, Y. Chen, R. Jalili and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6602–6606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Im, H. G. Moon, J. S. Lee, I. Y. Chung, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 443–452 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Hasan, S. M. Said, M. F. M. Sabri, A. S. A. Bakar, N. A. Hashim, M. M. I. M. Hasnan, J. M. Pringle and D. R. MacFarlane, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed  , Image used under Creative Commons License CC BY2.0 http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/legalcode.
T. J. Abraham, N. Tachikawa, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2527–2532 RSC .
T. Quickenden and Y. Mua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3652–3659 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Salazar, S. Kumar and B. A. Cola, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 325–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uhl, M. Pellet, J. Tschanz, E. Laux, T. Journot, L. Jeandupeux and H. Keppner, Mater. Today, 2015, 2, 669–674 CrossRef .
B. Burrows, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† The power output of a thermocell, usually reported as power density (mW m−2), is also proportional to ΔT2. Therefore, where power values are reported in this article, a calculated value of the power normalised to ΔT2 (K2) has been added to allow a more accurate comparison of cells tested at different values of ΔT. The square law dependence arises from the fact that Pmax in a cell = ΔV2/R where R is the overall effective resistance of the cell and is made up of a number of electrical and electrochemical components.8,63This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

M. F. Dupont
	Dr Madeleine Dupont is an Associate Research Fellow in the Institute for Frontier Materials at Deakin University, Melbourne. She completed her BSc and PhD at the University of Newcastle, Australia. Her PhD research focused on electrochemical energy storage. Since moving to Deakin University in 2016, she has been conducting research into the development and optimization of thermoelectrochemical cells for thermal energy harvesting.

D. R. MacFarlane
	Professor Doug MacFarlane leads the Monash Ionic Liquids Group at Monash University. He is currently an Australian Research Council Laureate Fellow. He is also the Program Leader of the Energy Program in the Australian Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science. His group focuses on a range of aspects of ionic liquids and their application in the energy sciences and sustainable chemistry. Professor MacFarlane graduated from Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand and then undertook his graduate work in the Angell group at Purdue University, Indiana. He has been a Professor of Chemistry at Monash since 1995.

J. M. Pringle
	A/Prof. Jennifer Pringle is a Senior Research Fellow in the Institute for Frontier Materials at Deakin University and a chief investigator in the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science. She received her degree and PhD at The University of Edinburgh in Scotland before moving to Monash University in Melbourne, Australia in 2002. From 2008–2012 she held an ARC QEII Fellowship, investigating the use of ionic electrolytes for dye-sensitized solar cells. A/Prof. Pringle moved to Deakin University, Melbourne in 2013. There she leads research into the development and use of ionic electrolytes for applications including thermal energy harvesting and solid state lithium batteries.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a thermocell containing the aqueous ferri/ferrocyanide redox couple (Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−). This system has a negative Seebeck coefficient (−1.4 mV K−1) meaning that oxidation occurs at the hot electrode and reduction at the cold electrode. For a redox couple with a positive Seebeck coefficient, this would be reversed, with oxidation occurring at the cold electrode and reduction at the hot electrode.	 
A + ne− → B	(1)
	(2)
nF(∂E/∂T)t=∞ = SB − SA	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
I3− + 2e− → 3I−	(7)

 	Fig. 2  The Co2+/3+(bpy)3 (NTf2)2/3 redox couple (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridyl) – one of a family of Co2+/3+ based redox couples that exhibit high Seebeck coefficient values due to spin state changes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ionic liquid structures studied in thermocell devices.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current and (b) power performance for 0.1 M Co2+/3+(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3 in [C2mim][B(CN)4]/MPN mixtures and maximum power density and current vs. volume ratio (v/v) for (c) [C2mim][B(CN)4]/MPN and (d) [C2mim][eFAP]/DMSO mixtures. All at Thot = 130 °C and Tcold = 60 °C. Adapted from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Thermocell power output using quasi-solid-state electrolytes with different wt% cellulose concentrations, (b) diffusion coefficients of Fe(CN)64− and Fe(CN)63− in solution and in the solid electrolytes at 22 °C inset: solid redox electrolyte with 5 wt% cellulose and (c) SEM images of the cross sections of the quasi-solid-state electrolytes after freeze-drying, with 5 and 20 wt% cellulose. Adapted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagrams of convection occurring in cells with different orientations (a) hot-over-cold (minimal convection) (b) cold-over-hot and (c) vertical.	 

 	Fig. 7  Thermal images of (I) a cell with no membrane, and membrane-containing thermoelectrochemical cells (MTEC) with (II) membrane closer to cold electrode, (III) membrane at the center between the electrodes, and (IV) membrane closer to hot electrode. Images taken after 24 and 38 minutes of heating. Derived from ref. 58 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of two “z-” series-connected p-type half-cells that both use aqueous Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− as the redox mediator. (b) Illustration of a p-type half-cell (using aqueous Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− as the redox mediator) and an n-type half-cell (using aqueous Fe2+/Fe3+ as the redox mediator) that are connected in series. (c) A thermocell array with 14 n–p cells (28 half-cells). The green and orange colors are those of the Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− and Fe2+/Fe3+, redox couples, respectively. (d) Photograph of the sealed thermocell array for the redox couple array in (c). (e) The voltage–time curves of different capacitors when charged by four series-connected thermocell arrays, ΔT of 21 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 27.	 
Footnote
† The power output of a thermocell, usually reported as power density (mW m−2), is also proportional to ΔT2. Therefore, where power values are reported in this article, a calculated value of the power normalised to ΔT2 (K2) has been added to allow a more accurate comparison of cells tested at different values of ΔT. The square law dependence arises from the fact that Pmax in a cell = ΔV2/R where R is the overall effective resistance of the cell and is made up of a number of electrical and electrochemical components.8,63

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
