Fascinating MXene nanomaterials: emerging opportunities in the biomedical field  - Biomaterials Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1BM00526J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1BM00526J
(Review Article)
Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 5437-5471Fascinating MXene nanomaterials: emerging opportunities in the biomedical field

        
          
            Xiangping 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhongjun 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jinmei 
            Qiu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianxin 
            Wang
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Tongkai 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aScience and Technology Innovation Center, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou 510405, China. E-mail: chentongkai@gzucm.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, Institute of Microscale Optoelectronics, and Otolaryngology Department and Biobank of the First Affiliated Hospital, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, Health Science Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. E-mail: hzhang@szu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University and Key Laboratory of Smart Drug Delivery, Ministry of Education, Shanghai 201203, China
Received 
      2nd April 2021
    , Accepted 25th June 2021First published on 28th June 2021AbstractIn recent years, there has been rapid progress in MXene research due to its distinctive two-dimensional structure and outstanding properties. Especially in biomedical applications, MXenes have attracted widespread favor with numerous studies on biosafety, bioimaging, therapy, and biosensing, although their development is still in the experimental stage. A comprehensive understanding of the current status of MXenes in biomedicine will promote their use in clinical applications. Here, we review advances in MXene research. First, we introduce the methods of synthesis, surface modification and functionalization of MXenes. Then, we summarize the biosafety and biocompatibility, paving the way for specific biomedical applications. On this basis, MXene nanostructures are described with respect to their use in antibacterial, bioimaging, cancer therapy, tissue regeneration and biosensor applications. Finally, we discuss MXene as a promising candidate material for further applications in biomedicine.
1 Introduction
In recent years, nanomaterials (e.g., two-dimensional (2D) materials, metal nanoparticles, metal nanoclusters, and quantum dots) have attracted considerable interest in the fields of biomedicine, physics, and environmental science.1,2 Owing to their size, structures, and physical and chemical properties, nanomaterials can be well designed to be multifunctional, which benefits targeted treatment and compliance with precision medicine.3–6 Nevertheless, biocompatibility is an intractable problem and challenge during the bioapplication of nanomaterials (Table 1). In contrast, the unique properties of 2D nanomaterials offer advantages to address biomedical issues. Hence, 2D nanomaterials are characterized based on their particular physicochemical properties, such as distinct surface chemistry, large surface area and quantum size effect.7,8 The unique surface area of nanomaterials provides the opportunity for the absorption and loading of bio-macromolecules, chemical drugs, and fluorescent probes via covalent or noncovalent interactions.9,10Furthermore, strong optical absorbance and near-infrared (NIR) laser responses are advantages of 2D nanomaterials for use as photothermal and photodynamic agents.11 Considering these benefits, the integration of 2D nanomaterials and biomedicines represents a potentially new horizon for theranostic modalities.
Table 1 Comparison of several nanomaterials with respect to their biomedical applications




Material
Biomedical applications
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Metal nanoparticles
Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery
High stability, high density and strong affinity for sulfurized compounds
Nonbiodegradability, and unpredictable release

25 and 26


Metal nanoclusters
Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery
Ultrafine size, tunable biomolecular sequence, biocompatibility, and variable bioactivities
Size heterogeneity, instability and susceptible to oxidation

3, 6 and 27


Quantum dots
Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery
Strong fluorescence, robust photostability, small size, long half-life in circulation
High cytotoxicity of cadmium metal, oil solubility and low yield

4, 28 and 29


2D nanomaterials
Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery
Large surface area, ultrathin size, hydrophilicity, high biocompatibility, safety, and biodegradability
Low yield and susceptible to oxidation

5, 8 and 21




MXenes, which are a novel family of 2D transition metals originally identified in 2011, represent a large group of carbides and nitrides with the general chemical formula Mn+1Xn, (n = 1–3).12,13 Mn+1Xn compounds have a layered structure comprising n + 1 layers of M (early transition metal, e.g. Ti, Nb, Ta, Mo, V, Cr) and n layers of X (carbon or nitrogen).14,15 Currently, over 70 MXenes with different compositions have been predicted, whereas only over 30 MXenes have been generated experimentally.16 Due to the presence of the transition metal carbides and H or O terminals, MXenes are conductive, hydrophilic and chemically and structurally stable.17,18 MXenes not only possess the standard features of 2D nanomaterials, but also exhibit excellent optical, electronic and magnetic properties. Furthermore, forming direct energy bandgaps through the decrease in system size, MXene quantum dots (QDs) exhibit PL properties that induce radiative electronic transitions. Chemical quenching of PL permits the use of MXene QDs as bioimaging and labeling agents.19 MXenes also exhibit outstanding light absorption, which may be due to stronger electronic conductivity in comparison with that of reduced graphene oxide.20 Under NIR-I and NIR-II laser stimulation, the optical absorption properties of MXenes have promoted their application as photothermal materials in photothermal therapy (PTT) and photodynamic therapy (PDT) of deep tissues (Table 2). More importantly, a variety of surface modifications can be introduced to improve some defects of MXenes in vivo, including poor water dispersibility, slow degradation and toxicity without impairing their properties.21 Consequently, bioapplications of MXenes have become a focus of research.
Table 2 Comparison of the photothermal effects in some two-dimensional materials




Material
Size of material
PTCE
Change in temperature
Power and time
Laser
Application
Ref.




CDT: chemodynamic therapy, CT: computed tomography, MRI: magnetic resonance imaging, N. A.: not applicable, PAI: photoacoustic imaging, PDT: photodynamic therapy, PTCE: photothermal conversion efficiency, PTT: photothermal therapy, TIR: thermal infrared imaging.





Graphene



rGO@AuNS-DODAB/DOPE-FA
51.3 nm
38.6%
To 52.6 °C
0.1 W cm−2 for 10 min
808 nm
PTT and PAI

30



nZVI/rGO@pDA
250 nm long and 0.88 nm thick
24.1%
From 37 to 42.3 °C
1.5 W cm−2 for 3.5 min
808 nm
PDT, PTT and MRI

31



GO-IONP-PEG
50–150 nm
N. A.
From 28 to 56.6 °C
2 W cm−2 for 8 min
808 nm
PTT, drug delivery and MRI

32



GO-PEG
300–500 nm
N. A.
To 50 °C
0.7 W cm−2 for 90 s
808 nm
PTT

33




Boron nanosheets



DOX-17AAG@B-PEG-cRGD
6.1 nm thick
41%
To 58.5 °C
1 W cm−2 for 5 min
808 nm
PTT and drug delivery

34



B@Ce6-PAH-PAA
2.4 nm thick
43.8%
Elevating 38.8 °C
2 W cm−2 for 5 min
808 nm
PTT and PDT

35



BQDs-PEG
2.2 ± 0.4 nm thick
23.7%
To 52 °C
1 W cm−2 for 10 min
808 nm
PTT and PA imaging

36



B-PEG/DOX
20 to 50 nm think
42.5%
Elevating 37 °C
2 W cm−2 for 5 min
808 nm
PTT and drug delivery

37




Black phosphorus



BP@Cu0.2@PEG-RGD
60–120 nm laterally
35.4%
Elevating 31 °C
1 W cm−2 for 10 min
808 nm
PTT, CDT and PET

38



HA-BP
30 nm
46.05%
Elevating 30.4 °C
1.5 W cm−2 for 10 min
808 nm
PTT, PDT, immunotherapy and PAI

39



BP/DTX@PLGA
3 nm
N. A.
Elevating 20 °C
1 W cm−2 for 10 min
808 nm
Drug delivery and PTT

40



BPNS-GNBP
Length size of 80 ± 4 nm
41.3%
Elevating 40 °C
1 W cm−2 for 6 min
808 nm
PTT and PDT

41




MXene



Mo2C-PVA
2.2–9.0 nm thick
24.5% at 808 nm and 43.3% at 1064 nm
From 25.0 to 57.8 °C at 808 nm and to 62.3 °C at 1064 nm
1 W cm−2 for 10 min
808 and 1064 nm
PTT

42



Ti2N QDs
4.83 ± 2.69 nm laterally
48.62% at 808 nm and 45.51% at 1064 nm
To 60 °C
1 W cm−2 for 5 min
808 and 1064 nm
PTT and PAI

43



V2C nanosheets
50–100 nm
48%
To 57.9 °C
0.48 W cm−2 for 5 min
808 nm
PTT, MRI and PAI

44



Nb2C-MSNs-SNO
∼200 nm laterally
39.09%
To 59.6 °C
1.5 W cm−2 for 5 min
1064 nm
Thermogaseous therapy and PAI

45





To date, more than 20 synthetic MXenes have been utilized in multiple applications as biomedicines, biosensors, and for energy storage.22,23 Based on the latest reports on MXene nanosheets and their nanocomposites in biomedicine, we have systematically summarized the advances in synthesis methods, surface chemistry, and biomedical applications as well as their biocompatibility and cytotoxicity. The current opportunities and challenges for the future development of MXenes for bioapplications and healthcare are also discussed.
2 Synthesis methods
The process of MXene synthesis is influenced by parameters such as surface charge, particle size and chemistry properties.24 There are two approaches for the synthesis of MXenes: top-down methods, which are based on direct exfoliation of bulk crystals, and bottom-up methods, in which MXene preparation is controlled at the atomic/molecular level.
2.1 Top-down methods
In top-down methods, ultrathin and nanoscale MXenes are commonly prepared by selectively removing the A group element (Al, Si, Tl, S, As) layers of Mn+1AXn by etching and exfoliation (Fig. 1a).46,47 Aqueous hydrofluoric acid (HF), HF-containing etchants or LiF/HCl are used to etch weakly bonded A layers.12 At the end of the reaction process, MXenes possess hydrophilic surface groups, such as –F, –OH, and –O, replacing A layers.48,49 A mixture of Mn+1AXn and HF is centrifuged to separate the solids, which are then washed with deionized water to obtain stacked layers (Fig. 1b–d).46 Subsequent ultrasonication followed by delamination with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) separates the sticky sheets into one or more MXene monolayers with a thickness of less than 1 nm (Fig. 1e). During the process of delamination, the MXene colloid can also be converted into MXene QDs by prolonged ultrasonication.19 Under conditions of different temperatures and particle sizes, conversion of a given MAX phase is required to determine the relevant etching time and concentration.16
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the process for MXene nanosheet synthesis. (b) Scanning electron microscopy images showing the compact structure of the MAX phase. After etching (c), a certain amount of thick intercalated-MXene layers (d) showed spontaneous delamination. (e) MXene nanosheets were formed by ultrasonication.46 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (f) A schematic diagram showing the reaction between TBAOH and Al to achieve intercalation and form Al(OH)4−, which promotes a critical process. Fractured Ti–Al metallic bonds and intercalated ions promote delamination. (g) AFM image of extremely thin delaminated nanosheets.53 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (h) A schematic diagram of the synthesis of V2C using algae extract. (i) Element mapping of V2AlC untreated (top) and treated (bottom) with algae solution for 48 h.44 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
Ti3C2 nanosheets were initially discovered by exfoliating Ti3AlC2 with HF. The majority of MXenes are derived from the MAX phase containing Al in HF solution. Ti3SiC2 has also been exploited because it is readily available and cheap to use in comparison with Ti3AlC2, although Ti–Si bonds are harder to break than Ti–Al bonds using an HF etchant. Recently, researchers proposed the use of oxidant-assisted selective etching of Si from Ti3SiC2 by immersing the Ti3SiC2 powder in an aqueous mixture of HF/H2O2.50 This method of etching using an oxidant is universally used to manufacture Ti3C2 and exfoliate Ti3C2 into single flakes and can be achieved with or without intercalants. Furthermore, cations such as NH4+, Al3+, and Na+ can be intercalated in Ti3C2 flakes. NH4HF2 is used as an alternative to HF as an etchant in MXene synthesis.51 Although HF etching has the advantages of simplicity and efficiency, HF residues, which can induce cell death, restrict the biological application of MXenes. Accordingly, fluorine-free or low LiF and HCl preparations would expand the biomedical application of MXenes by avoiding the latent bio-security issue. Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH) has been used as an etching solution to deal with bulk Ti3AlC2 (Fig. 1f).52,53 TBAOH etching has been combined with assisted exfoliation and mechanical force assisted liquid exfoliation to exfoliate Ti3AlC2. The exposed edges and surfaces of broken particles have OH− groups that interact with Al atoms to generate Al(OH)4−. Hence, the weak binding force between Ti3C2 and bulky intercalated ions leads to isolated thin Ti3C2 nanosheets (Fig. 1g). Under 808 nm laser exposure, Ti3C2 maintained a strong absorbance with an extinction coefficient of 29.1 L g−1 cm−1, which was higher than that of most documented photoabsorption materials. Furthermore, algae extracts were used to intercalate and delaminate V2AlC efficiently (Fig. 1h).44 After incubation with algae extracts for 48 h, Al was etched to obtain V2C through element mapping analysis (Fig. 1i). Moreover, TMAOH is an efficient etchant for Al etching along with the production of Al(OH)4−, which is a titanium-mediation moiety present on the Ti3C2 layer.53 Researchers have developed a two-step exfoliation strategy for MAX phase Ti3AlC2.54 After the Al layer is removed by treatment with 40% HF aqueous solution, TPAOH intercalates the etched Ti3C2 powder in water to obtain Ti3C2 nanosheets substantially reduced in lateral size that then facilitate the biomedicine application of MXenes. Top-down methods are characteristically simple processes that provide high yields. Safer etchants will promote the use of MXene in a variety of applications. In new research, algae extracts avoided the harsh conditions of conventional delamination methods, with low-cost, high-yield and environmentally friendly merits. However, the shortcomings of this method are poor control of the surface chemistry, structure and morphology. For instance, some by-products may coexist with MXenes after etching, which have unknown impacts on the properties and performance of nanosheets.47 Hence, these defects are believed to boost the development of revised top-down methods.
2.2 Bottom-up methods
Recently, the chemical vapor deposition method (CVD) has become the main bottom-up method for MXene preparation. Researchers have developed high-quality ultrathin α-Mo2C crystals using the CVD technique with methane as the carbon source and Cu/Mo foils as substrates at high temperatures.55,56 Mo2C, which is a type of interstitial carbide, has strong Mo–Mo bonds and weak Mo–C bonds (Fig. 2a).57 Under high growth temperatures above 1085 °C, Cu melts and Cu/Mo foil is produced. Mo then diffuses onto the surface of Cu/Mo foil to generate Mo2C by reacting with methane (Fig. 2b).55 Its lateral sizes are over 100 μm (Fig. 2c) with thicknesses ranging from 3 nm to 20 or 30 nm, comprising 6 to 60 monolayers (Fig. 2d). With increasing experimental temperature, the lateral size of α-Mo2C crystals was enlarged within a short growth time. Notably, α-Mo2C sheets exhibited superior stability in various liquids, including ethanol, water, acetone, and HCl, after thermal annealing in air at 200 °C for 2 h.
 Fig. 2  (a) Crystal structure of α-Mo2C.57 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Images of different shapes of α-Mo2C crystals on a Cu/Mo substrate. (c) Optical image of hexagonal ultrathin α-Mo2C crystal; size, approximately 100 μm. (d) Optical image of hexagonal ultrathin α-Mo2C crystals; thicknesses, 6.7 nm.55 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (e) Schematic diagram of growth in situ under low and high CH4 flow rates. (f) Optical image of α-Mo2C crystals on a Cu surface at a low CH4 flow rate. (g) AFM image of hexagonal Mo2C crystals on Cu surface. (h) Optical image of α-Mo2C crystals on graphene at a high CH4 flow rate. (i) AFM image of hexagonal Mo2C crystals on graphene.58 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, a one-step direct approach for in situ growth of graphene substrates was developed for the synthesis of uniform Mo2C crystals with a large surface area.58 CH4 flow rate and graphene-template growth had an impact on the morphology and thickness of Mo2C crystals (Fig. 2e). Uniform morphology and thickness of Mo2C crystals of 8 nm grown on graphene were observed under high methane flux (Fig. 2f and g), whereas non-homogeneous growth of crystals with various shapes in the 170–250 nm size range were generated under a low flow rate (Fig. 2h and i). Approximately 90% of the Mo2C crystals were hexagonal. By suppressing the reaction between surface segregated Mo atoms and the hydrocarbon precursor, graphene inhibited the high growth rate, controlling the thickness of Mo2C at the nanometer scale. This approach had the advantage of evading the transfer processes of vertically stacked 2D heterostructures and enhanced crystallinity, uniformity, and homogeneity with a low defect density.
Importantly, using bottom-up methods, ultrathin sheets can be prepared with large lateral dimensions and multiple shapes with typical features of well-defined crystals, such as rectangles, triangles, and hexagons. This approach has been used for preparing thin α-Mo2C sheets with a low number of atoms without surface terminations, which significantly improves the preparation methods and expands the MXene family.19,59 In addition, due to harsh composition conditions, such as high nucleation at high growth temperatures, the construction of large and thick crystals is challenging in terms of individual mass production.
3 Properties, surface modification and functionalization
3.1 Properties of MXenes
The fascinating physical and chemical properties of MXenes in electronic, optical and magnetic scopes determine their versatile applications in biomedicine. The outer transition metal layer of MXenes has a huge impact on the electronic properties than the inner layer, therefore, surface terminations can change the electronic bond structures by bonding with the outer layer transition metal atoms.60,61 The surfaces of MXenes are covered with O, OH and F groups after exfoliation of the MAX phase, which influences electronic and thermal transportation.61,62 The unique multilayer structures and active surface terminations can be applied in biosensors for detecting pressures,63 pH64 and molecules,65 which alter the electronic properties of MXene sensing platforms toward enhancing the sensitivity and resolution of the final product.
The optical properties, including absorption, emission and photoluminescence (PL), have been widely applied in the fields of biomedicine. Generally, the results of light–matter interaction include the following: 1. the photothermal process converts light energy into heat;10,66 2. the photodynamic process involves a photochemical reaction and generates ROS; 3. the photoelectric process transforms light energy into electricity.67–71 According to the high nonradiative nature and metallic or narrow bandgap properties, MXenes can be used as outstanding photothermal conversion agents to ablate tumors at 808 nm and 1064 nm, respectively.52 Under irradiation at 808 nm, the MXene nanosheet results ineffective singlet oxygen generation, which is employed in photodynamic therapy.72 The number of layers and surface termination can affect the electronic structure and optical properties toward modifying MXenes.73 The reduced system size and the formation of a direct energy bandgap in MXene contribute to good PL for bioimaging and labeling.19 The synthesis techniques available to prepare the material limit correlation research into the magnetic properties for biomedicine applications, creating a gap between theoretical and experimental outcomes. We believe that this may be an interesting area to explore in the biomedical application of MXenes in the future.
3.2 Surface modification and functionalization
Major synthesis methods are hydrophilic. Taking advantage of the large surface area, multiple functional groups, and prominent optical, physicochemical and electronic properties, surface modification and functionalization can be used to endow MXenes with properties such as high biocompatibility, safety, stability, biodegradability, and drug-loading capacity (Table 3). This is critical for the biomedical applications of MXenes. So far, physical absorption and electrostatic attractions are the most common types of modified molecules.8 Some noble metals (Au, Ag, and Pd) were added to MXenes for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS).74 In the case of Ti3C2 modified with Au, Ti3C2@Au possesses better stability, biocompatibility and enhanced optical absorbance in the NIR-I and NIR-II biological windows. Noble-metal-modified Ti3C2Tx not only exhibits high anti-cancer capability, but also lower toxicity than that of pure MXenes in vivo. In the engineering of magnetite iron oxide nanoparticles, Fe3O4, Ti3C2 can be used to achieve specific targeting to locate tumor tissues directly.75
Table 3 Modification and functionalization of MXenes in the field of biomedicine




MXene nanostructure
Modification/functionalization
Morphology
Application
Ref.




AIPH: 2,2′-azobis[2-(2-imidazolin-2-yl)propane]dihydrochloride, BG: bioactive glass, CT: computed tomography, EDRE: entropy-driven RNA explorer, GOD: glucose oxidase, HCHO: oxidized hyaluronic acid, IONPs: superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, MRI: magnetic resonance imaging, PAI: photoacoustic imaging, PAM: polyacrylamide, PDA: polydopamine, PEG: polyethylene glycol, PGE: poly(glycerol-ethylenimine), POM: polyoxometalate, PVA: polyvinyl alcohol, PVP: polyvinylpyrrolidone, RGD: arginine–glycine–aspartic acid, SP: soybean phospholipid, TP: titanium plates, TIR: thermal infrared imaging.




Nb2C-PVP
PVP
∼150 nm laterally and 0.5–0.8 nm thick
Cancer therapy and TIR imaging

81



MnOx/Ta4C3-SP
MnOx and SP
∼190 nm laterally
Cancer therapy, PAI, MRI and CT imaging

82



Ti3C2-SP
SP
150 nm laterally and 0.6 nm thick
Cancer therapy and TIR imaging

54



Ta4C3-IONP-SP
IONP and SP
255 nm laterally
Cancer therapy, MRI and CT imaging

83



DOX@Ti3C2-SP
SP
120 nm laterally and 0.9 nm thick
Cancer therapy, drug delivery, PAI and TIR imaging

84



GdW10@ Ti3C2
GdW10-based POM
∼148 nm laterally
Cancer therapy, MRI and CT imaging

85



DOX@ Ti3C2@mMSNs-RGD
Mesoporous silica and RGD
91.7–152.9 nm laterally
Cancer therapy, drug delivery and TIR imaging

77



Ta4C3-SP
SP
∼100 nm laterally and ∼1 nm thick
Cancer therapy, PAI and CT imaging

86



CTAC@Nb2CMSN-PEG-RGD
Mesoporous silica, PEG and RGD
220.2 nm laterally
Cancer therapy, PAI and TIR imaging

78



MXene/DOX@cellulose hydrogel
Cellulose
50–230 nm laterally and 1.9–10.3 nm thick
Cancer therapy, drug delivery and TIR imaging

87



MXene flake/Cu nanoclusters
Cu
1.6 nm thick
Biosensor

88



Ti3C2/PAM NC hydrogel
PAM
350 nm laterally and 11 nm thick
Drug delivery

76



MXene/cellulose membrane
Cellulose
50 nm thick
Antibacterial

89



Ti3C2-TAT@EDRE
EDRE and TAT peptide
1.1–3.4 nm thick
Fluorescence imaging

90



AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 NPs
Mesoporous silica, PEG and AIPH
219 nm laterally
Cancer therapy, PAI and TIR imaging

91



Ti3C2@Au
Au
∼200 nm laterally and ∼2 nm thick
Cancer therapy, PAI and CT imaging

74



MXene-IONPs@PEG-GOD
GOD, PEG and IONP
185.17 nm laterally and 1.44 nm thick
Cancer therapy, MRI and TIR imaging

92



Mo2C-derived polyoxometalate
POM
10 nm laterally
Cancer therapy, PAI and TIR imaging

93



Ti3C2-BG composite scaffold
BG scaffold
∼577 nm thick
Cancer therapy and tissue regeneration

94



Nb2C-MSNs-SNO
PEG and mesoporous silica
∼200 nm laterally and ∼2 nm thick
Cancer therapy and PAI

45



Mo2C-PVA
PVA
2.2–9.0 nm thick
Cancer therapy

42



Nb2C@TP
TP
∼150 nm
Antibacterial and tissue regeneration

95



MXene-AuNCs
Au nanoclusters
1–2 nm thick
Antibacterial

96



BG@NbSiR scaffold
Mesoporous silica, R837 and BG scaffold
255 nm
Cancer therapy and tissue regeneration

97



HPEM scaffold
HCHO, PDA and PGE
N. A.
Antibacterial and tissue regeneration

98





Polymer-based strategies are also suitable to expand the function of MXenes. Polyacrylamide (PAM) and Ti3C2 are used to synthesize a nanocomposite hydrogel (Ti3C2/PAM) with a uniform pore distribution. This honeycomb-like fine structure contributes to drug migration and stress release, strengthening mechanical properties, such as acid resistance and uniform pore distribution, for drug delivery and release.76 Soybean phospholipid (SP) and cellulose, two natural polymers, show promise in MXene applications due to low cost, in addition to enhanced biosafety and biocompatibility. To solve the poor stability of Ti3C2 in saline, SP has been utilized to improve this issue under physiological conditions. Ti3C2-SP exhibits outstanding dispersion in various solutions, whereas the photothermal conversion property and stability of nanosheets are not changed notably.54 Based on typical sol–gel chemistry, coating with a mesoporous silica shell has been implemented to establish multi-functional MXene platforms with hydrophilicity, dispersity and abundant surface chemistry.
In order to treat certain diseases, integrating the use of drugs and MXene nanosheets provided a favorable route by PTT and PDT. DOX loading of Ti3C2@mMSNs-RGD coated with a thin mesoporous silica layer facilitated drug delivery/release on-demand to achieve synergistic chemotherapy and photothermal therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma treatment.77 Mesopore-coated Nb2C also exhibited increased therapeutic efficacy for tumor eradication,53 guaranteeing a high drug-loading capacity.78 In the field of biosensor applications, MXenes are coated with some biomolecules, such as enzymes, nucleic acid, and peptides. Researchers have designed chimeric peptide-functionalize Ti3C2 to detect the activities of enzymes for post-translational modification studies.79 Considering the large surface area of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, they were combined with a duplex-specific nuclease-based amplification system that carried two different single-DNAs for oncomiR detection.80 These surface modifications amplified the signals involved and enhanced the specificity and sensitivity to achieve functionalization of MXene. MXenes with desirable traits have been generated by surface modifications and enhanced multi-function capacity. These strategies, including modification with metals, PEG (polyethylene glycol) and coating with mesoporous silica, not only enhance the physiochemical properties of MXenes, but also expand their applications in biomedicine. The outstanding performance of MXene nanocomposites would rapidly and comprehensively transform these applications.
4 Biosafety
Concerns resulting from the biocompatibility, biodegradation and toxicity of 2D materials restrict their translation into biochemical applications. Thus, long-term low toxicity, controlled biodegradability and elevated biocompatibility are required to meet clinical demands. MXenes and their nanocomposites display ultra-low toxicity and satisfactory biocompatibility, which are favorable characteristics for biomedical applications. During incubation with normal cells (HaCaT, MCF-10A and MRC-5 cell lines), MXenes (Ti3C2, Ti2C, and Ti2N) exerted no obvious influence on cell viability, with more than 70% cell survival, even at high concentrations (500 μg mL−1).99–101 On exposure to MXenes for 48 h, the cell viability of MSU1.1 cells was maintained at >75% for concentrations from 10 to 400 μg mL−1 (Fig. 3a).102 In contrast, the cytotoxic effects on cancerous cells (A375, MCF-7 and A549 cells) were greater than those against normal cells (HaCaT, MCF-10A and MRC-5 cells). Furthermore, Ti3AlC2, Ti3SiC2, Ti2AlN, and Mg/PLGA/Ti3C2 had no toxic effects on cultures of preosteoblasts (MC3T3-E1 and CRL-2593 cells), while cell proliferation was enhanced. This suggested that MXenes would produce strong cell affinity.103,104 Regardless of the cell-line type, the staining of the cytoskeleton network structure exhibited no alteration after incubation with a low concentration of MXenes (50 μg mL−1, Fig. 3b). In neural stem cells (NSC) and NSC-derived differentiated cells, Ti3C2 showed no observable adverse effects at a concentration of 12.5 μg mL−1, while significant apoptosis and membrane damage were observed in 25 μg mL−1 Ti3C2.105 After incubation with 25 μg mL−1 Ti3C2, 198 differently expressed genes in SCs were noted that were enriched in inflammatory, defense, stress, and stimulus responses involving the pathways of phagosomes, endocytosis, apoptosis, necroptosis, and others. In addition, a safety study of Ti3C2Tx in zebrafish embryos also revealed that the locomotion behavior and neuron and muscle activity of embryos was not influenced, indicating that Ti3C2Tx exerted neither acute toxic nor neurotoxic effects at the optimal dose of 50 μg mL−1 (Fig. 3c and d).106
 Fig. 3  (a) The WST-1 assay of the viability of normal human fibroblast (MSU1.1) cells cultured for 24 h and 48 h in the presence of carbide particles and MXenes. (b) Actin cytoskeleton staining of MSU1.1 (I) and HeLa cells (II) with MXene treatment at 50 μg mL−1 concentrations. Scale bar = 10 μm.102 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. (c) Cumulative mortality after treatment with DEBA (positive control), DMSO (negative control), and different doses of Ti3C2Tx. (d) Representative images of acute toxicity in zebrafish embryos under different treatments observed under a stereomicroscope.106 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of host tissue incubated with MXene films two weeks after surgery. (f) Blue arrows indicate macrophages and blue asterisks indicate blood vessels under low magnification and high magnification.107 Copyright 2019 Dove Medical Press. 
To evaluate biodegradation, human myeloperoxidase (hMPO), which produces hypochlorous acid and reactive radical intermediates that degrade carbon-based nanomaterials, was used to simulate the degradative performance of Nb2C-PVP nanosheets. After the addition of H2O2 and hMPO, the suspension of nanosheets became translucent. Even Nb2C almost disappeared after incubation with hMPO and H2O2 for 24 h.81 Moreover, investigations of the hematology parameters, blood biochemical indexes, and histopathological examination of mice for 28 days indicated that intravenous Nb2C-PVP did not cause any significant inflammation, infection, and renal and hepatic toxicities in vivo. Furthermore, the implantation of MXene films into subcutaneous tissues in rats resulted in mild inflammation and granulation in the tissue surrounding the cracked MXenes in addition to numerous fibroblasts and capillary vessels (Fig. 3e and f). Macrophages attached to MXenes, while obvious inflammatory cell infiltration and necrosis were not observed. MXenes were absorbed and biodegraded by phagocytosis in vivo.107 MXene nanosheets induce oxidative stress that is toxic to cancer cells, but has extremely low acute cytotoxicity and results in mild inflammatory responses from normal cells and tissues. Within the safe dose range, MXenes are highly biocompatible with a harmless biodegradation profile both in vitro and in vivo, which represents the foundation for developing bioapplications. Maintaining a safe dosage while producing an optimal performance would be the major obstruction to further biomedical development of MXenes.
5 Antibacterials
The oxidative stress induced in the bacterial membrane by direct contact with MXenes endow these materials with antibacterial properties that can be exploited in applications in the fields of health and the environment, including public hygiene and water treatment. Researchers have demonstrated the antimicrobial impacts on two bacterial models, Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis), of incubation with MXenes at different concentrations (2–200 μg mL−1) for 4 h.23 Delaminated Ti3C2Tx produced more pronounced antibacterial activity than that of Ti3AlC2 and multiple Ti3C2Tx in a dose-dependent manner in both bacterial strains. In TEM images, obvious cytoplasm leakage and membrane damage were observed in the presence of Ti3C2 at 50 μg mL−1, 100 μg mL−1, and 200 μg mL−1. After absorption on delaminated Ti3C2Tx, microorganisms were wrapped with increasing concentrations of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets that could induce membrane damage. These effects may also be ascribed to the strong reducing activity of MXene and the reactive surface. Ti3C2Tx nanosheets reacting with the cell wall17 and molecules could disrupt the cell structure and kill the microorganisms.
Recently, Nb2C nanosheets were grafted onto amidated titanium plates (Nb2C@TP) in order to prepare a biofunctional therapeutic platform for bacterial clearance and tissue regeneration.95 The biofilms formed through adherence of the invading bacteria possess great resistance when compared with that of planktonic bacteria due to the resistance to the infiltration of antibiotics and immune cells; hence, the destruction of the biofilm and the reduction of bacterial resistance are essential requirements for inhibiting bacterial growth. Increasing Nb2C concentrations resulted in only slight bacterial death, but live bacteria biofilm declined (Fig. 4a). On the surface of Nb2C-3@TP, the bacteria were ruptured, proving its capacity to inhibit biofilm formation and induce bacterial apoptosis. The RNA-seq transcriptomics indicated that Nb2C@TP downregulated energy-metabolism-related genes and activated the core gene Agr, which, in turn, significantly influenced bacterial growth and proliferation. Under the 808 nm laser, bacterial colonies and survival rates of S. aureus and E. coli gradually decreased in the Nb2C@TP groups with increasing irradiation time. According to TEM imaging, the cell wall and membranes of S. aureus and E. coli became blurry, disrupted the bubbles contained in them, and distorted the cytoplasmic structure (Fig. 4b). Hyperthermia caused by Nb2C@TP induced cilia and flagella to fall off, weaken bacterial spread, and thereby prevent biofilm formation. Furthermore, the bacterial cytoplasm became vacant and was only left with some amorphous debris. LDH tests and ortho-nitrophenyl-β-galactoside (ONPG) hydrolysis tests (Fig. 4c and d) clarified that thermotherapy with Nb2C@TP could destroy the bacterial membrane and cause bacterial death. To inhibit planktonic bacteria and biofilm formation, Nb2C@TP with laser treatment resulted in extremely low survival rates compared with Nb2C@TP alone (Fig. 4e). In addition, Nb2C@TP under the laser avoided excess ROS production to reduce the proinflammatory reaction and upregulate vascular endothelial growth factors toward promoting angiogenesis, tissue regeneration and wound healing.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM imaging of S. aureus (yellow spheres), E. coli (violet rods), and biofilms. Gray, blackish-green, grass-green, and royal-blue colors indicate TP, Nb2AlC, multilayered Nb2C, and Nb2C nanosheets. (b) TEM imaging of planktonic bacteria in different groups. (c) LDH release rate and (d) ONPG hydrolysis assays of bacteria after different treatments. (e) Bacterial colony images of planktonic bacteria and biofilm from implants and surrounding tissues.95 Copyright 2020 America Chemical Society. 
Researchers also compared the effects of graphene oxide (GO).89 GO at a concentration of 200 μg mL−1 resulted in 90% inactivation of Gram-positive B. subtilis and Gram-negative E. coli, which was lower than the 98% inactivation achieved by Ti3C2Tx at the same concentration. SEM analysis showed that, compared with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) composites, MXene/cellulose membranes remarkably reduced aggregation of S. aureus and E. coli on the surface. After incubation with E. coli and S. aureus suspensions for 24 h, scarcely any bacteria were distributed on the surface, indicating that the antibacterial performance of the MXene/cellulose membrane was superior to that of the rGO membrane. For further investigations of the interactions between MXene and bacteria, researchers prepared polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)-supported Ti3C2Tx for exposure to bacterial suspensions.108 The density and survival of bacteria exposed to the Ti3C2Tx film were lower than that of bacteria exposed to the control PVDF, although the aged Ti3C2Tx membranes were stored at room temperature for more than 30 days. This effective inhibitory activity could be promoted by the formation of TiO2 on the surface of Ti3C2Tx membranes. It was also discovered that cell membranes were predominantly damaged and rough on Ti3C2Tx surfaces, rather than smooth and intact on the pristine PVDF surface. Furthermore, other researchers lucubrated the antimicrobial mode-of-action with a broth microdilution assay and SYTO9 fluorescence.109 Ti3C2Tx precipitation in terrific broth (TB) media did not induce any significant differences in either the position or the height of the fluorescence compared with that of the Ti3C2Tx-treated and untreated bacteria samples, even at a high density of 100 μg ml−1 nanosheets. The properties of the physical interaction between bacteria and Ti3C2Tx were investigated. After incubation with Ti3C2Tx nanosheets (lateral size 0.09–4.40 μm), E. coli and B. subtilis exhibited noticeably decreased counts and SYTO9 fluorescence intensities. With the smallest lateral size of 0.09 μm, Ti3C2Tx nanosheets lead to approximately 50% dispersion of the bacterial population and reduce the mean fluorescence intensities of E. coli and B. subtilis, which suggest greater damage to the bacterial envelope and higher antibacterial activity of Ti3C2Tx. Similarly, after prolonged exposure, bacteria exhibited more than 90% dispersion and >95% DNA release from the bacterial cytosol. Lower fluorescence intensities and a higher rate of bacterial death indicated that the antibacterial properties were size- and time-dependent. Meanwhile, MXene conjugated with ultra-small gold generated localized high concentrations of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that oxidized the bacterial membrane lipid continuously in order to destroy the membrane and DNA of bacteria.96
MXene and its composites have outstanding antibacterial activity against E. coli, S. aureus and B. subtilis. Direct contact between MXene and cell membranes induced the alteration of bacterial dispersion and occurrence of substantial damage, causing death of the bacteria. In addition, smaller MXene nanosheets with a greater number of sharp edges have a higher potential to penetrate the cytosol and cut bacterial cell walls to permeate the cytosol and destroy the membrane integrity, releasing the cytoplasmic components. Additional studies of the mechanism underlying this irreversible cell damage are of great significance in implementing the antibacterial effects of MXenes in biomedicine.
6 Bioimaging
Physiochemical traits of MXenes, including excellent fluorescence quenching, strong X-ray attenuation and outstanding photothermal conversion capability, provide MXenes with superior potential for non-invasive bioimaging. To date, MXenes have been widely studied in the fields of fluorescence, photoacoustics, computed tomography, magnetic resonance and thermal infrared imaging; these areas will be discussed in this section.
6.1 Fluorescence imaging
Novel MXenes possessed bright and excitation-dependent fluorescence owing to abundant functional groups and well-defined structures.110 As demonstrated by the results of UV-vis spectroscopy, strong bluish-green fluorescence of Nb2C quantum dot (QD) suspension was emitted under the excitation of 365 nm UV light (Fig. 5a). As a result, MXene demonstrated great potential as a fluorescent probe for cellular fluorescence imaging. After incubation, the cytoplasm stained with Nb2C QDs selectively emitted green fluorescence (Fig. 5b–d). Furthermore, the poly(vinyl alcohol)/Nb2C (PVA/Nb2C) composite hydrogels with different shapes implanted in mice showed clear locations, boundaries, and intact shapes in the fluorescence pseudo-color images (Fig. 5e–g). In comparison with conventional organic fluorescent probes, Nb2C displayed more favorable photostability and pH stability (Fig. 5h). Furthermore, researchers exploited a multicolor cellular imaging probe based on Ti3C2 QDs to label RAW264.7 cells.111 Confocal images obtained by using three lasers revealed three colors of MXene quantum dots (MQDs) in RAW264.7 cells as a result of endocytosis. MQDs were focused on the cell membrane and the cytoplasm, with faint luminescent spots in the nucleus, which indicated that MQDs penetrated the cells without reaching the nucleus and disrupting genetic information. Moreover, the MQDs were also developed as fluorescent probes for microphage and embryonic stem cell labeling. Using heteroatom functionalization, N and P functionalized MQDs were prepared with a PL quantum yield and green fluorescence for the first time.112,113 Taking advantage of the inner filter effect, the fluorescence of MQDs can be read out and quenched by p-nitrophenol, so it is used directly as a fluorescent agent for alkaline phosphatase. A highly sensitive self-calibrated fluorescent probe was designed, consisting of Cy3 labeled CD36 (Cy3-CD63 aptamer) and Ti3C2 for the quantitative detection of exosomes, which integrated with this aptamer. The Cy3-CD63 aptamer was then released from the surface of Ti3C2, leading to the recovery of the Cy3 fluorescence. The intensity of the fluorescence correlated with the concentration of exosomes.114 This group demonstrated the value of MQDs as imaging agents based on their ability to penetrate the cell membrane and cytoplasm.
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis absorption, PL excitation (Ex, λem = 485 nm), and PL emission (Em, λex = 370 nm) spectra of Nb2C QDs in aqueous solutions. (b) The CLSM fluorescence images of NIH 3T3 cells at concentrations of 100, 150 (c), and 200 μg mL−1 (d) Nb2C QDs, respectively. The bright-field images (e1, f1, and g1) and fluorescent pseudo-colored images (e2, f2, and g2) of round (e), linear (f), and square (g) PVA/Nb2C QD hydrogels. (h) The normalized PL intensity of Nb2C, FITC, and RhB aqueous solutions under irradiation with a 350 W xenon lamp at different time points.110 Copyright 2020 Elsevier B. V. 
MXenes have also attracted attention as novel probes for the detection of nucleic acids. For example, novel ultrathin Mo2C QDs were generated to load a programmable molecular beacon (MB) for the detection of intracellular mature miRNAs through van der Waals forces between nucleobases and the basal plane of Mo2C.115 The Mo2C QD probe exhibited great cellular internalization in four cell lines (A549, MDA-MB-231, B16-F10 and normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF) cells), as well as showing a clear fluorescence signal difference between mature miRNA-21 and pre-miRNA-21 in all four cell lines. In addition, the Mo2C QD nanoprobe's fluorescence signal intensity was quantitatively more accurate and specific, indicating high selectivity and low false detection rates. Similarly, the application of Ti3C2 was reported for the imaging of the long noncoding RNA of prostate cancer gene 3 (lncRNA PCA3). After functionalization with a TAT peptide, Ti3C2-TAT composites were loaded with an entropy-driven RNA explorer (EDRE).90 Glutathione triggered the release of the EDRE, which entered the cell nucleus under the guidance of TAT peptides and was initiated by the target lncRNA PCA3. In this process, the fluorescence signals accumulated continually in cells, which resulted in fluorescence analysis of nuclear lncRNA PCA3 at low-picomolar concentrations. MXenes also have an outstanding signal amplification ability as DNA probes. Researchers studied the integration between single- and double-stranded DNA and Ti3C2Tx.116 The fluorescence quenching capacity of MXene was applied in the preparation of a nanoprobe (dcDNA-Ti3C2) to monitor expression changes of both MUC1 and cytoplasmic miR-21 within MCF-7 breast cancer cells.117 This study achieved simultaneous dual imaging analysis in situ at low-nanomolar concentrations and provided a strategy for the acquisition of real-time, outside-to-inside, and multiplayer information about different biomarkers for cancer diagnosis in vitro that highlighted the superb interfacial performance of Ti3C2.
Researchers have applied the superb optical absorption and fluorescence quenching properties of MXenes to cell imaging. In-depth studies and novel designs endow MXene with the capacity for rapid detection and high accuracy and specificity as fluorescent probes. MXene nanoprobes provide multilayer information and features of biomarkers in real-time and different spatial distributions, which prove their huge potential for cell imaging.
6.2 Photoacoustic imaging
Photoacoustic imaging (PAI) is a promising biomedical imaging modality that integrates the outstanding contrast of optical biomedical imaging with the very deep tissue penetrability of ultrasound imaging. The absorption of light energy within tissue induces thermoelastic expansion, which produces ultrasonic pressure waves that are collected by ultrasonic transducers to obtain the photoacoustic image.2 As a noninvasive and safe technique, PAI overcomes the disadvantages of conventional optical imaging to produce label- and speckle-free images, especially in deep biological tissues.118 Additional exploration of PAI contrast agents (CAs) is necessary to enhance the sensitivity and resolution of this technique.
Considering that PAI contrast relies on the absorption of light and thermoelastic conversion efficiency, novel 2D nanomaterials have attracted increasing attention.2 So far, MXenes have shown outstanding optical absorption properties and light conversion ability in near-infrared light.8 Several kinds of MXenes have been reported as PAI CAs, including Ta4C3, Ti3C2, Ti3N, V2C, and Nb2C. Ta4C3-based nanocomposites (e.g., Ta4C3-SP, MnOx/Ta4C3-SP) showed contrast enhancement at different concentrations in vitro. Regardless of subcutaneous administration or intravenous injection, photoacoustic signals of tumor issues were clear and observed to increase under NIR-I laser radiation.82,86 Similarly, increasing concentrations of Ti2N QDs induced an elevation in the intensity of photoacoustic signals under both NIR-I and NIR-II laser excitation (Fig. 6a).43 Within a certain time period, the merged images of photoacoustic signals increased to a maximum value from 0 h to 48 h in 4T1 tumor-bearing mice (Fig. 6b). The PA signal intensity decreased gradually from 4 h to 48 h in the tumors. Other researchers prepared Ti3C2@Au nanosheets that exhibited excellent optical absorbance properties.74 Taking advantage of the excellent performance, Ti3C2@Au was developed as a good photoacoustic contrast agent following the observation of an outstanding synergistic effect between MXene and Au nanoparticles. Compared with Ti3C2 alone, Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites displayed remarkable photoacoustic signals for both imaging and quantitative measurements from 680 nm to 970 nm, although they were at the same concentration.
 Fig. 6  (a) PA images of Ti2N QD solutions at different concentrations, ranging from 0 up to 500 ppm under 808 nm and 1280 nm laser excitation. (b) PA images in the tumors after tail vein injection at different time intervals.43 Copyright 2020 Elsevier B. V. (c) The preparation procedure of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD for heat transfer determined by applying linear time data. (d) PA images and quantitative curve of PA intensity for V2C-TAT at various concentrations in vitro. (e) PA images after intravenous injection of PBS, V2C-TAT and V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD. (f) PA images and corresponding signal intensity in vivo at different time-points after intravenous injection of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD.119 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. 
V2C was newly modified with cell nucleus-target TAT peptides (V2C-TAT) and encapsulated into endogenous exosomes (Ex) with Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) modification (Fig. 6c).119 V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD nanosheets demonstrated excellent photothermal conversion efficiency of up to 45.05% under NIR-II laser irradiation. In the context of the concentration dependence of nanosheets in vitro (Fig. 6d), in vivo studies of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD showed that the photoacoustic signal intensities were 2.11-fold stronger than that of the V2C-TAT group (Fig. 6e). Following injection of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGDs at different time points, distinct storage was observed in tumor sites, providing evidence of the high take up of nanosheets due to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect (Fig. 6f). Another example is core/shell-structured Nb2C-MSNs-SNO, in which Nb2C was coated with a mesoporous silica layer and the NO donor, S-nitrosothiol (RSNO), was embedded in the mesopores.45 Similarly, the rapid changes in photoacoustic signal intensities for Nb2C-MSNs-SNO at different intervals also indicated that 8 h post-injection was the ideal irradiation time for maximum accumulation under the NIR-II laser. Hence, Nb2C-MSNs-SNO and V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD are desirable PAI CAs for monitoring tumors.
Good optical traits and biological properties have promoted the investigation of MXenes as photoacoustic CAs. The promotion of new MXenes has facilitated highly efficient PAI. Although the application of MXenes in PAI is still in the research stage, MXenes deliver leading performance and overcome the disadvantages of traditional CAs that benefit the development of MXenes for PAI.
6.3 Computed tomography imaging
Computed tomography (CT) imaging has become a widely used medical imaging modality by introducing CAs.120 Since MXenes (Ta4C3, Ti3C2, Mo2C) have been shown to attenuate X-rays noticeably, these materials can serve as the CAs for CT. Researchers prepared Ta4C3-SP with improved physiological stability and biocompatibility.86 Significantly improved brightness was observed with increasing doses of Ta4C3-SP nanosheets. Hounsfield unit (HU) values and CT images demonstrated that the brightness correlated positively with increasing doses of Ta4C3-SP nanosheets. In vitro delivery of MnOx/Ta4C3-SP nanosheets improved HU values by approximately 3-fold compared with routine iodine-based Iopromide 300 at 10 mg mL−1.82 After injection into tumor-bearing mice, the composites produced strong contrast and increased HU values in CT images of 4T1 tumors. Furthermore, iron oxide nanoparticles were prepared through in situ growth on Ta4C3 nanosheets (Ta4C3-IONP-SP) for breast cancer diagnosis.83 With increasing time after intravenous administration of the nanosheets, the CT images and HU values of tumors were enhanced remarkably not only in transverse and coronal section images, but also in 3D-rendering axial images.
Similarly, both MnOx/Ta4C3-SP and Ta4C3-IONP-SPs displayed dose-dependent effects similar to those of Ta4C3-SP. In terms of Ti3C2 nanosheets, researchers utilized functionalized Ti3C2 composites (Ti3C2@Au-PEG and GdW10@Ti3C2) with core–shell structures and surface modification of GdW10-based polyoxometalates for diagnostic imaging.74,85 The results for Ti3C2@Au-PEG in vitro (Fig. 7a) and in vivo (Fig. 7b) indicated that both nanocomposites functioned as CAs to brighten the signal gradually and increased the HU values of tumors in a dose-dependent manner. GdW10@Ti3C2 also exhibited a linear relationship between HU values and Gd concentration in vitro. Brighter tumor sites after the injection of GdW10@Ti3C2 suggested that this material was a suitable CA for dual mode real-time imaging. Recently, Mo2C was also found to have high X-ray attenuation efficiency as a CA for tumor imaging.121 Based on its photothermal behavior, the CT images exhibited significant reduction in tumor sizes and eventual disappearance as the treatment progressed (Fig. 7c). At 6 h after injecting Mo2C, the CT signal at the site of intratumor injection was clearer than that from intravenous injection (Fig. 7d). These studies also confirmed that Mo2C, with a high effective atomic number, demonstrated outstanding efficiency to attenuate X-rays and realize CT imaging.
 Fig. 7  (a) CT images of Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites at different concentrations in vitro. (b) CT images of the tumor-bearing mouse before and after the injection of Ti3C2@Au in vivo.74 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. (c) CT imaging of the tumor sites at different time points. (d) CT imaging at 6 h post intratumor and intravenous injections.121 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As a CA candidate, the presence of biocompatible elements would be advantageous for CT imaging. The high atomic numbers of the metal elements and good biocompatibility provide MXenes with excellent X-ray CT contrast capability. Furthermore, the MXene composites combine the advantages of MXenes and modification materials for use in the corresponding contrast-enhanced CT imaging, thus confirming the potential of MXenes as CT contrast probes for diagnostic imaging.
6.4 Magnetic resonance imaging
Based on the advantages of radiation-free, nonionized, noninvasive detection, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a popular technique and widely used for tomographic imaging modality in clinical diagnosis. It offers an exquisite spatial–temporal resolution of soft tissue contrast, but low sensitivity for molecular activity, and cellular or small tissue lesions.122 CAs are used to improve imaging precision and efficiency. The MRI CAs are generally divided into T1-positive and T2-negative CAs. However, conventional CAs, such as Gd-based T1-positive CAs, have a deficiency of short internal circulation time, leading to low-resolution images and prolonged scanning time.123
The multiple functions and modifications of MXenes have attracted much attention for use as MRI CAs. Gd-Based GdW10@Ti3C2 nanocomposites were evaluated as T1-weighted CAs.85In vitro, T1-weighted MRI of GdW10@Ti3C2 solution exhibited concentration-dependent enhancement and an advantageous longitudinal relaxation rate r1 (Fig. 8a). Observations at four time points showed that GdW10@Ti3C2 accumulated gradually in tumors due to the EPR effect (Fig. 8b and c). Compared with the control group, there was a brightening effect of approximately 3.73-fold after intravenous injection of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD.44 In addition, MnOx/Ta4C3-SP nanosheets achieved pH-responsive and GSH-sensitive T1-weighted MRI due to the instability of Mn–O bonds in tumor microenvironments.82 At different pH values and GSH concentrations, the relaxivity r1 and T1-weighted MRI of nanocomposites were higher and brighter than those in the buffer solution. This is achieved by cleavage of Mn–O bonds to produce Mn2+, which elevates the probability of the paramagnetic interaction of Mn with water molecules to improve T1-weighted MRI in mildly acidic and high GSH microenvironments. The enhanced signal and T1-weighted MRI in tumor-bearing mice were also observed.
 Fig. 8  (a) T1-Weighted MRI and T1 relaxation rate of GdW10@Ti3C2 nanosheets at various Gd3+ concentrations in vitro. (b) MRI signal intensity of tumor-bearing mice at four time-points following injection of GdW10@Ti3C2. (c) Corresponding T1-weighted MR images of tumor-bearing mice.85 Copyright 2018 Springer. (d) T2-Weighted MRI and T2 relaxation rate (e) of MIG nanosheets in vitro. (f) The signal intensity of T2-weighted MR imaging at tumor sites at various time-points after the injection of MIG. (g) Corresponding T2-weighted MR images of tumor-bearing mice at different time-points before and after the injection of MIG. Yellow circles indicate the tumor sites.124 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. 

T
2-Weighted CAs reduce the T2 relaxation time to increase the T2 contrast effect, which produces a darker MR image.92 Ti3C2 and Ta4C3-SP were used for negative T2-weighted MRI based on integration with superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles to generate MXene-IONPs@PEG-GOD (MIG) and Ta4C3-IONP-SPs, respectively.83,92 Due to excellent superparamagnetic properties, magnetic saturation values and magnetic aggregation-improved MRI performance, gradual darkening of MR imaging of MIG in a dose-dependent manner was achieved (Fig. 8d). The transverse relaxation time (T2) of MIG was visibly elevated and showed a linear relationship with Fe concentration (Fig. 8e). Furthermore, grayscale levels and quantitative analysis showed conspicuous hypointense T2 signal regions at tumor sites over time in both coronal and transverse MR sections (Fig. 8f and g). Ta4C3-IONP-SPs also exhibited great imaging potential, which was verified by the superior diagnostic performance of T2-weighted MRI using MXene nanocomposites.
As a non-invasive imaging technique, MRI has been exploited for diagnostic imaging guidance in cancer patients. With high biosafety and biocompatibility, MXene nanocomposites have been applied for MRI, which verified better imaging efficiency in both T1-weighted and T2-weighted imaging. Therefore, the unique advantages and multiple diagnostic imaging achieved using MXenes provide a cutting-edge strategy to guide and monitor cancer therapy in further clinical applications.
6.5 Thermal infrared imaging
Thermal infrared (TIR) imaging, also known as infrared thermography, is a widespread non-invasive imaging technique for monitoring thermal biometric variations in surface temperature. Without direct contact with the bodies of humans and animals, thermal cameras used for TIR identify and convert infrared radiation emitted into radiometric thermal images to form superficial temperature distribution maps.124,125 In biomedicine, TIR imaging is applied in the diagnosis of diseases with abnormal thermal patterns, such as cancer, diabetes and peripheral vascular disorders.126 TIR imaging is also used to detect the photothermal conversion capability of photothermal agents by recording the changes in temperature in vitro and in vivo. Ideal photothermal agents achieve excellent performance in TIR. For example, V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD solutions exhibited optical absorbance at 1064 nm.119 At different concentrations (V2C-TAT, 0, 20, 50, 100, 200, and 400 μg mL−1, Fig. 9a) and various power densities (0.24, 0.48, 0.96, 1.44, and 1.92 W cm−2, Fig. 9b), the temperature was enhanced to peak values of 59.6 °C and 63 °C, respectively. This indicated the MXene nanocomposites converted optical energy into thermal energy, generating heat. In TIR imaging, in vivo tumor-bearing mice injected with V2C-TAT and V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD solutions had elevated temperatures (Fig. 9c), reaching more than 43 °C only at the tumor sites after 1064 nm laser irradiation (Fig. 9d). In addition, under laser irradiation at 808 nm, the temperature of the MIG solution (50 ppm) increased to 46 °C within 5 min in vitro (Fig. 9e).127 Furthermore, TIR imaging showed an identical tendency to temperature changes under NIR-I laser irradiation. Laser irradiation at 808 nm increased the temperature of tumor sites after injection with MIG and MXene-IONPs@PEG (MIP) solution containing MXene (Fig. 9f).
 Fig. 9  (a) TIR images of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD solutions with different concentrations under 1064 nm irradiation. (b) Photothermal heat curves of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD solution under 1064 nm laser irradiation at various power densities. (d) The temperature changes and corresponding TIR images (c) at the tumor site in different groups119 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. (e) TIR images of MIG solution at different concentrations in vitro under 808 nm laser irradiation. Copyright 2018 Springer. (f) TIR images of the tumor sites in tumor-bearing mice in the three groups under 808 nm laser irradiation.127 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. 
TIR imaging is an approach for the assessment of surface temperature using relatively simple devices without the risk of radiation exposure. In the process of PTT, TIR images provide dynamic information about surface temperature and the photothermal performance of MXenes has been verified. In other words, TIR imaging can be used for analysis and comparative therapy over a large area, while further guiding the exploitation of PTT, which is beneficial for the selection and identification of photothermal agents.
7 Cancer therapy
Conventional therapies of tumor ablation may induce serious side effects and unsatisfactory outcomes, including damage to normal cells and radiodermatitis.128,129 Consequently, MXenes have been developed for effective and precise invasive cancer therapy. To date, MXenes have been used for the following three main aspects of cancer therapy (Table 4): (i) photothermal transduction agents for PTT of cancer; (ii) the production of free radicals to induce cancer cell death; (iii) synergistic therapy using photothermal, photodynamic, chemical and gaseous approaches.
Table 4 Applications of MXenes in cancer therapy




MXene nanostructure
Photothermal conversion efficiency
Cancer therapy
Bioimaging
Laser
Ref.




N. A.: not applicable, CT: computed tomography, MRI: magnetic resonance imaging, PTT: photothermal therapy, PDT: photodynamic therapy, PAI: photoacoustic imaging, TIR: thermal infrared imaging.




Nb2C-PVP
36.4% at 808 nm and 45.65% at 1064 nm
PTT
TIR imaging
808 nm and 1064 nm

81



Ti3C2 QDs
52%
PTT
TIR imaging
808 nm

52



Ti3C2-DOX
58.3%
PTT, PDT and chemotherapy
TIR imaging
808 nm

72



MnOx/Ta4C3
34,9%
PTT
PAI, TIR, MRI and CT imaging
808 nm

82



Ti3C2-SP
30.6%
PTT
TIR imaging
808 nm

54



Ta4C3-IONP-SP
32.5%
PTT
TIRI, MRI and CT imaging
808 nm

83



Ti3C2-SP
N. A.
PTT and chemotherapy
PAI and TIR imaging
808 nm

84



Mo2C QDs
42.9%
PTT
PAI and TIR imaging
808 nm

130



Ta4C3-SP
44.7%
PTT
PAI, TIR and CT imaging
808 nm

86



CTAC@Nb2C-MSN
28.6%
PTT and chemotherapy
PAI and TIR imaging
1064 nm

78



MXene/DOX@cellulose hydrogel
N. A.
PTT and chemotherapy
TIR imaging
808 nm

87



AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2
27.03%
PTT and PDT
PAI and TIR imaging
1064 nm

91



Mo2C-derived polyoxometalate
36.2% at 808 nm and 47.8% at 1060 nm
PTT and PDT
PAI and TIR imaging
808 nm and 1060 nm

93



Mo2C
24.95%
PTT and PDT
PAI, TIR and CT imaging
1064 nm

121



MXene-IONPs@PEG-GOD
27.27%
PTT and PDT
MRI and TIR imaging
808 nm

92



Ti3C2-BG composite scaffold
N. A.
PTT
TIR imaging
808 nm

94



V2C
48%
PTT
TIR imaging
808 nm

44



Nb2C-MSNs-SNO
39.09%
PTT and photonic thermogaseous therapy.
PAI
1064 nm

45



V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD
45.05%
PTT
PAI, MRI and TIR imaging
1064 nm

119



GdW10@ Ti3C2
21.9%
PTT
MRI, TIR and CT imaging
808 nm

85



DOX@ Ti3C2@mMSNs-RGD
23.2%
PTT and chemotherapy
PAI and TIR imaging
808 nm

77



Ti3C2@Au
34.3% at 808 nm and 39.6% at 1064 nm
PTT and radiotherapy
PAI and CT imaging
808 nm and 1064 nm

74



Ti3C2-CoNWs
34.42%
PTT and chemotherapy
N. A.
808 nm

131



Ti2N
48.62% at 808 nm and 45.51% at 1064
PTT
PAI and TIR imaging
808 nm and 1064 nm

43



NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx
N. A.
PDT
N. A.
N. A

132



Nb2C/zein
N. A.
PTT
TIR imaging
1064 nm

133



PVP/Nb2C microneedles
36.4% at 808 nm and 45.65% at 1064 nm
PTT
TIR imaging
808 nm and 1064 nm

134



Ti3C2@Met@CP
59.6%
PTT, PDT and chemotherapy
TIR imaging
808 nm

135





7.1 Photothermal therapy
PTT is a promising approach to eliminate local tumors.136 Due to the thermal sensitivity of cancer cells, heat results in irreversible protein denaturation and damage to the cell membrane.137,138 PTT converts the energy obtained from light into thermal energy through the photothermal effect of photothermal transduction agents (PTAs) and NIR radiation. During this process, the temperatures of surrounding tissues are elevated, which initiates the death of cancer cells and minimizes damage to non-targeted tissues.139,140 Efficient PTT should possess the preconditions of excellent photothermal performance, superior photothermal conversion efficiency (PTCE) and nontoxicity.141 Among various 2D nanomaterials, MXenes are influential candidates for PTT due to their distinctive optical properties and biocompatibility.
Fluorine-free Ti3C2 QDs can be used to accomplish the rapid conversion of optical energy into thermal energy at very low concentrations (10 ppm). Furthermore, the photothermal conversion efficiency can reach 52.2%, which is higher than that of most previous PPT agents.52 Following culturing with HeLa, MCF-7, U251 and HEK 293 cells at a high dose of 100 ppm, the cytotoxic effects of Ti3C2 QDs were induced only under NIR laser irradiation. In addition, the synthesized Ti3C2 nanosheets showed photothermal stability and a PTCE of 59.8% in the NIR-I biowindow, which is higher than that of Ta4C3-SP (approximately 44.7%) and Ti2N QDs (48.62% and 45.51%).43,54,86,135 Breast tumor-bearing mice were treated with intravenous injections of Ti2N QDs. Under irradiation at 808 nm and 1064 nm, the temperatures at the tumor sites increased rapidly from 37.3 °C to 60.1 °C and 37.2 °C to 69.2 °C, respectively. Remarkably, the tumors in mice completely disappeared without any recurrence, leaving black scars at the irradiated sites.
Intriguingly, researchers integrated 2D Ti3C2 with 3D-printed bioactive glass (BG) scaffolds (designated TBGS) to destroy bone tumors by photonic hyperthermia while regenerating the damaged bone tissues.94 The 3D BG scaffolds were soaked with aqueous suspensions of Ti3C2 at different doses to obtain the optimal modified TBGS (Fig. 10a). In contrast to the rough and loosened surfaces of pure BG scaffolds, the surfaces of TBGS absorbed nanosheets were relatively smooth. Both SEM and element mapping analysis showed that the Ti and C signals tended to decrease from the surface to the interior of the scaffold. In addition to the results of energy-dispersive spectrometry analysis, these results revealed the preconceived structure and element distribution of TBGS coated with a Ti3C2 layer. Regardless of a dry or wet environment, the final equilibrium temperature is elevated gradually, with a maximum temperature of over 55 °C at power densities of 0.5, 0.75 and 1.0 W. In addition, the temperature of the TBGS induced by five cycles of laser irradiation showed high photothermal stability. Under laser irradiation at 808 nm, less than 40% of Saos-2 cells survived in culture TBGS with effective induction of apoptosis, thus exhibiting its excellent capacity for tumor cell destruction (Fig. 10b). The number of viable tumor cells decreased with the extension of irradiation time, frequency and power density. In a study involving a model of osteosarcoma of the distal femur or proximal tibia, the TBGS was implanted and phototherapy was administered after resection of tumors. Following laser irradiation at 808 nm with a power density of 1.0 W cm−2 for 10 min, the temperature at the sites of implanted TBGS increased rapidly to 63 °C, whereas the temperature in the BGS group increased to only 37 °C. At two weeks after treatment, the solid tumors in the TBGS group under laser irradiation at 808 nm were eradicated without reoccurrence (Fig. 10d and e). Furthermore, H&E staining and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling (TUNEL) demonstrated that the proliferation of Saos-2 cancer cells was inhibited following NIR-I irradiation (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of pure BGS and TBGS, including 3D printing and further Ti3C2 MXene integration. (b) CLSM images of dead (red) and live (green) Saos-2 cells under different treatments. (c) Photographs of tumor-bearing mice on day 14 under different treatments. H&E, TUNEL (apoptosis), and Ki-67 (proliferation) staining of tumor tissues 1 day after different treatments. (d) Increasing temperature curves of the tumor sites in the TBGS + NIR and BGS + NIR groups. (e) Variation in the tumor volumes over a period of time in different groups.94 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (f) Representative morphology and magnified imaging of the PVP/Nb2C microneedle array. Scale bar = 500 μm. (g) Images of BALB/c nude mouse and tumor-bearing mice after treatment with PVP/Nb2C microneedles (red solid circles).134 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In comparison with classical Ti3C2 and Ta4C3 for breast cancer, Nb2C, V2C and Mo2C are not only effective as novel PTAs for PTT, but also enable both harmless degradation and biocompatibility.42,44,130 Within 10 min, the temperature of the V2C solution increased to 57.98 °C at a concentration of 200 μg mL−1, while the PTCE was outstanding at 48%. Furthermore, V2C nanosheets displayed little cytotoxicity to MCF-7 cells. In contrast, only cancer cells were killed under laser irradiation at 808 nm through excellent photothermal effects in vitro. Subsequently, the distribution and blood circulation showed that V2C accumulated in the tumor and was excreted from the main organs with a blood circulation half-life of 1.53 h, which confirmed the PTT efficiency. After PTT for 12 days, the MCF-7 tumors were nearly ablated with negligible loss of body weight. In another study, the exposure of Nb2C-PVP to NIR-I and NIR-II biowindows had PTCEs of 36.5% and 46.65%, respectively, accompanied by notably increased temperature at five different densities.81 Compared with Au nanorods and indocyanine green, this material exhibited uniquely enduring and stable photothermal performance. In deep tissue PTT, Nb2C-PVP can penetrate to the depth of 4 mm in nude mouse tumors under different levels of laser irradiation. Tumors were nearly eradicated and the average lifespan of mice in the Nb2C-PVP treatment group was over 50 days, which indicated the outstanding effectiveness of Nb2C-PVP in promoting cancer cell and solid tumor ablation under NIR-I or NIR-II laser irradiation. Subsequent research combined Nb2C with a PVP microneedle system (Fig. 10f) and zein for superficial or local tumors that developed safe, precise, and high-efficiency strategies for photothermal therapy in tumor ablation (Fig. 10g).133,134
Unique photothermal conversion efficiency has promoted the use of MXenes in PTT of cancer. MXenes and their nanoscale composites accumulate effectively in cancer cells for precisely targeted therapy. Furthermore, various surface modifications contribute to the improvement of photothermal traits. The capacity of MXenes to achieve tumor elimination has highlighted their potential as excellent PTAs that will enhance the progress of PTT in tumor treatment.
7.2 Photodynamic therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a promising treatment strategy that exploits the accumulation of photosensitizers in tumor tissues to transfer NIR irradiation to molecular oxygen, leading to the generation of ROS.142,143 MXenes effectively generate free radicals for PDT. After the co-culturing of cells and Ti2C-PEG nanosheets for 24 h, tumor cell lines exhibited lower viability and increasing levels of ROS compared with those of normal cell lines, indicating that Ti2C-PEG nanosheets have higher selectivity against malignant cells.99 However, the hypoxic tumor microenvironment leads to a poor therapeutic outcome. In free-radical-mediated PDT, the generation of ROS is dependent on the local oxygen content.144,145 Similarly, hydroxyl radicals are not induced if the concentration of endogenous tumor hydrogen peroxide is insufficient.146
Following modification of MXene nanosheets with the catalysts glucose oxidase (GOD) and superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (Fe3O4, IONPs), tumor take up of glucose was catalyzed to produce large amounts of hydrogen peroxide. Fe3O4 nanoparticles in the tumor microenvironment then catalyze the production of hydroxyl radicals via the Fenton reaction.92 Researchers prepared nonoxidized MXene-Ti3C2Tx QDs (NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx) for cancer treatment (Fig. 11a), which showed the characteristics of a regular disk-shape, remarkable water dispersion, and Fenton-like reaction according to the ultrafast low-temperature microexplosion method.132 To detect the production of OH, the electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrum showed a typical 1:2:2:1 OH signal after NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx was added to the H2O2 solution (Fig. 11b). Compared with the cancer cells without NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx, 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA), the fluorescent probe of ROS, stained with strong green fluorescence, confirmed massive intracellular ROS production in NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx-treated cancer cells (Fig. 11d). Therefore, the concentration of GSH was 2–4 times greater than that of the normal cells (Fig. 11c). During the treatment of tumor-bearing BALB/c nude mice, the tumor volumes of the NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx groups were evidently decreased without losing any weight (Fig. 11e). With the observation of intratumor bleeding in the NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx groups (Fig. 11f), researchers speculated that NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx could react with excess H2O2 in the tumor microenvironment in order to produce OH and then destroy the integrity of the tumor vessels.
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic diagram of the mechanism of action of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx in treating tumors. (b) The ESR spectra of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx with H2O2 in the presence of DMPO (pH 6.5). (c) The GSH/GSSG ratio in HeLa cells before and after incubation with 150 μg mL−1 of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx. (d) ROS staining in HeLa and MCF-7 cells before and after incubation with 150 μg mL−1 of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx for 6 h. (e) A photograph of the dissected tumor from each group after different treatments. (f) A photograph of the internal structure of tumors, in which the inside of the tumor is hollow, but develops a spherical shell shape after 32 days of treatment.132 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (g) A schematic diagram of the therapeutic effects of AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 on cancer cells. (h) Bright- and dark-field high resolution TEM images of Nb2C@mSiO2 from the lateral (top) and vertical (bottom) perspectives. (i) ESR spectra of POBN in AIPH, Nb2C@mSiO2 nanoparticles, and AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 nanoparticle solution under 1064 nm laser irradiation for 3 min.91 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, with the assistance of the photothermal conversion of MXenes under NIR laser irradiation, the local temperature was increased, which further accelerated the catalytic reaction and cancer cell destruction. In addition, 2,2′-azobis[2-(2-imidazolin-2-yl) propane]dihydrochloride (AIPH) molecules decompose as a result of thermal activation to generate free radicals via a process that does not rely on oxygen levels. Nb2C@mSiO2 was prepared as a free-radical nanogenerator by coating Nb2C nanosheets with mesoporous silica in situ to guarantee a high loading of radical initiators and controllable free-radical release.91 AIPH was then introduced to the nanosheets to construct AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 (Fig. 11g and h), which possessed good optical stability and PTCE in the NIR-II region to permit precise control of the amount released for cancer treatment. By altering the power intensity or laser irradiation time to increase the temperature, AIPH can be released from the mesopores of AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2, with cumulative amounts reaching 45.5% and 34.7%, respectively. Following 1064 nm laser irradiation for 3 min, detection of the strong ESR signal peak of radicals (Fig. 11i) confirmed the close connection between the free-radical generation ability of AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 and laser irradiation. The absorbance of 2,2-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) free radicals (ABTS+˙) used for the detection of AIPH decomposition increased with irradiation in a time-dependent manner. In addition, heating AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 nanocomposites induced the generation of free radicals (green fluorescence) in both normoxic and hypoxic environments. After incubation with 4T1 cells under normoxic or hypoxic conditions, the fluorescence intensity of cellular take up was enhanced by approximately 15-fold. In the AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 group, cell apoptosis reached more than 85% and deformed the cytoskeleton under NIR-II laser irradiation following irradiation at 1064 nm. In vivo exposure of AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 to NIR-II laser irradiation reduced the tumor volume significantly, accompanied by increased cell apoptosis/necrosis during the 14-day period of treatment. In contrast, the single use of AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 without irradiation had only a negligible therapeutic effect on solid tumors.
Cancer cells are destroyed by PDT in a safe manner with good target specificity. As a photosensitizer, MXene composites exert significant inhibitory effects on cancer cells. The integration of oxygen-independent free-radical generation with the photothermal effect of MXene nanosheets provides a strategy for synergistic thermodynamic cancer treatment under anoxic conditions.
7.3 Synergetic therapy
Current research on the synergetic therapies of cancer refers to photothermal/photodynamic or chemodynamic therapy, or photothermal/chemotherapy and thermogaseous therapy. Under NIR irradiation, Mo2C produces notable ROS levels to achieve the synergetic outcomes of PPT and PDT.121 Mo2C has been utilized to load polyoxometalate (POM) as a chemodynamic (CD) agent that induces ROS for light- and oxygen-independent synergized PTT therapy.93 Acidifying POM clusters resulted in their self-assembly into spherical aggregates that effectively strengthened the absorbance of NIR-II laser irradiation as well as promoting selective accumulation in the tumor by the EPR effect. Treatment of Mo2C-derived POM with H2O2 induced high levels of ROS. POM was revived by endogenous reductants to sustain the cyclic production of 1O2. Using a fluorescent probe to detect ROS, heat was shown to promote the efficiency of ROS production in HeLa cells. ROS damage the function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, resulting in tumor cell destruction, an effect that is achieved only by chemodynamic therapy and/or PTT. Compared with the control group, POM induced marked increases in ROS within the tumor, especially under 1060 nm laser irradiation, leading to a reduction in solid tumor size and even elimination.
The self-assembly of cetanecyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) on Nb2C coated with tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) produced a uniform therapeutic mesopore layer on the surface of MXenes, which were designated CTAC@Nb2C-MSN.78 Retaining CTAC within the mesopores is required for this material to function as a chemotherapeutic agent directly. CTAC@Nb2C-MSN not only assisted chemotherapy to promote PTT, but also ensured the loading drug capacity, thus avoiding the complex processes of surfactant extraction and loading. Conjugation with RGD (a targeting peptide) allowed the selective recognition of the overexpressed integrin αvβ3 on the cancer cell membrane by CTAC@Nb2C-MSN-PEG-RGD to achieve the synergy of chemotherapy and PTT. MXenes can also be developed to deliver drugs for cancer chemotherapy with dual functionalities. The large surface area of Ti3C2 provides abundant anchoring sites for drug delivery. Ti3C2 nanosheets have been used as a multifunctional nanoplatform with a loading capacity of 84.2% for doxorubicin (DOX) and tumor-targeting hyaluronic acid (HA) via a layer-by-layer adsorption method.72 Ti3C2-DOX accumulates at tumor sites selectively and effectively within hours of injection. In another study, researchers combined chemotherapy and PTT to prepare DOX@Ti3C2-SP as an ideal drug delivery system for cancer therapy.84 By stirring nanosheets in DOX solution, DOX was introduced onto the surface of Ti3C2-SP and a heterostructured titanium carbide-cobalt nanowire (Ti3C2-CoNW) nanocarrier was obtained with excellent loading efficiencies, reaching 211.8% and 225.05%.131 With a decrease in the pH levels, DOX release was accelerated. In particular, the photothermal conversion of Ti3C2-SP and Ti3C2-CoNWs enhanced DOX release, making them pH-responsive and NIR-accelerated drug release systems due to the local thermal effect under 808 nm laser irradiation. Furthermore, MXene can also be modified with cellulose to generate MXene/DOX@cellulose hydrogels, which have expansile pores as well as enhanced photothermal and flexible physical performance for tumor eradication.87 Under irradiation, the pores of MXene/DOX@cellulose hydrogel expand, leading to the rapid release of DOX. A recent study designed multifunctional MXene to realize photothermal/photodynamic/chemotherapy for cancer. Metformin (Met) and compound polysaccharide (CP) were absorbed on the surface of Ti3C2 nanosheets to establish a nanocomposite drug delivery system (Ti3C2@Met@CP; Fig. 12a).135 Ti3C2 (Fig. 12b) demonstrated excellent features of high superficial area, PTCE, and effective singlet oxygen generation. Adequate irradiation time and illumination power density greatly improved the efficiency of Ti3C2@Met@CP to eliminate MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 12c), the mortality of which was apparently higher than that in other groups with 808 nm laser irradiation for 10 min. Then, subsequent animal experiments demonstrated the good therapeutic effect of Ti3C2@Met@CP under laser irradiation, whereby the solid tumors were ablated gradually without metastasis and recurrence (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of PTT/PDT/chemotherapy using Ti3C2@Met@CP. (b) TEM image of the Ti3C2 nanosheets. (c) CLSM images of MDA-MB-231 cells after different treatments with calcein-AM and propidium iodide staining. (d) Photographs of tumor-bearing mice and their tumor regions after different treatments.135 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic diagram of NO release from Nb2C-MSNs-SNO under 1064 nm laser irradiation. (f) Evaluation of NO release from negative control group (deionized water), positive control group (NaNO2), Nb2C-MSNs-SNO and Nb2C-MSNs-PEG after exposure to 1064 nm laser irradiation. (g) Quantitative assessment of NO release from Nb2C-MSNs-SNO and Nb2C-MSNs-PEG after various treatments with different power densities and concentrations (h). (i) Tumor inhibition rate of tumor-bearing mice following different treatments. (j) Western blot analysis and quantitative assessments of Bid, caspase-3 and caspase-7 protein expression in tumor tissues in different groups.45 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
Very recently, researchers explored an emerging thermogaseous cancer therapy using MXenes.45 Nb2C-MSNs-SNO nanocomposites were generated by coating Nb2C nanosheets with a mesoporous silica layer to provide reservoirs for NO donors (S-nitrosothiol, RSNO) by NIR irradiation (Fig. 12e). NO, which is a gasotransmitter, is used for eliminating cancer cells by oxidative and nitrosative stress as mechanisms to induce mitochondrial and DNA dysfunction.147 Nb2C-MSNs-SNO nanosheets not only had a good PTCE, but also controlled the release of NO. After irradiation at 1064 nm for 10 min, the Nb2C-MSNs-SNO solution was introduced into a Griess assay, in which a black solution turned red (Fig. 12f) to indicate the effective release of NO by the nanocomposites in a laser power density- and concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 12g and h). With different concentrations and laser power densities, the synergistic photonic thermogaseous therapeutic modality of Nb2C-MSNs-SNO composites showed a notable lethal effect on cancer cells only after irradiation. Furthermore, Nb2C-MSNs-SNO exhibited greater inhibitory effects on tumor volumes than that of Nb2C-MSNs-PEG (Fig. 12i). This material induced the upregulation of the apoptotic proteins Bid, caspase-3 and caspase-7 to trigger cancer cell apoptosis without injury to normal cells (Fig. 12j). Thus, thermogaseous therapy combined with PTT represents a novel strategy for cancer therapeutics.
The strong NIR absorption and efficient light-to-heat conversion of MXenes attracted tremendous attention in the exploration of synergetic therapy. Any kinds of synergetic therapy were based on the photothermal effects of MXenes. Due to surface modifications and multi-functionalization, MXenes created flexible and strengthening agents in various synergetic therapies for cancer. In addition, thanks to the advantages of synergism, the therapeutic effects and targeting ability of MXenes were enhanced by low toxicity. Hence, the outstanding optical properties endow MXenes with promising potential for tumor ablation.
8 Tissue regeneration
Similarly, the integration of surgery and chemotherapy may have some drawbacks, in that tissue defects exceed the self-healing ability and cause chronic pain in bone cancer patients.148,149 Delayed wound healing also induces financial and physical burdens on humans. The vascular system supplies adequate oxygen and nutrients, which play a crucial role in maintaining the growth and development of tissues. Following the infiltration of macrophages around the damaged tissues, they then secrete growth factors and cytokines, such as vascular endothelial growth factor, which stimulate angiogenesis, maturation of osteoblasts, ossification, re-epithelization and collagen synthesis in the bone tissues and wound.150–152 Accordingly, tissue regeneration, reconstruction and angiogenesis can be considered as the key issues to remedy these limitations. 2D nanomaterials are of great interest due to their high biocompatibility and biodegradable performance for tissue reconstruction.153,154 MXenes, which have excellent biocompatibility, also have advantages in cell and tissue regeneration.103,155 Ti3C2Tx was developed to accelerate the skin wounding healing process with good biodegradability and flexibility, according to its combination with regenerated bacterial cellulose.156 The composite nanofibers embedded Ti3C2 into nanofibers, introduced functional groups and enhanced hydrophilicity, which promoted the osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of mesenchymal stem cells.157 When MXenes were cultured with preosteoblast cells, the nanosheets promoted greater spreading, adhesion and proliferation of preosteoblasts compared with the effects of Ti alloy and pure Ti. In fibroblasts, the proliferative rate of MXenes was 3-fold greater than that of the osteoblasts. Ti3C2Tx was embedded in poly-lactic acid (PLA) to generate n-octyltriethoxysilane (OTES)-Ti3C2Tx/PLA nanocomposite membranes, which enhanced the ultimate tensile strength significantly. Similarly, preosteoblasts attached to the membranes and generated more protein. Compared with pure PLA membranes, the activity and proliferation of preosteoblast cells were much greater on OTES-Ti3C2Tx/PLA nanocomposite membranes.158
Furthermore, MXenes were prepared as guided bone regeneration (GBR) membranes. The ideal GBR films serve as a scaffold to induce stem cell attachment and bone cell migration. These films are also capable of promoting the differentiation of stem cells into osteoblasts.159–161 UHAPNWs/MXene nanocomposite membranes, which integrated Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and ultralong hydroxyapatite nanowires, guided bone cell attachments and prevented the interference of non-osteogenic tissues to maintain space for osteogenesis and promote bone regeneration.162 Following incubation with MXene nanosheets, the activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), a common marker of early osteoblastic differentiation of bone cells, was superior to that of the control groups in both osteogenic medium and growth medium.107 The mRNA levels of ALP, osteocalcin and osteopontin were also obviously increased in the MXene groups. In vivo, calvarial defect rats were covered with adherent MXene membranes. After 8 weeks, the rats treated with MXene membranes had nearly recovered with no evident infection or complications. Under micro-CT, MXene membranes were found to induce the production of uniform and continuous new bone without obvious malposition, as well as the formation of bone islands, indicating the extension of bone tissues from the defect margins and the formation of new bone. Evaluation of the bone volume fraction and trabecular thickness confirmed that MXene films were highly compatible with osseous and surrounding tissues.
To repair injured bone tissues after surgery and chemotherapy, the Ti3C2-BG scaffold could be an ideal bridge biomaterial to provide the structural support for cellular behavior and physiological activity.94 On the Ti3C2-BG scaffold, human bone mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) were recruited to adhere to the surface of the scaffold, exhibiting a disseminated form with extending pseudopodia, especially after 7 days (Fig. 13a and b). After 21 days, Alizarin red S staining of osteogenic differentiation showed a marked increase in calcium nodules, indicating the enhancement of osteogenic capability with the Ti3C2-BG scaffold (Fig. 13c). In addition, the expression of osteoblast-related genes, including collagen type I (COL I), Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), osteocalcin (OCN) and osteopontin (OPN), was significantly enhanced compared with that in the control and BGS groups (Fig. 13d). After implantation of the Ti3C2-BG scaffolds for 24 weeks, 3D reconstruction images obtained by micro-CT showed further calcification of tissues in the defective cranial apexes, in keeping with the results of fundamental quantitative parameter analysis (Fig. 13e). The local secondary inflammation caused by photothermal therapy could recruit precursor cells to regenerate, similar to that in the primary phase of bone healing. Furthermore, compared with the BGS group, there were some mineralized bone tissues, which promoted the formation of new bone surrounding the implantation region of the TBGS, as revealed by Goldner staining (Fig. 13f). During the 8 weeks of the study, fibroblasts and macrophages were first recruited to the pores of the TBGS. This was followed by the formation of red osteoid tissues around the scaffolds and concurrent degradation of the TBGS occurred at 16 weeks. Finally, the defective bones were nearly recovered and covered with mineralized bones without any visible scaffold or obvious toxicity, infection, and inflammation (Fig. 13g). Consequently, the addition of Ti3C2 could efficiently accelerate the regeneration of new bone tissues for better reconstruction of the defective bone. Then, researchers applied thermogaseous and 3D printing to construct MS/MXene-BG-SNO, which combined Nb2C MXene wrapped with S-nitrosothiol (R SNO)-grafted mesoporous silica and 3D-printed BG scaffolds, to achieve controlled NO release, tumor ablation, and bone tissue regeneration.163 The increased vasculature surrounding the MXene scaffold demonstrated its combined role in neovascularization and bone regeneration. More importantly, the network of blood vessels benefited osseous circulation and scaffold degradation. Moreover, a novel implant, SP@MX/GelMA, consisted of Ti3C2 nanosheets, gelatin methacrylate (GelMA) hydrogels, and bioinert sulfonated polyether ether ketone (SP).164 The introduction of tobramycin endowed the implant with antibacterial activity and enhanced osteogenicity, which was a promising strategy to repair postoperative injured tissues.
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of hBMSCs at day 1 after seeding on 1.0 TBGS. (b) CLSM images of hBMSCs on BGSs and TBGSs at days 1 and 7. (c) Alizarin red S staining of control, BGSs, and TBGSs at day 21. (d) Osteogenic gene expression (COL1, RUNX2, OPN, and OCN) of hBMSCs in the three groups at day 7. (e) 3D reconstruction (top) and micro-CT images (bottom) of circular defects at 24 weeks after scaffold implantation. (f) Goldner staining of harvested craniums of rats at week 24 after implantation of BGS and TBGS. Green tissues (yellow triangles) are mineralized bone tissues. (g) Goldner staining of TBGS group at 8, 16 and 24 weeks. Black asterisks indicate implanted scaffolds that were not biodegraded completely. Yellow triangles indicate new osseous tissue.94 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
The high biosafety and biocompatibility of MXenes offer favorable conditions for tissue regeneration and a good curative effect. The combination of Ti3C2 and 3D-printed scaffolds, combined with the photothermal conversion effect of MXene and the bone regeneration ability of the scaffold, facilitated the reconstruction of the bone defect after the destruction of residual bone-tumor cells. These studies not only provide a novel nanoplatform, but also open a new direction for the biomedical application of MXenes.
9 Biosensors
On account of their outstanding electrical conductivity, hydrophilicity and multilayer nanostructures, MXenes play a crucial role as attachment sites for signal molecules and use in electrochemical sensing. MXene nanosheets have been utilized for highly sensitive detection and imaging of DNA, aptamers, enzymes, antibodies and other molecules (Table 5) and monitoring changes in disease diagnosis and bioanalysis.
Table 5 Applications of MXenes in biomarker detection




Biosensing material
Biomarker
Detection linear range
Detection limit
Ref.




ACOP: acetaminophen, CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen, FA: folic acid, GSH: glutathione, human papillomavirus, INZ: isoniazid, HPV, UA: uric acid.




Ti3C2
Phenol
0.05–15.5 μM
12 nM

186



f-Ti3C2-MXene
CEA
0.0001–2000 ng mL−1
0.000018 ng mL−1

172



Ti3C2/DNA/Pd/Pt
Dopamine
0.2–1000 μM
30 nM

182



Ti3C2-MXene/AuNPs
CEA
0.0002–20000 pM
0.07 fM

174



MXene flake/Cu
GSH
5.0–100 μM
3.0 μM

88



AuNP@Ti3C2Tx
UA and FA
0.03–1520 μM (UA) and 0.02–3580 μM (FA)
11.5 nM (UA) and 6.20 nM (FA)

190



AuNPs/MoS2/Ti3C2
miRNA-182
1 fM–0.1 nM
0.43 fM

169



Ti3C2Tx
Dopamine
0.015–10 mM
3 nM

183



MXene-Ti3C2/CuS
Cholesterol
10–100 μM
1.9 μM

191



Ti3C2Tx
ACOP and INZ
0.25–2000 μM (ACOP) and 0.1–4.6 mM (INZ)
0.048 μM (ACOP) and 64 μM (INZ)

181



TiO2/Ti3C2
GSH
0.1–1000 μM
0.009 μM

179



Ti3C2
HPV
0.5 nM–50 nM.
100 pM

170



ε-Poly-L-lysine L-protected Ti3C2
Cytochrome c and trypsin
0.2–40 μM (cytochrome c) and 0.5–80 μg mL−1 (trypsin)
20.5 nM (cytochrome c) and 0.1 μg mL−1 (trypsin)

193



GSH-Ti3C2 MQDs
UA
1.2–75 mM
125 nM

189



cDNA-Fc/MXene
MUC1
0.001–1.0 × 104 nM
0.33 × 103 nM

166



TiO2/C-QDs
GSH
0.5–25 μM
0.2 μM

180



N-Ti3C2-MXene-hollow gold nanoparticles
CEA
0.001–1000 pM
0.15 fM

175





9.1 Tumor biomarker detection
The detection of tumor biomarkers has significant implications for early diagnosis and treatment of cancer.165 Larger surface area and superb conductivity are the advantages of MXenes for applications in tumor biomarker detection. For instance, researchers bound cDNA-ferrocene to MXene on the sensing electrode (Apt/Au/GCE), forming cDNA-Fc/MXene/Apt/Au/GCE.166 Competitive binding of Mucin1 (MUC1, a breast cancer marker) to the aptasensor modified on the electrode rather than to cDNA-Fc/MXene induced a conformational change in the DNA and disintegration of the Apt/cDNA-Fc double strand (Fig. 14a). This separation of the cDNA-Fc/MXene probe from the sensing electrode reduced the electrical signal to indicate a quantitative change in bound MUC1. The large surface area of Ti3C2 amplified the detection signals and enhanced the sensitivity. This aptasensor had a wide linear range of 1.0 pM–10 mM and a low detection limit of 0.33 pM (Fig. 14b and c). MicroRNA (miRNAs) detection by Ti3C2 was also reported for cancer diagnosis. MoS2/Ti3C2 nanohybrids were prepared to detect miRNA-182 and exhibited a tissue specific association with lung cancer development and evolution.167,168 Due to the good conductivity and large surface of MoS2/Ti3C2, this system is well suited to the detection of miRNA in serum.169 Tests on miRNA-182 at different concentrations showed that the biosensor was highly sensitive to changes in concentrations. The average peak current had a linear relationship with the logarithm of the concentration of miRNA-182 in the range from 1 fM to 0.1 nM.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the procedure used to prepare the competitive electrochemical aptasensor. (b) After the detection of different concentrations of MUC1, a corresponding square wave voltammogram is shown. The concentration of MUC1 ranged from a to i: 0, 1 pM, 10 pM, 100 pM, 1 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, 10 μM. (c) The standard curve of MUC1 detection.166 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B. V. (d) Schematic diagram of the electrochemical CEA detection mechanism. (e) TEM imaging of a single f-Ti3C2-MXene sheet. (f) The calibration plot of the magnitudes of current recorded versus the log of CEA concentration. (g) Response of the BSA/anti-CEA/f-Ti3C2-MXene/GC electrode at different doses of CEA (0.0001–2000 ng mL−1) (left). The panel on the right shows an enlarged view of the response.172 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B. V. 
In a study of cervical cancer, researchers provided a strategy for human papillomavirus (HPV) detection based on Ti3C2.170 They utilized the high fluorescence quenching ability of Ti3C2 and different affinities for ssDNA versus dsDNA to develop an “off–on” fluorescent nanoprobe for the detection of HPV-18. The dye-labeled ssDNA is attached to the surface of Ti3C2 nanosheets as a probe that quenches the fluorescence of the dye and hybridizes with its complementary target DNA to form a fluorescent dsDNA. Researchers also utilized Ti3C2 as a surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensor by coating it on the surface of metal thin films.171 In addition, researchers generated probes (BSA/anti-CEA/f-Ti3C2-MXene/GC) that were introduced to amino groups on the surfaces of single/few-layered Ti3C2 for covalent immobilization of anti-carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (Fig. 14d and e).172 CEA is a significant cancer biomarker that is widely used for the early identification of cancers, such as breast, gastric, liver, pancreatic and colorectal cancer.173 The high density of functional groups of Ti3C2 provides an advantage for loading biomolecules and rapid access to the analyte. The BSA/anti-CEA/f-Ti3C2-MXene/GC bioelectrode displayed a wide linear detection range from 0.0001 to 2000 ng mL−1 with good sensitivity (Fig. 14f and g). This is an ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensor for CEA detection that promotes the stability of the sensor. To further improve the sensitivity of detection, researchers combined a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)-polydopamine (PDA)-Ag nanoparticle (AgNP) signal enhancer with Ti3C2-MXene modified with staphylococcal protein A (SPA) to orient and immobilize monoclonal anti-CEA antibodies.174 The sensing platform of Ti3C2-MXene/AuNPs/SPA exhibited a superior detection range and an ultra-low detection limit of 0.07 fM compared with some reported biosensors. Furthermore, it had a high recovery, selectivity and sensitivity for the analysis of human serum samples. Very recently, a Ti3C2 nanosheet-based SPR biosensor was prepared that detected CEA with a detection range of 0.001–1000 pM, which indicated high sensitivity and selectivity.175
These studies demonstrated the feasibility and flexibility offered by MXenes as biosensors for tumor biomarker detection. Depending on the preparation and detection methods, MXene-based biosensors exhibited a wider linear detection range with good selectivity, which expanded their potential for biomedical applications.
9.2 Non-tumor biomarker detection
Glutathione (GSH), which plays pivotal roles in cell growth, function and immunity, is closely related to disorders such as cancer,176 diabetes and liver damage.177,178 Researchers have exploited the advantages of Ti3C2 QDs for photoelectrochemical (PEC) sensing and magnifying the absorption in the NIR region to detect GSH.179 TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystal (IOPC)/Ti3C2 QD composite films were prepared to form a novel type-II heterojunction full-spectrum-driven PEC sensor (TiO2/Ti3C2/Nafion electrode, Fig. 15a). As a type of photoactivation supporter, TiO2 connected strongly and easily with Ti3C2 QDs because Ti3C2 QDs had a much higher surface area and rich hydrophilic functional groups (Fig. 15b). The match of TiO2 and Ti3C2 QDs achieved directional carrier transfer, promoted the separation of charges and inhibited charge recombination. With increasing GSH concentration from 0.1 to 1000 μM, the photocurrent of the TiO2/Ti3C2/Nafion electrode was gradually increased under 150 W xenon light excitation at a potential of 0.1 V (Fig. 15c). In cell-based experiments, it also exhibited an excellent linear relationship with different HeLa cell numbers. At 1 μM to 200 μM GSH, the linear and detection limits were 0.99 and 0.55 μM, respectively (Fig. 15d). A study of stability confirmed that the photovoltaic behavior remained unchanged after 16 cycles. Despite the addition of some interfering substances, the TiO2/Ti3C2/Nafion electrode maintained good selectivity and anti-interference capacity.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the PEC mechanism of a TiO2/Ti3C2 electrode under illumination with standard solar lights. (b) HR-TEM image of TiO2/Ti3C2. (c) The changes in photocurrent induced by different GSH concentrations at a potential of 0.1 V. (d) Plot of HeLa cell number under 150 W xenon light excitation.179 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B. V. (e) Schematic diagram of the preparation of TiO2/C-QDs and detection of GSH. (f) The color change and absorbance of the groups with/without GSH after a 3 min reaction (2 mM TMB, pH 5, and 25 °C). (g) The color changes and UV-vis absorption spectra of the TiO2/C-QDs-TMB-PBS system with various GSH concentrations (2 mM TMB, pH 5, and 25 °C). (h) Studies of the selectivity of the TiO2/C-QDs-TMB-PBS system using GSH and other potential interferences.180 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, the oxidase-like activity of TiO2/C-QDs was utilized, by the addition of QDs of TiO2 on carbon to smaller and few-layered Ti3C2in situ.180 Owing to the absorbance of O2 in solution and the production of ROS, TiO2/C-QDs oxidized 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) to form TMBox, which is the oxidized form of TMB (Fig. 15e). GSH, a scavenger of reductive free radicals, consumes ROS and reduces the oxidation of TMB. Therefore, a decrease in the conversion of oxidized TMBox to TMB reduces the UV-vis absorbance at 652 nm, resulting in the transformation of a solution of the TiO2/C-QDs + TMB system from blue to colorless (Fig. 15f) as the concentration of GSH increases (Fig. 15g). More importantly, tests with various amino acids and relevant metal ions showed that this system was capable of suppressing the color change in the reaction of TMB (Fig. 15h), which indicated good selectivity for GSH. This specific detection of GSH was fast and sensitive with a linear range of 0.5–25 μM and a detection limit of 0.2 μM.
MXene flakes/Cu nanoclusters (NCs) are another example. Researchers formed MXene flakes and Cu NCs via electrostatic interactions.88 The decomposition of MXene flakes/Cu NCs permits GSH to recover the PL of Cu NCs, which is quenched by MXene flakes through an inner filter effect. Fluorescence and UV-visible spectrophotometry illustrated the recovery and obvious enhancement of PL intensity after introducing GSH because of host–guest interactions. This assay provided a single test for GSH ranging from 5.0 to 100 μM with a detection limit of 3.0 μM for target recognition, corresponding signal output and further magnification. MXenes have also been applied to the evaluation of drug and toxins, including acetaminophen, isoniazid,181 dopamine,182,183 mycotoxins,184 organophosphate,185 phenol186 and furazolidone,187 with good reproducibility and high selectivity.
MXenes have also received much attention for sensing biomarkers in human blood. Researchers constructed an electrochemical microfluidic chip that was integrated with a screen-printed electrode and a dialysis microfluidic chip based on MXene-Ti3C2Tx to analyze uric acid, urea, and creatinine.188 Very recently, researchers utilized GSH functionalized Ti3C2 MQDs (GSH-Ti3C2 MQDs) to achieve a naked-eye colorimetric and ratiometric fluorescence method for the detection of uric acid.189 Moreover, gold nanoparticles were placed on delaminated titanium Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. This nanocomposite was then combined with a glassy carbon electrode to sense uric acid and folic acid.190 Researchers selected hydrothermal methods to synthesize nanocomposites such as MXene-Ti3C2/CuS, ε-poly-L-lysine-protected Ti3C2 and MXene/NiCo-LDH for applications including colorimetric sensing, fluorometric sensing and modification of electrodes to detect H2O2, copper ions,112 cholesterol,191 glucose,192 cytochrome c and trypsin.193 At the cellular level, field-effect transistors (FET) have been prepared using ultrathin Ti3C2 and cultured neurons with MXene-FET biosensors to monitor dopamine and hippocampal spiking activity.194 Researchers developed a ratiometric pH sensor using Ti3C2 QDs passivated with polyethyleneimine to monitor intracellular pH.64 MXenes were successfully prepared as chemiluminescence biosensors for the detection of exosomes in serum.114,195 These strategies demonstrate that MXenes have excellent reproducibility, sensitivity and biocompatibility. Thus, MXene-derived nanomaterials provide feasible, sensitive and reliable tools for biological and clinical assay systems.
The feasibility and universality of functionalized MXenes for non-tumor biomarker detection have become a focus of research. By using methods such as electrochemical and colorimetric techniques, MXene composites have been developed that are superior to other 2D nanomaterials. The abundance of excellent properties of MXenes provide a massive untapped potential for biosensing.
9.3 Pulse monitoring
Integrating gels or microcapsules with MXenes lead to attractive sensing performances for measuring blood pressure and monitoring pulse rates. Some conditions can be diagnosed and distinguished based on pulse monitoring.196 For instance, researchers constructed Ti3C2/natural microcapsule (Ti3C2/NMC) biocomposite films in which Ti3C2 nanosheets were embedded in natural hierarchical microcapsules to form a biomimetic interlocked structure under vacuum filtration (Fig. 16a).197 The biocomposite films had better mechanical properties than those of pure Ti3C2 films, which demonstrated their superior deformability (Fig. 16b and c). Due to the high conductivity of Ti3C2 nanosheets and numerous available contact sites formed by the special interlocked structure (Fig. 16d), Ti3C2/NMC biocomposite films offer good sensitivity (Fig. 16e) and stability, even in tests of 5000 cycles of application/removal of an external force. The sensitivity of a sensor placed on a person's middle finger was enhanced by increasing the bending angle of the finger, providing a method that can be used to monitor articular nimbleness (Fig. 16f).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ti3C2/NMC biocomposite films. (b and c) SEM and optical images of the Ti3C2/NMC biocomposite films. (d) The schematic diagram for the flexible sensor of Ti3C2/NMC biocomposite films with an interlocked structure. (e) Pressure response of the sensor under various bending angles. (f) Monitoring current changes in the wrist position pulse pressure using the sensor.197 (g) Schematic diagram of MX/rGO aerogel for pressure sensing. (h) SEM images of MX/rGO aerogel under high magnification. (i) Current changes with respect to the applied pressure under different GO/MXene ratios. (j) Comparison of MX/rGO aerogel and rGO aerogel in terms of response time and recovery time. (k) Monitoring current change of the jugular vein pulse pressure using the sensor.198 Copyright 2018, 2019 America Chemical Society. 
A hybrid 3D MXene/reduced graphene oxide (MX/rGO) was prepared for use in a piezoresistive sensor (Fig. 16g).198 MX/rGO aerogel provides the large specific surface area of rGO and the excellent conductivity of MXene as well as abundant pores. Under repeated compression–release cycled, the aerogel was compressed by over 60%, so that the pores and the distance between the pores decreased, causing an increase in the conductive path (Fig. 16h). Increased amounts of MXene resulted in improvements to the conductive path, leading to enhanced sensitivity of the hybrid aerogel with a constant concentration of rGO (Fig. 16i). Furthermore, MX/rGO had robust mechanical properties of rapid response (245 ms) and recovery time (212 ms), which were beneficial for the recycling of sensing materials (Fig. 16j). After 10000 cycles, there was little signal attenuation and the stability was maintained to provide the material with a long working life. When the MX/rGO aerogel was placed on the jugular vein and wrist to monitor pulses, changes in the relevant waveforms were obvious and clearly distinguished (Fig. 16k). In addition, MXene-based conductive hydrogels were explored as a wearable strain sensor with antifreeze, self-healing and conductive properties.199–201
The MXene composites combined with gels or microcapsules have high deformability and flexible sensing capability. Even when measuring the pulse, which is a weak physiological signal in humans, MXene biosensors still show a rapid response and great stability. In addition, low cost and the wide range of MXene biosensors are also very appealing. The good performance in real-time monitoring of pulses indicates a promising role in health monitoring applications.
10 Others
MXenes are desirable drug carriers because of their large surface area. Absorption and functionalization with hydrogel endow MXenes with improved DOX-loading capability for combination with chemotherapy and photothermal ablation of cancer.72,87 Furthermore, the mechanical properties of Ti3C2/PAM NC hydrogels, which utilize Ti3C2 as a cross-linker for in situ free-radical polymerization, can be enhanced by improving the concentration of Ti3C2, which is crucial for a robust and stable network.76 Despite elongation and severe compression, Ti3C2/PAM NC hydrogels did not exhibit fractures and recovered without a compression force. Furthermore, using chloramphenicol as a model drug, the honeycomb-like structure and excellent swelling ability of Ti3C2/PAM NC hydrogels showed promise as a carrier, with percentage release values and drug loadings that were much higher than those of traditional organic cross-linked BIS/PAM hydrogels.
Recent research showed that Nb2C could be utilized as a radioprotectant because of its antioxidant effect.202 Ionizing radiation (IR) produced destructive ROS, which damaged cellular DNA, proteins and lipids.203,204 Different concentrations of surface-modified Nb2C effectively eliminated superoxide radicals in a concentration-dependent manner. Following elevation of the Nb2C-PVP concentration, the signal of hydrogen peroxide was diminished, revealing its function as a ROS scavenger. When the 3T3/A31 fibroblast cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) were exposed to IR, pretreatment with Nb2C-PVP notably decreased cell death and apoptosis, as well as lowering ROS levels. Injection of Nb2C-PVP promoted the survival of mice exposed to sublethal (5 Gy) and lethal (6.5 Gy) doses of radiation, with rates reaching 100% and 81.25%, respectively. In addition, Nb2C-PVP accelerated hematopoiesis and alleviated hemorrhage and depletion of the bone marrow caused by IR. Furthermore, without pretreatment, the total SOD activity was decreased by approximately 38%–71%. Nb2C-PVP reversed the decline and the SOD activities were restored by decreasing MDA after pretreatment with Nb2C-PVP. This relieved oxidative damage to cells and tissues and showed a protective response against IR-induced degeneration of multiple organs, including the small intestine, lung, and liver in mice. Nb2C-PVP, which is an excellent radioprotectant with the properties of low toxicity and rapid clearance, awaits further development for applications in the field of radiation protection.
Very recently, MXene was applied as a candidate material for engineered cardiac patches (ECPs) to constructure functional cardiac tissues in the treatment of myocardial infarction. Due to its excellent conductivity, biocompatibility, and hydrophilicity, researchers introduced Ti2C into a mussel-inspired cryogel to develop a cardiac patch (Ti2C-cryogel) with better mechanical strength and toughness. In vitro, Ti2C-cryogel promoted cardiac cell maturation and vessel-shape framework formation by offering a more physiological-lie conditions for endothelial cells. In vivo, the transplanted Ti2C-cryogel ECP adhered to the surface of the epicardium, reduced inflammatory reaction, triggered microvessel density, and improved the heart function after transplantation for 4 weeks. These studies together reveal the novel explorations of MXene nanomaterials that are crucial for the in-depth study of MXenes and the utilization of their features to expand their application range.205
11 Conclusions and future perspectives
From their discovery in 2011 to the present day, MXenes have been applied in many and varied fields due to their large surface area, ease of functionalization, high conductivity and good optical properties. As an emerging class of nanomaterial, the electronic properties of MXenes endow sufficient flexibility to synthesis and modification processes; these materials are prepared to absorb and detect ions, biomarkers, and drugs. MXene's excellent optical properties facilitate the realization of photoconversion that can be readily combined to design photoresponsive nanocomposites for imaging-guided diagnosis and synergistic therapies. These characteristic properties have demonstrated that MXenes are appropriate for integration with biomedicine, offering opportunities to broaden their application domains. However, complex preparation processes using bottom-up methods tend to lack widespread research and applications using this method have been proposed to control the morphology of MXenes without surface functional groups. Top-down methods are the mainstream method of MXene synthesis. Through the design of surface modifications with moieties including PEG, noble metals and targeted peptides, MXenes perform various functions, indicating that multi-functionalization is crucial for the effective exploitation of MXenes. Furthermore, methods for bulk production, reduced cost and improved stability must be addressed for further industrial translation. Precise control of the surface engineering and in vivo release, as well as sustaining good biodegradation, is required for the development of surface modifications.
Since their simple and direct application as biosensors, the applications of MXenes have been extended to antibacterials, drug delivery, medical diagnosis and therapy. As photothermal agents, both pure nanoscale MXene and its nanocomposites, MXenes mediate photothermal performance, and thus, exhibit commendable potential for enhanced theranostics. Based on the photothermal effect, MXenes play critical or coordinated roles in therapies to improve and strengthen the outcomes, especially in phototherapy and synergistic therapy. Surface modifications and the incorporation of targeting groups promote the accumulation and localization of MXenes in tumor tissues. Integration with chemotherapy and PDT further damage the tumor microenvironment to inhibit solid tumor growth and reduce metastasis and recurrence in vivo. Especially, studies have extended the applied scope of MXenes to tissue engineering and cardiology, which have broadened their application domain significantly. However, potential clinical translation must consider various issues. The ultimate aim of researchers should be to exploit the advantages of nanomedicine for treatments and diagnosis, making it essential to evaluate detailed toxicological and adverse effects. Although studies have indicated low cytotoxicity and good biocompatibility, the pharmacokinetic characteristics of MXenes and relevant composites, including absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and unavoidable immune responses, remain to be defined. In addition, studies reveal the superiority of MXenes in PTT and PDT, while avoiding injury to surrounding tissues and organs. Therefore, further clinical investigations to minimize side effects are indispensable. Compared with other 2D materials, MXenes are still emerging entities in the field of biomedical development. Thus, a multi-disciplinary research approach and increasing investment are expected to promote clinical transformation and bioapplications in fields such as medicine, chemistry, and pharmacy to overcome these challenges. We expect that increased exploration of MXenes will promote our understanding and reveal the further potential of MXenes in clinical and translational applications to benefit the well-being of humans.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2019B1515120043), the Guangdong Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (2018A030310623) and the Guangdong Provincial Medical Scientific Research Foundation of China (A2019027).
Notes and references
P. Pashazadeh-Panahi and M. Hasanzadeh, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2019, 120, 109484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, R. Zhu, J. Song, H. Yang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805875 Search PubMed .
P. Gao, X. Chang, D. Zhang, Y. Cai, G. Chen, H. Wang and T. Wang, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2021, 11, 1175–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao, P. Li, L. Li and M. Yang, Acta Biomater., 2018, 74, 36–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie, C. Kang, H. Zhang, O. C. Farokhzad and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
K. Zheng and J. Xie, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 665–679 CrossRef CAS .
D. An, J. Fu, Z. Xie, C. Xing, B. Zhang, B. Wang and M. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 7076–7120 RSC .
K. Huang, Z. Li, J. Lin, G. Han and P. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5109–5124 RSC .
L. Cheng, X. Wang, F. Gong, T. Liu and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, e1902333 Search PubMed .
T. Fan, Y. Zhou, M. Qiu and H. Zhang, J. Innovative Opt. Health Sci., 2018, 11, 1830003 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and L. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15685–15708 RSC .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. VahidMohammadi, J. Rosen and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2021, 372, eabf1581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hantanasirisakul and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804779 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhang and H. Xie, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 81–120 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, R. Jiang, Y. Feng, H. Ouyang, N. Zhou, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2019, 12, 1325–1338 RSC .
X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Cao and G. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 2742–2757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, Z. Ren and G. Singh, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, A. V. Kuklin, A. Baev, Y. Ge and P. N. Prasad, Phys. Rep., 2020, 848, 1–58 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Bhattarai, Z. Dai and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2053–2108 RSC .
H. Lin, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800518 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rasool, M. Helal, A. Ali, C. E. Ren, Y. Gogotsi and K. A. Mahmoud, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3674–3684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Akuzum, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, N. J. Alvarez, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2685–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Balfourier, J. Kolosnjaj-Tabi, N. Luciani, F. Carn and F. Gazeau, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 22639–22648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jeong, E. Choi, E. Ellis and T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 3480–3496 RSC .
X. Yan, W. Zhennan, Y. Qiaofeng and X. Jianping, Aggregate, 2021, 2, 19114–19132 Search PubMed .
A. Nair, J. T. Haponiuk, S. Thomas and S. Gopi, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2020, 132, 110834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mo, L. Hu, G. Zeng, G. Chen, J. Wan, Z. Yu, Z. Huang, K. He, C. Zhang and M. Cheng, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2017, 101, 2713–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jia, W. Xu, Z. Ye, Y. Wang, Q. Dong, E. Wang, D. Li and J. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, e2003707 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Lin, Y. C. Chen and P. I. Huang, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zheng, L. Xiao, L. Wang, J. Cui, D. Sha and C. Liu, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 375–6386 Search PubMed .
X. Deng, H. Liang, W. Yang and Z. Shao, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2020, 208, 111913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fu, G. R. Williams, S. Niu, J. Wu, F. Gao, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Li and L. M. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 14739–14750 RSC .
Y. Kang, X. Ji, Z. Li, Z. Su and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 4609–4619 RSC .
T. Guo, Q. Tang, Y. Guo, H. Qiu, J. Dai, C. Xing, S. Zhuang and G. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 306–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, N. Kong, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Xiao, S. T. Gan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Song, Q. Xiong, S. Shi, Z. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, L. Mei and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, e1803031 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hu, L. Xie, Y. Zhang, M. Hanyu, Z. Yang, K. Nagatsu, H. Suzuki, J. Ouyang, X. Ji, J. Wei, H. Xu, O. C. Farokhzad, S. H. Liang, L. Wang, W. Tao and M. R. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Tang, C. Li, Y. Lu, L. Cheng and J. Liu, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 472–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Shao, Z. Li, Q. Ren, X. F. Yu and S. Liu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5587–5594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Xiao, D. Liang, X. Liang, L. Mi, J. Wang and J. Liu, Acta Biomater., 2020, 107, 260–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, R. Wang, Y. Zhou, L. Ding, X. Gao, B. Zhou, P. Hu and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901942 CrossRef .
J. Shao, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, J. Lin and P. Huang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 126009 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zada, W. Dai, Z. Kai, H. Lu, X. Meng, Y. Zhang, Y. Cheng, F. Yan, P. Fu, X. Zhang and H. Dong, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 6601–6606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, X. Guan, H. Lin, Y. Pu, Y. Fang, W. Yue, B. Zhou, Q. Wang, Y. Chen and H. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Han, S. Luo, L. Xie, J. Zhu, W. Wei, X. Chen, F. Liu, W. Chen, J. Zhao, L. Dong, K. Yu, X. Zeng, F. Rao, L. Wang and Y. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8443–8452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, B. Wu and L. Li, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9000–9006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, T. Fan, W. Chen, Y. Li and B. Wang, Bioact. Mater., 2020, 5, 1071–1086 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, T. S. Mathis, A. Sarycheva, C. B. Hatter, S. Uzun, A. Levitt and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5444–5448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L. A. Näslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, X. Cai, H. Cui, S. W. Lee, X. F. Yu and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17859–17864 RSC .
J. Xuan, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Liang, L. Cheng, X. Yang, Z. Liu, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and F. Geng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14569–14574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 384–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X. L. Ma, H. M. Cheng and W. Ren, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Gedeon, Z. Cheng, C. Xu, Z. Shao, H. Sun, S. Li, Y. Cao, X. Zhang, Q. Bian, L. Liu, Z. Liu, H. M. Cheng, W. Ren and M. Pan, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3327–3335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, W. Luo, H. Kitadai, X. Wang and X. Ling, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807160 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Geng, X. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Sun, W. Fu, J. Chen, W. Liu, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700072 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, W. Sun, D. Geng, W. Fu, J. Dan, Y. Xie, P. Kent, W. Zhou, S. J. Pennycook and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1808343 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dong, H. Kumar, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 422–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarikurt, D. Çakır, M. Keçeli and C. Sevik, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8859–8868 RSC .
C. Ma, Q. Yuan, H. Du, M. G. Ma, C. Si and P. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34226–34234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, X. Sun, W. Xu, G. Pan, D. Zhou, J. Zhu, H. Wang, X. Bai, B. Dong and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1111–1118 RSC .
S. Yan, Z. Yimeng, Z. Huixin, L. Meiling and L. Yang, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 10668–10676 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fu, D. An, Y. Song, C. Wang, M. Qiu and H. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 422, 213467 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, S. Long, B. Li, L. Yan, W. Xie, Y. Niu, X. Wang, Q. Guo and A. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 117, 21870–21878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, D. Zhu, L. Yan, N. Wang, L. Han, X. Bao, Z. Du, Y. Niu and R. Yang, J. Phys. Chem., 2015, 120, 22757–22765 Search PubMed .
M. Qiu, R. G. Brandt, Y. Niu, X. Bao, D. Yu, N. Wang, L. Han, L. Yu, S. Xia and R. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8501–8511 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, Q. Meng, L. Quan, S. Liu and H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 448–5460 Search PubMed .
D. Zhu, Q. Zhu, C. Gu, D. Ouyang, M. Qiu, X. Bao and R. Yang, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 5788–5795 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Zou, Q. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, P. Chen, J. Shao and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40077–40086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, Z. Dong, R. Zhang, X. Yi, K. Yang, M. Jin, C. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Z. Liu and L. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 284–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Hussein, M. M. Zagho, B. R. Rizeq, N. N. Younes, G. Pintus, K. A. Mahmoud, G. K. Nasrallah and A. A. Elzatahry, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 4529–4539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, X. J. Yang, P. Li, Y. Zhao and Q. J. Niu, Soft Matter, 2019, 16, 162–169 RSC .
Z. Li, H. Zhang, J. Han, Y. Chen, H. Lin and T. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706981 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, X. Jing, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, H. Ran, P. Li and Y. Chen, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 4491–4508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, P. Zeng, X. Zhu, C. Lei, Y. Huang and Z. Nie, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 8819–8826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mohammadniaei, A. Koyappayil, Y. Sun, J. Min and M. H. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 159, 112208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, S. Gao, C. Dai, Y. Chen and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16235–16247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, Y. Chen, X. Jing, L. Xiang, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Liu, X. Han and R. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12696–12712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Lin, M. Zhao, C. Dai, S. Zhang, W. Peng and Y. Chen, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 1648–1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, J. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, P. Li and Y. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, e1701394 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zong, H. Wu, H. Lin and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 4149–4168 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Y. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703284 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xing, S. Chen, X. Liang, Q. Liu, M. Qu, Q. Zou, J. Li, H. Tan, L. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27631–27643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. E. Shi, F. Han, L. Xie, C. Zhang, T. Li, H. Wang, W. F. Lai, S. Luo, W. Wei, Z. Wang and Y. Huang, Mikrochim. Acta, 2019, 187, 38 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Zha, X. Zhao, J. H. Pu, L. S. Tang, K. Ke, R. Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36589–36597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Song, S. Wei, S. Zeng, S. Yang, C. Lei, Y. Huang, Z. Nie and S. Yao, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 8622–8629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, H. Lin, L. Yu and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2223–2235 CAS .
L. Gao, J. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Peng, W. Lu, L. Yu, Z. Yan and Y. Wang, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 92–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Zhu, H. Guo, A. Sun, P. Chen, L. Xi, W. Huang, X. Song and X. Dong, Angew. Chem., 2019, 121, 800 Search PubMed .
S. Pan, J. Yin, L. Yu, C. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Gao and Y. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, Y. Luo, H. Lin, M. Ge, J. Shi and X. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 1086–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zheng, S. Li, L. Jing, P. Y. Chen and J. Xie, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, e2001007 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chao, Y. Luodan, Y. Heliang, C. Yu and H. Yongqiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2006214 Search PubMed .
L. Zhou, H. Zheng, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Liu, F. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Kong, F. Zhou and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2468–2480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Szuplewska, D. Kulpińska, A. Dybko, A. M. Jastrzębska, T. Wojciechowski, A. Rozmysłowska, M. Chudy, I. Grabowska-Jadach, W. Ziemkowska, Z. Brzózka and A. Olszyna, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 98, 874–886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Jastrzębska, A. Szuplewska, T. Wojciechowski, M. Chudy, W. Ziemkowska, L. Chlubny, A. Rozmysłowska and A. Olszyna, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 339, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Szuplewska, A. Rozmysłowska-Wojciechowska, S. Poźniak, T. Wojciechowski, M. Birowska, M. Popielski, M. Chudy, W. Ziemkowska, L. Chlubny, D. Moszczyńska, A. Olszyna, J. A. Majewski and A. M. Jastrzębska, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2019, 17, 114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scheibe, J. K. Wychowaniec, M. Scheibe, B. Peplińska, M. Jarek, G. Nowaczyk and Ł. Przysiecka, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 5, 6557–6569 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, N. Qiu, Q. Deng, M. Kang, H. Yang, J. Baek, Y. Koh, S. Du, Q. Huang and H. Kim, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 2293–2301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, B. Huang, X. Liu, W. Yuan, Y. Zheng, Z. Li, K. Yeung, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Cui and S. Wu, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 568–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, H. Ge, L. Zhang, X. Lei, Y. Yang, Y. Fu and H. Feng, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2020, 33, 2953–2962 Search PubMed .
G. Nasrallah, M. Al-Asmakh, K. Rasool and K. A. Mahmoud, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1002–1011 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Fu and A. Mo, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 10091–10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rasool, K. A. Mahmoud, D. J. Johnson, M. Helal, G. R. Berdiyorov and Y. Gogotsi, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1598 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Arabi Shamsabadi, M. Sharifian Gh., B. Anasori and M. Soroush, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16586–16596 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, J. Zhao, S. Yi, X. Wan and J. Tang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 309, 127735 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xue, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, S. Du, Q. Huang and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604847 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Guan, J. Ma, W. Yang, R. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Dong, Y. Fan, L. Cai, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, N. Li and Q. Xu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14123–14133 RSC .
Z. Guo, X. Zhu, S. Wang, C. Lei, Y. Huang, Z. Nie and S. Yao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19579–19585 RSC .
Q. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Liu and Y. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 12737–12744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Dai, H. Lu, F. Yang, H. Dong and X. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10615–10618 RSC .
C. L. Manzanares-Palenzuela, A. M. Pourrahimi, J. Gonzalez-Julian, Z. Sofer, M. Pykal, M. Otyepka and M. Pumera, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 10010–10017 RSC .
S. Wang, S. Wei, S. Wang, X. Zhu, C. Lei, Y. Huang, Z. Nie and S. Yao, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Upputuri and M. Pramanik, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2020, 12, e1618 Search PubMed .
Y. Cao, T. Wu, K. Zhang, X. Meng, W. Dai, D. Wang, H. Dong and X. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1499–1510 CAS .
Q. Chen, J. Wen, H. Li, Y. Xu, F. Liu and S. Sun, Biomaterials, 2016, 106, 144–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Huang, C. Yang, F. Wang, C. Song, Y. Gao, Y. Qiu, M. Yan, B. Yang and C. Guo, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 2729–2739 RSC .
Z. Zijian, B. Ruiliang, W. Zhantong, B. Henry, L. Lixin, M. Hellmut, M. Jeeva, T. Longguang, T. Wei, T. Rui, Y. Guocan, M. Ying, N. Gang, G. Jinhao and C. Xiaoyuan, Bioconjugate Chem., 2019, 30, 1821–1829 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jeong, H. S. Hwang and K. Na, Biomater. Res., 2018, 22, 20 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cardone and A. Merla, Sensors, 2017, 17, 1042 CrossRef PubMed .
B. D. S. Lokesh, S. Jeyakumar, V. P. Jitendra, M. Sathiyabarathi, A. Manimaran, A. Kumaresan, H. A. Pushpadass, M. Sivaram, K. P. Ramesha and M. A. Kataktalware, J. Therm. Biol., 2018, 78, 10–21 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Mambou, P. Maresova, O. Krejcar, A. Selamat and K. Kuca, Sensors, 2018, 18, 211–216 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liang, Y. Li, M. Huo, H. Lin and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42917–42931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, P. Jungsuwadee, M. Vore, D. A. Butterfield and D. K. St Clair, Mol. Interventions, 2007, 7, 147–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lorette and L. Machet, Cancer Radiother., 2001, 5(Suppl 1), 116s–120s CrossRef .
W. Dai, H. Dong and X. Zhang, Materials, 2018, 11, 1776 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Han, W. Yang, X. Gan, Y. Yang, K. Xie, L. Xie and Y. Deng, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 116, 111212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. Liu, D. Huang, N. Xue, Y. Dang, M. Zhang, L. Zhang, B. Li, D. Liu, L. Wang, H. Liu and X. Tao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000308 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhou, Y. Pu, H. Lin, W. Yue, H. Yin, Y. Yin, W. Ren, C. Zhao, Y. Chen and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 5257–5266 RSC .
S. Lin, H. Lin, M. Yang, M. Ge, Y. Chen and Y. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 10265–10276 RSC .
L. Bai, W. Yi, T. Sun, Y. Tian, P. Zhang, J. Si, X. Hou and J. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 6402–6417 RSC .
J. Chen, C. Ning, Z. Zhou, P. Yu, Y. Zhu, G. Tan and C. Mao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 99, 1–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ito, M. Shinkai, H. Honda, K. Yoshikawa, S. Saga, T. Wakabayashi, J. Yoshida and T. Kobayashi, Cancer Immunol. Immunother., 2003, 52, 80–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Melamed, R. S. Edelstein and E. S. Day, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Thang, Z. Wang, X. Lu and B. Xing, Theranostics, 2019, 9, 3308–3340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hwang, J. Nam, S. Jung, J. Song, H. Doh and S. Kim, Nanomedicine, 2014, 9, 2003–2022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Hu, Y. J. Cheng and X. Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22657–22672 RSC .
J. Chen, T. Fan, Z. Xie, Q. Zeng, P. Xue, T. Zheng, Y. Chen, X. Luo and H. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2020, 237, 119827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shanmugapriya and H. W. Kang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 105, 110110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, H. Chen, H. P. Tham, S. Phua, J. G. Liu and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27553–27562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, F. Xue, T. Yi, H. P. Tham, J. G. Liu and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16344–16351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lennicke, J. Rahn, R. Lichtenfels, L. A. Wessjohann and B. Seliger, Cell Commun. Signaling, 2015, 13, 39 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fan, N. He, Q. He, Y. Liu, Y. Ma, X. Fu, Y. Liu, P. Huang and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20055–20062 RSC .
N. Zhang, D. Zhao, N. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Xie, Y. Ji, C. Zhou, J. Zhuang, Y. Wang and J. Yan, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med., 2018, 29, 138 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Szivek, D. A. Gonzales, A. M. Wojtanowski, M. A. Martinez and J. L. Smith, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2019, 107, 242–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hu and B. R. Olsen, J. Clin. Invest., 2016, 126, 509–526 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Casarrubios, A. Polo-Montalvo, M. C. Serrano, M. J. Feito, M. Vallet-Regí, D. Arcos and M. T. Portolés, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, R. Fu, C. Zhu and D. Fan, Colloids Surf., B, 2021, 205, 111869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dubey, R. Bentini, I. Islam, C. Tong and V. Rosa, Stem Cells Int., 2015, 2015, 804213 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Yu, J. Chang and C. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13678–13708 RSC .
A. Rafieerad, W. Yan, G. L. Sequiera, N. Sareen, E. Abu-El-Rub, M. Moudgil and S. Dhingra, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, e1900569 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mao, S. Hu, Y. Gao, L. Wang, W. Zhao, L. Fu, H. Cheng, L. Xia, S. Xie, W. Ye, Z. Shi and G. Yang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, e2000872 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Huang, X. Chen, Y. Dong, X. Zhang, Y. Wei, Z. Yang, W. Li, Y. Guo, J. Liu, Z. Yang, H. Wang and L. Jin, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 2125–2131 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Deng, S. Jeong, T. Jang, S. Du, H. Kim, Q. Huang and C. Han, Mater. Lett., 2018, 229, 114–117 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Bottino, V. Thomas, G. Schmidt, Y. K. Vohra, T. M. Chu, M. J. Kowolik and G. M. Janowski, Dent. Mater., 2012, 28, 703–721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, N. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Jiang and F. Wu, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 171, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Bottino and V. Thomas, Front. Oral Biol., 2015, 17, 90–100 Search PubMed .
Y. Fu, J. Zhang, H. Lin and A. Mo, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2021, 118, 111367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, H. Yin, T. Xu, D. Zhu, J. Yin, Y. Chen, X. Yu, J. Gao, C. Zhang, Y. Chen and Y. Gao, Small, 2020, 16, e1906814 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yin, Q. Han, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Gan, K. Xie, L. Xie and Y. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 45891–45903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bray, J. Ferlay, I. Soerjomataram, R. L. Siegel, L. A. Torre and A. Jemal, CA Cancer J. Clin., 2018, 68, 394–424 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Sun, L. Lu, X. Yang, J. Xia, F. Zhang and Z. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1094, 18–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Zhao, Y. Fan, J. Liu, X. Li, H. Liu and J. Chen, Mol. Carcinog., 2018, 57, 125–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, H. Gong, Y. Yuan, Y. Li, C. Wang, W. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Liu, H. Liu and J. Chen, J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res., 2018, 37, 141 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Wei, S. Jiao, S. Zhu and X. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 137, 45–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, Y. Zhang, D. Lu, Y. Guo and S. Guo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 286, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Q. You, Y. Shan, S. Gan, Y. Zhao, X. Dai and Y. Xiang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 210–215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, Y. Lei, N. H. Alshareef, M. A. Quevedo-Lopez and K. N. Salama, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 121, 243–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, H. Ma, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, T. Yan, B. Du and Q. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37637–37644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, N. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Xu, S. Wei, J. Wu, G. Jia, X. Fang, F. Chen and X. Cui, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 144, 111697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, N. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, J. Wu, G. Jia, F. Ji, X. Fang, F. Chen and X. Cui, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 3354–3360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Li, S. Liu, C. Ma and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10846–10847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Fruehauf and F. L. Meyskens Jr., Clin. Cancer Res., 2007, 13, 789–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Zhang, C. Zheng, S. S. Guo, J. Li, H. H. Yang and G. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3426–3434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Li, G. Pan, W. Xu, J. Zhu, D. Zhou, D. Li, C. Chen, G. Lu and H. Song, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 289, 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, G. Xu, Y. Niu, X. Ding, Y. Han, W. Kong, Y. Fang, H. Niu and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 3513–3518 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X. Jiang, J. Zhang, H. Zhang and Y. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 130, 315–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, B. Wang, A. Ding, B. Weng and J. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 816, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, A. Iqbal, S. A. Zaidi, S. Hwang and C. M. Koo, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 79, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Li, Y. Huang, M. Xiong, F. Wang and C. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 142, 111531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, X. Zhang, L. Ma, J. Gao and Y. Jiang, Biochem. Eng. J., 2017, 128, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, X. Lu, Dhanjai, Z. S. Wu, Y. Dong, X. Wang, S. Zheng and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 107, 69–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kokulnathan and T. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 2554–2561 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Jiang, R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Wu, W. Lu, J. Li, Y. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807326 CrossRef .
M. Liu, Y. He, J. Zhou, Y. Ge, J. Zhou and G. Song, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1103, 134–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Elumalai, V. Mani, N. Jeromiyas, V. K. Ponnusamy and M. Yoshimura, Mikrochim. Acta, 2019, 187, 33 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Kang, L. Kong, H. Shi, Y. Zhang, M. Cui and D. P. Yang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 104, 110000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Fang, H. Zhou, F. Wu, Y. Lu, H. Luo, Y. Zhang and B. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 495, 143554 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, J. Zhou, Y. He, Z. Cai, Y. Ge, J. Zhou and G. Song, Mikrochim. Acta, 2019, 186, 770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, M. Zhu, W. Zhang, X. Zhen, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, C. Zhi and P. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3333–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Q. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 124–125, 184–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pang, J. H. Koo, A. Nguyen, J. M. Caves, M. G. Kim, A. Chortos, K. Kim, P. J. Wang, J. B. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 634–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Z. Lou, L. Wang, L. Zhao, S. Zhao, D. Wang, W. Han, K. Jiang and G. Shen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9139–9147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. Yue, H. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Zhao, J. Rao, S. Luo, J. Wang, X. Jiang, Z. Liu, N. Liu and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3209–3216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhang, K. H. Lee, D. H. Anjum, R. Sougrat, Q. Jiang, H. Kim and H. N. Alshareef, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0098 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liao, X. Guo, P. Wan and G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904507 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, L. Wan, Y. Gao, X. Fang, T. Lu, L. Pan and F. Xuan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900285 CrossRef .
X. Ren, M. Huo, M. Wang, H. Lin, X. Zhang, J. Yin, Y. Chen and H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 6438–6454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shao, Y. Luo and D. Zhou, Antioxid. Redox Signal., 2014, 20, 1447–1462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Pisoschi and A. Pop, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2015, 97, 55–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ye, Z. Wen, F. Wen, X. Song, L. Wang, C. Li, Y. He, S. Prakash and X. Qiu, Theranostics, 2020, 10, 2047–2066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Metal nanoparticles	Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery	High stability, high density and strong affinity for sulfurized compounds	Nonbiodegradability, and unpredictable release	
25 and 26
Metal nanoclusters	Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery	Ultrafine size, tunable biomolecular sequence, biocompatibility, and variable bioactivities	Size heterogeneity, instability and susceptible to oxidation	
3, 6 and 27
Quantum dots	Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery	Strong fluorescence, robust photostability, small size, long half-life in circulation	High cytotoxicity of cadmium metal, oil solubility and low yield	
4, 28 and 29
2D nanomaterials	Antibacterials, bioimaging, biosensor, theranostics and drug delivery	Large surface area, ultrathin size, hydrophilicity, high biocompatibility, safety, and biodegradability	Low yield and susceptible to oxidation	
5, 8 and 21



Graphene

rGO@AuNS-DODAB/DOPE-FA	51.3 nm	38.6%	To 52.6 °C	0.1 W cm−2 for 10 min	808 nm	PTT and PAI	
30

nZVI/rGO@pDA	250 nm long and 0.88 nm thick	24.1%	From 37 to 42.3 °C	1.5 W cm−2 for 3.5 min	808 nm	PDT, PTT and MRI	
31

GO-IONP-PEG	50–150 nm	N. A.	From 28 to 56.6 °C	2 W cm−2 for 8 min	808 nm	PTT, drug delivery and MRI	
32

GO-PEG	300–500 nm	N. A.	To 50 °C	0.7 W cm−2 for 90 s	808 nm	PTT	
33


Boron nanosheets

DOX-17AAG@B-PEG-cRGD	6.1 nm thick	41%	To 58.5 °C	1 W cm−2 for 5 min	808 nm	PTT and drug delivery	
34

B@Ce6-PAH-PAA	2.4 nm thick	43.8%	Elevating 38.8 °C	2 W cm−2 for 5 min	808 nm	PTT and PDT	
35

BQDs-PEG	2.2 ± 0.4 nm thick	23.7%	To 52 °C	1 W cm−2 for 10 min	808 nm	PTT and PA imaging	
36

B-PEG/DOX	20 to 50 nm think	42.5%	Elevating 37 °C	2 W cm−2 for 5 min	808 nm	PTT and drug delivery	
37


Black phosphorus

BP@Cu0.2@PEG-RGD	60–120 nm laterally	35.4%	Elevating 31 °C	1 W cm−2 for 10 min	808 nm	PTT, CDT and PET	
38

HA-BP	30 nm	46.05%	Elevating 30.4 °C	1.5 W cm−2 for 10 min	808 nm	PTT, PDT, immunotherapy and PAI	
39

BP/DTX@PLGA	3 nm	N. A.	Elevating 20 °C	1 W cm−2 for 10 min	808 nm	Drug delivery and PTT	
40

BPNS-GNBP	Length size of 80 ± 4 nm	41.3%	Elevating 40 °C	1 W cm−2 for 6 min	808 nm	PTT and PDT	
41


MXene

Mo2C-PVA	2.2–9.0 nm thick	24.5% at 808 nm and 43.3% at 1064 nm	From 25.0 to 57.8 °C at 808 nm and to 62.3 °C at 1064 nm	1 W cm−2 for 10 min	808 and 1064 nm	PTT	
42

Ti2N QDs	4.83 ± 2.69 nm laterally	48.62% at 808 nm and 45.51% at 1064 nm	To 60 °C	1 W cm−2 for 5 min	808 and 1064 nm	PTT and PAI	
43

V2C nanosheets	50–100 nm	48%	To 57.9 °C	0.48 W cm−2 for 5 min	808 nm	PTT, MRI and PAI	
44

Nb2C-MSNs-SNO	∼200 nm laterally	39.09%	To 59.6 °C	1.5 W cm−2 for 5 min	1064 nm	Thermogaseous therapy and PAI	
45


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the process for MXene nanosheet synthesis. (b) Scanning electron microscopy images showing the compact structure of the MAX phase. After etching (c), a certain amount of thick intercalated-MXene layers (d) showed spontaneous delamination. (e) MXene nanosheets were formed by ultrasonication.46 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (f) A schematic diagram showing the reaction between TBAOH and Al to achieve intercalation and form Al(OH)4−, which promotes a critical process. Fractured Ti–Al metallic bonds and intercalated ions promote delamination. (g) AFM image of extremely thin delaminated nanosheets.53 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (h) A schematic diagram of the synthesis of V2C using algae extract. (i) Element mapping of V2AlC untreated (top) and treated (bottom) with algae solution for 48 h.44 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Crystal structure of α-Mo2C.57 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Images of different shapes of α-Mo2C crystals on a Cu/Mo substrate. (c) Optical image of hexagonal ultrathin α-Mo2C crystal; size, approximately 100 μm. (d) Optical image of hexagonal ultrathin α-Mo2C crystals; thicknesses, 6.7 nm.55 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (e) Schematic diagram of growth in situ under low and high CH4 flow rates. (f) Optical image of α-Mo2C crystals on a Cu surface at a low CH4 flow rate. (g) AFM image of hexagonal Mo2C crystals on Cu surface. (h) Optical image of α-Mo2C crystals on graphene at a high CH4 flow rate. (i) AFM image of hexagonal Mo2C crystals on graphene.58 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 


Nb2C-PVP	PVP	∼150 nm laterally and 0.5–0.8 nm thick	Cancer therapy and TIR imaging	
81

MnOx/Ta4C3-SP	MnOx and SP	∼190 nm laterally	Cancer therapy, PAI, MRI and CT imaging	
82

Ti3C2-SP	SP	150 nm laterally and 0.6 nm thick	Cancer therapy and TIR imaging	
54

Ta4C3-IONP-SP	IONP and SP	255 nm laterally	Cancer therapy, MRI and CT imaging	
83

DOX@Ti3C2-SP	SP	120 nm laterally and 0.9 nm thick	Cancer therapy, drug delivery, PAI and TIR imaging	
84

GdW10@ Ti3C2	GdW10-based POM	∼148 nm laterally	Cancer therapy, MRI and CT imaging	
85

DOX@ Ti3C2@mMSNs-RGD	Mesoporous silica and RGD	91.7–152.9 nm laterally	Cancer therapy, drug delivery and TIR imaging	
77

Ta4C3-SP	SP	∼100 nm laterally and ∼1 nm thick	Cancer therapy, PAI and CT imaging	
86

CTAC@Nb2CMSN-PEG-RGD	Mesoporous silica, PEG and RGD	220.2 nm laterally	Cancer therapy, PAI and TIR imaging	
78

MXene/DOX@cellulose hydrogel	Cellulose	50–230 nm laterally and 1.9–10.3 nm thick	Cancer therapy, drug delivery and TIR imaging	
87

MXene flake/Cu nanoclusters	Cu	1.6 nm thick	Biosensor	
88

Ti3C2/PAM NC hydrogel	PAM	350 nm laterally and 11 nm thick	Drug delivery	
76

MXene/cellulose membrane	Cellulose	50 nm thick	Antibacterial	
89

Ti3C2-TAT@EDRE	EDRE and TAT peptide	1.1–3.4 nm thick	Fluorescence imaging	
90

AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 NPs	Mesoporous silica, PEG and AIPH	219 nm laterally	Cancer therapy, PAI and TIR imaging	
91

Ti3C2@Au	Au	∼200 nm laterally and ∼2 nm thick	Cancer therapy, PAI and CT imaging	
74

MXene-IONPs@PEG-GOD	GOD, PEG and IONP	185.17 nm laterally and 1.44 nm thick	Cancer therapy, MRI and TIR imaging	
92

Mo2C-derived polyoxometalate	POM	10 nm laterally	Cancer therapy, PAI and TIR imaging	
93

Ti3C2-BG composite scaffold	BG scaffold	∼577 nm thick	Cancer therapy and tissue regeneration	
94

Nb2C-MSNs-SNO	PEG and mesoporous silica	∼200 nm laterally and ∼2 nm thick	Cancer therapy and PAI	
45

Mo2C-PVA	PVA	2.2–9.0 nm thick	Cancer therapy	
42

Nb2C@TP	TP	∼150 nm	Antibacterial and tissue regeneration	
95

MXene-AuNCs	Au nanoclusters	1–2 nm thick	Antibacterial	
96

BG@NbSiR scaffold	Mesoporous silica, R837 and BG scaffold	255 nm	Cancer therapy and tissue regeneration	
97

HPEM scaffold	HCHO, PDA and PGE	N. A.	Antibacterial and tissue regeneration	
98


 	Fig. 3  (a) The WST-1 assay of the viability of normal human fibroblast (MSU1.1) cells cultured for 24 h and 48 h in the presence of carbide particles and MXenes. (b) Actin cytoskeleton staining of MSU1.1 (I) and HeLa cells (II) with MXene treatment at 50 μg mL−1 concentrations. Scale bar = 10 μm.102 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. (c) Cumulative mortality after treatment with DEBA (positive control), DMSO (negative control), and different doses of Ti3C2Tx. (d) Representative images of acute toxicity in zebrafish embryos under different treatments observed under a stereomicroscope.106 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of host tissue incubated with MXene films two weeks after surgery. (f) Blue arrows indicate macrophages and blue asterisks indicate blood vessels under low magnification and high magnification.107 Copyright 2019 Dove Medical Press.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM imaging of S. aureus (yellow spheres), E. coli (violet rods), and biofilms. Gray, blackish-green, grass-green, and royal-blue colors indicate TP, Nb2AlC, multilayered Nb2C, and Nb2C nanosheets. (b) TEM imaging of planktonic bacteria in different groups. (c) LDH release rate and (d) ONPG hydrolysis assays of bacteria after different treatments. (e) Bacterial colony images of planktonic bacteria and biofilm from implants and surrounding tissues.95 Copyright 2020 America Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis absorption, PL excitation (Ex, λem = 485 nm), and PL emission (Em, λex = 370 nm) spectra of Nb2C QDs in aqueous solutions. (b) The CLSM fluorescence images of NIH 3T3 cells at concentrations of 100, 150 (c), and 200 μg mL−1 (d) Nb2C QDs, respectively. The bright-field images (e1, f1, and g1) and fluorescent pseudo-colored images (e2, f2, and g2) of round (e), linear (f), and square (g) PVA/Nb2C QD hydrogels. (h) The normalized PL intensity of Nb2C, FITC, and RhB aqueous solutions under irradiation with a 350 W xenon lamp at different time points.110 Copyright 2020 Elsevier B. V.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) PA images of Ti2N QD solutions at different concentrations, ranging from 0 up to 500 ppm under 808 nm and 1280 nm laser excitation. (b) PA images in the tumors after tail vein injection at different time intervals.43 Copyright 2020 Elsevier B. V. (c) The preparation procedure of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD for heat transfer determined by applying linear time data. (d) PA images and quantitative curve of PA intensity for V2C-TAT at various concentrations in vitro. (e) PA images after intravenous injection of PBS, V2C-TAT and V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD. (f) PA images and corresponding signal intensity in vivo at different time-points after intravenous injection of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD.119 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) CT images of Ti3C2@Au nanocomposites at different concentrations in vitro. (b) CT images of the tumor-bearing mouse before and after the injection of Ti3C2@Au in vivo.74 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. (c) CT imaging of the tumor sites at different time points. (d) CT imaging at 6 h post intratumor and intravenous injections.121 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) T1-Weighted MRI and T1 relaxation rate of GdW10@Ti3C2 nanosheets at various Gd3+ concentrations in vitro. (b) MRI signal intensity of tumor-bearing mice at four time-points following injection of GdW10@Ti3C2. (c) Corresponding T1-weighted MR images of tumor-bearing mice.85 Copyright 2018 Springer. (d) T2-Weighted MRI and T2 relaxation rate (e) of MIG nanosheets in vitro. (f) The signal intensity of T2-weighted MR imaging at tumor sites at various time-points after the injection of MIG. (g) Corresponding T2-weighted MR images of tumor-bearing mice at different time-points before and after the injection of MIG. Yellow circles indicate the tumor sites.124 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TIR images of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD solutions with different concentrations under 1064 nm irradiation. (b) Photothermal heat curves of V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD solution under 1064 nm laser irradiation at various power densities. (d) The temperature changes and corresponding TIR images (c) at the tumor site in different groups119 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society. (e) TIR images of MIG solution at different concentrations in vitro under 808 nm laser irradiation. Copyright 2018 Springer. (f) TIR images of the tumor sites in tumor-bearing mice in the three groups under 808 nm laser irradiation.127 Copyright 2019 America Chemical Society.	 


Nb2C-PVP	36.4% at 808 nm and 45.65% at 1064 nm	PTT	TIR imaging	808 nm and 1064 nm	
81

Ti3C2 QDs	52%	PTT	TIR imaging	808 nm	
52

Ti3C2-DOX	58.3%	PTT, PDT and chemotherapy	TIR imaging	808 nm	
72

MnOx/Ta4C3	34,9%	PTT	PAI, TIR, MRI and CT imaging	808 nm	
82

Ti3C2-SP	30.6%	PTT	TIR imaging	808 nm	
54

Ta4C3-IONP-SP	32.5%	PTT	TIRI, MRI and CT imaging	808 nm	
83

Ti3C2-SP	N. A.	PTT and chemotherapy	PAI and TIR imaging	808 nm	
84

Mo2C QDs	42.9%	PTT	PAI and TIR imaging	808 nm	
130

Ta4C3-SP	44.7%	PTT	PAI, TIR and CT imaging	808 nm	
86

CTAC@Nb2C-MSN	28.6%	PTT and chemotherapy	PAI and TIR imaging	1064 nm	
78

MXene/DOX@cellulose hydrogel	N. A.	PTT and chemotherapy	TIR imaging	808 nm	
87

AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2	27.03%	PTT and PDT	PAI and TIR imaging	1064 nm	
91

Mo2C-derived polyoxometalate	36.2% at 808 nm and 47.8% at 1060 nm	PTT and PDT	PAI and TIR imaging	808 nm and 1060 nm	
93

Mo2C	24.95%	PTT and PDT	PAI, TIR and CT imaging	1064 nm	
121

MXene-IONPs@PEG-GOD	27.27%	PTT and PDT	MRI and TIR imaging	808 nm	
92

Ti3C2-BG composite scaffold	N. A.	PTT	TIR imaging	808 nm	
94

V2C	48%	PTT	TIR imaging	808 nm	
44

Nb2C-MSNs-SNO	39.09%	PTT and photonic thermogaseous therapy.	PAI	1064 nm	
45

V2C-TAT@Ex-RGD	45.05%	PTT	PAI, MRI and TIR imaging	1064 nm	
119

GdW10@ Ti3C2	21.9%	PTT	MRI, TIR and CT imaging	808 nm	
85

DOX@ Ti3C2@mMSNs-RGD	23.2%	PTT and chemotherapy	PAI and TIR imaging	808 nm	
77

Ti3C2@Au	34.3% at 808 nm and 39.6% at 1064 nm	PTT and radiotherapy	PAI and CT imaging	808 nm and 1064 nm	
74

Ti3C2-CoNWs	34.42%	PTT and chemotherapy	N. A.	808 nm	
131

Ti2N	48.62% at 808 nm and 45.51% at 1064	PTT	PAI and TIR imaging	808 nm and 1064 nm	
43

NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx	N. A.	PDT	N. A.	N. A	
132

Nb2C/zein	N. A.	PTT	TIR imaging	1064 nm	
133

PVP/Nb2C microneedles	36.4% at 808 nm and 45.65% at 1064 nm	PTT	TIR imaging	808 nm and 1064 nm	
134

Ti3C2@Met@CP	59.6%	PTT, PDT and chemotherapy	TIR imaging	808 nm	
135


 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of pure BGS and TBGS, including 3D printing and further Ti3C2 MXene integration. (b) CLSM images of dead (red) and live (green) Saos-2 cells under different treatments. (c) Photographs of tumor-bearing mice on day 14 under different treatments. H&E, TUNEL (apoptosis), and Ki-67 (proliferation) staining of tumor tissues 1 day after different treatments. (d) Increasing temperature curves of the tumor sites in the TBGS + NIR and BGS + NIR groups. (e) Variation in the tumor volumes over a period of time in different groups.94 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (f) Representative morphology and magnified imaging of the PVP/Nb2C microneedle array. Scale bar = 500 μm. (g) Images of BALB/c nude mouse and tumor-bearing mice after treatment with PVP/Nb2C microneedles (red solid circles).134 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic diagram of the mechanism of action of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx in treating tumors. (b) The ESR spectra of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx with H2O2 in the presence of DMPO (pH 6.5). (c) The GSH/GSSG ratio in HeLa cells before and after incubation with 150 μg mL−1 of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx. (d) ROS staining in HeLa and MCF-7 cells before and after incubation with 150 μg mL−1 of NMQDs-Ti3C2Tx for 6 h. (e) A photograph of the dissected tumor from each group after different treatments. (f) A photograph of the internal structure of tumors, in which the inside of the tumor is hollow, but develops a spherical shell shape after 32 days of treatment.132 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (g) A schematic diagram of the therapeutic effects of AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 on cancer cells. (h) Bright- and dark-field high resolution TEM images of Nb2C@mSiO2 from the lateral (top) and vertical (bottom) perspectives. (i) ESR spectra of POBN in AIPH, Nb2C@mSiO2 nanoparticles, and AIPH@Nb2C@mSiO2 nanoparticle solution under 1064 nm laser irradiation for 3 min.91 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of PTT/PDT/chemotherapy using Ti3C2@Met@CP. (b) TEM image of the Ti3C2 nanosheets. (c) CLSM images of MDA-MB-231 cells after different treatments with calcein-AM and propidium iodide staining. (d) Photographs of tumor-bearing mice and their tumor regions after different treatments.135 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic diagram of NO release from Nb2C-MSNs-SNO under 1064 nm laser irradiation. (f) Evaluation of NO release from negative control group (deionized water), positive control group (NaNO2), Nb2C-MSNs-SNO and Nb2C-MSNs-PEG after exposure to 1064 nm laser irradiation. (g) Quantitative assessment of NO release from Nb2C-MSNs-SNO and Nb2C-MSNs-PEG after various treatments with different power densities and concentrations (h). (i) Tumor inhibition rate of tumor-bearing mice following different treatments. (j) Western blot analysis and quantitative assessments of Bid, caspase-3 and caspase-7 protein expression in tumor tissues in different groups.45 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of hBMSCs at day 1 after seeding on 1.0 TBGS. (b) CLSM images of hBMSCs on BGSs and TBGSs at days 1 and 7. (c) Alizarin red S staining of control, BGSs, and TBGSs at day 21. (d) Osteogenic gene expression (COL1, RUNX2, OPN, and OCN) of hBMSCs in the three groups at day 7. (e) 3D reconstruction (top) and micro-CT images (bottom) of circular defects at 24 weeks after scaffold implantation. (f) Goldner staining of harvested craniums of rats at week 24 after implantation of BGS and TBGS. Green tissues (yellow triangles) are mineralized bone tissues. (g) Goldner staining of TBGS group at 8, 16 and 24 weeks. Black asterisks indicate implanted scaffolds that were not biodegraded completely. Yellow triangles indicate new osseous tissue.94 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 


Ti3C2	Phenol	0.05–15.5 μM	12 nM	
186

f-Ti3C2-MXene	CEA	0.0001–2000 ng mL−1	0.000018 ng mL−1	
172

Ti3C2/DNA/Pd/Pt	Dopamine	0.2–1000 μM	30 nM	
182

Ti3C2-MXene/AuNPs	CEA	0.0002–20000 pM	0.07 fM	
174

MXene flake/Cu	GSH	5.0–100 μM	3.0 μM	
88

AuNP@Ti3C2Tx	UA and FA	0.03–1520 μM (UA) and 0.02–3580 μM (FA)	11.5 nM (UA) and 6.20 nM (FA)	
190

AuNPs/MoS2/Ti3C2	miRNA-182	1 fM–0.1 nM	0.43 fM	
169

Ti3C2Tx	Dopamine	0.015–10 mM	3 nM	
183

MXene-Ti3C2/CuS	Cholesterol	10–100 μM	1.9 μM	
191

Ti3C2Tx	ACOP and INZ	0.25–2000 μM (ACOP) and 0.1–4.6 mM (INZ)	0.048 μM (ACOP) and 64 μM (INZ)	
181

TiO2/Ti3C2	GSH	0.1–1000 μM	0.009 μM	
179

Ti3C2	HPV	0.5 nM–50 nM.	100 pM	
170

ε-Poly-L-lysine L-protected Ti3C2	Cytochrome c and trypsin	0.2–40 μM (cytochrome c) and 0.5–80 μg mL−1 (trypsin)	20.5 nM (cytochrome c) and 0.1 μg mL−1 (trypsin)	
193

GSH-Ti3C2 MQDs	UA	1.2–75 mM	125 nM	
189

cDNA-Fc/MXene	MUC1	0.001–1.0 × 104 nM	0.33 × 103 nM	
166

TiO2/C-QDs	GSH	0.5–25 μM	0.2 μM	
180

N-Ti3C2-MXene-hollow gold nanoparticles	CEA	0.001–1000 pM	0.15 fM	
175


 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the procedure used to prepare the competitive electrochemical aptasensor. (b) After the detection of different concentrations of MUC1, a corresponding square wave voltammogram is shown. The concentration of MUC1 ranged from a to i: 0, 1 pM, 10 pM, 100 pM, 1 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, 10 μM. (c) The standard curve of MUC1 detection.166 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B. V. (d) Schematic diagram of the electrochemical CEA detection mechanism. (e) TEM imaging of a single f-Ti3C2-MXene sheet. (f) The calibration plot of the magnitudes of current recorded versus the log of CEA concentration. (g) Response of the BSA/anti-CEA/f-Ti3C2-MXene/GC electrode at different doses of CEA (0.0001–2000 ng mL−1) (left). The panel on the right shows an enlarged view of the response.172 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B. V.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the PEC mechanism of a TiO2/Ti3C2 electrode under illumination with standard solar lights. (b) HR-TEM image of TiO2/Ti3C2. (c) The changes in photocurrent induced by different GSH concentrations at a potential of 0.1 V. (d) Plot of HeLa cell number under 150 W xenon light excitation.179 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B. V. (e) Schematic diagram of the preparation of TiO2/C-QDs and detection of GSH. (f) The color change and absorbance of the groups with/without GSH after a 3 min reaction (2 mM TMB, pH 5, and 25 °C). (g) The color changes and UV-vis absorption spectra of the TiO2/C-QDs-TMB-PBS system with various GSH concentrations (2 mM TMB, pH 5, and 25 °C). (h) Studies of the selectivity of the TiO2/C-QDs-TMB-PBS system using GSH and other potential interferences.180 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ti3C2/NMC biocomposite films. (b and c) SEM and optical images of the Ti3C2/NMC biocomposite films. (d) The schematic diagram for the flexible sensor of Ti3C2/NMC biocomposite films with an interlocked structure. (e) Pressure response of the sensor under various bending angles. (f) Monitoring current changes in the wrist position pulse pressure using the sensor.197 (g) Schematic diagram of MX/rGO aerogel for pressure sensing. (h) SEM images of MX/rGO aerogel under high magnification. (i) Current changes with respect to the applied pressure under different GO/MXene ratios. (j) Comparison of MX/rGO aerogel and rGO aerogel in terms of response time and recovery time. (k) Monitoring current change of the jugular vein pulse pressure using the sensor.198 Copyright 2018, 2019 America Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
