Highly concentrated synthesis of copper-zinc-tin-sulfide nanocrystals with easily decomposable capping molecules for printed photovoltaic applications ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR03104G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR03104G
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10183-10188Highly concentrated synthesis of copper-zinc-tin-sulfide nanocrystals with easily decomposable capping molecules for printed photovoltaic applications†Youngwoo Kima, Kyoohee Wooa, Inhyuk Kima, Yong Soo Choa, Sunho Jeongb and Jooho Moon*aaDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Korea. E-mail: jmoon@yonsei.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2-312-5375;   Tel: +82-2-2123-2855bDevice Materials Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), 19 Sinseongno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, KoreaReceived 17th June 2013, Accepted 17th August 2013First published on 27th August 2013AbstractAmong various candidate materials, Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) is a promising earth-abundant semiconductor for low-cost thin film solar cells. We report a facile, less toxic, highly concentrated synthetic method utilizing the heretofore unrecognized, easily decomposable capping ligand of triphenylphosphate, where phase-pure, single-crystalline, and well-dispersed colloidal CZTS nanocrystals were obtained. The favorable influence of the easily decomposable capping ligand on the microstructural evolution of device-quality CZTS absorber layers was clarified based on a comparative study with commonly used oleylamine-capped CZTS nanoparticles. The resulting CZTS nanoparticles enabled us to produce a dense and crack-free absorbing layer through annealing under a N2 + H2S (4%) atmosphere, demonstrating a solar cell with an efficiency of 3.6% under AM 1.5 illumination.IntroductionSemiconductor nanocrystals have attracted great attention because of their light-harvesting properties and size-dependent, tunable optoelectronic characteristics.1–3 In particular, nanocrystal dispersions which are amenable to scalable coating or printing methods are considered as a key ingredient in depositing photo-active, functional layers as an alternative to their vacuum-deposited counterparts. In this regard, it would be highly beneficial to employ semiconducting nanocrystals composed of earth-abundant elements with low toxicity which are scalable for realizing low-cost and sustainable solar cells. Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) is a promising solar cell material that contains earth-abundant elements and exhibits a near-optimum direct band gap energy of ∼1.5 eV and a large absorption coefficient (∼104 cm−1), which are similar to the values of Cu2(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS), which is one of the most successful thin film photovoltaic (PV) materials.4–6 Using a nanoparticle-derived CZT (S1−xSex) absorber layer, the Hillhouse and Agrawal group demonstrated a relatively high efficiency of 7.2%.4 More recently, Cao et al. suggested a nanoparticle mixture approach using ZnS binary and Cu2SnS3 ternary chalcogenides which allows facile control of the film composition and, in turn, a CZT (S1−xSex) nanocrystal-based device with an efficiency of 8.5%.7 To date, however, much effort has been made to realize the combinatorial pathway of a less-scalable synthetic method with a molar concentration below 0.5 M and thermal/chemical annealing under a toxic Se atmosphere, which is not likely to be widely adopted for use in large-scale commercial low-cost PV systems.8–12 Vaporized Se is very toxic and its hydride gas is extremely harmful to the human body. Selenization at elevated temperatures is a prerequisite in order to induce the vigorous densification reaction of particulate CZTS films as well as to adjust the optical band gap to be suitable for high-performance solar cells. In the past decade, in spite of extensive research, there have been only a few reports on the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of CZTS nanocrystal-derived solar cells. Without the selenization process, the PCEs of CZTS nanocrystal-based devices have been limited to below around 2%.13The efficiencies of CZTS nanocrystal-based devices are generally restricted by the highly populated interparticle interfaces, which interfere with the efficient charge transport between neighboring nanoparticles.14 The most plausible reason for the formation of such highly resistive interfaces is the presence of capping ligands around the nanocrystals, even after annealing at high temperatures above 500 °C. Oleylamine (OLA) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), both of which have long aliphatic carbon chains, are commonly incorporated as capping molecules to stabilize the nanoparticle surface because they offer stable passivation of the CZTS nanocrystal surface and good dispersion stability in non-coordinating solvents.4,12–15 However, ligands with long aliphatic carbon chains do not decompose easily and leave behind hydrocarbon impurities during heat treatment under an oxygen-free atmosphere, which hinders the mass transfer between adjacent CZTS nanoparticles for the grain growth of particulate films, resulting in an adverse effect on the device performance.16 Long-chain capping ligands can be replaced with short-chain ligands with lower boiling points through a ligand exchange methodology using suitable chemical reagents such as ethylenediamine and acetonitrile.17 However, this subsequent method adds complexity to the synthesis process impacting the cost-effective fabrication of photovoltaic devices and gives rise to non-uniform device performance due to partially incomplete surface functionalization in some cases. Recently, hydrophilic CZTS nanocrystals were synthesized via a solvothermal route to overcome the organic impurity issue by using polyvinylpyrrolidone as a surfactant and/or capping ligand. However, a solvothermal synthesis method is not favorable for safe, large-scale production since it is conducted in a stainless steel autoclave with an extremely high vapor pressure.13 Surfactant-free, solvent-redispersible CZTS nanocrystals have been synthesized in a scalable manner, but it has not been demonstrated whether these nanocrystals can be effective in forming a device-quality CZTS absorber layer.18Herein, we report a facile, highly concentrated, and scalable synthetic method to produce phase-pure CZTS nanocrystals surrounded by triphenylphosphate (TPP), a new capping ligand which is easily decomposable at low temperatures. Triphenylphosphate, which is an economical and less toxic capping ligand, enables stable surface passivation even in the absence of a long aliphatic carbon chain, allowing for a film-like, structured, device-quality CZTS layer with large grains. We successfully synthesized CZTS nanoparticles with a single crystalline phase through a simple wet-chemical reaction with a molar concentration of ∼1.5 M, which is much higher as compared to the concentration involved in conventional synthesis methods (<0.5 M). To clarify the critical effect of the organic capping ligand under a toxic Se-free, diluted H2S atmosphere, the temperature-dependent microstructural evolutions of both TPP-capped CZTS (denoted as TPP-CZTS) and OLA-capped CZTS (denoted as OLA-CZTS) nanoparticle-derived absorber films were comparatively investigated in conjunction with an in-depth analysis of the decomposition behaviors of the capping ligands. In addition to the basic study on nanocrystal-derived CZTS absorber layers, the performance of a photovoltaic device employing the TPP-capped CZTS absorber layer was evaluated.Results and discussionWe synthesized CZTS nanocrystals using a hot-injection method that involves the injection of a highly concentrated (1.5 M) metal (Cu, Zn, Sn, and S) precursor solution into a hot TPP-containing solution. Copper(II) acetylacetonate, zinc acetate, tin(IV) acetate, and elemental sulfur (S) were dissolved in oleylamine and heated at 150 °C for 30 min under an inert atmosphere. The atomic ratio of the Cu:Zn:Sn:S precursor was 1.70:1.22:1.00:3.99. The mixture was then cooled and injected rapidly into a reaction bath containing the TPP capping ligand at 300 °C. After the reaction, CZTS nanocrystals were repeatedly washed using standard precipitation and suspension techniques. The experimental details are described in the ESI.†19,20 From a single reaction, ∼4.5 g of CZTS nanocrystals were obtained from a 100 mL reaction volume, demonstrating the possibility of facile scale-up for the synthesis of cost-effective CZTS nanocrystals. For a comparative study, we also synthesized OLA-capped CZTS nanocrystals in the same manner.Fig. 1a and b show high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images of TPP-CZTS and OLA-CZTS nanocrystals. The resulting CZTS nanocrystals exhibited similar particle size distributions (14.5 ± 4.6 nm for TPP-capped CZTS and 13.4 ± 2.9 nm for OLA-capped CZTS, as shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI†) with slightly irregular morphological characteristics. It was also revealed that both nanocrystals are highly crystallized, showing a lattice spacing corresponding to a tetragonal CZTS structure. The interplanar distances were measured to be 3.1 Å and 2.7 Å, indicative of (112) and (200) planes, respectively. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were also matched to the structure of kesterite CZTS (JCPDS 26-0575), as observed with the diffraction spots corresponding to the (112), (220), and (312) planes. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)-energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping of the as-synthesized TPP-CZTS nanocrystals confirmed that Cu, Zn, Sn, and S were evenly distributed inside the nanocrystals without noticeable segregation (Fig. 1c). According to the STEM-EDX drift-corrected spectrum (Fig. S2, ESI†), the composition of the synthesized nanocrystals was determined to be Cu:Zn:Sn:S = 1.78:1.34:1.00:3.80. This composition is almost identical to the initial precursor composition, indicating that all of the chemical reagents are involved in the chemical reaction forming the kesterite CZTS phase without elemental loss even under the highly concentrated synthesis conditions. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the resulting CZTS nanocrystals capped with both capping ligands more clearly demonstrate the presence of the phase-pure kesterite structures (Fig. 2a) where no noticeable secondary and/or impurity phases were observed. However, it should be noted that XRD alone is insufficient to determine the phase purity of CZTS nanocrystals, because many binary and ternary chalcogenides have similar crystal structures.21,22 We measured the Raman spectra in order to identify the phases of the as-synthesized CZTS nanocrystals (Fig. 2b and c). The existence of kesterite CZTS for both the OLA- and TPP-capped nanocrystals was clarified with intense peaks at 285 cm−1 and 338 cm−1, respectively, which are very close to those reported for CZTS thin films.23,24 The peak at 476 cm−1 for Cu2−xS was invisible and peaks at 274 cm−1 and 351 cm−1 attributed to zinc blende ZnS did not appear. Fig. 1  HR-TEM images and SAED patterns of (a) OLA-capped CZTS nanocrystals and (b) TPP-capped CZTS nanocrystals. (c) Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping results for the TPP-capped CZTS nanocrystals.  Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns (λ = 1.54 Å) of the two different types of capping ligand-based CZTS nanocrystals. The peaks were indexed to tetragonal CZTS (JCPDS 26-0575). Below the XRD pattern, the JCPDS standard peaks for CZTS (black) are also shown as well as the possible impurity phases of Cu2SnS3 (red) and ZnS (blue). (b and c) Raman spectra of CZTS nanocrystals produced using the two different types of capping molecules. To produce a dense absorber layer for PV devices, the synthesized CZTS nanocrystals were redispersed in a non-polar solvent. In general, nanocrystals surrounded by organic capping ligands have good dispersion capabilities in non-polar solvents. However, commonly used non-coordinating solvents are highly toxic (e.g., toluene) and/or highly vaporizable (e.g., hexane), while they effectively prevent the generation of cracks in particulate films.18 As an alternative, we selected 1,2-dichlorobenzene to prepare a well-dispersed CZTS nanocrystal ink while preventing crack formation by capillary-induced compression stress during the drying process. The CZTS nanocrystal ink was coated directly onto a Mo-coated soda-lime glass (SLG) substrate by a spin-coating method. After deposition, the films were dried on a hot plate at 350 °C for 10 min under atmospheric conditions. After drying, the CZTS nanocrystal films were soaked in a sodium salt solution and dried on a hot plate at 80 °C for 10 min. The CZTS nanocrystal films with a thickness of approximately 1.4 μm were then annealed at temperatures ranging from 350 to 500 °C for 30 min under a N2 + H2S (4%) atmosphere. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the films prepared from the two differently capped CZTS nanocrystals are shown in Fig. 3a. It was revealed that the TPP-CZTS nanocrystal films were more reactive toward sintering and the grain growth reaction than the OLA-CZTS nanocrystal films. Unlike the OLA-CZTS nanocrystal films, dense and well-grown microstructures with larger grains and less porosity were achieved when using the TPP-CZTS nanocrystals. This distinct difference in the sintering behavior depending on the capping ligand is not attributable to the particle characteristics such as the particle size, morphology, and crystallinity as both types of nanocrystals exhibited similar morphological and crystalline properties. The boiling point of the capping ligand is not a critical factor to determine the temperature-dependent microstructural evolution. The boiling points of TPP and OLA are ∼370 °C and ∼364 °C, respectively. Fig. 3  (a) Microstructural evolution of granular films prepared from CZTS nanocrystals capped with the two different types of capping molecules under a N2 + H2S (4%) atmosphere, as analyzed by scanning electron microscopy. (b) TG analysis results of the TPP- and OLA-capped CZTS nanocrystals obtained under a nitrogen atmosphere. (c) Schematic of CZTS nanocrystals with the two different types of capping ligands. To investigate why the nanocrystal reactivity is critically influenced by the chemical structure of the capping ligand, we analyzed the thermal behaviors of both nanocrystals, as shown in Fig. 3b. Weight losses below 600 °C predominantly account for the decomposition of the capping molecules because no other organic solvents and/or compounds were present in our phase-pure CZTS nanocrystals, as confirmed by the Raman spectra shown in Fig. 2b and c. Single phase CZTS crystals are known to undergo phase transition in the temperature range of 820–876 °C, prior to bulk CZTS melting (991 °C).25,26 The subtle weight loss below 200 °C is associated with adsorbed solvent molecules. It was observed that the on-set temperatures for thermal decomposition are similar to each other and the total weight loss of the TPP-CZTS is larger than that of the OLA-CZTS. However, an abrupt thermal decomposition in the temperature range of 250–350 °C took place for TPP-CZTS nanocrystals (red line), while the OLA-CZTS nanocrystals showed a more gradual, sluggish decomposition behavior (blue line). This implies that TPP adsorbed on the surface of CZTS nanocrystals is easily removable at a faster rate than OLA despite the larger amount adsorbed, which is most likely due to different thermal decomposition kinetics governed by the chemical structure of the capping ligand. OLA capping ligands have long aliphatic carbon chains, as shown in Fig. 3c. In contrast, TPP capping ligands have less bulky aromatic carbon groups. The long aliphatic carbon groups of OLA lead to stronger intermolecular interactions compared to the less bulky aromatic carbon groups of TPP.27 To investigate more detailed information of the decomposition kinetics, we carried out isothermal thermogravimetric analysis at 300 °C for the ligands (without particles) (Fig. S3, ESI†). The decomposition of the OLA and TPP ligands started at 8.0 min and 10.5 min, respectively, and they were completely decomposed at 29.5 min and 26.0 min, respectively. The time required for the complete decomposition of TPP (15.5 min) was shorter than that for OLA (21.5 min). This indicates that TPP ligands are more rapidly thermally degradable than OLA ligands and the reactive sintering process is triggered more effectively for TPP-CZTS nanocrystal films through exposure of the bare nanoparticle surface, where the mass transport between neighboring nanocrystals for the annihilation of interparticle interfaces favorably occurs without interference from organic capping ligands. Therefore, we used only the TPP-CZTS nanocrystals in the further analysis and cell fabrication. We utilized UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy to evaluate the optical band gap of the CZTS nanocrystal film by extrapolating the linear region of the plot of (αhν)2versus hν while obtaining the intercept on the hν-axis (Fig. S4 in the ESI†), where α, h, and ν are the optical absorption coefficient, Planck's constant, and frequency, respectively. The direct optical band gap energy (Eg) of the as-prepared TPP-CZTS nanocrystal film was measured to be 1.50 eV. For the films annealed under N2 + H2S (4%) at 500 °C, the band gap value decreased to 1.47 eV. This change of the band gap energy may be caused by enhanced crystallinity and/or an enlarged grain size. The measured Eg value of the CZTS nanocrystal films is close to the optimum value for photovoltaic solar conversion in a single band gap device.28,29Finally, solar cell devices incorporating the TPP-CZTS nanocrystals were prepared. This device had a layered structure composed of a Mo-coated SLG/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/indium tin oxide (ITO)/patterned Ni/Al grid, as shown in Fig. 4a. The samples were mechanically scribed into cells with a total area of 0.25 cm2. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics under AM 1.5 illumination are shown in Fig. 4b. All device performance parameters were obtained based on the cell area excluding the shaded areas (∼11% of the total device area) by the Ni/Al finger electrode. The as-fabricated devices exhibited an effective area efficiency of 3.6% [open-circuit voltage (Voc) = 0.431 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) = 23.28 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) = 35.78%]. Fig. 4c shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the TPP-CZTS nanocrystal-based solar cell as a function of the photon wavelength. The maximum quantum efficiency of 50% was observed at a photon wavelength of 550 nm. The band gap was measured to be approximately 1.48 eV, as obtained from a fitted plot of [Eln(1 − EQE)]2vs. E near the band edge. The EQE response in the long-wavelength region (around 600 nm) was reduced by a few degrees, which may be caused by the high recombination losses in the bulk and depletion regions.30 The photovoltaic responses of the devices made from the CZTS nanocrystal layers were reproducible, demonstrating that these nanocrystals have potential as light absorbing materials in PVs. Although the efficiency of our solar cell is the highest among phase-pure CZTS nanocrystal-based devices without selenization, significant improvement is still required for practical applications. A plausible reason for the low efficiency is the high series resistance and low shunt resistance. These behaviors likely arise from the presence of occasional holes or cracks in the nanocrystal-based absorber layer, through which CdS and/or ZnO layers can penetrate to the back contact (Fig. S5 in the ESI†). In this regard, we are currently working on producing more uniform and denser CZTS films by controlling the process conditions. Organic impurities also hinder the grain growth and sintering reaction inside a nanocrystal-based film, so that it is necessary to further optimize the pre-annealing process to completely remove the ligand molecules. We believe that resolving these issues would facilitate CZTS solar cells with much higher efficiencies required for realistic photovoltaic uses. Fig. 4  (a) Cross-sectional image of TPP-CZTS nanocrystal-derived CZTS thin film solar cells annealed at 500 °C for 30 min under a N2 + H2S (4%) atmosphere. The samples were mechanically scribed into cells with a total area of 0.25 cm2. (b) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the CZTS solar cell measured in the dark and after exposure to light for 10 min under standard AM 1.5 illumination. The efficiency of the cell was 3.6%. The integrated intensity was reduced using neutral density filters to 1000 W m−2. (c) EQE curve of the CZTS nanocrystal-based thin film solar cells. The band gap of the CZTS absorber layer was determined to be 1.48 eV by a plot of [Eln(1 − EQE)]2versus E. ConclusionsIn summary, we demonstrated a facile, large-scale synthesis method for CZTS nanocrystals, using a less toxic and easily removable organic ligand, TPP. The resulting CZTS nanocrystals were phase-pure and highly crystalline, which allowed us to fabricate a CZTS absorber layer with a large grain size and a low level of impurities through annealing under a N2 + H2S (4%) atmosphere. It was clarified that the TPP capping ligand surrounding the CZTS nanocrystals decomposed more rapidly than the commonly used ligand, OLA, making the TPP-capped nanocrystal films more reactive toward the sintering reaction and grain growth. These results suggest that capping molecules for chalcogen nanoparticles should be carefully designed to fabricate a high-quality absorber layer. Although we did not optimize the processing parameters, our preliminary CZTS nanocrystal-based thin film solar cell demonstrated a conversion efficiency of 3.6% without requiring additional toxic Se treatment. This device performance is the best result achieved among CZTS nanoparticulate absorber layers and did not require annealing under a toxic Se atmosphere, which implies that the synthetic methodology suggested in this study opens up the new possibility of generating low-cost photovoltaic devices through a scalable chemical pathway. It is believed that the approach reported here would be the first step towards the realization of low toxicity, low-cost, and sustainable solar cells created by a nanocrystal-based solution process.AcknowledgementsThis research received financial support from a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (no. 2012R1A3A2026417). It was also partially supported by a grant (B551179-08-03-00) from the cooperative R&D program funded by the Korea Research Council Industrial Science and Technology.Notes and referencesP. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CAS .D. M. N. M. Dissanayake, R. A. Hatton, T. Lutz, C. E. Giusca, R. J. Curry and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 133506 CrossRef .J. Jasieniak, B. I. MacDonald, S. E. Watkins and P. Mulvaney, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W. Yang, B. C. Walker, E. A. Stach, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7060 CAS .T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cao, M. S. Denny Jr, J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. S. Ionkin, L. K. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, H. D. Rosenfeld, K. R. Choudhury and W. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Kameyama, T. Osaki, K. Okazaki, T. Shibayama, A. Kudo, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5319 RSC .I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. L. Rogach, T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, N. Gaponik, V. Lesnyak, A. Shavel, A. Eychmu1ller, Y. P. Rakovich and J. F. Donegan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14628 CAS .Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Tian, X. Xu, L. Han, M. Tang, R. Zou, Z. Chen, M. Yu, J. Yang and J. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3847 RSC .V. A. Akhavan, B. W. Goodfellow, M. G. Panthani, C. Steinhagen, T. B. Harvey, C. J. Stolle and B. A. Korgel, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 189, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Steinhagen, M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Chory, F. Zutz, F. Witt, H. Borchert and J. Parisi, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2010, 7, 1486 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Riha, S. J. Fredrick, J. B. Sambur, Y. Liu, A. L. Prieto and B. A. Parkinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 58 CAS .O. Zaberca, A. Gillorin, B. Durand and J. Y. Chane-Ching, J. Mater.
Chem., 2011, 21, 6483 RSC .W. P. Lee and A. F. Routh, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 437, 664 CrossRef PubMed .H. Katagiri, K. Jimbo, S. Maw, M. Win, K. Oishi, M. Yamazaki, H. Araki and A. Takeuchi, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Paier, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115126 CrossRef .P. A. Fernandes, P. M. P. Salome and F. A. da Cunha, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Zou, L. Zhang, D. Lin, Y. Yang, Q. Li, X. Xu, X. Chen and S. Huang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3310 RSC .S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liu, M. Ge, Y. Yue, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, X. Chen and N. Dai, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2011, 5, 113 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Dunitz, A. Gavezzotti and W. B. Schweizer, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2003, 86, 4073 CrossRef CAS .K. Jimbo, R. Kimura, T. Kamimura, S. Yamada, S. M. Win, H. Araki, K. Oishi and H. Katagiri, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Katagiri, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480, 426 CrossRef PubMed .S. Ahmed, K. B. Reuter, O. Gunawan, L. Guo, L. T. Romankiw and H. Deligianni, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 253 CrossRef CAS .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods for CZTS nanocrystal synthesis, device fabrication, and characterization; the size distribution and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra of the synthesized CZTS nanoparticles; UV-vis spectra of the CZTS films; isothermal analysis of triphenylphosphate (TPP) and oleylamine (OLA); microstructural SEM images of annealed CZTS nanocrystal films. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr03104gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  HR-TEM images and SAED patterns of (a) OLA-capped CZTS nanocrystals and (b) TPP-capped CZTS nanocrystals. (c) Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping results for the TPP-capped CZTS nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns (λ = 1.54 Å) of the two different types of capping ligand-based CZTS nanocrystals. The peaks were indexed to tetragonal CZTS (JCPDS 26-0575). Below the XRD pattern, the JCPDS standard peaks for CZTS (black) are also shown as well as the possible impurity phases of Cu2SnS3 (red) and ZnS (blue). (b and c) Raman spectra of CZTS nanocrystals produced using the two different types of capping molecules.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Microstructural evolution of granular films prepared from CZTS nanocrystals capped with the two different types of capping molecules under a N2 + H2S (4%) atmosphere, as analyzed by scanning electron microscopy. (b) TG analysis results of the TPP- and OLA-capped CZTS nanocrystals obtained under a nitrogen atmosphere. (c) Schematic of CZTS nanocrystals with the two different types of capping ligands.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Cross-sectional image of TPP-CZTS nanocrystal-derived CZTS thin film solar cells annealed at 500 °C for 30 min under a N2 + H2S (4%) atmosphere. The samples were mechanically scribed into cells with a total area of 0.25 cm2. (b) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the CZTS solar cell measured in the dark and after exposure to light for 10 min under standard AM 1.5 illumination. The efficiency of the cell was 3.6%. The integrated intensity was reduced using neutral density filters to 1000 W m−2. (c) EQE curve of the CZTS nanocrystal-based thin film solar cells. The band gap of the CZTS absorber layer was determined to be 1.48 eV by a plot of [Eln(1 − EQE)]2versus E.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental methods for CZTS nanocrystal synthesis, device fabrication, and characterization; the size distribution and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra of the synthesized CZTS nanoparticles; UV-vis spectra of the CZTS films; isothermal analysis of triphenylphosphate (TPP) and oleylamine (OLA); microstructural SEM images of annealed CZTS nanocrystal films. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr03104g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
