Glass–ceramic dielectric materials with high energy density and ultra-fast discharge speed for high power energy storage applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC05253D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC05253D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 15118-15135Glass–ceramic dielectric materials with high energy density and ultra-fast discharge speed for high power energy storage applications

        
          
            Shaohui 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Shen
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Haoshan 
            Hao
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jiwei 
            Zhai
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Science, Henan Institute of Engineering, Zhengzhou 451191, China
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Civil Engineering Materials of Ministry of Education, Functional Materials Research Laboratory, School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tongji University, 4800 Caoan Road, Shanghai 201804, China. E-mail: apzhai@tongji.edu.cn
Received 
      25th September 2019
    , Accepted 8th November 2019First published on 9th November 2019AbstractFerroelectric glass–ceramic materials have been widely used as dielectric materials for energy storage capacitors because of their ultrafast discharge speed, excellent high temperature stability, stable frequency, and environmental friendliness. Electrical equipment and electronic devices with high power density and integration have been developed in recent years. Glass–ceramic materials with high energy storage density, fast charge–discharge capability, and stable high-temperature performance play an important role in obtaining lightweight and miniature electronic components. High-performance ferroelectric glass–ceramics have attracted much research attention. Ferroelectric glass–ceramics with high energy storage density have been developed, although their application is limited. The basic mechanism of ferroelectric glass–ceramics requires investigation to improve their performance and meet future energy needs. This paper summarizes the research progress of glass–ceramics used in energy storage as well as introduces the concept of energy storage density, analyzes influencing factors, and discusses research direction and development prospects of ferroelectric glass–ceramic materials.
Shaohui Liu
Shaohui Liu obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tongji University in 2015. He has worked as an Associate Professor at the School of Science, Henan University of Engineering, since 2017. He is mainly interested in the fabrication of advanced energy density glass–ceramics and organic–inorganic nano-composites and their applications in capacitors.
Bo Shen
Bo Shen obtained her Master's degree from the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 1995. She is an Associate Professor at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tongji University. Her research interests include the design, synthesis and phase structure of ferroelectric glass–ceramics.
Haoshan Hao
Haoshan Hao received his PhD degree from the School of Physical Engineering, Zhengzhou University, in 2007. He currently holds the position of a professor at the School of Science, Henan University of Engineering, China. He is interested in dielectric ceramics and thermoelectric ceramics.
Jiwei Zhai
Jiwei Zhai obtained his PhD degree from the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 1997. He is currently a Professor at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tongji University. His research is focused on developing advanced microwave dielectric ceramics (including LTCC) and devices, ferroelectrics, piezoelectric ceramics for energy and microwave applications via a coordinated experiment with theory approach. He has published more than 500 journal papers, 55 granted patents, and 30 plenary and invited talks at international conferences.
1. Introduction
Environmental pollution and the energy crisis are the major problems that limit social progress. The improvement of energy efficiency and development of new green energy sources have become major challenges in various fields. In this regard, the design and development of functional materials for energy storage has attracted much attention worldwide. Energy storage and conversion and energy consumption reduction have become the focus of development of energy storage materials. At present, energy storage methods mainly include batteries, inductive energy storage, and capacitor energy storage.1–14 A comparison of energy storage and power densities of several energy storage devices is shown in Fig. 1. Fuel cells and lithium-ion batteries mainly convert electrical and chemical energy through electrochemical reactions. These materials have high energy storage density, but their charge and discharge performances are limited by electrochemical voltage and working stability. Moreover, their low voltage and low power density limit their application. With the development of pulsed power technology, high requirements are placed on the energy storage density of components.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of energy storage and power densities of several energy storage devices. 
Capacitors have the advantages of large discharge power, high utilization efficiency, fast charge and discharge speed, and stable performance15–19 compared with other energy storage devices; capacitors play an important role in power systems, electronic devices, and pulsed power supplies and are widely used in hybrid industrial vehicles, pulsed power systems, electromagnetic guns, electromagnetic launch platforms, and other modern industrial and defense fields.20–24Fig. 2 shows the application fields of capacitors with high energy storage density. In the civilian sector, energy storage capacitors are an indispensable part of inverter equipment, such as new solar and wind energy generation systems and hybrid electric vehicles. Energy storage capacitors only account for 40% of the total volume of inverters because of the low energy storage density of dielectric materials. In military applications, tanks, electromagnetic guns, directional energy weapons, electrified launching platforms, and integrated electric propulsion ships require l00 kA of working current, which can be supplied by capacitors with high energy storage density. Energy storage capacitors applied to pulsed power sources should withstand a high voltage of more than 1 MV and have a high energy pulse formation duration of less than 0.1 s and high requirements for power density. With the development of miniaturized, integrated, and high-speed electronic devices, capacitors are required to have high energy storage, miniature size, light weight, low cost, and high reliability. However, current capacitive components have low energy storage density, small discharge current, and short life, which limit their application. Therefore, the development of dielectric materials with high energy storage density has become the key to improve the energy storage characteristics of capacitors.25–30
 Fig. 2  Application fields of capacitors with high energy storage density. 
The breakdown strength and dielectric constant should be improved, and the loss of materials should be reduced to obtain high energy storage density. Traditional dielectric materials, such as ceramics or polymers, fail to optimize the electric displacement and breakdown strength simultaneously. The dielectric constant of ferroelectric ceramics is large, but their breakdown resistance is relatively low. The dielectric constant obviously decreases with increasing applied electric field, leading to a huge reduction in the energy storage density of the materials and thus limiting their application in devices, such as those with pulsed power. Polymer materials have high breakdown strength but a low dielectric constant. The development of dielectric materials with high energy storage density and dielectric constant while maintaining high breakdown strength remains challenging.
Ferroelectric glass–ceramics (also known as “glass–ceramics”) are composite materials with a large number of glass and ceramic phases that are uniformly distributed in the original single compact, uniform, and defect-free glass.31 These materials use the thermodynamic properties of glass to crystallize the glass with a specific component of crystal nucleating agent (without addition) under certain conditions (Fig. 3). The ferroelectric glass ceramics are prepared by a traditional melt-annealing method. Firstly, the raw materials are mixed uniformly according to the proportions required. Then the mixed raw materials are melted at high temperature. The melted glass solution is quickly introduced into a preheated metal mold to form transparent glass. And the glasses are annealed to remove the residual thermal stress inside them. Finally, these annealed glasses are crystallized at the crystallization temperature. Glass ceramics are obtained. The dielectric constants, breakdown strengths and energy storage properties of different materials are summarized in Table 1. Compared with traditional polymers and ceramic dielectrics, ferroelectric glass–ceramics simultaneously possess a higher dielectric constant in the ferroelectric phase and excellent breakdown strength in the glass phase by means of the synergistic effect of ferroelectric and glass phases; as such, these materials are expected to obtain high energy storage density. The journal publications on energy densities of ferroelectric glass-ceramics reported in the literature from 2000 to 2018 are summarized and shown in Fig. 4, in which we can observe that the research on the energy densities of ferroelectric glass-ceramics increased rapidly from 2008 to 2018. The special dielectric properties of ferroelectric glass–ceramics have been widely investigated by scholars and research institutions in various countries in recent years.19,32–36 The U.S. Department of Energy has listed the application of ferroelectric glass–ceramic dielectrics in high-temperature three-phase inverters as an important part of automotive technology programs.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the preparation of glass–ceramics. 
Table 1 Comparison of dielectric constants, breakdown strengths and energy storage properties of materials




Material category
Dielectric constant@1 kHz, RT
Breakdown strength (kV cm−1)
Energy storage density (J cm−3)




Polymer
2.2
∼4000
1–1.2


Ceramic
1000
∼100
1–5


Glass–ceramic
100
∼1200
5–20




 Fig. 4  The journal publications on energy densities of ferroelectric glass–ceramics reported in the literature from 2000 to 2018 are summarized using the“Web of Science” by counting the relevant articles with the key words of“glass–ceramics” and “energy density”. 
The preparation of glass–ceramics includes glass preparation, crystallization, grain control, and glass–ceramic processing.16,17,37–39 A single dense, uniform, and defect-free glass forms a composite material containing a large amount of glass phase and a uniform distribution of ceramic phase.40–44 The ferroelectric glass ceramics are prepared by a traditional melt-annealing method. Firstly, the raw materials are mixed uniformly according to the proportions required. Then the mixed raw materials are melted at high temperature. The melted glass solution is quickly introduced into a preheated metal mold to form transparent glass. And the glasses are annealed to remove the residual thermal stress inside them. Finally, these annealed glasses are crystallized at the crystallization temperature. Glass ceramics are obtained.
2. Key parameters for evaluating the energy storage performance of glass–ceramic materials
2.1 Energy density and efficiency
As shown in the shadowed area in Fig. 5(a), the energy storage density of linear dielectric materials depends on their breakdown strength and dielectric constant, as depicted in eqn (1). The energy storage density of linear materials is linear with the dielectric constant and the quadratic of electric field strength. Therefore, linear materials with high energy storage density can be obtained by increasing their dielectric constant and breakdown field strength. (1)As shown in Fig. 5(b), the stored energy of ferroelectric materials is not equal to the released energy because of hysteresis, and partial energy loss occurs (i.e., the closed part of the hysteresis loop). For the ferroelectric glass ceramics, the dielectric constant and the polarization are nonlinearity dependent on the high electric field and decrease rapidly as the electric field increases, leading to early polarization saturation and limited energy density. So the energy density of the ferroelectric glass ceramics should be calculated from the D–E loops. The red area is related to the loss energy density. The blue area corresponds to the released energy density in the discharging process. The maximum energy storage density of ferroelectric materials is related to the breakdown field strength, dielectric constant, and shape of hysteresis loop.45–50 For the antiferroelectric material shown in Fig. 5(c), double hysteresis loops will appear when the electric field reaches a certain value (the electric field intensity corresponding to the antiferroelectric–ferroelectric phase transition). Although the theoretical energy storage density of antiferroelectric ceramics is high (50 J cm−3),19 their breakdown field is low, and ordinary ceramics cannot reach 100 kV cm−1, limiting the improvement of their energy storage density. Large strain of antiferroelectrics near the phase transition leads to cracks and defects within the antiferroelectrics, immensely reducing their breakdown strength and service life. Most antiferroelectric materials contain lead, which is harmful to the environment and does not conform to the trend of material development.
 Fig. 5  Energy storage characteristics of various dielectric materials. 
The energy storage density of ferroelectric and antiferroelectric materials is integrated with hysteresis loops. The energy storage density of ferroelectric and antiferroelectric materials is expressed as follows: (2)where Dmax is the saturated electric displacement intensity, Dr is the residual electric displacement intensity, E is the applied electric field intensity, and D is the electric displacement intensity.
As shown in Fig. 5, the red part is the energy storage density loss Wloss, and the blue part is the discharge energy storage density Wdischarge. The energy storage density is equal to the sum of stored energy and discharge energy densities. The ratio of discharge energy storage density to the total energy storage density is the energy storage efficiency (η), as shown in formula (3). (3)
2.2 Charge–discharge performance
Considering the application of ferroelectric glass ceramics, the charge–discharge performance is critical to evaluate the power density of the glass ceramic capacitors. A set of charge–discharge test device mainly includes an oscilloscope, high voltage DC power supply, current probe, vacuum switch and discharge circuit, which is reported in previous studies.51–53 The test principle is as follows. The ferroelectric glass ceramics is first charged by the external DC power supply, and then, through the high-speed vacuum switch, the stored energy in the ferroelectric glass ceramics is discharged to a load resistor (RL) in the discharge circuit. The relation among the current passed through the resistor, the voltage across the resistor and time in the process of discharging is recorded by the current probe and oscilloscope.
2.3 Breakdown field
The breakdown field of dielectric materials is mainly divided into three categories, namely, electrical, thermal, and electrochemical breakdown. The breakdown conditions and the required time for the breakdown process are different.2,3,54,55
Electrical breakdown refers to the occurrence of electronic conductance in dielectric materials under a strong electric field, which results in a rapid increase in conductive current and destruction of dielectric insulation. Electrical breakdown theory is defined based on two ionization theories, namely, intrinsic breakdown and avalanche breakdown. Intrinsic breakdown refers to the energy imbalance between the energy obtained by electrons and the energy lost by electron collision under a strong electric field. The energy obtained is greater than the lost energy, leading to the destruction of the dielectric structure. Avalanche breakdown refers to the phenomenon where the energy balance between the obtained and lost energy is destroyed, the electron acceleration and lattice collision ionization form an electron avalanche, and the instantaneous breakdown voltage is high causing the dielectric to fail.56–60
Thermal breakdown is a process where the gradual accumulation of heat increases the temperature inside the material, leading to the destruction of dielectric insulation. Dielectric materials generate heat under the electric field because of leakage current, electrical loss, and local gas ionization discharge. When the heat generation rate of the dielectric is greater than that of the heat dissipation rate outside, the heat will gradually accumulate, thereby increasing the temperature inside the material and leading to the increase in losses. When the critical value is reached, the dielectric will lose its insulation, and breakdown occurs.61–65
Electrochemical breakdown refers to the phenomenon where the chemical change of the dielectric during long-term use results in the destruction of electrical properties because of the influence of electricity, light, heat, and surrounding media.
2.4 Dielectric polarization
The polarization of dielectric materials can be divided into electronic, ion, orientation and interfacial polarization on the basis of different polarization mechanisms (Fig. 6). Dielectric materials may involve several different polarization mechanisms. Each polarization mechanism corresponds to a certain frequency (cut-off frequency). If the frequency exceeds the cut-off frequency, the corresponding polarization will not contribute to the polarization response.66–70
 Fig. 6  Relation of dielectric polarization and frequency response. 
The negative charge center of the electron coincides with the positive charge center of the nucleus, and the atom has no net dipole moment. However, the electron cloud outside the nucleus in the molecule will move relative to the nucleus under the applied electric field, causing a change in the center of the positive and negative charges of the molecule, generating displacement, and forming a dipole moment (Fig. 7). This phenomenon is called electron polarization. Electron polarization occurs only in the valence electrons of the outer layer and is reversible because of the large binding force of electrons in the inner layer of the atom. The establishment and disappearance of electron polarization is short, which is approximately 10−16–10−15 s. At the ultraviolet frequency, electron polarization will no longer respond to the applied electric field.71–76
 Fig. 7  Diagrams of dielectric polarization mechanisms. 
Ionic polarization generally exists in NaBr, KCl, and NaCl plasma crystals. As shown in Fig. 7, the net dipole moment of the ionic crystal is zero without the electric field applied. The positive and negative ions in the ionic crystals deviate from their center positions and move in opposite directions under the applied electric field, resulting in an induced dipole moment. For ion polarization, the time for establishment and disappearance is also very short with a small energy loss, ranging from 10−13 s to 10−12 s.
Some dielectric materials have permanent dipole moments in their molecules. When no external electric field is applied, the dipole moments of these dielectric materials are randomly oriented under thermal excitation (Fig. 7). However, when an electric field is applied, the dipole moment undergoes rotational motion and tends to be aligned along the applied electric field, causing the dielectrics to produce dipole moments along the direction of the electric field. Dipole orientation polarization is generated. The dipole moment rotating in the direction of the electric field needs to overcome its own inertia and rotational resistance. The time of dipole orientation polarization is longer than that of electron and ion polarization, which is approximately 10−6–10−2 s, and the energy loss is large in the entire process.
Interfacial polarization refers to polarization caused by the accumulation of electric charges at the interface between different materials or regions of the same material under a high electric field; this phenomenon is also called space charge polarization (Maxwell–Wagner effect).2,77,78 The polarization of the glass and ceramic phases differs under the high electric field at the interface of glass–ceramics because of their obvious difference in dielectric properties and conductivity (Fig. 7). Local ions and charges will shift to the interface to balance the difference between the two polarizations, resulting in interfacial polarization. On the one hand, interfacial polarization can improve the dielectric properties by increasing the polarization in the glass–ceramics. On the other hand, interfacial polarization can cause electric field distortion and uneven electric field distribution, leading to a decrease in the breakdown strength of glass–ceramics. The establishment and disappearance of interfacial polarization are long, ranging from seconds to hours or even years; as such, the space charge cannot be released quickly. From the point of view of energy storage, dielectric capacitors require that all charges stored in dielectric materials must be rapidly and reversibly released during polarization. The space charge cannot be rapidly released because of the long discharge time of interface polarization charge, causing a large energy loss. The interfacial polarization in the composite material should be reduced to meet the requirements for high-voltage power frequency and radio frequency conditions.
3. Classification of glass–ceramic materials for energy storage capacitors
3.1 Niobate-based glass–ceramics
Niobate-based glass–ceramics are an important glass–ceramic system. The structure of the precipitated crystals of bismuth silicate ferroelectric glass–ceramics can be divided into tungsten bronze and perovskite types.70,79–83Fig. 8 shows the diagrams of tungsten bronze and perovskite structures. The tungsten bronze structure includes barium strontium niobate (SrxBa1−xNb2O6),84 lead niobate (PbNb2O6),85 sodium barium niobate (Ba2NaNb5O15),45 and potassium strontium niobate (KSr2Nb5O15).86 The perovskite type includes potassium niobate (KNbO3) and sodium niobate (NaNbO3).46 The two structures have high dielectric constant and structural adjustability. This type of glass–ceramic system has been widely investigated. The tungsten bronze structure is formed by the oxygen octahedron joints of the common apex. The common apex BO6 oxygen octahedra are connected into a stack along their quadruple axes, and the stacks are joined in a common point. The structural formula of tungsten bronze is (A1)2(A2)4(B1)2(B2)8O30. The ions occupying these interstitial positions need to meet certain ionic radii and valence requirements. Ions with a large ionic radius and rare earth ions, such as Pb2+, Ba2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Na+, and K+, are filled at the A1 and A2 sites. High valence ions, such as Nb5+, Ta5+, W6+, Ti4+, Zr4+, and Fe3+, are filled in the B1 and B2 positions.5,21,22,45,55,87–91 The barium strontium niobate solid solution is a finite solid solution formed by the two phase crystals of strontium niobate and barium niobate at a certain proportion; this solution is a kind of crystal with a non-filled tungsten bronze structure. The Nb ion is located at the center of the oxygen octahedron (B position), the Sr ion occupies the A2 position, and the Ba and Sr ions fill the position of the A1 ion. At room temperature, ions in the gap undergo spontaneous displacement polarization in the c-axis direction, resulting in the high dielectric constant of barium strontium niobate. The structure of tungsten bronze is adjustable in various components, enabling it to have excellent performance in terms of nonlinear optical and dielectric properties.
 Fig. 8  Diagrams of the tungsten bronze structure of SrxBa1−xNb2O6 and the perovskite structure of NaNbO3. 
During the 1960s and 1970s, Andrew Herczog et al.92,93 investigated the crystallization behavior of Na2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics. The nucleation and crystallization of NaNbO3 ceramics with a perovskite structure in a Na2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass system were evaluated. Crystallization occurred in a narrow temperature range and at a certain heating rate. With increasing heating rate, the crystallization temperature increased, and the viscosity of the crystalline glass decreased. When the content of SiO2 increased from 14 wt% to 27 wt%, the size of the crystal grains varied from 20 nm to 1000 nm. In the 1990s, a company assessed the preparation mechanism of niobate-based glass–ceramics and focused on the crystallization of perovskite-based NaNbO3 glass–ceramics. In the 1990s, M. J. Reece et al.31 investigated niobate-based glass–ceramics with a tungsten bronze phase and produced high-density and large-sized bulk (Pb, Ba, Sr) Nb2O6 glass–ceramics with a tungsten bronze structure. The grain size in the glass–ceramic system was less than 200 nm. The dielectric properties of the glass–ceramics were related to the grain size and phase composition of their crystalline phases. In the 21st century, Lanagan et al.21 studied the nucleation and crystallization behavior of PbO–BaO–SrO–Nb2O5–B2O3–SiO2 glass–ceramics. The phase structure of glass–ceramics comprised the tungsten bronze phase Sr0.33Ba0.67Nb2O6. The maximum dielectric constant of glass–ceramics reached 200. The dielectric constant was related to the microstructure of glass–ceramics. Shyu et al.94 assessed the crystallization behavior and dielectric properties of the (Sr, Ba)Nb2O6–SiO2 glass–ceramic system. Ba2SiO3 was formed on the surface of glass–ceramics, and the (Sr, Ba)Nb2O6 phase was generated inside. The ceramic phase consisted of six major dendritic crystals, which rapidly grew along the two directions of the center. The crystal growth directions of the dendritic were [100], [010], and [001]. The dielectric constant of the glass–ceramic was determined by the combination of ceramic and glass phases. Shyu84,94 determined the optimum composition of bismuth citrate glass based on the phase diagram and successfully prepared bismuth citrate glass–ceramics through integral crystallization. The (Ba, Sr) Nb2O6 phase precipitated below 1000 °C, and the optimized dielectric constant of the glass–ceramics was 351.
The energy storage performance of glass–ceramics is related to the composition, grain size, and morphology of the ceramic phase. The energy storage density of niobate-based glass–ceramics is low. Many scholars have doped rare-earth elements and controlled the grain morphology, size, and composition of glass–ceramics to improve their energy storage density.
Many scholars have doped rare-earth elements to improve the energy storage density of glass–ceramics. Zhou44 studied the effects of rare-earth doping on the structure and dielectric properties of a Ba2NaNb5O15–NaNbO3–SiO2 system. The dielectric constant increased with the addition of rare-earth La2O3 to niobate glass–ceramics. When the amount of La2O3 added increased from 0 to 3 mol%, the dielectric constant increased from 328 to 754, and the dielectric loss was maintained at a low level. Xue effectively improved the dielectric constant and breakdown electric field of glass–ceramics by optimizing the ceramic ratio of the Ba2NaNb5O15–NaNbO3–SiO2 system.95 The energy storage density was 5.12 J cm−3 in the optimized glass–ceramics. The effects of Gd2O3 on the structure and dielectric properties of NaO–BaO–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics were evaluated.28 The phase transition, microstructure, and dielectric performance of glass–ceramics with various amounts of Gd2O3 added were investigated. The TEM result showed that crystal particles with a size of 20–40 nm were uniformly dispersed in the residual glass matrix [Fig. 9(a) and (b)]. The dielectric constant was 349, and the breakdown strength was 56.16 kV mm−1 when the content of Gd2O3 was 1% (mole fraction) in the NaO–BaO–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics [Fig. 9(c)]. La2O3 and MnO2 doping into the SrO–BaO–Nb2O5–SiO2–Al2O3–B2O3 glass–ceramics affected their structures and properties.27,95 The addition of La2O3 influenced the dielectric constant reduction and significantly changed the microstructure morphology of the glass–ceramics, resulting in improved breakdown strength. The optimized energy storage density of 7.2 J cm−3 was achieved in the glass–ceramics added with 0.2 mol% La2O3. MnO2 doping into glass–ceramics, as a grain growth inhibitor, remarkably affected the grain size reduction. A small amount of MnO2 doped into glass–ceramics decreased their leakage current density and dielectric loss. When the glass–ceramics were added with 0.05 mol% MnO2, the breakdown strength and theoretical energy storage density reached 1470.6 kV cm−1 and 9.2 J cm−3, respectively. The effects of doping of rare-earth Gd2O3 on the energy storage density of the BaO–K2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramic system were investigated.35 The surface morphology of the glass–ceramics greatly improved, and the corresponding dielectric constant and breakdown strength significantly increased. The doping of 1.0 mol% Gd2O3 remarkably improved the energy storage density, reaching 12.14 J cm−3 with a breakdown strength of 1818 kV cm−1 and a dielectric constant of 83. The discharge period reached 25 ns.
 Fig. 9  (a) TEM image and (b) corresponding energy-dispersive spectroscopic analysis of glass–ceramic composites with 1 mol% Gd2O3. (c) Weibull plots of the breakdown strength of Gd2O3-added glass–ceramics.28 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
Researchers have regulated the composition of the ceramic phase to obtain glass–ceramics with high energy storage density. Wang30 found that the dielectric constant of the Na2O–PbO–Nb2O5–SiO2 system increased with increasing temperature after partially replacing PbO by SrO. The dielectric constant of Na2O–PbO–Nb2O5–SiO2 annealed at 900 °C was approximately 380 because of the formation of the high dielectric constant of the SrNb2O6 and NaNbO3 phases. The breakdown strength decreased from 120 kV mm−1 to 57.3 kV mm−1. The dielectric constant and dielectric loss of the (Pb, Sr)Nb2O6–NaNbO3–SiO2 system significantly improved, and the dependence of the dielectric constant on temperature improved when the ratio of Sr to Pb was 4:6. The Na2O–BaO–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics were prepared through rapid cooling-controlled crystallization.85 The SrNb2O6 and NaNbO3 crystals were precipitated after annealing the glass–ceramics at 750 °C, and the maximum energy storage density was 1.87 J cm−3. Xue et al.77 evaluated the influence of the Ba/Na ratio on the morphology and dielectric properties of (BaO, Na2O)–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics. Different Ba/Na ratios had obvious effects on the dielectric and energy storage properties of the (BaO, Na2O)–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics. The increase in the Ba/Na ratio was beneficial to the precipitation of Ba2NaNb5O15 with a high dielectric constant in the glass matrix. When the ratio of Ba/Na was 2, the breakdown strength of the ceramics reached 864 kV cm−1, and the dielectric constant was 150 within −50 °C to 100 °C. The energy storage property of the (BaO, SrO)–Nb2O5–B2O3 glass–ceramic system was assessed by adjusting the Ba/Sr ratio to optimize the microstructure and dielectric properties.24 When the ratio of Ba/Sr reached 1, the dielectric constant was maintained at around 100. The breakdown field strength reached 944 kV cm−1. The method improved the energy storage performance, and the storage density reached 5.9 J cm−3. Zhang et al.51 investigated the effects of Na2O content on the structure and properties of BaO–SrO–Nb2O5–SiO2–B2O3 glass–ceramics. The addition of Na2O changed the structure of the crystalline phase, and an appropriate amount of Na2O increased the dielectric constant; however, the addition of Na2O reduced the breakdown strength of the glass–ceramics. Zeng et al.43 evaluated the effects of BaF2 on the dielectric properties of BaO–SrO–Nb2O5–B2O3 glass–ceramics. Fig. 10 shows the microstructure of glass–ceramics with different BaF2 contents. Compared with the SEM results of glass–ceramics with different BaF2 contents, the addition of BaF2 hindered the growth of (Ba, Sr) Nb2O6 crystals and decreased the pores of glass–ceramics, resulting in improved breakdown strength. Fig. 11 shows the Weibull plots and breakdown strength of glass–ceramics with different BaF2 contents. The breakdown strength of glass–ceramics obviously increased by increasing the content of BaF2. Therefore, the dielectric constant and breakdown strength could be improved by adding an appropriate amount of BaF2. The effects of ZnO on the dielectric performance and energy storage properties of BaO–SrO–Nb2O5–Al2O3–SiO2 were also investigated.96 The addition of zinc oxide promoted the glass crystallization. When the concentration of ZnO was 0.5 mol%, the dielectric constant reached the maximum, and the energy storage density was ∼6.17 J cm−3.
 Fig. 10  Field-emission SEM micrographs of (a) 0 mol% BaF2, (b) 2.5 mol% BaF2, (c) 4 mol% BaF2, (d) 5 mol% BaF2, and (e) 6 mol% BaF2. B2O3–Nb2O5–SrO–BaO–BaF2 glass–ceramics heat treated at 830 °C for 4 h.43 Copyright 2010, Wiley. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Weibull plots of dielectric breakdown strength and (b) average breakdown strength of glass–ceramics heat treated at 830 °C for 4 h.43 Copyright 2010, Wiley. 
Some scholars have improved the energy storage density of glass–ceramics by controlling the morphology and grain size of the ceramic phase. Chen et al.97 optimized the crystallization temperature to improve the dielectric storage properties of the Na2O–BaO–SrO–Nb2O5–SiO2–B2O3 system through two-step crystallization. When the glass–ceramics were treated at 800 °C for 3 h and after treatment at 950 °C for 3 h, the dielectric constant reached 50, the breakdown strength was 1400 kV cm−1, and the energy storage density reached 4 J cm−3. Wang et al.78 studied the effect of crystallization time on the microstructure and dielectric properties of SrO–BaO–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics. The phase content and grain size of the ceramics increased with increasing crystallization time. The polarization behavior of the glass matrix and grains was evaluated by analyzing the complex impedance. Han91 assessed the ANb2O6–NaNbO3–SiO2 (A = Pb, Sr, Ba) glass–ceramics system and found that it had low dielectric constant ceramic phase-silicate precipitation. The glass–ceramics were crystallized at an appropriate crystallization temperature, and the dielectric constant was maintained between 300 and 400 at room temperature. The Curie temperatures of Pb2NaNb5O15 and NaNbO3 phases were 415 °C and 365 °C, respectively. The grain size of the ANb2O6–NaNbO3–SiO2 glass–ceramic system was expressed in nanometers and showed an evident ferroelectric phase at room temperature, resulting in a plump hysteresis loop. This condition implied that part of the energy in the glass–ceramics system was not released and had low discharge efficiency. To optimize the energy storage characteristics of strontium barium niobate-based glass–ceramics, Chen20 adjusted the composition and microstructure by adding P2O5 into the system. The dielectric constant reached 90, and the breakdown field strength was 1650 kV cm−1 with the addition of P2O5. The theoretical energy storage density of the optimized glass–ceramics reached 9.1 J cm−3. To solve the above problems, Y. Zhang et al.33 optimized the microstructure and breakdown strength of titanate-based glass–ceramics by adding 4 mol% AlF3 and 1 mol% MnO2 into (Ba, Sr) titanium-based glass–ceramics. The breakdown field strength reached 621 kV cm−1. A certain amount of rare-earth oxide Yb2O3 was added in titanate-based glass–ceramics to suppress the precipitation of the ceramic phase with a low dielectric constant. This phase in the glass–ceramics was inhibited, and the microstructure was optimized. The breakdown field strength reached 1470, and the energy storage density reached 3.5 J cm−3. Wang et al. prepared BaO–PbO–Na2O–Nb2O5–Al2O3–SiO2 glass–ceramics and evaluated their energy storage performance.1 The energy storage density of the glass–ceramics crystallized at 900 °C reached 20.7 J cm−3. The maximum power density and discharge time of glass–ceramic capacitors were 78.2 MW cm−3 and <35 ns, respectively (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  (a) Underdamped discharge current density curves of the glass–ceramic capacitors under different charge electric fields; (b) overdamped instantaneous discharge power density curves and (c) energy density profiles under charge electric fields from 150 kV cm−1 to 400 kV cm−1; (d) overdamped instantaneous discharge power density curves at testing temperatures from 20 °C to 120 °C.1 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Previous studies focused on single-phase systems with only perovskite or tungsten bronze phases in glass–ceramics. In recent years, the coexistence of perovskite and tungsten bronze structures in multiphase niobate glass–ceramic systems has been widely investigated. The high dielectric constant of niobate glass–ceramics mainly originates from the excellent dielectric properties of tungsten bronze and perovskite ceramics. Du Jun et al.29 investigated the microstructures, crystallization behavior, and dielectric energy storage properties of (Ba, Sr, Pb) Nb2O6–NaNbO3–SiO2 glass–ceramics. With increasing annealing temperature, three crystalline phases, namely, Pb2Nb2O7, NaNbO3, and PbNb2O6, precipitated successively. These phases had different crystallization temperatures. The dielectric properties of glass–ceramics can be adjusted by controlling the annealing temperature and time. The glass–ceramics after annealing at 850 °C exhibited optimal dielectric properties. B. Rangarajan prepared Ba2NaNb5O15–NaNbO3–SiO2 glass–ceramics and evaluated the effect of MnO2 doping on their dielectric properties.49 The main ceramic phases were Ba2NaNb5O15 with a tetragonal tungsten bronze structure and NaNbO3 with a perovskite structure after annealing at 950 °C. The dielectric constant was 400. Doping a small amount of MnO2 in the glass–ceramics significantly reduced the dielectric loss. Peng et al.55 studied the glass–ceramics of the Ba2NaNb5O15–NaNbO3–SiO2 and Sr2KNb5O15–KNbO3–SiO2 systems. The dielectric constant of glass–ceramics with a multiphase structure was significantly higher than that with a single-phase structure. Glass–ceramics with a multiphase structure exhibit excellent dielectric properties, such as good dielectric constant temperature stability and low dielectric loss. Du et al.22 investigated the dielectric properties of PbO–Na2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics. When the sample was annealed at 850 °C for 3 h, the dielectric constant of the glass–ceramics reached the maximum value of 600 because of the precipitation of NaNbO3 and PbNb2O6 phases with high dielectric constants. The dielectric constant of PbO–Na2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics increased from 50 to 240. With increasing crystallization temperature, the breakdown strength continuously decreased from 178 kV mm−1 to 100 kV mm−1; when the crystallization temperature was 850 °C, the maximum energy storage density of the glass–ceramics was 17 J cm−3.70 The effects of the SrO content on the crystallization and dielectric properties of the SrO–PbO–Na2ONb2O5–SiO2 system were investigated.57 When the SrO content was 6% (molar fraction) and the sintering temperature was 900 °C, the maximum dielectric constant was approximately 600.
3.2 Titanate-based glass–ceramics
Titanate-based glass–ceramics are ferroelectric materials with a perovskite structure in the main crystalline phase. The general formula is ABO3, the crystal structure of the ceramic phase is a cubic crystal, and the A site with a coordination number of 12 is generally an alkaline earth metal ion with a large radius (e.g., Ba2+, Sr2+, Ca2+, and Pb2+). The B site with a coordination number of 6 is a transition metal ion with a small radius (e.g., Ti4+ and Zr4+). As shown in Fig. 13, the O2+ and A-site ions with a large radius form a cubic compact stack (face-centered structure), and the latter occupy the eight apex positions of the unit cell and the former is located at the face center. The B-site ions with a small radius are filled in the octahedral space of the body. Barium strontium titanate (BaxSr1−xTiO3 0 < x < 1) with a perovskite structure is an infinite solid solution of barium titanate and strontium titanate. This structure combines the advantages of the high dielectric constant of barium titanate and the good stability of the bias voltage of strontium titanate. The constant performance of BST can be controlled by adjusting the ratio of barium to strontium. When the content of barium exceeded 20%, the BaxSr1−xTiO3 transformed from the triclinic system to an orthorhombic system, then from the orthorhombic system to a tetragonal system, and finally from the tetragonal system to a cubic system with increasing temperature; this phenomenon has gained much attention in academia.
 Fig. 13  Diagram of the perovskite structure of BaTiO3. 
Edward P.90 investigated the microstructures, dielectric properties, and energy storage behavior of glass–ceramics with Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3, Ba0.7Sr0.3TiO3 and Ba0.8Sr0.2TiO3 as ceramic phases. When only SiO2 was used as the amorphous glass phase, a large number of undesired ceramic phases with a low dielectric constant, such as the silicate phase, were generated during crystallization, resulting in the low dielectric constant of the glass–ceramic system. When a small amount of Al2O3 was added to promote the formation of the amorphous phase network structure, the formation of the silicate phase was inhibited and the amount of the predicted BaxSr1−xTiO3 ceramic phase significantly increased in the glass–ceramic system. The dielectric constant reached 1000. The ceramic phase particles of the glass–ceramics were dendrites, resulting in their low breakdown strength. This condition was mainly due to the high electric field concentration at the end of dendrites, leading to the premature breakdown of the glass–ceramics.94,98 However, the ceramic phase particles in the glass–ceramics were dendritic crystals by conventional crystallization method. Various processing techniques have been adopted to solve that problems, such as nucleating agent of glass, rare earth elements doping and crystallization processes. The effects of different heat treatment processes on the crystal structure of glass–ceramics were investigated to solve the problems of inhomogeneous microstructures and dendritic growth of titanate-based glass–ceramics.98 The microwave crystallization heat treatment of titanate-based glass–ceramics optimized the microstructure of the glass–ceramics and transformed the dendrites into spherical crystals, thereby significantly increasing the breakdown field strength of the glass–ceramics. The microstructure and dielectric properties of the BaTiO3-based glass–ceramics were optimized by adjusting the Ba/Ti ratio.99 Increasing the Ba/Ti ratio resulted in the formation of dendrites and an increase in porosity, which was unfavorable to the breakdown strength of the glass–ceramics. When the Ba/Ti ratio was increased from 0.97 to 1.48, the breakdown field strength decreased from 50.1 kV mm−1 to 29.5 kV mm−1. For the dielectric properties, increasing the Ba/Ti ratio resulted in an increase in the dielectric constant, implying the increase in the amount of BaTiO3 in the high dielectric constant phase. The relationship of dielectric loss and Ba/Ti ratio was the same as that of the dielectric constant. Therefore, the Ba/Ti ratio should be appropriately adjusted to balance the microstructural and dielectric properties and optimize the breakdown strength and dielectric constant of the glass–ceramics for improving their energy storage density.
4. Factors affecting energy storage performance and fast discharge speed
4.1 Effect of chemical bonds and bond strength
Two kinds of theories, namely, irregular network and crystal theories, are used for glass structures.39 Irregular network theory mainly emphasizes the continuity, uniformity, and remote disorder of the polyhedron arrangement in the glass; meanwhile, crystal theory emphasizes the discontinuity, short-range orderliness, and micro-inhomogeneity. A chemical bond is the main factor determining the structure of substances and plays an important role in the formation of glass. Chemical bonds include metal, covalent, ionic, and hydrogen bonds, which are not absolute but have transitional forms. Mixed bonds exist between covalent and ionic bonds and between covalent and metallic bonds; these mixed bonds play an important role in glass formation.
Ionic bond compounds independently exist in the form of positive and negative ions in the melt state with huge fluidity. The probability of lattice formation is high because of various ionic bond actions and nondirectional and high coordination numbers, and a crystal lattice is rapidly formed by Coulomb forces at the freezing point. Glass formation is difficult for ionic bond compounds. Metallic bonding materials exist as positive ions after losing their weak electrons during melting. Valence electrons belong to a certain band but are not fixed in a certain local area. The atoms meet to form a lattice with a large probability because of the nondirectivity and saturation of metal bonds, making it difficult for glass formation. Most covalent bonding materials have molecular structures and are connected by covalent bonds within the molecules. No directional van der Waals force exists between the molecules. During cooling, the probability of forming a molecular lattice is relatively high, making it difficult for glass formation. The transition of an ionic bond to a covalent bond, which is an ionic–covalent mixed bond, is mainly for the hybrid orbitals of the s-p electronic form and constitutes the π and σ bonds caused by the strong polarization effect. This kind of mixed bond easily changes the bond angle of the ionic bond and forms asymmetric deformation, which is conducive to the long-distance disorder of the glass. The mixed bond possesses the directionality and saturation of the covalent bond and cannot easily change the bond length and bond angle tendency, resulting in short-range ordering of glass. Glass formation is easily achieved for materials with an ionic–covalent mixed bond.
The role of different oxides in the glass structure mainly depends on the bond strength and their interaction. Compounds with high single bond strength are likely to form glass. On the basis of the bond strength, oxides can be divided into three categories, namely, network forming agents, network intermediates, and network modifiers. Oxides, such as SiO2, B2O3, P2O5, and GeO2, with a bond strength of more than 80 kcal mol−1 can form glass by themselves, and are called glass oxide formation or glass network formation bodies. Oxides with bond strength between 60 and 80 kcal mol−1 cannot form glass by themselves, and their glass forming ability is lower than that of network forming bodies. However, they can enter the network structure and make up the network when they coexist with the formation bodies. These oxides are called intermediate oxides or network intermediates, such as Al2O3, BeO, ZnO, and Ti2O. Oxides with bond strength below 60 kcal mol−1 have lower network forming ability than the network intermediates. These oxides cannot form glass themselves and cannot enter the network structure. They are usually dissociated outside the network structure or break the network to make the bridge oxygen in the network break and form nonbridge oxygen, which can change the performance of glass. They are called glass regulated oxides, network outer bodies or network modifiers, such as Na2O, K2O, CaO, and MgO. The coordination state can be investigated through Raman scattering spectroscopy, infrared absorption and emission spectroscopy, and atomic radial distribution function.
Adding an appropriate amount of high-value oxides in glass energy storage materials as network intermediates can help suppress the network, such as a broken network effect caused by the body, immensely reduce the oxygen content in the bridge structure, and improve the glass forming ability, thereby improving the breakdown strength and extending the upper limit of dielectric constant. The newly formed chemical bonds have better thermal stability, their bond length, bond angle, and bond strength remain constant with increasing temperature, and the glass has better temperature stability.
The energy storage performance of glass is related to the content of nonbridge oxygen. With increasing nonbridging oxygen content, the structure of the glass network becomes loose and the breakdown strength decreases. The energy storage performance of glass is related to the chargeability of the glass network skeleton. Intermediates have different effects on energy storage performance. Nb2O5 exists as a network intermediate in the form of NbO6 octahedron, makes the network matrix negatively charged, and acts as a mesh supplement, immensely reducing the content of nonbridging oxygen in the glass and improving the breakdown strength.
4.2 Effect of microstructure
In the microstructure of glass–ceramics, the size and morphology of the grains of the ceramic phase and the number of defects have a significant effect on energy storage performance. The ceramic phase with a large grain size is prone to cracks, pores, and other defects, thereby decreasing the breakdown strength. When the grain size of the ceramic phase is small, the probability of forming micropores is small, and the degree of compact accumulation is high, resulting in high breakdown strength. However, if the particles are too small, then agglomeration will cause the density of the material to decrease and deteriorate the dielectric properties. Excessively small ceramic phase agglomerates deteriorate the dielectric properties and reduce the energy storage density of the glass–ceramics. Therefore, an appropriate amount of glass phase can be added in the ceramic, which refines the ceramic particles and utilizes its rheological properties at high temperatures to encapsulate the ceramic particles for forming a “core–shell” structure, thereby reducing the sintering temperature and increasing the density. Based on the impedance analysis, grain boundaries with a low dielectric constant and good insulation performance endure most of the electric fields, thereby increasing the breakdown strength of the glass–ceramics. The residual polarization strength decreases with decreasing ceramic particle size, which is beneficial to the increase in the energy storage density. Glass–ceramics with dendritic crystals have lower breakdown field strength than spherical crystal grains. A high electric field is generated at the end of the dendrites under the applied electric field because of the uneven microstructure, leading to the breakdown of the glass–ceramics as well as the low breakdown field strength and low energy storage performance. The presence of pores causes the glass–ceramics to be subjected to uneven electric field strength during polarization. High electric fields are easily produced at the pore boundary, leading to the decrease in the breakdown strength of the glass–ceramics. Glass–ceramics form a liquid phase during sintering, and these liquid phases are filled in the particle gap, which is advantageous for the elimination of the pores as well as for reducing the porosity and increasing the breakdown strength and energy storage density. Glass–ceramics were fabricated via controlled conventional crystallization and microwave heat treatment.100 The effects of different crystallization routes on the energy storage properties of glass–ceramics were investigated. The SEM results showed that the microwave heat treatment enabled the microstructure of glass–ceramics to be uniform without any dendritic structure (Fig. 14). Microwave heat treatment improved the breakdown property of the glass–ceramics.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM of the samples using the conventional method and schematic of crystallization; (b) schematic of a sample using microwave heat treatment.100 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
4.3 Effect of interface polarization
For glass–ceramics consisting of ferroelectric and glass phases, their polarization degrees are different under the applied electric field because of the large difference in the dielectric constants between the two phases. Local charges and ions move toward the interface, and many charges accumulate at the interface and polarize to balance the polarization difference, resulting in the distortion of the local electric field. These space charges cannot be completely released during the discharge process because of the long discharge time of space charge polarization, resulting in a decrease in the discharge efficiency of the glass–ceramics (Fig. 15). Thus, interface polarization should be reduced and energy storage performance should be improved.
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the charge and discharge mechanism of nanocomposites with an applied electric field: (a) without interfacial polarization, (b) with high interfacial polarization, and (c) with low interfacial polarization. Interfacial polarization charges are represented by green dipoles. Charges completely released during the discharge are represented by orange dipoles.101 Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing. 
The interfacial polarization of glass–ceramics in the Ba1−xSrxTiO3 system was discussed using a Maxwell–Wagner capacitor model.102 When the conductivity of the glass phase in the system decreased or the dielectric constant of the glass phase increased, the dielectric relaxation polarization weakened. Hence, the interfacial polarization is highly dependent on the conductivity and dielectric constant of the glass phase. Reducing the difference in the conductivity and dielectric properties between the glass and ceramic phases can effectively reduce the interface polarization. The relationship between the interfacial polarization and dielectric breakdown strength in BaO–SrO–TiO2–Al2O3–SiO2 glass–ceramics was evaluated through impedance analysis.2 When the sintering temperature was increased from 780 °C to 830 °C, the breakdown strength of the glass–ceramics rapidly decreased because the precipitation of the crystal led to the formation of the glass phase–crystal phase interface; moreover, many space charges accumulated at the interface, resulting in interface polarization. When the temperature continued to rise to 950 °C, the breakdown strength increased possibly because of the increase in the degree of crystallization, resulting in a decrease in the accumulated interfaces and charges at the interface. Zhang et al.103 observed that the energy efficiency of BaO–SrO–TiO2–Al2O3–SiO2–BaF2 glass–ceramic samples was related to interfacial polarization. With increasing interfacial polarization, many charges can be captured at the interface during charging, thereby increasing the charge energy density. Many charges are not released during the discharge process because of the relaxation phenomenon, resulting in a decrease in energy efficiency. With increasing sintering temperature, the number of interfaces and space charges at the interface decreased, leading to a decrease in the interface polarization and an increase in the discharge energy density and energy efficiency.
4.4 Effect of the glass matrix
The glass matrix has a huge influence on the crystallization properties, microstructure, and puncture strength of glass–ceramics. Therefore, the control of the glass matrix in the glass–ceramics is crucial. The regulation of the glass matrix in the experiment is mainly conducted in terms of two aspects, namely, the content and composition of the glass phase.
The breakdown strength and charge and discharge efficiency of the glass–ceramics increased, whereas the dielectric constant decreased with increasing glass phase content. Excessive glass phase content may cause some adverse effects, such as excessive viscosity, pore formation, and crystallization ability reduction. When the glass phase content is less than 20 wt% in niobate glass–ceramics, the glass is prone to phase separation. During crystallization, the nucleation and crystallization rates are high, and crystallization is difficult to control. Therefore, the microscopic morphology of the glass–ceramics is extremely uneven. When the glass phase content is higher than 20 wt%, the distribution of the ceramic phase in the glass matrix is relatively uniform, and the crystallization is controllable. When the content of the glass phase is further increased, the glass gradually becomes metastable, and the crystallization ability gradually decreases; as such, crystallization is difficult. The composition control of the glass phase is mainly used to control the network formation and network intermediates in the glass network structure. Silicon-based glasses composed of [SiO4] tetrahedra have been widely investigated because of their lack of valence change, stable structure, high viscosity, and absence of pore formation. The breakdown strength is usually considerable. For the regulation of their composition, different oxides, such as Al2O3, B2O3, and ZrO2, are added into glass–ceramics to modify their network structure. Al2O3 is mainly used as a network intermediate, which acts as a supplementary network for the network structure and can inhibit the breaking of the structure by using alkali metal and alkaline earth metal oxides.104 Al2O3 can effectively reduce the content of nonbridged oxygen and improve the breakdown strength. An excessive amount of Al2O3 usually increases the viscosity and easily produces pores. B2O3 is also a kind of network formation. A small amount of doping in the silica-based glass phase can reduce the melting temperature and contribute to the clarification of glass melting. ZrO2 is mainly used as a nucleating agent in the glass phase to promote glass crystallization and enhance the glass network structure. (BaO, R2O)–Nb2O5–SiO2 (R = Li, Na, K) glasses were prepared by melted annealing and controlled crystallization.105 The amorphous property was confirmed through XRD, and the glass network structure was analyzed through Raman spectroscopy. The network structure consisted of SiO4 tetrahedra and NbO6 octahedra. Nb2O5 existed as a network intermediate in the system. With increasing radius of the R ion, the dielectric constant increased gradually and the breakdown strength improved. The component (BaO, Na2O, K2O)–Nb2O5–SiO2 exhibited the highest breakdown strength of 4432.5 kV cm−1 and a dielectric constant of approximately 22 at room temperature with good temperature stability, resulting in the highest storage density of 19 J cm−3. The component showed good discharge performance with a discharge period of 9 ns and a maximum power density of 12 MW cm−3 (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  (a) Underdamped I–t curve and (b) power density under 3 kV of (Ba, Na, K)–Nb–Si glass.105 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
4.5 Effect of sample thickness
Sample thickness has a huge influence on breakdown strength. The breakdown strength of glass–ceramics decreases with increasing thickness because the defects increase. Under an external electric field, these defects will make the electric field distribution uneven, leading to a decrease in the breakdown strength. An empirical power exponential dependence (Eb ∝ d−n) exists between the breakdown strength and sample thickness d. Previous literature reports confirmed that this formula can be applied to glass–ceramics, but the application range is below 50 μm. When the thickness exceeds 50 μm, the breakdown strength is greatly reduced due to defects and charge trapping on the surface of the sample. Ref. 39 reported that the breakdown strength significantly increases when the thickness of the material is less than 100 μm. Deng37 observed that the breakdown strength significantly increased with decreasing sample thickness of the Ba1−xSixTiO3 ceramic system containing Ba–B–Al–Si glass. When the sample thickness was 0.1 mm, the breakdown strength of the glass–ceramics was 36 kV mm−1, and the energy storage density was 1.98 J cm−3. In addition, cracks were easily generated because of the stress limitations induced by machining in the sample with thickness less than 30 μm, resulting in the abnormal decrease in the breakdown strength. The test thickness of all samples in the experiment was controlled at 30–100 μm. Another factor that affects the breakdown strength is surface roughness, which also affects the uniformity of electric field distribution on the surface and the charge injection at the interface between the metal electrode and glass. Therefore, surface polishing is required to improve the breakdown strength.
The dependence of the breakdown strength of the (BaO, Na2O)–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramic system on the thickness was investigated.16 The breakdown strength and thickness of the BNN-AS glass–ceramic system followed the empirical exponential relationship (Eb ∝ d−n) with exponent n = 0.21 (Fig. 17). The breakdown mechanism was the electrical breakdown dominated by electron–phonon interactions. At 30 μm, the energy density reached 16.6 J cm−3.
 Fig. 17  Log of breakdown field versus log of thickness.16 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
For a glass–ceramic dielectric with the same thickness, a multilayer series structure can achieve higher breakdown field strength than a single-layer dielectric. The design of the multilayer series structure can effectively reduce the distortion of electric field in the edge and interior of the dielectric layer. The electric field distribution of the material is close to the distribution of parallel plate capacitance, and the uniform electric field distribution can significantly increase the breakdown strength of the sample.
The material and structure of the electrode have a huge influence on the breakdown strength. Electric fields are easily accumulated at the edge of the electrode (the edge effect of the electrode) to reduce the breakdown strength of the dielectrics.40 Therefore, a reasonable design of the electrode structure and the reduction of the edge effect can effectively improve the breakdown strength. Luo Jun et al.67 observed that a double-layer composite electrode prepared by magnetron sputtering gold plating and screen silver printing had better interface bonding quality than a one-layer electrode prepared by screen silver printing. The pores and other defects were reduced by sintering at the interface between the electrode and the dielectric, thereby increasing the breakdown strength of glass–ceramics. The maximum breakdown strength can reach 96 kV mm−1, and the energy storage density was 8.2 J cm−3. Zhu Jun et al.83 compared the effects of different metal film inner electrode layers on the performance of glass–ceramic capacitors. The breakdown strength of the sample with Pt and Au electrodes was higher than that of the sample with a silver electrode. The leakage current of the sample with the silver electrode was relatively larger than those of the samples with other electrodes. This condition could be due to the fact that the silver electrode entered the glass–ceramic through the interface during sintering, thereby reducing the insulation resistance of the medium and increasing the leakage current. Pt and Au electrodes inhibited the diffusion of metal and improved the microstructure near the dielectric/electrode interface. The breakdown strength of glass–ceramic capacitors significantly increased. Luo et al.23 compared several electrode structures and found that a bowl-like electrode structure effectively reduced the edge effect of the electrode; the breakdown strength was significantly higher than that of other structures. The sample with the bowl-like electrode had the highest discharge speed of 5.7 kA ns−1, and the discharge circuit lasted the longest, reaching 32 ns. The media play an important role in the evaluation of dielectric properties. Liquid testing media are widely used to measure the breakdown strength under high electric fields to avoid arc generation and corona discharge. Han et al.55 investigated the energy storage properties of a PbO–Na2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 system by using different testing liquids. The breakdown strength and dielectric properties of the PbO–Na2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramics were adjusted by using appropriate testing liquid medium. The highest breakdown strength of the PbO–Na2O–Nb2O5–SiO2 glass–ceramic was obtained when the test liquid medium was glycerol. The breakdown strength was 105.6 kV mm−1 compared with other liquid media.
5. Outlook and perspectives
In 2019, the National Academy of Sciences published the third decade of research on materials research, the Frontiers of Materials Research: A 10-year Survey. The survey focused on the progress and achievements in the field of materials research in the past decade, identified opportunities, challenges, and new directions for materials research in 2020–2030, and proposed recommendations to address these challenges. The “Materials Research Frontier: 10-year Survey” report indicates that the competition between developed and developing countries in the areas of smart manufacturing and materials science will intensify in the next decade. With the development of the digital and information age in the United States and the global challenges, the impact of materials research on emerging technologies, national needs, and science in the United States will become important. Next-generation information and energy systems will require new electronic materials and devices that provide high power density, high efficiency, and small footprint. Glass ceramics are used as solid electrolytes for energy storage and nonlinear optics and in energy storage and quantum communication. New opportunities in ceramic–glass research include the use of defects as a new dimension in material design, understanding grain boundary evolution and crystal phase evolution, determining the energy-saving process for making ceramics, producing dense and ultrahigh temperature ceramics, and exploring the basic mechanism of transition liquid phase densification produced by cold sintering technology. Glass–ceramic materials are widely applied as dielectric materials for energy storage capacitors because of their ultrafast discharge speed, excellent high temperature stability, stable frequency, and environmental friendliness. In recent years, the energy storage performance of glass–ceramics has been enhanced by improving their preparation and regulating their matrix composition and structure. However, some problems, such as low breakdown strength and low energy storage density, still exist. Future studies on the improvement of energy storage performance of glass–ceramic materials should be conducted on the following aspects:
The influences of crystal phase structure and component on the energy storage performance of glass–ceramics should be systematically investigated to reveal the intrinsic factors affecting the energy storage density of glass–ceramics. The crystal structure and the proportion of phases of glass–ceramics should be accurately determined through high-resolution electron microscopy and in situ measurements. The changes in the phase structure and microstructure caused by the external environment would be clarified. The physical mechanism of interface polarization affecting the energy storage performance of glass–ceramics would be elucidated.
A new glass–ceramic material system should be developed by combining theoretical research with computational simulation, and the design and performance prediction of new glass–ceramic material systems should be conducted based on first-principles and phase-field simulations. At the same time, subsequent studies on known glass–ceramic systems should be performed to achieve the desired performance.
Advanced material preparation processes (including hot pressing and microwave sintering, etc.) should be adopted to obtain a dense structure by adjusting the grain morphology, size, and control defects. The relationship between grain morphology, size, and energy storage performance should be clarified to establish relevant theories for guiding the development of glass–ceramic systems.
Scientific research results and commercial application are combined to accelerate the transformation and industrialization of the technology for promoting the development of glass–ceramics with high energy storage density and their energy storage components and devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Ministry of Sciences and Technology of China through the 973-project under Grant (2015CB654601), the National Natural Science Foundation Project of China (11847122), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded Project (2017M611614).
References
S. J. Wang, J. Tian, J. R. Liu, K. Yang, B. Shen and J. W. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12608–12614 RSC .
J. Huang, Y. Zhang, T. Ma, H. Li and L. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 042902 CrossRef .
X. Ran, X. Zhuo, Y. Feng, X. Wei and H. Dong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 281–286 Search PubMed .
P. Pernice, S. Esposito, A. Aronne and V. N. Sigaev, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1999, 258, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Gorzkowski, M. J. Pan, B. A. Bender and C. C. M. Wu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 91, 1065–1069 CrossRef .
Z. M. Dang, J. K. Yuan, S. H. Yao and R. J. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6334–6365 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Dang, J. K. Yuan, J. W. Zha, T. Zhou, S. T. Li and G. H. Hu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 660–723 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, X. Wang, H. Gong, Y. Hao, Z. Shen and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 750–758 RSC .
Q. Li, G. Zhang, F. Liu, K. Han, M. R. Gadinski, C. Xiong and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 922–931 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Yuan, Y. Niu, J. Chen, Q. Wang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10849–10855 RSC .
D. Zhang, X. Zhou, J. Roscow, K. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Luo and C. R. Bowen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Yao, Z. Song, H. Hao, Z. Y. Yu, M. H. Cao, S. J. Zhang, M. T. Lanagan and H. X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601727 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Luo, J. Roscow, X. Zhou, S. Chen, X. Han, K. Zhou, D. Zhang and C. R. Bowen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7091–7102 RSC .
L. A. Fredin, Z. Li, M. A. Ratner, M. T. Lanagan and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5946–5953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Z. Yong, C. Deng, X. Dai and L. Li, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 92, 1350–1353 CrossRef .
J. R. Liu, K. Yang, J. W. Zhai and B. Shen, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 38, 2312–2317 CrossRef CAS .
M. Touzin, D. Goeuriot, H.-J. Fitting, C. Guerret-Piécourt, D. Juvé and D. Tréheux, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 27, 1193–1197 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yang, F. Yan, Y. Lin and T. Wang, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 38, 1367–1373 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. S. Deng and X. M. Dai, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 109–113 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Chen, J. Zheng, C. L. Yuan, C. R. Zhou, X. L. Kang, J. W. Xu and Y. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2016, 176, 46–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, B. Jones and M. Lanagan, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 0–2826 Search PubMed .
J. Du, B. Jones and M. Lanagan, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 2821–2826 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Q. Tang, Q. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Du, H. Li and J. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1976–1978 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, G. H. Chen, C. L. Yuan and Y. Yun, Mater. Lett., 2014, 117, 7–9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Wang, Y. P. Pu, Y. F. Cui, Y. Shi and H. Y. Zheng, Mater. Lett., 2017, 201, 203–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Xue, J. W. Zhai, S. Xiao, S. M. Xiu and B. Shen, Mater. Lett., 2017, 190, 154–156 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiu, B. Shen and J. Zhai, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 95, 349–353 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yi, Q. Zhang, J. Luo, Q. Tang and J. Du, Scr. Mater., 2011, 65, 296–299 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, J. Luo, Q. Tang and J. Du, Scr. Mater., 2011, 65, 296–299 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Q.-M. Zhang and J. Du, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2010, 20, 1434–1438 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Reece, C. A. Worrell, G. J. Hill and R. Morrell, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Qiao, Y. M. Tian, K. Y. Wang, G. M. Li and Y. S. Chai, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 37, 995–999 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Jeon, S. K. Lee, S. W. Kim and D. K. Choi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 94, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sarkar and M. L. Sharma, Mater. Res. Bull., 1989, 24, 773–779 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, J. R. Liu, B. Shen, J. W. Zhai and H. T. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2017, 223, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, J. Luo, Q. Tang and J. Du, Rare Met., 2012, 31, 281–284 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rong, P. Du, W. Weng and G. Han, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 26, 1611–1617 CrossRef .
H. T. Wang, J. H. Liu, J. W. Zhai, Z. B. Pan and B. Shen, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 37, 3917–3925 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Yong, X. Song, Z. Yuan, M. Tao, Z. Qian, C. Deng and T. Liang, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 32, 559–567 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Z. Yi and J. Du, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 2353–2356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Liu, J. Zhai and S. Bo, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99, 2909–2912 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yong, J. Huang, M. Tao, X. Wang, C. Deng and X. Dai, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 1805–1810 CrossRef .
Y. Zeng, X. Qin, S. Jiang, G. Zhang and Z. Ling, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 469–473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, J. Luo, Q. Tang and J. Du, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 372–375 CAS .
C. Davis, A. L. Pertuit and J. C. Nino, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 100, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Layton and A. Herczog, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 50, 369–375 CrossRef .
J. H. Liu, H. T. Wang, B. Shen, J. W. Zhai, P. Li and Z. B. Pan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 100, 506–510 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Q. Zhang, J. Du, Q. Tang and W. Lei, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 92, 1871–1873 Search PubMed .
B. Rangarajan, B. Jones, T. Shrout and M. Lanagan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 90, 784–788 CrossRef .
M. J. Reece, C. A. Worrell, G. J. Hill and R. Morrell, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 79, 17–26 CrossRef .
L. Yang, X. Kong, F. Li, H. Hao, Z. Cheng, H. Liu, J.-F. Li and S. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 102, 72–108 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Chu, X. Zhou, K. L. Ren, B. Neese, M. R. Lin, Q. Wang, F. Bauer and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2006, 313, 334–336 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neese, B. J. Chu, S. G. Lu, Y. Wang, E. Furman and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2008, 321, 821–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. P. Thakur, D. Kumar, O. M. Parkash and L. Pandey, Bull. Mater. Sci., 1995, 18, 577–585 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Han, Q. M. Zhang, Q. Tang, J. Luo and J. Du, Ceram. Int., 2010, 36, 2011–2016 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Hu, T. Wang, L. Y. Zhao, L. Jin, Z. Xu and X. Y. Wei, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, C. H. Mao, G. X. Dong and J. Du, Ceram. Int., 2009, 35, 1261–1265 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, L. Zhang, H. Talebinezhad, Y. Tong and Z. Y. Cheng, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 16977–16983 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Ping, W. F. Liu and S. T. Li, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 11388–11394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, S. J. Wang, K. Yang, J. R. Liu, J. W. Zhai and B. Shen, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 15490–15494 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Wang, J. H. Liu, J. W. Zhai, B. Shen, Z. B. Pan, J. R. Liu and K. Yang, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 8898–8904 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Wang, J. H. Liu, J. W. Zhai, B. Shen, Z. B. Pan, K. Yang and J. R. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 4183–4187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Z. Yong, X. Liu and X. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 2069–2076 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Wang, J. Tian, T. Jiang, J. W. Zhai and B. Shen, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 23109–23115 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Wang, J. Tian, K. Yang, J. R. Liu, J. W. Zhai and B. Shen, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 8528–8533 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Wang, Y. Zhang, T. Ma, C. S. Deng and X. M. Dai, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, S57–S60 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jun, D. Jun, T. Qun and D. Guixia, Electron. Compon. Mater., 2008, 27, 72–74 Search PubMed .
W. F. Liu, W. W. Ping and S. T. Li, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1423–1428 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Cui and I. S. Baturin, Ferroelectrics, 2013, 442, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Du, Q. Tang and C. Mao, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2008, 55, 3549–3554 CAS .
T. Wang, Y. H. Wang, H. B. Yang, Y. Lin, L. Kong, S. Y. Gao and F. Wang, J. Adv. Dielectr., 2018, 8, 1850041 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chakrabarti, K. Biswas and A. R. Molla, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 740, 237–249 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Liu, H. T. Wang, B. Shen, J. W. Zhai, Z. B. Pan, K. Yang and J. R. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 722, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, Y. Tong, H. Talebinezhad, L. Zhang and Z. Y. Cheng, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 745, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, Y. P. Pu and X. Y. Du, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 785, 350–355 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Xie, G. X. Bai, Y. J. Cai, Y. Tian, F. F. Huang, S. Q. Xu and J. J. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 788, 972–977 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xue, J. Wang, S. Liu, W. Zhang, L. Tang, S. Bo and J. Zhai, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 7495–7499 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Tang, S. Bo and J. Zhai, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 288–293 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, G. Chen, C. Zhou, M. Jiang, H. Wang and X. Liu, Chin. J. of Nonferrous Met., 2011, 21, 1457–1462 CAS .
L. Chang, Q. Zhang, Q. Tang, Z. Hao, F. Tan and J. Du, J. Electron. Mater., 2016, 45, 3025–3029 CrossRef .
J. H. Liu, H. T. Wang, J. W. Zhai, B. Shen, Q. Luo and Q. J. Zhi, J. Electron. Mater., 2018, 47, 7429–7434 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiao, S. M. Xiu, K. Yang, B. Shen and J. W. Zhai, J. Electron. Mater., 2018, 47, 834–842 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, J. Luo, Q.-M. Zhang and J. Du, J. Inorg. Mater., 2011, 26, 613–618 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shyu and H. W. Peng, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 2057–2063 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Luo, Q. Tang, D. Han, Y. Zhou and J. Du, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 8832–8835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Xue, S. Xiao and J. W. Zhai, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 16758–16764 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Cheng, M. Lanagan, J. T. Lin, B. Jones and M. J. Pan, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 438–446 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Fletcher, A. D. Hilton and B. W. Ricketts, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1996, 29, 253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Garai, N. Sasmal, A. R. Molla, S. P. Singh, A. Tarafder and B. Karmakar, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 1612–1623 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Gorzkowski, M. J. Pan, B. Bender and C. C. M. Wu, J. Electroceram., 2007, 18, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Han, Q. M. Zhang, J. Luo, Q. Tang and J. Du, Solid State Sci., 2012, 14, 661–667 CrossRef CAS .
A. Herczog, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1964, 47, 107–115 CrossRef CAS .
A. Herczog, IEEE Trans. Parts, Hybrids, Packag., 1973, 9, 247–256 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shyu and J. R. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 3135–3140 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Xiu, S. Xiao, B. Shen and J. W. Zhai, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 4557–4561 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, W. Wei, S. Bo, J. Zhai and B. K. Ling, J. Electron. Mater., 2015, 44, 227–234 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Chen, W. J. Zhang, X. Y. Liu and C. R. Zhou, J. Electroceram., 2011, 27, 78–82 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Tang, B. Shen and J. Zhai, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 288–293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Deng, X. Dai and L. Li, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 1350–1353 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Xue, S. Liu, J. Wang, S. Bo and J. Zhai, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 617, 740–745 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, S. Xue, B. Shen and J. Zhai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 032907 CrossRef .

          M.-J. Pan, E. P. Gorzkowski, B. A. Bender, C. C. M. Wu and Ieee, in 2006 15th IEEE International Symposium on Applications of Ferroelectrics, 2007, pp. 25–28.
Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhu, Z. Fu and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 514–518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiu, X. Shi, S. Xue, S. Bo and J. Zhai, J. Electron. Mater., 2015, 45, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, K. Yang, J. Zhai, B. Shen, H. Wang and F. Li, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 206, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Shaohui Liu
	Shaohui Liu obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tongji University in 2015. He has worked as an Associate Professor at the School of Science, Henan University of Engineering, since 2017. He is mainly interested in the fabrication of advanced energy density glass–ceramics and organic–inorganic nano-composites and their applications in capacitors.

Bo Shen
	Bo Shen obtained her Master's degree from the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 1995. She is an Associate Professor at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tongji University. Her research interests include the design, synthesis and phase structure of ferroelectric glass–ceramics.

Haoshan Hao
	Haoshan Hao received his PhD degree from the School of Physical Engineering, Zhengzhou University, in 2007. He currently holds the position of a professor at the School of Science, Henan University of Engineering, China. He is interested in dielectric ceramics and thermoelectric ceramics.

Jiwei Zhai
	Jiwei Zhai obtained his PhD degree from the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 1997. He is currently a Professor at the School of Materials Science & Engineering, Tongji University. His research is focused on developing advanced microwave dielectric ceramics (including LTCC) and devices, ferroelectrics, piezoelectric ceramics for energy and microwave applications via a coordinated experiment with theory approach. He has published more than 500 journal papers, 55 granted patents, and 30 plenary and invited talks at international conferences.

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of energy storage and power densities of several energy storage devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Application fields of capacitors with high energy storage density.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the preparation of glass–ceramics.	 

Polymer	2.2	∼4000	1–1.2
Ceramic	1000	∼100	1–5
Glass–ceramic	100	∼1200	5–20

 	Fig. 4  The journal publications on energy densities of ferroelectric glass–ceramics reported in the literature from 2000 to 2018 are summarized using the“Web of Science” by counting the relevant articles with the key words of“glass–ceramics” and “energy density”.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Energy storage characteristics of various dielectric materials.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Relation of dielectric polarization and frequency response.	 

 	Fig. 7  Diagrams of dielectric polarization mechanisms.	 

 	Fig. 8  Diagrams of the tungsten bronze structure of SrxBa1−xNb2O6 and the perovskite structure of NaNbO3.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TEM image and (b) corresponding energy-dispersive spectroscopic analysis of glass–ceramic composites with 1 mol% Gd2O3. (c) Weibull plots of the breakdown strength of Gd2O3-added glass–ceramics.28 Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Field-emission SEM micrographs of (a) 0 mol% BaF2, (b) 2.5 mol% BaF2, (c) 4 mol% BaF2, (d) 5 mol% BaF2, and (e) 6 mol% BaF2. B2O3–Nb2O5–SrO–BaO–BaF2 glass–ceramics heat treated at 830 °C for 4 h.43 Copyright 2010, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Weibull plots of dielectric breakdown strength and (b) average breakdown strength of glass–ceramics heat treated at 830 °C for 4 h.43 Copyright 2010, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Underdamped discharge current density curves of the glass–ceramic capacitors under different charge electric fields; (b) overdamped instantaneous discharge power density curves and (c) energy density profiles under charge electric fields from 150 kV cm−1 to 400 kV cm−1; (d) overdamped instantaneous discharge power density curves at testing temperatures from 20 °C to 120 °C.1 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Diagram of the perovskite structure of BaTiO3.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM of the samples using the conventional method and schematic of crystallization; (b) schematic of a sample using microwave heat treatment.100 Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the charge and discharge mechanism of nanocomposites with an applied electric field: (a) without interfacial polarization, (b) with high interfacial polarization, and (c) with low interfacial polarization. Interfacial polarization charges are represented by green dipoles. Charges completely released during the discharge are represented by orange dipoles.101 Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Underdamped I–t curve and (b) power density under 3 kV of (Ba, Na, K)–Nb–Si glass.105 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Log of breakdown field versus log of thickness.16 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
