Core–shell nanoparticles: synthesis and applications in catalysis and electrocatalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00343A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00343A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7540-7590Core–shell nanoparticles: synthesis and applications in catalysis and electrocatalysis

        
          
            Manoj B. 
            Gawande
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Anandarup 
            Goswami
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Tewodros 
            Asefa
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Huizhang 
            Guo
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ankush V. 
            Biradar
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Dong-Liang 
            Peng
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Radek 
            Zboril
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Rajender S. 
            Varma
          
          
        
      *f
aRegional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Faculty of Science, Department of Physical Chemistry, Palacky University, Šlechtitelů 11, 783 71, Olomouc, Czech Republic. E-mail: manoj.gawande@upol.cz; radek.zboril@upol.cz
bDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 610 Taylor Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA
cDepartment of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 98 Brett Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, People's Republic of China
eCatalysis Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pune 411008, India
fSustainable Technology Division, National Risk Management Research Laboratory, US Environmental Protection Agency, 26 West Martin Luther King Drive, MS 443, Cincinnati, Ohio 45268, USA. E-mail: Varma.Rajender@epamail.epa.gov
Received 
      26th April 2015
    First published on 19th August 2015AbstractCore–shell nanoparticles (CSNs) are a class of nanostructured materials that have recently received increased attention owing to their interesting properties and broad range of applications in catalysis, biology, materials chemistry and sensors. By rationally tuning the cores as well as the shells of such materials, a range of core–shell nanoparticles can be produced with tailorable properties that can play important roles in various catalytic processes and offer sustainable solutions to current energy problems. Various synthetic methods for preparing different classes of CSNs, including the Stöber method, solvothermal method, one-pot synthetic method involving surfactants, etc., are briefly mentioned here. The roles of various classes of CSNs are exemplified for both catalytic and electrocatalytic applications, including oxidation, reduction, coupling reactions, etc.
Manoj B. Gawande
Manoj B. Gawande received his PhD degree in Chemistry in 2008 from, Institute of Chemical Technology (formerly UDCT), Matunga, Mumbai, India. He was awarded several prestigious fellowships, including BK-21 Research fellowship, FCT Research fellowship and recently was awarded Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Samman, by Govt. of India and NRI Welfare Society of India. After several research stints in Germany, Portugal, Singapore, England and USA, he is presently working as Senior Researcher and Head of Division of Nanocatalysis laboratory at RCPTM, Faculty of Science, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. His research interests include core–shell/carbon/magnetic nanocatalysis. He has published nearly 65 scientific papers including several reviews.
Anandarup Goswami
Anandarup Goswami obtained his PhD in organolithium chemistry under Prof. David B. Collum at Cornell University (2010) and later joined Prof. Kai C. Hultzsch's group at Rutgers University to work on organometallic catalysis. He has a keen interest in heterogeneous catalysis, which he explored in Prof. Tewodros (Teddy) Asefa's group, with special emphasis on silica/metal/carbon-based nanomaterials and their applications. Presently, he is working as researcher in the field of nanocatalysis at the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Faculty of Science, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, with Dr. Manoj B. Gawande and Prof. Radek Zboril.
Tewodros Asefa
Tewodros (Teddy) Asefa is a Professor in Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology & Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Rutgers University at New Brunswick, USA. He received his MSc from SUNY-Buffalo (1998) and his PhD from University of Toronto (2002). He received fellowships to serve as Visiting Professor at Kyoto University, Japan (2014); Maringá State University, Brazil (2014–2017); and ETH Zürich, Switzerland (2015). He also received NSF CAREER award (2007–2012), NSF Special Creativity award (2011), Rutgers Board of Governors Research Fellowship (2012), and NSF's American Competitiveness Fellowship (2010). He co-edited a book on Nanocatalysis (Wiley) and wrote 120 papers and few book chapters.
Ankush V. Biradar
Ankush V. Biradar received his PhD in chemistry from the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune/University of Pune under the supervision of Dr Shubhangi Umbarkar in 2009. After graduating, he moved to Prof. Tewodros Asefa's group, first at Syracuse University and then Rutgers University in New Jersey, USA, where he worked on the synthesis and catalytic properties of multifunctional nanomaterials. In 2012, he moved back to India and joined the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, as a Scientist. His research interests lie in the development of nanostructured catalysts (especially non-noble metal-based ones), and their utilization for oxidation and hydrogenation reactions.
Radek Zboril
Radek Zboril received his PhD degree from Palacky University, Olomouc. After his PhD study, he underwent several foreign stays at universities in Tokyo, Delaware and Johannesburg. Currently, he is a Professor at the Department of Physical Chemistry and General Director of the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials at Palacky University, Olomouc. He has published more than 250 papers in prestigious journals with research interests in nanomaterials area that include iron and iron oxide based nanoparticles (NPs), silver NPs, carbon nanostructures, and magnetic NPs and their applications in biomedicine, environmental technologies, sensing and catalysis.
Rajender S. Varma
Rajender S. Varma was born in India (PhD, Delhi University 1976). After postdoctoral research at Robert Robinson Laboratories, Liverpool, UK, he was a faculty member at Baylor College of Medicine and Sam Houston State University prior to joining the Sustainable Technology Division at the US Environmental Protection Agency in 1999. He has over 40 years of multidisciplinary research experience and is lately engaged in greener assembly of nanomaterials and the sustainable applications of magnetically retrievable nanocatalysts. He is a member of the editorial advisory board of several international journals, published over 415 scientific papers, and has been awarded 14 US Patents.
1. Introduction
Nanomaterials have attracted enormous attention owing to their interesting properties as well as utility in the diverse areas including nanocatalysis,1,2 magnetite-supported catalysis,3–5 nanoelectronics,6–10 integrated catalysis,11etc.12–20 Rapid development of nanotechnology over the past few decades has allowed researchers to view conventional heterogeneous catalysts from a new perspective.21–24 In particular, catalytic materials can now be prepared with greater precision via nanotech-enabled processes.25–27 Nanoparticles (NPs) containing noble metals, which often serve as active catalytic components, can now be routinely synthesized with well-defined sizes, shapes, crystal facets, structure and composition.28,29 Such controllability over materials' structures could potentially lead to the development of new technologies for applications in green, sustainable and economically-viable chemical processes, which are currently regarded as among the most desirable yet challenging areas in chemistry.30–33 Besides offering solutions to the traditional demands for catalysts to be efficient and selective for a particular catalytic reaction that will transform raw materials into valuable chemicals, such as pharmaceuticals and fuels, these nanomaterials could assist in the development of green chemistry, offering the advantages of waste reduction, atomic efficiency, higher reaction rates and also facile catalyst recovery.34–37
Traditionally, composite nanomaterials constructed with cores (inner material) and shells (outer layer material), both at nanoscale, are broadly defined as CSNs (core–shell nanoparticles).38 Though, historically, the term was coined for the concentric multilayer semiconductor nanoparticles39,40 with the advancement in the field of core–shell nanomaterials, the definition of the core–shell nanomaterials can be extended to the class of nanomaterials having distinct boundary materials covering (either fully or partially) the inner component as long as they can be separately identified. Depending on the compositions and arrangements of the two components in the materials, core–shell nanostructures can be divided into several classes, including inorganic/inorganic, inorganic/organic, organic/inorganic and organic/organic type CSNs.41–43 As interest in task-specific nanomaterials with multi-functional capabilities and/or enhanced properties is increasing, core–shell nanostructures are increasingly attracting attention because of their conducive and versatile compositions and structures to serve such purposes.44–47 In addition, CSNs may have properties that are synergistic between the cores and shells and/or offer new properties depending on the interactions between the cores and shells.48–52 Such unique, useful and tailorable properties have also advanced CSNs as a very important class of emerging nanomaterials for a wide range of applications in, for instance, bio-nanotechnology,53–55 enhanced optical devices,56–58 tailored magnetic devices,59–63 electronic optical devices,42 bioimaging systems,64,65 energy storage materials,66 genetic engineering and stem cells,67,68 fuel cell,69,70 dye sensitized solar cells71 and many important catalytic processes72–82 (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Applications of CSNs in various areas of modern technology especially in the field of catalysis. 
One important challenge, often faced by chemists working in the area of catalysis, is the development of highly active and selective, robust, low-cost and environmentally benign catalytic systems. This issue, as a whole or in part, could be addressed by developing catalytic systems with core–shell structural features. Among the possible advantages that these types of nanomaterials can offer, three major ones can be highlighted: (1) the use of the core as a support allowing the specific surface (shell) nanoarchitecture in terms of porosity, surface area, etc., thus resulting in superior catalytic performance of such a layer/shell, (2) synergism between the shell and the core enabling to achieve higher efficiency/yield/selectivity in catalytic applications and (3) combination of the properties of the core and shell towards improved/combined applications (e.g. magnetically separable nanocatalysts with the possibility of the repetitive use without the loss of the catalytic efficiency).
The catalytic and electrocatalytic activity of such catalyst depends on its synergistic interactions between the core and shell. Primarily there are three major effects (and in most cases a combined one) that can play important roles in deciding the catalytic/electrocatalytic activity of a particular materials: (a) ligand effect, which involves the interaction between the core and the shell because of atomic vicinity affecting the charge transfer between the components, thus altering the band-structures; (b) ensemble effects, which is governed by the material's adsorption on the surface due to the presence of distinct atomic groups, and finally (c) geometric effects, originating from the difference in reactivity of the surface atoms because of their three dimensional structural constraints (e.g. surface strain).
For instance, by coating precious metal catalysts (e.g., Au, Pt or Pd), as a monolayer on the surfaces of non-precious metal-based nanomaterials (e.g., Ni, Fe or Co), atom-economical and cost effective CSNs with good catalytic efficiency can be produced. This strategy has been successfully exploited by Son et al. via Ni@Pd core–shell NP-based catalysts that displayed high catalytic activity for the Sonogashira coupling reactions.83 Similarly, carbon-supported Pd@Co CSNs were synthesized by Wang et al. and used as electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).84 In addition to decreasing the amount of expensive material used in the catalytic system by placing Pt only as a shell monolayer over Co and Fe surfaces, the composite materials (Pt3Co and Pt3Fe) could result in improved oxygen adsorption energy, and thereby enhanced catalytic activity and stability.85,86
Additionally, rational design and applications of CSNs with tailored structures and efficient catalytic activity can often be investigated by applying density functional theory (DFT) and other theoretical considerations.49,87–89 DFT studies, which have been successfully used to model various chemisorption and desorption processes, primarily involve the d-band center model.90 In such a model, the ligand and strain effect from the core to the shell components are assumed to affect the d-band width or d-band filling.91,92 By harnessing such theoretical designs, supported by experiments, CSNs catalysts can be prepared with enhanced activity and selectivity.93
Recently, Tedsree et al. synthesized Ag NPs coated with a thin layer of Pd atoms, which showed significantly enhanced catalytic activity toward hydrogen evolution from formic acid at ambient temperature.94 The improved catalytic activity of the materials was attributed to the fact that the Pd shell contains terrace sites and is electronically activated by the Ag core. Meanwhile, lattice strain has been found to be advantageous for tuning the catalytic activity of core–shell structure.95 Xu75 and Li96 synthesized Au@Co CSNs that have efficient catalytic activity for the hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane. Similarly, Ag@Ni CSNs synthesized via a one-pot synthetic procedure showed enhanced catalytic activity towards hydrogen evolution from the dehydrogenation of sodium borohydride in aqueous solutions97 and transfer hydrogenation reactions of aromatic nitro and carbonyl compounds.98 In another example, alumina-supported Cu@Ni and Ni@Cu CSNs were shown to have comparable catalytic activity towards water-gas-shift reaction, giving significantly low undesirable methanation side-reaction, than conventional supported Ni catalyst.72 In other words, the selectivity of the water-gas-shift reaction was improved by using CSNs as catalysts. By incorporating magnetic materials, multifunctional CSNs with catalytic as well as magnetic properties (the latter being useful for the ease of recyclability/magnetic separation of the CSNs after the reaction), could be synthesized in an analogous manner.99 This synthetic strategy has been widely applied for the fabrication of various bifunctional nanomaterials, e.g., magnetic and optically/photocatalytically active Fe3O4@ZnS NPs.57 Stark and co-workers have reviewed nanomaterials comprising ferrite NPs and their use as a semi-heterogeneous catalyst support.100
Overall, the variety of CSNs with different sizes (5–500 nm), morphologies (spherical, honeycomb, hollow, etc.), compositions (organic, inorganic etc.), and their catalytic applications in various types of catalytic processes, organic reactions and electrocatalysis are presented in detail. For instance, Fe2O3@Au CSNs,101 carbon-coated cobalt,102 FeCo/graphitic core–shell nanocrystals,55 and FePt@ZnO CSNs103 exhibit promising catalytic properties for various reactions. The noble metal (Au and Pt)-supported magnetic CSNs not only have strong magnetic properties allowing excellent recovery of the catalysts after its use via magnetic separation but also exhibit enhanced catalytic properties. The advantages pertinent to both shell and the core materials, in addition to their nanoscale structures, has motivated worldwide research in the synthesis and investigation of multifunctional CSNs for the catalysis of various chemical reactions (Fig. 1).104–121
2. Focus of review
The focus of the present review is to provide an up-to-date appraisal of CSNs and their potential applications in catalysis and electrocatalysis, encompassing oxidation, reduction, semi-hydrogenation and carbon–carbon coupling reactions, oxygen storage, etc.
In addition, the structure–property relationships of the materials, especially the effect of shape and size of both core and shell on the properties of the materials and their effects on catalysis are discussed. The detailed preparative procedures for various types of CSNs have been omitted in this review as they have been extensively covered earlier.122 However, representative methods, including basic general procedures for various classes of CSNs, are briefly mentioned, followed by more detailed description of a modern classification approach with recent examples.123–130 Moreover characterization techniques for CSNs are also mentioned briefly.
3. Synthetic and characterization techniques of core–shell nanoparticles
As mentioned earlier, the recent upsurge in the field of CSNs can be attributed to their diverse applications because of their unique structural, physical and chemical properties.122,131–133 Although the review primarily focuses on the catalytic properties of CSNs, the synthetic strategies, used to make assemblies of CSNs as well as different characterization techniques are briefly described in the following sections.
3.1. Synthesis of core–shell nanocatalysts
As far as synthesis is concerned, the techniques that have been used to synthesize nanomaterials can generally be applied to prepare the core and/or shell components of CSNs. Although “top-down” approaches are possible, in which external controls like microfabrication techniques, mechanical stress, etc. are utilized to break down the bulk materials to the desired nanomaterials with different shapes and sizes, “bottom-up” techniques are mostly preferred. In the latter case, the materials are synthesized from molecular or atomic building blocks, relying on the inherent chemical properties of the individual constituents and their mutual interactions to allow control over the shape and size of the nanomaterials. Using bottom-up synthetic methods, core and shell(s) of CSNs can be synthesized either in a stepwise or one-pot fashion. Both of these approaches have been used for the synthesis of CSNs. However, other new and modified procedures are continuously being developed and reported in the literature.

3.1.1. Classification. 
Inspired by the classification developed by Paria,122 the current section focuses on the syntheses of different CSNs according to type (rather than the procedures employed to make them) of the materials and categorizes CSNs in two main classes: organics (Section 3.1.1.1) and inorganics (Section 3.1.1.2) (Fig. 2).134 The “organic” materials are related to carbon-based materials (mostly polymers), whereas the “inorganic” class includes metal, metalloid and metal salt NPs. Synthetic methods employed for each of these categories are discussed in this review with recent examples. Towards the end, a modern classification approach based on the shell properties of the core–shell nanomaterials is included in view of the increasing importance of nanocatalysis (Section 3.1.1.3).
 Fig. 2  General classification of CSNs based on material-type (along with the most prevalent synthetic methods) and properties of their shells. 
3.1.1.1. Organics. 
Although these types of CSNs are relatively new compared to conventional CSNs, the advantages of using carbon-based compounds, particularly with regard to the stability/biocompatibility of the material, have generated a great deal of interest.135 The syntheses of such materials mostly rely on polymerization techniques to prepare the organic core, shell or both. The basic strategy of polymerization involves formation of 3D network-like structures via addition of several units of appropriate monomeric substrates with key functionalities. Although organic cores are often synthesized first, organic shells can also be prepared in situ. Additionally, surface modifiers, such as surfactants, polyeletrolytes, etc., can be used to improve the coating efficiency and stability. Recently, Asefa and co-workers successfully demonstrated the preparation of polyaniline (PANI) inside mesoporous channels of amine-functionalized SBA-15 using persulfate as an oxidant and used the resulting composite core–shell nanostructures to produce mesoporous carbons that can serve as an efficient metal-free electrooxidation catalyst for various reactions.15,136 Chen and co-workers demonstrated facile syntheses of shells around metallic systems using (1) amphiphilic block copolymers (polystyrene-block-poly(acrylic acid) (PSAA)), and (2) conductive polymers (such as PANI, polypyrrole (PPy), etc.) to develop metal-based CSNs.38 Other carbon-based materials, such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes (single-walled or multi-walled), etc., have also been harnessed for different catalytic transformations. Detailed discussion on the syntheses of these materials is beyond the scope of this section. However, in brief, most of them are prepared via doping or functionalization of carbon materials with different active species, which can also ultimately result in hollow CSNs after removal of organic part either via extraction or calcination;137–140 recent examples from the literature are described in Section 3.1.1.3.
3.1.1.2. Inorganics. 
The “inorganic” materials can be categorized further into two main sub-categories, namely (a) silica-based CSNs and (b) metal-based CSNs.
Almost all the silica-based CSNs are synthesized using sol–gel chemistry, historically known as the Stöber method.141 This wet chemical method entails the hydrolysis and subsequent condensation of silicon alkoxides or silicon halides in alcohol, water or a mixture thereof in the presence of a base catalyst, such as ammonia, to afford uniform colloidal microspheres. Because of its simplicity, reproducibility as well as versatility, this method has been applied to synthesize different types of silica-based CSNs with great success. Although most of the CSNs prepared using this method involve solid, non-porous SiO2, newer strategies have now been developed to generate porous materials using either template-based techniques or post-synthetic modifications. This, in turn, allows not only increased surface area of the resulting CSNs but also better accessibility of the cores as well as shells themselves. Moreover, the pores of the materials can further be modified with different functional groups, providing the materials with multi-functionality for various catalytic applications.
The broad class of “metal-based CSNs” requires further sub-classification as it covers the entire range of metal, metal alloys, metal oxides, metal salts, etc. and can thus be sub-divided into three parts: (i) metallic NPs, (ii) metal oxides, and (iii) metal salts.
In general, metallic NPs are synthesized via reduction of their corresponding metal-salts, either using external reducing agents (such as NaBH4, hydrazine, etc.) or via trans-metallation utilizing the intrinsic redox properties of the metal precursors. The reaction medium, temperature and type of reducing agent influence the reaction kinetics, and any manipulation of these parameters may lead to significant differences in particle growth, size, shape, and thereby different chemical, physical, optical and biological properties.
Among the metal oxide NPs, titania-based materials, often obtained via the “sol–gel” method (similar to silica), possess a range of chemical, physical and optical properties that render them useful in photo-, bio- and energy-related applications. Additional actions such as “thermal-treatment” may allow tuning of the structures, physical robustness or porosity of the materials. In general, the kinetics involving the formation of titania-based materials is faster than that of silica-based materials due to the relatively higher reactivity of the precursors in the former case. Nevertheless, because of the availability of various structurally and electronically different precursors, as well as the interesting phase-behavior, the final structure and reactivity of the precursors can be modulated to produce different types of nanostructures. In the context of CSNs, several examples have recently been reported where TiO2 in different forms was used as one of the components (mostly as shell).133 Apart from the sol–gel method, co-precipitation or thermal decomposition methods are also used to access other metal oxides depending on the chemical properties of the metal precursors. Whereas the co-precipitation technique is mainly used for metal oxides/hydroxides that can be precipitated under basic conditions, thermal decomposition involves high temperature treatment or thermolysis of organometallic precursors in the presence of oxygen or air to afford the final product. Pertinent examples of the latter case include magnetic core–shell nanocatalysts where the core is synthesized using a combination of hydrolysis and thermal treatment of Fe-precursors.142–144 In addition, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and pulse layer deposition (PLD) have also been employed to prepare metal oxides from gaseous precursors and are often applied for the in situ synthesis of metal oxides.
In the class of “metal-salt”-based CSNs, metal chalcogenides/halides have found a range of applications in semiconductor-based devices and (bio)imaging. They are commonly synthesized by precipitating metal salts from a mixture of metal precursors and desired counter ions in the presence of stabilizer/capping agents. In this case, the inherent reactivity of metal salts toward external parameters (e.g., oxygen, temperature, etc.) plays an important role, rendering further modification. A relatively new method, named as “successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction” (SILAR, first developed by Ristov145 but its acronym was coined by Nicolau146) has been developed to synthesize metal-salt-based CSNs, mainly for their semiconductor and photovoltaic properties. This method allows uniform and isotopic growth of shell materials covering the core particles and minimizes the formation of unwanted nanocrystals of just the shell material. Additionally, annealing between successive depositions (which is particularly important for making multishell NPs) allows elimination of the possible biasness that might generate from either the core or shell materials. The progress on different SILAR techniques have also been reviewed by Tolstoy.147
Beyond such classifications and the aforementioned methods, depending on the applications as well as availability of sophisticated techniques, alternate energy inputs, such as ultrasound-, and microwave-irradiation, electrodeposition, etc., have been used for the synthesis of various CSNs. In the case of sonochemical synthesis, varying the sound frequency helps to (i) form local microreactors/cavities in which reaction can occur, (ii) promote better mixing (therefore less agglomeration), and (iii) produce short-lived shock waves, which can generate localized heating in order to produce smaller particles. The electrodeposition method generally involves deposition of the substrate/core material on the surface of an electrode or supported matrix from a bulk electrolyte solution using an electric field, followed by further decoration of the shell either by using different electrolytes or by varying the synthetic strategy. Last, but not least, recent developments in microwave technology have enabled the synthesis of either component of CSNs in shorter time with moderate to large control over structural properties.148–150
In addition to such classifications, some of the hybrid-structures (e.g. metal–organic-frameworks,151 zeolite-based structures,152 covalent-organic-frameworks,153etc.) have also been introduced recently in the literature, and hopefully a special classification and major discussion may be warranted in future for these classes of materials.
3.1.1.3. Classification based on shell properties. 
Given the current status of core–shell nanocatalysis, we envision that a modern classification based on the shell properties of the materials would be beneficial, particularly for comparison of different synthetic strategies leading to varied shell properties. Broadly, these materials can be divided into three major categories: (1) hollow-core–shell, (2) core–multishell, and (3) core–porous-shell, each of which is discussed briefly in the following sections.
3.1.1.3.1. Hollow-core–shell NPs. 
Although not essentially CSNs by definition, hollow-core–shell type nanomaterials need to be mentioned here as the first step in their preparation is analogous to the one used for making normal CSNs described earlier. Once, the CSNs have been synthesized, the core is sacrificed using a variety of conditions specific to the core materials: organic core materials are removed either by calcination or dissolution in organic solvents, whereas inorganic core(s) are purged with strong acid or base. The removal of core materials offers some additional advantages depending on its application. In the case of multiple shells (described later), the inner shells can also be removed using specific methods.
Possibly the most common examples of this category are the inorganic oxide shell-based hollow core–shell particles, which are prepared from their precursors either separately or during calcination of the organic cores. Silica, titania or ceria (sometimes in combination) are often used because of their versatility in crafting different nanostructures. For example, Zhang et al. utilized a combination of sol–gel and hydrothermal action to synthesize Pd@hCeO2 (Pd NPs embedded in a hollow shell of CeO2) starting from carbon microspheres and using the latter as a sacrificial core;154 Pd NPs, prepared via reduction (using alcohol) in the presence of poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as capping agent, were first adsorbed on carbon microspheres (generated via thermal treatment of glucose). Hydrothermal treatment was then employed to coat CeO2 outside the Pd-NP-grafted carbon spheres, followed by calcination in presence of air to remove the carbon core (Fig. 3). The resulting Pd@hCeO2 was shown to be highly active toward the thermal and photocatalytic reduction of aromatic nitro compounds with excellent recyclability.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Pd@hCeO2 core–shell nanocomposite particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The presence of the shell in Pd@hCeO2 prevents leaching and aggregation of the Pd-NPs in the catalytic reaction. Following an analogous pathway, core–void–shell anatase TiO2 was prepared via solvothermal treatment of sucrose and TiO2, followed by removal of the carbon-precursor via calcination.155 The final material showed enhanced photocatalytic activity for the degradation of rhodamine B and improved lithium storage capacity. A slightly different approach for the preparation of hollow-core–shell mesoporous TiO2 has been reported156 using a stepwise protocol based on seed-emulsion-polymerization, followed by coating of the Ti-precursor and subsequent calcination to generate hollow TiO2 materials for electrophoretic studies.157,158 Ohtani and co-workers adopted a similar procedure involving solvothermal and calcination techniques for the synthesis of SiO2/void/TiO2 (and also platinized SiO2/void/TiO2).159,160 These photocatalytically active materials were used in the stereoselective synthesis of pipecolinic acid. In a related example, SiO2/Mg(OH)2 spheres have been prepared using a modified Stöber method to prepare SiO2 spheres (cores), followed by polyethyleneglycol (PEG) and sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS) mediated coating of Mg(OH)2 onto the SiO2 spheres;161 depending on the ratio of precursors, different morphologies, including hollow core–shell and honeycombed structures, were obtained. Apatite-type La9.33(SiO4)6O2 hollow nanosphere catalysts were synthesized using a protocol that included a combination of hydrothermal synthesis (to prepare the cores), modified Stöber method (to coat the cores with silica shells), thermal treatment (to form a hollow structure via decomposition of cores) and finally solvothermal treatment (for controlled etching of the silica layers); the resulting material was shown to catalyze oxidative coupling of methane.162 Another major class of oxides, i.e., zeolites (aluminosilicates), has also been used as a component of numerous CSNs. Recently, morphological control of zeolites has been achieved using a polymer network with special attention to the synthesis of hollow core–shell structures.163
Besides silica, ceria or titania, other metal oxides have been explored for synthesizing hollow CSNs. For instance, the synthesis of hollow core–shell ZrO2@void@BiVO4 NPs that can serve as visible light photocatalysts for the photodegradation of methylene blue has been investigated.164 Their synthetic strategy involved initial hydrothermal treatment of aqueous Bi(NO)3 and NH4VO3 to synthesize BiVO4 core, followed by successive coating of carbon (glucose as carbon precursor) and ZrO2 (using ZrOCl2). Finally calcination in the presence of air removed the carbon layer to afford ZrO2@void@BiVO4. Zhang et al. described a novel, one-pot synthesis of an iodine incorporated (core) BiOCl shell structure. Depending on the ratio of inorganic precursors, they obtained hierarchical or pure hollow-structures, which showed catalytic activity towards the photodegradation of phenol and rhodamine B.165,166 Fan and co-workers reported a combination of hydrothermal, atomic-layer-deposition (ALD) and solvothermal synthetic methods (to remove the sacrificial middle layer), followed by annealing to procure the porous material to produce a hollow-core–shell microstructure (Fig. 4).167 In that case, a CoO precursor was first synthesized on a nickel foam using a hydrothermal process, followed by coating of the “as-grown CoO nanostructure” with Al2O3 and then with TiO2 using ALD method. The removal of sacrificial Al2O3 with strong base and subsequent annealing afforded CoO@TiO2 CSNs that showed enhanced activity as supercapacitor electrodes. The ALD method provides better control over the thickness of the resulting coating compared to other methods – an aspect particularly important for catalysis. A detailed study of the solvothermal synthesis of Co(OH)2 based flowerlike hollow core–shell structures has also been reported.168 Plasma polymerization was also used to prepare hollow NPs from simple organic substrate.169
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the fabrication process of the “wire-in-tube” type CoO@TiO2 nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another example related to biosensing, a “nano-sheet”-based titania microsphere encapsulating horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was synthesized by a hydrothermal method followed by trapping of the enzyme via adsorption.170 The resulting material was used for mediator-free bio-sensing of H2O2 aided by the redox-active HRP enzyme. The structure of the material was shown to be dependent on the reaction time, while its hollow structure enabled better electron transfer as well as higher stability of the material. In a related example, the facile synthesis of a hollow core–shell NiO microsphere has been reported, where hexamethylenetetramine was used as sacrificial carbon source. A lamellar template-based mechanism involving Ni2+ ions, sodium citrate and ethanol leading to intercalated Ni-hydroxide layers during an alkalization process was suggested (Fig. 5);166 the final product, obtained via calcination in the presence of air, was shown to have excellent supercapacitive properties.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the theoretical model for the lamellar template and morphology evolution of hollow core–shell NiO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd. 
The advantages of utilizing the intrinsic magnetic properties have been thoroughly demonstrated for Fe-oxide based materials. For instance, a two-step solvothermal synthetic method has been developed to synthesize ferrimagnetic bisphthalonitrile–Fe3O4-hollow-core–shell microspheres.149 In the first step, Fe3O4 NPs were formed by the reduction of FeCl3 using ethylene glycol in an autoclave; high boiling ethylene glycol was used because of its ability to reduce the metal-salts, whereas sodium acetate and polyethylene glycol (PEG) were added to prevent particle agglomeration. Next, bisphthalonitrile (BPHR) solution and Fe3O4 NPs were stirred to coat the Fe3O4 with BPHR molecules via physical adsorption, followed by another solvothermal procedure to polymerize BPHR molecules into iso-indole on the surface of Fe3O4. During this process, aggregation of Fe3O4 NPs resulted in hollow hybrid microspheres. Earlier, a less complicated synthesis was reported to prepare hollow core–shell α-Fe2O3 hierarchical nanostructures, which were used for the photocatalytic degradation of phenol.171 A similar synthetic strategy was also reported for the synthesis of magnetic hollow core–shell structures for drug delivery, where their formation was suggested to occur via a possible Ostwald ripening mechanism (Fig. 6).172
 Fig. 6  Illustration of the possible formation mechanism of core/shell hierarchical nanostructures via Ostwald ripening process in the presence of various precursors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
The synthesis of iron oxides@SnO2 “quasi” hollow-structures has been reported using a seed-mediated hydrothermal method to produce a photocatalytically active material.173 In another study, Fe3O4-embedded hollow polymer spheres were synthesized using a combination of various techniques: polymerization (to synthesize the cores), adsorption (to graft the Fe3O4 NPs on the cores), encapsulation (via a second polymerization to make outer shells), and finally selective dissolution (of the core).174 A template-based synthetic method was used (involving emulsion polymerization and subsequent hydrothermal technique) to prepare hollow core–shell microspheres of spinel ferrites (MFe2O3, where M = Zn, Co, Ni, Cd).175
In addition to metal oxides, different metal-based hollow core–shell structures have been synthesized. Ye et al. demonstrated the phase-transfer based synthesis of Ag@Ru hydrosol (with ruthenium shell) via a ligand exchange reaction.176 The Ag-core was finally removed by treatment of the material with aqueous NaCl solution, which was followed by an additional phase-transfer recovery step to afford hollow Ru NPs. Niu and co-workers reported the synthesis of hollow Ag@Pd core–shell nanowires (NWs) that can catalyze formic acid oxidation. The material was synthesized using a seed-mediated growth method (successive chemical reduction), in which galvanic displacement was suggested to be responsible for the formation of the hollow-structure in the material.177 A similar strategy was employed to synthesize hollow Au@Pd and Au@Pt core–shell nanocatalysts for ethanol oxidation.178 Also, a one-step pyrolysis method was developed for the synthesis of hollow carbon nanospheres with a supported PtRu electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation.179,180 The synthesis of hollow core–shell and flower-like Au–TiO2 nanocomposite materials with photocatalytic activity towards adsorption and photon-assisted desorption of thiol is another example, where a simple, controllable, wet chemical synthetic method was employed.181
One of the major applications of the hollow-core–shell architecture is in the development of anode materials for lithium ion batteries. Li and co-workers have summarized recent progress in the synthesis of Si@C core–shell composite materials, particularly for lithium ion battery applications, with an additional discussion on their future perspectives.182 Owing to the potential of hollow core (silicon)–shell (carbon) nanocomposites as an anode material in lithium ion batteries, several variants of similar structures have been prepared.183 For instance, in the procedure, reported by Liu and co-workers, first Si nanospheres were calcined in the presence of air to coat their surfaces with an oxide layer. Next, carbon was coated using chemical vapor deposition method.183 Finally, etching of the silica layers around the NPs delivered hollow Si@C nanocomposite particles. A coaxial electrospinning method has also been employed to synthesize Si(core)–hollow carbon nanofibers (sheath), that were shown to be a promising anode material in lithium-ion batteries.184 The mechanistic details of the core–shell interaction in coaxial electrospinning were previously explored,185 focusing mainly on carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Beyond silicon, combining alcoholysis and subsequent calcination involving SnCl2 and glycerol as metal and carbon precursors, respectively, hollow SnO2@C CSNs, with enhanced lithium-ion battery storage capacity has successfully been synthesized.186 A similar synthetic method has been used to make Sn@carbon NPs in bamboo-like carbon nanofibers for a similar potential application in lithium-ion batteries (Fig. 7).187 Lately, “dealloying” of Li from a Li–Sn alloy using an electrochemical method produced hollow CSNs along with other different bicontinuous microstructures depending upon the composition, size of particles and also kinetics of the process.188
 Fig. 7  Preparation of Sn@carbon NPs encapsulated in hollow carbon nanofibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Apart from the conventional “inorganic” precursors based techniques, an “all-organic” based synthesis of hollow NPs has been reported, which involved synthesis of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) cores by controlled heating above the LCST (lower critical solution temperature) of polymers in the presence of a small amount of sodium dodecyl sulfate, followed by the formation of shells via radical copolymerization using 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) and poly(ethylene glycol)dimethacrylate (PEG-DMA) as cross-linking agents.189 Subsequent partial removal of the PNIPAM cores by dialysis resulted in the final material. In another study, the synthesis of two-layered hollow chiral NPs using a combination of polymerization, sol–gel, and extraction methods has been reported and the materials have been employed in the enantioselective crystallization of alanine. Hollow nanostructures were also synthesized by employing biopolymeric systems as precursors. Lipid–polymer–lipid-hybrid hollow nanostructures were synthesized using a combination of a double-emulsion and solvent evaporation technique and self-assembly route.190 Another study described the synthesis of a pH-sensitive hollow polymer microcapsule via sequential steps involving two-stage distillation, precipitation polymerization, followed by removal of the core.191 Nakashima and co-workers reported several synthetic routes involving core–shell-corona type polymeric micelles as a versatile template for the synthesis of inorganic hollow nanospheres.192
More sophisticated techniques were recently developed for the assembly of unique nanostructures. For example, He et al. used γ-ray assisted polymerization (Fig. 8).193 By applying a combination of laser-induced deposition and self-assembly synthetic procedures, Lei reported carbon nitride-based materials with different microstructures, including flower-like, hollow core–shell and nanorod structures.194
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of polymer microspheres with a hollow core/porous shell structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Though, the detailed discussion is out of the scope of this current manuscript, multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) can be combined with various materials to produce diverse hollow CSNs displaying interesting properties. Since the discovery of single and multiwalled carbon nanotubes, interest in this class of materials has increased because of their potential applications, ranging from catalysis to nanoelectronics, and also for the option of affixing various classes of functional groups via chemical or physical methods.195–197 As far as syntheses of such materials are concerned, arc-discharge, laser-ablation, electrolysis, chemical-vapor-deposition and, to some extent, sonochemical and hydrothermal procedures have been deployed depending on the desired application; further modifications are also possible.198
Another similar hollow CSNs involving fullerenes (another form of carbon nanomaterials) can be made using aforementioned technologies. Although typical synthetic procedures mostly rely on arc-discharge, different metals can be incorporated either via vapor or solution phase doping.199 Encapsulation of various molecules inside the fullerene cage (known as “endohedral fullerenes”) has recently been exploited and the synthetic approaches mainly entail trimetallic-template, ion-bombardment, high-pressure and the relatively new CAPTEAR (chemically adjusting plasma temperature, energy, and reactivity) synthetic methods to produce carbon-based core–shell type nanostructures.200
3.1.1.3.2. Core-multishell NPs. 
In lieu of removing some parts of the materials for forming “hollow NPs”, coating the core materials successively with similar or different types of materials can result in so-called “core–multishell NPs”, which have been explored recently for a number of applications ranging from catalysis to biology. These types of NPs are generally synthesized in a stepwise manner and mostly designed to utilize different functionalities of the multishell rather than just to protect the core materials. Furthermore, the inner layers of such NPs can sometime shield the core from outer layers, which may otherwise not be compatible with each other.
Until recently, most of the research efforts on core–multishell nanomaterials were concentrated on applications based on the optical and electronic properties of the materials rather than catalysis. As a consequence, most of the materials belong to the inorganic type and are mainly synthesized using strategies similar to those described in earlier sections. In addition, due to the advancement and availability of various sophisticated instrumentation, many other novel materials with unique properties can also be made. In the following section, recent examples of core–multishell nanomaterials along with their respective synthetic strategies are described to provide a holistic picture of this important area.
Perhaps the most prevalent literature under this category belongs to quantum dots (QDs). These are the nanoparticles, mostly synthesized by the SILAR approach in which individual layers are synthesized starting with metal-salts/metal–chalcogenides on the core materials. The first synthesis of multilayered QDs was reported by Shi and co-workers,201 subsequently followed by several synthetic strategies for preparing multishell QDs. For example, Park group has incorporated a PbxCd1−xS interlayer between a PbS and CdS layer in a PbS/CdS/ZnS quantum-dot-sensitized solar cell using the SILAR method.202 A more complex CdSe/CdS/CdS/Cd0.75Zn0.25S/Cd0.5Zn0.5S/Cd0.25Zn0.75S/ZnS/ZnSQDs/PMMA bulk nanocomposite has been synthesized using a combination of SILAR method (to prepare layered QDs) and photopolymerization (to synthesize the outer organic shell) using 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyldiphenylphosphine oxide (TPO) as the initiator (Fig. 9).203 In their synthetic scheme, the authors reported modification of the QDs with the amphiphilic polymer poly(ethylene glycol)-oleate (PEG-oleate) in order to make a homogeneous dispersion. Meyer also reported a similar approach to synthesize QDs followed by photopolymerization of the shell materials on a glass surface and showed the application of the materials as solar-concentrators.204 Peng,205 Li,206–209 Han,210 Masumoto,211,212 Hollingsworth,213 Dai,214 Cho215 and Mews216 have employed similar stepwise successive deposition methods to synthesize QDs for different photovoltaic applications. Gamelin and co-workers reported an analogous technique for Mn-based water-soluble dual-emitting core–multishell QD nanocrystals for optical thermometry applications.217 A combination of MW-assisted synthesis and the SILAR method was employed to generate core–shell and core–multishell materials, and the final nanocrystals (NCs) were shown to be useful for cell imaging applications.148 The surface chemistry of core–multishell InP (Indium Phosphide) QDs (comprising of an InP core coated with a zinc blende bulk structure surrounded by an organic coating), prepared via the SILAR method was extensively studied by Chaudret to explore the intricate interaction between the different layers.218
 Fig. 9  
In situ polymerization method for the generation of transparent QDs/PMMA nanocomposites. Adapted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another method of utilizing the above-mentioned “layer-by-layer” approach for generating multishell materials involves successive deposition of either a liquid or vapor of the materials onto a surface. For example, vertical heterostructures, composed of core–multishell Ga(In)P/GaAs/GaP grown on a flat Si(111) surface, were synthesized by a layer-by-layer vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) synthetic method involving a conventional bottom-up approach.219 A successive layer-by-layer (SLBL) strategy was also employed to fabricate core–multishell NPs using Re–OA (rare-earth metal chlorides in oleic acid at 140 °C to make the cores) and Na-TFA–OA (sodium trifluoroacetate dissolved in oleic acid at room temperature to make the shells) (Fig. 10).220 In the latter case, the authors showed the versatility of the synthetic method, accommodating different phases as well as allowing better control over the shell thickness and dopant positions via simple variation of the reaction conditions and precursor solutions.
 Fig. 10  (A) SLBL synthetic procedure for core@shell UCNPs (up-conversion nanoparticles). (B–D) Schematic of the synthesis of shell thickness controllable β-NaGdF4:Yb,Er@NaYF4 CSNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Takashi and co-workers used a phosphine-free method entitled “Selective Area Metal Chemical Vapor Epitaxy (SA-MOVPE)” (a variation of chemical vapor deposition for achieving selective and controlled deposition) to synthesize core–multishell NWs involving In, Ga, As, Si, P, etc. for solar cell, photoluminescence and other photovoltaic applications.221–228 An analogous synthetic approach for generating epitaxial core–multishell nanopillars based on GaAs (doped with nitrogen and phosphorous) and InGaP has been described.229 A similar approach was adopted by Gutsche et al. for the synthesis of n-GaAs/InGaP/p-GaAs core–multishell nanowire diodes,230 and by the Lieber group for the preparation of CSNs with n-GaN cores and InxGa1−xN/GaN/p-AlGaN/p-GaN shells.42,231 A thermoresponsive chemical connector based on Ge/perylene/PNIPAM (PNIPAM = poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)) was developed by Javey and co-workers via a combined deposition and photopolymerization method (Fig. 11).232 Solid-state lithium-ion nanobatteries were synthesized using a combination of gold-catalyzed growth of Si-NWs followed by stepwise coating of different layers (10 nm Ti, 30 nm Pt, 40 nm Ti, and ≈180 nm of LiCoO2) by sputter deposition techniques under an inert atmosphere.233 Similar growth techniques have been used by Picraux234,235 for making core/multishell germanium/silicon nanowire heterostructures and also by Patolsky for creating wire-in-wire and/or tube-in-tube or wire-in-tube nanostructures.236,237 Kempa et al. used a gold nanocluster catalyzed growth process to obtain coaxial Si- and B-based multishell NWs using SiH4 as the silicon precursor, B2H6 as the p-type dopant and PH3 as the n-type dopant for the application as ultrathin photovoltaic materials.238
 Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication procedure for a thermoresponsive NW forest, used as one mate of the proposed unisex fasteners. (b and c) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Ge/parylene NW forests before and after deposition of the PNIPAM outer shell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
More traditional methods have also been used for synthesizing core–multishell nanomaterials. For example, Fe3O4@Ag/SiO2/Au microspheres were prepared starting from Fe3O4 (prepared via solvothermal method) and using reduction, sol–gel process and interfacial growth chemistry.239 In another example, CaCO3 (PAH/astralen)x/Ag (where x = 1–3, PAH = polyaniline hydrochloride) core–multishell microparticles composed of a solid carbonate core coated with silver NPs and astralen (polyhedral multishell fullerene-like structure) have also been synthesized using a conventional approach. The synthetic procedure involved precipitation (to make the CaCO3 core) followed by layer-by-layer assembly of astralen with polyallylamine hydrochloride (PAH) and finally deposition of Ag-NPs by means of the silver mirror reaction.240 Xiong and co-workers241 demonstrated that incorporation of “gain” material (fluorophore dye) into core–multishell Au/silica/silica spherical nanocavities allows resonance energy-transfer from the gain media to the plasmon, thereby compensating loss due to energy dissipation. In their synthesis, a Au-NP core was first synthesized using conventional reduction of a Au-salt by sodium citrate. This was followed by coating the surfaces of the Au-NPs with silica shells using a mixture of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and 3-(aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane (APTMS). Then, using a controlled etching technique (by treating the sample with strong base at elevated temperature), allowed formation of a thin shell surrounding the Au-NP core. Finally, a modified Stöber method using a mixture of fluorophore dye and TEOS afforded the final product, where the dye particles were doped only in the outer layer (Fig. 12). In their recent report,242,243 Catala et al. demonstrated a surfactant-free one-pot multistep procedure to obtain core–multishell magnetic/photomagnetic co-ordination NPs specifically composed of face-centered-cubic Prussian blue analogs (PBAs) of the general formula AIxMII[M′III(CN)6](2+x)/3, [where A is an alkali-metal cation and MII and M′III are transition-metal ions].244 The particle-size (and also shell thickness) was shown to be easily controllable and in good agreement with calculated values. Zeng and co-workers reported the sol–gel synthesis of Zn1−xCoxO/Co1−yZnyO core–multishell NPs that could be used as a catalyst for CO oxidation at relatively low temperature.245
 Fig. 12  Core–shell/multishell plasmodia nanocavities. Schematic of (a) Au (yellow)/silica (green) and (b) Au/silica/dye silica core–multishell nanostructures. Dye molecules (shown as red stars) are dispersed in the outermost silica shell (shown as green shell). (c–g) TEM images of Au/silica core–shell structures with different shell thickness. (h) TEM images of Au/silica/dye (rhodamine 6G) silica core–multishell nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
A step-by-step synthetic method has been used to obtain hetero-epitaxial growth of core–shell and core–multishell nanomaterials containing Pd and Au NPs.246,247 Ming and co-workers have reported the synthesis of silica/Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites prepared by depositing Ag on silica supporting cores followed by additional coating of titania.248 First, silica microspheres were treated with a solution containing Sn2+ ions, followed by another solution containing Ag+ ions to obtain silver NPs outside the core via galvanic replacement. Then electroless-plating using Ag+ and formaldehyde solution resulted in the formation of Ag shells outside the silica microspheres. The resulting NPs were then coated with titania shells via the traditional sol–gel method along using PVP (poly-vinylpyrrolidone) as stabilizer. A flow synthesis of core–double–shell Au/Ag/Au NPs with narrow size distribution has also been reported where tetradecane was used as carrier medium to generate segmented flow.249 Further, multishell hydrogel NPs with a Ag-NP core, protective citrate capping, pH indicator dye shell and polyacrylamide cladding have been prepared.250
Mainly comprising “organic” materials, special types of core–multishell NPs have been introduced recently involving supramolecular dendritic assemblies, which have potential applications in drug/dye/metal ions delivery251–257 as well as catalysis258–260etc. In a typical synthetic procedure, a polar inner core (mostly PEG related materials, PEG = polyethylene glycol) was chemically attached (typically via simple esterification between mPEG (methoxypoly(ethylene glycol)) and diacid based linkers) to a non-polar intermediate shell. The ensuing material was then conjugated via amidation using EDC (1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide) coupling to a hydrophilic outer core (generally PEI, polyethyleneimine) to produce the final material (Fig. 13). This synthetic strategy is attractive, because depending on the desired application the synthetic procedure, polarity and sequence of layering can all be easily altered along with the chain-length and molecular weight of each of the precursors. Regarding catalysis, these dendritic core–multishell composites could be used to incorporate catalytically active metal ions/NPs for assorted organic transformations (including enantioselective reactions) with high reactivity and excellent recyclability.258–260
 Fig. 13  Schematic of the structure of a core–multishell NP synthesized using a combination of esterification and amidation reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.1.3.3. Core–porous-shell NPs. 
Although it is difficult to completely separate the category “core–porous-shell” from the aforementioned two classes of CSNs because porosity in the materials can be brought about either directly or after synthesizing the particles using earlier described protocols, this section includes recent and exclusive examples of porous-shell NPs, the associated synthetic strategies and applications. In addition to chromatographic separation,261–265 these particles have been explored for diverse catalytic applications.
The techniques for utilizing the pores of core–porous shell nanomaterials depend on the intrinsic chemical reactivity of the shells and compatibility with cores. In most cases, a mild variant of the strategy employed to remove the shell completely (as described for hollow-shell nanomaterials) can be used to partially “etch” the shells to render them porous. The most prevalent examples here are the inorganic oxides, which can be easily etched by treatment with strong base/acid.
Asefa and co-workers have reported the synthesis of both core–shell and core–porous-shell type silica-based microparticles together with their applications for catalysis.266,267 The synthesis involved a combination of (1) the Stöber synthesis of silica core microparticles, (2) grafting of different functional groups (e.g., amine, thiol, amine based dendrimer, etc.) on the surfaces of the core NPs, (3) incorporation of metal-ions or metallic NPs using the different surface functional groups on the microparticles as ligands, (4) coating the resulting materials with a layer of metal oxides using another sol–gel (Stöber-like) process, and finally (5) base-assisted partial etching of the metal oxide shells to produce porous shells. The pore size of the materials was shown to be easily controllable by varying external reaction parameters (e.g., reaction temperature, etching time, etc.). The porous shells around the NPs thus enabled selective transport of substrates/product. Fig. 14 shows a schematic of the procedural route for porous SiO2–AuNP–SiO2 core–shell–shell materials,268 which were used for the selective oxidation of styrene with good recyclable property and almost no leaching of the metals.
 Fig. 14  Schematic representation of the synthesis of a porous SiO2–AuNP–SiO2 core–shell–shell microsphere catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2012 Springer. 
In another related example, Yu et al. developed a synthetic strategy involving sol–gel, hydrothermal, polymerization, and carbonization to synthesize silicalite-1 (core)/mesoporous shell structures.269,270 Chen and co-workers reported the synthesis of Pd/SiO2 and Ca–Pd/SiO2 egg–porous-shell nanomaterials via an impregnation method to explore their catalytic prowess in CO hydrogenation to methanol with high selectivity.271 Porous Fe3O4/Fe/SiO2 and Fe3O4/SnO2 core/shell nanorods possessing magnetic and electromagnetic properties were synthesized by Chen and co-workers using a combination of hydrothermal, sol–gel, and annealing methods.150,272 Commercially available films composed of Ag65Au35 (based on atom %) were used to synthesize nanoporous gold by chemical etching with 70% HNO3 aqueous solution at room temperature. Subsequent controlled incorporation of Ag into the nanopores of the material was carried out using an electroless-plating method.273 A combination of a hydrothermal and layer-by-layer deposition technique has also been applied to synthesize α-Fe2O3@SnO2@C porous core–shell nanorods.274 The resulting materials showed excellent performance when used as an anode for lithium-ion batteries. Wang's group reported a simple oxidation-based method to generate porous core–shell structured Ni/NiO anode materials for lithium ion batteries.275 Using a similar approach, Mathur and co-workers synthesized porous Ni/Ni3S2 core–shell nanotubes via a hydrothermal method followed by controlled oxidation.276 A general galvanic displacement approach has also been employed to synthesize porous core–shell Au–M (M = Au, Pd, and Pt) nanostructures that served as efficient electrocatalysts for EtOH oxidation as well as the oxygen reduction reaction.277
The synthetic strategies for porous CSNs have been extended to relatively sophisticated unconventional methods. For example, the synthesis of hierarchical porous core–shell carbon nanostructures using detonation-assisted-chemical-vapor-deposition has been reported.278 In this process, picric acid was assumed to create the required high temperature environment by detonation, where the premixed carbon(phenol)/catalyst(cobalt acetate) precursors decompose to form carbon nanostructures. In another study, a coaxial electrospinning system with a “water-immersed collector” was used to synthesize polycaprolactone and gelatin based highly porous core–shell nanostructures (Fig. 15).279 A combination of electrostatic spray deposition (ESD) and high temperature treatment was also successfully employed by Wang and co-workers to obtain three-dimensional porous core–shell Sn@carbon anode materials on nickel foam.280 Using a protocol involving electrodeposition (to make Ni nanowire), plasma annealing (to make Ni@NiO) and finally hydrothermal reduction, one-dimensional Ni@NiO/Pt hybrid NWs were synthesized.281 The resulting material showed excellent catalytic activity for the electrooxidation of ethanol in alkaline media and high tolerance against CO-poisoning. Porous metal oxide (Co3O4@NiO and ZnO@NiO) core–shell NWs with excellent supercapacitive properties have been prepared by Fan and co-workers using hydrothermal, chemical bath deposition and finally thermal annealing.282 A similar technique was used to synthesize Co3O4@NiO, which displayed a high catalytic efficiency towards methanol oxidation.283 Zhang's group made porous silica CSNs via the sol–gel method and used them as a fluorescent sensor for the detection of very low concentrations of Zn2+ ions by employing rhodamine 101 adsorbed on the solid cores and 8-aminoquinoline impregnated onto the porous silica shells.284 Weitz and co-workers used a microfluidic and “porogen-templating” techniques to prepare NPs with a hydrophobic porous core and hydrophilic porous surface.285 While the hydrophilic surface allowed good dispersibility in water, the hydrophobic cores enabled adsorption of organic molecules into the NPs from the surrounding aqueous environment, thus enhancing their high adsorption capacity (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 15  Electrospinning system for creating core–shell and porous core–shell fiber networks. (A) core–shell electrospinning system for core–shell nanofibers. (B) Electrospinning setup in a water-immersed collector for preparing porous core–shell fiber networks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the mechanism of mixing driven phase separation, precipitation polymerization and subsequent pore formation after removal of porogen PDMS oil. (b–e) SEM images of the surface and the three different layers within the porous particle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
As opposed to repeating the different synthetic strategies for core–shell nanoparticles, already extensively covered in other reviews, the aforementioned classification hopefully have provided some thoughts to the readers for possible extension/development in the field of core–shell nanocatalysts.
The above section described different synthetic strategies used for making CSNs according to the types of materials. A novel classification system based on the shell-properties has been introduced considering recent upsurge in their applications. In contrast to the archaic literature precedence, most of the recent methods are primarily application-driven. Based on the compatibility between the layers as well as their utilizations, combinations of different synthetic methods or simplification of relatively complicated and time-consuming methods are becoming routine practices. With such enhanced synthetic prowess, core–shell nanomaterials with hybrid structures and unique functionalities can be obtained in a relatively shorter time to find their utility in varied applications, especially in catalysis.

3.2. Characterization techniques for core–shell nanoparticles
The above sections described common synthetic strategies and some recent examples of different types of CSNs. However, before discussing the catalytic applications, it is important to provide an overview of the techniques available for characterizing such systems. In this section, some common techniques related to CSNs (or nanomaterials in general) are mentioned.
The properties and performance of nanomaterials, especially as nanocatalysts, relies heavily on their size, morphology, structure and composition. In the case of CSNs, the combination of the inner core and outer shell, dispersion of catalytic groups on the surface of the materials and diffusion of the NPs in the reaction have crucial effects on their properties and catalytic activities. Therefore, characterization of CSNs to obtain information regarding their structural features and physical properties are not only important for understanding their structure–catalytic activity relationships but also for gaining deeper insights into the catalytic mechanisms involving these nanosystems. Consequently, a range of parameters that define CSNs needs to be characterized and assessed (Fig. 17). To describe CSNs as completely as possible, it is necessary to elucidate the chemical and physical properties of the materials, i.e., the size and shape of the particles, surface characteristics, nature of surface coating and presence of impurities/dopants (which are often incorporated by combining a series of complimentary analytical methods). Below, the major characterization techniques used to probe the structures, compositions and properties of CSNs are briefly described.
 Fig. 17  Structural and compositional features of CSNs that can affect CSNs catalytic properties. 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) has long been the method of choice for studying the crystal phases or microstructures of a range of materials, including CSNs. Particularly for CSNs, XRD is an important tool that can shed light on the presence of core–shell structures in the NPs. Even separated phases belonging to the core and shell could be detected simultaneously. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images are usually used to determine the size, morphology and homogeneity of the NPs. However, because signal collection in SEM usually involves collecting secondary electrons and therefore generating only a surface image, it is difficult to distinguish the core from the shell with SEM analysis. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) enables the simultaneous observation of lattice fringes with different spacings in the core and shell from a single particle. Additionally, energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), which is typically attached as an accessory to TEM instruments, can serve as a powerful method for determining the distribution of elements within specified region. Thus, EDS can be reliably used to characterize the chemical nature of the core and shell within a core–shell nanosystem. Another important technique used for core–shell nanomaterials, particularly for their composition, elemental mapping and also sometimes depth-profiling, is electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) – a technique often considered complimentary to EDS. This technique has been routinely used for core–shell nanocatalysts to obtain valuable information regarding their structure activity relationships (see Section 5 on electrocatalysis). In high angle annular dark-field STEM (HAADF-STEM), regions with larger average atomic number are indicated by brighter contrast in images, as long as this area has the same thickness. Therefore, Z-contrast (Z is the average atomic number) images can be used to detect the element distribution visually and directly. More advanced electron microscopy methods, such as aberration-corrected STEM operating at a lower voltage (100 kV), has recently been developed to give the images at atomic-resolution.286 In fact, annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) and atomic-resolution spectroscopic mapping are nowadays routinely used under various suitable conditions. By taking advantage of the unique optical properties, such as plasmonic, absorption and emission properties, of NCs (which are quite sensitive to their surface modification), several spectroscopic techniques have been developed to directly or indirectly, characterize CSNs. UV-Vis spectroscopy is one of the most commonly used spectroscopic techniques for the analysis of different types of NPs, especially those capable of absorbing in the UV-Vis region of electromagnetic radiation. For organic type core@shell nanostructures, infrared spectroscopy can be used for the identification of the organic molecules/moieites present in the nanostructures.
Raman spectroscopy is also another important technique for studying the surface characteristics of core–shell nanomaterials. Additionally, surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) can be used for studying CSNs containing SERS active metals, such as Au, Ag, and Cu, and for the detection and monitoring of surface processes relevant for catalysis by core–shell nanomaterials. Gas adsorption/desorption machinery equipped with an automated analyzer, which allows multilayer adsorption/desorption of gas (mostly nitrogen) over a material's surface as a function of relative pressure, is also useful for the characterization of core–shell nanomaterials, especially those containing porous structures. In particular, the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method is commonly used for determination of the specific surface area of porous core–shell nanomaterials, whereas the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method can be employed to determine the pore volume and pore size of the materials; the choice being dictated by the pore sizes and structures in the materials.
The above section highlights the key tools used to characterize CSNs by providing information about their physicochemical properties. In the context of current review, these tools are also important for checking the integrity of the nanocatalysts after catalytic reactions and often provide insights into the interactions of different components of the catalyst with the reactant molecules.
4. Applications of core–shell nanoparticles in catalysis
The systematic design and synthesis of core–shell nanocatalysts comprising active metal NPs in the core and closely assembled structures with nano-gaps in the shell to permit substrates access to the core metal can allow access to highly selective nanocatalysts.287–297 In this section, various catalytic reactions by CSNs298 are described, such as hydrogenation reactions, oxidation reactions, cross-coupling reactions, tandem deprotection-Knoevenagel and Henry reactions, aerobic oxidative esterifications and synthesis of bulk chemicals (e.g., adipic acid), etc.
4.1. Hydrogenation reactions
Hydrogenation reactions are important in the industrial syntheses of dyes, biologically active compounds, pharmaceuticals, rubber and agricultural chemicals.299–301 Nanomaterial-catalyzed hydrogenations of alkynes, alkenes, aromatic nitro compounds and ketones have received much interest in the last decade because of their use in the synthesis of important raw materials along with the remarkable effectiveness of nanomaterials in catalyzing such reactions.300,302–304 Hydrogenation reactions are often performed using traditional catalysts for several important drug intermediates and pharmaceutical precursors,305–307 for which the selectivity of the reactions is the biggest concern. Among such processes, catalytic transfer hydrogenation (CTH) reaction is becoming increasing popular because of its wide usage and versatility. The practical use of CSNs for CTH often stems from the fact that these materials offer high selectivity (both regio- and chemo-selectivity) along with their enhanced ease of separation and recyclability; several types of core–shell nanocatalysts have been successfully employed for various transfer hydrogenation reactions.308–311

4.1.1. Chemoselective reduction reaction. 
Kaneda and co-workers have reported the synthesis of Ag@CeO2 core–shell nanocatalysts using the reverse micelle method and showed their catalytic properties in chemoselective reduction reactions.312 The material (denoted as the core–shell nanocomposite AgNPs@BM) consisted of AgNPs covered with a basic material (BM) (Fig. 18). It is worth emphasizing that a hydrogen molecule was cleaved heterolytically at the junction between AgNPs and basic sites (or BM) of the materials, thereby suppressing the unfavorable homolytic fission of the hydrogen molecule on the bare AgNPs. The resultant Ag hydride and proton species enable the complete chemoselective reduction of nitro compounds while retaining the CC bonds intact (Fig. 19). Similarly, AgNPs@CeO2 was shown to catalyze the deoxygenation of epoxides to alkenes with excellent (99%) selectivity (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 18  (a) Representation of Ag/HT (HT represents hydrotalcite support) reacting with H2; both polar and nonpolar hydrogen species are formed. (b) Representation of AgNPs@BM; AgNPs are covered with a basic material (BM), which reacts with H2 to result in exclusive formation of polar hydrogen species. A basic site of HT and BM is represented by BS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 19  Chemoselective reduction of various organic substrates on silver@cerium dioxide core–shell nanocatalyst. 
 Fig. 20  Electron micrographs of AgNPs@CeO2: (a) SEM and (b) HRTEM images of a AgNPs@CeO2 nanocomposite particle, (c) line-scan STEM-EDS across the AgNPs@CeO2 nanocomposite (Ag: red squares, Ce: green squares). The circled areas correspond to the spherical CeO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
AgNPs@CeO2, has also been shown to catalyze the chemoselective reduction of unsaturated aldehydes to the corresponding unsaturated alcohols with H2;313 the nanogaps among adjacent CeO2 NPs within the shell allow better access of reactants to the active Ag sites in the core. Exploiting the interaction between the basic sites of CeO2 and Ag NPs effectively induced the heterolytic cleavage of H2 to Ag–hydride and proton species, allowing the highly chemoselective reduction of unsaturated aldehydes to the corresponding allylic alcohols.


4.1.2. Semihydrogenation of alkynes by Pd@MPSO/SiO2. 
The semihydrogenation of alkynes is an important synthetic protocol for preparing (Z)-alkenes, which are important building blocks for fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals, such as flavors, natural products and bioactive molecules.314 A core–shell nanocatalyst consisting of Pd NPs shielded within a DMSO-type matrix on the surface of SiO2 producing Pd@MPSO/SiO2 CSNs (MPSO = methyl-3-trimethoxysilylpropylsulfoxide) has been designed and shown to catalyze the selective semihydrogenation of alkynes.315 The shell containing an alkyl sulfoxide network acted as a macroligand and permitted the selective entrance of alkynes to the active center of the Pd NPs, encouraging the selective semihydrogenation of alkynes (Fig. 21).315,316 Varying the molar ratios of MPSO to Pd during the synthesis resulted in two different core–shell nanocatalysts, namely Pd@MPSO/SiO2-1 (where MPSO:Pd = 7:1) and Pd@MPSO/SiO2-2 (where MPSO:Pd = 100:1). The material Pd@MPSO/SiO2-1 was successfully employed as a catalyst for the semihydrogenation of a wide range of internal alkynes (aromatic and aliphatic alkynes) to the corresponding alkenes, affording >97% yield (Table 1). Pd@MPSO/SiO2-2 also catalyzed the selective semihydrogenation of a variety of terminal alkynes, such as ethynyl benzenes, bearing electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups to the corresponding terminal alkenes with excellent selectivity (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 21  Schematic showing the principles behind the synthesis of Pd@MPSO/SiO2 core–shell nanocatalyst. Adapted from ref. 315. 
Table 1 Semihydrogenation of internal alkynes using Pd@MPSO/SiO2-1a









Entry
Alkyne
Product

T (h)
Alkenes
Yieldb (%) Z:E
Alkanes





a Reaction conditions: alkyne (0.5 mmol), Pd@MPSO/SiO2-1 (0.02 g, Pd: 0.2 mol%) and MeOH (5 mL).
b Determined by Gas Chromatography (GC) yield using an internal standard.
c Pd@MPSO/SiO2-1 (0.1 g, Pd: 0.05 mol%), 1 (10 mmol), MeOH (40 mL), H2 (1 atm.), 30 °C.
d Reaction was conducted at 40 °C.
e THF was used as a solvent.





1






2
97
97:3
3


2c






8
95
97:3
5


3d






6
98
97:3
2


4d






6
99
98:2
1


5d






6
98
98:2
2


6e






6
98
95:5
2


7d






8
98
97:3
2




 Fig. 22  Semihydrogenation of terminal alkynes using Pd@MPSO/SiO2-2. 


4.1.3. Reduction reactions with magnetically separable core–shell nanocatalysts. 
Magnetically separable NPs are increasingly used as robust catalysts for various organic transformations because they are easily recoverable and reusable as catalyst for multiple catalytic runs. Such nanomaterials can easily be synthesized via a stepwise or an in situ synthetic method. For example, a simple one-pot process has been developed where oleylamine serves as both solvent and reducing agent for the Ag+ and Ni2+ ions and triphenylphosphine as surfactant.98 TEM images of the nanocatalyst showed particles with spherical morphology of diameter ca. 14.9 nm (Fig. 23A) and narrow size distribution (σ = 1.14 nm). The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 23A(b)) acquired for the NPs displayed diffraction rings, which could be indexed to face-centered cubic (fcc) corresponding to both Ni and Ag. The compositional scan profile red line marked in the HAADF image (Fig. 23A(d)) on a single particle clearly showed two types of strong signals: one corresponding to Ni at the edge and the other corresponding to Ag at the center of particle, typical of a core–shell structure.
 Fig. 23  (A) Ag–Ni CSNs: (a) low-magnification TEM image (at 50 nm), (b) SAED pattern, (c) HRTEM image, and (d) EDS spectra recorded from the center. (B) Hydrogen transfer reactions of aromatic nitro and carbonyl compounds on Ag@Ni core–shell nanocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The above mentioned nanomaterials can serve as catalysts for the reduction of functional groups (e.g., nitro, azido and carbonyl compounds), that are of high importance for organic synthesis300,301,317 and the synthesis of many biologically active compounds for medical applications. Specifically, Ag@Ni CSNs have been deployed for the hydrogen transfer reactions of aromatic nitro compounds using isopropyl alcohol (IPA) as hydrogen donor (Fig. 23B, right); both, electron withdrawing and electron donating groups, such as –Cl, –Br, –F, and –OCH3, were found to have no significant influence on the reaction. In addition, the catalytic performance of the CSNs was evaluated for the reduction of carbonyl compounds and found to provide good to excellent yields (90–94%).


4.1.4. Asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of aromatic ketones on immobilized rhodium catalyst. 
Core–shell nanostructured mesoporous silica microspheres have successfully been used as a support material for making nanocatalysts for asymmetric synthesis. The core of silica spheres enables the assembly of various chiral functionalities while the shell of silica spheres prevents leaching of chiral organometallics. Li and co-workers used such an immobilized rhodium catalyst for asymmetric transfer hydrogenation reaction,318 wherein a chiral Cp*RhTsDPEN complex (Cp* = pentamethyl cyclopentadiene, TsDPEN = 4-methylphenylsulfonyl-1,2-diphenylethylenediamine) was assembled within the core of mesoporous silica spheres. The detailed synthetic protocol used for making these core–shell nanostructured mesoporous silica nanospheres with Cp*RhTsDPEN functionality is shown in Fig. 24. First, the TsDPEN-functionalized internal core (2) was obtained via co-condensation of a chiral silica resource and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) in the presence of a mixture of cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) and triethanol amine (TEA). TEA helps to promote high nucleation and slow growth of the generated seeds, resulting in mesoporous silica NPs. The continuous growth of the external shell around the nanospheres was made possible using additional TEOS along with CTAC. Finally, direct complexation of [Cp*RhCl2]2, followed by the removal of the CTAC templates via Soxhlet extraction afforded the mesoporous catalyst Cp*RhTsDPEN-CSSDMSS (3) as a light red-colored powdered material (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Synthesis of the heterogeneous catalyst Cp*RhTsDPEN-CSSDMSS (3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The resulting nanocatalyst was successfully employed as a catalyst for the asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of aromatic ketones in aqueous medium in the absence of any phase transfer catalyst (PTC), affording excellent conversion and high enantioselectivity. The nanocatalyst demonstrated its versatility in accommodating various substrates with electron donating as well as electron withdrawing groups. Moreover, the catalyst was successfully recycled up to twelve times with no significant loss of catalytic activity.


4.1.5. Vapor-phase cyclohexene hydrogenation by Au–Rh core–shell nanoparticles. 
Humphrey and co-workers have reported a MW-assisted method for the synthesis of Au–Rh CSNs in which AuNP seeds were coated by Rh shells in a one-pot procedure.319 The Au NPs were prepared by NaBH4 reduction of HAuCl4·H2O in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) in ethylene glycol at 150 °C for 30 min under MW irradiation and then left for an overgrowth step without further modification. Based on the desired thickness of the shell, a specific quantity of RhCl3·xH2O in ethylene glycol was added at a rate of 20.0 mL h−1 to the suspended Au NPs under MW heating. In situ reduction of Rh(III) by ethylene glycol facilitated the isotropic overgrowth of Rh(0) onto the AuNP seeds under MW irradiation at 150 °C (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Schematic of the synthesis of Au–Rh CSNs using a microwave (MW)-assisted synthetic method: yellow/orange = Au; blue/violet = Rh. Reprinted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The catalytic activity of the resulting CSNs was assessed using vapor-phase cyclohexene hydrogenation as a model reaction in a down flow reactor. Before packing the catalyst in the reactor, Au, Rh and Rh–Au CSNs were supported on amorphous silica using the reported procedure.320 Next, a few milligrams of each catalyst (material) were studied using a single-pass reactor, in which a low pressure stream of H2/He and cyclohexene were passed over the catalyst at 30 °C, while the exhaust mixture was monitored with an automated GC to evaluate the progress of the catalytic reaction. The results revealed that the catalytic activity of the materials was highly dependent on the thickness of the shell of the core–shell nanomaterial.


4.1.6. Hydrogenation of alkenes by SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2 and SiO2/Pd-PAMAM type core–shell–shell microspheres. 
Asefa and co-workers have reported the synthesis of stable catalytic core–shell type microreactors, which comprise SiO2 microsphere-supported metal NPs embedded in multicores of hollow and nanoporous ZrO2 shell.321 The catalyst, SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2, was synthesized in three main steps (Fig. 26A). In the first step, silica microspheres were prepared by the Stöber method. The surfaces of the silica microspheres were then modified using 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS) to form aminopropyl-terminated SiO2 microspheres. Finally, Pd NPs were supported on the aminopropyl-terminated silica microspheres by reducing an aqueous solution of Pd salt with citric acid. In the second step, the SiO2/Pd core microspheres were coated with a silica shell, thus producing SiO2/Pd/SiO2 core–shell–shell microspheres, which were further coated by a surfactant/ZrO2 shell. The ZrO2 shell was prepared by mixing SiO2/Pd/SiO2 core–shell–shell microspheres in an aqueous solution containing polyethylene glycol dodecyl ether (Brij® 30) surfactant and zirconium butoxide [Zr(OBu)4], and aging the solution for 12 h. The ensuing solid product was calcined at 1073 K for 2 h to afford the SiO2/Pd/SiO2/h-ZrO2 core–shell–shell microspheres. Finally, the controlled etching of the silica shell with an aqueous NaOH solution generated the hollow SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2 core–shell–shell microspheres (or core–shell microsphere catalysts). The formation of the hollow shell was closely monitored by taking TEM images (Fig. 26B, right) of samples collected from solutions during etching of the inner silica shells of SiO2/Pd/SiO2/ZrO2, which gradually produced yolk–shell-type SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2 microspheres. The images showed that SiO2 microsphere-supported Pd NPs were encapsulated within a hollow and nanoporous ZrO2 shell (yolk–shell type catalytic microreactors). The hollow and nanoporous ZrO2 shell was permeable enough to allow reactants to reach the Pd-anchored-SiO2 cores, while at the same time robust enough to keep the Pd NPs intact and give high conversion and recyclability for the hydrogenation of olefins.
 Fig. 26  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2 core–shell–shell microspheres or microsphere catalysts. (B) TEM images showing the structural evolution of SiO2/Pd/SiO2/ZrO2 core–shell–shell–shell microspheres after etching with dilute NaOH solution for different etching times: (a) 2 h, (b) 6 h, (c) 9 h, (d) 12 h, (e) 15 h, (f) 20 h, (g and h) 24 h, (i) 27 h, and (j) 48 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The catalytic activity of the generated core–shell microspheres was then investigated toward the hydrogenation of styrene as a model reaction. The reaction proceeded at room temperature and under 2 MPa H2 pressure, giving high yield in 30 min. The versatility of the catalysts was exemplified for various styrenes and recycling experiments (Table 2).
Table 2 Hydrogenation of various substrates by SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2 core–shell–shell microsphere catalysts




No.
Substrate
Product
Time (h)
Conversion (%)
Selectivity (%)
TOF (h−1)




Reaction conditions: substrate (1 mL); methanol (20 mL); catalyst (10 mg, 5.42 wt% Pd in the SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2 core–shell–shell microspheres); reaction temperature (25 °C); and reactor pressure (2 MPa H2 pressure).




1






0.3
∼100
∼100
5145


2






1.5
93
∼100
1187


3






3
94
∼100
492




The same group reported the synthesis of CSNs containing dendrimers in the structure, where core–shell microspheres containing SiO2 cores and dendrimer-encapsulated ultra-small Pd were assembled, producing SiO2@Pd–PAMAM microspheres.266 In the synthesis, SiO2 microspheres were first prepared by the Stöber method and then functionalized with vinyl groups by grafting their surfaces with vinyltriethoxysilane (VTS). Afterwards, the vinyl groups were converted into epoxides by using m-chloroperoxybenzoic acid. Upon treatment with amine terminated G4 poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers, the SiO2-supported epoxides underwent ring-opening and afforded SiO2@PAMAM core–shell microspheres. Pd NPs within the cores of the SiO2-supported PAMAM dendrimers were generated by reducing Pd(II) ions in the cores of the dendrimers with NaBH4. TEM images and size distribution of the resulting SiO2@PAMAM core–shell microspheres are shown in Fig. 27.
 Fig. 27  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of SiO2@Pd–PAMAM dendrimer type core–shell microspheres or nanocatalysts. (B) (a and b) Low magnification and (c) high magnification TEM images of etched SiO2 microspheres. (d and e) Enlarged TEM images of SiO2@Pd–PAMAM core–shell microspheres. (f) Size distribution of Pd NPs in SiO2@Pd–PAMAM core–shell microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 266. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The SiO2@Pd–PAMAM core–shell microspheres were evaluated for hydrogenation (or reduction) reactions toward various functional groups under 10 bar hydrogen pressure at room temperature (RT) (Fig. 28). The SiO2 microspheres supported the permeable core–shell structures and the ultrasmall Pd NPs embedded in the attached dendrimer contributed to high catalytic activities. The catalysts showed excellent recyclability without loss of catalytic activity. These CSNs microspheres retained their catalytic activity better than in control samples, including SiO2@Pd core–shell microspheres that contained no dendrimers or contained a commercially available Pd/C (1 wt%) catalyst.
 Fig. 28  SiO2@Pd–PAMAM core–shell microspheres catalyze hydrogenation reactions of various functional groups. 


4.1.7. Magnetic core–shell Au nanocatalyst for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol. 
Zhu and co-workers have reported a magnetic core–shell Au nanocatalyst for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol under benign reaction conditions.292 The as-synthesized Au–Fe3O4@metal–organic framework (MOF) nanocatalyst had a magnetic Au–Fe3O4 core and a porous MOF shell. The nanocatalyst was synthesized by a versatile layer-by-layer assembly protocol, and the shell thickness in the CSNs was controlled by adjusting the number of cycles employed for the self assembly. The ensuing Au (3–5 nm) NPs were located between the magnetite core and MOF shell and were evenly dispersed on the surface of the magnetite NPs (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  (a) Synthesis of magnetic core–shell Au–Fe3O4@MOF nanocatalyst, (b) TEM images of Au–Fe3O4, (c) single particle of core–shell Au–Fe3O4 showing mappings for Au, C, Fe and O elements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Furthermore, the Au–Fe3O4@MOF nanocatalyst was shown to be the best candidate among other reported Au-based catalysts toward the reduction of 4-nitrophenol as it could be recycled for several runs due to the magnetic Fe3O4 core.292 Such type of nanocatalyst can be employed in large-scale synthesis of various compounds in industry, where isolation, separation and reusability are essential to reduce the total synthetic cost.
Recently, bimetallic CSNs have been developed where chemical reactions occurring on the shell and core metal can distinctly modify the performance of the whole core–shell nanocatalysts. Smart design of such core–shell materials by varying the reaction conditions can control their physicochemical properties and catalytic activity.322–324 For example, Xu and co-workers synthesized Au@Ag CSNs decorated on a metal–organic framework (MOF) by a sequential deposition reduction method.295 In a typical synthesis of Au–Ag core–shell catalysts, Au–Ag NPs were stabilized on a representative MOF (ZIF-8) (Au–Ag-ZIF-8). The 3D scaffold of ZIF-8 (Zn(MeIM)2, MeIM = 2-methylimidazole) provides high thermal and chemical stability with pore size and surface area conducive for depositing metal NPs.325 The size of Au@Ag NPs was successfully controlled at 2–6 nm without the need for surfactant by a sequential deposition reduction approach (Fig. 30). Changing the Au/Ag ratio altered the composition whereas reversing the Au/Ag deposition order changed the structure of the Au–Ag NPs. Applying a post treatment procedure converted the core–shell structure to an Au–Ag alloy. The Au–Ag-ZIF-8 core–shell nanocatalyst was employed for the catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NPh) using NaBH4 as reductant in water. The reduction kinetics were followed by UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy after the addition of the catalyst;295 the absorption peak of 4-nitrophenolate at ∼400 nm decreased along with a concomitant increase of the ∼300 nm peak corresponding to 4-aminophenol.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation methods used for Au–Ag core–shell nanocatalysts. (b) Catalytic conversion of 4-NPh over ZIF-8 stabilized catalysts: 2Au (I20), 2Au–1Ag (I21), 2Au–2Ag (I22), 2Au–3Ag (I23), 2Au–4Ag (I24), 2Ag (II02), 2Ag–1Au (II12), 2Ag–2Au (II22), 2Ag–4Au (II42), and post treated I22. (b) Arrhenius plot of the rate constant for the reduction of 4-NPh over I22. Reprinted with permission from ref. 295. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
As shown in Fig. 30b, the reaction did not occur over an Au (I20) catalyst and proceeded only sluggishly with an “induction period” over a Ag (II02) catalyst.295 However, the catalytic activity was significantly improved by applying the Au–Ag core–shell catalysts. Among all these synthesized catalysts,295 I22 displayed the highest activity with a rate constant estimated to be 4.97 × 10−3 s−1, suggesting that it is the most promising candidate among Au- and Ag-based catalysts.326–329 Au–Ag core–shell catalysts have also been shown to be highly reusable and stable,330 as confirmed in the latter case by TEM/HAADF-STEM analysis after catalysis.295
This section described various important chemoselective reductions performed by core–shell nanocomposite, AgNPs@BM, as it forms both polar and nonpolar hydrogen species on respective Ag and BM, in a protocol that precludes the use of traditional bases such as NaOH and KOH. The Pd@MPSO/SiO2 core–shell catalyst, deployed for semihydrogenation of terminal alkynes, uses expensive Pd, which could be replaced by other transition metal such as Ni, Cu, etc.; core–shell recyclable catalysts Ag@Ni, employed for nitro and carbonyl group reduction reactions, is a good example of cost-effective and sustainable process. Catalysts such as Cp*RhTsDPEN-CSSDMSS and Au–Rh core–shell provide ideal examples for asymmetric reduction of ketones and vapor-phase cyclohexene hydrogenation, respectively.

4.2. Oxidation reactions
Catalytic oxidations of alcohols, aldehydes and sulfides are among the most important and common reactions in organic synthesis as they can be used to produce a range of valuable raw materials for the fine chemical and pharmaceutical industry.36,331–333 Various CSNs have been employed as catalysts for oxidative transformations,334,335 as shown below.

4.2.1. One-pot oxidation of sulfides by Pd/SiO2@TiMS core–shell nanocatalyst. 
Yamashita and co-workers synthesized Pd NPs supported on SiO2 nanosphere core coated with a Ti-containing mesoporous silica shell (Pd/SiO2@TiMSS)336 for one-pot oxidation of sulfide to sulfoxide. To make the nanocatalysts, colloidal SiO2 nanospheres, prepared via Stöber method were first functionalized with Pd NPs337–339 followed by a coating of Ti-containing mesoporous silica shell (Fig. 31a).340
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the procedure used to prepare Pd/SiO2@TiMSS, SiO2/@Pd(R)/TiMSS and SiO2/@Pd(S)/TiMSS. (b) Effect of the catalysts on the concentration of H2O2. (c) Oxidation of methyl phenyl sulfide using in situ generated H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
For catalytic studies, SiO2@Pd(R)/TiMSS and SiO2@Pd(S)/TiMSS (where (R) denotes random and (S) designates the surface) were investigated for one-pot generation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2); the concentration of H2O2 in the reaction medium is almost independent of the catalysts used (Fig. 31b). The catalytic activity of the nanomaterials were then evaluated for the one-pot oxidation of methyl phenyl sulfide into methyl phenyl sulfoxide (A) (Fig. 31c) using in situ generated H2O2, where Pd/SiO2@TiMSS was found to be the best catalyst.


4.2.2. Oxidation of alcohols on Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au core–shell catalyst. 
Facile synthesis of hierarchical core–shell Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au (LDH = layered-double-hydroxides) nanomaterials as magnetically recyclable catalysts for catalytic oxidation of alcohols was reported by Zhang and co-workers.341 Briefly, the nanomaterials were synthesized by making Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH nanospheres and then supporting Au NPs on the surfaces of the MgAl–LDH of Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH342,343 (Fig. 32A). Fig. 32B(b) shows SEM/TEM images of Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au nanocatalyst and its precursors. The images show that the Fe3O4 NPs had a smooth surface and mean diameter of 450 nm with a narrow size distribution. After coating the nanospheres with carbonate–MgAl–LDH, the materials showed honeycomb like morphology with many voids of about 100–200 nm in size.
 Fig. 32  (A) Synthesis of core–shell Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au NPs. (B) SEM (a–c), TEM (d and e), and HRTEM (f) images of Fe3O4 (a), Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH (b and d), and Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au (c, e, and f). (C) Catalytic oxidation of 1-phenylethanol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The catalytic oxidation of 1-phenylethanol was then performed by using the magnetic Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au (7.0 nm Au) NPs as catalyst, affording acetophenone (99%) with excellent yield and high turnover frequency (TOF) of 66 h−1; the catalytic activity was comparable to the value previously reported for Au/MgAl–LDH (TOF, 74 h−1) containing Au NPs with average size of 2.7 nm at 40 °C.344 The magnetic property of the Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au nanospheres was successfully utilized to easily separate the nanocatalysts from the reaction mixture after the reactions (Fig. 32C).


4.2.3. Oxidation of benzyl alcohol by gold–palladium core–shell nanocrystals. 
Tilley and co-workers developed Au–Pd core–shell NCs with optimized size, shape and facets for catalytic applications.345 In their study, icosahedral Au–Pd core–shell NCs were synthesized by a seed-mediated approach, in which nucleation and growth stages were independently controlled. To grow the Pd shell around the Au seeds, palladium acetylacetonate and hexadecylamine in toluene in a 2:1 molar ratio of Pd to Au were added into the solution (Fig. 33). The CSN catalysts were then supported on activated carbon with a loading of 1 wt% metal NPs. The catalytic activity of the resulting series of Au–Pd core–shell NCs with varied shell thickness (0.4, 0.8, 1.5, 2.2, and 3.2 nm) was evaluated toward the oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde. Typically, in the presence of 25 mg of these Au–Pd/C NPs, benzyl alcohol (40 mL) was converted into benzaldehyde in an autoclave under 10 bar oxygen at 140 °C under solvent-free conditions. The NCs with shell thickness of 2.2 nm (ca. 12 atomic layers of Pd) were found to give the highest (TOF) and selectivity in the reaction.
 Fig. 33  Micrograph images of Au–Pd core–shell NCs: (a) bright-field TEM, (b) high-resolution TEM, (c) STEM-EDX map shown as an overlay of gold and palladium signals, and (d) HAADF-STEM image showing a contrast difference between the gold core (bright) and palladium shell (dark). Dotted blue line represents the EDX line scan shown in (e) with Pd shown in red, Au in green and Cu in black. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.2.4. Lab-in-a-shell approach for selective catalysis. 
Dai and co-workers have reported a “lab-in-a-shell” approach for the synthesis of multifunctional CSNs with metal clusters as a core and microporous silica as shell.334 Noble metals such as Pd and Pt were incorporated in the void space mediated by the capture of polymer dots inside the silica shell (Fig. 34). TEM images of the Pd cluster@silica core–shell nanospheres revealed that the Pd NPs were implanted inside the silica hollow shell and most of the core clusters were attached to the interior wall of the silica shell (Fig. 34b).
 Fig. 34  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of metal cluster@silica core–shell nanospheres. (b) TEM image of Pd cluster@silica core–shell nanospheres. (c) Size-selective catalysis of Pd cluster@silica core–shell nanospheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
The Pd-cluster embedded in the hybrid core–shell nanocatalysts displayed excellent size-selective catalysis for the allylic oxidation of cyclohexene moieties with different molecular size (e.g., 0.5 nm cyclohexene, 1.91 nm cholesteryl acetate (CA)). Whereas a Pd/silica nanocatalyst successively oxidized cyclohexene and CA to the corresponding 2-cyclohexene-1-one, 2-cyclohexenol, cyclohexene oxide and 7-ketochlolesteryl acetate as main products with conversions of 23.1% (cyclohexene) and 9.8% (CA), a 4 times higher than cyclohexene conversion (93.7%) was achieved with high selectivity for the dehydrogenation product over the same catalyst (97.7%) (Fig. 34c). The selective oxidation of organic compounds such as hydrocarbons or alcohols is an important reaction in industrial organic synthesis.346 Furthermore, Pd/silica (Pd loading 0.9%) CSNs have been employed for the solvent-free oxidation of hydrocarbons and alcohols in an O2 atmosphere to give corresponding products with excellent conversions.


4.2.5. CO oxidation with core–shell nanoparticles. 
Chen et al. have reported a simple synthetic strategy for making core–shell microspheres consisting of CuO NPs dispersed on the surface of Al2O3 for CO oxidation.347 The obtained Al2O3@CuO core–shell submicrospheres displayed uniform core–shell structures, with shells composed of small CuO NPs (without the formation of CuAl2O4 passivation layer between CuO and Al2O3). Notably, when these Al2O3@CuO submicrospheres were used as a catalyst for CO oxidation, a significantly improved activity was observed compared to conventional supported CuO/Al2O3348 (prepared by impregnation and calcination processes) catalysts in a continuous-flow fixed-bed reactor with feed gas containing 1.0 vol% CO, 1.6 vol% O2, and 97.4% He (balance gas) at a total flow rate of 50 mL min−1, which corresponds to a gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) of 30000 mL h−1 gcat−1. A maximum conversion was obtained at 160 °C for the reaction.
Bao and co-workers developed a synthetic method for generating FeO-on-Cu@Pt-oxide-on-NM (noble metal) type nanomaterials349 for catalytic CO oxidation (Fig. 35). The Cu@Pt CSNs were synthesized by a sequential polyol process. In the synthesis, PtCl2 was first added to a “freshly prepared” colloidal solution of Cu/EG (EG = Ethylene glycol) at 130 °C under an Ar atmosphere. The resulting Cu@Pt and Pt NPs were further decorated with FeO through a reductive deposition–precipitation (RDP) process and their catalytic activity was evaluated for PROX (PReferential OXidation). The particles showed significantly improved catalytic activity for the catalytic oxidation of CO, especially after the Cu@Pt NPs had been decorated with FeO patches. Moreover, even though they contained much less Pt, these CSNs exhibited a similar catalytic activity to that of Pt NPs covered with surface FeO patches.
 Fig. 35  Various structural configurations of supported NPs catalysts: (A) noble metal NPs, (B) “TMO-on-NM” (transition metal oxide = TMO) NPs consisting of a noble metal NPs decorated with surface TM oxide, and (C) “TMO-on-NM Shell” NPs with TM oxide decorating the surface of a core–shell NP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 


4.2.6. CO oxidation on sinter-resistant Au–mesoporous-silica core–shell nanoparticles. 
Yin and co-workers and Kresge et al. synthesized sub-5 nm nanosized Au NPs@mesoporous-silica (m-SiO2) nanospheres via a soft-templating method and investigated their catalytic activity for CO oxidation (Fig. 36).350,351 The BET surface area and total pore volume of the resulting material, as analyzed by the nitrogen physisorption, were found to be 736 m2 g−1 and 0.92 cm3 g−1, respectively. Besides their excellent catalytic activity for CO oxidation, the Au@m-SiO2 core–shell nanospheres displayed robustness, showing good sinter-resistant properties even at 750 °C. The SiO2 shell not only prohibited Au NPs from migrating but also restricted its growth. Such silica-based catalytic systems could possibly be extended to other important metals and high temperature and pressure organic reactions.
 Fig. 36  Schematic of the formation procedures used for mesoporous silica nanospheres with or without Au NPs. Adapted from ref. 344. 
The significance of the catalytic reactions is exemplified by the selective oxidation of methyl phenyl sulfide to methyl phenyl sulfoxide using SiO2/@Pd(R)/TiMSS and SiO2/@Pd(S)/TiMSS catalysts, wherein in situ generated H2O2, avoids external addition of an oxidant.

4.3. Coupling reactions
Coupling reactions are an integral part of the synthesis of many drug intermediates and pharmaceutical precursors.352–355 The most important coupling reactions include Heck reaction, Suzuki–Miyaura reaction and Sonogashira reaction, which often involve precious metals, such as Pd, Au, etc., and are deployed in countless synthetic processes.356 The following section describes examples of these reactions that can be effectively catalyzed by a variety of CSNs containing metals.

4.3.1. Au–Pd core–shell catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura reaction. 
Amatore and co-workers have reported the synthesis and catalytic activity of Au–Pd CSNs toward the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction between 4-bromoanisole and phenyl boronic acid in aqueous medium with base K2CO3 at room temperature (Fig. 37).357 The coupling products were obtained in excellent yield (95%) and also at a faster rate than other reported catalysts.358,359 The Au@Pd CSNs were found to have unique structural features, in which a shell of one or several Pd(0) monolayer(s) (MLs) was precisely wrapped around a Au(0) nanocore (Fig. 37A(a)). Two to five monolayers of Pd were found to be responsible for the NPs' optimum catalytic conversion rate (Fig. 37A(b)).
 Fig. 37  (A) (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of 16 nm Au@Pd NPs with two monolayers of Pd. (b) Plot of yield vs. Pd shell thickness as a function of reaction time for the cross-coupling between 4-bromoanisole with phenylboronic acid. (B) Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 357. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.3.2. Suzuki–Miyaura reaction catalyzed by Ni/Pd core–shell nanoparticles. 
Metin and co-workers synthesized Ni–Pd CSNs supported on graphene (G) by a sequential reduction method for the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction.360 The catalyst showed a narrow size distribution with a mean particle size of ∼10 nm and a standard deviation of 5% with respect to the particle diameter. Phenyl boronic acid and 4-chloro-4-flurophenylboronic acid were successfully coupled with aryl iodides, bromides, and even chlorides, in a mixture of dimethylformamide (DMF)/water in the presence of base at 110 °C. To compare the effect of the NPs' structural features on the catalytic activity, three different Ni/Pd NPs with different Ni/Pd molar ratio, namely 2/3, 7/3 and 3/2, were synthesized. The resulting Ni/Pd CSNs supported on graphene were then employed as catalysts for the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions, all delivering excellent yields of the corresponding products (Fig. 38). Among the three Ni/Pd NPs investigated, the one with Ni/Pd ratio of 3/2 was found to be the most active catalyst for the reaction. Moreover, the G–Ni/Pd nanocatalysts remained stable under the reaction condition and were easily recyclable, affording 98% conversion after five catalytic cycles without any noticeable Ni/Pd compositional change.
 Fig. 38  Suzuki–Miyura coupling reaction catalyzed by G–Ni/Pd CSNs. 
Yang et al. have reported the synthesis of nanoporous organosilica microspheres consisting of a magnetic Fe3O4 core and an organosilica shell with built-in N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) moiety attached to Pd (Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC) (Fig. 39a).361 The Fe3O4 microspheres were coated with a thin layer of SiO2 on which a NHC-functionalized nanoporous organosilica shell was created surrounding silica-coated Fe3O4 cores via a sol–gel process in the presence of CTAB templates. After removing the CTAB templates, magnetic core–shell nanoporous organosilica microspheres with built-in NHC moieties were formed. By gradually reducing the amount of siliceous precursors added in the third step, three different materials could be obtained with decreasing shell thickness. The corresponding Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC was finally obtained by dispersing the nanospheres in dry 1,4-dioxane containing Pd(acac)2 (acac = acetylacetonate) and mixing the dispersion at 100 °C for 30 h under N2 atmosphere.
 Fig. 39  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC(x), (b) Suzuki–Miyaura coupling products between various arylboronic acids with chlorobenzene over Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC. (c) C–C coupling products between benzylic chloride and various arylboronic acids over Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC. Adapted from ref. 361. 
The catalytic activity of the resulting Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC was evaluated for Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of chlorobenzene and phenylboronic acid in isopropyl alcohol at 80 °C under N2 atmosphere (Fig. 39b). Many other substrates, including moderately sterically demanding arylboronic acids, were found to be smoothly converted to the corresponding coupling products in 70–86% yields with the aid of NPs as catalyst. Using phenylboronic acid and benzylic chlorides as substrates, the Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC gave diphenylmethane in a yield up to 79% (Fig. 39c). Both electron-rich and electron-poor arylboronic acids afforded various diarylmethanes in 71–89% yields.


4.3.3. Sonogashira coupling reaction catalyzed by inside-out type core–shell nanoparticles. 
The Sonogashira reaction is typically a C–C bond forming reaction, which enables the coupling of a terminal sp hybridized carbon from an alkyne with a sp2 carbon of an aryl or vinyl halide (or triflate).362 There are many examples in the literatures of this class of reaction, catalyzed by various metal-containing nanomaterials, including CSNs.363,364
Recently, Varma and co-workers reported the use of inside-out core–shell architectures (Cu2O@Cu) with a Cu2O core and Cu shell as catalyst for the Sonogashira coupling reaction.365 Their facile solution-phase synthetic strategy generated Cu on the outside, producing Cu2O@Cu type CSNs (cf., the more commonly reported material is Cu@Cu2O) (Fig. 40).365
 Fig. 40  (a) SEM images of inside-out core–shell architectures (Cu2O@Cu). (b) Sonogashira coupling reactions of aryl iodides with phenyl acetylenes catalyzed by Cu2O@Cu NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 365. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The Cu2O@Cu CSNs were found to successfully catalyze Sonogashira coupling reactions between aryl iodides and phenylacetylenes to afford the corresponding biarylacetylenes in excellent yields (85–94%) (Fig. 40b). Notably, the reaction does not proceed with either Cu2O or Cu alone but only with the porous core–shell catalyst. Thus, Cu2O@Cu offers a good substitute for expensive Pd in this type of coupling. The recovered Cu2O@Cu CSNs after the catalytic reactions retained their core–shell nanostructures and remained stable without significantly losing their catalytic activity even after multiple runs.
Common coupling reactions such as Suzuki–Miyaura, Heck reaction, and Sonogashira reaction are well studied using various types of heterogeneous catalysts. A variety of core–shell NPs namely Au–Pd, Ni/Pd and Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC core–shell NPs are used for Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions in benign media. The noble and rare metals, Pd, and Au could be replaced by other inexpensive base metals such as copper. Chiral NHC could be incorporated in core–shell NPs synthesis for application in asymmetric reactions. The inside-out core–shell architectures (Cu2O@Cu) used for the Sonogashira reaction is an example of a benign protocol where coinage metal replaces a noble metal.

4.4. Ammonia decomposition reaction with iron-based core–shell nanoparticles
Ammonia synthesis, which was invented by Fritz Haber almost one-hundred years ago, is a key reaction in various industrial processes.366,367 In recent years, the reverse protocol that entails the decomposition of ammonia into hydrogen and nitrogen has come into the limelight, particularly in the context of alternative fuel-resources. This approach has enabled the development of ammonia-based hydrogen production, in addition to ammonia fuel cells (as sources of ‘clean’ energy).368
In the hydrogen production process, ammonia decomposition requires temperatures above 400 °C for thermodynamic reasons, and therefore most direct ammonia fuel cells typically function at temperatures between 500 and 700 °C. In this context, high temperature stability coupled with long lifetime is the most important requirement for potential catalysts. Core–shell nanocatalysts address this problem, as exemplified by Lu and co-workers, who synthesized high-temperature stable iron-based core–shell nanocatalysts for ammonia decomposition (Fig. 41).369 The catalysts were found to be highly stable at 750 °C with a space velocity of 120000 cm3 gcat−1 h−1 and maintained conversions of around 80% for the test period of 33 h. Furthermore, the particle size had only a limited effect on the catalytic activity for the diameter range 35–75 nm (Fig. 41). Moreover, it was noted that the cooling rate after reaction has a strong influence on the observed iron and iron nitride phases.
 Fig. 41  (A) Schematic pathway for the synthesis and application of high temperature-stable NH3 decomposition catalysts based on hematite NPs in a porous silica shell. (B) TEM images of (a) α-Fe2O3-35@pSiO2, (b) α-Fe2O3-75@pSiO2, (c) @pSiO2, and (d) α-Fe2O3-50 + @pSiO2 after calcination, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 369. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.5. Tandem deprotection-Knoevenagel and Henry reaction by core–shell nanocatalysts
In addition to stabilizing catalytic groups and increasing catalyst shelf-life, some CSNs can serve as multifunctional catalyst for tandem reactions. Catalytically active organofunctional groups can be grafted onto CSNs, as exemplified by Song and co-workers,370 who designed a core–shell structured mesoporous silica nanospheres with acid and basic groups in isolation from one other (Fig. 42).
 Fig. 42  (A) Synthesis procedure for acid–base bifunctional core–shell structured catalyst (yellow helix = –SO3H, white helix = –NH2). (B) Schematic reaction flow of the two-step cascade reaction sequences on the core–shell structured bifunctional catalyst MS-A@MS-B. (C) One-pot tandem deprotection-Knoevenagel and Henry reaction successfully catalyzed by acid–base containing MS-A@MS-B core–shell type nanocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 370. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The detailed synthetic method is illustrated in Fig. 42. Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) and 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTMS) were self-assembled with surfactant (CTAB) templates, followed by oxidation of the thiol groups to sulfonic acid functionalities to produce acid-functionalized mesostructured silica (MS-A). The resulting material was further coated with an amino functionalized mesoporous silica shell using TEOS and APTMS. Final removal of surfactant by an extraction procedure delivered the desired acid–base bifunctional core–shell catalyst (MS-A@MS-B) (Fig. 42A). In two cascade reaction sequences, this catalyst was expected to show high activity and selectivity towards the desired product with no intermediate species (Fig. 42B). In fact, the bifunctional MS-A@MS-B catalyst was successfully used for performing one-pot tandem deprotection-Knoevenagel and Henry reactions (Fig. 42C).
4.6. CO adsorption on Pd- and Pt-based core–shell nanocatalysts
Remarkable advances in the field of CSNs have enabled nanocatalysts to be designed with unique properties because of their varied nanoarchitecture, composition and particle size, which can be easily adjusted in a controllable way to tune their optical, electrical, magnetic and catalytic properties.288,371,372 All-metal core–shell colloids, especially Au-, Pd-, and Pt-based core–shell colloids, with controlled shapes are attractive due to their excellent optical and catalytic activities. Among these, Au@Pd, Au@Pt, Pt@Pd, and Pd@Pt CSNs have been shown to exhibit superior catalytic properties generally not attainable by their monometallic counterparts.122,373,374
Gorte and co-workers have reported a synthetic procedure involving self-assembly to generate novel CSN catalysts with optimized Pt and Pd cores and CeO2, ZrO2, and TiO2 shells for CO chemisorption, which also show excellent dispersity in organic solvent (Fig. 43a).375 Previously, the same group prepared dispersible Pd@CeO2 NPs, from the reaction between cerium alkoxide and Pd NPs stabilized by 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid, in which Ce species self-assembled on the surface of the particles.376
 Fig. 43  (a) Schematic of the procedure used for synthesizing M@oxide nanostructures. (b) Representative TEM image of dodecylamine-protected Pt NPs (left), along with a histogram indicating particle size distribution (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 375. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
TEM study revealed that the core of the NPs was approximately 2 nm in diameter and decorated by amorphous oxide shells (Fig. 43b).375 These particles adsorbed onto inert supports and served as heterogeneous nanocatalysts. The interaction between the different metals and the reducible shells was undoubtedly the key factor affecting the activity as well as stability of the core–shell catalysts. The uptake of CO was quantitatively determined by volumetric adsorption measurements on samples after they had been oxidized and reduced under conditions identical to those employed in the diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) experiments (Table 3).
Table 3 CO chemisorption promoted by CSNs containing Pd/Pt NPs




Sample
Pd/Pt dispersion (%)




1 wt% Pd/Al2O3
32


1 wt% Pd@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3
10


1 wt% Pd@9 wt% TiO2/Al2O3
16


1 wt% Pd@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3
17


1 wt% Pt@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3
6


1 wt% Pt@9 wt% TiO2/Al2O3
17


1 wt% Pt@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3
18




The CO uptake was measured on Pt@CeO2/Al2O3 and Pd@CeO2/Al2O3 CSNs after raising the reduction temperature to 673 K prior to chemisorption of CO at room temperature. After raising the reduction temperature from 423 to 673 K, dispersion of the Pd@CeO2/Al2O3 core–shell nanocatalysts decreased considerably from 12 to 5% (Table 4). Re-oxidation of the Pd@CeO2/Al2O3 CSNs and subsequent reduction at 423 K, again decreased the dispersion only to 10%, signifying that the oxidizing treatment partially restored the initial dispersion. In contrast, for Pt@CeO2/Al2O3, there was no loss in CO uptake upon increasing the reduction temperature. Rather, the calculated dispersion actually increased slightly from 6 to 8%. Oxidizing the Pt@CeO2/Al2O3 core–shell nanocatalysts, followed by subsequent reduction at 423 K, restored the initial metal dispersion, suggesting that Pt@CeO2/Al2O3 is considerably less susceptible towards deactivation following the reduction–oxidation process. The interaction between the reducible shells and different metals certainly appears to be an overbearing factor affecting the stability of these core–shell nanocatalysts.
Table 4 Metal dispersion based on CO uptake at RT




Sample
1st reduction at 423 K
2nd reduction at 423 K
3rd reduction at 423 K




1 wt% Pd@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3
12
5
10


1 wt% Pt@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3
6
8
6


1 wt% Pd@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3
18
11
17


1 wt% Pt@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3
18
14
19




4.7. Aerobic oxidative esterification by AuNiOx/SiO2–Al2O3–MgO catalysts
Esterification is one of the most common transformations in organic synthesis.377 The oxidative esterification of aldehydes with alcohols is a useful route for the synthesis of esters because aldehydes as raw materials are readily available on a commercial scale.
Suzuki et al. have investigated AuNiOx core–shell nanostructures for oxidative esterification, in which the surface of a Au NP core was covered by NiOx.378 The oxidative esterification of methacrolein with methanol to form methyl methacrylate was performed on supported gold-nickel oxide (AuNiOx) NPs as the catalyst and molecular oxygen as the terminal oxidant. Various types of supports, such as SiO2–Al2O3 and SiO2–TiO2, were explored for the esterification of aldehydes by alcohols, and the best yield was obtained for AuNiOx/SiO2–Al2O3–MgO catalysts.378 The reaction scope was studied using different aldehydes and alcohols under optimized conditions (Table 5).
Table 5 AuNiOx-catalyzed aerobic oxidative esterification of aldehydes with alcohols with AuNiOx/SiO2–Al2O3–MgO catalystsa




Entry
Aldehyde
Alcohol
Product
Conversion/selectivityb (%)





a Reaction conditions: aldehyde (15 mmol), AuNiOx/SiO2–Al2O3–MgO (Au: 0.1 mol%) in alcohol (10 mL), O2/N2 (7:93 (v/v), 3 MPa) at 80 °C for 1 h.
b Determined by GC.





1



Methanol



62/98


2



Ethanol



11/97


3




n-Butanol



15/97


4



Methanol



61/97


5



Ethanol



10/97




The distribution of AuNiOx NPs was precisely controlled to avoid any loss of metal during these reactions. The AuNiOx layer was sharply localized to a region 10 μm deep from the catalyst surface layer (Fig. 44).
 Fig. 44  Electron-probe microanalysis spectra of a single particle of AuNiOx/SiO2–Al2O3–MgO. (a) Secondary electron image and line analysis. (b) Color mapping display corresponding to the concentration of the element distribution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
4.8. Catalytic applications of Al2O3@Fe2O3 CSNs for the synthesis of adipic acid
Adipic acid is one of the most widely used dicarboxylic acids in the chemical industry.379 The most common industrial process for its synthesis involves nitric acid oxidation of cyclohexanol or cyclohexanol–cyclohexanone mixtures.380 However, in this process, production of nitrous oxide (N2O) as an unavoidable chemical waste contributes significantly to global warming. Bhaumik and co-workers have reported mesoporous, crystalline Al2O3@Fe2O3 CSNs via a new synthetic approach in aqueous medium381 utilizing the negative charges on the surface of γ-Al2O3 for the formation of the CSNs. TEM images and the BET surface area analysis support the mesoporosity in the materials (Fig. 45). These Al2O3@Fe2O3 CSNs acted as a Fenton catalyst in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, and it displayed high catalytic activity for the one-step conversion of cyclohexanone to adipic acid in an environmentally greener aqueous reaction medium.
 Fig. 45  TEM images of (a) self-assembled Al2O3@Fe2O3 CSNs, and (b and c) single particles. In (b), a peripheral α-Fe2O3 layer and (012) lattice fringes are clearly seen. The FFT pattern of (c) is shown in (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 381. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.9. Heterogeneously exposed core–shell Pt@TiO2 catalysts
A simple method for the synthesis of exposed core–shell heterogeneous catalyst array has been reported using the space specificity of an embodied micelle.382 The particular chemical sources for the core and shell were deposited selectively at specific regions on the embodied micelles with the help of chemical treatment (Fig. 46).
 Fig. 46  Schematic of the synthesis of heterogeneous exposed core–shell catalysts using space specificity. The inset diagram shows the principle of space specificity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 382. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The catalyst was prepared by spin coating 0.5% micelle solution (polystyrene-block-poly(4-vinylpyridine)) (PS-b-P4VP) in toluene on a silicon wafer, followed by immersing the silicon wafer in methanol at room temperature for 10 h, which generated micelles with distinct core and shell regions. This arrangement allowed the catalyst to act as photocatalyst for water splitting, and such micelles are also commonly used materials for thin film processes,383 allowing NPs to be produced with varied compositions384,385 that can be deposited on various substrates.386 Additionally, a heterogeneous Pt–TiO2 catalyst array was also developed to permit facile fabrication of a catalyst for efficient hydrogen generation through photocatalytic water decomposition.
5. Electrocatalysis by core–shell nanocatalysts
Noble metal-based catalysts are widely employed for various electrochemical transformations and energy conversion, enabling technologies such as water electrolysers, fuel cells and metal–air batteries to be developed.387,388 As mentioned earlier, some of the main synthetic methodologies employed for the synthesis of core–shell materials include dendrimer encapsulation,389 sol–gel synthesis,390 as well as colloidal and reverse micelle methods.391 Energy conversion using electrocatalysts plays an important role in the design and improvement of cost-effective benign technologies that have the potential to alleviate global warming and over-dependence on fossil fuels. In this regard, fuel cells (electrochemical energy-conversion devices) with polymer electrolyte membranes can act as convenient power sources in the transportation sector, one of the principal consumers of fossil fuels and emitters of greenhouse gases.
The optimum catalytic activity of these materials can be tuned by controlling their size, structure, and composition for a specific catalytic reaction.392,393 The electrocatalytic activity of such catalyst depends on its synergistic interactions between the core and shell, primarily involving (a) ligand effects, which affect charge transfer between the components, (b) ensemble effects, which govern the material's adsorption due to the presence of distinct atomic groups, and finally (c) geometric effects, which depend on three dimensional structural characteristics.394 Based on the type, core–shell catalysts have been used in many areas of electrocatalysis, such as ORR (oxygen reduction reaction), OER (oxygen evolution reactions), alcohol oxidation, etc.;287,395–416 some recent examples of core–shell based catalysts are discussed below.
Platinum metal is the single best metal catalyst for the ORR at low temperature in polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells in both, alkaline and acid electrolytes.417–419 To increase the reaction rate, several bimetallic electrocatalysts composed of Pt and 3d-transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni,) have been examined.401,420–425 Adzic and co-workers have investigated PtNiN core–shell catalysts with a low Pt content shell and inexpensive NiN core and showed that they displayed excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability for the ORR.426 The catalysts were synthesized by chemical reduction and subsequent thermal annealing in N2, wherein NH3 was used as a nitrogen precursor at ambient pressure. High angle annular dark-field (HAADF) images of the materials revealed the core–shell structure of the NPs (Fig. 47). By overlapping the two-dimensional mapping of Pt and Ni in EELS signals from a single NP, as shown in Fig. 47a (dotted lines), the core–shell structure of the materials was confirmed. The EELS line scan profile defined the distribution of Pt and Ni components in a representative single NP, enabling the Pt shell thickness to be directly measured (Fig. 47c). The presence of N atoms in the core allowed facile diffusion of interacted Pt from the inner shells to the surface, filling the vacancy sites (geometric effect), resulting in augmented durability of the catalysts (Fig. 48).
 Fig. 47  (a) HAADF-STEM image of a PtNiN CSN with corresponding two-dimensional EELS mapping of Pt M and Ni L signals (dotted lines for visualization purposes only). (b) STEM image of PtNiN CSNs. (c) EELS linescan profiles of Pt and Ni and schematic of a single PtNiN NP (blue, Pt; gray, Ni; purple, N). Reprinted with permission from ref. 426. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 48  Schematic of the inner Pt diffusion process to the defective sites at the vertex during cycling in electrolyte. For clarity, the inner Pt atoms involved in diffusion are shown in green, whereas defects are in yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 426. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Electrochemistry and DFT methods revealed that the high ORR activity and durability of the PtNiN catalyst can be attributed to the Ni nitride core, which influences the behavior of the Pt shell by inducing both geometric and electronic effects, thus controlling the catalytic activity.426 The same group used a surfactant-free, ethanol-aided, wet chemical synthetic approach to coat Pd NPs with uniform Pt atomic layers on a carbon support.427 The monolayer deposition was carried out during the oxidation of ethanol catalyzed by the core NPs. Subsequent reduction of [PtCl6]2− ions to Pt atoms allowed the formation of atomic Pt layers; the reducing power of ethanol was tunable by adjusting the temperature, H2O, and pH. Table 6 summarizes the ORR activities for Pd@PtML and Pd@Pt2ML samples fabricated via the ethanol-based approach as compared with those for Pd@PtML fabricated via Cu under potential deposition. The smooth Pt surface obtained at 70 °C was responsible for a smaller electrochemical surface area (ECSA) than that obtained at room temperature owing to high coordination sites on smooth terraces (less reactive to H adsorption/desorption) rather than low coordination sites on a roughened surface with edges and defects.
Table 6 Mass activities (MA) and specific activities (SA) for PtML samples synthesized by either ethanol-based approach or by Cu underpotential deposition (UPD), derived from the ORR kinetic currents at 0.9 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)427




Samples
Pd@PtML Cu UPD
Pd@PtML ethanol
Pd@Pt2ML ethanol





a MAPt, mass activity normalized by the mass of Pt.
b MAPGM, mass activity normalized by the mass of Pt-group metals (PGM).
c SA, specific activity normalized by the ECSA.
d ECSA, electrochemical surface area.





Pt/(Pt + Pd) (at%)
26.9
27.3
33.3


Pt (wt%)
16.5
17.1
18.1


Pd (wt%)
24.5
24.9
19.7


MAPta (A mg−1)
0.62
0.64
0.62


MAPGMb (A mg−1)
0.25
0.26
0.30


SAc (mA cm−2)
0.25
0.58
0.70


ECSAd (m2 g−1)
191
110
89




Ge et al. have synthesized composition-controlled bimetallic catalysts containing Pt as a shell and Cu as a core by electrochemically dealloying a bulk Pt15–Cu85 (atom %) binary alloy using a potential-controlled approach.428 Dealloying at 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 and 0.7 V yielded bimetallic Pt–Cu catalysts with chemical compositions of Pt48Cu52, Pt55Cu45, Pt67Cu33 and Pt100Cu0, respectively. The Pt/Cu ratio of the dealloyed nanoporous catalyst could readily be adjusted over a wide composition range by simply controlling the dealloying potential. The thickness of the Pt shell was dependent on the potential cycles. The prepared catalyst was well characterized by aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) equipped with electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS), the results of which are shown in Fig. 49. The resulting material was used as an electrocatalyst for the electrochemical oxidation of formic acid and its catalytic activity was compared with a commercial Pt/C catalyst in 0.1 M HClO4 solution media. The dealloyed Pt–Cu sample containing ≈67.2% Pt exhibited voltammetric behavior very similar to that of the Pt/C catalyst, i.e., hydrogen adsorption/desorption at 0.03–0.4 V, the electrochemical double layer at 0.4–0.6 V and the formation of Pt oxides and their reduction at 0.6–1.2 V vs. RHE.
 Fig. 49  STEM image and EDS elemental maps of the dealloyed Pt–Cu ligament: (a) HAADF-STEM image of the nanoporous structure; (b) mixed STEM-EDS elemental mappings of Pt-L & Cu-K; (c) elemental mapping of Pt-L; and (d) elemental mapping of Cu-K. The composition intensity profile of (e) Pt and (f) Cu were taken from the labeled region in (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 428. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Bimetallic IrCu NPs have been synthesized and used as a core for a Pt monolayer electrocatalyst.429 The CSNs were prepared by dissolving IrCu alloy, which ultimately resulted in a relatively Ir-rich shell. Partial removal of the surface Cu by dealloying greatly increased the mass activity and specific activity of the catalyst. It was suggested that these IrCu particles may have a controlled Pt monolayer, leading to a downshift of the d-band center with respect to the Fermi level. The altered electronic and geometric effects due to the IrCu core were compared to pure Ir enhanced ORR activities and an augmented stability for the PtMLIrCu core–shell electrocatalyst was obtained.
IrNi@IrOx NPs were also prepared in an analogous manner, using IrNix as precursor alloy by selective surface dealloying of Ni and controlled surface oxidation of Ir. These metal-oxide hybrid (M1M2@M1Ox) core@shell NPs were used as electrocatalysts for the OER; a 3-fold higher catalytic activity was observed for the electrochemical OER over benchmark catalysts (IrNi@IrOx metal oxide core–shell). Furthermore, the noble-metal content of the catalysts could be lowered without compromising the catalytic activity of the materials411 and the general synthetic approach could be adapted to make a range of other noble metal NPs for catalysis.
In another recent report, a Au@Co3O4 core–shell nanocatalyst with uniform overall particle size and shell thickness was synthesized by adjusting the amount of oleylamine (OAm) and oleic acid (OA) ligands (Fig. 50). The resulting material showed a very strong synergistic effect between the core and shell. Specifically, the Co3O4 shell in Au@Co3O4 displayed strong binding to oxygen due to its Co atoms, which are known active centers for the OER. The nanocatalyst was shown to catalyze the OER, giving an overpotential value of 0.35 V. The Au@Co3O4 NCs gave a 7 times higher current density in the OER than a Au and Co3O4 NC mixture or Co3O4 NCs alone and 55 times higher than Au NCs alone (Fig. 51). A stable overpotential of only 0.31 V was needed for Au@Co3O4 to achieve a current density of 10 A gcatalyst−1.430
 Fig. 50  (a) Scheme showing the synthetic route for Au@Co3O4 core–shell NCs. (b) TEM image of Au NCs (inset: histogram of the size distribution). (c) TEM image of Au@Co NCs (inset: histogram of the size distribution). (d) TEM image of a two-layer array of the Au@Co NCs (inset: modeled projection of the two-layer NC assembly). (e) HRTEM image of a single Au@Co NC. (f) TEM image of Au@Co3O4 NCs supported on carbon. (g) HRTEM image of a single Au@Co3O4 NC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 430. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 51  (a) iR-corrected polarization curves of Au@Co3O4/C (64 μgAu@Co3O4 cm−2, in which the Au loading was 24 μgAu cm−2 and Co3O4 loading was 40 μgCo3O4 cm−2), (Au + Co3O4)/C (24 μgAu cm−2 and 40 μgCo3O4 cm−2), Co3O4/C (40 μgCo3O4 cm−2), and Au/C (24 μgAu cm−2) catalysts recorded in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and continuous electrode rotating speed of 2500 rpm. (b) Activity of the catalysts at an overpotential of 0.35 V. (c) Tafel plots of catalysts. (d) Chronopotentiometry curves of Au@Co3O4/C and Ir/C (40 μgIr cm−2) under a current density of 10 A gAu@Co3O4−1 or 10 A gIr−1 in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 430. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Wang et al. have investigated the effect of synthetic parameters on a Pd–Pt core–shell catalyst by STEM analysis and their electrocatalytic activity for the ORR;431 effects of the thickness of the Pt shell, lattice mismatch and particle size on the specific and mass activities originating from changes in the effective surface area were discussed. The prepared core–shell structure was characterized at an atomic level using Z-contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy coupled with element-sensitive electron energy loss spectroscopy (Fig. 52a–f). The total number of atoms in the column, the square of their average atomic number (Z2), was determined based on brightness reflecting into enhanced HAADF intensity. Coupling element-sensitive EELS with HAADF images offered an alternate means for determining the thickness and uniformity of the Pt shells (Fig. 52g and h). The enhanced catalytic activity was attributed to the effect of nanosize-induced surface contraction on the facet-dependent oxygen binding energy.
 Fig. 52  (a and b) HAADF-STEM images of the Pd(core)–Pt(shell) NPs obtained for the PdCPt1 and PdCPt4 samples, respectively. NPs overlap on the left side in (a) and at the top in (b). (c and d) Intensity profiles (O) from the scan lines (the left ends are defined to be zero on the x-axes and the intensity at the nearby vacuum set the zero for y-axes) in (a) and (b), and the best fits (black lines), based on the structure models shown in (e) and (f) for Pd particles with 1 and 3–4 Pt surface layers, respectively. (f) Projection of the structure model with 4 Pt layers on the STEM image plane (left) and the arrangements of atoms in the vertical columns along the scan line (right); HAADF and Pd EELS intensity profiles for a PdCPt2 sample. (g) Comparison of HAADF (black) and Pd EELS (red) intensity profiles in a line scan. (h) Two-dimensional mapping of HAADF intensity (left) and Pd EELS signal (right) obtained with 0.27 nm per pixel resolution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 431. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Sun et al. have reported a facile synthetic method for making monodisperse, sub-5 nm core/shell Au/PtCu NPs by reducing platinum- and copper–acetylacetonate in the presence of 5 nm Au NP seeds and 1,2-hexadecanediol (HDD), OAm and OA as capping agent at 200 °C (Fig. 53a–d).432 The Au core provided suitable nucleation sites for CuPt alloy formation. The interaction between the core and shell made these Au/CuPt NPs useful for ORR and methanol oxidation reaction in 0.1 M HClO4 solution. Their specific (mass) reduction and oxidation activities reached 2.72 mA cm−2 (1500 mA mg−1 Pt) at 0.9 V and 0.755 mA cm−2 (441 mA mg−1 Pt) at 0.8 V (vs. RHE), respectively (Fig. 53e and f). The existence of the Au NPs at the core suppressing the Pt usage as well as the stability of the Au/CuPt catalyst for fuel cell reactions was demonstrated. The core/shell design was found to be effective for optimizing the catalysis.
 Fig. 53  TEM images of (a) 5 nm Au NPs and (b) 7.5 nm Au/Cu35Pt65 NPs. (c and d) HRTEM images of a single Au/Cu35Pt65 NP acquired at a different focus condition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 432. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
A one-pot solvothermal method has been used for the preparation of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) supported hollow Ag@Pt core–shell nanospheres (hAg@Pt), using ethylene glycol (EG) as a reducing agent and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as a soft template.433 Control experiments showed that the molar ratios of the Pt–Ag precursors, amount of SDS, presence of RGO and reaction temperature were critical for achieving the best catalytic activity (Fig. 54). The electrocatalytic activity and durability toward ethylene glycol oxidation was enhanced using hAg@Pt–RGO, which could offer a promising potential electrocatalyst for direct alcohol fuel cells. Certain defects in RGO were suggested to be responsible for better adsorption of the OH(ads) species generated from water dissociation during the electrochemical measurements. Compared to metallic nanostructures, hAg@Pt–RGO showed a higher catalytic activity for water dissociation as more OH(ads) could be adsorbed on the catalyst. Meanwhile, the well-dispersed hAg@Pt on the RGO increased the surface area and improved the electrical conductivity of the nanocomposites, providing more active sites available for EG molecules.433
 Fig. 54  (A and B) TEM and (C) HRTEM images of hAg@Pt–RGO. The inset in image (A) shows the corresponding SAED pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 433. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another study, monodispersed core/shell Ni/FePt NPs were prepared by seed-mediated growth and subsequently converted to Ni/Pt NPs. The aforementioned NPs were washed by acetic acid to obtain active Ni/Pt catalysts and employed in the ORR. The specific activity and mass activity of 4.2/0.8 nm core/shell Ni/FePt after an acetic acid wash reached 1.95 mA cm−2 and 490 mA mg−1 Pt at 0.9 V (vs. RHE). These results were much better than those obtained with a benchmark commercial Pt catalyst (0.34 mA cm−2 and 92 mA mg−1 of Pt at 0.9 V). Cu@CuPt core@shell NWs with 1D nanostructure were also synthesized using Cu NWs as templates in organic solvent medium and they were shown to have efficient electrocatalytic activity toward the ORR.434
Well-defined Pt–Pd@Pd core–shell nanospheres (PtPd@Pd NSs) have been synthesized for electrocatalytic oxidation using a simple one-pot solution approach, where N-methylimidazole and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) were used as directing and capping agents without application of any seed, template or organic solvent.435 The ORR mass activity and specific activity over the PtCu NWs were 0.216 A mg−1 and 0.404 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V, respectively, which were found to be 3.1 and 3.7 times larger than values obtained for a commercial Pt/C catalyst, respectively.435 According to theoretical calculations, the electronic effect of the Cu substrate on the Pt monolayer was responsible for the higher activity of PtCu NWs compared to the commercial Pt/C catalyst. Furthermore, the PtCu NWs showed much better durability and stability compared to the commercial Pt/C.
Recently, Yung and co-workers have synthesized Pt nanostructures from submonolayer to monolayer by ion adsorption-in situ electrochemical reduction of Au NPs supported on multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs).436 The coverage of Pt on the Au surface was controlled by varying the concentration of Pt(II) or by repeating the ion adsorption and electrochemical reduction process. The as-prepared Au@Pt/CNTs catalysts displayed coverage-specific electrocatalysis. Au@Pt/CNTs with low Pt coverage were shown to be inactive towards methanol oxidation but oxidized formic acid effectively through a direct pathway with mass specific activity 90 times higher than that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst. Owing to the catalyst's inertness to methanol, it showed high performance in the ORR with high methanol tolerance. However, simply increasing the Pt coverage to above 40% caused the formic acid oxidation process to proceed by both direct and indirect catalytic pathways, resulting in high methanol oxidation activity (Fig. 55). A strong relationship between the surface Pt coverage of the as-prepared Au@Pt/CNTs material and its electrocatalytic activity towards formic acid, methanol and oxygen was reported.
 Fig. 55  (a) Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of Au@Pt/CNTs with 27.9% Pt coverage in 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.025 M HCOOH (black line) and 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M methanol (red line), both recorded at 50 mV s−1. (b) CVs of Au@Pt/CNTs with 57.6% Pt coverage in 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.025 M HCOOH (black line) and 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M methanol (red line), both recorded at 50 mV s−1. (c) LSVs (linear sweep voltammograms) of Au@Pt/CNTs with 27.9% Pt coverage in 0.5 M H2SO4 with and without 0.1 M methanol, 10 mV s−1, 1600 rpm. (d) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) results of Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 with and without 0.1 M methanol, 10 mV s−1, 1600 rpm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 436. Copyright 2013 Springer. 
Kim et al. have reported Pd@Pt core–shell NCs437 synthesized by an aqueous one-pot synthetic method comprising sequential formation of the Pd core followed by the Pt shell as a result of the inherently slower reduction of Pt precursors used in the synthesis. The Pt shell thickness of the Pd@Pt NCs could readily be manipulated by controlling the molar ratio of Pt and Pd precursors in the growth solutions (Fig. 56). The electrocatalytic activity of the prepared Pd@Pt catalyst was tested for MOR activity and shown to be highly dependent on the Pt shell thickness due to different interactions between the Pt and Pd. The Pd1@Pt1 catalyst was found to exhibit the highest catalytic activity.
 Fig. 56  Low (a–c) and high magnification (d–f) HRTEM images of Pd3@Pt1 (a and d), Pd1@Pt1 (b and e), and Pd1@Pt3 (c and f) NCs. Scale bars indicate 5 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 437. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Nogami and co-workers synthesized Pt–Pd core–shell nanoparticles using a modified polyol method and have described the details of their formation and growth mechanism.70,438–440 In their procedures, in order to control the morphology of the Pt-NP core, AgNO3 acts as a structure-modifying agent; ensuing Pt-NP core serve as seeds for Pd-shell materials. Well-characterized materials by HRTEM and EDS have revealed the information regarding the morphology and the size of the core and shell (Fig. 57), which have allowed them to provide the possible growth mechanism. The materials were successfully applied as electrocatalyst in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs). Their electrochemical study revealed that the Pt–Pd nanocatalysts showed better electrocatalytic activity and stabilization than the parent Pt nanocatalysts and the activity is more dependent on the nanostructuring effect than the size of materials. This is one of the examples, where a direct synergistic effect of Pt–Pd nanocatalysts was demonstrated, which aided the materials to achieve higher catalytic activity than their individual components.
 Fig. 57  (a–e) HRTEM images of Pt–Pd core–shell nanoparticles. (f–h) Models of octahedral, cubic and tetrahedral Pt–Pd core–shell nanoparticles. Scale bars: (a–d) 5 nm and (e) 2 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright 2011 Elsevier Ltd. 
The size-dependent activity of Pt-based alloys consisting of Pt and late transition metals (TM) elements in the 3d series, typically Pt3Fe, Pt3Co and Pt3Ni, were studied for the ORR in fuel cells. The electrocatalytic results were supported by DFT calculations. The activity of core–shell Al13@Pt42 catalyst was found to depend on the formation of alloy with Al with the cluster; the covalent Pt–Al bonding effectively activated the Pt atoms at the edge sites, which enabled a high utility to be achieved of up to 70% (Fig. 58).441
 Fig. 58  Size-dependent percentage of atoms on the (111) plane, edge and vertex, represented by R(111), Re and Rv, respectively. Rshell denotes the percentage of atoms on the shell, where Rshell = R(111) + Re + Rv. Atoms in yellow, blue and orange denote Ptv, Pte and Pt(111) atoms. Inset is the structure of Pt561 where Re = R(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
Guo et al. used a seed-mediated growth method to prepare core/shell FePtM/FePt (M = Pd, Au) NWs.442 They adapted a method of controlled decomposition of Fe(CO)5 and reduction of Pt(acac)2 in the presence of 2.5 nm wide FePtM NW seeds and were able to deposit ∼0.3–1.3 nm thick FePt shell on the FePtM core. These FePtM/FePt NWs were used for the ORR and displayed activity that was dependent on shell thickness and core composition as well as significant stability under the ORR conditions.
Generally, bimetallic and multimetallic NPs display better catalytic activity compared to their monometallic counterparts. It is quite tricky to optimize activity on the basis of composition and structure, as metal migration allows the geometric, electronic, and ensemble effects to change over time. Bimetallic nanoparticles endure metal migration under specific reaction conditions, caused by surface energy discrepancy and/or presence of oxidizing or reducing agents in the system. This has gained tremendous interest in nanocatalysis research.322 For instance, in well-designed core–shell structure, the core metal could have lower surface energy than the shell metal, so when sufficient energy provided, the core metal would migrate to the particle surface in order to lower the overall surface energy.
Brodsky et al. have synthesized Au@Pd core–shell octahedral NPs with tunable thicknesses for electrocatalytic applications.443 Under electrochemical conditions, Au metal migrated from the core to shell, and the extent of migration was shown to depend on the type and pH of the electrolyte, as well as the potential range employed (Fig. 59). TEM images revealed Au seeds and thin and thick shell Au–Pd octahedra (Fig. 59b). Additionally, continual lattice fringes from the Au core to Pd shell phases were observed, indicating epitaxial growth (Fig. 59c). Both particle types had well-defined structures and good monodispersity, which enabled a thorough electrochemical evaluation. The Au@Pd core–shell nanocatalyst was employed for its electrocatalytic activity, including metal relocation by cyclic voltammetry and the ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR).443 In the EOR, it was observed that migration was more prevalent in the thin shell particles, at first promoting EOR activity by strain effects, but then inhibiting activity because of a combination of ligand and ensemble effects. The thick octahedral shell prevented relocation but inhibited Au-induced strain effects, resulting in overall low catalytic activity. Migration of metals during catalytic ethanol oxidation was found to alter the particle's surface composition and electronic structure, thus improving the core–shell particles' activity (Fig. 60).
 Fig. 59  (a) Surface metal migration of CSNs. (b) Thick shell Au–Pd nanooctahedra, and (c) HR-TEM image of a thin shell octahedron's Au–Pd interface, showing epitaxial growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 60  (a and b) EOR performed on thin and thick shell Au–Pd core–shell octahedra, respectively, in 1 M KOH and 1 M ethanol. (c and d) Plots of EOR current density vs. cycle number for thin and thick shell octahedra, respectively, for peaks I–IV as labeled in (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Sun and Lu have reported444 the synthesis of monodispersed M/CuPd NPs using palladium- and copper–acetylacetonate in the presence of Ag (or Au) NPs with well-ordered shell thicknesses (0.4, 0.75, and 1.1 nm) and CuPd compositions for use in the ORR (Fig. 61). Catalysts with compositions of Ag/Cu37Pd63 and Au/Cu40Pd60 having 0.75 and 1.1 nm shells, respectively, were found to be more efficient compared to a commercial Pt catalyst, exhibiting their mass activity ∼0.20 A mg−1 of noble metal at −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl (4 M KCl). Additionally, DFT-based calculations showed that Ag/CuPd and Au/CuPd NPs with 0.8 and 1.2 nm thick CuPd2 shells have the optimal surface strain and composition to catalyze the ORR. The obtained catalysts exhibited higher stability than Pt-based catalysts, retaining 77.6% of their activity after 48000 s i–t test (62.9% for the Pt catalyst). Thus, these Ag (Au)/CuPd NPs offer a promising non-Pt alternative for catalyzing the ORR. This investigation focused on tuning the surface strain and composition in the core–shell structure to maximize its ORR performance, thereby identifying an advanced nanocatalyst that exhibited ORR activity superior to that of Pt.
 Fig. 61  Monodisperse M/CuPd NPs for the ORR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 444. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Lin and co-workers have reported near-monolayer thick shell atoms for application as ORR electrocatalysts in the direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC).445 X-ray diffraction results confirmed that the crystal structure experienced compressive strain near the Pt shell region. The shell thickness of Ru@Pt CSNs was determined to be 1.5 atomic layers using a core–shell scattering model in the small-angle X-ray scattering experiment. The power density of a DMFC with Ru core–Pt shell NPs was ∼450% (from 17.1 to 92.8 mW cm−2 mg−1), which was far superior to component Pt NPs, Overall, this proved to be one of the most inexpensive and environmentally benign DMFCs showing exceptional performance (Fig. 62). The inherent strain promoted substantial valence charge donation from Pt to Ru, thereby increasing the (binding energy) Eb by 0.44 eV and thus lowering the valence band (VB) level by 0.31 eV. Such VB amendment increased the surface activity for the electrooxidation of methanol and subsequent chemisorption, initiated carbon monoxide oxidation and enhanced the anodic reaction kinetics of the DMFC system. The electrocatalytic results indicated that the Ptshell/Rucore NPs are promising candidates for the development of high-performance, inexpensive and environmentally benign DMFCs.
 Fig. 62  Scheme for assembly of a DMFC full stack. (a) Devices of flow field, fluid components, frames and membrane electrolyte assembly (MEA). (b) Assembled full stack. (c) Details of MEA component. Reprinted with permission from ref. 445. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The noble and the non-noble metals can be tuned in the alloy precursor, such that both expansive and compressive strain can control the strengthening or weakening of surface bonds, permitting continuous alteration of their catalytic activity. Strasser et al. have investigated the remarkable electrocatalytic activity exhibited by dealloyed Pt–Cu NPs and demonstrated how lattice strain can be employed practically to adjust the catalytic activity of dealloyed bimetallic NPs for the ORR.95 The density of the shell changed the d-band structure of the Pt atoms, thereby weakening the adsorption energy of the reactive intermediates compared to using unstrained Pt, resulting in increased catalytic performance, as confirmed by DFT-based calculations. Energy-dispersive elemental color-map overlays for Pt and Cu were acquired using a probe-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) for the Pt25Cu75 alloy precursor annealed at 800 °C and dealloyed catalyst separately (Fig. 63). A resultant EDS sketch across the diameter of characteristic (∼4 nm) dealloyed NPs confirmed the existence of a Pt-enriched layer (∼0.6 nm) on the surface of the dealloyed particles, (Fig. 63c). Fig. 63d shows that the dealloyed NP catalysts synthesized at higher annealing temperature displayed reduced activity probably because of alterations in the mean particle size. Overall, the strain-related tuning for the ORR may offer a useful route for controlling the activity of other significant electrocatalytic chemical reactions that involve amendment of the adsorption energy of reactive intermediates, including the electrooxidation of small organic molecules (viz. methanol, ethanol and related moieties).95
 Fig. 63  Elemental maps and line profiles of Pt–Cu bimetallic NP precursors and dealloyed active catalysts. High resolution energy dispersive spectroscopy (HR-EDS) elemental maps of a Pt25Cu75 bimetallic NP alloy precursor (a) and the active electrocatalyst obtained after Cu dealloying from the precursor (b). Pt is shown in blue, Cu in red and pink domains indicate well-alloyed Pt–Cu domains. (c) HR-EDS line profile across an individual 4 nm diameter dealloyed Pt–Cu alloy active-catalyst particle. (d) Experimental and predicted relationships between electrocatalytic ORR activity and lattice strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group. 
The deployment of core–shell nanostructures as electrocatalyst in various applications including ORR, HER, EOR, DMFC, etc. displayed many unique properties that are not exhibited by several others catalysts. The design and development of practical electrochemical processes using core–shell nanocatalysts is generally meant to overcome the overpotentials and low current density. Moreover, core–shell nanostructures provide an exceptional way to increase the surface energy of active sites on shell surface and decrease the reactions overpotential.
The integration of various components into a hybrid nanosystem for the optimum and synergistic utilization offers an effective way to design effective electrocatalysts as exemplified by various hybrid strategies to enhance the electrocatalytic property of core–shell nanostructures nanoparticles for different electrocatalytic applications.
6. Perspectives and future prospects
Over the last decade, CSNs have been actively employed in various advanced applications, including solar cells, chemical sensing, catalysis and electrocatalysis. Some of the biggest challenges in this field include ensuring the compatibility between the core and shell and utilizing the unique properties of core and shell individually. In addition, improvement of both core and shell materials for specific applications, particularly in the context of sustainable energy, has also been the focus of recent research efforts.
Various types of cores have been used, including oxides such as silica, ZrO2, iron oxides and also metals especially the noble ones (e.g., Ag, Cu, Pd). Among these options, earth-abundant iron oxide (magnetite and maghemite) or iron supports are considered a superior class for decorating (or being decorated with) various catalytic active shells (Cu, Pt, Ni, etc.),293,434,446–451 mainly because they (i) are inexpensive, (ii) can be prepared easily, and, most importantly, (iii) can be separated magnetically, which is undoubtedly a great advantage from sustainable chemistry viewpoint. Recently, iron (Fe(0))-based CSNs have also been synthesized successfully in a variety of applications,452–454 but maintaining a stable Fe(0) oxidation state has always been a topic of concern which needs to be resolved in a better and more efficient way.
As explained in the review, core–shell nanomaterials are often known to have better catalytic activity due to the presence of different effects (ligand, ensemble and geometric). Hence, it's important to identify the experimental factors that can steer the core–shell materials to have such desirable effects. The understanding of the atomic arrangements and the interactions between core and shell at the interface has always been considered crucial for designing efficient nanocatalysts. The availability of the state-of-the-art instrumental techniques and powerful computational ability has allowed studying them so closely. For instance, high aberration corrected STEM technique and theoretical-calculation-directed studies have elucidated the formation mechanism and explained the stability of Pd–Pt and Pt–Pd bimetallic core–shell materials.455 In another study, the atomic arrangements of Fe/Cu and Fe/Au core–shell nanomaterials, prepared via gas-phase deposition, have been investigated using EXAFS (extended absorption fine structure)456 which revealed the structural complexity of the core materials as a function of shell materials. The synergism between the core and shell is an important factor for several catalytic and electrocatalytic applications; electrocatalytic activity of Pd–Pt alloy and core–shell has been investigated for DMFCs as a function of size, shape, and compositions of the nanocatalyst and the highest activity was discerned for core–shell nanoparticles with monolayer shell when compared to their alloys and mixed NPs.457 Such continuing progress in this area will help attain the optimum conditions to develop core–shell nanocatalysts endowed with higher efficiency.
Another significant challenge for core–shell synthesis is their bulk-scale preparation, as during the scaling up process, they often lose their intrinsic chemical and physical properties, which are fundamentally important for their catalytic behavior. Additionally, most of these core–shells NPs, especially the ones employed in electrocatalysts, are rather expensive, although they are quite effective for the respective applications.458–463 Hence, replacing such noble metal containing CSNs by inexpensive materials for electrocatalysis and related applications is likely to be an active area of future research.464–467
Recently, “surface-protected etching” processes have been successfully employed for the fabrication of several nanostructured systems, including yolk–shell and core satellite nanocatalysts, in which mostly metal nanocatalysts are stabilized by porous shells.330,468–470 Although, the uniformity of the pores can often be a concern and needs thorough investigation, the porosity of the silica and titania shells, which affects the reaction rates of catalytic processes, can be well controlled during such an etching process. An advanced “surface-protected calcination” method may also be ideal for the preparation of anatase titania shells, in which added silica species can stop overgrowth of the titania grains and help maintain its porous structure and structural reliability.
A similar approach may also be used for materials with effective photocatalytic activity. Additional important considerations for these types of core–shell nanostructures are the availability of various metal combinations and prospects for studying the synergies between the different components of the core–shell structures to boost structural stability and catalytic activity/selectivity. This has allowed the development of highly effective and stable photocatalysts featuring multilayer core–shell structures. The etching-based protocol mentioned above is easy to use, convenient in engineering the pore size and generally applicable to many oxide materials.
In terms of the synthesis, recent advances have led to the design and preparation of more complicated structures including movable cores within hollow shells and hollow movable cores within hollow shells and surface metal migration of CSNs.443 The unique design and characteristics of these nanocatalysts offer advantages in different applications, including magnetic photocatalysts, self-assembled photonic crystals with controlled bandgaps, and magnetic toners and inks. Additionally, since they are known to have good encapsulation ability, the targeted release of biomolecules may also be possible.
The emerging areas of flow chemistry, MW- and sonication-assisted techniques have also recently made inroads in the nanocatalysis and electrocatalysis arena.471,472 Use of a flow reactor in conjunction with MW-assisted methods appears to be the best approach for preparing CSNs on a relatively large scale. Also, the fact that the synthesis of CSNs by MW irradiation or sonochemical methods is relatively unexplored owing to their inadequacy in controlling morphology, suggests the future paths based on the development of the novel CSNs involving such technologies.473 Additionally, mechanochemical techniques such as grinding, has not yet been explored for the synthesis of CSNs, probably due to inherent limitations of the technique. Recently, a trimetallic core–shell system, also known as trimetallic NPs or integrated NPs, has been employed for ORR, hydrolytic dehydrogenation, methanol electrooxidation, catalytic hydrolysis of amine borane and other applications.474–476 On this basis, optimal metallic cores or shells could be designed for specific applications. Considering the current state of core–shell nanocatalysts, we are hopeful that better systems than currently available ones will be found that are capable of performing more efficiently and selectively.
7. Concluding remarks
CSNs have emerged as valuable and versatile nanomaterials for catalysis because of their additive or complementarily enhanced properties compared to their one-component counterparts. The strain and ligand effect between the core and surrounding shell can be exploited for tailoring the catalytic activity and selectivity of core–shell nanocatalysts. Recent developments in the preparation of CSNs and their catalytic and electrocatalytic applications, including hydrogenation reactions, oxidation reactions, coupling reactions, cycloaddition reactions, ammonia decomposition, ORR, AOR, etc. have been summarized in this review article. Advanced techniques used for the characterization of core–shell nanostructures have also been briefly illustrated. The key structural factors affecting catalytic activities of nanostructured materials, namely surface charge, surface area, surface functionality, size distributions, structure, etc., have particularly been emphasized. In addition, ways to unravel their structure–catalytic activity relationships and use the outcomes of studies as a guide for further development of new and improved CSNs for catalytic applications have been discussed.
In spite of their widespread application in catalysis, some aspects require further research; the interaction between the core and shell is possibly the most important among them. As an example, there have been some disagreements as to whether the ligand effect contributes to the d-band width or induces a direct charge transfer that affects d-band filling and how the thickness/properties of the shell influences the overall catalytic process.
Moreover, core–shell catalysts have become useful materials for electrocatalysis and have shown enhanced catalytic activity in various electrocatalytic reactions. These catalysts have been made from transition or non-transition metals, and their properties have been varied or tuned according to the elements they are composed of and the synthetic protocols employed to make them. Many of the synthetic methods used to make these materials mainly involved wet chemical approaches, electrodeposition, electrochemical dealloying, solvothermal method, etc. By using one or a few of these synthetic methods, or in combination, and by varying the synthetic conditions, a wide variety of core–shell electrocatalysts with different structure and properties has been prepared. While many of the materials reported and discussed above contain noble metals, making materials entirely from non-noble metals and earth-abundant elements is of increasing interest in order to address sustainability challenges. Many of these materials and the electrochemical transformations they catalyze would also be of great interest for future renewable energy technologies, such as fuel cells, water electrolysers and energy storage devices.
CSNs appear to offer great potential for vapor phase reactions (e.g., hydrogenation, oxidation, and alkylation) involving gas phase reactors as well. Combination of two different metals (bimetallic) for the core and shell has led to the emergence of a new generation of nanocatalyst that can be explored for a number of important chemical reactions. Further, tuning the composition of the two metals would allow selective organic transformations with ease and provide additional tools for chemists to attain the goal of sustainability. These advancements in core–shell nanocatalysis will be expected to provide a solid and stable platform for the development of heterogeneous catalysis, green chemistry, and environmentally benign protocols in the near future.
Disclaimer
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), through its Office of Research and Development, partially funded and collaborated in, the research described herein. It has been subjected to the Agency's administrative review and has been approved for external publication. Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Agency, therefore, no official endorsement should be inferred. Any mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the project LO1305 and the Operational Program Education for Competitiveness – European Social Fund (project CZ.1.07/2.3.00/ 30.0041) of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. TA gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation in the USA (Grant Nos. 1508611 and 1134289) for his group's work on core–shell nanocatalysis.
References
M. C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. B. Bonifacio, R. S. Varma, I. D. Nogueira, N. Bundaleski, C. A. A. Ghumman, O. M. N. D. Teodoro and P. S. Branco, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1226–1231 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3371–3393 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, A. K. Rathi, I. D. Nogueira, R. S. Varma and P. S. Branco, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1895–1899 RSC .
A. H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Georgakilas, A. B. Bourlinos, R. Zboril, T. A. Steriotis, P. Dallas, A. K. Stubos and C. Trapalis, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1766–1768 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pykal, K. Safarova, K. M. Siskova, P. Jurecka, A. B. Bourlinos, R. Zboril and M. Otyepka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11800–11803 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zboril, F. Karlicky, A. B. Bourlinos, T. A. Steriotis, A. K. Stubos, V. Georgakilas, K. Safarova, D. Jancik, C. Trapalis and M. Otyepka, Small, 2010, 6, 2885–2891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 226–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wittstock, V. Zielasek, J. Biener, C. M. Friend and M. Baumer, Science, 2010, 327, 319–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pecher and S. Mecking, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6260–6279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Silva and T. Asefa, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1878–1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Silva, J. Al-Sharab and T. Asefa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7171–7175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Baruwati, V. Polshettiwar and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 926–930 RSC .
B. Baruwati and R. S. Varma, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 1041–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zoppellaro, J. Tucek, R. Herchel, K. Safarova and R. Zboril, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 8144–8150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, S. Furukawa, R. Ohtani, H. Sukegawa, Y. Nemoto, J. Reboul, S. Kitagawa and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 984–988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, S. N. Shelke, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1338–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Duncan, A. V. Biradar, S. Rangan, R. E. Mishler and T. Asefa, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4950–4963 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zaera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2746–2762 RSC .
J. C. Park, A. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim, S. Park, K. H. Park and H. Song, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8484–8486 RSC .
M. Kim, J. C. Park, A. Kim, K. H. Park and H. Song, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6441–6447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Park and H. Song, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 33–49 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, P. Brault, G. Zhi, A. Caillard, G. Jin and X. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24164–24171 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Nadagouda, V. Polshettiwar and R. S. Varma, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2026–2031 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. B. Bonifacio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5522–5551 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. B. Bonifacio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, ChemSusChem, 2013, 7, 24–44 CrossRef PubMed .
B. M. Trost, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 695–705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. S. Varma, in Green Chemical Reactions, ed. P. Tundo and V. Esposito,  2008, pp. 155–171 Search PubMed .
F. Jutz, J. M. Andanson and A. Baiker, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 322–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, R. K. Pandey and R. V. Jayaram, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1113–1125 Search PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. Rathi, I. D. Nogueira, C. A. A. Ghumman, N. Bundaleski, O. M. N. D. Teodoro and P. S. Branco, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kahandal, S. R. Kale, M. B. Gawande, R. Zboril, R. S. Varma and R. V. Jayaram, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6267–6274 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Y. Chen, Y. H. Feng and H. Y. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1636–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Hoener, K. A. Allan, A. J. Bard, A. Campion, M. A. Fox, T. E. Mallouk, S. E. Webber and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 3812–3817 CrossRef CAS .
I. Honma, T. Sano and H. Komiyama, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6692–6695 CrossRef CAS .
H. Amouri, C. Desmarets and J. Moussa, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2015–2041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Lauhon, M. S. Gudiksen, D. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2002, 420, 57–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Park, K. Woo and J.-P. Ahn, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1497 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-L. Jiang, T. Akita, T. Ishida, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1304–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Douvalis, R. Zboril, A. B. Bourlinos, J. Tucek, S. Spyridi and T. Bakas, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1130 CrossRef .
D. Maity, G. Zoppellaro, V. Sedenkova, J. Tucek, K. Safarova, K. Polakova, K. Tomankova, C. Diwoky, R. Stollberger, L. Machala and R. Zboril, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11398–11400 RSC .
X. Pang, L. Zhao, W. Han, X. Xin and Z. Lin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 426–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1044–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kitchin, J. Nørskov, M. Barteau and J. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 156801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cha, N. C. Jeong, S. Song, H.-J. Park, T. C. Thanh Pham, R. Harder, B. Lim, G. Xiong, D. Ahn, I. McNulty, J. Kim, K. B. Yoon, I. K. Robinson and H. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 729–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Adijanto, D. A. Bennett, C. Chen, A. S. Yu, M. Cargnello, P. Fornasiero, R. J. Gorte and J. M. Vohs, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2252–2257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Guo, Y. Dai, D. Geng, Z. Han, D. Li, T. Yang, S. Ma, W. Liu and Z. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 083116 CrossRef .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. Vander Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, S. Peng, W. Wen, P. Sheng and W. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 292–297 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Seo, J. H. Lee, X. Sun, Y. Suzuki, D. Mann, Z. Liu, M. Terashima, P. C. Yang, M. V. McConnell, D. G. Nishimura and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 971–976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Tang, K. Lee and M. Ouyang, Nature, 2010, 466, 91–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Wan, Y. Shan, K. Chen and X. Han, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4892–4898 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. S. Clavero, Z. Huba, K. J. Carroll, E. E. Carpenter, D. Gu and R. A. Lukaszew, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1237–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Peng, K. Sumiyama, T. J. Konno, T. Hihara and S. Yamamuro, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 2093–2100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamamuro, K. Yamamoto, D. L. Peng, T. Hirayama and K. Sumiyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 242510 CrossRef .
R. Katoh, T. Hihara, D. L. Peng and K. Sumiyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 252501 CrossRef .
D. L. Peng, T. Hihara, K. Sumiyama and H. Morikawa, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 3075 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. She, Y. Z. Chen, X. Z. Chen, K. Zhang, Z. Y. Wang and D. L. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2757–2765 RSC .
H. Ow, D. R. Larson, M. Srivastava, B. A. Baird, W. W. Webb and U. Wiesner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 113–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, G. B. Braun, Y. Shi, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, N. O. Reich, D. Zhao and G. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2850–2851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Fredin, Z. Li, M. A. Ratner, M. T. Lanagan and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5946–5953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shah, P. T. Yin, S. Ghoshal and K.-B. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6190–6195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Markova, A. B. Bourlinos, K. Safarova, K. Polakova, J. Tucek, I. Medrik, K. Siskova, J. Petr, M. Krysmann, E. P. Giannelis and R. Zboril, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16219–16223 RSC .
M. M. Maye, J. Luo, L. Han, N. N. Kariuki and C. J. Zhong, Gold Bull., 2003, 36, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Long, Y. Yang, C. Minh Thi, N. V. Minh, Y. Cao and M. Nogami, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 636–676 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Wu, Y.-T. Liu, P.-C. Huang, T.-J. Mark Luo, C.-H. Lee, Y.-W. Yang, T.-C. Wen, T.-Y. Chen and T.-L. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9181–9192 RSC .
J.-H. Lin and V. V. Guliants, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 445–446, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, B. Zhu, M. Yao, S. Wang and S. Zhang, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 1003–1007 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huizhang, Y. Chen, X. Chen, R. Wen, G.-H. Yue and D. L. Peng, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 195604 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-M. Yan, X.-B. Zhang, T. Akita, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5326–5327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, M. Miyauchi, Y. Ishikawa, A. Pyatenko, N. Koshizaki, Y. Li, L. Li, X. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19102–19109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhong and M. M. Maye, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1507–1511 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Zhou, Z. W. Liu, X. S. Du, D. R. G. Mitchell, Y. W. Mai, Y. S. Yan and S. Ringer, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Peng, L. Xu, L. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Wu and P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14219–14227 RSC .
Z. Zhang, H. Che, Y. Wang, J. Gao, Y. Ping, Z. Zhong and F. Su, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 211, 421–431 CrossRef .
T.-Y. Chen, T.-J. M. Luo, Y.-W. Yang, Y.-C. Wei, K.-W. Wang, T.-L. Lin, T.-C. Wen and C. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16969–16978 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tan, C. Du, G. Yin, P. Zuo, X. Cheng and M. Chen, J. Catal., 2012, 295, 217–222 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Son, Y. Jang, J. Park, H. B. Na, H. M. Park, H. J. Yun, J. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, H. L. Xin, H. Wang, Y. Yu, E. Rus, D. A. Muller, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2274–2281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, A. V. Ruban and M. Mavrikakis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4717–4725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, in Advances in Catalysis, ed. H. K. Bruce and C. Gates, Academic Press,  2000, vol. 45, pp. 71–129 Search PubMed .
F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, Q. Wu, A. D. Jensen, B. Temel, J.-D. Grunwaldt and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2012, 293, 51–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mavrikakis, B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2819–2822 CrossRef .
B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 7413–7421 CrossRef .
A. Ruban, B. Hammer, P. Stoltze, H. L. Skriver and J. K. Nørskov, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1997, 115, 421–429 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Nørskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 156801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang and G. Henkelman, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 194504 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, D. M. Do, G. K. Chuah and S. Jaenicke, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tedsree, T. Li, S. Jones, C. W. A. Chan, K. M. K. Yu, P. A. J. Bagot, E. A. Marquis, G. D. W. Smith and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 302–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Strasser, S. Koh, T. Anniyev, J. Greeley, K. More, C. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Kaya, D. Nordlund, H. Ogasawara, M. F. Toney and A. Nilsson, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6280–6281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Guo, Y. Z. Chen, X. Z. Chen, R. T. Wen, G. H. Yue and D. L. Peng, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 195604 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, H. Guo, A. K. Rathi, P. S. Branco, Y. Chen, R. S. Varma and D.-L. Peng, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1050–1054 RSC .
T. M. Ruhland, J. R. V. Lang, H. G. Alt and A. H. E. Müller, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 2146–2153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schätz, O. Reiser and W. J. Stark, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8950–8967 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Hou and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8698–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Tan and R. N. Grass, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4297–4299 RSC .
T. Zhou, M. Lu, Z. Zhang, H. Gong, W. S. Chin and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 403–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, T. Cui, J. Wu, Q. Chen, X. Yin, F. Cui and K. Sun, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2287–2295 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 1816–1824 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Ruhland, J. R. V. Lang, H. G. Alt and A. H. E. Mueller, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 2146–2153 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Kalidindi, U. Sanyal and B. R. Jagirdar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 5870–5874 RSC .
L. Y. Wang, H. Y. Park, S. I. I. Lim, M. J. Schadt, D. Mott, J. Luo, X. Wang and C. J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2629–2635 RSC .
X. Zhang and Z. Su, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4574–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Wei, Y. Yu, J. Song, X. Wang, A. Li, X.-W. Liu and W.-Q. Deng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1670–1672 RSC .
H.-L. Jiang, T. Akita and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10999–11001 RSC .
J. Wang, D. Dong-Minh, G.-K. Chuah and S. Jaenicke, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alayoglu and B. Eichhorn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17479–17486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Wang, H. Inada, L. Wu, Y. Zhu, Y. Choi, P. Liu, W.-P. Zhou and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17298–17302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cargnello, M. Grzelczak, B. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, Z. Syrgiannis, K. Bakhmutsky, V. La Parola, L. M. Liz-Marzan, R. J. Gorte, M. Prato and P. Fornasiero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11760–11766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, S. Wu, S. Jungwirth, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Wang and Y. Li, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 295402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Y.-L. Qin, X. Liu and X.-B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12468–12470 RSC .
X. Guo, Q. Zhang, Y. H. Sun, Q. Zhao and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1165–1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Feng and H. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1636–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mitsudome and K. Kaneda, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1681–1691 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lin and V. V. Guliants, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 445, 187–194 CrossRef .
R. Ghosh Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 2373–2433 CrossRef PubMed .
D. X. Li, Q. He and J. B. Li, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 149, 28–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zou, S. S. Wu and J. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3893–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sanchez, B. Julian, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559–3592 RSC .
W. Schartl, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1899–1908 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hao, R. J. Xing, Z. C. Xu, Y. L. Hou, S. Gao and S. H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2729–2742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Protiere and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Schartl, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 829–843 RSC .
F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 11–22 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mitsudome and K. Kaneda, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1681–1691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Feng and H. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1636–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 142–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Feng, Z. J. Fang, J. M. Yang, B. H. Zheng and Y. H. Jiang, Carbohydr. Res., 2011, 346, 352–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kumar, V. B. Kumar and P. Paik, J. Nanopart., 2013, 2013, 24 Search PubMed .
R. Silva, D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7823–7826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoon and A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9410–9416 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Z. Xiao, A. R. Votruba, C. Vilos and O. C. Farokhzad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7027–7031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, R. Mao, D. Tian, W. Wang, D. Zhao, X. Yang and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3652–3658 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. Chen, D. Zeng, Y. Tian, F. Chen, J. Feng and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6001–6013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Stöber, A. Fink and E. Bohn, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62–69 CrossRef .
D. Channei, B. Inceesungvorn, N. Wetchakun and S. Phanichphant, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 7756–7762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hoshi, W. Hao, Y. Fujita, A. Funayama, Y. Miyauchi, K. Hashimoto, K. Miyamoto, R. Iwasaki, Y. Sato, T. Kobayashi, H. Miyamoto, S. Yoshida, T. Mori, H. Kanagawa, E. Katsuyama, A. Fujie, K. Kitagawa, K. I. Nakayama, T. Kawamoto, M. Sano, K. Fukuda, I. Ohsawa, S. Ohta, H. Morioka, M. Matsumoto, K. Chiba, Y. Toyama and T. Miyamoto, J. Bone Miner. Res., 2012, 27, 2015–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, Y. Zhao, H. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Li, S. He, Y. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1525–1534 RSC .
M. Ristov, G. J. Sinadinovski and I. Grozdanov, Thin Solids Films, 1985, 123, 63 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Nicolau, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1985, 22/23, 1061 CrossRef .
V. P. Tolstoy, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2006, 75, 161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Su, H. Xu, S. Gao, J. D. Dixon, Z. P. Aguilar, A. Y. Wang, J. Xu and J. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 625–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, A. Du, F. Jin, Z. Wang and X. Liu, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2013, 340, 70–75 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Chen, P. Gao, R.-X. Wang, C.-L. Zhu, L.-J. Wang, M.-S. Cao and H.-B. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10061–10064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5819–5825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cha, N. C. Jeong, S. Song, H.-J. Park, T. C. Thanh Pham, R. Harder, B. Lim, G. Xiong, D. Ahn, I. McNulty, J. Kim, K. B. Yoon, I. K. Robinson and H. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 729–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, V. Venkatesh, D. B. Shinde, S. Kumari, A. Halder, S. Verma and R. Banerjee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1979–1988 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, D. Tian, L. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Guo and X. Yang, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 201, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon and A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9410–9416 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, T. Tan, P. Qi, S. Wang, S. Bian, X. Li, Y. An and Z. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 3499–3503 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tan, S. Wang, S. Bian and X. Li, Adv. Mater. Res., 2009, 79–82, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandren and B. Ohtani, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 246, 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandren and B. Ohtani, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 677–679 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan and F. Du, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 2126–2128 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zhang, X. Yi, J. Zhang, Z. Xie, J. Kang and L. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 10244–10246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao, Y. Huang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9827–9831 RSC .
B. Yao, M. Liu, Z. Ma and C. Wang, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 148–149, 1331–1338 CAS .
K. Zhang, D. Q. Zhang, J. Liu, K. X. Ren, H. Luo, Y. J. Peng, G. S. Li and X. B. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 700–707 RSC .
D. Han, P. Xu, X. Jing, J. Wang, D. Song, J. Liu and M. Zhang, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 203, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guan, X. Xia, N. Meng, Z. Zeng, X. Cao, C. Soci, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9085–9090 Search PubMed .
R. Qiao, X. L. Zhang, R. Qiu, J. C. Kim and Y. S. Kang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1886–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao and T. Matsoukas, J. Nanopart. Res., 2004, 6, 447–455 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xie, Y. Zhao, X. Chen, H. Liu, D. G. Evans and W. Yang, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 6588–6594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Cao, Y.-J. Zhu, G.-F. Cheng and Y.-H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2010, 71, 1680–1683 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Cao and Y.-J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12149–12156 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, S. Zhang, F. Ren, X. Xiao, J. Zhou and C. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4676–4684 RSC .
N. S. Kim and J.-D. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2012, 18, 1721–1729 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Lai, H. Wang, D. Mao, C. Xing and D. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2792–2797 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ye, H. Liu, J. Yang, H. Cao and J. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 12309–12316 RSC .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, D. Han, Q. Zhang and L. Niu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 105609 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Song, D. H. Anjum, R. Sougrat, M. N. Hedhili and N. M. Khashab, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 22, 25003–25010 RSC .
Y. Ding, B. Jin, G. Gu and X.-H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9141–9146 RSC .
Y. Ding and X.-H. Xia, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 1512–1517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4342–4345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8864–8873 RSC   and references therein.
X. Li, P. Meduri, X. Chen, W. Qi, M. H. Engelhard, W. Xu, F. Ding, J. Xiao, W. Wang, C. Wang, J.-G. Zhang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11014–11017 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. Wang, K. Tang and J. Maier, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2647–2650 RSC .
T. J. Longson, R. Bhowmick, C. Gu and B. A. Cruden, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12742–12750 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, R. Mao, D. Tian, W. Wang, D. Zhao, X. Yang and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3652–3658 RSC .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. Wang, A. Dhanabalan, A. P. A. van and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6485–6489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen and K. Sieradzki, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Weda, B. Trzebicka, A. Dworak and C. B. Tsvetanov, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1467–1474 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Shi, Z.-Y. Xiao, A. R. Votruba, C. Vilos and O. C. Farokhzad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7027–7031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, L. Chen, B. Huang, F. Bai and X. Yang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3556–3563 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sasidharan and K. Nakashima, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 12, 1102–1106 Search PubMed .
X. He, X. Ge, H. Liu, M. Wang and Z. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5891–5892 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Yang, P. W. May and L. Yin, Sequential nucleation and growth of complex nanostructures by a two-step strategy, in Nanotechnology Nanofabrication, Patterning and Self Assembly, ed. C. J. Dixon and O. W. Curtines, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., New York, USA,  2010, ch. 12, pp. 409–433 Search PubMed .
J. Prasek, J. Drbohlavova, J. Chomoucka, J. Hubalek, O. Jasek, V. Adam and R. Kizek, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15872–15884 RSC .
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Terrones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2003, 33, 419–501 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782–5816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Meyer, Recl. Trav. Chim. Pays-Bas, 1992, 111, 413 CrossRef .
A. A. Popov, S. Yang and L. Dunsch, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5989–6113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Zhang, B. D. Chen, Y. L. Wang, F. F. Guo, Z. Q. Li and D. L. Shi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 426–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, H. Choi, C. Nahm, C. Kim, J. I. Kim, W. Lee, S. Kang, B. Lee, T. Hwang, H. H. Park and B. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 183901 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, B. Zhang, M. Gu, S. Huang, X. Liu, B. Liu and C. Ni, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 1548–1553 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bomm, A. Buechtemann, A. J. Chatten, R. Bose, D. J. Farrell, N. L. A. Chan, Y. Xiao, L. H. Slooff, T. Meyer, A. Meyer, S. W. G. J. H. M. van Sark and R. Koole, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2087–2094 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Li, A. Wang, W. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12567–12575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, H. Shen, C. Zhou, H. Yuan, C. Liu, H. Wang, L. Ma and L. S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20876–20881 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, H. Yuan, J. Z. Niu, S. Xu, C. Zhou, L. Ma and L. S. Li, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 375602 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shen, C. Zhou, S. S. Xu, C. Yu, H. Wang, X. Chen and L. S. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6046–6053 RSC .
H. Shen, H. Wang, C. Zhou, J. Z. Niu, H. Yuan, L. Ma and L. S. Li, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 9180–9188 RSC .
J. Y. Woo, S. K. Tripathy, K. Kim and C.-S. Han, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 063105 CrossRef .
P.-T. Jing, X. Yuan, W.-Y. Ji, M. Ikezawa, X.-Y. Liu, L.-G. Zhang, J.-L. Zhao and Y. Masumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 093106 CrossRef .
P. Jing, J. Zheng, M. Ikezawa, X. Liu, S. Lv, X. Kong, J. Zhao and Y. Masumoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13545–13550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Werder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, T. T. Han, H. Agren, L. Lin, P. Chen, Y. Liu, G. Q. Tang, J. Wu, Y. Yue and N. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 173102 CrossRef .
J. Lim, S. Jun, E. Jang, H. Baik, H. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1927–1932 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xie, U. Kolb, J. Li, T. Basche and A. Mews, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7480–7488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. McLaurin, V. A. Vlaskin and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14978–14980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cros-Gagneux, F. Delpech, C. Nayral, A. Cornejo, Y. Coppel and B. Chaudret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18147–18157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tateno, G. Zhang, H. Gotoh and T. Sogawa, J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 890607 Search PubMed .
X. Li, D. Shen, J. Yang, C. Yao, R. Che, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 25, 106–112 CrossRef .
Y. Masumoto, K. Goto, S. Tomimoto, P. Mohan, J. Motohisa and T. Fukui, J. Lumin., 2013, 133, 135–137 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nakai, M. Yoshimura, K. Tomioka and T. Fukui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 52, 055002 CrossRef .
M. Yoshimura, E. Nakai, K. Tomioka and T. Fukui, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 052301 CrossRef .
Y. Masumoto, Y. Hirata, P. Mohan, J. Motohisa and T. Fukui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 211902 CrossRef .
K. Tomioka, J. Motohisa, S. Hara, K. Hiruma and T. Fukui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1639–1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Masumoto, K. Goto, S. Yoshida, Y. Sakuma, P. Mohan, J. Motohisa and T. Fukui, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 075313 CrossRef .
P. Mohan, J. Motohisa and T. Fukui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 133105 CrossRef .
K. Tomioka, M. Yoshimura and T. Fukui, Nature, 2012, 488, 189–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mariani, Z. Zhou, A. Scofield and D. L. Huffaker, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1632–1637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gutsche, A. Lysov, D. Braam, I. Regolin, G. Keller, Z.-A. Li, M. Geller, M. Spasova, W. Prost and F.-J. Tegude, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Li, C.-Y. Wen and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2287–2291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ko, Z. Zhang, Y.-L. Chueh, E. Saiz and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ruzmetov, V. P. Oleshko, P. M. Haney, H. J. Lezec, K. Karki, K. H. Baloch, A. K. Agrawal, A. V. Davydov, S. Krylyuk, Y. Liu, J. Y. Huang, M. Tanase, J. Cumings and A. A. Talin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 505–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Dayeh, A. V. Gin and S. T. Picraux, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 163112 CrossRef .
S. A. Dayeh, N. H. Mack, J.-Y. Huang and S. T. Picraux, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 023102 CrossRef .
M. Ben-Ishai and F. Patolsky, Adv. Mater., 2009, 22, 902–906 CrossRef PubMed .
I. M. Ben and F. Patolsky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8699–8702 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Kempa, J. F. Cahoon, S.-K. Kim, R. W. Day, D. C. Bell, H.-G. Park and C. M. Lieber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 1407–1412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Shen, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang, J. Zong and C. Z. Li, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 690–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Stetciura, A. V. Markin, A. N. Ponomarev, A. V. Yakimansky, T. S. Demina, C. Grandfils, D. V. Volodkin and D. A. Gorin, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4140–4147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Peng, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Ji, H. V. Demir, C. H. A. Huan, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6250–6259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Catal, D. Brinzei, Y. Prado, A. Gloter, O. Stephan, G. Rogez and T. Mallah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 183–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dia, L. Lisnard, Y. Prado, A. Gloter, O. Stephan, F. Brisset, H. Hafez, Z. Saad, C. Mathoniere, L. Catala and T. Mallah, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 10264–10274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Catala, D. Brinzei, Y. Prado, A. Gloter, O. Stéphan, G. Rogez and T. Mallah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 183–187 CrossRef PubMed .
K. X. Yao and H. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1373–1385 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, L.-D. Sun, W. Feng, H. Chen, M. H. Yeung, J. Wang and C.-H. Yan, Small, 2010, 6, 2566–2575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, V. Salgueirino-Maceira, F. Garcia-Santamaria and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 471–473 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Z. L. Wang, P. Zhan, J. H. Zhang, W. Y. Zhang, H. T. Wang and N. B. Ming, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3042–3046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Knauer, A. Thete, S. Li, H. Romanus, A. Csaki, W. Fritzsche and J. M. Koehler, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 166, 1164–1169 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ray, Y.-E. K. Lee, G. Kim and R. Kopelman, Small, 2012, 8, 2213–2221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Quadir, M. R. Radowski, F. Kratz, K. Licha, P. Hauff and R. Haag, J. Controlled Release, 2008, 132, 289–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuechler, M. R. Radowski, T. Blaschke, M. Dathe, J. Plendl, R. Haag, M. Schaefer-Korting and K. D. Kramer, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2009, 71, 243–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Keilitz, M. R. Radowski, J.-D. Marty, R. Haag, F. Gauffre and C. Mingotaud, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2423–2425 CrossRef CAS .
C. Treiber, Q. M. Abdul, P. Voigt, M. Radowski, S. Xu, L.-M. Munter, T. A. Bayer, M. Schaefer, R. Haag and G. Multhaup, Biochemistry, 2009, 48, 4273–4284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saliba, C. V. Serrano, J. Keilitz, M. L. Kahn, C. Mingotaud, R. Haag and J. D. Marty, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6301–6309 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schwarze, J. Keilitz, S. Nowag, R. Y. Parapat, R. Haag and R. Schomacker, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6511–6518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fleige, B. Ziem, M. Grabolle, R. Haag and U. Resch-Genger, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9452–9459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Keilitz, M. Schwarze, S. Nowag, R. Schomaecker and R. Haag, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 863–870 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nowag, X.-S. Wang, J. Keilitz, A. Thomas and R. Haag, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 807–811 CrossRef CAS .
J. Keilitz, S. Nowag, J.-D. Marty and R. Haag, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2010, 352, 1503–1511 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nagae and T. Tsukamoto, Chromatography, 2013, 34, 41–47 CAS .
K. Lomsadze, G. Jibuti, T. Farkas and B. Chankvetadze, J. Chromatogr. A, 2012, 1234, 50–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fanali, G. D'Orazio, T. Farkas and B. Chankvetadze, J. Chromatogr. A, 2012, 1269, 136–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gritti, N. Tanaka and G. Guiochon, J. Chromatogr. A, 2012, 1236, 28–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D'Orazio, S. Rocchi and S. Fanali, J. Chromatogr. A, 2012, 1255, 277–285 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Biradar, A. A. Biradar and T. Asefa, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14408–14418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Shi and T. Asefa, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9455–9462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das and T. Asefa, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 587–594 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Yu, S. B. Yoon, Y. J. Lee and K. B. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7040–7045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Yu, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2005, 10, 341–346 CAS .
J.-R. Song, L.-X. Wen, L. Shao and J.-F. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 253, 2678–2684 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Chen, P. Gao, C. L. Zhu, R. X. Wang, L. J. Wang, M. S. Cao and X. Y. Fang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 054303 CrossRef .
L.-H. Qian, Y. Ding, T. Fujita and M.-W. Chen, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4426–4429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Du, Y. Chen, C. Zhai, H. Zhang and D. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4744–4750 RSC .
X. Li, A. Dhanabalan, K. Bechtold and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, L. Gao and S. Mathur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21730–21735 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kuai, B. Geng, S. Wang and Y. Sang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 9423–9429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Song, J. Du, J. Zhao, S. Feng, G. Du and Z. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1524–1530 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gulfam, J.-M. Lee, J.-E. Kim, D.-W. Lim, E.-K. Lee and B.-G. Chung, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10993–10999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, A. Dhanabalan, L. Gu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 238–244 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hasan, S. B. Newcomb and K. M. Razeeb, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F203–F209 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, X.-B. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Wu, Z. G. Li, X. H. Huang and Y. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2012, 224, 1–5 CrossRef .
D. Lu, L. Yang, Z. Tian, L. Wang and J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2783–2789 RSC .
A. Abbaspourrad, N. J. Carroll, S.-H. Kim and D. A. Weitz, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3215–3221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Van Tendeloo, S. Bals, S. Van Aert, J. Verbeeck and D. Van Dyck, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5655–5675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, K. Deng, L. He, Y. Liu, G. Li, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1738–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. Li, T. Wang, G. Wu, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10647–10649 RSC .
P. Shen, H. T. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Y. Xin, L. F. Fei, X. G. Luo, R. Z. Ma and S. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3456–3464 RSC .
S. Prabhudev, M. Bugnet, C. Bock and G. A. Botton, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6103–6110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Chen, Q. Xu, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Small, 2015, 11, 71–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ke, L. Wang and J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1201–1208 RSC .
D. Llamosa, M. Ruano, L. Martinez, A. Mayoral, E. Roman, M. Garcia-Hernandez and Y. Huttel, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13483–13486 RSC .
J. Li, Z. Huang, M. Yang, L. Tan, X. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Tang, Q. Ma and G. Wang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 2949–2955 RSC .
H.-L. Jiang, T. Akita, T. Ishida, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1304–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. G. Silva, E. Teixeira-Neto, N. López and L. M. Rossi, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, K. Tao, C. Xiong and S. Zhou, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 405–414 Search PubMed .
Y.-Z. Chen, Q. Xu, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Small, 2015, 11, 70 CrossRef .

          G. W. Kabalka and R. S. Varma, in Comprehensive Organic Synthesis, ed. B. M. Trost and I. Fleming, Pergamon Press, Oxford,  1991, vol. 1998, p. 1363 Search PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. K. Rathi, P. S. Branco, I. D. Nogueira, A. Velhinho, J. J. Shrikhande, U. U. Indulkar, R. V. Jayaram, C. A. A. Ghumman, N. Bundaleski and O. M. N. D. Teodoro, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 12628–12632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. K. Rathi, P. S. Branco, T. M. Potewar, A. Velhinho, I. D. Nogueira, A. Tolstogouzov, C. A. A. Ghumman and O. M. N. D. Teodoro, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3611–3617 RSC .
T. Ikariya and A. J. Blacker, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1300–1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Morris, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2282–2291 RSC .
V. Polshettiwar, B. Baruwati and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 127–131 RSC .
I. N. Michaelides and D. J. Dixon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 806–808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yan, T. Jin, Y. Ishikawa, T. Minato, T. Fujita, L. Y. Chen, M. Bao, N. Asao, M. W. Chen and Y. Yamamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17536–17542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. U. Blaser, C. Malan, B. Pugin, F. Spindler, H. Steiner and M. Studer, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2003, 345, 103–151 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Jiang, Y. F. Zhou, Y. L. Zhang, S. H. Xuan and X. L. Gong, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4594–4601 RSC .
R. Hudson, A. Riviere, C. M. Cirtiu, K. L. Luska and A. Moores, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3360–3362 RSC .
Y. Han, D. Peng, Z. Xu, H. Wan, S. Zheng and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8350–8352 RSC .
P. Zhang, Y. Hu, B. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Zhou, H. Yu, X. Zhang, L. Chen, B. Eichhorn and S. Zhou, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1335–1343 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mitsudome, Y. Mikami, M. Matoba, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 136–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mitsudome, M. Matoba, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5255–5258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. L. Burwell, Chem. Rev., 1957, 57, 895–934 CrossRef .
T. Mitsudome, Y. Takahashi, S. Ichikawa, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1481–1485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takahashi, N. Hashimoto, T. Hara, S. Shimazu, T. Mitsudome, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 405–407 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. W. Johnstone, A. H. Wilby and I. D. Entwistle, Chem. Rev., 1985, 85, 129–170 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Zhang, R. H. Jin, H. Yao, S. Tang, J. L. Zhuang, G. H. Liu and H. X. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7874–7876 RSC .
S. Garcia, R. M. Anderson, H. Celio, N. Dahal, A. Dolocan, J. P. Zhou and S. M. Humphrey, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4241–4243 RSC .
N. Dahal, S. García, J. Zhou and S. M. Humphrey, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9433–9446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. V. Biradar and T. Asefa, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 132–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tao, M. E. Grass, Y. Zhang, D. R. Butcher, J. R. Renzas, Z. Liu, J. Y. Chung, B. S. Mun, M. Salmeron and G. A. Somorjai, Science, 2008, 322, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Kim, H. Lee, H.-J. Kim and T.-H. Lim, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2085–2087 RSC .
X.-C. Huang, Y.-Y. Lin, J.-P. Zhang and X.-M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1557–1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hayakawa, T. Yoshimura and K. Esumi, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 5517–5521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Mei, M. Drechsler and M. Ballauff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 813–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jana, S. K. Ghosh, S. Nath, S. Pande, S. Praharaj, S. Panigrahi, S. Basu, T. Endo and T. Pal, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 313, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. C. Park and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1523–1528 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Ge and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2867–2871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1692–1701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. O'Mahony, A. Ford and A. R. Maguire, J. Sulfur Chem., 2013, 34, 301–341 CrossRef .
K. Kaczorowska, Z. Kolarska, K. Mitka and P. Kowalski, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 8315–8327 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-A. Qiao, P. Zhang, S.-H. Chai, M. Chi, G. M. Veith, N. C. Gallego, M. Kidder and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11260–11263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shokouhimehr, K.-Y. Shin, J. S. Lee, M. J. Hackett, S. W. Jun, M. H. Oh, J. Jang and T. Hyeon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7593–7599 RSC .
S. Okada, K. Mori, T. Kamegawa, M. Che and H. Yamashita, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9047–9051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Diaz, J. Arbiol, A. Cirera, F. Sanz, F. Peiro, A. Cornet and J. R. Morante, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4362–4366 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Zhong, J. S. Hu, Z. M. Cui, L. J. Wan and W. G. Song, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4557–4562 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Z. M. Cui, F. Niu, L. Jiang and W. G. Song, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6524–6526 RSC .
M. Barmatova, I. Ivanchikova, O. Kholdeeva, A. Shmakov, V. Zaikovskii and M. Mel'gunov, Catal. Lett., 2009, 127, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mi, X. Chen, Y. Ma, S. Yin, F. Yuan and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12804–12806 RSC .
H. Deng, X. L. Li, Q. Peng, X. Wang, J. P. Chen and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2782–2785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fan, D. Pan and H. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 9009–9018 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mitsudome, A. Noujima, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 1890–1896 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Henning, J. Watt, P. J. Miedziak, S. Cheong, M. Santonastaso, M. Song, Y. Takeda, A. I. Kirkland, S. H. Taylor and R. D. Tilley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1477–1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Enache, J. K. Edwards, P. Landon, B. Solsona-Espriu, A. F. Carley, A. A. Herzing, M. Watanabe, C. J. Kiely, D. W. Knight and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2006, 311, 362–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Qi, G. Li, F. Zheng, S. Li and Z. Tang, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 694–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-F. Luo, P. Fang, M. He and Y.-L. Xie, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 239, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Guo, Q. Fu, Y. X. Ning, M. M. Wei, M. R. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Jiang and X. H. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12350–12353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Wu, Z. Y. Lim, C. Zhou, W. G. Wang, S. H. Zhou, H. F. Yin and Y. J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3215–3217 RSC .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710–712 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Iliopoulou, Curr. Org. Synth., 2010, 7, 587–598 CrossRef CAS .
A. Suzuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6722–6737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Suzuki and Y. Yamamoto, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 894–901 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Wegner and M. Auzias, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8236–8247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arpad, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 2251–2320 CrossRef PubMed .
P.-P. Fang, A. Jutand, Z.-Q. Tian and C. Amatore, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12184–12188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Suzuki, J. Organomet. Chem., 1999, 576, 147–168 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alonso, I. P. Beletskaya and M. Yus, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 3047–3101 CrossRef CAS .
O. Metin, S. F. Ho, C. Alp, H. Can, M. N. Mankin, M. S. Gultekin, M. Chi and S. Sun, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Yang, G. Li and Z. C. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6639–6648 RSC .
R. Chinchilla and C. Najera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5084–5121 RSC .
L. Zhang and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3257–3267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sui, W. Fu, Y. Zeng, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Li, M. Li and G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4282–4285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kou, A. Saha, C. Bennett-Stamper and R. S. Varma, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5862–5864 RSC .

          F. Haber, Kaiserliches Patentamt, DE235421,  1911 Search PubMed .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Yin, B. Q. Xu, X. P. Zhou and C. T. Au, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 277, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. Feyen, C. Weidenthaler, R. Guettel, K. Schlichte, U. Holle, A.-H. Lu and F. Schueth, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 598–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, C. Y. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Yu and W. G. Song, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10541–10543 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Y. Jeong, M. Imura, L. Wang, L. Radhakrishnan, N. Fujita, T. Castle, O. Terasaki and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14526–14529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, S. Ishihara, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10819–10821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16762–16765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Nemoto and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9674–9677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bakhmutsky, N. L. Wieder, M. Cargnello, B. Galloway, P. Fornasiero and R. J. Gorte, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 140–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cargnello, N. L. Wieder, T. Montini, R. J. Gorte and P. Fornasiero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1402–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Otera, Esterification: Methods, Reaction and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2003 Search PubMed .
K. Suzuki, T. Yamaguchi, K. Matsushita, C. Iitsuka, J. Miura, T. Akaogi and H. Ishida, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1845–1849 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sato, M. Aoki and R. Noyori, Science, 1998, 281, 1646–1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellan, J. C. J. Bart and S. Cavallaro, Catal. Today, 1991, 9, 237–254 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Patra, A. Dutta and A. Bhaumik, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 12388–12395 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, K. M. Choi, J. H. Choi, D. K. Lee, H. J. Jeon, H. Y. Jeong and J. K. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11002–11004 RSC .
J. Eastoe, M. J. Hollamby and L. Hudson, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 128, 5–15 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Heshmatpour, R. Abazari and S. Balalaie, Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 3001–3011 CrossRef CAS .
N. Toshima and T. Yonezawa, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 1179–1201 RSC .
M. Aizawa and J. M. Buriak, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5090–5101 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. S. Badawal, S. S. Giddey, C. Munnings, A. I. Bhatt and T. Hollenkamp, Front. Chem., 2014 DOI:10.3389/fchem.2014.00079 .
R. M. Crooks, M. Zhao, L. Sun, V. Chechik and L. K. Yeung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 34, 181–190 CrossRef .
S. Mann, S. L. Burkett, S. A. Davis, C. E. Fowler, N. H. Mendelson, S. D. Sims, D. Walsh and N. T. Whilton, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2300–2310 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chandra, D. S. Doke, S. B. Umbarkar and A. V. Biradar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19060–19066 RSC .
Z. Peng and H. Yang, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 143–164 CrossRef CAS .
W. Niu and G. Xu, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 265–285 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, Q. Wang, D. Saxner, N. A. Deskins, D. Su, J. E. Krzanowski, A. I. Frenkel and X. Teng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15172–15183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ataee-Esfahani, L. Wang, Y. Nemoto and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6310–6318 CrossRef CAS .
R. Choi, S.-I. Choi, C. H. Choi, K. M. Nam, S. I. Woo, J. T. Park and S. W. Han, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8190–8198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Hwang, S. J. Yoo, J. Shin, Y.-H. Cho, J. H. Jang, E. Cho, Y.-E. Sung, S. W. Nam, T.-H. Lim, S.-C. Lee and S.-K. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1309 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kang, L. Qi, M. Li, R. E. Diaz, D. Su, R. R. Adzic, E. Stach, J. Li and C. B. Murray, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2818–2825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sasaki, H. Naohara, Y. Cai, Y. M. Choi, P. Liu, M. B. Vukmirovic, J. X. Wang and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8602–8607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. T. Trinh, J. Yang, J. Y. Lee and M. Saeys, J. Catal., 2012, 291, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. L. Xin, R. Hovden, H. Wang, Y. Yu, D. A. Muller, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 81–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, H. L. Xin, H. Wang, Y. Yu, E. Rus, D. A. Muller, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2274–2281 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2674–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Beard, D. Borrelli, A. M. Cramer, D. Blom, J. W. Van Zee and J. R. Monnier, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2841–2853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. E. Hu, Q. Wang, K. Gaskell, A. I. Frenkel, G. S. Jackson and B. Eichhorn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6924–6925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, G. S. Jackson and B. W. Eichhorn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3173–3176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, L. Wang, D. Mott, P. N. Njoki, Y. Lin, T. He, Z. Xu, B. N. Wanjana, I. I. S. Lim and C.-J. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4342–4347 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mani, R. Srivastava and P. Strasser, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2770–2778 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, F. H. B. Lima, M. H. Shao, K. Sasaki, J. X. Wang, J. Hanson and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22701–22704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. An, Q. Zhang, S. Alayoglu, N. Musselwhite, J.-Y. Shin and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4907–4912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Nong, L. Gan, E. Willinger, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2955–2963 RSC .
H. N. Nong, H.-S. Oh, T. Reier, E. Willinger, M.-G. Willinger, V. Petkov, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2975–2979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Singh, B. Seddon, E. Dempsey, W. Redington and C. Dickinson, Electroanalysis, 2015, 27, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang and P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 546–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Arroyo-Ramirez, C. Chen, M. Cargnello, C. B. Murray, P. Fornasiero and R. J. Gorte, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19509–19514 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, P. Wang, C. J. Werth and T. J. Strathmann, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3551–3559 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Zhang, M. B. Vukmirovic, Y. Xu, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2132–2135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. B. Lima, J. Zhang, M. H. Shao, K. Sasaki, M. B. Vukmirovic, E. A. Ticianelli and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley and J. K. Norskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2897–2901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mani, R. Srivastava and P. Strasser, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 666–673 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Paulus, A. Wokaun, G. G. Scherer, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenkovic, V. Radmilovic, N. M. Markovic and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 4181–4191 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, M. B. Vukmirovic, D. Su, K. Sasaki, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, S. Liao and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1748–1753 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Cantane, F. E. R. Oliveira, S. F. Santos and F. H. B. Lima, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136, 351–360 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, Z.-G. Shao, W. Lu, H. Xiao, F. Xie, X. Qin, J. Li, F. Liu and B. Yi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13413–13423 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Kuttiyiel, K. Sasaki, Y. M. Choi, D. Su, P. Liu and R. R. Adzic, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6266–6271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y.-C. Hsieh, V. Volkov, D. Su, W. An, R. Si, Y. Zhu, P. Liu, J. X. Wang and R. R. Adzic, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 738–742 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, L. Chen, J. Kang, T. Fujita, A. Hirata, W. Zhang, J. Jiang and M. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4156–4162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, K. A. Kuttiyiel, J. P. Labis, K. Sasaki, G.-G. Park, T.-H. Yang and R. R. Adzic, Top. Catal., 2013, 56, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhuang, W. Sheng and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3950–3955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Wang, H. Inada, L. Wu, Y. Zhu, Y. Choi, P. Liu, W.-P. Zhou and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17298–17302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, D. Li, Y. Ding, W. Zhu, S. Guo, Z. L. Wang and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5745–5749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-N. Zheng, J.-J. Lv, S.-S. Li, M.-W. Xue, A.-J. Wang and J.-J. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3445–3451 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Hao, D. Su, V. V. T. Doan-Nguyen, Y. Wu, J. Li, S. Sun and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15921–15924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Lv, J.-N. Zheng, Y.-Y. Wang, A.-J. Wang, L.-L. Chen and J.-J. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2014, 265, 231–238 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, W.-T. Wong and K.-F. Yung, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 410–417 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, Y. W. Lee, M. Kim and S. W. Han, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7901–7905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Nguyen, M. Ohtaki, T. Matsubara, M. T. Cao and M. Nogami, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12265–12274 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Long, T. Asaka, T. Matsubara and M. Nogami, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 2901–2907 CrossRef .
N. V. Long, M. Ohtaki, T. D. Hien, J. Randy and M. Nogami, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9133–9143 CrossRef .
B. B. Xiao, Y. F. Zhu, X. Y. Lang, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Zhang, D. Su and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13879–13884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Brodsky, A. P. Young, K. C. Ng, C.-H. Kuo and C.-K. Tsung, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9368–9378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, X. Zhang, W. Zhu, K. He, D. Su, A. Mendoza-Garcia, S. F. Ho, G. Lu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15026–15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Wang, Y.-T. Liu, I. L. Chen, Y.-W. Yang, T.-K. Yeh, C. H. Lee, C.-C. Hu, T.-C. Wen, T.-Y. Chen and T.-L. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2253–2262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, X. Pang, Y. He, B. Li and Z. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6058–6067 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gorshkov, V. Kuzmenko and V. Privman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24959–24966 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, H. Liu, P. Cui, Z. Peng, S. Zhang and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, Y. Dong, W. Yang, J. Yu, Z. Xu and Y. Hou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 15197–15202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, H. Sai, F. von Stein, M. Riccio and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5201–5207 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, A. Sigdel, S. Zhang, D. Su, Z. Xi, Q. Li and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12508–12512 CAS .
W. E. Mahmoud, L. M. Bronstein, F. Al-Hazmi, F. Al-Noaiser and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13095–13101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Amram and E. Rabkin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10687–10693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Chaudhary, S. K. Mohanty and A. R. Koymen, Carbon, 2014, 79, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Sanchez, M. W. Small, J.-M. Zuo and R. G. Nuzzo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8683–8689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Baker, M. Roy, S. C. Thornton, M. Qureshi and C. Binns, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 385301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Long, T. Duy Hien, T. Asaka, M. Ohtaki and M. Nogami, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 8478–8491 CrossRef .
Y. Cho, W. H. Lee and H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11635–11641 RSC .
F. Pincella, Y. Song, T. Ochiai, K. Isozaki, K. Sakamoto and K. Miki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 605, 115–120 CrossRef .
T. A. G. Silva, E. Teixeira-Neto, N. Lopez and L. M. Rossi, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Sneed, A. P. Young, D. Jalalpoor, M. C. Golden, S. Mao, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang and C.-K. Tsung, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7239–7250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiang, P. Li, H. Chong, L. Feng, F. Fu, Z. Wang, S. Zhang and M. Zhu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1337–1343 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Su, W. Luo and G. Cheng, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1617–1625 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Erokhin, E. S. Lokteva, A. Y. Yermakov, D. W. Boukhvalov, K. I. Maslakov, E. V. Golubina and M. A. Uimin, Carbon, 2014, 74, 291–301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mahara, H. Ishikawa, J. Ohyama, K. Sawabe, Y. Yamamoto, S. Arai and A. Satsuma, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 910–912 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, H. Zhang, Y.-X. Wu, Q.-C. Zhuang, L.-L. Tian and X.-X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 134, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Sheng, F. Nie and J. Zheng, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 730, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Goebl, T. Zhang and Y. Yin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11836–11842 RSC .
Q. Zhang, J. Ge, J. Goebl, Y. Hu, Z. Lu and Y. Yin, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 583–591 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. Ge, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2201–2214 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Matin, J.-H. Jang and Y.-U. Kwon, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 3710–3718 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Yin, Y. Hu, C. Li, P. Wu, S. Wei and C. Cai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11861–11867 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Yu and P. Dutta, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Su, W. Luo and G. Cheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 3360–3370 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kang, Y. W. Lee, Y. Park, B.-S. Choi, J. W. Hong, K.-H. Park and S. W. Han, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7945–7955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, L. Yang, N. Cao, C. Du, K. Hu, J. Su, W. Luo and G. Cheng, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 325–332 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Manoj B. Gawande
	Manoj B. Gawande received his PhD degree in Chemistry in 2008 from, Institute of Chemical Technology (formerly UDCT), Matunga, Mumbai, India. He was awarded several prestigious fellowships, including BK-21 Research fellowship, FCT Research fellowship and recently was awarded Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Samman, by Govt. of India and NRI Welfare Society of India. After several research stints in Germany, Portugal, Singapore, England and USA, he is presently working as Senior Researcher and Head of Division of Nanocatalysis laboratory at RCPTM, Faculty of Science, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. His research interests include core–shell/carbon/magnetic nanocatalysis. He has published nearly 65 scientific papers including several reviews.

Anandarup Goswami
	Anandarup Goswami obtained his PhD in organolithium chemistry under Prof. David B. Collum at Cornell University (2010) and later joined Prof. Kai C. Hultzsch's group at Rutgers University to work on organometallic catalysis. He has a keen interest in heterogeneous catalysis, which he explored in Prof. Tewodros (Teddy) Asefa's group, with special emphasis on silica/metal/carbon-based nanomaterials and their applications. Presently, he is working as researcher in the field of nanocatalysis at the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Faculty of Science, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, with Dr. Manoj B. Gawande and Prof. Radek Zboril.

Tewodros Asefa
	Tewodros (Teddy) Asefa is a Professor in Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology & Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Rutgers University at New Brunswick, USA. He received his MSc from SUNY-Buffalo (1998) and his PhD from University of Toronto (2002). He received fellowships to serve as Visiting Professor at Kyoto University, Japan (2014); Maringá State University, Brazil (2014–2017); and ETH Zürich, Switzerland (2015). He also received NSF CAREER award (2007–2012), NSF Special Creativity award (2011), Rutgers Board of Governors Research Fellowship (2012), and NSF's American Competitiveness Fellowship (2010). He co-edited a book on Nanocatalysis (Wiley) and wrote 120 papers and few book chapters.

Ankush V. Biradar
	Ankush V. Biradar received his PhD in chemistry from the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune/University of Pune under the supervision of Dr Shubhangi Umbarkar in 2009. After graduating, he moved to Prof. Tewodros Asefa's group, first at Syracuse University and then Rutgers University in New Jersey, USA, where he worked on the synthesis and catalytic properties of multifunctional nanomaterials. In 2012, he moved back to India and joined the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, as a Scientist. His research interests lie in the development of nanostructured catalysts (especially non-noble metal-based ones), and their utilization for oxidation and hydrogenation reactions.

Radek Zboril
	Radek Zboril received his PhD degree from Palacky University, Olomouc. After his PhD study, he underwent several foreign stays at universities in Tokyo, Delaware and Johannesburg. Currently, he is a Professor at the Department of Physical Chemistry and General Director of the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials at Palacky University, Olomouc. He has published more than 250 papers in prestigious journals with research interests in nanomaterials area that include iron and iron oxide based nanoparticles (NPs), silver NPs, carbon nanostructures, and magnetic NPs and their applications in biomedicine, environmental technologies, sensing and catalysis.

Rajender S. Varma
	Rajender S. Varma was born in India (PhD, Delhi University 1976). After postdoctoral research at Robert Robinson Laboratories, Liverpool, UK, he was a faculty member at Baylor College of Medicine and Sam Houston State University prior to joining the Sustainable Technology Division at the US Environmental Protection Agency in 1999. He has over 40 years of multidisciplinary research experience and is lately engaged in greener assembly of nanomaterials and the sustainable applications of magnetically retrievable nanocatalysts. He is a member of the editorial advisory board of several international journals, published over 415 scientific papers, and has been awarded 14 US Patents.

 	Fig. 1  Applications of CSNs in various areas of modern technology especially in the field of catalysis.	 

 	Fig. 2  General classification of CSNs based on material-type (along with the most prevalent synthetic methods) and properties of their shells.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Pd@hCeO2 core–shell nanocomposite particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the fabrication process of the “wire-in-tube” type CoO@TiO2 nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the theoretical model for the lamellar template and morphology evolution of hollow core–shell NiO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2013 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustration of the possible formation mechanism of core/shell hierarchical nanostructures via Ostwald ripening process in the presence of various precursors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Preparation of Sn@carbon NPs encapsulated in hollow carbon nanofibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of polymer microspheres with a hollow core/porous shell structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  
In situ polymerization method for the generation of transparent QDs/PMMA nanocomposites. Adapted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) SLBL synthetic procedure for core@shell UCNPs (up-conversion nanoparticles). (B–D) Schematic of the synthesis of shell thickness controllable β-NaGdF4:Yb,Er@NaYF4 CSNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication procedure for a thermoresponsive NW forest, used as one mate of the proposed unisex fasteners. (b and c) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Ge/parylene NW forests before and after deposition of the PNIPAM outer shell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  Core–shell/multishell plasmodia nanocavities. Schematic of (a) Au (yellow)/silica (green) and (b) Au/silica/dye silica core–multishell nanostructures. Dye molecules (shown as red stars) are dispersed in the outermost silica shell (shown as green shell). (c–g) TEM images of Au/silica core–shell structures with different shell thickness. (h) TEM images of Au/silica/dye (rhodamine 6G) silica core–multishell nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of the structure of a core–multishell NP synthesized using a combination of esterification and amidation reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic representation of the synthesis of a porous SiO2–AuNP–SiO2 core–shell–shell microsphere catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2012 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 15  Electrospinning system for creating core–shell and porous core–shell fiber networks. (A) core–shell electrospinning system for core–shell nanofibers. (B) Electrospinning setup in a water-immersed collector for preparing porous core–shell fiber networks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the mechanism of mixing driven phase separation, precipitation polymerization and subsequent pore formation after removal of porogen PDMS oil. (b–e) SEM images of the surface and the three different layers within the porous particle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structural and compositional features of CSNs that can affect CSNs catalytic properties.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Representation of Ag/HT (HT represents hydrotalcite support) reacting with H2; both polar and nonpolar hydrogen species are formed. (b) Representation of AgNPs@BM; AgNPs are covered with a basic material (BM), which reacts with H2 to result in exclusive formation of polar hydrogen species. A basic site of HT and BM is represented by BS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  Chemoselective reduction of various organic substrates on silver@cerium dioxide core–shell nanocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 20  Electron micrographs of AgNPs@CeO2: (a) SEM and (b) HRTEM images of a AgNPs@CeO2 nanocomposite particle, (c) line-scan STEM-EDS across the AgNPs@CeO2 nanocomposite (Ag: red squares, Ce: green squares). The circled areas correspond to the spherical CeO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic showing the principles behind the synthesis of Pd@MPSO/SiO2 core–shell nanocatalyst. Adapted from ref. 315.	 



1	

	

	2	97	97:3	3
2c	

	

	8	95	97:3	5
3d	

	

	6	98	97:3	2
4d	

	

	6	99	98:2	1
5d	

	

	6	98	98:2	2
6e	

	

	6	98	95:5	2
7d	

	

	8	98	97:3	2

 	Fig. 22  Semihydrogenation of terminal alkynes using Pd@MPSO/SiO2-2.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Ag–Ni CSNs: (a) low-magnification TEM image (at 50 nm), (b) SAED pattern, (c) HRTEM image, and (d) EDS spectra recorded from the center. (B) Hydrogen transfer reactions of aromatic nitro and carbonyl compounds on Ag@Ni core–shell nanocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  Synthesis of the heterogeneous catalyst Cp*RhTsDPEN-CSSDMSS (3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic of the synthesis of Au–Rh CSNs using a microwave (MW)-assisted synthetic method: yellow/orange = Au; blue/violet = Rh. Reprinted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of SiO2/Pd/h-ZrO2 core–shell–shell microspheres or microsphere catalysts. (B) TEM images showing the structural evolution of SiO2/Pd/SiO2/ZrO2 core–shell–shell–shell microspheres after etching with dilute NaOH solution for different etching times: (a) 2 h, (b) 6 h, (c) 9 h, (d) 12 h, (e) 15 h, (f) 20 h, (g and h) 24 h, (i) 27 h, and (j) 48 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


1	

	

	0.3	∼100	∼100	5145
2	

	

	1.5	93	∼100	1187
3	

	

	3	94	∼100	492

 	Fig. 27  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of SiO2@Pd–PAMAM dendrimer type core–shell microspheres or nanocatalysts. (B) (a and b) Low magnification and (c) high magnification TEM images of etched SiO2 microspheres. (d and e) Enlarged TEM images of SiO2@Pd–PAMAM core–shell microspheres. (f) Size distribution of Pd NPs in SiO2@Pd–PAMAM core–shell microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 266. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  SiO2@Pd–PAMAM core–shell microspheres catalyze hydrogenation reactions of various functional groups.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Synthesis of magnetic core–shell Au–Fe3O4@MOF nanocatalyst, (b) TEM images of Au–Fe3O4, (c) single particle of core–shell Au–Fe3O4 showing mappings for Au, C, Fe and O elements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 292. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation methods used for Au–Ag core–shell nanocatalysts. (b) Catalytic conversion of 4-NPh over ZIF-8 stabilized catalysts: 2Au (I20), 2Au–1Ag (I21), 2Au–2Ag (I22), 2Au–3Ag (I23), 2Au–4Ag (I24), 2Ag (II02), 2Ag–1Au (II12), 2Ag–2Au (II22), 2Ag–4Au (II42), and post treated I22. (b) Arrhenius plot of the rate constant for the reduction of 4-NPh over I22. Reprinted with permission from ref. 295. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the procedure used to prepare Pd/SiO2@TiMSS, SiO2/@Pd(R)/TiMSS and SiO2/@Pd(S)/TiMSS. (b) Effect of the catalysts on the concentration of H2O2. (c) Oxidation of methyl phenyl sulfide using in situ generated H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) Synthesis of core–shell Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au NPs. (B) SEM (a–c), TEM (d and e), and HRTEM (f) images of Fe3O4 (a), Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH (b and d), and Fe3O4@MgAl–LDH@Au (c, e, and f). (C) Catalytic oxidation of 1-phenylethanol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  Micrograph images of Au–Pd core–shell NCs: (a) bright-field TEM, (b) high-resolution TEM, (c) STEM-EDX map shown as an overlay of gold and palladium signals, and (d) HAADF-STEM image showing a contrast difference between the gold core (bright) and palladium shell (dark). Dotted blue line represents the EDX line scan shown in (e) with Pd shown in red, Au in green and Cu in black. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of metal cluster@silica core–shell nanospheres. (b) TEM image of Pd cluster@silica core–shell nanospheres. (c) Size-selective catalysis of Pd cluster@silica core–shell nanospheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Various structural configurations of supported NPs catalysts: (A) noble metal NPs, (B) “TMO-on-NM” (transition metal oxide = TMO) NPs consisting of a noble metal NPs decorated with surface TM oxide, and (C) “TMO-on-NM Shell” NPs with TM oxide decorating the surface of a core–shell NP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic of the formation procedures used for mesoporous silica nanospheres with or without Au NPs. Adapted from ref. 344.	 

 	Fig. 37  (A) (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of 16 nm Au@Pd NPs with two monolayers of Pd. (b) Plot of yield vs. Pd shell thickness as a function of reaction time for the cross-coupling between 4-bromoanisole with phenylboronic acid. (B) Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 357. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 38  Suzuki–Miyura coupling reaction catalyzed by G–Ni/Pd CSNs.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC(x), (b) Suzuki–Miyaura coupling products between various arylboronic acids with chlorobenzene over Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC. (c) C–C coupling products between benzylic chloride and various arylboronic acids over Pd-coordinated Fe3O4@mSiO2-NHC. Adapted from ref. 361.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) SEM images of inside-out core–shell architectures (Cu2O@Cu). (b) Sonogashira coupling reactions of aryl iodides with phenyl acetylenes catalyzed by Cu2O@Cu NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 365. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 41  (A) Schematic pathway for the synthesis and application of high temperature-stable NH3 decomposition catalysts based on hematite NPs in a porous silica shell. (B) TEM images of (a) α-Fe2O3-35@pSiO2, (b) α-Fe2O3-75@pSiO2, (c) @pSiO2, and (d) α-Fe2O3-50 + @pSiO2 after calcination, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 369. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 42  (A) Synthesis procedure for acid–base bifunctional core–shell structured catalyst (yellow helix = –SO3H, white helix = –NH2). (B) Schematic reaction flow of the two-step cascade reaction sequences on the core–shell structured bifunctional catalyst MS-A@MS-B. (C) One-pot tandem deprotection-Knoevenagel and Henry reaction successfully catalyzed by acid–base containing MS-A@MS-B core–shell type nanocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 370. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 43  (a) Schematic of the procedure used for synthesizing M@oxide nanostructures. (b) Representative TEM image of dodecylamine-protected Pt NPs (left), along with a histogram indicating particle size distribution (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 375. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

1 wt% Pd/Al2O3	32
1 wt% Pd@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3	10
1 wt% Pd@9 wt% TiO2/Al2O3	16
1 wt% Pd@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3	17
1 wt% Pt@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3	6
1 wt% Pt@9 wt% TiO2/Al2O3	17
1 wt% Pt@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3	18

1 wt% Pd@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3	12	5	10
1 wt% Pt@9 wt% CeO2/Al2O3	6	8	6
1 wt% Pd@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3	18	11	17
1 wt% Pt@9 wt% ZrO2/Al2O3	18	14	19


1	

	Methanol	

	62/98
2	

	Ethanol	

	11/97
3	

	
n-Butanol	

	15/97
4	

	Methanol	

	61/97
5	

	Ethanol	

	10/97

 	Fig. 44  Electron-probe microanalysis spectra of a single particle of AuNiOx/SiO2–Al2O3–MgO. (a) Secondary electron image and line analysis. (b) Color mapping display corresponding to the concentration of the element distribution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 45  TEM images of (a) self-assembled Al2O3@Fe2O3 CSNs, and (b and c) single particles. In (b), a peripheral α-Fe2O3 layer and (012) lattice fringes are clearly seen. The FFT pattern of (c) is shown in (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 381. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 46  Schematic of the synthesis of heterogeneous exposed core–shell catalysts using space specificity. The inset diagram shows the principle of space specificity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 382. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) HAADF-STEM image of a PtNiN CSN with corresponding two-dimensional EELS mapping of Pt M and Ni L signals (dotted lines for visualization purposes only). (b) STEM image of PtNiN CSNs. (c) EELS linescan profiles of Pt and Ni and schematic of a single PtNiN NP (blue, Pt; gray, Ni; purple, N). Reprinted with permission from ref. 426. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 48  Schematic of the inner Pt diffusion process to the defective sites at the vertex during cycling in electrolyte. For clarity, the inner Pt atoms involved in diffusion are shown in green, whereas defects are in yellow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 426. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 


Pt/(Pt + Pd) (at%)	26.9	27.3	33.3
Pt (wt%)	16.5	17.1	18.1
Pd (wt%)	24.5	24.9	19.7
MAPta (A mg−1)	0.62	0.64	0.62
MAPGMb (A mg−1)	0.25	0.26	0.30
SAc (mA cm−2)	0.25	0.58	0.70
ECSAd (m2 g−1)	191	110	89

 	Fig. 49  STEM image and EDS elemental maps of the dealloyed Pt–Cu ligament: (a) HAADF-STEM image of the nanoporous structure; (b) mixed STEM-EDS elemental mappings of Pt-L & Cu-K; (c) elemental mapping of Pt-L; and (d) elemental mapping of Cu-K. The composition intensity profile of (e) Pt and (f) Cu were taken from the labeled region in (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 428. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) Scheme showing the synthetic route for Au@Co3O4 core–shell NCs. (b) TEM image of Au NCs (inset: histogram of the size distribution). (c) TEM image of Au@Co NCs (inset: histogram of the size distribution). (d) TEM image of a two-layer array of the Au@Co NCs (inset: modeled projection of the two-layer NC assembly). (e) HRTEM image of a single Au@Co NC. (f) TEM image of Au@Co3O4 NCs supported on carbon. (g) HRTEM image of a single Au@Co3O4 NC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 430. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 51  (a) iR-corrected polarization curves of Au@Co3O4/C (64 μgAu@Co3O4 cm−2, in which the Au loading was 24 μgAu cm−2 and Co3O4 loading was 40 μgCo3O4 cm−2), (Au + Co3O4)/C (24 μgAu cm−2 and 40 μgCo3O4 cm−2), Co3O4/C (40 μgCo3O4 cm−2), and Au/C (24 μgAu cm−2) catalysts recorded in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and continuous electrode rotating speed of 2500 rpm. (b) Activity of the catalysts at an overpotential of 0.35 V. (c) Tafel plots of catalysts. (d) Chronopotentiometry curves of Au@Co3O4/C and Ir/C (40 μgIr cm−2) under a current density of 10 A gAu@Co3O4−1 or 10 A gIr−1 in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 430. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 52  (a and b) HAADF-STEM images of the Pd(core)–Pt(shell) NPs obtained for the PdCPt1 and PdCPt4 samples, respectively. NPs overlap on the left side in (a) and at the top in (b). (c and d) Intensity profiles (O) from the scan lines (the left ends are defined to be zero on the x-axes and the intensity at the nearby vacuum set the zero for y-axes) in (a) and (b), and the best fits (black lines), based on the structure models shown in (e) and (f) for Pd particles with 1 and 3–4 Pt surface layers, respectively. (f) Projection of the structure model with 4 Pt layers on the STEM image plane (left) and the arrangements of atoms in the vertical columns along the scan line (right); HAADF and Pd EELS intensity profiles for a PdCPt2 sample. (g) Comparison of HAADF (black) and Pd EELS (red) intensity profiles in a line scan. (h) Two-dimensional mapping of HAADF intensity (left) and Pd EELS signal (right) obtained with 0.27 nm per pixel resolution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 431. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 53  TEM images of (a) 5 nm Au NPs and (b) 7.5 nm Au/Cu35Pt65 NPs. (c and d) HRTEM images of a single Au/Cu35Pt65 NP acquired at a different focus condition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 432. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 54  (A and B) TEM and (C) HRTEM images of hAg@Pt–RGO. The inset in image (A) shows the corresponding SAED pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 433. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 55  (a) Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of Au@Pt/CNTs with 27.9% Pt coverage in 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.025 M HCOOH (black line) and 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M methanol (red line), both recorded at 50 mV s−1. (b) CVs of Au@Pt/CNTs with 57.6% Pt coverage in 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.025 M HCOOH (black line) and 0.1 M H2SO4 + 0.1 M methanol (red line), both recorded at 50 mV s−1. (c) LSVs (linear sweep voltammograms) of Au@Pt/CNTs with 27.9% Pt coverage in 0.5 M H2SO4 with and without 0.1 M methanol, 10 mV s−1, 1600 rpm. (d) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) results of Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 with and without 0.1 M methanol, 10 mV s−1, 1600 rpm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 436. Copyright 2013 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 56  Low (a–c) and high magnification (d–f) HRTEM images of Pd3@Pt1 (a and d), Pd1@Pt1 (b and e), and Pd1@Pt3 (c and f) NCs. Scale bars indicate 5 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 437. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 57  (a–e) HRTEM images of Pt–Pd core–shell nanoparticles. (f–h) Models of octahedral, cubic and tetrahedral Pt–Pd core–shell nanoparticles. Scale bars: (a–d) 5 nm and (e) 2 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright 2011 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 58  Size-dependent percentage of atoms on the (111) plane, edge and vertex, represented by R(111), Re and Rv, respectively. Rshell denotes the percentage of atoms on the shell, where Rshell = R(111) + Re + Rv. Atoms in yellow, blue and orange denote Ptv, Pte and Pt(111) atoms. Inset is the structure of Pt561 where Re = R(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 59  (a) Surface metal migration of CSNs. (b) Thick shell Au–Pd nanooctahedra, and (c) HR-TEM image of a thin shell octahedron's Au–Pd interface, showing epitaxial growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 60  (a and b) EOR performed on thin and thick shell Au–Pd core–shell octahedra, respectively, in 1 M KOH and 1 M ethanol. (c and d) Plots of EOR current density vs. cycle number for thin and thick shell octahedra, respectively, for peaks I–IV as labeled in (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 61  Monodisperse M/CuPd NPs for the ORR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 444. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 62  Scheme for assembly of a DMFC full stack. (a) Devices of flow field, fluid components, frames and membrane electrolyte assembly (MEA). (b) Assembled full stack. (c) Details of MEA component. Reprinted with permission from ref. 445. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 63  Elemental maps and line profiles of Pt–Cu bimetallic NP precursors and dealloyed active catalysts. High resolution energy dispersive spectroscopy (HR-EDS) elemental maps of a Pt25Cu75 bimetallic NP alloy precursor (a) and the active electrocatalyst obtained after Cu dealloying from the precursor (b). Pt is shown in blue, Cu in red and pink domains indicate well-alloyed Pt–Cu domains. (c) HR-EDS line profile across an individual 4 nm diameter dealloyed Pt–Cu alloy active-catalyst particle. (d) Experimental and predicted relationships between electrocatalytic ORR activity and lattice strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
