Inorganic iodide ligands in ex situ PbS quantum dot sensitized solar cells with I − /I 3 − electrolytes   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM32459H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32459H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16914-16919Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInorganic iodide ligands in ex situ PbS quantum dot sensitized solar cells with I−/I3− electrolytes†

        
          
            Guangda 
            Niu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liduo 
            Wang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Gao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Beibei 
            Ma
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Haopeng 
            Dong
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Qiu
          
        
      
Key Lab of Organic Optoelectronics and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P. R. China. E-mail: chldwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      19th April 2012
    , Accepted 25th June 2012First published on 25th June 2012AbstractIn this paper, inorganic iodide ligands were used in PbS quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) with iodide/triiodide electrolytes. Inorganic ligands are employed to replace organic ligands in QDSCs for the first time. They combined effects of passivating surface states and decreasing the interface resistance between QDs and sensitized TiO2, QDs and electrolyte. Then the corrosion of PbS QDs by triiodide in iodide/triiodide electrolytes was suppressed and electron injection and hole transfer was much easier. Stability test verified iodide ligands could prevent PbS from corrosion of iodide/triiodide electrolytes. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) showed that iodide ligands effectively decreased the interface resistance and improved the electron transfer. Finally, the performance with iodide ligands was significantly improved and achieved 3.7 times that of the untreated cells in efficiency.
1. Introduction
Quantum dots sensitized solar cells have been given extensive attention in the past two decades for they are potential low cost alternatives to existing silicon cells. Quantum dots such as CdS,1 CdSe,2 CdTe,3 PbS,4 and InAs5 have been applied to sensitize nanoporous electrodes. Due to the quantum-size effect, the absorption spectrum can be easily tuned to match the solar spectrum by changing the particle size. QDs also possess high absorption coefficient which is necessary for thin mesoporous electrodes. Moreover, multiple exciton generation (MEG)6 and high stability exhibit great potential of employing QDs in solar cells.
Nowadays, in quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs), two methods of deposition of QDs on TiO2 have been researched: in situ and ex situ. In the in situ method, QDs are synthesized on TiO2 surface by chemical bath deposition (CBD)7–9 or successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR).10,11 This method could produce high surface coverage on TiO2 films and direct connection between QDs and TiO2. But the poor control over composition, size and surface properties will lead to a broad size distribution of QDs and an internal recombination of QDSCs. Therefore the prospects of the in situ method are limited.
In the alternative approach of ex situ method, QDs were pre-synthesized using an established method and the TiO2 film was sensitized by the solution of QDs. This method has better control on the structure, size and electronic properties of QDs.
However, QDs as prepared are typically surrounded with a layer of long chain organic ligands, such as tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO) or oleic acid (OA) which usually acts as a barrier to charge transfer, and these ligands decrease the electronic coupling between QDs and TiO2. The pre-synthesized QDs usually are attached to TiO2 by direct adsorption (DA)12–14 or linker assisted assembly (LAA).15,16 DA means QDs are attached to TiO2 without molecular linkages and the long chain organic ligands will affect the charge transfer process. In LAA, a short chain bifunctional organic linker was employed to replace long chain organic ligands of QDs and linkers (e.g. mercaptopropionic acid, MPA) anchor to TiO2 with carboxylic group. Compared to organic ligands which were long or short in size, inorganic ligands exhibit smaller size and higher electron mobility. Thereby in QDSCs, the distance of charge transfer could be reduced and the electronic coupling could be enhanced. However, as far as we are concerned, inorganic ligands employed in QDSCs remained unexplored.
Up to now, ex situ quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) only achieved poor conversion efficiencies.13,14,16,17
One of the main reasons is the degradation of semiconductor QDs in triiodide/iodide electrolytes.1 A polysulfide electrolyte (S2−/Sx2−) was introduced into QDSCs to solve this issue. Whereas the low energy difference between the conduction band edge of semiconductor TiO2 and the oxidation-reduction potential of S2−/Sx2− couple often results in lower Voc values.18 The triiodide/iodide redox electrolytes have larger energy difference and lead to higher Voc than polysulfide electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 7. However, the instability of QDs in triiodide/iodide electrolytes has been the obstacle for the use of triiodide/iodide electrolytes in QDSCs. So it is extremely necessary to increase the photostability of QDs in triiodide/iodide redox electrolytes. The instability is caused by the presence of surface states on pre-synthesized QDs which can trap the photoexcited electrons. I3− in electrolytes can capture those trapped electrons and lead to the accumulation of holes in QDs, and then cause the degradation. Coating the particles with thin layers of wide band gap materials can efficiently block these trap states.19 Shalom et al.8 used TiO2 to protect CdS from corrosion of triiodide/iodide electrolyte. They got a higher open circuit voltage and better fill factor than the cells using polysulfide electrolyte and achieved power conversion efficiency of 1.24%.
Another reason for the limited conversion efficiency of QDSCs is that in ex situ QDSCs, organic ligands around QDs increase the interface resistance to the charge carriers flux.2 Talapin20 found that by employing molecular metal chalcogenide surface ligands around QDs, the size-dependent optical absorption properties had been preserved and the electron mobility had been improved markedly. Sargent21 established an atomic ligand strategy that makes use of monovalent halide anions to enhance electronic transport and successfully passivate surface defects in PbS CQD films.
In this paper, PbS QDs were assembled on TiO2 by the ex situ approach. Then by film ligand exchange after QDs sensitization, i.e. solid-state treatment, inorganic ligands were introduced to replace organic ligands for the first time in QDSCs. The objective is to use inorganic iodide ligands to protect PbS QDs from corrosion of triiodide through surface passivation and decrease the interface resistance between QDs and sensitized TiO2, QDs and electrolyte through size and electron mobility advantages. Then the stability of QDs in iodide/triiodide electrolyte and the charge transport will be improved. Moreover, the use of I−/I3− redox couple will lead higher open circuit voltage and better fill factor than polysulfide electrolyte. As a result, the overall efficiency and stability would both be enhanced.
The inorganic iodide ligands which were firstly used in QDSCs open a new path to protect QDs from corrosion along with decreasing the interface resistance between QDs and TiO2, QDs and electrolytes.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Preparation of PbS QDs
PbS CQDs were synthesized using a variation on a literature method.22 A mixture of PbO (0.18 g, 0.8 mmol), oleic acid (0.5 mL) and 1-octadecene (7.5 mL) was heated to 120 °C under Ar for 1 h to make the PbO totally dissolve. A solution of TMS (84 μL) in 1-octadecene (4 mL) was injected swiftly into the vigorously stirring lead precursor solution at 120 °C. Then the heating mantle was moved away and the reaction vessel was cooled to 60 °C by ice water bath. 20 mL acetone was added to the vessel to quench the reaction. Then PbS QDs was isolated from the growth mixture by precipitation at 6000 rpm. The precipitate was redispersed in 20 mL n-hexane and precipitated again with 20 mL n-hexane for three times. Finally, QDs was dispersed in n-hexane to store.
2.2. Preparation of the photoanode
The TiO2 colloid was prepared by a hydrothermal method, which has been well documented in the previous report.19 To prepare porous TiO2 film, transparent conductive FTO glass (12 Ω □−1) was completely cleaned and then a thin compact TiO2 film (about 8 nm in thickness) was deposited on the FTO by dip coating in order to improve ohmic contact and adhesion between the following porous TiO2 layer and the conductive FTO glass. The doctor blade technique was then adopted to prepare the porous TiO2 layer with the thickness of the porous layer being controlled by an adhesive tape. Afterwards, the film was thermo-treated at 450 °C for 30 min. When cooled to 110 °C, the TiO2 electrode was sensitized by immersion in PbS QD absolute hexane solution for 12 h and cleaning with absolute hexane.
The ligands exchange process is as follows: the sensitized film was immersed into tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) methanol solution for 2 hours. Then the film was washed with methanol to remove redundant ions and dried in air.
2.3. Preparation of the electrolyte
The preparation procedure for the polymer gel electrolytes includes two steps. First, liquid electrolyte was prepared. Second, poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) was slowly added into the liquid electrolyte slowly and heated under strong stirring until the polymer gel electrolyte became homogeneous. The composition of the liquid electrolyte is as follows: 0.1 mol L−1 LiI, 0.1 mol L−1 I2, 0.6 mol L−1 1,2-dimethyl-3-propyl imidazolium iodide (DMPII), and 0.45 mol L−1N-methyl-benzimidazole (NMBI). The solvent was 3-methoxypropionitrile (MePN);14 the weight ratio (versus liquid electrolyte) for the PEO in the electrolyte was 10.0%.
It is worth mentioning that the electrolyte we used here was quasi-solid PEO electrolyte, which was more stable than liquid electrolyte.
2.4. Fabrication of the QDSCs
A chemically platinized conductive glass was used as the counter electrode. When assembling the DSCs, the polymer gel electrolyte was sandwiched by a sensitized TiO2 electrode and a counter electrode with two clips; the space between the two electrodes was controlled by an adhesive tape with a thickness of 30 μm.
2.5. Characterization
A JEM-2010-FEG instrument was used for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) to provide size data. The UV-vis reflectance absorption spectra were measured with a Hitachi U-3010 spectroscope. The UV-vis-near IR spectra were measured with Varian Cary 5000 with an integrating sphere accessory. The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum was measured with a Perkin-Elmer Spectrum GX FTIR spectrometer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was measured with a PHI 5300ESCA instrument. Photocurrent–voltage (I–V) and EIS were investigated by ZAHNER CIMPS electrochemical workstation.
3. Results and discussion
The UV-vis-near IR absorption spectrum of the pre-synthesized PbS QDs in hexane solvent was shown in Fig. 1. QDs in solution (hexane as solvent) exhibit a lowest-energy exciton peak at 842 nm (∼1.47 eV). According the formula Brus raised below,23 our particles have a diameter of 3.2 nm. (1)Where Ebulk is the band gap of bulk materials, me and mh is the effective mass of electron and hole, ε is the semiconductor dielectric constant.
 Fig. 1  UV-vis-near IR absorption spectrum of PbS QDs before and after ligands exchange. 
A TEM image of PbS QDs with oleic acid ligands is shown in Fig. 2. The average diameter of the QDs is about 3.14 nm (from the size distribution histogram in the ESI†), which is consistent with the results from absorption spectra. According to the report from Borrelli,24 the energy level relative to vacuum can be calculated from the diameter data. We got the LUMO level of our QDs to be −3.61 eV vs vacuum (the detailed calculation process is shown in the ESI†). The TiO2 particles employed in our studies are large band gap semiconductors with conduction band at −3.9 eV (vs vacuum).25 So the QDs used in this work can assure the electron injection from LUMO of PbS QDs to conduction band of TiO2.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of PbS QDs surrounded with oleic acid ligands. 
As the adsorption of PbS QDs (oleic acid ligands) on TiO2 was physical adsorption, and iodide anion was nucleophilic, the Pb2+ at the surface of QDs was electrophilic, and methanol could partially remove the oleic acid. Iodide anion and the excess Pb2+ could bind together to replace the physical adsorbed oleic acid between PbS QDs and TiO2. Moreover, oleic acids reacted with tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) as follow equations. Oleic acid reacted with TBAI to form the product tetrabutylammonium oleate. The products have good solubility in methanol and could be washed away from films by methanol and so the remaining iodides were bound to Pb2+ on the QDs’ surfaces. CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)7COO− + (C4H9)4NI → I− + CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)7COON(C4H9)4(2) 2I− + Pb2+ (surface) → PbI2(3)
As shown in FTIR spectra (shown in Fig. 3), before the treatment, the 2925 cm−1 peak and 2855 cm−1 peak was attributed to C–H vibrations and 1540 cm−1 peak, 1405 cm−1 peak and 1305 cm−1 was attributed COO− vibrations. After the treatment, these peaks were disappeared or reduced to very small peaks. These can verify that the oleic acid was successfully removed from the QDs.
 Fig. 3  FTIR results of PbS/TiO2 films before (dotted line) and after iodide ligand exchange treatment (solid line). The spectra of TiO2 has been subtracted as a base line. 
The molecular size of the ligands around the QDs could affect the inter-dot spacing of QDs. Sargent21 has studied the fact that halide atoms did decrease the inter-dot spacing markedly compared to organic ligands. Based on their results, we thought in our case iodide ligands, could lead to the shorter space between QDs than oleic acid. This could also explain the absorption spectra change in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1, we prepared samples on the films. With oleic acid ligands, the films had an absorption peak at 857 nm. After ligand exchange, the peak redshifted to 940 nm. The redshift was a result of the delocalization of electron and hole wavefunctions due to electronic coupling caused by the decreased distance between QDs.
In QDs, the surface states were mainly caused by the dangling bonds at the surface of QDs. Inorganic halide atoms could remove the dangling bonds caused by the excess Pb at the surface and passivate the surface states of the QDs. This could also explain how the trapping was suppressed. From the XPS spectra in Fig. 4, the films after treatment contain sulfur, lead and iodide elements. The element titanium comes from TiO2 in the substrate. Iodide 3d5 has the binding energy of 630.4 eV and 619.2 eV, similar to the binding energy of I 3d5 in bulk PbI2.26 That meant the binding between the iodide ligands and the excess Pb was very similar to that of PbI2. On the other hand, from the atomic concentration from quantitative XPS analysis in Table 1, the concentration of iodide (17.2%) is close to the difference between Pb (48.5%) and S (34.3%). Similar to the model Yu suggested,27 PbS QDs are composed of a PbS core and a Pb-terminated surface shell. The excess Pb was located at the surface of QDs. We proposed that I− bound to the Pb2+ in surface with a ratio of 1:1 (details are shown in the ESI†). PbI2 at the surface could be seen as a 1:1 I− to Pb2+ shell to the PbS core, shown in Fig. 7(b). Vogel suggested that coating the particles with thin layers of wide band gap materials can efficiently block trap states19 and PbI2 has a wide band gap of 2.6eV.28 As the 1:1 I− to Pb2+ shell is very similar to bulk PbI2, the trapping states energy level caused by the excess Pb were adjusted to another level, i.e., the band of the similar chemicals of bulk PbI2. In a word, inorganic iodide ligands could reduce the number of surface dangling bonds, which acts as trap states for charge carriers, and enhance the cells' stability against photodegradation.
 Fig. 4  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of PbS/TiO2 films after iodide ligand exchange treatment. 
Table 1 Elemental atomic percentage from quantitative XPS analysis




 
Pb4f
S2p
I3d




Atomic concentration
48.5%
34.3%
17.2%




We conducted a cell stability test to explore the corrosion protecting effect and the stability test was measured within 3 minutes. Fig. 5 shows the change of photocurrent vs time curves. The cells without any QDs showed stable photocurrent, indicating the iodide/triiodide electrolyte volatilized slowly enough to be neglected. But the photocurrent of cells with PbS QDs-OA-ligands decreased quickly because the interaction between the QDs and iodide worked and QDs were corroded by electrolytes quickly. We found that the corrosion took place mainly in the first minute. When the ligands were exchanged to iodide ligands, the photocurrent decreased much less than that of the oleic acid ligand samples indicating that the corrosion was suppressed forcefully. The stability test verified the atomic ligands of iodide could protect QDs from corrosion as we proposed.
 Fig. 5  Stability test of QDSCs with oleic acid ligands (circles) and with iodide ligands (triangles): photocurrent–time curves. 
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out to study the interface resistance behavior of different film components. Here, the equivalent circuit proposed by Zhang2 has been adopted, which deals with the EIS of QDSCs. The equivalent circuit used to fit the impedance measurements was shown in Fig. 6. Rs is related to the interface resistance of FTO electrode, R1 is the interface resistance of TiO2/sensitizers interface, and C1 is its capacitance. R2 and C2 are the interface resistance and capacitance of the sensitizers/electrolyte interface, outside the TiO2 pores, and W is the Warburg impedance generated by the interface resistance to the ion movement in the electrolyte.
 Fig. 6  Nyquist plots of QDSCs with oleic acid ligands (circle) and with iodide ligands (square). The inserted chart is the equivalent circuit for QDSCs. 
The TiO2/QDs film has a high interface resistance between TiO2 and QDs sensitizers, with R1 = 132.2 Ω as shown in Table 2, caused by the long chain ligands. The high interface resistance was harmful for the electron injection process at this interface. After the introduction of iodide ligands, the interface resistance of TiO2/PbS QDs was strongly reduced to 45.68 Ω. The same phenomenon happened at the PbS QDs/electrolytes interface, with R2 decreased from 484.5 Ω to 156.8 Ω. The distance between QDs and the substrates (such as TiO2) will affect the rate constant of electron transfer, mainly because the distance affects the electronic coupling.29 When iodide acts as ligands, the distance between QDs and substrates (TiO2) was shorter than oleic acids as ligands. Then the electronic coupling could be strengthened and electron transfer is much easier. Therefore the resistance between QDs and TiO2 will be decreased. Similarly, resistance between QDs and electrolytes was also decreased. We could expect that the electron injection and hole transfer was much easier after ligands exchange from oleic acids to inorganic iodide ligands.
Table 2 The fitted results of EIS of QDSCs with oleic acids as ligands and with iodides as ligands




 

R
1/Ω

R
2/Ω




TiO2/PbS/oleic acid
132.2
484.5


TiO2/PbS/iodide
45.68
156.8





Fig. 7 shows a schematic drawing of the structure of the QDs and electron transfer process. PbS QDs are composed of a PbS core and a Pb-terminated surface shell. The excess Pb was located at the surface of QDs. The Pb-terminated shell bound to the ligands (oleic acid or iodide ligands). Those ligands could suppress the Pb shell to different degrees according to their different interaction with the Pb shell. In Fig. 7(a), electrons were excited to LUMO level of the PbS QDs by sunlight. Then these electrons experienced competitive processes such as electron injection into the conduction band of TiO2 and trapping by surface states of QDs. After ligand exchange, atomic ligands of iodide surrounded PbS, just as shown in Fig. 7(b). Surface states were passivated by iodide ligands at the surface and trapping was suppressed and photostability could be enhanced when there was less trapping of photoelectrons, which is consistent with the stability test results. Meanwhile, electron injections would be more efficient. Iodide ligands also shortened the distance between QDs and TiO2 and enhanced electronic coupling, which could explain the resistance decrease of R1 at the QDs/TiO2 interface. Fig. 7 also shows the two kinds of electrolytes: S2−/Sx2− and I−/I3−. Their different oxidation–reduction potentials lead to different Voc and I−/I3− electrolytes have a higher open-circuit voltage.
 Fig. 7  Structure of PbS QDs and electron transfer: (a) with oleic acid as ligands; (b) with iodide as ligands. The lines on QDs represent HOMO and LUMO level, lines below the LUMO level line represent surface states. Curves and circles represent oleic acid and iodide, respectively. ES2−/Sx2− and EI−/I3− mean the oxidation–reduction potential of S2−/Sx2− and I−/I3−, respectively. 
The photocurrent density–voltage curves of PbS QDSCs with different ligands surrounded were measured under illumination of one sun (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Fig. 8 shows the J–V characteristics of the PbS QDSCs with OA ligands and with I− ligands. The values of the short-circuit-current density (Jsc), the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the fill factor (FF), and the photovoltaic conversion efficiency (η) are given in Table 3. The Jsc of the basic device with PbS QDs surrounded by OA is 0.80 mA cm−2. After solid state treatment, the photoanode with I− atomic ligands has the Jsc value of 1.77 mA cm−2, 122% more than the device before treatment. The increase of Jsc could be attributed to two factors: on one hand, iodide ligands around PbS QDs formed a thin layer of PbI2 and could passivate the surface states of PbS more effectively than organic ligands, which results in the suppression of the surface trapping of photoexcited electrons and holes in PbS, and then more electrons inject from PbS QDs to TiO2; on the other hand, the distance between QDs and TiO2 is shortened for the length of iodide (2.2 Å) is much shorter than oleic acids (22 Å), and then charge transfer became much easier and then more electrons can actually injected into the conductive band of TiO2. The value of FF rose from 0.38 to 0.70 caused by the easy charge transfer between QDs and TiO2. The electron injection from QDs to TiO2 and holes transfer from QDs to electrolytes is improved for the better conduction properties of iodide ligands. We also fabricated solar cells without any QDs. As a result, the efficiency of iodide ligands QDSCs was 0.89%, which was 3.7 times that of the oleic acid ligand cells, which is a significant enhancement.
 Fig. 8  
J–V curves of QDSCs before (circles) and after iodide ligand exchange treatment (triangles). Squares represent cells without PbS QDs adsorption. 
Table 3 Photovoltaic parameters of QDSCs with oleic acid ligands and with iodide ligands




Samples

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF

η (%)




PbS/oleic acids
0.80
0.77
0.38
0.24


PbS/iodides
1.77
0.71
0.70
0.89




4. Conclusion
In summary, atomic iodide ligands were introduced into quasi-solid state QDSCs for the first time. There are two functions of iodide ligands in QDSCs. Firstly, the atomic ligands could remove the holes accumulated on QDs and passivate the surface states on PbS QDs, resulting in protecting PbS QDs from corrosion of triiodide in iodide/triiodide electrolytes. The cells with iodide ligands achieved much better stability. Secondly, iodide ligands decreased the interface resistance between QDs sensitized TiO2 and electrolytes, which was verified by EIS results. As a result, the performance of QDSCs was significantly improved. The short current was increased from 0.80 mA cm−2 to 1.77 mA cm−2, fill factors increased from 0.38 to 0.70 and the power conversion efficiency increased from 0.24% to 0.89%, achieving 3.7 times that of the untreated cells. The inorganic ligands iodide which was firstly employed in QDSCs opened a new path to enhance the stability of QDSCs which allows the use of I−/I3− electrolytes. Other inorganic ligands should also be investigated for application in QDSCs.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant no. 50873055 and the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China under Grant no. 2009CB930602.
Notes and references
Y.-L. Lee and C.-H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 584 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zarazúa, E. De la Rosa, T. López-Luke, J. Reyes-Gomez, S. Ruiz, C. Ángeles Chavez and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23209 Search PubMed .
G. Y. Lan, Z. Yang, Y. W. Lin, Z. H. Lin, H. Y. Liao and H. T. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2349 RSC .
B.-R. Hyun, Y.-W. Zhong, A. C. Bartnik, L. Sun, H. D. Abruna, F. W. Wise, J. D. Goodreau, J. R. Matthews, T. M. Leslie and N. F. Borrelli, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2206 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, K. Zhu, A. G. Norman, S. Ferrere, A. J. Frank and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25451 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H. Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi, L. J. Diguna and T. Toyoda, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 084304 CrossRef .
M. Shalom, S. Dor, S. Ruhle, L. Grinis and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3895 CAS .
Y. Tachibana, H. Y. Akiyama, Y. Ohtsuka, T. Torimoto and S. Kuwabata, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 88 CrossRef CAS .
V. González-Pedro, X. Xu, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5783 CrossRef .
H. Choi, R. Nicolaescu, S. Paek, J. Ko and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9238 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fuke, L. B. Hoch, A. Y. Koposov, V. W. Manner, D. J. Werder, A. Fukui, N. Koide, H. Katayama and M. Sykora, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6378 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. Song, X. Sun, W. Deng, C. Jiang, W. Lei, J. Huang and R. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153115 CrossRef .
S. Giménez, I. Mora-Seró, L. Macor, N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, R. Gómez, L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 295204 CrossRef .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chakrapani, D. Baker and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9607 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Luan, X. Xu, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 484 CAS .
S. Q. Fan, B. Fang, J. H. Kim, B. Jeong, C. Kim, J. S. Yu and J. Ko, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13644 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vogel, P. Hoyer and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3183 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2009, 324, 1417 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Hyun, Y. W. Zhong, A. C. Bartnik, L. Sun, H. D. Abruña, F. W. Wise, J. D. Goodreau, J. R. Matthews, T. M. Leslie and N. F. Borrelli, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2206 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cahen, G. Hodes, M. Grätzel, J. F. Guillemoles and I. Riess, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, D. D. Sarma and A. K. Sood, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1992, 48, 1779 CrossRef .
Q. Dai, Y. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, D. J. Pellegrino, M. Zhao, B. Zou, J. T. Seo and W. W. Yu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1518 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Zhang, S.-C. Xiang, G.-C. Guo, G. Xu, M.-S. Wang, J.-P. Zou, S.-P. Guo and J.-S. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4149 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2299 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: calculation process of LUMO levels of QDs; calculation process of the component of QDs. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm32459hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  UV-vis-near IR absorption spectrum of PbS QDs before and after ligands exchange.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of PbS QDs surrounded with oleic acid ligands.	 
CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)7COO− + (C4H9)4NI → I− + CH3(CH2)7CHCH(CH2)7COON(C4H9)4	(2)
2I− + Pb2+ (surface) → PbI2	(3)

 	Fig. 3  FTIR results of PbS/TiO2 films before (dotted line) and after iodide ligand exchange treatment (solid line). The spectra of TiO2 has been subtracted as a base line.	 

 	Fig. 4  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of PbS/TiO2 films after iodide ligand exchange treatment.	 

Atomic concentration	48.5%	34.3%	17.2%

 	Fig. 5  Stability test of QDSCs with oleic acid ligands (circles) and with iodide ligands (triangles): photocurrent–time curves.	 

 	Fig. 6  Nyquist plots of QDSCs with oleic acid ligands (circle) and with iodide ligands (square). The inserted chart is the equivalent circuit for QDSCs.	 

TiO2/PbS/oleic acid	132.2	484.5
TiO2/PbS/iodide	45.68	156.8

 	Fig. 7  Structure of PbS QDs and electron transfer: (a) with oleic acid as ligands; (b) with iodide as ligands. The lines on QDs represent HOMO and LUMO level, lines below the LUMO level line represent surface states. Curves and circles represent oleic acid and iodide, respectively. ES2−/Sx2− and EI−/I3− mean the oxidation–reduction potential of S2−/Sx2− and I−/I3−, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  
J–V curves of QDSCs before (circles) and after iodide ligand exchange treatment (triangles). Squares represent cells without PbS QDs adsorption.	 

PbS/oleic acids	0.80	0.77	0.38	0.24
PbS/iodides	1.77	0.71	0.70	0.89
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: calculation process of LUMO levels of QDs; calculation process of the component of QDs. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm32459h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
