Engineered nanomembranes for smart energy storage devices  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00708A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00708A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1308-1330Engineered nanomembranes for smart energy storage devices

        
          
            Xianfu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Oliver G. 
            Schmidt
          
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Chenglin 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *ad
aCollege of Physics, Optoelectronics and Energy & Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. E-mail: c.yan@suda.edu.cn
bInstitute for Integrative Nanosciences, IFW-Dresden, Helmholtzstrasse 20, Dresden, 01069, Germany
cMerge Technologies for Multifunctional Lightweight Structures, Chemnitz University of Technology, Chemnitz 09107, Germany
dSuzhou Key Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technology, Suzhou 215006, China
Received 
      13th September 2015
    First published on 21st December 2015AbstractEngineered nanomembranes are of great interest not only for large-scale energy storage devices, but also for on-chip energy storage integrated microdevices (such as microbatteries, microsupercapacitors, on-chip capacitors, etc.) because of their large active surfaces for electrochemical reactions, shortened paths for fast ion diffusion, and easy engineering for microdevice applications. In addition, engineered nanomembranes provide a lab-on-chip electrochemical device platform for probing the correlations of electrode structure, electrical/ionic conductivity, and electrochemical kinetics with device performance. This review focuses on the recent progress in engineered nanomembranes including tubular nanomembranes and planar nanomembranes, with the aim to provide a systematic summary of their fabrication, modification, and energy storage applications in lithium-ion batteries, lithium–oxygen batteries, on-chip electrostatic capacitors and micro-supercapacitors. A comprehensive understanding of the relationship between engineered nanomembranes and electrochemical properties of lithium ion storage with engineered single-tube microbatteries is given, and the flexibility and transparency of micro-supercapacitors is also discussed. Remarks on challenges and perspectives related to engineered nanomembranes for the further development of energy storage applications conclude this review.
Xianfu Wang
Xianfu Wang received his BS degree from Jiangsu University in 2010 and PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2015. He is now an associate professor at Soochow University. His current research focuses on the design and synthesis of nanostructured materials along with the investigation of their fundamental properties and potential applications in energy storage devices.
Yu Chen
Yu Chen was born in Suzhou, China in 1986. He received his BE in Materials Science and Engineering and PhD degrees from National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2009 and 2014, respectively. After his postdoctoral studies (also at NUS), he became an associate professor in the School of Energy at Soochow University, China. His primary research interests focus on nanostructured functional materials and their applications in energy storage, particularly in the area of lithium/sodium-ion batteries and supercapacitors.
Oliver G. Schmidt
Oliver G. Schmidt is a Director at the IFW Dresden, Germany, and also holds a full Professorship in Material Systems for Nanoelectronics at the Chemnitz University of Technology, Germany. His scientific activities focus on inorganic nanomembrane materials and bridge across interdisciplinary research fields ranging from magnetoelectronics and nanophotonics to energy storage and microrobotics. He received the Otto-Hahn Medal from the Max-Planck-Society in 2000, the Philip-Morris Research Award in 2002, the Carus-Medal in 2005, and the International Dresden Barkhausen Award in 2013. He has published more than 500 peer-reviewed journal papers and has given more than 200 invited talks.
Chenglin Yan
Chenglin Yan is a full professor at Soochow University and executive director of key laboratory of advanced carbon materials and wearable energy technology in Suzhou, China. He received his PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 2008. In 2011, he became a staff scientist and a group leader at the Institute for Integrative Nanoscience at the Leibniz Institute in Dresden. In 2013, the IFW-Dresden awarded Dr Chenglin Yan the IIN Research Prize 2013 for his group's research work. He received the Thousand Young Talents Award from the Chinese Thousand Talents Program in 2014.
1. Introduction
Due to the gradual depletion of non-renewable resources like oil, coal, and natural gas and the increasing environmental problems such as pollution and global warming, new energy sources including hydro-electric power, wind, solar, tidal, and geothermal that are sustainable, safe, and environmentally friendly are urgently demanded. However, these dynamic resources vary with time and geographic condition, making them cumbersome to use stably and deterministically. For this reason, energy storage is a key component in the utilization of electricity generated from these intermittent renewable sources.1–4 Among storage media, electrochemical energy storage devices such as rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs) and supercapacitors (SCs) have attracted worldwide attention because of their vital roles as the dominant power sources for applications ranging from portable electronics to electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), and even huge energy-storage systems.5–14
Among the numerous nanostructures that have been fabricated for energy storage, two-dimensional (2D) nanomembranes have some superior properties including small weight, large exposed surface area, and specific facets, which fulfill the requirements for lithium storage.15–19 In addition, 2D-like nanostructured materials – nanomembranes – are ideal materials for fast lithium storage, which requires stability, high active surface area, and open shortened path for lithium insertion/deinsertion.16 In addition, the nanomembranes exhibit high mechanical stability, high flexibility, and good machinability, which are the right attributes for fabricating micro-SCs and flexible SCs that may display huge potential in miniature, flexible, and wearable electronics.20–24 In the past few years, two basic kinds of nanomembranes have been studied as high-performance electrodes for energy storage devices. One is conventional 2D plane nanomembranes. The other is 3D tubular nanomembranes, which can be fabricated from the plane nanomembranes. Due to their unique structures and excellent properties, both the plane nanomembranes and tubular nanomembranes have been designed and explored extensively for high-performance energy storage devices, especially LIBs and SCs. In particular, the single rolled-up tube batteries reviewed herein are promising for the fundamental study of voltammetry and electrochemical processes and can also be used as a local on-chip energy supply or for driving ultra-compact autonomous microsystems.
Rolled-up nanotechnology is an advanced strategy to deterministically rearrange the geometry of nanomembranes by strain release. It can be a versatile method to roll nanomembranes of different functional materials and form tubular structures by relaxing the intrinsic strain, thus enhancing tolerance towards stress cracking. For example, the inorganic nanomembranes deposited on a polymer sacrificial layer can be released by dissolving the sacrificial layer with acetone, generating micro-/nanotubular structures (Fig. 1a). Fig. 1b–i shows examples of tubular structures rolled up from nanomembranes using this technology. Importantly, it is very convenient to place the tubular structure accurately on a chip, as preliminarily demonstrated in Fig. 1j for a SiO/SiO2 tubular nanomembrane array.25 To date, this technology has proven to be an intriguing approach for improving the electrochemical performance of various electrode materials. Moreover, rolled-up nanotechnology provides a facile way to fabricate microbatteries, which could scale down battery size for the miniaturization of electronic devices and for on-chip energy supply for driving ultra-compact autonomous microsystems, thus paving the way for the integration of microbatteries with other microdevices such as field effect transistors, photodetectors, memories, and logic gates for on- and off-chip applications (Fig. 1k). Rolled-up nanotechnolgy can also provide a platform for the fundamental study of voltammetry and electrochemical processes.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the process of rolling up a nanomembrane into a tube. Optical images of rolled-up nanomembranes (b) Pt, (c) Pd/Fe/Pd, (d) TiO2, (e) ZnO, (f) Al2O3, (g) SixNy, (h) SixNy/Ag, and (i) diamond-like carbon. (j) SEM image of an array of rolled-up SiO/SiO2 nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (k) Concept diagram of on-chip integrated devices based on microbatteries. 
This article reviews the recent development of engineered nanomembranes, including 3D tubular and 2D plane nanomembranes with a focus on their applications in energy storage devices such as LIBs, Li–O2 batteries, capacitors, and SCs. A lab-on-chip electrochemical device platform based on microbatteries for probing the correlation between the nanomembrane electrode structure, electrical/ionic conductivity, and the fundamental electrochemical kinetics is introduced. In the first part, we give a general introduction regarding the metrics of nanomembranes for energy storage devices. The second part starts with a brief introduction of rolled-up nanotechnology for nanomembrane engineering followed by a detailed description of their applications in LIBs, Li–O2 batteries, single tubular batteries, and capacitors along with an analysis of nanomembrane structures and their energy storage performances. Fundamental studies on the voltammetry and electrochemical kinematics of lithium ion storage and different proton diffusion behaviors are also highlighted. In the following section, a simple overview of recent progress related to LIBs based on 2D plane nanomembranes is given, and micro-SCs on graphene and composite planar nanomembranes are also introduced in detail with a focus on their high energy and power densities. A discussion of their flexibility, transparency, future challenges, and opportunities for the fabrication of state-of-the-art micro-SCs is also provided. Finally, we give some general remarks on several important aspects and challenges that are present in the current study and provide an outlook towards further development in engineered nanomembranes for energy-storage devices.
2. Tubular nanomembranes
In general, the Li+ storage mechanisms for anodes can be classified into three types:26 insertion reaction, alloying–dealloying, and conversion reaction. For each reaction, one of the big challenges for Li+ storage is electrode pulverization and consequent deterioration in cycling performance caused by the large volume changes and strain accommodation generated during lithiation/delithiation processes. On the other hand, electrode pulverization generated by stresses during Li+ insertion/extraction also creates new interfaces, which consume lithium and increase diffusion lengths, thus leading to performance degradation.27 Therefore, if the strain caused by lithiation or delithiation can be released by the composition and morphology of the electrode material, batteries with high capacity, long cycle life, and high rate capability could be realized.
To this end, we introduced rolled-up nanotechnology as a new strategy to fabricate strain-released hierarchy micro-/nanostructures. The most attractive feature of these materials is “strain release,” during which the strain energy relaxes to a minimal level by rolling. This feature improves the capability of the structure to accommodate strain (stress) induced by Li+ insertion/extraction, thereby enhancing the tolerance to stress cracking and preventing the electrode from pulverization. By using rolled-up nanotechnology, we have explored various tubular nanomembranes and studied their potential applications in enhancing Li+ storage performance. In this section, we begin with an introduction of rolled-up nanotechnology and focus on the evolution of tubular nanomembranes for Li+ storage from silicon-based, germanium-based, and composite tubular nanomembranes. We then provide further discussion to highlight the intrinsic merits of tubular nanomembranes for Li+ storage.
2.1 Rolled-up nanotechnology for nanomembrane engineering
Rolled-up nanotechnology is an approach to automatically rearrange 2D thin films into tubular geometries by releasing the strain in the thin membranes.28 To date, this technique has proven to be an intriguing approach for various promising applications including microelectronics,29 biology,30 optics,31 and energy storage.32 It is worth noting that rolled-up nanostructures possess relaxed elastic strain energy, opening up the possibility for Li+ storage due to the released strain introduced during the lithiation and delithiation processes.
Specifically, the residual strain present in thin membranes results in a change in film dimensions via either bending or wrinkling processes. The self-rolling process is mainly driven by the residual strain (stress) in nanomembranes, and the mechanism has been investigated in detail to quantitatively determine the wrinkling or bending/rolling. Fig. 2 provides a simple model to illustrate the physical mechanism based on strain–stress theory. For simplicity, a bilayer nanomembrane (layers 1 and 2 with thicknesses d1 and d2, respectively) grown on a sacrificial layer is considered. When the sacrificial layer is removed by well-chemical selective etching, part of the nanomembrane is free-hanging over a distance h and is initially in an unrelaxed strained state over the entire length L. As the sacrificial layer is gradually being removed, strain-relaxing takes place in the part of the free-hanging bilayer and initiates bending due to the existence of a strain gradient (or Δε) across the bilayer thickness. We suppose that layers 1 and 2 are subject to biaxial strains ε1 and ε2, respectively. Depending on the specific materials, these two strains are generally different so that an average strain and a strain gradient can be defined as:33εave = ηε1 + (1 − η)ε2Δε = ε1 − ε2where η = d1/(d1 + d2).
 Fig. 2  Schematics of (a) a flat bi-layer nanomembrane, (b) a bent nanomembrane with radius R, and (c) a wrinkled structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2009 American Physical Society. 
To determine the bending direction, the length of h is crucial. When h is small, the fixed boundary confinement in the x direction limits the relaxation in x, and the strain is relaxed via bending in the y direction (Fig. 2b). With increasing h, the constraint from the fixed boundary weakens; thus, the membrane stretches in both directions. However, there is still a geometric constraint for strain relaxation in the x direction, thus leading to the formation of wrinkles (Fig. 2c). The real shape might be a combination of bent and wrinkled structures.34–36 It should be pointed out that 3D micro-/nanostructures produced by the rolling or bending of nanomembranes also depend on the strain gradient (or Δε). Wrinkled nanomembranes occur if a relatively small strain gradient exists (Δε < 0.5%), and rolled nanomembranes are obtained if the strain gradient is sufficiently large (Δε > 0.5%). In the latter case, the free-hanging bilayer tends to be rolled until the minimized elastic strain energy is achieved, which gives rise to a radius of the curved film as:  We can clearly see that the self-rolling process is determined by the layer thicknesses (d1 and d2), and the strain states (ν: Poisson ratio, Δε), which are strongly influenced by film deposition parameters. Meanwhile, Δε > 0 implies a roll-upwards process, while Δε < 0 implies a downwards-rolling mechanism. Finally, a tubular nanomembrane can be obtained when the film length is longer than the circumference along the rolling direction.
From above, we know that the introduction of a strain gradient perpendicular to the nanomembranes is essential for the fabrication of rolled-up structures. To obtain rolled-up nanomembranes, several methods have been explored. One is utilizing lattice mismatch in nanomembranes grown by epitaxy. Groups IV, III–V, and even II–VI semiconductor materials have been successfully strain-engineered and rolled.37–43 The biggest advantage of this method is that the engineering process is controllable. Due to the well-known values of the lattice constants, we can calculate the strain gradient between the different nanomembranes accurately, which is beneficial to the design of experiments.44–46 Nevertheless, this method depends on the values of lattice constants, which limits the fabrication of some materials without exact values. Moreover, the epitaxial nanomembranes are expensive and complicated to fabricate, putting severe limits to practical applications. In addition, nanomembranes deposited by other non-epitaxial vapour deposition methods may also be inherently strained, containing some built-in stress.34 The strain gradient can be obtained based on the deposition parameters. Heating or cooling material systems with different coefficients of thermal expansion is another way to generate strain gradients within the nanomembranes.34
By combining the two latter approaches, a novel and facile method to roll-up nanomembranes on a polymer sacrificial layer (mainly a photoresist) has been explored.28 Utilizing conventional photolithography, the nanomembranes can be correctly patterned on a photoresist layer during deposition, which provides the obvious convenience of the accurate positioning of microtubes and module integration on a single chip. It is worth mentioning that the evolution of substrate temperature, deposition rate, and base pressure need to be taken into account during nanomembrane deposition. Meanwhile, various diameters can be obtained by changing the thickness and the strain gradient of the nanomembranes. However, it is not possible to obtain an accurate analytical description of the strain gradient and diameter of a tubular nanomembrane in this case. In addition, the nanomembranes deposited on photoresist layers are always of poly-crystalline or amorphous nature, which may influence their properties for applications in electronic devices. However, the amorphous structrures may also impart the layers with huge potential as electrodes for LIBs. Therefore, the tubular nanomembranes reviewed in this article are mainly fabricated using this method.
2.2 Engineered tubular nanomembranes for lithium-ion batteries
As mentioned above, tubular nanomembranes made by rolled-up nanotechnology can release the strain caused by lithiation or delithiation as well as provide extra interior space for electron and ion transport, thus improving the electrochemical performance of the LIB. For this reason, we have fabricated various kinds of tubular nanomembranes with different architectures using rolled-up nanotechnology and explored their potential applications as high-performance electrodes for LIBs.47–56 In the following section, we will review the electrochemical performances of these unique architectures containing silicon-based, germanium-based, and composite tubular nanomembranes and illustrate their inherent merits for use in LIBs.

2.2.1 Silicon-based tubular nanomembranes. 
Silicon (Si) is regarded as one of the most promising anode materials for next-generation LIBs due to its highest theoretical capacity (∼4200 mA h g−1), environmental benignity, abundance in nature, and low working potential.57,58 Despite these preeminent properties, conventional Si anodes face significant challenges due to the large volume changes (400%) during alloy processes to form LixSi (0 ≤ x ≤ 4.4). These changes hinder Si as a commercial negative electrode because of the loss of electrical contact between active materials caused by mechanical fracture, accumulation of solid–electrolyte interphase layers, and rapid capacity fading during electrochemical cycling.59 Recently, nanotechnology has achieved a breakthrough to overcome these challenges.60 Various Si nanomaterials and engineered Si nanostructures such as nanowires/particles, hollow spheres, and porous nanostructures have shown stable cycling and high resistance to fracture in spite of the large volume change.60–63 In addition, composites with carbon such as Si NPs coated with carbon black,64 carbon-coated yolk–shell structured Si composites,59 Si–carbon core–shell structures,65 and even single-layer graphene-coated Si nanowires66 have been designed to improve the structural and electrical integrity of Si anodes. In contrast to these works, using engineered 3D tubular nanomembranes, we can not only accommodate the kinetic properties towards Li ion and electron transport, but also minimize the mechanical stress induced by the volume change of Si.
Using a downwards rolling method, Deng et al. fabricated rolled-up C/Si/C trilayer nanomembranes48 by first depositing a spin-coated sacrificial layer (photoresist) on the top of an Si substrate followed by the radio frequency sputtering of C/Si/C multi-layers, during which the intrinsic strain caused by thermal expansion effects was generated. When the sacrificial layer was selectively etched by acetone, the composite nanomembranes naturally peeled off from the Si substrates and broke into micrometer-sized pieces due to the pulling strain (Fig. 3a). These pieces further self-rolled into multilayer tubular structures (Fig. 3b). In this unique architecture, the Si nanomembranes work as the active layer for Li+ storage, and the carbon layers serve as the supporting layer because of their high stability and excellent conductivity. As a result, when used as anodes for LIBs, the multilayer C/Si/C nanomembranes exhibited synergistic properties and superior electrochemical performance. The tubular C/Si/C multilayers exhibit excellent stability with a highly reversible capacity. The capacity of the 300th cycle is about 1000 mA h g−1, almost 100% of that of the second one at a current density of 500 mA g−1 (Fig. 3c). Such an ultra-long cycle life is not observed for most other Si-based anodes. More importantly, the overall tubular morphology as well as the encapsulation of Si layers within the double carbon layers are well maintained even after 82 cycles, revealing the stable cycling performance of the multilayer C/Si/C microtubes for LIBs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication process, (b) SEM image, and (c) cycling performance of rolled-up C/Si/C multilayer nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Graphene, which consists of a single or a few stacked ordered sp2 carbon sheets, is regarded as an ideal protective material for electrode materials and has shown great potential in improving battery performance due to its high electrical conductivity and specific surface area.67 With good flexibility, graphene and rGO are highly compatible with the strain engineering strategy and have been utilized widely to form composites with other materials to enhance their Li+ storage performances. To further improve the capacity and cycling stability of Si-based tubular nanomembranes, a tubular Si/rGO bilayer nanomembrane consisting of parallel aligned Si and rGO nanolayers was fabricated using the above rolled-up nanotechnology process.49 The Si/rGO bilayer nanomembranes (Fig. 4a) sandwiched with Si as an electrochemically active layer and rGO as a conductive protecting layer were designed to combine the merits of Si nanomembranes and rGO protecting layers. As expected, the tubular Si/rGO bilayer nanomembranes delivered an initial discharge/charge capacity of 2871/1817 mA h g−1 with a higher initial Coulombic efficiency of 63.3% at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (Fig. 4b), which were much higher than those of the electrode with pure Si nanomembranes (2683/1250 mA h g−1, 46.6%). Importantly, an ultra-long cycling stability was achieved by using the tubular hybrid bilayer nanomembranes. A high reversible capability of 571 mA h g−1 was maintained after 2000 charge–discharge cycles at a high current density of 3000 mA g−1 (Fig. 4c). These results obviously reveal the unique merits of tubular structures combining Si and rGO nanomembranes for releasing the strain generated in the alloy processes and thus realizing high cycling stability.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of rolled-up Si/rGO bilayer nanomembranes. (b) Cycling performance at (b) 100 mA g−1 and (c) 3 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
As discussed above, the strain-released rolled-up Si-based nanomembranes exhibited enhanced capacity and cycling stability. However, in these cases, two or even more different materials were adopted to realize different functionalities for each layer, which not only causes difficulties in the preparation, but also may cause interfacial strain. To solve these problems, Zhang et al. further demonstrated a hierarchical electrode design with just one material. Taking multilayered SiOx as an example, by controlling the oxygen content x in each SiOx layer, some desired functionalities for different layers with improved performance can be achieved.50
The fabrication process is the same with the rolled-up nanotechnology mentioned above. An oxygen-rich SiOx (with x ∼ 1.85) film and a silicon-rich SiOy (with y ∼ 0.5) film can be obtained by controlling the oxygen partial pressure. Fig. 5a shows the morphology of the as-fabricated SiOx/SiOy tubular structures, and the interfaces between the two layers can be clearly observed in Fig. 5b. The outer layer of the membrane is a thin (about 12 nm), oxygen-rich amorphous SiOx layer that acts as a strain buffer/mechanical supporting layer. The inner layer of the membrane is a thicker (about 35 nm), Si-rich amorphous SiOy layer, which has a large capacity for Li+ storage due to the electrochemically active Si domains. The benefits of this unique structure are the first discharge and charge capabilities of 2595 and 1372 mA h g−1, respectively, achieved at 100 mA g−1. The specific capacity stabilized at around 1300 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles, revealing the excellent cycling property resulting from the superior mechanical stability. The wound-up layer structure was conserved very well after the first charge and even after 80 cycles (Fig. 5c and d), indicating that the oxygen-rich amorphous SiOx layer can be an excellent strain buffer layer, and the tubular nanomembranes can effectively avoid mechanical failure during the expansion/contraction of the active layers.
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of an SiOx/SiOy bilayer nanomembrane. The surface morphology of the cycled electrodes (c) after the first charge and (d) after 80 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


2.2.2 Germanium based tubular nanomembranes. 
In addition to Si, germanium (Ge) has also attracted considerable attention recently because of its high theoretical capacity of 1600 mA h g−1 despite its high cost. Compared to Si, Ge has advantages for high-power LIBs because of its intrinsic kinetic superiority. The electrical conductivity of Ge is 10000-times higher than that of Si because of its smaller band gap of 0.6 eV. In addition, the Li+ diffusion coefficient of Ge is about 400-times higher than that of Si at room temperature.68,69 Similar to the Si anode, the commercial application of Ge in LIBs is also hindered by the poor cycle stability because the drastic volume change during the Li+ uptake and release process results in the pulverization and exfoliation from the current collector, leading to poor cycling ability and rapidly declining capacity.70 To overcome these problems, tremendous efforts have been made to design materials that can buffer the volume change, including mesoporous Ge particles,71 Ge nanowires,72 Ge microcubes,73 Ge@C nanoparticles,74 and composite electrodes incorporating graphene.75–78 Among these electrodes, the careful engineering of hybrid Ge-based electrode materials provides both high storage capacity and high conductivity for enhanced Li storage properties.
Using rolled-up nanotechnology, Yan et al. fabricated a new type of configuration based on Ge/Ti hybrid multilayers.51 Metallic Ti is employed mainly because of its outstanding electrical properties, high chemical stability, and mechanical strength to buffer huge volume changes during the lithiation/delithiation processes.79Fig. 6a shows a schematic of the fabrication process for the strain release of Ge/Ti bilayer hybrid films. The Ge/Ti films bent and formed into a tubular structure after etching the sacrificial layer due to the existing intrinsic stress gradient in the bilayer. The hybrid tubular nanomembranes showed discharge and charge capacities of 1753 and 1490 mA h g−1, respectively, for the first cycle at C/16 (Fig. 6b). Importantly, the Coulombic efficiencies of Ge-based anodes are known to be relatively low. However, in our hybrid nanomembranes, a high Coulombic efficiency of 85% could be achieved (Fig. 6c), which is much higher than that of Ge nanowires (33%),80 Ge nanotubes (76%),81 and Ge/graphene composites (52%).74 After 100 cycles, the hybrid Ge/Ti microtubes exhibited excellent capacity retention and maintained a stable capacity of about 930 mA h g−1 with high Coulombic efficiency, demonstrating the advantages of the strain-released structures for improving electrochemical properties and enhancing cycling performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) cycling performance, and (c) coulombic efficiency at a current rate of C/16 of the multilater Ge/Ti nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Apart from single-phase Ge anodes, Ge-based oxides such as GeO2 and GeOx were recently found to exhibit significantly better cycling stability and rate capability than pure Ge. The enhanced cycling and rate performance stems from the Ge metal nanocrystals formed by the electrochemical conversion reaction of Ge oxides in the first Li+ insertion process.82–86 To further improve the electrochemical properties of Ge-based oxides, composite electrodes containing GeOx nanostructures and reduced graphene or other carbon materials have been explored.87–89 Chen et al. reported strain-driven multilayer graphene/GeO2 tubular nanomembranes52 in which GeO2 multilayers work as the active layers for Li+ storage, while graphene serves as the electrically conductive and elastic layer and also provides additional lithium storage sites. The SEM image in Fig. 7a clearly shows that the layered platelets are composed of curled nanosheets, and a representative tubular graphene/GeO2 nanomembrane is composed of C, Ge, and O (Fig. 7b). Such novel graphene-based tubular nanoarchitectures provide short Li+ pathways and high electrical and ionic conductivities; hence, they exhibit much improved specific capacity along with super rate capability and cycling performance. As shown in Fig. 7c, the hybrid nanomembranes exhibited excellent rate capability with charge capacities of 886 and 624 mA h g−1 at 0.2 and 2 C, respectively. Even at a high current of 5 C, a capacity of 504 mA h g−1 was still achieved, much higher than that of the rolled-up pure GeO2 nanomembranes (239 mA h g−1). Remarkably, a highly stable capacity of 571 mA h g−1 was obtained after 1000 cycles at 2 C, revealing ultra-long cycling life. The enhanced rate capability and cycling stability can be attributed to the highly conductive graphene and shortened diffusion pathway, which facilitate efficient electron and ion transport; the hollow nanostructures with large active surfaces, which provide more reaction sites; and the strain-released nanomembranes, which improve cycling stability.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image, (b) elemental mapping images, (c) rate, and (d) long cycling performance of the graphene/GeO2 tubular nanomembranes (scale bar: 20 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


2.2.3 Other tubular nanomembranes. 
Rolled-up nanotechnology is highly adaptable for self-curled tubular structures, and many other self-wound nanomembranes have also been fabricated to explore their applications in improving Li+ storage performance. For example, RuO2/C composite tubular nanomembranes showed enhanced cycling stability when compared to RuO2 powder.47 The discharge capacity of the RuO2 powder was reduced to 90 mA h g−1 after 15 discharge cycles at C/16, while the RuO2/C tubular nanomembranes showed a discharge capacity of 830 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of 99%, implying enhanced lifetime and good reversibility of the hybrid tubes. The improved electrochemical properties can be ascribed to the tubular nanomembrane structure, allowing for strain-relaxation, along with the stable supporting carbon layer, which maintains the electrode integrity during the conversion reaction of the active layer. Moreover, the large electron contact area and good adherence caused by the close contact between the entire active layer and the conductive carbon layer are also beneficial for the improved electrochemical performance.
As one of the transition metal oxides, NiO has been considered as a promising anode material for next-generation LIBs due to its high theoretical capacity (718 mA h g−1), low cost, and improved safety.90–92 In addition, the density of NiO is 6.67 g cm−3, leading to high volumetric energy density.93 Till now, NiO nanosheets,94 nanorod arrays,95 microtubes,96 and NiO/C composites97–99 have been explored to obtain high specific capacities with average cycling stability. However, none of them realize super rate capability and long cycling stability because of the intrinsic low conductivity and drastic volume variation during lithiation or delithiation.
To this end, Sun et al. designed 3D “curved” NiO nanomembranes using the typical rolled-up method followed by a thermal oxidation process.53 The product is composed of large quantities of curved nanomembranes with an average diameter of around 10 μm (Fig. 8a). This particular structure results in excellent lithium storage performance as it combines efficient 3D electron transport, excellent connectivity with electronic and ionic sources, and short diffusion distance. As expected, the tubular nanomembranes exhibited excellent rate capability; even after cycling at an extremely high C-rate of 50 C, the capacity was able to recover to the initial value when the current rate was set back to 0.2 C after 110 cycles. Importantly, the “curved” NiO electrode showed ultra-long cycle life for LIBs. The electrodes deliver a high capacity of 721 mA h g−1 at 1.5 C (1 C = 718 mA g−1) after 1400 cycles with excellent stability (Fig. 8b). This impressive power rate and ultra-long lifespan are the best results ever reported for NiO-based electrodes.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image and (b) reversible capacity versus cycle number for the curved NiO nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic configuration of a stacked SnO2/Cu cell. (d) SEM image and (e) cycling performance of the SnO2/Cu nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Using the tubular nanomembranes construction, the strain of lithiation/delithiation in SnO2 electrodes can also be relieved. The result showed that a long cycling life of 1000 cycles at 1600 mA g−1 with a high reversible capacity of 854 mA h g−1 could be realized using rolled-up amorphous SnO2 nanomembranes. It is worth mentioning that the amorphous electrode can deliver a high rate capability of up to 40 A g−1, which is greatly improved compared to most pure SnO2 anodes.54 The superior performance is ascribed to the structural advantages of amorphous structures, such as the short diffusion paths of Li+ and the efficient accommodation of strain.100,101 Moreover, the unique mechanical features also enable the electrodes to buffer the strain, delaying pulverization and extending the cycling life.
As reviewed above, the rolled-up tubular nanomembranes can efficiently improve the electrochemical performances of LIBs. The main drawback of the tubular nanomembranes is the large hollow center, although this can benefit ion transport. To some extent, the hollow structure limits the packing density and therefore the potential for further practical applications. To increase the volume energy of tubular nanomembranes, compact sandwich-like nanosheet stacks were also created by applying rolled-up nanotechnology and a subsequent compression step.55 To obtain the sandwich-like structures, SnO2/Cu bilayered tubular nanomembranes are first strain engineered with carbon black (CB) periodically clamped between each layer. Then, compact 2D nanosheet stacks with well-defined channels can be readily formed after compressing the rolled-up tubular nanomembranes at a pressure of around 2.9 kPa (Fig. 8d). With CB acting as the interlayer, the restacking and agglomeration of the SnO2/Cu sandwich-like structures can be prevented during charge/discharge processes, and volume changes can also be accommodated by the free channels (Fig. 8c). Furthermore, these 2D nanosheets possess large active surfaces, enhancing the electrochemical reactions at the interfaces between active materials and the electrolyte. Furthermore, the hybrid Cu thin films can act as conductive layers, providing excellent electronic conductivity, and as structural buffers, preserving the integrity of the entire electrode. Benefitting from these unique advantages, the 2D sandwich-like SnO2/Cu hybrid anodes thus exhibited a high reversible capacity of 713 mA h g−1 and a stable cycling performance of about 75% capacity retention at 0.2 A g−1 after 150 cycles (Fig. 8e).

2.3 Tubular nanomembranes for Li–O2 batteries
Rechargeable Li–O2 batteries have gained recognition as one of the most promising candidates to replace conventional LIBs because of the possibility to achieve the high energy density desired for long-range electric vehicles.102–104 However, key limitations such as large charge/discharge overpotential, low rate capability, and poor cycle life must be resolved for practical applications. A desirable Li–O2 cathode must be conductive and stable in extremely oxidative environments and show good catalytic activity towards both the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER).105–107 Therefore, the oxygen electrode should consist of porous conductive substrates to accommodate insoluble discharge products because the overall energy density is determined by the amount of insoluble discharge products stored in the oxygen electrode.108 Furthermore, the oxygen electrode should facilitate oxygen diffusion and electrolyte impregnation. Thus, it is essential to optimize the porosity of the oxygen electrode to provide a large space for insoluble discharge products and enhance oxygen diffusion and electrolyte impregnation throughout the electrode.
To our delight, the hollow architectures of the rolled-up tubular nanomembranes render them excellent candidates for oxygen electrodes. Very recently, Lu et al. fabricated a trilayer Pd/MnOx/Pd nanomembrane (Fig. 9a) using the typical rolled-up nanotechnology process.56 When used as the cathode catalyst, a specific capacity of 6750 mA h g−1 was achieved at a current density of 70 mA g−1 (Fig. 9b), much higher than those of Super P (1930 mA h g−1) and pure MnOx nanomembranes (4500 mA h g−1). More importantly, by sandwiching the MnOx layer between two ultrathin Pd films, the charge overpotential was significantly lowered to about 3.16 V (the overpotential is about 0.2 V, which is the theoretical limit proposed in the literature109), leading to a power efficiency of about 86%. When the current density was increased to 200 mA g−1, the power efficiency of Pd/MnOx/Pd remained over 80%, much higher than those of bare MnOx and Super P (Fig. 9c). The cathode catalyst also exhibited high cycling stability. As revealed in Fig. 9d, there is no apparent degradation of either the discharge or charge potential up to 190 cycles for the battery with the Pd/MnOx/Pd electrode, and it finally cycles 269 times before the discharge voltage drops to 2.0 V, representing a great improvement over electrodes previously reported in the literature. Moreover, the terminal charge potential of the Pd/MnOx/Pd electrode stays below 4.2 V during the entire process, effectively suppressing the side reactions and achieving stable cycling performance.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of the Pd/MnOx/Pd nanomembrane. (b) Voltage profiles, (c) power efficiencies, and (d) cycling stability of the hybrid nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
2.4 Electrochemical fundamental study based on single rolled-up nanomembrane tube batteries
Rolled-up nanotechnology offers an advanced strategy to deterministically rearrange 2D plane nanomembranes into 3D micro/nano-hierarchical tubes. Importantly, combined with conventional photolithography, the 3D micro/nano tubular nanomembranes can be easily patterned on a chip, which shows great potential to fabricate miniature devices, especially energy storage devices for fundamentally exploring the kinetics of ion or electron storage. In this section, we summarize several interesting fundamental studies on LIBs, SCs, and electrostatic capacitors based on single tubular nanomembranes.

2.4.1 Single tubular LIBs. 
The above results have demonstrated that tubular nanomembranes can greatly enhance the electrochemical performance for lithium ion storage due to the fast ionic transport and powerful strain accommodation resulting from the unique hollow micro/nano-hierarchical structure. Despite these achievements, a deeper understanding of the relationship between the tubular structure, electrical/ionic conductivity, the electrochemical kinetics as well as the lithium storage performance still needs to be explored. However, it is a great challenge to obtain this information with batteries based on bulk electrodes because they are often composed of electrodes, conductive additives, and polymer binders, which will introduce some uncertainty into fundamental electrochemical kinetic studies. To eliminate these uncertainties, it is necessary to investigate single active materials.
To date, considerable efforts have been made to develop such platforms using single active materials with well-defined geometries, which enable the direct observation of electrochemical behaviors and structural changes in active materials. Based on studies of single nanostructured devices, lithographic techniques were developed and applied to battery studies. By fabricating a microelectrode attached to a particle to establish an electrical contact, Uchida's group investigated the kinetics of Li+ extraction/insertion by measuring the current and potential of a single particle.110 An electrode platform to test the electrical transport and observe the structural evolution of single silicon nanowires has also been investigated.111 Recently, by combining single nanostructure device diagnostics with in situ electron microscopy techniques, a deeper understanding of battery operational processes has been obtained. Huang et al. directly observed the lithiation of a single SnO2 nanowire during electrochemical charging using in situ transmission electron microscopy.112 Using the same method, Wang and co-workers presented a two-phase process of electrochemical lithiation in amorphous Si.113 MacDowell also investigated the electronic properties and structural changes in a single Si nanowire.114 However, these technologies using lithographic techniques and in situ transmission electron microscopy are too complicated to be operated. Besides, these technologies depend largely on the equipment, which may not allow widely for the direct correlation of the electrochemical property with the structure on the same single electrode material. Rolled-up nanotechnology, by contrast, is more readily accessible, flexible, and cost-effective, and it is very convenient to accurately place the tubular structure on a chip. Therefore, rolled-up nanotechnology is expected to be a practical method to fabricate on-chip energy storage devices to elucidate the direct relationship between electrical transport, structure, and electrochemistry of a single electrode.
Using the rolled-up nanotechnology, Si et al. presented a lab-on-chip electrochemical device platform to probe the electrochemical kinetics, electrical properties, and lithium-driven structural changes.115Fig. 10a shows a schematic of a micro-LIB based on a single Si tubular nanomembrane; a single Si tube and a strip of lithium foil were used as the working electrode and counter electrode, respectively, and a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) chamber served as the electrolytic cell. Fig. 10b reveals an optical microscopy image of the single rolled-up Si tubular nanomembrane with a diameter of around 30 μm, and three Ti contacts were made with one in the middle of the tube and two at its two ends. The biggest advantage of this approach to fabricate the on-chip device is that the tubular nanomembranes is self-wound at the end of the Ti electrode by controlling the experimental parameters. Using the single rolled-up tube platform, we have gained a better understanding of the different diffusion behavior of Li+ in the Si tubular nanomembrane. As demonstrated in Fig. 10c, the maximum diffusion coefficient occurs at around 0.2 V, probably due to the increased contact area between the electrode and electrolyte because the fast reaction between Li and Si introduces a large volume expansion as well as the formation of wrinkles and small particles on the surface. The Li+ diffusion coefficient in the Si tube is about 10−11 cm2 s−1, which is several times higher than that in planar Si films under all potentials except at 0 V. The maximum conductivity of 0.56 S cm−1 occurs at around 0.12 V, which can be attributed to the decomposition of the conductive alloy and the formation of the less-conductive alloy (Fig. 10d). Meanwhile, the volume expansion of the Si tube upon the insertion of lithium contributes to the increase in overall conductivity since the cross section increases during the expansion of the tube. Furthermore, the morphological evolution of a single Si tube can be easily observed in our device. The single Si tube reveals a smooth surface (Fig. 10e), while after three cycles, the tube exhibits a highly wrinkled structure (Fig. 10f) that can apparently accommodate large volume strains introduced during electrochemical processes.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the single device. (b) Optical microscopy image of a single rolled-up silicon tube. (c) Diffusion coefficient of Li+ ion in an Si tube. (d) Electrochemical conductivity during first discharge/charge cycle. Morphology of a tube before cycling (e) and after three cycles (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Using the single-microtube-based LIB device, the correlation between the electrical transport and electrochemical properties of the hybrid multilayer Ge/Ti microtubes for Li+ storage was also probed.51 The device starts with the fabrication of a plane-strained multilayer nanomembrane by the sequential deposition of Ge and Ti thin films on top of a sacrificial layer (Fig. 11a). Once the sacrificial layer is selectively removed, the strained Ge/Ti bilayer starts to roll towards the Au finger structures. After the rolling process, the microtube on top of the Au fingers established an electrical connection (Fig. 11b). Fig. 11c shows a single rolled-up device for electric transport measurements during lithiation and delithiation. The middle electrode acts as the anode for the lithium-ion battery, and the two electrodes at the open ends are used for electrical transport measurements. Using the single rolled-up Ge/Ti microtube as the working electrode, propylene carbonate/ethylene carbonate as the electrolyte, and a metallic lithium foil as the counter electrode, we have conducted an electrical transport investigation of a single Ge/Ti microtube before and after lithiation. First, the hybrid Ge/Ti structure exhibits a much higher electric conductivity compared to pure Ge microtubes (Fig. 11d), highlighting the merits of incorporating the Ti multilayer in significantly improving the conductivity. After lithiation, an enhancement of the conductivity performance by almost one order of magnitude can be observed due to the insertion of lithium into the amorphous Ge microtubes and the formation of more conductive LixGe alloys (Fig. 11e). Meanwhile, after delithiation, a decrease in conductivity was measured, and the conductivity of the hybrid Ge/Ti can be partially recovered (Fig. 11f). This behavior is attributed to the decomposition of the conductive LixGe alloy and the formation of the less conductive Ge.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) Fabrication schematic and (c) optical microscopy overview image of a single rolled-up device. (d) Transport properties of the single Ge/Ti and Ge microtubes. (e and f) Transport properties of the single Ge/Ti microtubes before and after discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The strain-release method provides a straightforward and novel way to explore the fundamental transport characteristics of lithium ion and conductivity evolution during the reaction while overcoming limitations apparent in conventional lithography. The insertion rate of Li+ in active electrodes is known to vary from site to site. To further understand the diffusion kinetics of Li+ in the single tubular electrodes of batteries, multiple contacts on single tubular electrode may be designed for recording the conductance of different parts of the electrode at the charge/discharge status and giving detailed information. For example, Mai's group explored the Li+ and Na+ transport in different parts of single H2V3O8 nanowires using on-chip micro-electrochemical devices.116 To advance the fundamental and practical study of tubular electrode materials for energy storage applications, fundamental studies on this area might be an exciting motivation.


2.4.2 Single tubular supercapacitors. 
Rolled-up nanotechnology has shown great opportunities for the fabrications of lab-on-chip electrochemical device platforms based on individual tube micro/nanostructures. Apart from the single tubular LIBs for electrochemical kinetics reviewed above, on-chip single tubular supercapacitors for different proton diffusion behaviors have also been carefully designed. Ji et al. demonstrated a single Swiss roll redox micro-SC by rolling up a multilayered Au/RuO2 nanomembrane.117 The prepared Swiss roll microtubes are approximately 7 μm in diameter with around 7 windings deduced from the rolling length of 150 μm. The on-chip tubular SC revealed clear electrochemical reversibility of the Faradaic redox transition of amorphous RuO2. The calculated capacitance is about 1 μF at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, corresponding to 2200 μF cm−2, which is close to that of the theoretical redox capacitance of anhydrous RuO2. It is worth noting that the micro-SC size is greatly reduced when compared to that of a commercial 1 μF capacitor, and the 2D area is reduced to 1/20 of that of the unrolled planar film. The other merit of this rolled-up tubular SC is that the proton diffusion behavior of the redox micro-device can be readily tuned by controlling the hollow core, the multilayer rolled-up wall, and the tube diameter and rotation.
Micro-SCs have been extensively studied in the last several years. However, little attention has been paid to the electrochemical kinetics of single active material because there is no mature platform. Excitingly, the self-rolled-up single tubular SCs reviewed here exhibited great potential for studying charge transfer at the electrolyte/electrode interface. Furthermore, this technique can be further applied to electrochemical microprobes in cell electrophysiology and to the local detection of microenvironments.


2.4.3 Single tubular capacitors. 
In the case of miniaturized energy autonomous systems (MEAS) containing electronic devices, energy harvesters and energy-storage elements (e.g., wireless sensor networks and medical device implants), the reduction of the entire system must be addressed. To make energy storage devices suitable for MEAS, several features are needed, including long life (10 years or more), short charging time (seconds to minutes), ultra-long charge–discharge life (up to 10000 cycles), small geometric dimensions (<1 mm2), high temperature stability, and parallel manufacturing capability.118 Alternatively, electrostatic capacitors can fulfil those criteria including life and charging time, charging–discharging cycles, miniaturization, and large-scale production. Therefore, electrostatic capacitors are appealing for MEAS when the footprint area is reduced.
The rolled-up nanomembranes offer a feasible route towards reducing the footprint by curling thin membranes into tubular architectures. Bufon et al. fabricated self-wound ultracompact capacitors (UCCaps) using rolled-up nanotechnology.32 As outlined in Fig. 12a–c, the process starts with the fabrication of a planar-strained multilayer nanomembrane by the sequential deposition of metal and dielectric thin films on top of a sacrificial layer. The 3D UCCap is self-assembled by selectively removing the sacrificial layer. The rolling of the tubular nanomembrane capacitor shown in Fig. 12d results in the reduction of the footprint to about 0.002 mm2, representing a compactification of 25 times compared to the original unrolled size (0.050 mm2). It is worth mentioning that the specific capacitance of the UCCap can be easily changed by adjusting the number of windings. For example, the capacitance per footprint area significantly increases from 1.3 to 200 μF cm−2 with enhanced winding number (Fig. 12e), revealing the merit of combining top-down methods with self-assembly methods. Startlingly, the UCCap obtained by rolling a nanomembrane with a length of 1 mm exhibited a high power density of 2000 W kg−1 and a specific energy density of 0.55 W h kg−1 in the range of supercapacitors, confirming the great potential to improve performance by reducing the footprint area using the rolled-up nanomembranes.
 Fig. 12  (a and b) Layer sequence used to create rolled-up capacitors. (c) Layer sequence for inorganic and hybrid organic/inorganic capacitors. (d) Typical SEM images of nanomembrane-based UCCaps. (e) Relationship between capacitance per footprint area and number of windings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
As confirmed above, the self-assembling rolled-up process is responsible for the decrease in the device's footprint area and consequently for the increase in the capacitance per footprint area. To further increase the capacitance, Sharma et al. tailored the electrical properties by combining different high-k dielectrics such as Al2O3, TiO2, and HfO2.119Fig. 13a shows a schematic of a roll-up UCCap and the corresponding oxide layer sequence used to form the device, in which the electron beam-evaporated Au/Ti and Cr membranes served as the two capacitor plates with a multi-layer stack dielectric consisting of Al2O3, TiO2, and HfO2 between them. As expected, the capacitances of the rolled-up capacitors based on 100% Al2O3 dielectric layers as well as Al2O3–TiO2 multilayers increased by a factor of about 1.3. Upon HfO2 incorporation, a typical increased factor of 1.7 is observed upon rolling. Fig. 13b shows the increase in the capacitance of a rolled-up device as a function of the amount of incorporated HfO2 and TiO2. The incorporation of high-k oxides results in increases in capacitance of up to 100% when compared to UCCaps using only Al2O3 as the dielectric. In addition to tailoring the capacitances of UCCaps by incorporating HfO2 and TiO2, the devices can also be engineered in a variety of configurations to increase the capacitance and for other applications. For example, we can fabricate UCCaps with longer tubes and consequently larger active areas. Furthermore, the technology demonstrated here also allows the creation of self-rolled double-tube capacitors electrically connected in parallel. Fig. 13c demonstrates a four-inch wafer containing 1600 devices, in which two UCCaps are electrically contacted in parallel and share the same bond pads (Fig. 13d). This novel double-tube design satisfies the architecture required for electrically driven autonomous systems.120 Furthermore, two parallel contacted UCCaps can also be obtained by a double-rolling process (Fig. 13e) in which two complete sacrificial/capacitor layer stacks are processed on top of each other and then rolled in parallel. UCCaps with different geometries can be easily fabricated, demonstrating the high flexibility of the rolled-up fabrication process.
 Fig. 13  (a) Rolling up and layer sequence of the UCCap. (b) Capacitance per footprint area, Cpa, and increase of Cpa for UCCaps as functions of HfO2 and TiO2 contents. (c) Four-inch Si/SiO2 wafer containing an array of double-tube UCCaps (d). (e) UCCaps processed in parallel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

3. Thinning nanomembranes
2D plane nanomembranes have lateral dimensions of at least two orders of magnitude larger than their thickness and combine the merits of their 0D and 1D counterparts.121 With their unique mechanical features, the 2D nanomembranes can be distorted, wrinkled, and folded into 3D configurations, which is attractive and expected to buffer the strain of lithiation/delithiation for applications in LIBs.122 On the other hand, the nanomembranes can also provide 2D transport pathways between layers, which can promote pseudocapacitive-type electrodes for fast charge and discharge.123 Recently, numerous inorganic nanomembranes have been designed as electrodes for energy storage devices with the aim of improving their electrochemical properties. In this section, we briefly summarize the recent development of 2D nanomembranes utilized as electrodes for LIBs and SCs with a focus on metal oxide, graphene, and their composites.
3.1 Thin nanomembranes for lithium-ion batteries
Transition-metal oxides such as Co3O4,124 Fe2O3,125 and NiO126 have been widely studied as anode materials for rechargeable LIBs due to their potentially higher specific capacities compared to graphite. Unfortunately, these metal oxides exhibit low reversible capacity, unsatisfactory capacity retention, and poor rate capability. As mentioned above, 2D nanomembranes possess high mechanical stability and short ion transport pathways, which can be used to achieve long cycling life and high rate capability with satisfactory reversible capacity. For example, Liu et al. designed free-standing Fe2O3 nanomembranes that exhibited very encouraging results with ultra-long cycling life and high rate capability.127 The Fe2O3 nanomembranes with thickness of 103–165 nm (Fig. 14a) were obtained by the annealing oxidation of Fe nanomembranes in air. Benefiting from the unique 2D structure, the nanomembranes exhibited excellent rate performance. As shown in Fig. 14b, the reversible capacities of the last cycle at 0.5 C, 1 C, 2 C, 5 C, 10 C, 20 C, and 50 C in the first turn were 822, 750, 668, 552, 462, 354, and 178 mA h g−1, respectively. Importantly, ultra-long cycling performance can also be achieved using film-like electrodes (Fig. 14c). The initial discharge/charge capacity at 1 C was 1232/803 mA h g−1, and the reversible capacity of the 100th cycle at 1 C was 834 mA h g−1. When the current density was increased to 6 C, the first discharge/charge capacity was 715/610 mA h g−1. The electrode retained ultra-long and stable cycling at 6 C with a reversible capacity of about 570 mA h g−1. The reversible capacity of 530 mA h g−1 after 3000 cycles was still much higher than the theoretical capacity of graphite.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image, (b) rate capability, and (c) cycling performance of the Fe2O3 nanomembrane electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2001, Nature Publishing Group. 
Hybrid nanostructures have been proposed to surpass the limitations associated with single-phase nanomaterials.128 Recently, the presence of an active metal (Fe, Ni, Co, etc.) phase was shown to enhance the electric conductivity and facilitate the electrochemical reaction kinetics of electrode materials.129,130 Based on these considerations, Sun et al. designed and synthesized novel multifunctional Ni/NiO hybrid nanomembranes with rough and undulating surface morphologies using a physical deposition method combined with chemical etching and thermal oxidation.131 The ratio of NiO to Ni was determined to be 52.4:47.6 (wt%). The freestanding thin nanomembranes delivered initial discharge and charge capacities of 857 and 588 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C (1 C = 718 mA g−1), respectively. After 900 cycles at 6 C, the capacity remained at about 743 mA h g−1 with a high Coulombic efficiency. More importantly, the anodes can be discharged and charged at an ultrahigh rate of 115 C if only the mass of NiO is taken into consideration or 60 C if the total mass of the Ni/NiO nanomembranes is considered.
Using a similar construction, Yu et al. demonstrated 3D Au/a-Ge thin nanomembranes by depositing amorphous Ge onto nanoporous gold films.132 The hybrid electrode delivered a reversible capacity as high as 1200 mA h g−1 and showed an outstanding capacity retention of 90% after 100 cycles when tested for Li storage in the voltage window of 0.005–1.2 V (vs. Li+/Li). In addition, this material preserved 47.5% of its 1 C capacity when cycled at 60 C. The super electrochemical properties can be attributed to the specific bicontinuous structure of the Au/Ge electrode, which provides an interconnected electrolyte-filled pore-network that enables rapid ion transport. In addition, the use of a-Ge preformed in the Au structure prevented solid-state amorphization. Furthermore, the 3D porous Au network provides highly conductive electron transport pathways, and the specific 3D porous structure offers enough space to permit charge–discharge volume changes, which can prevent isolation even after long cycle lifetimes.
Designing hybrid carbon-based nanomembranes is another appealing strategy to improve the reaction kinetics and realize superior energy storage performance of metal oxide nano-films. Among various carbon nanomaterials, graphene has been accepted as a leading candidate for hybrid electrodes due to its superlative electronic properties, large surface area, and excellent flexibility.133 For electrodes based on hybrid graphene, the dispersed active materials attached on graphene sheets can provide a large surface area for Li+ access and effectively shorten the diffusion pathway for Li+ transport. To realize hybrid graphene-based electrodes with excellent performance, an intimate interaction between graphene and active materials is highly desired to enhance the effective and rapid charge transfer and prevent volume change and aggregation of nanoparticles upon cycling.134
Yu's group demonstrated 2D ZnMn2O4–graphene nanosheets using a facile two-step synthesis approach involving a polyol process followed by thermal annealing.135 As revealed in Fig. 15a and b, conductive graphene nanosheets act as flexible 2D substrates for the uniform anchoring of ZnMn2O4 nanoparticles. The graphene sheets can provide elastic buffer space to accommodate volume changes of ZnMn2O4 nanoparticles during charge/discharge processes, thus leading to good cycling stability. Furthermore, the graphene sheets have good electric conductivity and can serve as electron transport channels for ZnMn2O4 nanoparticles, thus facilitating effective charge transport for high rate performance. Moreover, unique 2D hybrid nanostructures can enable large active sites for Li+ transport to achieve higher specific capacity. When compared with ZnMn2O4 nanoparticles and ZnMn2O4–rGO mixtures, the hybrid nanosheets delivered an enhanced rate capability at current densities ranging from 200 to 3200 mA g−1 (Fig. 15c). Moreover, the hybrid nanomembranes also showed long cycling stability. After 1500 cycles, a stable discharge capacity of 650 mA h g−1 was obtained, resulting in a capacity retention of 81% (Fig. 15d). Using the ZnMn2O4–graphene nanosheets as anode and LiFePO4 nanosheets as cathode, the full battery delivered a reversible capacity of 124 mA h g−1 after 100 charge–discharge cycles at 30 mA g−1 over a voltage range of 0.9–3.9 V vs. Li+/Li, corresponding to 94% capacity retention.136
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) SEM image, (c) rate performance, and (d) long cycling stability of the 2D hybrid ZnMn2O4/grapheme nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Thin nanomembranes for supercapacitors
As mentioned above, thin nanomembranes exhibit high mechanical stability, imparting them with great potential applications in electronic devices that can be bent and stretched for future electronics. Furthermore, highly transparent devices can also be realized by using thin nanomembranes. In recent years, many thin nanomembranes have been designed to achieve flexible, transparent, and miniature SCs. In this section, we review the recent development of thin nanomembranes towards micro-SCs with a focus on their flexibility, transparency, and micro-volume.

3.2.1 Graphene nanomembranes. 
Graphene nanomembranes are expected to play a crucial role in the development of electrodes for SCs owing to their large in-plane conductivities. The use of ultrathin graphene films has the following advantages: the substantial mechanical strength of the graphene materials allows for the formation of flexible and robust thin films that can be used for graphene-based flexible and stretchable SCs; and the transparency of the graphene films in SCs allows for their application in transparent electronics.
Recently, many graphene nanomembrane-based SCs have been reported that exhibit high flexibility, stretchability, and transparency. For example, Chen's group prepared ultrathin graphene films with thicknesses of 25, 50, 75, and 100 nm using a vacuum filtration method.137 After transferring the films onto a PET substrate, a maximum transmittance of approximately 70% was obtained for the 25 nm thick grapheme film at 550 nm. The conductivities of the films ranged from 800–1000 S m−1. In addition, the film deposited on a PET substrate can be readily bent to some degree without losing conductivity. When used as electrodes for SCs, capacitances of 111, 105, 102, and 99 F g−1 were obtained for the films with thicknesses of 25, 50, 75, and 100 nm, respectively, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. To pursue transparent and stretchable SCs, Dai's group demonstrated a wrinkled graphene sheet with a large area (2 × 4 cm2) by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of methane with a carrier gas of argon and hydrogen at 1000 °C.138 The wrinkled graphene sheet was then transferred with its structural integrity onto a PDMS substrate and exhibited a high transparency of 50–60% at 550 nm (94% transmittance for the 0.5 mm-thick PDMS substrate) and excellent stretchability. Using PVA–H3PO4 as a gel electrolyte, the planar SCs showed optical transmittances in the range of 48 to 57%. Furthermore, their CVs, charging–discharging performances, and specific capacitances remained almost unchanged when they were stretched to a strain of up to 40%, revealing the excellent stretchability of the graphene-based SCs.
Using the prestraining-then-buckling method, Xu et al. also realized stretchable graphene electrodes SCs with high transparency and high rate.139 Four-layer graphene films were processed by fabricating individual graphene films followed by a film-transporting and laying-up process. Fig. 16a shows the morphology of the buckled graphene layer with nanoscale, ripple-like features. After assembly into a SC based on the graphene/PDMS film using a PVA–H2SO4 gel electrolyte, an optical transmittance of 72.9% was obtained at a wavelength of 550 nm (Fig. 16b). In addition, the as-assembled SC was also capable of withstanding tensile strains of up to 40% (Fig. 16c). The area-specific capacitance increased with tensile strain from 0% to 40% (Fig. 16d), which can be attributed to the increased pressure applied by the upper and lower PDMS films during stretching at tensile strains of 20%, 30%, and 40%, which can facilitate the wettability of the graphene electrode. Importantly, the CV curves maintained an ideal, rectangular shape at scan rates of up to 6000 mV s−1 at 0% and up to 4000 mV s−1 at 40%, indicating good electrical double-layer capacitive behavior and rate capability.
 Fig. 16  (a) SEM image of the buckled graphene film. (b) Transmittances of the supercapacitor. (c) Digital photo of the supercapacitor stretched by tensile strains of 0% to 40%. (d) CV curves at different tensile strains. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The above-discussed transparent graphene nanomembranes are usually coated on transparent substrates. However, transparency for the freestanding flexible graphene paper has never been realized because a thin transparent graphene sheet will fracture easily when the template or substrate is removed using traditional methods. Thus, it is a great challenge to fabricate freestanding transparent graphene nanofilms with good flexibility and electrical conductivity to use in multifunctional electronics. Very recently, Li et al. solved this problem and presented a freestanding, flexible, and transparent graphene paper.140 In their preparation, graphene paper was fabricated from NaCl power in a microwave plasma-enhanced CVD system. After the fabrication, the interconnected graphene structure was mechanically peeled off using a sharp razor blade. The peeled-off, freestanding graphene paper showed excellent transmittance (Fig. 17a) and comprised regularly arranged prism-like graphene microstructures (Fig. 17b). To fabricate transparent and flexible SCs, a graphene film on PDMS was then prepared by spreading the H2SO4/HNO3-treated graphene sheet onto a PDMS substrate followed by a drop of alcohol to eliminate the wrinkles and fix the active material. After assembling with PVA–H2SO4 gel electrolyte, the as-prepared SC with a graphene thickness of 380 nm delivered a transmittance of about 46.5% at a wavelength of 550 nm (Fig. 17c). The specific capacitance was calculated to be 3.3 mF cm−2, which was nearly 1000-times greater than that of the laminated/wrinkled ultrathin CVD graphene film-based SC and at least ten-times greater than those of previously reported transparent and flexible SCs based on pure carbon materials.139,141,142 When the device was stretched to different strains, the capacitance remained nearly constant, demonstrating its relatively good stretchability for practical applications. A potential of 2.0 V was realized by connecting two SCs in series, which could light up a light-emitting diode (LED; turn-on voltage = 1.5 V), demonstrating the potential applications of flexible and transparent graphene nanomembrane-based SCs (Fig. 17d).
 Fig. 17  (a) Photographs and (b) SEM image of a graphene paper. (c) Fabrication and photograph of a transparent supercapacitor. (d) Power delivery of supercapacitors in series. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 Hybrid nanomembranes. 
To push the energy and power density limit of thin SCs based on nanomembranes, a great deal of effort has been devoted to improving the capacitance by fabricating composite nanomembrane electrodes. Particularly, composites consisting of carbon materials and pseudocapacitive materials such as MnO2,143 RuO2,144 and other metal oxides145 are the most promising electrode materials for film SCs. These types of composites effectively take advantage of both the high conductivity of the carbon materials and the high specific capacitance of the pseudocapacitive materials, resulting in significant improvements in both the energy density and power density.
In addition to the carbon materials/metal oxide composites, composite nanomembranes combining carbon with conductive polymers, such as polyaniline (PANI), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), and polypyrrole (PPy), have recently been studied extensively for energy storage.146 For example, Lee et al. developed a mechanically robust, electrically conductive, freestanding, and transparent hybrid nanomembrane. The hybrid structure was made of densified carbon nanotube sheets (CNS) coated with PEDOT using vapor phase polymerization. The hybrid nanomembranes peeled from the glass slide were optically transparent and freestanding in ethanol (Fig. 18a). The one-layer CNS/85 wt% PEDOT nanofilm exhibited a transmittance of 56% at 550 nm and a sheet resistance of 312 Ω sq−1. When used as an electrode for SC in a three-electrode cell, the hybrid nanomembranes showed rectangular cyclic CV curves even at high scan rates of up to 5 V s−1 (Fig. 18b). As the scan rate increased from 0.01 to 100 mV s−1, the volumetric capacitances decreased from 123 to 40 F cm−3. As calculated, the hybrid nanomembrane exhibited a power density of 7910 W cm−3 (4391 kW kg−1) and an energy density of 70 mW h cm−3 (37 W h kg−1). The gravimetric energy density of the hybrid nanomembrane was almost twice that of the transparent graphene nanofilm (thickness = 50 nm) SC, and the power density was at least 130-times higher.137
 Fig. 18  (a) Photograph of a PEDOT/CNS hybrid nanomembrane. (b) CV curves of the supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of the Au/MnO2 film. (d) Specific capacitance of the supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
In the past few years, printable SCs have been advanced through the fabrication of thin films and have exhibited excellent scalability and flexibility.148,149 Very recently, using graphene-conducting polymer hybrid nanomembranes as electrodes, Müllen's group demonstrated an ultrathin printable SC with alternating current (AC) line-filtering performance.150 In their method, the conductive hybrid ink of electrochemically exfoliated graphene and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was spray-coated on a gold-deposited, 2.5 μm-thick PET substrate with a tuneable thickness ranging from nanometers to micrometers. Then ultrathin printable SC was constructed with two hybrid nanomembranes sandwiching a thin polymer gel electrolyte of PVA/H2SO4 and exhibited an unprecedented volumetric capacitance of 348 F cm−3 and excellent cycling stability with no capacitance loss after 50000 cycles.
As mentioned above, the presence of an active metal phase can enhance the electric conductivity and facilitate the electrochemical reaction kinetics of electrode materials. Composite nanomembranes combining metals and metal oxides have also been investigated to improve the electrochemical performance of planar SCs. In 2011, Chen's group presented a 100 nm-thick nanoporous gold/MnO2 composite nanofilm (Fig. 18c). The hybrid nanofilm was fabricated by de-alloying Ag65Au35 (at%) to produce conductive nanoporous gold and then plating nanocrystalline MnO2 into the nanopores.151 When used an active electrode for a simple SC in a 2 M Li2SO4 aqueous solution, the specific capacitances of nanoporous hybrid nanofilms at various currents appeared to be much higher than those of the bare nanoporous gold, and the longer plating time (up to 20 min) of MnO2 yielded the highest specific capacitance (Fig. 18d). The power and energy densities of the SC reached maxima of 57 W h kg−1 and 16 kW kg−1, respectively, at an MnO2 plating time of 20 min. The high energy density greatly exceeds the values of commercial devices at the same power density.152


3.3.3 Thin nanomembranes for on-chip supercapacitors. 
Developing miniaturized SCs, also called micro-SCs, has attracted much attention in recent years for powering microelectronics because conventional SCs are too large for very small devices, and conventional manufacturing methods are not compatible with microelectronic fabrication.153 For micro-SCs, the most important performance metrics are high area energy and power density due to the small footprint areas of the devices. In addition to the micro-SCs with planar 2D electrodes discussed above, in-plane on-chip SCs have been designed to further enhance the area energy and power density, in which each electrode consists of several fingers. The electrode fabrication usually follows methods for thin film fabrication with the addition of an electrode-patterning step before or after electrode deposition. To date, many on-chip SCs have been fabricated based on various active electrodes such as monolithic carbon films,154 OLC micrometer-thick layers,155 PANI nanowire arrays,156 MoS2 films,157 and so on.
An alternative way to increase the energy density of micro-SCs is using high-surface-area graphene as the electrode material.158,159 The thicknesses of these graphene films are usually at on the micrometer scale. An increase in the thickness of the electrode and mass loading of the electrode material are known to increase the electrode resistance and result in decreased gravimetric capacitance.160 Therefore, fabricating nanoscale graphene films has been pursued for high-performance on-chip SCs. Niu et al. achieved a flexible, compact, ultrathin, and all-solid-state on-chip SC based on lateral, ultrathin, rGO interdigitated microelectrodes, which were fabricated using photolithography and selective electrophoretic buildup.161 The specific capacitances of the on-chip SC based on rGO interdigitated electrodes (25 nm thickness) were much higher than those of the plane SCs on 2D rGO film electrodes due to the shortened diffusion path lengths. The calculated volumetric energy density is 31.9 mW h cm−3, and the maximum volumetric power density is 324 W cm−3.
To further improve the rate performance of on-chip SCs, Wu et al. developed a novel class of all solid-state in-plane interdigital micro-SCs based on methane plasma-reduced graphene (denoted MPG) films with a nanoscale thickness of 6–100 nm.162Fig. 19a shows the fabrication process of the in-plane micro-SC, in which PVA–H2SO4 was used as the gel electrolyte. Due to the high electrical conductivity (345 S cm−1) of the MPG films and the planar geometry of the micro-devices, the resulting micro-SC delivered a maximum areal capacitance and a stack capacitance of 17.9 F cm−3. When compared with the MPG film-based in-plane micro-SC and TG film-based in-plane micro-SC, the MPG film-based in-plane micro-SC showed enhanced rate capability (Fig. 19b) and charged and discharged rapidly up to 1000 V s−1, three orders of magnitude higher than conventional SCs, highlighting the superiority of the planar device geometry over the classical sandwich-like stacked SC geometry. As expected, the micro-SC manifested an ultrahigh power density of 495 W cm−3, which is at least 50-times higher than that of conventional SCs. An energy density of 2.5 mW h cm−3, which is comparable to those of lithium thin-film batteries, was also achieved (Fig. 19c). In addition, the micro-SC delivered a superior cycling stability (98.3% capacitance retention after 100000 cycles at an ultrahigh scan rate of 50 V s−1).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of MPG-MSCs. (b) Stack capacitance versus scan rate. (c) Ragone plot of MPG-MSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Graphene quantum dots (GQDs), which are assembled by single-layer or few-layer graphene with a size of only several nanometers, have attracted tremendous research interest due to their unique properties associated with both graphene and QDs.163 Due to the high specific surface area, good electrical conductivity, and high mobility, GQDs are a possible electrode material for on-chip SCs to improve the capacity and rate performance. Using a simple electro-deposition approach, Liu et al. demonstrated a symmetric GQDs//GQDs micro-SC with an interdigital structure fabricated from a GQD thin-film with a thickness of 312 nm.164 The as-made GQD micro-SC had excellent power response with very short relaxation time along with constant and excellent cycle stability. Importantly, the on-chip SC delivered superior rate capability of up to 1000 V s−1 without any CV curve variance, revealing a fast charge transfer in the bulk of the GQDs and a small equivalent series resistance (ESR) of the micro-SC. The excellent electrochemical performance can be attributed to the larger specific surface area, more surface active sites, and more accessible edges, which conveniently afford ample interfaces for ion adsorption/desorption and excellent electron mobility.
Because they have higher energy and power densities than carbon materials in aqueous electrolytes, metal oxides have been explored as electrode materials for SCs. Among the numerous metal oxides, MnO2 is considered as the most attractive candidate as an electrode material for SCs because of its natural abundance, low cost, environmental friendliness, and high specific capacitance.165 However, the low ionic and electrical conductivity of pristine MnO2 often leads to poor rate performance. For micro-SCs, the short electrolyte diffusion distance should enable the high rate capability of MnO2 electrodes. For example, Wang et al. presented a two-step lithography fabrication method to realize on-chip micro-SCs based on nanostructured MnO2 micro-electrode arrays with a narrow interelectrode distance of 4 μm.166 This micro-SC device exhibited a high areal capacitance of 56.3 mF cm−2 at a current density of 27.2 μA cm−2 and an energy density of 5.01 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 12.02 mW cm−2.
To further improve the electrochemical performance of manganese oxide-based mirco-SCs, Si et al. designed MnOx/Au multilayer thinfilms on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates. The hybrid membranes were deposited by electron beam evaporation for use in on-chip micro-SCs, in which very thin layers of gold were incorporated into the MnOx layer as conductive additives to enable effective charge transport and electrode integrity, thus endowing the electrodes with high capacity, high rate capability, and excellent cycling stability.167 Each finger has a length of 4.8 mm, a width of 100 μm, and an interelectrode distance of 100 μm with a 50 nm-thick MnOx/Au multi-layered film (Fig. 20a and b). Due to the unique structure, the multi-layered nanofilm exhibited a volumetric capacitance of about 78.6 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, much higher than that of the bare MnOx nanomembrane (Fig. 20c). The micro-SC exhibits a maximum energy density of 1.75 mW h cm−3 and a maximum power density of 3.44 W cm−3. Furthermore, good long-term cycling stability with a capacitance retention rate of 74.1% after a large number of cycles (15000) was also achieved, demonstrating the high stability of the on-chip micro-SC based on the composite nanomembranes.
 Fig. 20  (a) Photograph of a real, flexible micro-supercapacitor. (b) Schematic diagram of the symmetric microsupercapacitor with 24 interdigital fingers. (c) Volumetric capacitance of MnOx/Au multilayers and bare MnOx micro-supercapacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Design of planar supercapacitors based on hybrid 2D δ-MnO2/graphene structures. (f) CV curves for the planar supercapacitor under three different bending states: (e) flat, folded, and rolled. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
One problem with multi-layered nanomembranes is that the layer-by-layer tight stacking in the thin film inevitably diminishes the interlayer spaces between ultrathin nanosheets, which could significantly hinder electrolyte ion diffusion. To this end, Peng et al. presented a novel hybrid structure by integrating δ-MnO2 nanosheets with graphene sheets to enhance the performance of on-chip micro-SCs.168 As revealed in Fig. 20d, the hybrid structures introduced more electrochemically active surfaces for the absorption/desorption of the electrolyte ions and created extra interfacial area at the hybrid interlayer to facilitate charge transport during charge/discharge processes, offering good rate capability and cycling stability. In addition, the integrated δ-MnO2 nanosheets served as active centers for pseudocapacitive reactions, contributing to the great enhancement in specific capacitance. Meanwhile, the δ-MnO2 integrated with graphene could potentially tailor the distance between each sheet of densely stacked graphene and open up the interlayer space to allow more electrolyte ions to penetrate efficiently into the hybridized film. Accordingly, the as-fabricated in-plane SC based on the 50 nm-thick hybrid film yielded high specific capacitances of 254, 249, 232, 217, and 208 F g−1 at current densities of 0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10 A g−1, respectively, and delivered a high energy density of 17 W h kg−1 at a power density of 2520 W kg−1, which was superior to those of graphene-based planar SCs. Meanwhile, the in-plane micro-SC also exhibited excellent flexibility without noticeable structural destruction and performance degradation, even after being folded or rolled thousands of times (Fig. 20e and f), demonstrating a promising feature for next-generation flexible energy storage devices.

4. Conclusions and outlook
This review summarizes some representative applications of engineered nanomembranes with a focus on tubular nanomembranes and plane nanomembranes for lithium ion batteries, lithium–O2 batteries, capacitors, and supercapacitors. As illustrated in this paper, nanomembranes have proven to be effective in improving the performances of these devices due to their novel geometric characteristics and unique machinability. The rational and creative design of unique nanomembrane structures helps address the significant issues encountered during electrochemical reactions, thus dramatically enhancing the capacity, rate capability, and cycling life of nanomembrane-based electrodes. In general, nanomembranes improve performance by (i) providing a large surface area to boost the electrochemical reaction or ion adsorption occurring at the interface between electrodes and electrolyte; (ii) shortening the ion and electron transport paths to ensure fast reaction, thus enhancing the rate performance; (iii) enabling hybrid electrodes to deliver high energy and power densities by applying the merits of different materials; and (iv) engineering various architectures to achieve high flexibility, excellent stretchability, and super transparency for micro-electronic devices. These developments reviewed in this article greatly enrich engineered nanomembranes as effective electrodes and represent promising steps towards viable energy storage devices. Although the merits of engineered nanomembranes as high-performance electrodes have been well demonstrated, the following several aspects of nanomembranes still need to be addressed.
(i) More studies on next-generation energy storage devices based on tubular nanomembranes are needed. To date, the application of nanomembranes in energy storage devices has mainly focused on lithium-ion batteries, which have demonstrated enhanced electrochemical performance. Based on these achievements, lithium–sulfur batteries, lithium–O2 batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and so on should be studied extensively to explore the feasibility of unique tubular nanomembranes and to improve the specific capacity, rate capability, and cycling stability of these devices.
(ii) A deeper and broader understanding of lithium storage mechanisms and electrochemical reaction pathways for single tubular nanomembranes should be developed. In situ nanocharacterization techniques have recently been utilized to analyze lithium storage mechanisms in several cell models with complicated fabrication processes. As the rolled-up nanotechnology delivers unique advantages for fabricating microbatteries using single tubular nanomembranes, clear observations of the morphological evolution and conductivity changes are expected to be easily achieved. In addition, lithium ion insertion/deinsertion and electron transport at different parts of a single tube can be explored to obtain a deeper understanding of lithium ion diffusion and electron transport.
(iii) Fundamental studies on all-solid-state on-chip supercapacitors based on single tubular nanomembranes should attract more interest for future miniature electronic devices. Although single tubular nanomembrane-based electrostatic capacitors and capacitor arrays have been realized, the storage energy needs to be improved to power miniature electronic devices for practical applications. To this end, single tubular micro-supercapacitors and device arrays with high energies may make miniature electronic devices possible to use in daily life.
(iv) Planar nanomembranes for micro-integrated energy systems are undoubtedly a promising research area. In this integrated energy system, energy collection and energy storage combined with other electronic devices are realized with one device. Due to the excellent mechanical stability, high flexibility, and good machinability of the 2D plane nanomembranes, flexible and wearable integrated micro-energy systems might not be far off.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support from the “Thousand Talents Program,” the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (no. BK20140315), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51402202), key laboratory of advanced carbon materials and wearable energy technology in Suzhou, Jiangsu Shuangchuang Plan, and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).
Notes and references
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
G. N. Zhu, Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6652–6667 CAS .
C. M. Park, J. H. Kim, H. Kim and H. J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
X. Wang, B. Liu, Q. Xiang, Q. Wang, X. Hou, D. Chen and G. Shen, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 308–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, B. Liu, X. Hou, Q. Wang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1073–1082 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Xiang, B. Liu, L. Wang, T. Luo, D. Chen and G. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 2007 Search PubMed .
X. B. Chen, C. Li, M. Gratzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
Y. Yang, G. Y. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018–3032 RSC .
Q. F. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Z. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
H. L. Wang and H. J. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3088–3113 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Liu, J. S. Chen, X. F. Wei, X. W. Lou and X. W. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 998–1002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Liu and X. W. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4097–4111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Choi, K. Na, J. Kim, Y. Sakamoto, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2009, 461, 246–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yin, Y. Y. Zhang, J. H. Kong, C. J. Zou, C. M. Li, X. H. Lu, J. Ma, F. Y. C. Boey and X. D. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3831–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Wu, L. Peng, C. Lin, S. Hu, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832–17838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Han, Z. Dai, H. Pang, Y. Zheng, Y. Q. Lan, J. Bao and J. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3761–3770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, C. Lu, X. Wang, R. Y. Tay and B. K. Tay, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1528–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mei, G. Huang, A. A. Solovev, E. B. Urena, I. Mönch, F. Ding, T. Reindl, R. K. Fu, P. K. Chu and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4085–4090 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Wang, W.-Q. Han, H. Chen, J. Bai, T. A. Tyson, X.-Q. Yu, X.-J. Wang and X.-Q. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20692–20695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. G. Schmidt and K. Eberl, Nature, 2001, 410, 168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Grimm, C. C. B. Bufon, C. Deneke, P. Atkinson, D. J. Thurmer, F. Schäffel, S. Gorantla, A. Bachmatiuk and O. G. Schmidt, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 213–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Magdanz, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6581–6588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Madani, M. Kleinert, D. Stolarek, L. Zimmermann, L. Ma and O. G. Schmidt, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 189–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. B. Bufon, J. D. C. González, D. J. Thurmer, D. Grimm, M. Bauer and O. G. Schmidt, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2506–2510 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cendula, S. Kiravittaya, Y. Mei, C. Deneke and O. G. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 085429 CrossRef .
M. H. Huang, F. Cavallo, F. Liu and M. G. Lagally, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 96–120 RSC .
W.-P. Huang, H. H. Cheng, A. I. Fedorchenko and A.-B. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 053103 CrossRef .
R. Huang and Z. Suo, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cavallo, R. Songmuang, C. Ulrich and O. G. Schmidt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 193120 CrossRef .
N. Y. Jin-Phillipp, J. Thomas, M. Kelsch, Ch. Deneke, R. Somuang and O. G. Schmidt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 033113 CrossRef .
R. Somuang, A. Rastelli, S. Mendach and O. G. Schmidt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 091905 CrossRef .
M. H. Huang, C. Boone, M. Roberts, D. E. Savage, M. G. Lagally, N. Shaji, H. Qin, R. H. Blick, J. A. Nairn and F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2860–2864 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Thurmer, Ch. Deneke, Y. F. Mei and O. G. Schmidt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 223507 CrossRef .
P. O. Vaccaro, K. Kubota and T. Aida, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2852–2854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Hu, Y. Bando, J. H. Zhan, M. Y. Liao, D. Golberg, X. L. Yuan and T. Sekiguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 113107 CrossRef .
F. Liu, M. G. Lagally and J. Zang, MRS Bull., 2009, 34, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Golod, V. Ya. Prinz, V. I. Mashanov and A. K. Gutakovsky, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2001, 16, 181–185 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang and Y. Mei, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2517–2546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-X. Ji, X.-L. Wu, L.-Z. Fan, C. Krien, I. Fiering, Y.-G. Guo, Y. Mei and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4591–4595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Ji, C. Yan, J. Zhang, W. Si, S. Baunack, S. Oswald, Y. Mei and O. G. Schmidt, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 2382–2386 CrossRef .
X. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Si, L. Xi, B. Eichler, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1198–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Deng, L. Liu, W. Si, S. Oswald, L. Xi, M. Kundu, G. Ma, T. Gemming, S. Baunack, F. Deng, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4527–4532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, W. Xi, W. Si, J. Deng and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1269–1274 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, C. Yan, Y. Chen, W. Si, J. Deng, S. Oswald, L. Liu and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300912 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Si, L. Xi, S. Oswald, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 282–288 RSC .
J. Deng, C. yan, L. Yang, S. Baunack, S. Oswald, H. Wendrock, Y. Mei and O. G. Schmidt, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6948–6954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, J. Deng, W. Si, X. Sun, X. Liu, B. Liu, L. Liu, S. Oswald, S. Baunack, H. J. Grafe, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Sci., 2015, 1500113 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. Mcdowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang and L. Hu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 310–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, H.-W. Lee, I. Ryu, W. D. Nix, H. Gao and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, I. Ryu, H. Wu, N. Liu, L. Hu, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2949–2954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ge, Y. Lu, P. Ercius, J. Rong, X. Feng, M. Mecklenburg and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 261–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Jung, T. H. Hwang, S. B. Park and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2092–2097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gohier, B. Laïk, K.-H. Kim, J.-L. Maurice, J.-P. Pereira-Ramos, C. S. Cojocaru and P. T. Van, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2592–2597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. L. Li, X. F. Zhang, B. Luo, M. H. Jin, M. H. Liang, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux and L. J. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1437–1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
D. Wang, Y.-L. Chang, Q. Wang, J. Cao, D. B. Farmer, R. G. Gordon and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11602–11611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Graetz, C. C. Ahn, R. Yazami and B. Fultz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A698 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cui, L. Gu, L. Zhi, N. Kaskhedikar, P. A. van Aken, K. Müllen and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3079–3083 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, J. Kim, N.-S. Choi, M. G. Kim and S. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2203–2212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kennedy, E. Mullane, H. Geaney, M. Osiak, C. O'Dwyer and K. M. Ryan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 716–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Yang, D. Xiao, P. Hu, H. a. Xu, Y. Duan, S. Pang, L. Gu and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2189–2194 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xue, S. Xin, Y. Yan, K.-C. Jiang, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2512–2515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Ren, Q.-H. Wu, H. Tang, G. Hong, W. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1821–1826 CAS .
W. Li, M. i. Li, Z. Yang, J. Xu, X. Zhong, J. Wang, L. Zeng, X. Liu, Yu. Jiang, X. Wei, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 2762–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Jin, G. Yang, J. Wang and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3479–3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, K. Song, C. Zhu, C.-C. Chen, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7051–7059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Variola, F. Vetrone, L. Richert, P. Jedrzejowski, J. H. Yi, S. Zalzal, S. Clair, A. Sarkissian, D. F. Perepichka, J. D. Wuest, F. Rosei and A. Nanci, Small, 2009, 5, 996–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chan, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 307–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Park, Y. Cho, K. Kim, J. Kim, M. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9647–9650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, N. Li, H. Cui and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1128–1136 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lv, M. L. Gordin, R. Yi, T. Xu, J. Song, Y.-B. Jiang, D. Choi and D. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1059–1066 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Wang, W.-Q. Han, H. Chen, J. Bai, T. A. Tyson, X.-Q. Yu, X.-J. Wang and X.-Q. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20692–20695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Hou, Z. Liang, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang and Y. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13956–13959 RSC .
Y. Son, M. Park, Y. Son, J.-S. Lee, J.-H. Jang, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1005–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi, K. Y. Jung and Y. C. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13952–13959 CAS .
H. Qiu, L. Zeng, T. Lan, X. Ding and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1619–1623 CAS .
S. Jin, N. Li, H. Cui and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1128–1136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, M. Xu, H. Wu, J. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Peng and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19821–19825 RSC .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2526–2542 RSC .
J. Liang, H. Hu, H. Park, C. Xiao, S. Ding, U. Paikc and X. W. n. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1707–1711 CAS .
Z. bai, Z. Ju, C. Guo, Y. Qian, B. Tang and S. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3268–3273 RSC .
Y. Zhu, H. Guo, Y. Wu, C. Cao, S. Tao and Z. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7904–7911 CAS .
W. Yang, G. Cheng, C. Dong, Q. Bai, X. Chen, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20022–20029 CAS .
N. Wang, L. Chen, X. Ma, J. Yue, F. Niu, H. Xu, J. Yang and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16847–16850 CAS .
L. Liu, H. Guo, J. Liu, F. Qian, C. Zhang, T. Li, W. Chen, X. Yang and Y. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9485–9488 RSC .
Y. Xia, W. Zhang, Z. Xiao, H. Huang, H. Zeng, X. Chen, F. Chen, Y. Gan and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9209–9215 RSC .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, L.-C. Yin, N. Li, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3214–3223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Wang, W.-Q. Han, H. Chen, J. Bai, T. A. Tyson, X.-Q. Yu, X.-J. Wang and X.-Q. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20692–20695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Li, X. B. Meng, J. Liu, D. S. Geng, Y. Zhang, M. N. Banis, Y. L. Li, J. L. Yang, R. Y. Li, X. L. Sun, M. Cai and M. W. Verbrugge, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1647–1654 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
F. Li, T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1125–1141 CAS .
H. Jung, J. Hassoun, J. Park, Y. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 579–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liao, X. Wang, Y. Sun, D. Tang, M. Han, P. He, X. Jiang, T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1992–1997 CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Hummelshøj, A. C. Luntz and J. K. Nørskov, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 034703 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Dokko, M. Mohamedi, M. Umeda and I. Uchida, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mai, Y. Dong, L. Xu and C. Han, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4273–4278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Huang, L. Zhong, C. M. Wang, J. P. Sullivan, W. Xu, L. Q. Zhang, S. X. Mao, N. S. Hudak, X. H. Liu, A. Subramanian, H. Fan, L. Qi, A. Kushima and J. Li, Science, 2010, 330, 1515–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Wang, Y. He, F. Fan, X. H. Liu, S. Xia, Y. Liu, C. T. Harris, H. Li, J.
Y. Huang, S. X. Mao and T. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 709–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 894–900 CrossRef CAS .
W. Si, I. Mönch, C. Yan, J. Deng, S. Li, G. Lin, L. Han, Y. Mei and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7973–7978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, M. Yan, X. Tian, C. Yang, M. Shi, Q. Wei, L. Wu and L. Mai, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3879–3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, J. Deng, W. Si, X. Sun, X. Liu, B. Liu, L. Liu, S. Oswald, S. Baunack, H. J. Grafe, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500113 Search PubMed .

          M. Belleville, E. Cantatore, H. Fanet, P. Fiorini, P. Nicole, M. Pelgrom, C. Piguet, R. Hahn, C. V. Hoof and R. Vullers, Rep. CATRENE Work. Group Energy Auton. Syst.,  2009 Search PubMed .
R. Sharma, C. C. B. Bufon, D. Grimm, R. Sommer, A. Wollatz, J. Schadewald, D. J. Thurmer, P. F. Siles, M. Bauer and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301631 Search PubMed .
E. J. Smith, W. Xi, D. Makarov, I. Mönch, S. Harazim, V. A. B. Quiñones, C. K. Schmidt, Y. Mei, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 1917–1931 RSC .
B. Nikoobakht and X. L. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1883–1887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. B. Bufon, J. D. C. González, D. J. Thurmer, D. Grimm, M. Bauer and O. G. Schmidt, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2506–2510 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Augustyn, J. Come, M. A. Lowe, J. W. Kim, P.-L. Taberna, S. H. Tolbert, H. D. Abruña, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, B. Liu, S. Ran, H. Huang, X. Wang, B. Liang, D. Chen and G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23541–23546 RSC .
Y. Fu, Q. Wei, X. Wang, H. Shu, X. Yang and S. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13807–13818 CAS .
J. Liang, H. Hu, H. Park, C. Xiao, S. Ding, U. Paik and X. W. (David) Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1707–1711 CAS .
X. Liu, W. Si, J. Zhang, X. Sun, J. Deng, S. Baunack, S. Oswald, L. Liu, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. M. Reddy, S. R. Gowda, M. M. Shaijumon and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5045–5064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, Y. Zhong and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15158–15166 CAS .
B. Qu, L. Hu, Y. Chen, C. Li, Q. Li, Y. Wang, W. Wei, L. Chen and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7023–7026 CAS .
X. Sun, W. Si, X. Liu, J. Deng, L. Xi, L. Liu, C. Yan and O. G. Schmidt, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Yan, L. Gu, X. Lang, K. Tang, L. Zhang, Y. Hou, Z. Wang, M. W. Chen, O. G. Schmidt and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 281–285 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiong, B. Liu, V. Teran, Y. Zhao, L. Peng, X. Wang and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8610–8616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. XIong, L. Peng, D. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Wang and G. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 816–823 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yu, I. Roes, A. Davies and Z. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 253105 CrossRef .
T. Chen, Y. Xue, A. K. Roy and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1039–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, J. Kang, J.-B. Choi, J. Suhr, J. Yu, F. Li, J.-H. Byun, B.-S. Kim and T. W. Chou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9437–9445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, G. Yang, Y. Sun, H. Song, H. Cui, G. Yang and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3195–3203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Jung, M. B. Karimi, M. G. Hahm, P. M. Ajayan and Y. J. Jung, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2 Search PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. M. Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Chen, H. T. Chen, J. Qiu and C. W. Zhou, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, X. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
J. A. Lee, M. K. Shin, S. H. Kim, S. J. Kim, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, R. Ovalle-Robles, M. D. Lima, M. E. Kozlov and R. H. Baughman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 327–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Xu, M. G. Schwab, A. J. Strudwick, J. Hennig, X. L. Feng, Z. S. Wu and K. Müllen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1035–1040 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, Z. Liu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and L. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3669–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 CAS .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogosti, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, W. Zou, B. Quan, A. Yu, H. Wu, P. Jiang and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, S. Yang, W. Gao, Z. Liu, Y. Gonf, L. Ma, G. Shi, S. Lei, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2013, 9, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. EI-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2011, 334, 917–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, L. Zhang, L. Liu, B. Zhu, H. Dong and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4035–4042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 Search PubMed .
Z. P. Zhang, J. Zhang, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8869–8890 CAS .
W. Liu, Y.-Q. Feng, X.-B. Yan, J.-T. Chen and Q.-J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4111–4122 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. W. Zhu, X. D. Wu, Q. F. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, B. D. Myers, J. Yan, G. Shekhawat, V. Dravid and P. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4119–4122 RSC .
W. Si, C. Yan, Y. Chen, S. Oswald, L. Han and O. G. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3218–3223 CAS .
L. Peng, X. Peng, B. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xianfu Wang
	Xianfu Wang received his BS degree from Jiangsu University in 2010 and PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2015. He is now an associate professor at Soochow University. His current research focuses on the design and synthesis of nanostructured materials along with the investigation of their fundamental properties and potential applications in energy storage devices.

Yu Chen
	Yu Chen was born in Suzhou, China in 1986. He received his BE in Materials Science and Engineering and PhD degrees from National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2009 and 2014, respectively. After his postdoctoral studies (also at NUS), he became an associate professor in the School of Energy at Soochow University, China. His primary research interests focus on nanostructured functional materials and their applications in energy storage, particularly in the area of lithium/sodium-ion batteries and supercapacitors.

Oliver G. Schmidt
	Oliver G. Schmidt is a Director at the IFW Dresden, Germany, and also holds a full Professorship in Material Systems for Nanoelectronics at the Chemnitz University of Technology, Germany. His scientific activities focus on inorganic nanomembrane materials and bridge across interdisciplinary research fields ranging from magnetoelectronics and nanophotonics to energy storage and microrobotics. He received the Otto-Hahn Medal from the Max-Planck-Society in 2000, the Philip-Morris Research Award in 2002, the Carus-Medal in 2005, and the International Dresden Barkhausen Award in 2013. He has published more than 500 peer-reviewed journal papers and has given more than 200 invited talks.

Chenglin Yan
	Chenglin Yan is a full professor at Soochow University and executive director of key laboratory of advanced carbon materials and wearable energy technology in Suzhou, China. He received his PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 2008. In 2011, he became a staff scientist and a group leader at the Institute for Integrative Nanoscience at the Leibniz Institute in Dresden. In 2013, the IFW-Dresden awarded Dr Chenglin Yan the IIN Research Prize 2013 for his group's research work. He received the Thousand Young Talents Award from the Chinese Thousand Talents Program in 2014.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the process of rolling up a nanomembrane into a tube. Optical images of rolled-up nanomembranes (b) Pt, (c) Pd/Fe/Pd, (d) TiO2, (e) ZnO, (f) Al2O3, (g) SixNy, (h) SixNy/Ag, and (i) diamond-like carbon. (j) SEM image of an array of rolled-up SiO/SiO2 nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (k) Concept diagram of on-chip integrated devices based on microbatteries.	 
εave = ηε1 + (1 − η)ε2
Δε = ε1 − ε2

 	Fig. 2  Schematics of (a) a flat bi-layer nanomembrane, (b) a bent nanomembrane with radius R, and (c) a wrinkled structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2009 American Physical Society.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication process, (b) SEM image, and (c) cycling performance of rolled-up C/Si/C multilayer nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of rolled-up Si/rGO bilayer nanomembranes. (b) Cycling performance at (b) 100 mA g−1 and (c) 3 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of an SiOx/SiOy bilayer nanomembrane. The surface morphology of the cycled electrodes (c) after the first charge and (d) after 80 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) cycling performance, and (c) coulombic efficiency at a current rate of C/16 of the multilater Ge/Ti nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image, (b) elemental mapping images, (c) rate, and (d) long cycling performance of the graphene/GeO2 tubular nanomembranes (scale bar: 20 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image and (b) reversible capacity versus cycle number for the curved NiO nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic configuration of a stacked SnO2/Cu cell. (d) SEM image and (e) cycling performance of the SnO2/Cu nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of the Pd/MnOx/Pd nanomembrane. (b) Voltage profiles, (c) power efficiencies, and (d) cycling stability of the hybrid nanomembranes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the single device. (b) Optical microscopy image of a single rolled-up silicon tube. (c) Diffusion coefficient of Li+ ion in an Si tube. (d) Electrochemical conductivity during first discharge/charge cycle. Morphology of a tube before cycling (e) and after three cycles (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) Fabrication schematic and (c) optical microscopy overview image of a single rolled-up device. (d) Transport properties of the single Ge/Ti and Ge microtubes. (e and f) Transport properties of the single Ge/Ti microtubes before and after discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a and b) Layer sequence used to create rolled-up capacitors. (c) Layer sequence for inorganic and hybrid organic/inorganic capacitors. (d) Typical SEM images of nanomembrane-based UCCaps. (e) Relationship between capacitance per footprint area and number of windings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Rolling up and layer sequence of the UCCap. (b) Capacitance per footprint area, Cpa, and increase of Cpa for UCCaps as functions of HfO2 and TiO2 contents. (c) Four-inch Si/SiO2 wafer containing an array of double-tube UCCaps (d). (e) UCCaps processed in parallel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image, (b) rate capability, and (c) cycling performance of the Fe2O3 nanomembrane electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2001, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) SEM image, (c) rate performance, and (d) long cycling stability of the 2D hybrid ZnMn2O4/grapheme nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) SEM image of the buckled graphene film. (b) Transmittances of the supercapacitor. (c) Digital photo of the supercapacitor stretched by tensile strains of 0% to 40%. (d) CV curves at different tensile strains. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Photographs and (b) SEM image of a graphene paper. (c) Fabrication and photograph of a transparent supercapacitor. (d) Power delivery of supercapacitors in series. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Photograph of a PEDOT/CNS hybrid nanomembrane. (b) CV curves of the supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of the Au/MnO2 film. (d) Specific capacitance of the supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of MPG-MSCs. (b) Stack capacitance versus scan rate. (c) Ragone plot of MPG-MSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Photograph of a real, flexible micro-supercapacitor. (b) Schematic diagram of the symmetric microsupercapacitor with 24 interdigital fingers. (c) Volumetric capacitance of MnOx/Au multilayers and bare MnOx micro-supercapacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Design of planar supercapacitors based on hybrid 2D δ-MnO2/graphene structures. (f) CV curves for the planar supercapacitor under three different bending states: (e) flat, folded, and rolled. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
