Advanced electrocatalytic systems for enhanced atom/electron utilization  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE03323B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE03323B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 1334-1363Advanced electrocatalytic systems for enhanced atom/electron utilization

        
          
            Heng 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lisong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Jianlin 
            Shi
          
          
        
      *b
aShanghai Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Chemical Processes, School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, P. R. China. E-mail: lschen@chem.ecnu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructures, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, P. R. China. E-mail: jlshi@mail.sic.ac.cn
cInstitute of Eco-Chongming, Shanghai 202162, China
Received 
      14th October 2022
    , Accepted 8th February 2023First published on 9th February 2023AbstractValue-added chemical production via electrocatalysis is of great significance in green chemical society, the industrialization of which, however, is restricted by its low profit, especially due to the high energy cost and single target product. This means that the atoms/electrons in the whole electrocatalytic system are far from being efficiently utilized. Herein, to achieve maximum atom/electron utilization, the most recent advances are summarized in three stages based on the levels of atom/electron utilization of the whole system: (i) traditional electrocatalytic systems featuring half atom/electron utilization (HU-ES), (ii) atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic systems (USE-ES), including co-electrolysis systems (CES) and self-powered electrocatalytic systems (SPES), and (iii) atom/electron full utilization electrocatalytic systems (FU-ES), including rechargeable functional batteries (RFB) and self-co-electrolysis systems (SCES). We will mainly focus on the development of various systems as well as the corresponding electrocatalysts in this review. The present challenges and related prospects will also be discussed, hopefully to benefit further development of electrocatalytic systems with much enhanced atom/electron utilization in the future.
Heng Xu
Heng Xu is now a doctoral candidate in the School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal University under the supervision of Prof. Jianlin Shi. His research is focused on the design of advanced electrolytic systems and synthesis of electrocatalysts for value-added chemical production.
Lisong Chen
Lisong Chen received his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jianlin Shi from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (SICCAS) in 2016. He is now an associate professor at East China Normal University (ECNU). His research interest is on electrocatalysts for renewable energy.
Jianlin Shi
Prof. Jianlin Shi received his PhD degree in Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (SICCAS). He is now a professor of SICCAS and an academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research areas include the synthesis of mesoporous nanomaterials and their catalytic and biomedical applications, and most recently he has mainly focused his attention on electrocatalysis. He has published over 500 scientific papers which have been cited more than 39,000 times by other scientists with an H-index of 111 (2020). He has been in charge of more than 30 important research projects and has received a number of awards for his achievements.

Broader context
The enhancement of atom/electron utilization in electrocatalytic systems is of great significance to meet the growing demands for clean energy supply and environmental protection. Recent efforts related to traditional electrocatalytic systems have successfully enhanced the profit of electrocatalytic reactions by accelerating the reaction kinetics. However, these studies are mainly focused on single-target electrode reactions or products, while much less attention has been paid to reactions on the counterpart electrode and external energy supply, which obviously ignores or wastes a large amount of ‘invisible cost’ at the counterpart electrodes when we calculate the benefits and costs of the whole reaction system. In this original review, we will, for the first time, summarize/discuss the most recent remarkable advances in atom/electron utilization enhancement using three strategies which are categorized based on the level of atom/electron utilization of the whole system as follows: (i) traditional electrocatalytic systems featuring half atom/electron utilization (HU-ES), (ii) atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic systems (USE-ES), including co-electrolysis systems (CES) and self-powered electrocatalytic systems (SPES), and (iii) atom/electron full utilization electrocatalytic systems (FU-ES), including rechargeable functional batteries (RFB) and self-co-electrolysis systems (SCES). We will mainly focus on the development of various systems as well as the corresponding electrocatalysts in this review. The present challenges and related prospects will also be discussed, hopefully to benefit further development of electrocatalytic systems with much enhanced atom/electron utilization in the future.

1. Introduction
To meet the ever-increasing demands for clean energy and overcome the environmental problems originating from population growth and industrial expansion, carbon peaking and neutralization have aroused great attention worldwide and become one of the most intensive concerns in the present chemical and energy studies.1,2 Therefore, the development of novel strategies for clean energy supply, pollutant removal and fuel/chemical synthesis is of vital importance and significance, among which electrocatalysis has been considered a most promising approach. When powered by external electricity, precursors can be oxidized and reduced, respectively, at the anode and the cathode in an electrocatalytic system, without using any chemical oxidant/reductant which may cause serious pollution. With a well-controlled electric field as either a strong nucleophilic or electrophilic agent, the chemical bonds in the precursors can be activated with high precision for the subsequent chemical reactions. Moreover, different from conventional thermal catalysis, electrocatalysis is usually performed at room temperature and ambient pressure under favorable reaction conditions.3–5
Enormous efforts and achievements have been made on numerous electrocatalytic reactions, including the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), nitrate reduction reaction (NORR), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), etc., to produce value-added chemicals such as hydrogen gas (H2), oxygen (O2), ammonia (NH3), formic acid and so on. Great attention has been paid to advanced strategies for designing high-performance electrocatalysts, such as defect introduction, nanostructure construction, atomic dispersion and heterointerface engineering. The corresponding catalytic mechanisms of these electrocatalysts have also been explored in order to lower the energy cost and enhance the productivity of value-added chemicals.6 Nevertheless, these studies are mainly focused on single-target electrode reactions or products, while much less attention has been paid to reactions on the counterpart electrode and external energy supply, which, obviously, ignores or wastes large quantities of ‘invisible costs’ at the counterpart electrodes when we calculate the benefits and costs of the entire reaction system. In a complete electrocatalytic system, oxidation and reduction reactions take place concurrently and in parallel in accordance with the coupled electron-donating and electron-accepting processes at the anode and cathode, respectively. If only the reaction at the targeted electrode is concerned, the precursors as well as electrons on the opposite side will be wasted, no matter how high the productivity of the targeted reaction might be.7 Moreover, there will be most probably additional invisible wastes that could be easily overlooked. Electrocatalytic systems are always powered by electricity from fossil fuels, which costs heavily but wastes large amounts of electrons during the system operation. The discharged water/gas wastes and/or other low/no value chemicals need to be treated, which also demands additional or unexpected costs (Fig. 1). As a matter of fact, the overall profit and the cost of an electrocatalytic system, either visible or invisible, can be mainly attributed to the utilization of electrons/atoms in value-added conversion.
 Fig. 1  The development of electrocatalytic systems to generate more revenue and cause less pollution to the human society. 
The product profit increase and energy cost decrease mean the atom and electron utilization enhancement of the overall electrocatalytic system in essence, which relies on the invention and development of innovative electrocatalytic systems and electrocatalysts. In addition to enhancing the economy of the targeted electrode reaction, a co-electrolysis system (CES) strategy has also been proposed aiming to obtain enhanced electron and atom utilization of both sides and concurrently produce two or more kinds of value-added chemicals.8 For example, the energy consumption in the HER can be greatly lowered by replacing the OER with kinetically favorable anodic reactions such as the hydrate oxidation reaction (HzOR), ethanol oxidation reaction, glucose oxidation reaction (GOR), and amine oxidation reaction (AOR).9 Besides, organic reduction–oxidation co-electrolysis can also produce value-added chemicals at both the anode and cathode simultaneously. To enhance the electron economy of electrolysis, self-powered electrocatalytic systems (SPES) have been developed by using low-value chemical energy from polluted water, organics, biomass, etc., in which electricity can be generated intrinsically inside the electrocatalytic systems to drive the electrocatalytic reaction at the adjacent or opposite electrode. Different from CES, SPES can be operated without an external energy supply, but the atoms at the anode are still wasted. Due to the low equilibrium potential of metal oxidation, several classical electrochemical reduction reactions can be applied in SPES as cathodic reactions. Until now, a number of SPES have been developed, including metal–CO2 batteries, metal–H2O batteries, metal–NO3−/NO2− batteries, etc. The above-mentioned two systems feature largely improved electron/atom utilization benefiting from their distinctive system configurations, but drawbacks remain. To further ameliorate the electrocatalytic system, self-co-electrolysis systems (SCES) have been developed most recently, featuring maximized electron availability and 100% atom utilization theoretically, which optimizes the economy of the whole reaction system. Unfortunately, extensive and in-depth discussions about the approaches for electron/atom utilization maximization of electrocatalytic systems are not available to date in the literature.
In this review, we will summarize the recent developments of electrocatalytic systems towards enhanced atom and electron economy in three system configurations, which are catalogued according to the levels of atom/electron utilization of the whole system: (i) traditional electrocatalytic systems featuring half atom/electron utilization (HU-ES): only single-target catalytic reactions and chemical production at one electrode are concerned; (ii) atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic systems (USE-ES): (a) atoms in the counterpart electrode are used to produce high value chemicals like the working electrode in the system, namely, co-electrolysis systems (CES), and (b) the systems are driven by electricity power source agent, which can generate electricity inside the system, namely, self-powered electrocatalytic systems (SPES); and (iii) atom/electron full utilization electrocatalytic systems (FU-ES): no atoms or electrons will be wasted, in which two types of systems can be established: (a) the electron donors are rechargeable in the system, namely, rechargeable functional batteries (RFB), and (b) the electron donors themselves are used as the atom sources in the system, namely, self-co-electrolysis systems (SCES). The relationship and distinct advantages of these strategies are summarized in Fig. 2 and Table 1.
 Fig. 2  The advantages and disadvantages of the three configurations of electrocatalytic systems including the atom/electron half-utilization electrocatalytic system (HU-ES), the atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic system (USE-ES) and the atom/electron full-utilization electrocatalytic system (FU-ES). 
Table 1 Feature comparison among the three configurations of electrocatalytic systems




Types
Sub-types
Dual products
Atom utilization
Energy output
Electron utilization
Recyclability




HU-ES
HU-ES
No
50%
No
50%
No


USE-ES
CES
Yes
100%
No
100%
No


SPES
No
50%
Yes
100%
No


FU-ES
SCES
Yes
100%
Yes
200%
No


RFB
No
100%
Yes
100%
Yes




The rational design of an anodic reaction plays a crucial, even decisive role in the elevation of the atom and electron utilization in the case of fixed cathode reactions, such as the HER or CO2RR. Our discussions will be mainly concentrated on the design of the whole electrocatalytic system, especially on the value-added chemical production by anodic reactions coupled with cathodic reactions. Moreover, the remaining challenges and prospects for future development of electron/atom utilization in an electrocatalytic system will be discussed at the end of this review. It is hoped that this review will shed light on the design and optimization of low-cost and highly efficient electrocatalytic systems and thus benefit the design and application of FU-ES in the future.
2. Atom/electron half-utilization electrocatalytic systems (HU-ES)
Featuring electron accepting/donating properties, electrodes (cathode/anode) are equivalent to strong nucleophilic/electrophilic reagents that reduce/oxidize the precursor reactants. In cathode electroreduction reactions, including the HER, CO2RR, NRR, etc., the electrons donated by the cathode can be transferred to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of precursor reactants, such as H2O, CO2 and N2, resulting in the formation of cathode reductive products, such as H2, CO/HCOOH or C2 compounds and NH3, respectively.10 In contrast, anodes accept electrons from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of precursor reactants, such as H2O, H2 and CH3OH, to trigger electrooxidation reactions, including the OER, HOR, methanol-oxidation reaction (MOR), etc., producing oxidative products, such as O2, H+ and HCOOH or others, etc., respectively. The specific interaction or coordination between catalytic active sites and precursor reactants is the basis of electrocatalytic reactions. Therefore, several strategies have been designed to regulate the electron structure of electrocatalysts to enhance the atom and electron utilization, including defect engineering, nanostructuring, atomic dispersion, etc., and the underlying kinetic mechanisms of these electrocatalyst-assisted reactions have been well explored. Besides, finding the appropriate operating medium and developing high-technology devices also favor the atom/electron utilization enhancement via reactant activity and mass diffusion promotion during the value-added chemical generation.
2.1 Rational design of electrocatalysts
In the past few decades, diverse strategies for electrocatalyst design have been proposed and widely used in most electrocatalytic reactions. The types of electrocatalysts are increasing rapidly, together with the development of novel concepts and battery assemblies, though sometimes these concepts are similar to each other. In this review, we will summarize and discuss four typical kinds of electrocatalysts including doping, atomic dispersion, nanostructure, and heterointerface engineering, all of which show effective and efficient utilization of the intrinsic atoms involved. The diagram (Fig. 3) highlights the main points of these four strategies.
 Fig. 3  Four classic types of electrocatalysts. 

2.1.1 Defect engineering. 
Defect engineering is one of the most classical strategies for regulating the electron structure of electrocatalysts, which includes point defects, linear defects, and interface defects, categorized based on the defect configuration.6 Point defects, defined as the atomic position deviation from the normal arrangement in the crystal structure at the node or neighboring micro-regions, are commonly formed by removing or replacing the in situ atoms, creating vacancy defects and replacement defects, respectively. Vacancy defects have been widely reported to improve the electrocatalytic activities of metal compounds, such as transition metal oxides, sulfides, selenides, and so on. Zheng and co-workers11 reported a lithiation-enabled vacancy-engineering strategy for creating high-density nitrogen vacancies at the surface of Cu3N catalysts, as shown in Fig. 4a and b. The N vacancies lead to a decreased distance between adjacent Cu atoms, which is beneficial to the bonding of C* intermediates absorbed at Cu sites. The vacancy-abundant Cu3Nx catalyst exhibits enhanced electrocatalytic performance for C2 production with an extra-high faradaic efficiency (FE) of 81.7 ± 2.3%, which represents an attractive approach to achieve multi-carbon chemical production through CO2 electrochemical reduction. Recently, Hu and co-workers12 fabricated a Cu and In bimetallic selenide with Se vacancies (V-CuInSe2) for efficient CO2 electroreduction (CO2RR) to CO. The Se vacancies which were introduced on the crystal surface were in favor of the CO formation path instead of HCOOH, which resulted from the decreased H* absorption energy.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of C2 product generation through C–C coupling catalyzed by Cu3N and Cu3Nx. (b) FE of the CO2RR product using Cu3Nx catalysts at varied applied constant potentials.11 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. The electron backscatter diffraction orientation maps (left) and snapshots of the scanning electrochemical cell microscopic video at −1.05 V versus Ag/AgCl (right) of defective Au particles during the (c) HER and (d) CO2RR.16 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Coordination numbers around the Ni atoms of 4.3% N–Ni nanosheets, 1.6% N–Ni nanosheets and Ni foil. (f) Mass and specific activities of various Ni-based catalysts.18 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Different from vacancy defects, replacement defects tailor the electron structure by doping heteroatoms into the catalyst to substitute for the in situ atoms. The introduced heteroatoms with stronger/weaker electro-positivity/negativity will change the electron densities of neighboring atoms, therefore enhancing the catalytic activity. As a promising CO2RR catalyst, SnS2 has a narrow potential window to generate HCOOH with high selectivity, which restricts its wide application in industry. By doping Cu atoms, the matrix of SnS2 can be dynamically restructured to form a metal alloy phase, which redistributes the electron structure and modulates the d-band center of the crystal to obtain high CO2RR catalytic performance of 55% FE toward formic acid formation at a potential of −0.9 V (vs. RHE).13 Hu and co-workers14 modulated a bimetallic carbide–graphite composite by doping with nitrogen atoms (N-Fe2MoC-GC) to tailor the electron structures of Fe and Mo sites. Affected by N atoms with strong electronic affinity, the adjacent Fe and Mo sites become more positive as their electrons are captured by the neighboring N atoms, which favors O2 absorption and activation and the subsequent H2O2 production through the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). The high ORR selectivity of the N-Fe2MoC-GC ensures the impressive performance of the fuel cell. Using the sweeping voltammetry method, it is determined that the N-Fe2MoC-GC exhibits a mass activity as high as 83 mA mgcat.−1 at 0.9 V versus RHE, which is 2.2 times that of Pt/C (40 wt%, mA mgcat.−1). Han's group15 suggested that the dual doping of anions and cations might bring more space to modulate the electrocatalyst performance, thanks to the opposite charge of the doped ions. A dual Ag- and S-co-doped Cu2O/Cu foam (Ag,S–Cu2O/Cu) catalyst reported in this work achieved a rather high FE of 67.4% and a high current density of 122.7 mA cm−2 in CO2-to-methanol conversion by benefiting from the enhanced *H and *CHO intermediate absorption.
Linear and interface defects usually appear as one- or two-dimensional periodic failures within crystal lattices, which play crucial roles in the regulation of the facet structure of electrocatalysts. A number of researchers have found that edge dislocation and crystal lattice separation in electrocatalysts can enhance their electrochemical performances. A representative work has been reported by Kanan's group,16 in which scanning electrochemical cell microscopy was employed to record electrochemical CO2RR and HER in the vicinity of grain boundaries on Au materials. It has been demonstrated that the current density of the CO2RR in the slip band (SB) is higher than that in neighboring grains, and the current density of the HER is independent of grain boundary defects (Fig. 4c and d). Guan and co-workers17 reported a charge-induced crystal distortion and morphology remodeling method to form edge-enriched dislocation defects. After electrochemical reduction, a certain amount of P atoms in the Mn-doped CoP (Mn-CoP) nanowire catalyst have been removed due to the distortion and breakage of lattices, and thus linear and interface defects have been generated. The distortion and interface defects provide less positive values of H absorption energy, which weaken the interaction between Co sites and H*, resulting in the enhancement of electrocatalytic HER performance.
In recent years, a unique type of defects, strain defects, have been widely studied and reported. As described by Guo's group, the surface strain of nanomaterials inherently exists for two reasons: (i) the lowered coordination or dangling bonds of surface atoms compared with the inner atoms and (ii) the intrinsic characteristics of nanomaterials like the size effect or structural disorder. As for the electrocatalyst, the direct effect of strain is a change in the bond length, which can be defined as ε = (dp − ds)/ds, where ε is the strain intensity, dp refers to the inter-atom distance in the local area, and ds is defined as the standard atom–atom distance in bulk materials. The strain of the electrocatalyst lattice may further change the coordination numbers and electron densities of surface atoms, which will cause the change of surface energy and enhance the specific adsorption of the target molecules. Strain defects can be generated through several common methods during electrocatalyst fabrication, including the core–shell structure, particle size regulation, alloying, and morphology modulation. Wang and co-workers18 achieved controllable orbital hybridization and strain field by inserting N atoms into Ni sheets. It has been determined that the face-centered cubic structure of the Ni lattice will not collapse after N insertion, but the missing Ni–Ni coordination is able to induce partially released tensile strain. Furthermore, the strain defects can shorten the distance between Ni and N atoms, which is in favor of the hybridization between Nid orbitals and Nsp orbitals (Fig. 4e). The orbital hybridization may result in strengthened –OH adsorption at Ni sites, which boosts the Volmer rate-determining step of the HOR resulting from such an adsorption strengthening (Fig. 4f).


2.1.2 Nanostructure. 
Electrocatalysts can be classified as 0D (nanoparticle, quantum dot), 1D (nanowire, nanoneedle, nanoarray, nanotube), 2D (nanosheet), and 3D (0D/1D/2D composite, hierarchical) structures according to their morphologies. Nanomaterials of specific dimensions may exhibit unique physical and chemical properties, such as ultrahigh catalytic activity, high surface energy, large specific surface area, directional electron/photon/heat conduction, and mass transport, which enable them to meet the various requirements in catalyzing target chemical reactions. In addition, almost all electrocatalysts, such as metallic alloys, metal compounds, and metal-free materials, have been designed to possess special nanostructures endowing them with various functional features like enhanced catalytic site strength and density, and mass/electron/heat diffusivity. Due to their ultrasmall grain size, 0D materials always exhibit broadened energy gaps and large surface energy, resulting from the shift of the electron energy level near the Fermi level from the quasi-continuous to discrete level, thus leading to discontinued HOMO and LUMO levels, which is in favor of the enhancement of catalytic activity. For example, Wang's group19 have electro-coupled N2 and CO2 reduction in H2O and produced urea successfully by applying PdCu alloy quantum dots supported on TiO2 sheets (PdCu–TiO2) as the catalyst (Fig. 5a). Although N2 is an ultra-stable molecule and hard to be reduced, this C–N coupling reaction still reaches a high FE of 8.92% and a high urea formation rate of 3.36 mmol g−1 h−1 under the catalysis of PdCu–TiO2 (Fig. 5b), which is a milestone in urea synthesis. By using hard or soft templates, 0D materials can be synthesized into multiple shapes, like sphere, cube, sheet, stick and flower, exposing designated lattice surfaces with high activity controllably. Yan's group20 fabricated a unique In(OH)3 nanocube catalyst exposing a well-defined single (100) facet to accelerate the C–N coupling reaction by using NO3−, instead of N2, as the N source. This nanocubic In(OH)3 semiconductor catalyst can shift from n-type to p-type in the presence of a surface hole accumulation layer formed by CO2-capturing surface electrons from the (100) facet, which can impede the HER process efficiently (Fig. 5c). Finally, this In(OH)3 enables an ultra-high urea yield of 533.1 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at a low potential of −0.6 V (vs. RHE), while the FE, nitrogen selectivity and carbon selectivity of this electrocatalytic system can reach 53.4%, 82.9% and ∼100%, respectively (Fig. 5d and e).
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of Pd1Cu1/TiO2; inset: size distribution of PdCu nanoparticles. Scale bar: 25 nm. (b) FE and operating current densities of all products at varied potentials.19 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic illustration of the n–p semiconductor type transformation and CO2 capture process of In(OH)3 nanocubes. (d) FEurea and (e) Nurea-selectivity at different potentials on In(OH)3 in 0.1 M KNO3 electrolyte with CO2 feeding gas.20 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. 
Compared with 0D materials, 1D and 2D materials usually have ordered and continuous atom arrays that can provide necessary conductivity or anisotropy. For instance, Wang's group reported21 an ultra-sensitive Ru-dispersed Cu nanowire (Ru-CuNW) catalyst, as shown in Fig. 6a, which can adapt to an extremely wide NO3− concentration window from an industrial wastewater level of 2000 ppm to a drinkable water level <50 ppm while maintaining a high selectivity of >99% NO3− conversion and >90% FE (Fig. 6b). Moreover, the produced high concentration NH3 can be removed by air purging to the acidic electrolyte in the form of solid NH4Cl, which is significant in performing industrial NORR without difficulties in product purification and separation. As a common 2D material, MoS2 is regarded as a promising electrocatalyst for the HER due to its abundant edge sites. However, MoS2 is likely to form a multi-layered pyramid structure during chemical vapor deposition (CVD). In this multilayer structure, the electron transfer is impeded by the inevitable interlayer potential barrier between adjacent layers. Yuan and co-workers22 reported an interesting approach by tilting the substrate during CVD to prepare screw-structured MoS2 with abundant edge active sites (Fig. 6c and e). Even if this screw-structured MoS2 maintains the 3D pyramid structure, its monomer has only one continuous surface exhibiting features like a 2D material. By using COMSOL Multiphysics software, the eddy current density of screw-structured pyramid MoS2 has been simulated which is over one order of magnitude higher than that of step-structured pyramid MoS2 (Fig. 6d and f). This screw-structured pyramid MoS2 demonstrated enhanced HER performance with an overpotential of −105 mV compared with step pyramid MoS2 (−177 mV).
 Fig. 6  (a) EDS mapping images of Ru-CuNW demonstrating good dispersion of Ru atoms. (b) N-Balance and NH3 FE of the Ru-CuNW applied NORR reaction.21 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group. The magnified AFM images of (c) step- and (e) screw-structured pyramid MoS2. Simulated eddy current density of (d) step- and (f) screw-structured pyramid MoS2.22 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
To date, research studies on 3D materials are mostly focused on integrating the advantages of 0D, 1D, and 2D materials. Actually, one of the main design ideas for 3D materials is to construct hierarchical structures. Recently, Dongyuan Zhao et al. have reported the versatile synthesis of mesoporous crystalline TiO2 materials by using the mono-micelle assembly method.23 In this review, they divided the evolution of crystalline mesoporous materials into three groups: well-defined (hydrolysis matching with assembly), highly crystalline (balanced porosity and crystallinity), and nano-architectured meso-structure (all issues balanced) (Fig. 7). TiO2 materials, which have been widely applied as catalysts in various photo/electrocatalytic reactions owing to their outstanding catalytic activity and chemical stability, could be controllably constructed from 0D to 3D hierarchical macro-mesoporous structures by self-assembly, which paves the way for developing electrocatalysts with high atom/electron utilization and energy storage devices of high performance. Moreover, this mono-micelle assembly method can be used to prepare not only TiO2 materials, but also metal-free mesoporous superstructured carbon materials. Zhao's group have achieved the controllable construction of hierarchical 3D carbon materials with a unique pore structure.24 The obtained carbon materials with well-organized mesostructures have been manifested as advanced ORR electrocatalysts, which exhibited a 0.82 V (vs. RHE) half-wave potential, equivalent to that of commercial Pt/C catalysts. This impressive electrochemical performance of carbon materials is benefited from their highly accessible and catalytically active surface sites and appealing functionality due to their well-organized mesostructures.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the evolution of mesoporous materials in three periods: well-defined, highly crystalline, and nano-architectured mesostructures. (b) A compilation of images showing representative examples of versatile TiO2 mesostructures.23 Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 


2.1.3 Atomic dispersion. 
2.1.3.1 Single-atom catalysts (SACs). 
As we all know, catalytic active sites have always been the exposed atoms on the surface of catalysts. In addition to the elaborate design of the catalyst structure, the specific surface area, especially the active site density of the catalyst, can be greatly increased, but even so there will be a certain amount of active atomic sites inside the catalyst being wasted. Decreasing the size of catalysts to nano- or sub-nano-levels is a promising strategy to maximize the atomic utilization of the catalytic reaction. However, the isolated atoms cannot exist alone, which means that they must be well dispersed and supported on the substrate. The concept of single-atom catalysts (SACs) has been proposed by Tao Zhang and his co-workers in 2011.25 They prepared a FeOx supported single Pt atom catalyst (Pt–FeOx) that showed excellent performance in both CO electrooxidation and preferential oxidation of CO in H2. Since then, the concept of SACs has attracted great attention worldwide, as reported by Tao Zhang et al. on the development of atomic dispersion (Fig. 8a) and the preparation, characterization, and catalytic performance of SACs in 2013.26 Until now, several kinds of SACs have been synthesized successfully, which are as follows: (i) carbon-based SACs including graphene, nitrogen doped graphene, MOFs and other porous carbon materials; (ii) transition metal dichalcogenide and transition metal phosphide supported SACs, and (iii) other support-confined SACs like metal alloys and carbides.27 These SACs have been applied in most catalytic reactions due to their high reactivity and stability.28 Recently, Zhao's group29 fabricated a bifunctional carbon supported single-atom Ru/Co–N4 electrocatalyst (Ru/Co–N–C) to achieve efficient water splitting. This Ru/Co–N–C catalyst presents excellent activity comparable to Pt/C and RuO2 in both strong acidic and alkaline electrolytes, which requires overpotentials of only 13 and 23 mV for the HER and 232 and 247 mV for the OER to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH, respectively. Moreover, this catalyst exhibits impressive stability for as long as 330 h by maintaining a high current density of 450 mA cm−2. In SACs, metal ligand modification of the active sites is an efficient strategy to enhance the activity and stability of electrocatalysts. Coupled with strong electron donating ligands, the active sites can be endowed with enhanced charge density, resulting in the d-band center shift. Wang and co-workers30 proposed an electronic metal-supported interaction (EMSI) effect in a Cu1–TiC SAC. Different from traditional organic ligands, Cu centers become electron-rich due to the electronic perturbations from adjacent TiC, which can be considered as a novel metal ligand. Due to the EMSI effect, the number of electrons participating in the reaction would be increased, and therefore a high linear-E-type regioselective conversion rate of electronically unbiased alkynes has been achieved. In addition to the element types as active sites, the concentration of active atoms dispersed on the substrate surface can also influence the selectivity and performance of the electrolytic reaction. Sargent et al.31 reported a Cu-supported Fe-single-atom catalyst which exhibited a high CO2-to-methane performance with a FE of 64% and an output current density of 128 mA cm−2. By combining the results of characterization and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, they found that the intermediate affinity to the catalyst transferred from *CO to *H with the Fe atom number on the Cu surface increasing from 1 to 7 (Fig. 8b). Moreover, the single Fe atom site shows a stronger *CO adsorption capacity than the Cu site, which is beneficial to the production of CH4 instead of CO. This work reveals the relationship between the affinity of various intermediates and the atomic distribution of the catalyst, which is instructive for constructing CO2RR electrocatalysts to produce different target products.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the relationship between surface free energy and specific activity per metal atom with metal particle size.26 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Effect of iron domain sizes on the copper surface on the adsorption energies of H* and CO*.31 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Distribution of NO3− along the z-axis electrode distance based on molecular dynamics simulations. Finite element analysis of the NO3− distribution difference near (d) CuCl_BEF and (e) CuCl in KNO3 solution.46 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Difference in the charge density values of S adsorbed on CoNi@NGs with the red and blue areas denoting increased and decreased charge density values, respectively. (g) LSV curves for the oxidation activity over CoNi@NGs in 2% H2S/syngas (49% CO, 49% H2 and 2% H2S), syngas (50% CO and 50% H2) and Ar.50 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.1.3.2 Dual single-atom catalysts (DSACs). 
Similar to the bulk phase of composite materials, the adjacent isolated atoms can also exert a synergistic effect during the electrocatalytic process theoretically. The application of dual (or even tri-) single-atom catalysts in various reactions has been widely reported in recent years. Compared with SACs, DSACs exhibit more than one kind of active centers with different electronic states in the local domain, which can meet the needs of intermediate absorption in multi-reaction steps, therefore demonstrating enhanced activity and selectivity of atomic dispersion catalysts.32,33 According to the interactions between the atomic sites, DSACs can be categorized into (i) adjacent dual-atom pairs; (ii) bridge-linked dual-atom pairs; and (iii) non-interacting diatoms dispersed uniformly on the substrate surface.34–36 For DASCs, long-range interactions (LRI), a key part of synergistic interactions in DASCs, which are decided by the matched level between dual atom sites instead of the distance between two atomic sites, are an essential factor for the catalytic activity and stability enhancement of single-atom sites. Therefore, the first two types of DSACs are of high significance and great application potential.37 By using 2D/3D templates, the dual metal sites can also be anchored at defect sites to form metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts.38 Lu and co-workers developed a DSAC with Ni–Zn pair sites (NiZnN6) for CO2 conversion to CO, in which the heteronuclear coordination could modify the d-states of the metal atom by narrowing the gap between the d-band center (εd) of the Ni (3d) orbitals and the Fermi energy level, leading to stronger electronic interactions at the reaction interface. Thus, the free energy barrier and activation energy to strengthen the M–C bonding on NiZnN6 and break symmetric C–O bonds can be reduced. Finally, this NiZnN6 offers a FECO of over 90% across a wide range of potential from −0.5 to −1.0 V, superior to that of single Ni or Zn sites. Huang and co-workers39 reported an Ir1Mo1/TiO2 DSAC to catalyze the hydrogenation of 4-nitrostyrene (4-NS) into 4-vinylaniline (4-VA). In 4-NS hydrogenation, the Ir1 and Mo1 sites in Ir1Mo1/TiO2 can absorb the nitro group of 4-NS and the O atom of H2O, thus releasing N* and H*, respectively. The synergistic effect between the Ir1 and Mo1 sites of the Ir1Mo1/TiO2 DSAC enables a largely elevated electrocatalytic selectivity of over 96% for 4-VA, much better than that of either Ir1/TiO2 or Mo1/TiO2. As the application of DASCs broadens, their stability, which is essential to their industrial utilization, has gained increasing attention among researchers. Wang's group40 synthesized a novel supported Pd2 homonuclear DASC by an anion replacement deposition–precipitation (ARDP) method. Due to the coordination by ligands (N atoms), the Pd2 DASC centers would capture more electrons, resulting in an enhanced CO2RR performance of 98.2% FECO at −0.8 V vs. RHE. Moreover, the coordinated ligands will anchor at the Pd2-atom sites and cover them effectively, thus protecting Pd2-atom sites from leaking out during the catalytic reaction and enhancing the stability of the Pd2 DASC.


2.1.4 Heterointerface engineering. 
Heterointerface engineering, which has great potential to enhance the ionic/electronic conductivity, activity, and stability of functional materials, has been widely applied in the fields of electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and energy storage devices.41–43 Just as its name implies, a heterointerface is formed when two materials with dissimilar chemical states are in direct contact. Due to their different Femi energy and charge density values, electrons will transfer from one side to the other side across the interface, leading to the formation of a built-in electric field, a space charge region and local charge accumulation or depletion.44 These novel characteristics may provide enhanced activity and selectivity for electrocatalysts. For example, in 2019, Ai and co-workers45 firstly prepared a CoP–FeP composited electrocatalyst with a built-in electric field for electrochemical water splitting. Due to its lower conduction band, FeP can capture electrons from CoP to strengthen the interactions with H+ and promote the HER. Lu and co-workers46 utilized TiO2 as the electron donor to provide electrons to CuCl (CuCl_BEF) for NO3− reduction. As Fig. 7c–e shows, the NO3− ions tend to accumulate mainly on the TiO2 sites at the interface between CuCl_BEF and the electrolyte compared with bulk CuCl, and thus the absorbed NO3− can be reduced at the adjacent CuCl sites to NH3. Finally, an NH3 selectivity of 98.6% and a mass-specific ammonia production rate of 64.4 h−1 have been achieved over CuCl_BEF. Actually, as a strategy for chemical state regulation of materials, heterointerfaces can be engineered at various nanostructure electrocatalysts. Wang's group47 have prepared nanoframes of the Co3O4–Mo2N heterostructure successfully by pyrolyzing Prussian blue analogue nanoframes (NFs) cross-linked by Co–Mo dual-metal knots. The Co3O4–Mo2N heterostructure catalyst exhibits good bifunctional performance for the HER and OER, respectively, featuring 100 and 220 mV overpotentials to reach 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, the Co3O4–Mo2N heterostructure catalyst retains excellent stability for over 20 h during overall water splitting compared with the control group of Co3O4 and Mo–Co3O4, demonstrating the rational combination between the heterostructure and 3D nanostructure. To further maximize the heterointerface distributed on and active sites exposed, Wang and co-workers48 proposed a novel bottom-up approach for preparing 2D nonlayered transition metal carbide/nitride heterostructure nanosheets (h-TMCN) for water splitting. Interestingly, the hole size of h-TMCN can be well-regulated by tuning the temperature, and the mechanisms of h-TMCN formation, including unstable species vaporization, carbon source graphitization, and N, C diffusion, have been probed. This h-TMCN exhibits high performance for the OER featuring a 276 mV overpotential for reaching 50 mA cm−2. Interfacial design is also an effective strategy for improving the stability of electrocatalysts. Wang's group49 have proposed an in situ electrochemical surface reconfiguration (ESR) strategy for preparing a heterostructured NiV nitride@oxyhydroxide (NiVN@OOH) core–shell nanosheet array catalyst. The novel structure of the NiVN@OOH catalyst enables a synergetic effect between the doped aliovalent V atoms and NiV interface to increase the activity of the oxyhydroxide surface, benefiting the adsorption energy optimization of OER intermediates. Moreover, due to the strong chemical interaction, the in situ formed ultrathin NiVN@OOH shell shows outstanding stability in the long-term OER over 20 h.


2.1.5 Others. 
The confinement effect is generally defined as the molecular movement restriction in a space of certain sizes, which may probably lead to an abnormal distribution of local electron clouds and reaction pathway changes. Because atoms or molecules can show extremely strong interactions (absorption and coordination) in a strongly restricted space, the resultant confinement effect can endow the atom sites with much enhanced activity. From its definition, catalytically active sites can be designed and fabricated into the confined space of nano-/microstructures to achieve such a confinement effect. The confinement effect can be achieved by employing porous materials including mesoporous materials, microporous carbon, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and zeolite, in which the catalytic sites can be confined into confined spaces such as pore channels and cavities.
Deng and co-workers have proposed “graphene-encapsulated metal catalysts” by encapsulating the metal particles within a stable shell for protecting and anchoring the active sites precisely. They prepared an ultrastable N-doped graphene encapsulated CoNi nanoalloy (CoNi@NG) to produce H2 from H2S (Fig. 8f and g).50 Separated by an inert graphene layer, the CoNi alloy core can be well protected from harsh conditions and even O2 molecules.
Similar to heterointerface materials, twinned nanocrystals also have polycrystalline species in one bulk. However, the distribution of elements in twinned nanocrystals is relatively uniform, which makes the active sites distributed rather uniformly throughout the surface, but not accumulated at the interface. Pennycook and co-workers51 fabricated twinned tungsten carbonitride (WCN) nanocrystals where W2C and WN are chemically bonded at the molecular level by using W/Zn bimetallic imidazole frameworks as the precursor. These WCN nanocrystals show the desired HER activity benefiting from the abundant N–W–C interfaces while retaining the high chemical stability of the W element under both acidic and alkaline conditions.

2.2 Operating conditions
The acidity/basicity of an operating medium is equally important in influencing the selectivity of the target product in an electrocatalytic system due to the following reasons: (i) the performances of catalysts including activity and stability may be heavily dependent on the catalytic environment such as strongly acidic, neutral, and strongly alkaline electrolytes; (ii) the rate determining steps of electrocatalytic reactions are usually and largely influenced by the pH value; (iii) undesirable side reactions may take place at certain specific pH values, but may not at other pH values.
To maintain high-enough catalytic performances at varied acidities, electrocatalysts should be established and prepared to adapt to the whole pH range. For example, Mu's group52 synthesized a novel IrP2@NC electrocatalyst by using phytic acid as C and P sources and the Ir4+ capturer. The IrP2@NC electrocatalyst can achieve 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH at ultralow overpotentials of 8 and 28 mV, respectively, which greatly reduces the power consumption in hydrogen production. Although noble metals usually show outstanding catalytic activity, their high cost prevents their widespread application in industry. Wu's group53 reported a sequential phase conversion–induction strategy to fabricate Ni2P–Ni12P5@Ni3S2 hetero-nanorod arrays which display superior HER performance across the whole pH range. This Ni2P–Ni12P5@Ni3S2 material can output 10 mA cm−2 current density at 32, 46, and 34 mV overpotentials in 1.0 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4, and 1.0 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) electrolytes, respectively, exhibiting unprecedented HER performances of noble metal-free electrocatalysts, which are even better than several noble metal-based electrocatalysts. Du and co-workers54 prepared a self-supported Cu electrode by utilizing the plasma spraying (PS) technology. Different from most reported free-standing electrocatalysts, this Cu electrode (PS–Cu) can be synthesized at a larger scale (fabrication rate: 20 g min−1) and shows good stability (over 30 h). With the increase of the Cu–Cu atomic distance, the overlap of inter-atomic d-orbitals will decrease and the d-band center will upshift, which leads to an increased H* adsorption energy of the Cu sites. The PS–Cu electrode finally exhibits relatively high electrochemical HER performance under overall pH conditions, which are 182 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4, 261 mV in 1 M PBS, and 121 mV in 1 M KOH at 10 mA cm−2. Furthermore, the normalized current densities of −1.2 V vs. RHE and overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 of PS–Cu are much better than those of other Cu-based materials (Fig. 9a and b).
 Fig. 9  (a) The photograph of raw materials Cu powders and the spraying product PS-Cu membrane. (b) Overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and current densities at −1.2 V vs. RHE of PS-Cu, Cu NPs, Cu foam, and Pt foil.54 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) The relationship between the HER activity and pH value measured in a Na2SO4 electrolyte solution (0.5 M) saturated with H2 at a rotational rate of 3600 rpm using Pt disk (solid) and Pt/C (open) electrodes.55 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Scheme of two kinds of five-layer MEAs.57 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group. (e) A rendering of the MultiThor design. (f) Comparison of TCH, ECH, and ePMR hydrogenation.60 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The HER is also a representative reaction whose reaction path can be affected by the pH value. Due to the varied concentrations of H3O+ in electrolyte, the catalysts are more likely to absorb the H3O+ in the Volmer step, in which H* can be generated under acidic conditions, and absorb H2O under alkaline conditions. Takanabe's group55 conducted comprehensive studies aiming to understand the relationship between the electrocatalytic activity of the HER and operating medium. Several factors including the type of reactant, electrolytes (buffered or unbuffered) and their concentrations have been investigated to probe the possible HER mechanisms. They observed that, at varied pH values in the same 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution, the HER mechanistic switching is independent of the type of electrolyte salt, but relies on the concentration of H3O+. As shown in Fig. 9c, three kinetic regions are indicated for the HER depending on the pH value: a fast kinetic region (pH = 1–4, H3O+ ions are reactants), a slow kinetic region (pH = 5–9, H2O molecules are reactants), and a thermodynamically driven region (pH = 10–13, H2O molecules are reactants and the over-high pH values shift the thermodynamic potential of the HER necessitating external overpotentials for the reduction of H2O molecules). Besides, the concentrations of OH−− and H+, which are the main sources of O and H atoms, respectively, can greatly affect the reactivity of the C* sites of the target group in the organic oxygenation or hydrogenation reactions. Therefore, the hydrogenation reactions are often performed in strongly acidic solutions, while oxygenation reactions are often performed in strongly alkaline solutions.
During certain electrochemical reactions, the side reactions such as the HER and OER can be hardly avoided completely in aqueous solutions. However, most organic solvents cannot be used to substitute for water due to their high cost, toxicity, and low ionic conductivity. Fortunately, the kinetics of the HER and OER can be suppressed by tuning the pH value of electrolyte. For example, the NORR, especially in the case of high NO3− concentrations (over 50 mM), is usually performed under strong alkaline conditions. The NORR is an eight-electron cathodic reaction, which can be described by the following equation:NO3− (aq) + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4OH (aq) + 9OH− (aq)
From the Gibbs equation  where n, F, ΔG, R, and T are the electron transfer number (8), the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1), standard molar Gibbs free energy change of the chemical reaction at 298 K, the gas constant (8.314 J mol−1 K−1), and the temperature (298 K), respectively. The theoretical potentials of the NORR calculated (assuming [NO3−] is 0.25 mol L−1 and [NH4OH] is 10−3 mol L−1) at the pH values of 1, 7, and 14 are 0.8, 0.6, and 0.14 V, respectively, which means that the kinetics of the NORR will become faster at increased pH values in contrast to the HER.
2.3 Devices
Besides the design of catalysts, device establishment is another key route to improve the efficiency and performance of chemical reactions. In a simple catalytic system like water splitting, the classical single-pool cell is preferred due to its simple assembly. However, the liquid-phase products generated at the working electrode will electrochemically convert back at the counterpart electrode. H-type cells, by using an ion-exchange membrane (cation exchange membrane (CEM), an anion exchange membrane (AEM), and a bipolar membrane (BPM)) to separate two electrodes into two chambers, can well protect the obtained products, which have been widely used in various electrochemical reactions including the CO2RR, NORR, HOR, biomass conversion, etc. However, the electrochemical resistance is directly affected by the distance between electrodes. Due to the enlarged distance between the two electrodes and the separation by an ion-exchange membrane, the electrochemical resistance of H-type cells is inevitably much higher than that of a single-pool cell, leading to its much-lowered productivity and high energy cost. To solve these issues, novel flow cells, including membrane reactors and microfluidic reactors, have been developed which enable a direct contact between the electrodes and ion-exchange membrane by assembling membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs).56
As shown in Fig. 9d, MEAs are generally assembled into a five-layer structure, consisting of a catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) sandwiched between two gas diffusion layers (GDLs), or an ion-exchange membrane between two gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs).57 GDLs and CCMs are usually applied in membrane fuel cells such as hydrogen fuel cells (HFCs), direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs), and so on. The GDE using gaseous CO2 rather than solubilized CO2 as a substrate can resolve the limitation of the low concentration and slow diffusion of CO2 dissolved in electrolyte.58 Xia's group59 designed a solid-state electrolyte flow cell to achieve a high HCOOH selectivity of over 90% in a wide potential range of −0.8 to −1.3 V (vs. RHE) over the In2O3@C catalyst. Besides, Berlinguette's group60 designed electrocatalytic palladium membrane reactors (ePMRs) where the H+ ions (protons) were generated by splitting H2O molecules from the anode and then were absorbed at the Pd cathode/membrane to form active Had. These ePMRs are independent of the reaction temperature, hydrogen source and maximum electrolyte concentration, which combine the advantages of thermochemical hydrogenation (TCH) and electrochemical hydrogenation (ECH) (Fig. 9e and f).
3. Atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic systems (USE-ES)
In the previous section, we have presented several conventional strategies for improving the utilization of electrocatalytic systems including designing novel electrocatalysts, controlling operating conditions, and assembling high-technology devices, in which great progress has been made. However, these strategies mainly rely on the optimization of the components or operation conditions of the electrocatalytic reaction rather than the electrocatalytic system itself. In other words, the traditional electrocatalytic systems are usually focused on the reaction on a single electrode with the help of an external energy supply, which ignored and wasted the reactions at the counterpart electrode. To further elevate the economy and applicability of electrocatalytic systems, there are mainly two paths for selection: (i) co-producing high value-added chemicals at both electrodes simultaneously and (ii) generating electricity spontaneously to drive the electrocatalytic reactions. These two approaches have been recently reported as co-electrolysis systems and self-powered systems, respectively.
3.1 Co-electrolysis

3.1.1 HER-based co-electrolysis. 
Electrochemical water splitting is regarded as one of the most promising strategies for H2 production. However, the OER, anodic reaction of water splitting, requires a large overpotential (cat. 0.3–0.6 V) to drive due to its sluggish kinetics, which results in high electricity consumption. Moreover, the product, O2 gas, is of rather low value, which hardly contributes to the economy of the entire reaction system. These problems can be solved by replacing the OER with another oxidation reaction with much favorable kinetics and producing value-added products.61
3.1.1.1 HER–HzOR co-electrolysis. 
Hydrazine, a common toxic pollutant in industrial wastewater and seawater, can be easily oxidized as shown in the following equation: N2H4 + 4OH− → N2 + 4H2O + 4e−, which is an ideal reaction to substitute the OER due to its lower theoretical potential (−0.33 V). Xie's group62 have presented a satisfactory overall hydrazine splitting (OHzS) process in detail featuring favorable HzOR kinetics and superior dual-island active sites for the HER and HzOR, benefiting from the fabrication of bifunctional electrocatalysts (Fig. 10a). Due to the high price of hydrazine, it may not be cost-effective to use hydrazine only as a sacrificing agent for H2 production; however, electrocatalytic HzOR is desirable in removing the hydrazine pollutant in wastewater or seawater. In this way, a HER–HzOR coupling reaction system will be highly favorable for both H2 production and purification of hydrazine-contaminated wastewater, especially seawater. The theoretical potential of the HzOR is not only far lower than that of the OER but also lower than that of the chlorine electro-oxidation reaction (ClOR), implying the co-electrolysis of hydrazine and seawater will realize high-efficiency H2 production and seawater purification simultaneously, without the generation of toxic gases, like Cl2.63 However, it is well known that the concentration of hydrazine in common wastewater is always too low to donate enough electrons for the HER.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematics of conventional overall water splitting for the (A) HER, (B) HzOR-coupled HER and (C) HzOR-coupled HER using electrocatalysts for both the HER and HzOR.62 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM images (scale bar: 50 nm) of Pd/TNTA. (c) Illustration of the co-electrolysis of water and ethanol in an alkaline electrolyte. (d) Polarization curves for a HER–ethanol oxidation coupling membrane electrochemical reactor in 2 M NaOH water solutions of 2 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
3.1.1.2 HER–organic oxidation co-electrolysis. 
Since the 21st century, organic electrosynthesis has been regarded as one of the advanced methodologies to meet the green chemical principles of industrial organic synthesis. Under applied potential input, the electrons at the anode of the electrolytic cell are exported, which makes the anode extremely electrophilic. By tuning the voltage of the power supply, the electrophilicity of the anode can be well-regulated. This means that the reactants or functional groups can be selected accurately to be oxidized on the anode. The functional groups, including hydroxyl, carboxyl, aldehyde and amine groups, have been widely found in most kinds of organic matter like Cn chemicals and biomass derivatives, which can be converted to high-value industrial products electrochemically.64,65
Alcohol, as a kind of classical green renewable fuel and bulk chemical, is widely present in nature and plants. Alcohol oxidation is an essential route for fine-chemical synthesis and biomass-derivative conversion. In an electrocatalytic system, alcohol electrooxidation usually takes place in an aqueous electrolyte due to its significantly lower potential than that of the OER, which is beneficial to H2 generation at the cathode. Among most types of alcohols, no doubt ethanol is the most prevailing one. Ethanol is not just an important renewable and clean fuel, but also a key raw material for acetic acid production. Vizza's group66 first reported an ethanol oxidation assisted HER system in 2014, which can reduce the anodic energy consumption from 53.6 0 kW h kg−1H2 (OER) to 24.66 kW h kg−1H2 (ethanol-to-acetate conversion). Benefiting from the catalyst of TiO2 nanotube arrays supported by Pd nanoparticles (Pd/TNTA), the energy consumption of the cathodic reaction (HER) is reduced from 47.17 kW h kg−1H2 to 18.49 kW h kg−1H2 due to the accelerated HER kinetics (Fig. 10b–d). A simple calculation shows that the energy consumption of the entire system has been reduced by about 47.5% by this strategy. Attracted by the success of ethanol oxidation assisted HER systems, methanol, a C1 organic chemical with a higher hydrogen amount per molecule than ethanol, has also been applied as an essential anode agent in a HER coupled co-electrolysis system. Fu's group67 developed a single pool electrolytic cell achieving 10 mA cm−2 current density at a cell voltage of 1.497 V. Although the problem of low ionic conductivity of ion exchange membranes has been avoided by using a single pool cell, a question remains: is the H2 generated from water splitting or methanol reforming? With the aid of mass spectrometry, our group probed the reaction pathway and underlying mechanism of HER–methanol oxidation coupled co-electrolysis.68 The mass spectrometry analysis demonstrates that the HD and D2 will not be generated in the solution containing MeOD and H2O, which means that methanol is not the H source of H2 gas, i.e., H2 is produced by water splitting at the cathode under the assistance of anode methanol oxidation.
To further explore the electro-oxidation of organic chemicals, we selected glycerol, a conventional C3 chemical, as the agent for anode oxidation and developed a glycerol oxidation–HER coupled co-electrolysis system. Different from methanol and ethanol, glycerol contains several types of active chemical bonds, including O–H, C–O, and C–C bonds. Under the catalysis of nickel–molybdenum–nitride nanoplates (Ni–Mo–N/CFC) supported on carbon fiber cloth, the stable C–C bond was broken successfully and the value-added chemical formic acid was produced with a high FE of over 95%. This glycerol oxidation–HER coupled co-electrolysis system exhibits a low working potential of 1.36 V under a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is 260 mV lower than that required for conventional overall water splitting.
High value chemicals, such as alkane, imine, and carboxylic acid chemicals, can be obtained by the electrocatalytic oxidation of aldehydes.69,70 Zhang and co-workers71 designed a carbohydrate-universal catalyst of Co3FePx@NF for electrocatalytic oxidation of various carbohydrates (COR), including glucose, fructose, maltose, and sucrose, which exhibited a much lower potential than that required for the OER. A HER–GOR coupled co-electrolysis system has been assembled by using a 2-electrode system that can reach a high current density of over 200 mA cm−2. The operating potential of this system is 230 mV lower than that required for overall water splitting electrolysis at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Nevertheless, although the HER–COR coupled co-electrolysis system is able to achieve the energy-saving purpose to a certain extent, the potential of this system is still rather high at above 1.0 V. Most recently, HER–aldehyde (FF, HMF, and carbohydrates being the key precursors derived from biomass derivatives) oxidation coupled co-electrolysis has been widely demonstrated. FF and HMF, which are abundantly available biomass platform molecules, can be upgraded to furoic acid and FDCA, respectively, by co-electrolysis, and therefore such approaches can be applied in various industrial fields such as food, cosmetic, optical, and green polymer industries. The electrooxidation of HMF often occurs in an aqueous solution by using H2O as the oxygen source, which makes HER-coupled HMF oxidation possible. A novel strategy of glucose-assisted Cu(I)/Cu(II) redox reaction to reduce the overpotential of the GOR has been reported by Wang's group72 by applying Cu2O as the anode catalyst in this system. During electrolysis, Cu2O is converted to Cu(OH)2 by losing electrons from Cu(I) under alkaline conditions. Then, glucose is oxidized to gluconic acid in synergy with electric field-driven Cu(II) reduction back to Cu(I). This system can deliver a current density of 100 mA cm−2 at 0.92 V potential input. Moreover, the electricity consumption of this system to produce per cubic H2 gas is 2.2 kW h, which is much lower than that of conventional electrochemical water splitting (4.5 kW h). Wang and co-workers73 proposed a cyanide (CN) bound cobalt hydroxide, in which the N atoms on the CN group could be utilized to capture the bio-hydrogen atoms on the hydroxyl and aldehyde groups of HMF, obtaining FDCA eventually. This system has become a classic biomass oxidation-assisted HER energy-saving system. Unfortunately, however, this system failed to further convert the obtained bio-hydrogen into value-added chemicals. Next, Wang's group74 applied a simple Cu catalyst, which is able to release the *H species captured from FF and HMF, achieving H2 generation and biomass conversion simultaneously at the anode. By coupling this anodic reaction with the HER, they assembled a novel device capable of producing H2 at both the cathode and anode while converting FF/HMF at the anode. The energy consumption of this HER–biomass oxidation coupled co-electrolysis system is as low as 0.35 kW h per m3 of H2, just about 7% of that of overall water splitting electrolysis (5.0 kW h per m3 of H2). Carbohydrates are the most abundant biomass derived from agricultural crops possessing polyhydroxy aldehyde or polyhydroxy ketone structures, which can therefore be utilized as critical energy and chemical sources by coupled electrolysis. Similar to FF and HMF, carbohydrates can be oxidized in aqueous solution, which is highly desirable to couple with the HER for co-electrolysis (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  (a) Polarization curves of various anodic reactions and the cathodic HER. (b) Electrocatalytic conversion path from biomass feedstock into value-added chemicals with H2 generation at the anode.74 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. 
The AOR is another essential reaction for organic synthesis producing various high value chemicals, such as imines, nitriles, and azo compounds. It has been widely reported that the required potential of the AOR is significantly lower than that of the OER under the assistance of a suitable electrocatalyst.74 Thus, it will be a promising strategy to replace the OER with the AOR to boost the HER. Nitriles, an important class of precursors for producing agrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, and fine chemicals, can be synthesized through an electrooxidation method avoiding the use of toxic HCN or metal cyanides. Zhang's group75 explored the conversion of a series of organic amines to nitriles. Benefiting from the NiSe catalyst, benzamine can be transformed into benzonitrile with an especially high FE of ∼99%. Moreover, the bio-hydrogen released from the amine groups will be transferred to the cathode and transform into H2, which minimizes fluctuations in the pH value of electrolyte.


3.1.2 CO2 reduction-based co-electrolysis. 
Compared with the HER, the electrochemical CO2RR, which can produce a variety of value-added chemicals, can also be applied as the cathodic reaction in co-electrolysis. Several research studies on CO2 reduction reactions, including CO2RR-alcohol oxidation, CO2RR-biomass derivative oxidation, and so on, have been reported. Kenis’ group76 reported the co-electrolysis of CO2 and glycerol which can obtain various products controllably. Under varied reaction conditions (temperature, pressure, electrolyte, ion-transfer membrane), this co-electrolysis can produce various cathode chemicals such as CO, HCOOH, CH3OH, C2H4, CH4, and C2H5OH and the anode products of C3H6O3 and HCOOH. Our group designed a formic acid electro-synthesis strategy by concurrent CO2 reduction and methanol oxidation (Fig. 12a).77 As shown in Fig. 12b and c, under the catalysis of carbon cloth-supported mesoporous SnO2 (mSnO2/CC) on the anode and copper foam-supported CuO nanosheets (CuONS/CF) on the cathode, the electrolyzer requires a low input voltage of 0.93 V to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for concurrent formic acid production at both sides.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the concurrent electrochemical conversion to formic acid through the CO2RR on the cathode and methanol oxidation on the anode. LSV curves for (b) the CuONS/CF//mSnO2/CC cell with or without the addition of 1 M methanol in the anode and (c) those saturated with CO2 or Ar in the cathode with the addition of 1 M methanol.77 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) The photograph of a 4-NP and HMF co-electrolysis system before and after operation. (e) HPLC chromatograms of HMF. (f) UV-vis absorption spectra of 4-NP.78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. The paired electrolysis coupling (g) alcohol oxidation in a single-pool cell or (h) oxidative condensation in a divided cell to generate H2 gas for the following two hydrogenation reactions.80 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.3 Organic reduction–oxidation co-electrolysis. 
The organic reduction–oxidation co-electrolysis has also attracted the attention of researchers. Sun's group78 achieved paired electrocatalytic oxygenation and hydrogenation of 5-HMF to FDCA and oxidation of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) by using H2O as O and H sources (Fig. 12d–f) and simply prepared NiBx as the catalyst. In order to accelerate the kinetics of these electrochemical reactions, a high performance catalyst is required. Recently, Shi and co-workers79 prepared a Cu(OH)2 catalyst which provides O during its reformation which promotes the conversion of HMF through oxygenation to FDCA, and therefore the required potential is much lower than that for directly capturing O from H2O. Then, in an alkaline environment, the CuOOH would react with OH− spontaneously to form Cu(OH)2 and H2O. With the help of the Cu(OH)2 catalyst, the conversion of both HMF and 4-NP is close to 100% with FEFDCA and current density being as high as 99.8% and 100 mA cm−2, respectively.


3.1.4 Other co-electrolysis reactions. 
Theoretically, any electro-oxidation/reduction reaction can be combined into a co-electrolysis system. Moeller's group80 demonstrated this by coupling a series of organic oxidation reactions, including alcohol oxidation, oxidative condensation, intramolecular anodic olefin coupling reactions, amide oxidation and mediated oxidation, with the alcohol dehydrogenation reaction, as shown in Fig. 12g and h. They explained that cathodic reactions have the possibility of generating more valuable chemicals like bases, nucleophiles, radical anions, radicals, transition metal reagents, etc., and anodic reactions can in principle be paired with the generation of a variety of chemical reagents and synthetic transformations. Wang's group81 reported the co-electrolysis of H2 and O2 for the synthesis of H2O2. Under the catalysis of commercial Pt/C, an aqueous H2O2 solution of over 20% concentration can be obtained. This co-electrolysis system can reach an extra-high current density of 200 mA cm−2 and a H2O2 productivity of 3.4 mmol cm−2 h−1.

3.2 Self-powered electrolysis
As described earlier, self-powered electrolysis, which aims to drive electrocatalysis by self-generated electricity spontaneously, is another energy-saving electrolysis system besides co-electrolysis. The electricity is generally obtained from internal reactions with thermodynamic feasibility, mechanistically similar to galvanic cells. In addition, the equilibrium potential difference between the electro-redox reactions at two electrodes should be large enough to overcome the internal electric resistance of the device and the energy barriers of catalytic reactions. High activity catalysts are also important from the kinetic viewpoint of internal reactions. In addition to energy-saving, a self-powered system is easy to be assembled and dissembled. From reported studies, self-powered electrolysis systems can be divided into two major categories: (i) cell/electrolyte-coupled self-powered systems and (ii) cell/electrolyte integrated self-powered systems.

3.2.1 Cell/electrolyzer-coupled self-powered systems. 
The first self-powered system featuring the cell–electrolyzer coupling was reported by Wang's group82 in 2013. As the name implies, this system is composed of a cell for energy supply and an electrolyzer for high-value chemical production. They designed a hybrid energy cell that could harvest mechanical, thermal and solar energies for electricity generation based on its unique sandwich structure. The hybrid energy cell can be utilized as a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG), and thermoelectric cells and solar cells under the corresponding physical effects are able to provide a high output voltage of 5.2 V. To couple with the electrolyzer, the cell can supply electrical energy for water splitting and chemical conversion. Thus, self-powered systems have attracted great attention, and research studies on the cell–electrolyzer coupling are mainly focused on the design of multifunctional catalysts to accelerate the kinetics of the internal reactions of both galvanic cells and electrolyzers. The most reported cell/electrolyzer coupled self-powered systems are commonly based on a Zn–air battery (ZAB) or a direct hydrazine fuel cell (DHzFC) as the power supplier.
3.2.1.1 ZAB-based self-powered systems. 
Zn–air batteries, as promising energy storage devices with impressive theoretical energy density (1086 W h kg−1), are of significance for the development of next-generation batteries. The overall reaction of ZAB involves the Zn oxidation (Zn-to-Zn2+) at the anode and the ORR at the cathode. As described in Section 2.1.2, the ORR, which is usually a 4e− process, has a more sluggish kinetics than the HER. This means that the electrocatalysts at the cathode of ZAB must have excellent selectivity to avoid side reactions. The successful design of a Zn–air battery-based self-powered system necessitates a multifunctional electrocatalyst to enhance the kinetics of the ORR, OER and HER simultaneously. Back to the year 2016, Dai's group reported a series of metal-free ORR–HER bifunctional catalysts (N and P co-doped carbon networks83 and N, P, and F tri-doped graphene84) applied in a ZAB-coupled water splitting system. These ZAB show a power density of over 310 W g−1 which is indeed high enough at that time. To further elevate the power densities of ZAB and achieve the tri-functionalization of catalysts, metal-based electrocatalysts, especially Co-based catalysts, have gained great attention. Several catalysts including CoP@P,N co-doped carbon (CoP@PNC),85 CoMn2−xCrxO4,86 FeCo/Co2P nanoparticles,87 and CoFe2O4/CoFe88 have been reported. Wang and co-workers89 prepared a 1D/3D assembled heterogeneous electrocatalyst composed of Co5.47N and Co7Fe3 (CoFeN) embedded in a 3D cruciform carbon matrix modified by N-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs//CCM). The CoFeN-NCNTs//CCM showed excellent ORR activity (E1/2 = 0.84 V vs. RHE), and the ZAB equipped with CoFeN-NCNTs//CCM as the cathode catalyst exhibited a rather low charging–discharging voltage gap of 0.76 V and a stable working period as long as 445 h (Fig. 13a). In addition, the CoFeN-NCNTs//CCM displayed high electrocatalytic performance for water splitting (Fig. 13b and c). When the current density of the water-splitting cell reached 10 mA cm−2, the overpotentials of the OER and HER were determined to be 320 mV and −151 mV, respectively. To accelerate the kinetics of the ORR and the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte, current studies of ZAB are mainly focused on alkaline electrolytes. However, it is well known that alkaline electrolytes suffer severely from corrosion and carbonation. For the sake of safety and durability, neutral electrolytes are highly desired for substituting alkaline electrolytes to avoid the corresponding problems. In the case of neutral electrolytes, high performance electrocatalysts are critically important to meet the needs of ZAB. Zhu and co-workers90 fabricated single-atom iridium-embedded nitrogen-doped hierarchically porous carbon (SA-Ir/NC) which could provide a high open-circuit voltage (1.42 V) and an impressive power density of 90.4 mW cm−2 to ZAB. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that the single-atom Ir sites chelated with N atoms can export a stronger positive charge than other transition metal sites which favors O2 absorption. In addition, the long-term stable operation of ZAB is the basis of a ZAB-based self-powered system, which requires a stable electrocatalyst. Xue and co-workers91 prepared a bifunctional core–shell NiFe@N-graphite electrocatalyst for use in Zn–air batteries and water splitting. Due to its quite high electrocatalytic activity for the OER and ORR, the assembled Zn–air battery exhibited a large open-circuit voltage of 1.48 V and a small charge–discharge gap of 0.12 V with high cycling stability over 40 h at 20 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 13  (a) The galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of the CoFeN-NCNTs//CCM-based Zn–air battery and the commercial Pt/C&RuO2-based one as the control. (b) Photograph of the water splitting system powered by Zn–air batteries. (c) The production of O2 and H2 as a function of time.89 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
3.2.1.2 DHzFC-based self-powered systems. 
Direct hydrazine fuel cells (DHzFC), using hydrazine as the anodic fuel, have gained great attention since 1970s due to their high theoretical power density and carbon-free products (N2 and H2O). Because N2H4 has a high reactivity with H2O and H+ to form N2H5+, alkaline solutions are usually used as the electrolytes of DHzFC, and therefore alkaline-adapted electrocatalysts are needed for DHzFC. Zhang and co-workers92 reported a Ru2P catalyst with a partially exposed surface (RP-CPM). The RP-CPM-based DHzFC exhibits a high power density of 64.77 mW cm−2 at an output potential of 0.36 V. In addition, the RP-CPM shows excellent HER performance of 82 and 314 mV cm−2 to deliver large current densities of 200 and 500 mA cm−2, respectively, which are much better than that of commercial Pt/C. The self-powered system of DHzFC in series with a water splitting electrolyzer can supply a high output voltage of 1.0 V and generate H2 with a high productivity of 0.72 mmol h−1. To reduce the cost of electrocatalyst, they designed a noble-metal-free P,W co-doped Co3N catalyst (P,W-Co3N), which endows DHzFC with a high power density of 46.3 mW cm−2.93 Attractively, the H2 productivity of the P,W-Co3N-based self-powered system (1.25 mmol h−1) is even higher than that of the RP-CPM based self-powered system (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a self-powered HER system integrated with a home-made DHzFC (left) and OHzS (right) unit. (b) The discharging polarization curve and the resultant power density for the DHzFC assembling PW-Co3N NWA/NF as the anode and Pt/C as the cathode. (c) H2 generation rate of the DHzFC–OHzS coupled self-powered system at room temperature.93 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.2.2 Cell/electrolyzer integrated self-powered systems. 
Cell–electrolyzer coupling configurations have been reported as self-powered systems by several researchers, but the electrolyzer was still driven by external cells even though the cells were self-made. Therefore, atomic and electron utilization was not significantly enhanced. Hence, the term of “self-powered” in this “cell–electrolyzer coupling self-powered system” may be non-convincing. To further enhance the atomic and electron utilization, cell–electrolyzer integration has been adopted in self-powered systems, which is assembled as a galvanic cell. Cell/electrolyzer integrated self-powered systems reported so far are mainly driven by metallic materials which can donate electrons by converting the chemical energy to electrical energy at the anode to drive electrocatalysis reactions at the cathode.
As described earlier, hydrogen gas (H2) has been considered an ideal energy carrier that has great potential to replace traditional fossil fuels owing to its high energy density (between 120 and 142 MJ kg−1) and clean combustion product (water). Also water splitting is one of the most important methods to produce H2. It is well known that a large fraction of metal elements can react with H2O spontaneously to form metal oxides and H2, offering great possibilities for the design of self-powered metal–H2O batteries. Since the large-scale application of hydrogen gas suffers from the explosive risks and high costs of hydrogen storage and transportation, self-powered, functional, and even portable metal–H2O batteries may achieve instant H2 generation and energy supply on the spot.
Lithium (Li), the most common anode metal, has a sufficiently low equilibrium potential (−3.040 V vs. SHE), which provides strong-enough power to drive the water splitting reaction. However, pure Li metal is explosive in water, which prevents the application of direct reaction between Li and water. Guo et al.94 designed an asymmetric dual cell using an organic/aqueous electrolyte where the Li anode provides electrons for the cathodic HER. Depending on the working environment, this Li-based battery can be assembled into a Li–O2 battery (oxygen-rich environment) or Li–H2O battery (oxygen-free environment), and the whole reaction can be described using eqn (1) and (2), respectively. Li–O2 battery: 4Li + O2 + 2H2O → 4Li+ + 4OH−(1) Li–H2O battery: 2Li + 2H2O → 2Li+ + 2OH− + H2↑(2)
Even Li-based fuel cells show high reactivity and a broad working voltage range, but shortcomings such as low safety and high cost limit their wide application. In this aspect, some moderate alkaline-earth metals have been chosen for assembling functional batteries. Wen and co-workers95 reported a Zn–H2O battery that could generate H2 at the cathode using Zn as the anode material and commercial Pt/C as the cathode material. To accelerate the kinetics of Zn oxidation and the HER, NaOH (4.0 M) and H2SO4 (2.0 M) have been used as dual electrolytes in the anode and cathode, respectively, separated by an ion-exchange membrane (Fig. 15a). This Zn–H2O battery can output 5 mA cm−2 current density at a working potential of 1.22 V and generate ∼180 μmol H2 per hour (Fig. 15b and c), and the internal reactions are given in eqn (3)–(5):
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of a Zn–H2O battery composed of a Zn plate as the anode in 4.0 M NaOH and Pt/CNTs loaded on carbon cloth as the cathode in 2.0 M H2SO4, separated by a bipolar membrane. (b) H2 production and working voltage at a discharge current density of 10 mA cm−2. (c) Chronopotentiometric response of the Pt/CNT-based Zn–H2O battery at varied current densities ranging from 5 to 20 mA cm−2.95 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The discharging polarization curve and the resultant power density of a Zn–NO3− battery using Pd/TiO2 as the cathode catalyst. (e) NH3 yield and the corresponding FE of the Zn–NO3− battery. (f) Photograph of an electronic timer powered by the Zn–NO3− battery which worked for 100 min.99 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Cathodic reaction: 2H+ + 2e− → H2↑ (2.0 M H2SO4) Ec = 0.035 V(3)
Anodic reaction: Zn + 2OH− − 2e− → ZnO + H2O (4.0 M NaOH) Ea = −1.285 V(4)
Overall reaction: Zn + 2H+ + 2OH− → ZnO + H2O + H2↑ Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.32 V(5)
Although Zn–H2O batteries show great potential for future application without using organic phases, they suffer from high cost and potential risks due to the use of dual-electrolyte systems such as strong acid and strong alkaline solutions in the above-reported systems. Cheng et al.96 reported an alkaline Zn–H2O battery by using 1.0 M KOH solution as the electrolyte. The HER in this battery is boosted by the Ni-MOF nanoarray catalyst with a favorably low overpotential of 132 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Even though the alkaline Zn–H2O battery reaches a marked power density of 4.1 mW cm−2, its current density is still limited by the low ionic conductivity resulting from the application of the ion exchange membrane. Nadeema et al.97 assembled an Al–H2O battery in a single-pool electrolyzer using a low concentration of the alkaline solution (0.1 M KOH) as the electrolyte. To elevate the kinetics of the HER, they fabricated a novel Co@CoAl-layered double hydroxide/nitrogen-doped graphene HER catalyst. This Al–H2O battery exhibits a relatively high cell voltage of ∼1.0 V at a current density of 5 mA cm−2, and the specific capacity has been calculated to be ∼538 mA h g−1, which prevented the dangers of the dual-electrolyte system and reduced the additional cost resulting from the ion exchange membrane (Fig. 15e and f). The internal reactions of this Zn–H2O battery are described as follows (eqn (6)–(8)):
Cathodic reaction: 2H2O + 2e− → H2↑ + 2OH− (0.1 M KOH) Ec = −0.77 V(6)
Anodic reaction: Al + 3OH− → Al(OH)3 + 3e− (0.1 M KOH) Ea = −2.25 V(7)
Overall reaction: 2Al + 6H2O → 3H2↑ + 2Al(OH)3 (0.1 M KOH) Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.45 V(8)
Kim and co-workers98 designed an interesting aqueous Zn- or Al-based CO2 system for H2 production and electrical energy generation. Different from the above metal–H2O cells, these Zn- or Al–CO2 systems use no strong alkaline or acid solutions in the cathode pool. The CO2 emptied into the electrolyte can form H2CO3 by reacting with H2O. Driven by the metal oxidation at the anode, the H+ dissociated from H2CO3 can be reduced to H2. Meanwhile, K+ is transferred from the anode pool to the cathode pool to maintain the charge balance through a glass membrane.
The NORR producing NH3 from NO3− is another significant cathodic reaction in addition to the HER. Under alkaline conditions, the kinetics of the NORR is much faster than that of the HER. Zhi's group99 firstly proposed a Zn–NO3− battery by applying Pd-doped TiO2 nanoarrays (Pd/TiO2) as the cathode catalyst, and the reactions are presented in eqn (9)–(11). It has been explained that the Pd heteroatoms can induce the expansion of TiO2 lattices resulting in a weakened adsorption energy of the intermediates of NO3− to NH3. This Zn–NO3− battery can output electrical energy at a power density of 0.87 mW cm−2 and produce NH3 at a FE of 81.3% over the Pd/TiO2 catalyst, simultaneously. The generated electric power was able to drive an electronic timer for 100 min (Fig. 15d–f).
Cathode reaction: NO3− + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4OH + 9OH− (0.25 M LiNO3− + 5 M LiCl) Ec = 0.6 V(9)
Anode reaction: 4Zn + 8OH− → 4ZnO + 4H2O + 8e− (5.0 M KOH) Ea = 1.27 V(10)
Overall reaction: 4Zn+ NO3− + 3H2O → 4ZnO + NH4OH + OH− Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.87 V(11)
To save the Zn–NO3− battery preparation cost, they fabricated a noble-metal-free catalyst, iron-doped nickel phosphide (Fe-Ni2P), and adopted a mixed solution of 0.2 M K2SO4 and 0.05 M KNO3 as the electrolyte.100 Fe–Ni2P shows a satisfactory NORR electrocatalytic performance featuring a high NORR FE of 94.3% and a NO3− conversion efficiency up to 100%. Furthermore, the Fe–Ni2P-based Zn–NO3− battery exhibits a 3.25 mW cm−2 power density and an 85.0% FE of NH3 production. NO2−, which is one of the intermediate products in the NO3−conversion to NH3, also has the potential to be applied as a raw material to produce NH3. To achieve the removal of the NO2− pollutant in wastewater while producing NH3, Zhi's group101 designed a Zn–NO2− battery by using C-doped Co3O4 (C-Co3O4) as the cathode catalyst. Compared with NO3− reduction, NO2− reduction has a higher kinetics and selectivity due to its 6e− electron transfer process and fewer intermediates, which endows the Zn–NO2− battery with higher electrochemical performance than that of the Zn–NO3− battery. The obtained Zn–NO2− battery finally outputs a maximum power density of 6.03 mW cm−2 and an NH3 FE of 95.1%.
Hydrocarbon compounds are of great significance in various industrial fields including natural gas, fine petrochemical industry, and polymer synthesis. Methane (CH4), which is the end product of the CO2RR, is the main component of natural gas. With the help of electrocatalysts of high activity and CH4 selectivity, metal–CO2 batteries can generate electricity and CH4 simultaneously, which provide an economical technology roadmap for efficient CO2 utilization. Hu and co-workers assembled a Zn–CO2 flow battery by using a Zn wire as the anode and a hollow fiber of carbon nanotubes as the cathode material. This Zn–CO2 flow battery can achieve a CH4 FE of over 94.0% and an energy power density of 288.3 W h kgZn−1, and show excellent stability for at least 8 days. Similar devices were also used for the reduction of acetylene (C2H2) and impurities of crude ethylene (C2H4), which is a difficult and energy-intensive process in the state-of-the-art industrial technology. Zhang and co-workers102 demonstrated a novel Zn–C2H2 battery system which could not only convert C2H2 impurities to a high value C2H4 target product, but also generate electrical energy. This Zn–C2H2 battery assembled as a common GDE by applying 1.0 M KOH as the electrolyte exports an open circuit potential of 1.14 V and a maximum power density of 2.2 mW cm−2 under a pure C2H4 gas stream. In addition, the Zn–C2H2 battery exhibits an ultrahigh selectivity of C2H2 towards C2H4. During long-term operation, the concentration of C2H2 in the simulated crude C2H4 has been consistently maintained at around 3 ppm. The chemical mechanism of the Zn–C2H2 battery is described in eqn (12)–(14):
Cathode reaction: C2H2 + 2H2O + 2e− → C2H4 + 2OH− (1.0 M KOH) Ec = 0.733 V(12)
Anode reaction: Zn + 2OH− →ZnO + H2O + 2e− (1.0 M KOH) Ea = −1.20 V(13)
Overall reaction: Zn+ C2H2 + H2O → ZnO + C2H4 Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.32 V(14)

4. Atom/electron full utilization electrocatalytic systems (FU-ES)
Great achievements have been made in the development of co-electrolysis systems and self-powered systems for much enhanced electron utilization or without the need of an external power supply. Nevertheless, both systems still have their own drawbacks. Even though the consumption of electrical energy can be reduced by an additional reaction, the external electrical source is still necessary for co-electrolysis systems; in contrast, self-powered systems can work without an external energy input, but consume large quantities of sacrificial anode metal, which largely reduces the yield of the overall system. Therefore, atom/electron fully utilized electrocatalytic systems should be developed by achieving internal power supply but without wasting the electrode materials. Two strategies are proposed to achieve this goal: (i) assembling the rechargeable functional battery for electrode material recycling and high value chemical production and (ii) converting the electrode material to high value-added chemicals during the battery discharge process, which is herein named self-co-electrolysis.
4.1 Rechargeable functional batteries (RFB)
Rechargeability is the basic requirement in the conventional energy storage devices, and therefore the reactions at both the anode and cathode should be highly reversible. Different from the conventional energy storage devices, the primary purpose of functional batteries is to generate high-value chemicals, which means that the value-added products produced in the discharging process must be preserved in the charging process. Therefore, suitable alternative reverse reactions, like the OER, need to be introduced when designing rechargeable functional batteries. Metal–CO2 batteries, which have been considered as one of the most promising next-generation batteries, show great promise in meeting the growing energy demands of social development and greenhouse issues because of their advantages of high energy capability and CO2 recycling application (Fig. 16).103 Like batteries based on other cathodic reactions, metal–CO2 batteries are also driven by the oxidation of anode metals. Alkali metals, like Li, Na, and K, capable of providing high working voltage to metal–CO2 batteries due to their superior activity, are promising candidates as anode metals. However, CO2 is generally converted into carbonate at the cathode, in addition to carbon, through C2O42− intermediates (eqn (15)–(17)) during the discharging process of alkali metal–CO2 batteries, and these products are less value-added.104 Thus, alkali metal–CO2 batteries have been mainly applied for energy storage instead of CO2 recycling. 2CO2 + e− → C2O42−(15) C2O42− → CO22− + CO2(16) C2O42−+ CO22− → 2CO32− + C(17)
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of metal–CO2 batteries, including Li/Na–CO2 and Zn/Al–CO2 systems, for CO2 resource utilization in human life.103 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Pure Zn exhibits better air and water compatibility due to its moderate activity. Moreover, several studies have reported that various CO2 reduction products, such as CO and formic acid, can be generated in the discharging process of Zn–CO2 batteries. Teng et al.105 designed a ZnTe/ZnO@C CO2RR–OER bifunctional catalyst with a 0D/2D hierarchical structure, which exhibited excellent CO2RR electrocatalytic performance presenting over 83% formic acid FE and a 12 mA cm−2 current density under −1.0 V (vs. RHE) voltage input. By applying ZnTe/ZnO@C as the cathode material, the Zn–CO2 battery outputs a peak power density of 0.93 mW cm−2 at 3 mA cm−2 current density, with generation of formic acid at the cathode (Fig. 17a–c). The reaction mechanisms of the CO2RR catalyzed by ZnTe/ZnO@C in the Zn–CO2 battery are presented in eqn (18)–(22). CO2 (solution) + * → *CO2(18) *CO2 + e− →*CO2−(19) *CO2 + H+− → HCOO*(20) HCOO* + e− + H+− → HCOOH*(21) HCOOH* → HCOO− (solution) + H+ + *(22)
 Fig. 17  (a) Schemes of the mechanism of the discharging (left) and charging (right) processes of an aqueous Zn–CO2 battery equipped with a ZnTe/ZnO@C cathode and a bipolar membrane. (b) Charge−discharge polarization curves for a Zn–CO2 battery; inset: the power density at different current densities. (c) FE and the corresponding current densities of HCOO− for ZnTe/ZnO@C in CO2 saturated NaHCO3 solutions.105 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic configuration of a flow-cell reactor having a catalyst-loaded GDL. (e) FECO values and current densities of CA/N–Ni and CA/N aerogel-catalyzed flow-cell reactors.108 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
The catalytic activity of a cathodic electrocatalyst plays a key role in determining the performance of a CO2-based battery including peak power density, OCP, and the discharge–charge voltage gap. Recently, Yang et al.106 fabricated a hollow carbon sphere-supported atomically dispersed Bi cluster (BiC/HCS) catalyst. This BiC/HCS catalyst shows a high FE of 95–99% for formic acid and an ultrahigh stability at a current density of 3.0 mA cm−2 for over 60 h. Furthermore, the BiC/HCS based Zn–CO2 battery presented a high peak power density of 7.2 mW cm−2 and good rechargeability over 200 cycles under 3.0 mA cm−2.
CO is also an important C1 product of the CO2RR, which is significant for the synthesis of syngas and protein. Similar to CO2-to-HCOOH conversion, the formation of *COOH intermediates directly determines the kinetics of CO2-to-CO conversion. In addition, to remove the hydroxyl group, the H* intermediates are required to attack the O sites of the –OH group instead of C sites in the *COOH intermediates. For metal–CO2 batteries, a bifunctional electrocatalyst for efficient CO2-to-CO conversion and the OER is essential which determines the battery performance. Through a facile dicyandiamide-assisted annealing strategy, Wang and co-workers107 created an Fe–N5 atomic dispersion active site to induce more defects in the carbon nanofiber substrate. This Fe–N5 site shows more sluggish kinetics of H* absorption and faster kinetics of COOH*-to-CO* conversion than Fe–N4 sites, resulting in an enhanced FECO of 93.1%. By applying such a highly active electrocatalyst, the assembled Zn–CO2 battery outputs a 1.3 mW cm−2 maximum power density at 4.9 mA cm−2. Transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–NC) catalysts have been explored for CO2-to-CO conversion due to their unique 3d electron orbitals. Hou et al.108 synthesized carbon aerogel-supported M–N site catalysts (CA–N–M) by using a series of transition metals including Ni, Fe, Co, Mn, and Cu. The abundant M–N sites can be well dispersed on the hierarchical cross-linked nanostructured carbon aerogel. Among various CA–N–M catalysts, CA–N–Ni exhibited the best CO2RR activity with a FECO of 98% at −0.8 V (Fig. 17d–e). The Zn–CO2 battery with CA–N–Ni as the self-supported cathode exhibited a maximum power density of 0.5 mW cm−2. Lv et al.109 reported a new strategy of tailoring the dual-electron-withdrawing effect of defects and heteroatoms to optimize the electronic structures of metal complexes and finally fabricated a cobalt phthalocyanine catalyst supported on 3D nitrogen-doped hollow carbon spheres with high density carbon defects (CoPc@DNHCS). CoPc@DNHCS showed a high CO FE of 95.7% and a high current density of 16.5 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 760 mV. The CoPc@DNHCS based Zn–CO2 battery exhibited a marked electrochemical performance of 1.02 mW cm−2 maximum power density at 0.34 V and good rechargeable durability continuously for over 40 h.
4.2 Self-co-electrolysis systems
The metal–H2O functional batteries described in Section 3.2.3 fully meet the green chemical principles of non-toxicity and high efficiency. However, the electrical energy and value-added chemicals are generated at the expense of pure metals, which increases the cost of these systems. Kékedy-Nagy et al.110 found that struvite (MgNH4PO3) can be synthesized by the spontaneous combination of Mg2+, NH4+ and PO43−. Meanwhile, as an active alkaline-earth metal, Mg element has a low equilibrium potential (−2.372 V vs. SHE), which can be oxidized to Mg2+ ions easily. By using the NH4H2PO4 solution as the electrolyte, the Mg−H2O functional battery can produce MgNH4PO3 and H2, respectively, at the anode and cathode simultaneously. The internal reactions in the Mg−H2O battery are described using eqn (23)–(25):
Cathodic reaction: 2H2O + O2 + 4e− → 4OH− (ORR) H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + 1/2H2↑ (HER)(23)
Anodic reaction: Mg → Mg+ + e−; Mg+ + H2O → Mg2+ + OH− + 1/2H2↑(24)
Overall reaction: Mg2+ + NH4+ + HnPO4n−3 + 6H2O → MgNH4PO4·6H2O↓ + nH+(25)
Due to its ultrahigh oxidation activity as well as high cost, Mg is not an ideal material to be applied in aqueous solution for safety and cost concerns. Benefitting from its modest oxidation kinetics, Zn has been considered as one of the most promising anode materials for metal–H2O batteries. However, alkaline electrolytes have been generally used in Zn–H2O batteries to enhance the kinetics, while no reports on neutral electrolytes can be found despite being highly desired. Our group111 firstly reported a neutral Zn–H2O battery by applying the common phosphate buffered solution (PBS) as the electrolyte (Fig. 18a). To accelerate the Zn–H2O reaction kinetics, the N and Cu dual-doped CoP (N,Cu-CoP) electrocatalyst has been prepared as the cathode material, which exhibits impressive HER electrocatalysis performance exhibiting a 68 mV overpotential to reach 10 mA cm−2 current density. The N,Cu-CoP based Zn–H2O battery can output a maximum power density of 1.83 mW cm−2 and generate H2 at a production rate of 13.7 mL cm−2 h−1 simultaneously. Moreover, by changing the pH value (6, 7, and 8) and concentration (0.01, 0.1, and 1.0 M) of the PBS electrolyte, various solid-state value-added chemicals including NaZnPO4, an important industrial raw material to produce heat-reflective materials, Ni–Zn battery anodic materials and light-emitting diodes, and Zn3(PO4)2 can be controllably synthesized at the anode during the Zn electro-oxidation process (Fig. 18b–d). From the equations of internal reactions of this battery (eqn (26)–(28)), it can be clearly found that the atoms and electrons have been fully utilized, which means the atomic utilization of this battery reaches 100%. It has been estimated that the net profit of our Zn–H2O battery is 7 times that of the conventional OWS.
 Fig. 18  (a) SCES assembled using a Zn plate as the anode, N,Cu-CoP/CC as the cathode, and neutral 1 M PBS as the electrolyte that can generate H2 gas, NaZnPO4, and electrical energy concurrently. (b) Discharging polarization curve and resultant power density of the N,Cu-CoP/CC‖Zn SCES. (c) H2 production from the SCES using the above-mentioned aqueous electrolytes in 0.5 h. (d) Mass change of the Zn anode by the SCES using the above-mentioned aqueous electrolytes in 0.5 h.111 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
Cathode reaction: 2H2O + e− = H2↑ + 2OH−(26)
Anode reaction: Zn + 2e− + Na+ + PO43− = NaZnPO4↓(27)
Overall reaction: Zn + Na+ + PO43− 2H2O = NaZnPO4↓ + H2 + 2OH−(28)
5. Conclusion and perspective
The improvement of electrocatalytic economy is of great importance to meet the increasing demands for clean energy and valuable chemicals during sustained society development and progress. In this review, we have summarized the development history of electrocatalytic systems which has been categorized into three periods according to the rational designs of dual-electrode reaction systems as well as the corresponding electrocatalysts. For the traditional atom/electron half-utilization electrocatalytic systems (HU-ES), studies to enhance the profit of the reaction are mostly focused on the chemical moderation of the active sites of electrocatalysts, pH value regulation of electrolytes, and the ion/mass migration promotion (reactants, product molecules, intermediates, carrier ions) in the devices for the purpose of accelerating reaction kinetics. These studies are the cornerstones in designing novel electrocatalytic systems. As described earlier, HU-ES have two major problems including low atom utilization and the external electrical energy requirement. To avoid these two issues, co-electrolysis electrocatalytic systems (CES) and self-powered electrocatalytic systems (SPES) have been designed and developed. CES can make full use of all atoms of precursors, which can be considered as having 100% atom utilization in the reaction system under an external energy supply. Meanwhile, SPES can self-generate electricity by using sacrificing agents. Although SPES do not require external electricity to drive the electrochemical reactions, the cost of anodic material consumption is sometimes much higher than the profit from the products and electricity, as our group has calculated.111 These two approaches have partially achieved the goal of enhancing the electrocatalytic economy and are named in this review atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic systems (USE-ES). Therefore, to maximize the atomic utilization, or to make the full utilization of atoms in the electrocatalytic systems, is of great significance in optimizing the economy of the electrocatalytic system, and such a system is named an atom/electron full utilization electrocatalytic system (FU-ES). The first strategy of FU-ES is to combine the advantages of SPES and CES into one system by converting the anode materials to high value-added chemicals during anode oxidation, which is denoted as a self-powered co-electrolysis electrocatalytic system (SCES). In a reported SCES, the metal ions dissociated from the anode can bind with the electrolyte ions to generate value-added inorganic salts, while outputting electricity into the circuit. Instead of consuming the anode materials, rechargeable functional batteries (RFB) waste no atoms by recycling them. When using a strong alkaline electrolyte, the anode metals, such as Al and Zn, can be oxidized and then exist stably as coordinated ions during discharging; this anode oxidation reaction can output high enough voltage for the catalytic reaction at the cathode, and even to the external circuit; finally, the coordinated metal ions can be reduced back to metal atoms during charging. Although RFB and SCES have achieved 100% atom utilization and 200% electron utilization, theoretically, there are still several issues which cannot be ignored for further development of electrocatalytic systems with further enhanced atom/electron utilization, including the novel high performance catalyst development, product separation, rational design of reaction systems and the whole economic cost analysis.
5.1 Performance enhancement of electrocatalysts
The performance of electrocatalysts, including activity, selectivity, and stability, is the premise of an electrocatalytic system, especially when the electrons are fully utilized. Until now, the understanding of the microscopic features of the catalyst and the mechanisms of catalysis are still very limited. Fortunately, according to the results of massive experiments and theoretical analysis, there is a simple descriptor, named volcano curves, which depend on the adsorption free energy, that can guide electrocatalyst design by confirming the active-site species with high activity. Then, two catalyst development strategies can be proposed: (i) increasing the density of active sites by rationally constructing nanostructures and modulating the morphology of the supports while maintaining the intrinsic activity of the active sites of the electrocatalyst and (ii) increasing the intrinsic activity, namely electron structure regulation, by endowing the electrocatalysts with distinct features such as polymorph, interaction, confinement, alloying, adsorbate, etc.112 In some cases, high activity and stability are contradictory to each other, but there are still a number of efficient strategies reported so far to solve this problem. In situ growth/synthesis which enables strong chemical bonding between active sites and substrates is an efficient method.49 Besides, the use of stable ultrathin films to protect active sites is another way to improve the stability.50 The selectivity of an electrocatalyst is another key parameter that directly determines the atom-utilization of electrocatalytic systems. As described earlier, volcano curves can be used to guide the active site design for catalyzing intermediate species. By rationally matching different catalytic sites, the obtained catalyst is expected to be able to convert intermediates with fast kinetics and/or avoid side reactions, and finally augment the Faraday efficiency of electrocatalytic systems.
5.2 Rational design of reaction systems
In systems of CES and SPES, the theoretical standard electrode potentials (Etheo) of cathode and anode reactions are important, and the Etheo values of typical reduction and oxidation reactions are summarized in Table 2. However, the specific Etheo values are hard to calculate due to the unknown Gibbs free energy, especially for complex chemicals such as Cn chemicals or biomass derivatives. However, the theoretical standard electrode potentials of several half-reactions, especially those involving complex reactants, are difficult to be confirmed due to the unknown Gibbs free energy, which should be noticed in further investigation.
Table 2 The Etheo of half-reactions in advanced electrocatalytic systems




Oxidation reactions

E
theo (V)
Ref.




2H2O − 4e− → O2 + 4H+
+1.23
Lange's handbook of chemistry


4OH− − 4e− → O2 + 2H2O
+0.40




Li0 − e− ↔ Li+
−3.05




Na0 − e− ↔ Na+
−2.71




Mg0 − 2e− ↔ Mg2+
−2.36




Al0 − 3e− ↔ Al3+
−1.66




Zn0 − 2e− ↔ Zn2+
−0.74




Zn + 2OH− − 2e− → ZnO + 2H2O
−1.27

99



CH3OH + H2O − 4e− → 4H+ + HCOOH
+0.103

77



C3H8O3 + 8OH−– 8e− → 3HCOOH +5H2O
+0.69

113



N2H4 + 4OH− − 4e− → N2 + 4H2O
+0.23

9



2NH3 + 6OH− − 6e− → N2 + 6H2O
−0.77

114



CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− − 6e− → 5H2O + N2 + CO2
+0.37

115







Reduction reactions

E
theo (V)
Ref.




2H+ + 2e− → H2
0
Lange's handbook of chemistry


2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−
−0.83




CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−→ HCOOH
+0.07

77



C2H2 + 2H2O + 2e− → C2H4 + 2OH−
+0.73

102



NO3− + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4OH + 9OH−
+0.6

100





Although strategies of RFB and SCES have achieved full atom/electron utilization, theoretically, they still suffer from several obstacles against industrialization. As described in Section 4.1, the charging reaction of RFB should not lead to the oxidation of the discharging product, which is essential for the long-time operation of electrocatalytic systems. To date, only the OER has been applied in industry successfully, however, the product of which, O2 gas, is of poor value due to its abundance in the air. Therefore, the reactions of quicker kinetics and higher value chemicals are of great significance to substitute for the OER during the charging process. Moreover, the impact of the operating conditions on the Faraday efficiency also needs to be considered. As described in Section 2.2, the pH value is an essential factor affecting the kinetics of electrocatalytic reactions. For example, NO3− ions are much easier to be converted to NH4+ under strong alkaline conditions, meaning that a strong alkaline electrolyte is preferred in the Zn–NO3− battery assembly. The presently reported SCES only uses metals as anode materials which produces solid-state high value-added chemicals. However, the resultant high value-added chemicals are firmly adsorbed on the surface of the anode, which results in instability of the whole system and difficulties of product collection. If a liquid-phase or even gas-phase precursor with high oxidizing potential could be used, the electrocatalytic system can be operated stably at a high current density for a long time period, especially under the assistance of a corresponding high-efficiency catalyst. The reported biomass fuel cells can be regarded as a good example of sustained electrocatalytic systems. The total reactions of biomass oxidation and oxygen reduction are thermodynamically feasible, and high value-added products can be obtained from biomass oxidation. However, since the cathode of biomass fuel cells consumes oxygen to produce water, such fuel cells cannot be regarded as atom/electron full utilization electrocatalytic systems. Even so, biomass chemicals, as soluble and renewable resources with high activity, have great potential to become a typical example of all-atom utilization electrocatalytic systems. Besides, a number of chemical platform compounds widely involved in organic synthesis can also be considered as reactant/target products for establishing SCES, to which more attention is expected to be paid in future studies.
5.3 Economic analysis
The profit of a reaction system is always determined by the cost of consumption and value of products. From the viewpoint of consumption, as we explained earlier, attention must be paid not only to the “visible consumption” but also to the “invisible consumption”. The visible consumption involves the cost of raw materials and all components of devices that is obviously non-negligible, while the invisible consumption, such as the origin of electricity, the treatment cost of produced side products or even pollutants, might be unnoticed. For instance, the electricity power source that drives the electrocatalytic system may not be clean enough. In addition, the strong acid and alkaline solutions are always generated at the anode and cathode, respectively, during the electrocatalytic process, which are serious and even dangerous pollutants to the environment and therefore need further treatment. Therefore, a clean power source and moderate operating conditions (room temperature, stable raw materials, neutral buffer electrolyte) are still the key factors for elevating the profit of a whole electrocatalytic system. The concurrent electrolysis at both electrodes is an efficient approach to enhance the value of the products, and therefore more meaningful reactions are expected to be explored and paired with the requirements of human society and industrial development. Moreover, the electrical energy generated in self-powered systems which can be stored or used instantly is also a valuable product, even though it is invisible. Actually, if the electrical energy can be utilized appropriately, it can be identified that one electron can participate in up to three reactions, including the oxidation reaction (electron donation), the reduction reaction (electron capture), and electric current/power generation (electron transfer). In other words, the electron utilization can reach up to 300% theoretically.
5.4 Product separation
Most products of reported electrocatalytic systems are gases or liquids that need further separation and purification. The separation of gas-phase products can be achieved conveniently by using dual-pool reactors, but comparatively the cost of separating soluble products from electrolytes is usually high, especially at low concentrations. Production of insoluble or easily separable chemicals in/from electrolytes is favourable for the development of electrocatalytic systems. In addition, the use of organic-aqueous dual-phase electrolytes is another available strategy for reducing the separation cost. To make full use of the product/precursor mixed electrolyte after the electrocatalytic reaction, other chemicals can be added into the electrolyte mixture to produce novel high value compounds through further reactions such as precipitation and phase separation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFB4002700), Shanghai Science and Technology Committee Rising-Star Program (22QA1403400) and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (21ZR1418700).
References
M. He, Y. Sun and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202112835 CAS .
P. Gao, L. Zhong, B. Han, M. He and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202210095 CAS .
Z. Jiang, S. Xu, W. Ding, M. Gao, J. Fan, C. Hu, B. Shi and J. H. Clark, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4044–4050 RSC .
D. M. Koshy, S. S. Nathan, A. S. Asundi, A. M. Abdellah, S. M. Dull, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, Z. Bao, S. F. Bent and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 17472–17480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 2834–2854 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, C. Shi, X. Guo, Z. He, L. Pan, Z.-F. Huang, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2200307 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen and J. Shi, Sci. China: Mater., 2022, 65, 1–9 CAS .
R. Li, K. Xiang, Z. Peng, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Wei, L. Chen and J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19550–19571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Frontana-Uribe, R. D. Little, J. G. Ibanez, A. Palma and R. Vasquez-Medrano, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 2099–2119 RSC .
C. Peng, G. Luo, Z. Xu, S. Yan, J. Zhang, M. Chen, L. Qian, W. Wei, Q. Han and G. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2103150 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Zheng, G. Wang, Y. Cao, W. Ding, J. Zhang, H. Wu, J. Ding, H. Hu, X. Han, T. Ma, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2106354 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Wan, L. Zhong, D. Liu, H. Yang, C. Li, Z. Huang, C. Liu, J. Chen, H. Pan, D.-S. Li, S. Li, Q. Yan and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 26233–26237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, Y. Zhang, Z. Jiang, D. Jiang, W. Wei and Z. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2204031 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, J. Bi, J. Liu, Q. Zhu, C. Chen, X. Sun, J. Zhang and B. Han, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Mariano, M. Kang, O. J. Wahab, I. J. McPherson, J. A. Rabinowitz, P. R. Unwin and M. W. Kanan, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1000–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Q. Hu, H. Wang, M. Chen, X. Hao, Y. Ma, J. Liu, K. Tang, A. Abudula and G. Guan, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, X. Li, L. An, K. Iputera, J. Zhu, P. Gao, R.-S. Liu, Z. Peng, J. Yang and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1234–1242 RSC .
C. Chen, X. Zhu, X. Wen, Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, H. Li, L. Tao, Q. Li, S. Du, T. Liu, D. Yan, C. Xie, Y. Zou, Y. Wang, R. Chen, J. Huo, Y. Li, J. Cheng, H. Su, X. Zhao, W. Cheng, Q. Liu, H. Lin, J. Luo, J. Chen, M. Dong, K. Cheng, C. Li and S. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 717–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, L. Zhong, H. Liu, Z. Fang, C. Yan, M. Chen, Y. Kong, C. Lee, D. Liu, S. Li, J. Liu, L. Song, G. Chen, Q. Yan and G. Yu, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 868–876 CrossRef .
F.-Y. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu, S. Gupta, D. J. Rivera, S. V. Lambeets, S. Pecaut, J. Y. T. Kim, P. Zhu, Y. Z. Finfrock, D. M. Meira, G. King, G. Gao, W. Xu, D. A. Cullen, H. Zhou, Y. Han, D. E. Perea, C. L. Muhich and H. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 759–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Su, W. Zhou, L. Liu, M. Chen, Z. Jiang, X. Luo, Y. Yang, T. Yu, W. Lei and C. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111067 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lan, Q. Wei and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200777 CAS .
Z. Zhao, L. Duan, Y. Zhao, L. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Bu, Z. Sun, T. Zhang, M. Liu, H. Chen, Y. Yang, K. Lan, Z. Lv, L. Zu, P. Zhang, R. Che, Y. Tang, D. Chao, W. Li and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 11767–11777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, X. Xiong and D. Wang, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 5792–5815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, B. Wang, J. Di, Y. Li, S.-Z. Yang, H. Li and S. Guo, Mater. Today, 2022, 53, 217–237 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rong, X. Shen, Y. Wang, L. Thomsen, T. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Lu, R. Amal and C. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2110103 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-H. Li, J. Yang, H. Jing, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Li, J. Zhao, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 15453–15461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-F. Hung, A. Xu, X. Wang, F. Li, S.-H. Hsu, Y. Li, J. Wicks, E. G. Cervantes, A. S. Rasouli, Y. C. Li, M. Luo, D.-H. Nam, N. Wang, T. Peng, Y. Yan, G. Lee and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Li, Q. Wang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 7806–7839 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Li, S. Mu, F. Verpoort, J. Xue, Z. Kou and J. Wang, Interdisciplinary Materials, 2022, 1, 51–87 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Y. Qian, H. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Mu, D. Do, B. Zhou, J. Dong, W. Yan, Y. Qin, L. Fang, R. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Zhang, J. Dong, G. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Zhang and X. Fan, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, K. R. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Yan, S. Cao, Y. Ye, Q. Dong, X. Zhang, J. E. Thorne, L. Jin, K. L. Materna, A. Trimpalis, H. Bai, S. C. Fakra, X. Zhong, P. Wang, X. Pan, J. Guo, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista and D. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 2902–2907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Zou, X. Shen, Y. Yang, G. Hu, W. Li, Z. Peng, D. Banham, A. Dong and D. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103851 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jia, Q. Wang, J. Yang, K. Ye, X. Li, W. Zhong, H. Shen, E. Sharman, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 3420–3429 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Ye, L. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Huang, J. Bi, L. Xue, J. Sun, J. Yang, W. Zhang, X. Wang, P. Xiong and J. Zhu, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 45, 805–813 CrossRef .
J. Fu, J. Dong, R. Si, K. Sun, J. Zhang, M. Li, N. Yu, B. Zhang, M. G. Humphrey, Q. Fu and J. Huang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1952–1961 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Kang, C. Ye, R. Jin, H. Yan, R. Lin, J. Yang, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, L. Liu, W. Song, J. Liu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13388–13393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yoshimi, A. Tsukazaki, K. Kikutake, J. G. Checkelsky, K. S. Takahashi, M. Kawasaki and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 254–258 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Foerst, A. D. Caviglia, R. Scherwitzl, R. Mankowsky, P. Zubko, V. Khanna, H. Bromberger, S. B. Wilkins, Y. D. Chuang, W. S. Lee, W. F. Schlotter, J. J. Turner, G. L. Dakovski, M. P. Minitti, J. Robinson, S. R. Clark, D. Jaksch, J. M. Triscone, J. P. Hill, S. S. Dhesi and A. Cavalleri, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 883–888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bao, J. Wang, B. Wang, J. Sun, L. He, Z. Pan, Y. Jiang, D. Wang, X. Liu, S. X. Dou and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 17197–17209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, Y. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Zheng, X. Lou, B. Yu, J. Chen, Y. Chen, M. Liu and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 53–85 RSC .
Z. Niu, C. Qiu, J. Jiang and L. Ai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2335–2342 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Sun, H.-Q. Ji, L.-X. Li, H.-Y. Zhang, Z.-K. Wang, J.-H. He and J.-M. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 22933–22939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, P. Wang, W. Zang, X. Li, D. Chen, Z. Kou, S. Mu and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2107382 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kou, T. Wang, Q. Gu, M. Xiong, L. Zheng, X. Li, Z. Pan, H. Chen, F. Verpoort, A. K. Cheetham, S. Mu and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803768 CrossRef .
X. Gao, X. Li, Y. Yu, Z. Kou, P. Wang, X. Liu, J. Zhang, J. He, S. Mu and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105961 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. Guan, Y. Tu, S. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Wang, L. Yu, C. Ma, D. Deng and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 119–126 RSC .
Z. Kou, T. Wang, H. Wu, L. Zheng, S. Mu, Z. Pan, Z. Lyu, W. Zang, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900248 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Pu, J. Zhao, I. S. Amiinu, W. Li, M. Wang, D. He and S. Mu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 952–957 RSC .
H. Yang, P. Guo, R. Wang, Z. Chen, H. Xu, H. Pan, D. Sun, F. Fang and R. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2107548 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Kang, Y. Feng, Z. Li, W.-Q. Yang, C.-Q. Cheng, Z.-Z. Shi, P.-F. Yin, G.-R. Shen, J. Yang, C.-K. Dong, H. Liu, F.-X. Ye and X.-W. Du, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2112367 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shinagawa, A. T. Garcia-Esparza and K. Takanabe, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1497–1507 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Weekes, D. A. Salvatore, A. Reyes, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 910–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lazaridis, B. M. Stuehmeier, H. A. Gasteiger and H. A. El-Sayed, Nat. Catal., 2022, 5, 363–373 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wakerley, S. Lamaison, J. Wicks, A. Clemens, J. Feaster, D. Corral, S. A. Jaffer, A. Sarkar, M. Fontecave, E. B. Duoss, S. Baker, E. H. Sargent, T. F. Jaramillo and C. Hahn, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 130–143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, D. Liu, R. Qi, C. Xia, M. Li, B. You and B. Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200552 CAS .
R. S. Delima, M. D. Stankovic, B. P. MacLeod, A. G. Fink, M. B. Rooney, A. Huang, R. P. Jansonius, D. J. Dvorak and C. P. Berlinguette, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 215–224 RSC .
H. Zhou, Y. Ren, Z. Li, M. Xu, Y. Wang, R. Ge, X. Kong, L. Zheng and H. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, Q. Qian, Y. Li, Z. Li, Y. Liu, C. Xiao, G. Zhang and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202113082 CAS .
F. Sun, J. Qin, Z. Wang, M. Yu, X. Wu, X. Sun and J. Qiu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, M. Gao, W. Ding, C. Huang, C. Hu, B. Shi and D. C. W. Tsang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 125425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, H. Zhou, M. Xu, P. Hao, X. Kong and H. Duan, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 938–945 RSC .
Y. X. Chen, A. Lavacchi, H. A. Miller, M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, M. Innocenti, A. Marchionni, W. Oberhauser, L. Wang and F. Vizza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiang, D. Wu, X. Deng, M. Li, S. Chen, P. Hao, X. Guo, J.-L. Luo and X.-Z. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909610 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, S. Wang, Z. Hua, L. Chen and J. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25422–25428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Z. Li, S.-M. Xu, L. Lu, M. Xu, K. Ji, R. Ge, Y. Yan, L. Ma, X. Kong, L. Zheng and H. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8976–8982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Li, H. Zhou, Y. Xu, S.-M. Xu, Y. Ren, Y. Yan, J. Yang, K. Ji, L. Li, M. Xu, M. Shao, X. Kong, X. Sun and H. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, X. Teng, R. Zhang, P. Guo, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, H. Wang, X. Sun and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Zhou, Z. Wei, W. Zhou, D. Wang, J. Tian, T. Wang, S. Zhao, J. Liu, L. Tao and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2104791 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Deng, K.-H. Wu, X. Lu, S. Cheong, R. D. Tilley, C.-L. Chiang, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-G. Lin, W. Yan, J. Scott, R. Amal and D.-W. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 2612–2620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, L. Tao, X. Zhu, C. Chen, W. Chen, S. Du, Y. Zhou, B. Zhou, D. Wang, C. Xie, P. Long, W. Li, Y. Wang, R. Chen, Y. Zou, X.-Z. Fu, Y. Li, X. Duan and S. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2021, 5(1), 66–73 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, X. Chong, C. Liu, Y. Liang and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13163–13166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 466–474 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, Y. Li, L. Chen and J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3148–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, X. Sheng, X. Chen, Z. Fang, J. Jiang, M. Wang, F. Li, L. Fan, Y. Ren, B. Zhang, B. J. J. Timmer, M. S. G. Ahlquist and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9155–9159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pang, H. Bai, H. Zhao, W. Fan and W. Shi, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 1545–1557 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, B. H. Nguyen, M. C. Daugherty and K. D. Moeller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3562–3565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, Y. Xia, P. Zhu, L. Fan and H. Wang, Science, 2019, 366, 226–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, Z.-H. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2429–2434 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Qu, G. Shi, J. Liu, J. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2230–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13296–13300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Liu, Q. Qian, G. Wang and G. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 27–36 CrossRef .
W. Liu, J. Bao, L. Xu, M. Guan and Y. Lei, J. Power Sources, 2020, 479, 229099 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, Q. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Fang, Z. Liang, G. Shao, B. Tang, W. Yang, L. Qin and X. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903854 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Z. Xiao, X. Liu, J. Ren, T. Xing, Z. Li, X. Li and Y. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2022, 521, 230925 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, G. Liu, X. Liu, Q. Yu, H. Mao, Z. Xiao and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2107608 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, M. Yan, W. Song, Q. Fang, X. Wei, L. Jiao, W. Xu, Y. Kang, H. Wang, N. Wu, W. Gu, L. Zheng, L. Hu and C. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101193 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, D. Gao, W. Xiao, L. Ma, K. Sun, P. Xi, D. Xue and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706928 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Qian, Z. Li, Y. Zhu and G. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb4197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Qian, Z. Li, Y. Zhu and G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, Y. Wang, Y. Song, C. Li, X. Su, Y. Wang, W.-B. Cai and Y. Xia, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cai, Y. Li, G. Wang and Z. Wen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3910–3915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, L. Wang, H. Wang, C. Lei, B. Yang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Lei, S. Wang and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104621 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nadeema, G. Pandurang Kharabe, D. Prakash Biswal and S. Kurungot, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 2582–2591 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, J. Kim, S. Joo, Y. Yang, J. Shin, M. Liu, J. Cho and G. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9506–9511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, R. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Q. Yang, Z. Huang, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3938–3944 RSC .
R. Zhang, Y. Guo, S. Zhang, D. Chen, Y. Zhao, Z. Huang, L. Ma, P. Li, Q. Yang, G. Liang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103872 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Guo, C. Li, J. Liu, Z. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Li and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3024–3032 RSC .
S. An, Z. Liu, J. Bu, J. Lin, Y. Yao, C. Yan, W. Tian and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202116370 CAS .
J. Xie, Z. Zhou and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908285 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, X. Zhong, G. Zhou, N. Zhao and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2105812 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Teng, J. Lu, Y. Niu, S. Gong, M. Xu, T. J. Meyer and Z. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34(13), 6036–6047 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Li, J. Yang and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, e202213318,  DOI:10.1002/anie.202213318 .
Z. Li, J. Jiang, X. Liu, Z. Zhu, J. Wang, Q. He, Q. Kong, X. Niu, J. S. Chen, J. Wang and R. Wu, Small, 2022, 18, 2203495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Zheng, B. Yang, Z. Li, J. Lu, Q. Zhang, N. M. Adli, L. Lei, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, W. Wang, C. Zhang, M. Zhu, R. Lu, J. Ye, H. Yang, C. Wu, J. Liu, D. Rao, S. Shao and X. Lv, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2110649 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kekedy-Nagy, M. Abolhassani, S. I. P. Bakovic, Z. Anari, J. P. Moore, II, B. G. Pollet and L. F. Greenlee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18844–18858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, G. Xu, L. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2200058 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Wei, L. Chen, J. Shi and M. He, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5335 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Vitse, M. Cooper and G. G. Botte, J. Power Sources, 2005, 142, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhu, C. Guo, J. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Dub and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10906–10909 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Heng Xu
	Heng Xu is now a doctoral candidate in the School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal University under the supervision of Prof. Jianlin Shi. His research is focused on the design of advanced electrolytic systems and synthesis of electrocatalysts for value-added chemical production.

Lisong Chen
	Lisong Chen received his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jianlin Shi from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (SICCAS) in 2016. He is now an associate professor at East China Normal University (ECNU). His research interest is on electrocatalysts for renewable energy.

Jianlin Shi
	Prof. Jianlin Shi received his PhD degree in Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (SICCAS). He is now a professor of SICCAS and an academician of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research areas include the synthesis of mesoporous nanomaterials and their catalytic and biomedical applications, and most recently he has mainly focused his attention on electrocatalysis. He has published over 500 scientific papers which have been cited more than 39,000 times by other scientists with an H-index of 111 (2020). He has been in charge of more than 30 important research projects and has received a number of awards for his achievements.

Broader context
The enhancement of atom/electron utilization in electrocatalytic systems is of great significance to meet the growing demands for clean energy supply and environmental protection. Recent efforts related to traditional electrocatalytic systems have successfully enhanced the profit of electrocatalytic reactions by accelerating the reaction kinetics. However, these studies are mainly focused on single-target electrode reactions or products, while much less attention has been paid to reactions on the counterpart electrode and external energy supply, which obviously ignores or wastes a large amount of ‘invisible cost’ at the counterpart electrodes when we calculate the benefits and costs of the whole reaction system. In this original review, we will, for the first time, summarize/discuss the most recent remarkable advances in atom/electron utilization enhancement using three strategies which are categorized based on the level of atom/electron utilization of the whole system as follows: (i) traditional electrocatalytic systems featuring half atom/electron utilization (HU-ES), (ii) atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic systems (USE-ES), including co-electrolysis systems (CES) and self-powered electrocatalytic systems (SPES), and (iii) atom/electron full utilization electrocatalytic systems (FU-ES), including rechargeable functional batteries (RFB) and self-co-electrolysis systems (SCES). We will mainly focus on the development of various systems as well as the corresponding electrocatalysts in this review. The present challenges and related prospects will also be discussed, hopefully to benefit further development of electrocatalytic systems with much enhanced atom/electron utilization in the future.


 	Fig. 1  The development of electrocatalytic systems to generate more revenue and cause less pollution to the human society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The advantages and disadvantages of the three configurations of electrocatalytic systems including the atom/electron half-utilization electrocatalytic system (HU-ES), the atom/electron utilization semi-enhanced electrocatalytic system (USE-ES) and the atom/electron full-utilization electrocatalytic system (FU-ES).	 

HU-ES	HU-ES	No	50%	No	50%	No
USE-ES	CES	Yes	100%	No	100%	No
SPES	No	50%	Yes	100%	No
FU-ES	SCES	Yes	100%	Yes	200%	No
RFB	No	100%	Yes	100%	Yes

 	Fig. 3  Four classic types of electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of C2 product generation through C–C coupling catalyzed by Cu3N and Cu3Nx. (b) FE of the CO2RR product using Cu3Nx catalysts at varied applied constant potentials.11 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. The electron backscatter diffraction orientation maps (left) and snapshots of the scanning electrochemical cell microscopic video at −1.05 V versus Ag/AgCl (right) of defective Au particles during the (c) HER and (d) CO2RR.16 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Coordination numbers around the Ni atoms of 4.3% N–Ni nanosheets, 1.6% N–Ni nanosheets and Ni foil. (f) Mass and specific activities of various Ni-based catalysts.18 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of Pd1Cu1/TiO2; inset: size distribution of PdCu nanoparticles. Scale bar: 25 nm. (b) FE and operating current densities of all products at varied potentials.19 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic illustration of the n–p semiconductor type transformation and CO2 capture process of In(OH)3 nanocubes. (d) FEurea and (e) Nurea-selectivity at different potentials on In(OH)3 in 0.1 M KNO3 electrolyte with CO2 feeding gas.20 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) EDS mapping images of Ru-CuNW demonstrating good dispersion of Ru atoms. (b) N-Balance and NH3 FE of the Ru-CuNW applied NORR reaction.21 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group. The magnified AFM images of (c) step- and (e) screw-structured pyramid MoS2. Simulated eddy current density of (d) step- and (f) screw-structured pyramid MoS2.22 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the evolution of mesoporous materials in three periods: well-defined, highly crystalline, and nano-architectured mesostructures. (b) A compilation of images showing representative examples of versatile TiO2 mesostructures.23 Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the relationship between surface free energy and specific activity per metal atom with metal particle size.26 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Effect of iron domain sizes on the copper surface on the adsorption energies of H* and CO*.31 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Distribution of NO3− along the z-axis electrode distance based on molecular dynamics simulations. Finite element analysis of the NO3− distribution difference near (d) CuCl_BEF and (e) CuCl in KNO3 solution.46 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Difference in the charge density values of S adsorbed on CoNi@NGs with the red and blue areas denoting increased and decreased charge density values, respectively. (g) LSV curves for the oxidation activity over CoNi@NGs in 2% H2S/syngas (49% CO, 49% H2 and 2% H2S), syngas (50% CO and 50% H2) and Ar.50 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The photograph of raw materials Cu powders and the spraying product PS-Cu membrane. (b) Overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and current densities at −1.2 V vs. RHE of PS-Cu, Cu NPs, Cu foam, and Pt foil.54 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) The relationship between the HER activity and pH value measured in a Na2SO4 electrolyte solution (0.5 M) saturated with H2 at a rotational rate of 3600 rpm using Pt disk (solid) and Pt/C (open) electrodes.55 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Scheme of two kinds of five-layer MEAs.57 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group. (e) A rendering of the MultiThor design. (f) Comparison of TCH, ECH, and ePMR hydrogenation.60 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
NO3− (aq) + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4OH (aq) + 9OH− (aq)

 		 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematics of conventional overall water splitting for the (A) HER, (B) HzOR-coupled HER and (C) HzOR-coupled HER using electrocatalysts for both the HER and HzOR.62 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM images (scale bar: 50 nm) of Pd/TNTA. (c) Illustration of the co-electrolysis of water and ethanol in an alkaline electrolyte. (d) Polarization curves for a HER–ethanol oxidation coupling membrane electrochemical reactor in 2 M NaOH water solutions of 2 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Polarization curves of various anodic reactions and the cathodic HER. (b) Electrocatalytic conversion path from biomass feedstock into value-added chemicals with H2 generation at the anode.74 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the concurrent electrochemical conversion to formic acid through the CO2RR on the cathode and methanol oxidation on the anode. LSV curves for (b) the CuONS/CF//mSnO2/CC cell with or without the addition of 1 M methanol in the anode and (c) those saturated with CO2 or Ar in the cathode with the addition of 1 M methanol.77 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) The photograph of a 4-NP and HMF co-electrolysis system before and after operation. (e) HPLC chromatograms of HMF. (f) UV-vis absorption spectra of 4-NP.78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. The paired electrolysis coupling (g) alcohol oxidation in a single-pool cell or (h) oxidative condensation in a divided cell to generate H2 gas for the following two hydrogenation reactions.80 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of the CoFeN-NCNTs//CCM-based Zn–air battery and the commercial Pt/C&RuO2-based one as the control. (b) Photograph of the water splitting system powered by Zn–air batteries. (c) The production of O2 and H2 as a function of time.89 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a self-powered HER system integrated with a home-made DHzFC (left) and OHzS (right) unit. (b) The discharging polarization curve and the resultant power density for the DHzFC assembling PW-Co3N NWA/NF as the anode and Pt/C as the cathode. (c) H2 generation rate of the DHzFC–OHzS coupled self-powered system at room temperature.93 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 
Li–O2 battery: 4Li + O2 + 2H2O → 4Li+ + 4OH−	(1)
Li–H2O battery: 2Li + 2H2O → 2Li+ + 2OH− + H2↑	(2)

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of a Zn–H2O battery composed of a Zn plate as the anode in 4.0 M NaOH and Pt/CNTs loaded on carbon cloth as the cathode in 2.0 M H2SO4, separated by a bipolar membrane. (b) H2 production and working voltage at a discharge current density of 10 mA cm−2. (c) Chronopotentiometric response of the Pt/CNT-based Zn–H2O battery at varied current densities ranging from 5 to 20 mA cm−2.95 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The discharging polarization curve and the resultant power density of a Zn–NO3− battery using Pd/TiO2 as the cathode catalyst. (e) NH3 yield and the corresponding FE of the Zn–NO3− battery. (f) Photograph of an electronic timer powered by the Zn–NO3− battery which worked for 100 min.99 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2↑ (2.0 M H2SO4) Ec = 0.035 V	(3)
Zn + 2OH− − 2e− → ZnO + H2O (4.0 M NaOH) Ea = −1.285 V	(4)
Zn + 2H+ + 2OH− → ZnO + H2O + H2↑ Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.32 V	(5)
2H2O + 2e− → H2↑ + 2OH− (0.1 M KOH) Ec = −0.77 V	(6)
Al + 3OH− → Al(OH)3 + 3e− (0.1 M KOH) Ea = −2.25 V	(7)
2Al + 6H2O → 3H2↑ + 2Al(OH)3 (0.1 M KOH) Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.45 V	(8)
NO3− + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4OH + 9OH− (0.25 M LiNO3− + 5 M LiCl) Ec = 0.6 V	(9)
4Zn + 8OH− → 4ZnO + 4H2O + 8e− (5.0 M KOH) Ea = 1.27 V	(10)
4Zn+ NO3− + 3H2O → 4ZnO + NH4OH + OH− Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.87 V	(11)
C2H2 + 2H2O + 2e− → C2H4 + 2OH− (1.0 M KOH) Ec = 0.733 V	(12)
Zn + 2OH− →ZnO + H2O + 2e− (1.0 M KOH) Ea = −1.20 V	(13)
Zn+ C2H2 + H2O → ZnO + C2H4 Vcell = Ec − Ea = 1.32 V	(14)
2CO2 + e− → C2O42−	(15)
C2O42− → CO22− + CO2	(16)
C2O42−+ CO22− → 2CO32− + C	(17)

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of metal–CO2 batteries, including Li/Na–CO2 and Zn/Al–CO2 systems, for CO2 resource utilization in human life.103 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 
CO2 (solution) + * → *CO2	(18)
*CO2 + e− →*CO2−	(19)
*CO2 + H+− → HCOO*	(20)
HCOO* + e− + H+− → HCOOH*	(21)
HCOOH* → HCOO− (solution) + H+ + *	(22)

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schemes of the mechanism of the discharging (left) and charging (right) processes of an aqueous Zn–CO2 battery equipped with a ZnTe/ZnO@C cathode and a bipolar membrane. (b) Charge−discharge polarization curves for a Zn–CO2 battery; inset: the power density at different current densities. (c) FE and the corresponding current densities of HCOO− for ZnTe/ZnO@C in CO2 saturated NaHCO3 solutions.105 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic configuration of a flow-cell reactor having a catalyst-loaded GDL. (e) FECO values and current densities of CA/N–Ni and CA/N aerogel-catalyzed flow-cell reactors.108 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 
2H2O + O2 + 4e− → 4OH− (ORR) H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + 1/2H2↑ (HER)	(23)
Mg → Mg+ + e−; Mg+ + H2O → Mg2+ + OH− + 1/2H2↑	(24)
Mg2+ + NH4+ + HnPO4n−3 + 6H2O → MgNH4PO4·6H2O↓ + nH+	(25)

 	Fig. 18  (a) SCES assembled using a Zn plate as the anode, N,Cu-CoP/CC as the cathode, and neutral 1 M PBS as the electrolyte that can generate H2 gas, NaZnPO4, and electrical energy concurrently. (b) Discharging polarization curve and resultant power density of the N,Cu-CoP/CC‖Zn SCES. (c) H2 production from the SCES using the above-mentioned aqueous electrolytes in 0.5 h. (d) Mass change of the Zn anode by the SCES using the above-mentioned aqueous electrolytes in 0.5 h.111 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 
2H2O + e− = H2↑ + 2OH−	(26)
Zn + 2e− + Na+ + PO43− = NaZnPO4↓	(27)
Zn + Na+ + PO43− 2H2O = NaZnPO4↓ + H2 + 2OH−	(28)

2H2O − 4e− → O2 + 4H+	+1.23	Lange's handbook of chemistry
4OH− − 4e− → O2 + 2H2O	+0.40	

Li0 − e− ↔ Li+	−3.05	

Na0 − e− ↔ Na+	−2.71	

Mg0 − 2e− ↔ Mg2+	−2.36	

Al0 − 3e− ↔ Al3+	−1.66	

Zn0 − 2e− ↔ Zn2+	−0.74	

Zn + 2OH− − 2e− → ZnO + 2H2O	−1.27	
99

CH3OH + H2O − 4e− → 4H+ + HCOOH	+0.103	
77

C3H8O3 + 8OH−– 8e− → 3HCOOH +5H2O	+0.69	
113

N2H4 + 4OH− − 4e− → N2 + 4H2O	+0.23	
9

2NH3 + 6OH− − 6e− → N2 + 6H2O	−0.77	
114

CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− − 6e− → 5H2O + N2 + CO2	+0.37	
115


2H+ + 2e− → H2	0	Lange's handbook of chemistry
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−	−0.83	

CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−→ HCOOH	+0.07	
77

C2H2 + 2H2O + 2e− → C2H4 + 2OH−	+0.73	
102

NO3− + 7H2O + 8e− → NH4OH + 9OH−	+0.6	
100


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
