Electroluminescent materials toward near ultraviolet region   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01580F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01580F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8639-8668Electroluminescent materials toward near ultraviolet region†

        
          
            Shuo 
            Chen
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hui 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Functional Inorganic Material Chemistry, Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Materials, Heilongjiang University, 74 Xuefu Road, Harbin 150080, P. R. China. E-mail: hxu@hlju.edu.cn
Received 
      20th March 2021
    First published on 21st June 2021AbstractNear ultraviolet (NUV) light-emitting materials and devices are significant due to unique applications in anti-counterfeit, manufacturing industries, and hygienic treatments. However, the development of high-efficiency NUV electroluminescent devices encounters great challenges and is far behind their RGB emitter counterparts. Besides the photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs) of NUV materials being higher than 40%, charge injection and lopsided carrier transport also determine the device performance, leading to great efforts in optimizing the frontier molecular orbitals to fit the adjacent function layer. In the exploration of NUV materials, organic molecules are one of the primary candidates, given their preparative facility and structural variability. Recently, all-inorganic quantum-dot light-emitting diodes (QLEDs) of Cd-based, ZnSe, graphene and inorganic perovskite emitters and organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) were demonstrated for achieving NUV electroluminescence. Owing to the great efforts devoted to NUV material engineering and device configuration, NUV materials and devices have achieved great advances over the last two decades. In this review, we retrospect the development of NUV materials and devices covering all promising systems, which may inspire the enthusiasm of researchers to explore the huge potential in the NUV region.
Shuo Chen
Dr Shuo Chen obtained BS and MS degree in Chemistry from Heilongjiang University in 2007 and 2010, respectively. Subsequently, he received PhD diploma in 2014 at Harbin Institute of Technology, after which he did postdoctoral research at Perking University and Shenzhen University, respectively. Afterwards he has served as an associate professor in the group of Prof. Hui Xu at Heilongjiang University since 2019, where he currently studies electroluminescence based on deep-blue organic materials.
Hui Xu
Prof. Hui Xu received his MS degree in Material Science and PhD degree in Organic Chemistry from the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) and Fudan University under the supervisions of Profs Yudong Huang and Wei Huang, respectively. Then, he joined Heilongjiang University in 2006 and promoted full professor in 2011. From 2011 to 2013, he worked in Prof. Xiaogang Liu's group of National University of Singapore (NUS) as a postdoctoral researcher. He awarded the Humboldt Fellowship for Experienced Researcher in 2017 and worked with Prof. Klaus Meerholz in University of Cologne (UoC). He has published more than 100 peer-reviewed SCI papers. His current research focuses on phosphine-based optoelectronic materials.
1. Introduction
Near ultraviolet (NUV) light source has attracted special attention in the fields regarding commercial, civil and military applications.1–3 In general, NUV is a term for a specific band of electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength range of 300–400 nm. Each NUV light with a specific wavelength plays an irreplaceable role in industry and medical treatments, such as lighting, manufacturing, and photolithography.4–7 For instance, with respect to illumination lamps, the lighting source could pump 370 nm NUV backlight to subsequently excite multicolor down-converters.8 The color rendering index (CRI) of the NUV backlight excited three-primary-color white-emitting system was markedly higher than its counterpart adopting deep-blue backlight. In the printed circuit board (PCB) industry, photolithography is based on photo-initiated polymerization under exposure of 365 nm NUV. In this way, the designed circuit pattern can be transferred to the circuit board.9 Furthermore, NUV light also plays a crucial role in the maintenance of living organisms. In the range of 300–320 nm, appropriate NUV exposure facilitates the synthesis of vitamin D in the body. NUV phototherapy employing specific NUV light irradiation is an important kind of physiotherapy and photochemotherapy for specific therapeutic purposes. For example, the treatments of psoriasis and subgingival calculus require NUV focusing on 365 and 400 nm, respectively. However, most commercial NUV sources are cumbersome, big-volume and non-integrable. Therefore, it is indubitable that the development of NUV materials for ultralight, ultrathin and modular devices will open up the immense potential for brand-new applications.

Fig. 1 shows the milestones in the development of NUV optoelectronic applications. In 1980s, Akaski et al. reported the first GaN p–n junction LED, which completely changed the form of NUV light sources.10 With rapidly developed microelectronic fabrication technologies, compact NUV solid-state light sources, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), designing by III–V nitride semiconductors (GaN, AlGaN, and AlN) and ZnO junction have mushroomed in the following decade. Currently, the NUV LED as-fabricated by InGaN/GaN/AlGaN/GaN multiple quantum wells can obtain the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of up to 60%.11 In contrast, after the pioneering work on organic light-emitting diode (OLED) reported by Tang et al. in 1987, the first NUV OLED was also demonstrated in 2001.12 Afterwards, a large number of NUV organic emitters were synthesized, along with the development of visible-light OLED technology. In recent years, NUV quantum dots (QDs) and cesium lead halide perovskite nanocrystals (NC) have emerged with high purity and efficiency.13 In this review, we firstly introduce strategies and challenges for NUV materials design, and then we focus on the properties and device performance of NUV materials with emissions involved in the NUV region (peak wavelength <430 nm). This part of the content is divided into three sections, corresponding to the types of materials and devices: (i) organic materials and OLEDs with different luminescent mechanisms; (ii) all-inorganic QDs and quantum-dot LEDs (QLED); (iii) organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite NCs and perovskite LEDs (PeLED). Finally, prospects on integrating NUV devices into diverse potential applications are presented. We hope this review can benefit the research community interested in the development of NUV materials, and inspire more innovative ideas overcoming the challenges in material and device designs.
 Fig. 1  Timeline of developments of NUV electroluminescent devices. In 1989, Akaski realized GaN p–n junction LED for the first time. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 1989, IOP. In 2001, Shirota et al. developed a high-performance blue-UV-emitting OLED with EL peaking at 404 nm. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2001, American Institute of Physics. In 2015, Xue report of violet-blue QLEDs with EQE > 10%. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. After one year, Jin et al. reported room-temperature color-pure NUV LEDs based on a two-dimensional lead halide perovskite material [(PEA)2PbBr4]. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. In 2018, Meng et al. fabricated doped devices with state-of-the-art EQE of 20.4% and CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.03). Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. In 2020, Li et al. demonstrated high quantum efficiency NUV LEDs utilizing InGaN/GaN/AlGaN/GaN multiple quantum wells. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. In the same year, Lu synthesized the NUV TADF emitter CZ-MPS, which exhibits the EL peak of 389 nm along with the EQE of 9.3%, which represents the highest efficiency among the UV-OLED with the wavelength less than 400 nm. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. In 2020, Lee et al. designed a multiresonance-type emitter tDIDCz, which shows a violet emission with narrow full width at half a maximum of 14 nm. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
2. Principles and challenges in NUV material design
Ultraviolet (UV) is a term for a specific band of electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength range of 10–400 nm, among which the spectral range of extreme UV (EUV) featuring a high-energy radiation lies between 10 and 121 nm, corresponding to the energy distribution range of 12410.25 eV. In view of the property of ionizing electromagnetic radiation, EUV is crucial for semiconductor lithography. The rest of the wavelength range is divided into three parts according to two standards: (i) UV A (315–400 nm), UV B (280–315 nm), and UV C (100–280 nm); (ii) NUV (300–400 nm), middle UV (200–300 nm) and far UV (122–200 nm).19 Considering the profile width (∼100 nm for organic molecules), emissions with peak wavelengths <430 nm are at least partially involved in the NUV region, accompanied by deep-blue components reaching the limitation of the Commission Internationale de L’Eclairage (CIE) 1931 coordinates (x ≤ 0.18, y ≤ 0.08).20
NUV emitters with high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) are the basis of realizing high-performance electroluminescence (EL) devices. Currently, the main luminescent materials for NUV applications include organic semiconductor molecules, inorganic quantum dots (QD) and inorganic or organic–inorganic-hybrid perovskite materials. The photophysical and EL processes of these three kinds of materials have similarities and differences, which involve carrier and exciton kinetics, actually leading to the strategies of material and device optimization and the corresponding challenges.
2.1 Photophysical principles of NUV molecules
As depicted in Fig. 2, for the fused ring compounds, the fluorescence (FL) emission is gradually bathochromic-shifted along with the increment of conjugation π plane. The shortest emission wavelength of the smallest aromatic skeleton benzene is at 278 nm, which is in the range of middle UV. Blue-emitting tetracene with a peak wavelength of 480 nm reveals a 202 nm bathochromic shift relative to that of benzene. Moreover, the emission of linear structured molecules tends to be a bathochromic shift, compared to that of the nonlinearly structured congeners. For instance, anthracene exhibits a NUV emission with a maximum at 400 nm, which is ca. 20 nm longer than that of phenanthrene.21
 Fig. 2  Representative molecular segments for fabricating NUV emitters (the emission peak below 430 nm), as reported thus far in the literature. Inset: Schematic principle of conventional absorption and PL for anthracene. The overlap of the two curves represents self-absorption. 
Furthermore, the influences of substituents on the emission are dependent on substitution position and numbers. As a rule, if electron clouds of substituents interact with those of chromophores, they could extend π-electron delocalization for energy reduction, leading to a bathochromic shift, and vice versa. Besides, PLQY is also affected by the structures of organic molecules. The continuous conjugation, rigid plane, and electron-donating substituent groups could remedy non-radiative transition, leading to PLQY improvement. The effect of heteroatoms (N, O, S) on PLQY cannot be ignored. For pure hydrocarbons, singlet excitation is mainly attributed to spin-allowed π → π* transition featuring a high molar absorption coefficient (ε) of 104. For heteroatom-containing compounds, their spin-forbidden n → π* transitions have a low molar absorption coefficient (ε) of 102.

Fig. 2 summarizes the typical chromophores adopted in NUV materials, whose emission peaks are below 430 nm. The segments commonly employed by NUV molecules include pure hydrocarbon moieties, and electron donors (D) and acceptors (A), which are combined to tune emission wavelength and improve PLQY. As mentioned above, the following aspects should be considered when designing high-efficiency NUV emitters (i) suitable conjugated lengths of chromophores determine emission colors; (ii) appropriate intramolecular torsion angle could restrain intermolecular aggregation, therefore, preventing emission bathochromic shift and concentration quenching; (iii) incorporating donor and acceptor groups can enhance electrical properties, but accompanied by emission red-shifts induced by the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effect.
2.2 EL mechanisms of OLEDs
Organic emitters employed in NUV OLEDs can be classified into three types: traditional FL emitters, phosphorescent emitters, delayed FL material (TADF and hot exciton material).22–26 According to quantum statistics, recombination of electron and hole generates exciton at four spin-dependent states, including three triplet states (T) and one singlet state (S), which will be produced statistically considering the spin multiplicity (Fig. 3a). Assuming that the formation excitons (σS and σT) are the same (σS/σT = 1), the formation probability of S and T excitons (χS and χT) is only associated with the state density and can be expressed as following eqn (1) and (2):27 (1) (2)
 Fig. 3  EL mechanisms of OLEDs. Exciton utilization processes of (a) fluorescence (FL); (b) phosphorescence (PH); (c) thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF); (d) hybridized local and charge-transfer (HLCT) based OLEDs. IC: internal conversional, ISC: intersystem crossing, RISC: reverse intersystem crossing, and ΔEST: the singlet–triplet energy splitting; CT: charge transfer, LE: local excited, respectively. Superscripts and subscripts correspond to spin multiplicity and electronic energy-level number, respectively. (e) EL process in OLED, including carrier injection, transportation and recombination, and subsequent energy transfer, exciton conversion and radiation. HIL: hole injection layer; HTL: hole transport layer; HBL: hole blocking layer; EML: emission layer; EIL: electron injection layer; ETL: electron transport layer; EBL: electron-blocking layer; 3MLCT: triplet state metal-to-ligand charger transfer; FRET: Förster energy transfer; DET: Dexter energy transfer. 
EQE is an important parameter of OLEDs, for describing the photoelectric conversion capability, which can be calculated according to eqn (3):28 EQEmax = γ × ηST × ηout × ΦPL(3)where γ is the charge balance factor (ideally 1.0, assuming hole–electron balance), ηST is the fraction of excitons involving radiative decay, ηout (0.25 ± 0.05 for indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrate) is a light outcoupling efficiency. ηout can be calculated using the eqn (4), where n is the refractive index of organic layers (normally it is 1.7 ± 0.1 for organic molecules). ΦPL is PLQY of emitting layer (EML), which can be simply expressed as eqn (5)–(7):29 ηout = 1 − (1 − 1/n2)1/2(4) (5) (6) knr ∝ αexp(−βΔEopt)(7)where A is Einstein's A coefficient, kr and knr are the radiative and nonradiative rate constants, respectively. α and β are constants, and ΔEopt is the optical energy gap. Eqn (5)–(7) show that kr and knr are proportional and reversely proportional to ΔEopt, respectively. Since ΔEopt of NUV emitter is larger than that of visible light-emitting molecules, the former would be more advantageous in improving kr and reducing knr. However, taking electronic absorption and emission spectra of anthracene as an example, the absorption region of conjugated molecules falls into the middle UV and NUV (inset of Fig. 2). According to Franck–Condon principle about the mirror symmetry of absorption and emission, the shortest emission wavelength that a NUV molecule can achieve is inevitably in the NUV region, resulting in large absorption–emission overlap and marked self-absorption. Furthermore, to achieve NUV emission, conjugation extension must be limited, which would sacrifice electrical properties. Furthermore, limited conjugation degrades the oscillator strength (f) and PLQY.24,30–32 Therefore, the conflict between color purity and emission efficiency is the key and intrinsic challenge for developing high-performance NUV materials.
Traditional FL emitters can only utilize singlet excitons through radiation from the first singlet excited state (S1) to the ground state (S0). Therefore, the theoretical upper limit of internal quantum efficiency (IQE) in the electro-FL process is 25%. Noble-metal phosphorescent (PH) emitters can harvest both singlet and triplet excitons via effectively enhancing spin–orbit coupling (SOC) and intersystem crossing (IC) (Fig. 3b). TADF and hot exciton emitters can also realize 100% exciton utilization efficiency (EUE) through reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) (Fig. 3c).33 RISC for TADF luminogens is from their lowest triplet excited states (T1) to S1. Differently, RISC of host exciton materials is between their high-lying triplet (Tm, m ≥ 2) and singlet (Sn, n ≥ 1) states (Fig. 3d). For TADF and hot exciton devices, EUE can also be expressed as eqn (8):34 EUE = ΦPL × (0.25 + 0.75 × ϕRISC)(8)where ϕRISC as a rate constant of reverse intersystem crossing can be expressed as eqn (9): (9)In which kRISC and kTnr are the rate constants of RISC and triplet non-radiative transition, respectively. Theoretically, ϕRISC is the result of competition between RISC and triplet non-radiation.
According to electronic characteristics, NUV FL emitters can be divided into three types: unipolar emitters with electron-rich (p-type) and electron-deficient (n-type) features, and bipolar emitters. p-Type molecules usually contain electron-donating moieties, e.g. arylamine. This kind of material has the appropriate highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level to ensure a low energy barrier for hole injection from the anode, and the shallow lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level to block electron injection. On the contrary, n-type emitters usually contain electron-withdrawing moieties with electron-transporting predominance. For OLEDs using p-type emitters, recombination zones are close to EML|electron transporting layer (ETL) interfaces. Similarly, the recombination zones of p-type emitter-based devices are located at EML|hole transporting layer (HTL) interfaces. Both p- and n-type emitters have the common limitation in carrier flux unbalance. Regarding this issue, bipolar materials with balanced charge transport feature are desired.35,36 Bipolar emitters are conducive to both hole and electron injection and transport by integrating both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups. Therefore, bipolar molecules have HOMO and LUMO energy levels matching with those of adjacent carrier transport layers (CTL) for balancing carrier injection and transportation. Because NUV emitters feature large optical gaps, electron-donating and electron-withdrawing effects should be accurately tuned to preserve large enough band gaps.
To achieve deep-blue or NUV PH dyes, molecular design is focused on shallowing the LUMO and deepening the HOMO with ligand engineering. Most of the reported optical gaps for PH emitters are less than 3.2 eV, whose emission color purity can hardly satisfy the standard of CIEy < 0.10.37 Carbene-type ligands are commonly used to manage HOMO and LUMO levels by incorporating different aryl substituents. The weak electron-deficient character of carbene moiety can elevate LUMOs, leading to emission blue-shift.
Most TADF emitters are donor–acceptor (D–A) molecules, featuring the separated HOMO and LUMO. The ICT effect of TADF molecules should be strong enough to minimize singlet–triplet splitting (ΔEST) for efficient RISC, but simultaneously inducing bathochromic shift. The intensities of electron-withdrawing effects for conventional acceptors are in the order of the cyano group > triazine > arylboron > diphenylsulfone. To realize NUV emission, strong acceptors should be integrated with weak donors, and vice versa.22 Therefore, the key challenge of NUV TADF emitter development is how to accurately optimize the ICT effect to achieve the balance between RISC and NUV emission.
Hot exciton materials characteristic of hybridized local and charge transfer (HLCT) excited states can also harvest both singlet and triplet excitons.38–40 Compared to TADF emitters, the predominance of locally excited (1LE) components in S1 states of hot exciton materials gives rise to narrow and blue-shifted emissions and FL-like short lifetimes, making them competent and promising as NUV emitters. Furthermore, the charge transfer (CT) component facilitates RISC between high-lying triplet and singlet-excited states.40,41 The intermediate triplet state (Tm) of hot exciton materials should have a large energy gap (ΔETm–T1) to the T1, but a small enough gap ΔESn–Tm to Sn. Commonly, ΔETm–T1 even reached >1 eV to prevent interconversion from Tm to T1 and facilitated RISC to Sn providing suitable ΔESn–Tm. Therefore, the composition of the HLCT state is crucial for hot exciton materials, which are sensitive to not only molecular building blocks, e.g. chromophores, donors, acceptors, but also structural parameters, e.g., dihedral angle, linker length. Therefore, most hot exciton emitters are based on moderately twisted and separated D–A structures.
Under forward bias, electrons and holes are injected into the devices from cathode and anode, respectively (Fig. 3e). Through the transportation of carrier transporting layers (CTLs), both electrons and holes reach EML consisting of organic emitters, QDs and perovskites, and then form the electron–hole pairs, namely the so-called “excitons”. EML can be either a neat film or a doping system as emitter-doped host matrixes, the latter of which is widely used in PH and TADF diodes. To enhance charge combination in EMLs and prevent exciton diffusion to CTLs, carrier and exciton blocking layers can also be incorporated, which commonly enlarge charge barriers and have big enough excited-state energy levels, therefore device efficiencies can be improved. Finally, radiative transitions of excitons generate the light corresponding to the emission color of the emitters. Obviously, carrier flux balance and exciton radiation ratio are two of the key factors for EL efficiencies. It is noted that the Femi energy gap between cathode and anode is ∼2.0 eV, smaller than the energy gaps between the highest occupied (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMO) of organic molecules; while bandgaps of NUV emitters are markedly larger than visible light-emitting congeners. In this case, it is more difficult to realize balanced carrier injection and transportation in NUV EMLs. To solve this issue, multiple CTLs can be adopted to form cascade-like energy level distribution, facilitating carrier injection. Simultaneously, S1 and T1 energy levels of NUV emitters are remarkably larger, which establishes a higher requirement on exciting energy gaps of host matrixes.
For commercial applications, device engineering of NUV OLEDs is also significant to completely exhibit the EL performance of emitters. Several efforts were made in device physics and structure optimization, such as the development of anode materials,42 carrier injection layer (CIL),43,44 HTL,45,46 ETL,47,48 EML configuration17,18 and inverted architecture.49 The material selection and device engineering are systematic works, which are carried out for enhancing light outcoupling, carrier flux balance and exciton confinement within EML. Due to the large ΔEopt of NUV emitters, it is a challenge to find HTL and ETL materials with HOMO and LUMO deep and shallow enough to respectively match those of NUV emitters. In addition, it is another challenge to developing host materials with high enough T1 energy levels to support positive energy transfer to NUV phosphors and TADF dopants. Moreover, the sensitivity of the human eye dramatically decreases at the short wavelengths of the visible spectrum, reaching a reduction ratio of even 70% below 450 nm,50 which also limits EQE improvement.
2.3 Basic principles of QDs and perovskites
Since the pioneering QLED reported in 1994 by Colvin,51 colloidal QDs have attracted extensive attention in the field of luminescence, due to their adjustable band gap, electrical properties and wet processibility. Semiconductor QDs are mainly composed of elements from IIB–VIA, IIIA–VA, or IVA–VIA groups. Due to the tiny size of QD on the order of its exciton Bohr radius, the wave functions of electrons and holes in QDs experience the quantum confinement effect, leading to discrete energy levels in QDs, which bring about atom-like spectra featuring a narrow emission. The most significant change of QDs with particle size less than 30 nm is the drastic differences in terms of optical absorption, exciton energies and electron–hole recombination. Therefore, absorption and emission spectra of QDs are strongly size-dependent.52,53 For example, increasing the radius of CdSe QDs from 1.35 to 2.40 nm renders emission peaks red-shifted from 510 to 610 nm. Therefore, the entire visible and near-infrared (NIR) regions have been successfully covered by QD emitters,12,52,53 leaving NUV region as the last challenge.
Similar to the EL process of OLEDs, when QDs are excited by external energy (e.g., photon for photoluminescence, the electric field for electroluminescence, the primary electron for cathodoluminescence, etc.), electron and hole possess high energies through transitions of the electron from the ground state to an excited state. The energies associated with such excitations are directly determined by the electronic structures of the materials. The excited electron and hole may recombine to form an exciton, afterward relax to a lower energy state, ultimately reaching the ground state (Fig. 4a). The released energy during relaxation may be either radiative (emits photon) or nonradiative (emits phonons or Auger electrons). The emissions may originate from band-edge or near band-edge transitions or from defect and/or activator quantum states.54
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of electrical excitation of QLEDs (a) and perovskite LED (b). CB: conduction band; VB: valence band. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Compared to the backlight application utilizing the PL feature of QDs, electrically driven QLEDs are more attractive. In QLEDs, QDs are mainly excited through three ways: energy transfer, direct charge injection into the QDs, and electric field ionization. As show in Fig. 4b, the EL process in QLEDs is similar to OLEDs in terms of carrier injection, transportation and recombination.56 The difference is that electrons and holes are finally confined in conductive and valence bands of QDs, respectively, rather than in HOMO/LUMO of organic molecules. Commonly, QD films are typically composed of only 2–4 monolayers. Charge recombination zones are likely adjacent to CTLs. Therefore, in addition to the surface protection by complicated core–shell structures of QDs, interface optimization is critical to suppress interfacial quenching. It is noted that an appropriate CTL not only can efficiently transport charge carriers but also should passivate surface defects of QDs. Obviously, excited states with higher energy are more sensitive to quenching sites. Different from organic molecules with accurate structures, defect states in QDs inevitably induce quenching on NUV emission. As a consequence, although the first QD-enhanced television was released at the International Consumer Electronics Show (CES) 2013,57 which already marked the maturity of visible QD emitters, until the present, developing efficient NUV QD materials remains a formidable challenge.
Luminescent inorganic and organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites with the formula of ABX3 (A = Cs, FA = formamidinium, MA = methylammonium…; B = Pb, Sn,…; X = Cl, Br, I) have rapidly emerged for device applications (Fig. 4b). Perovskite materials are divided into three categories based on their structure at the nanoscale: 3D and nanostructured 3D perovskites with/without additives and ligands, 2D and quasi-2D perovskites (Ruddlesden–Popper phase perovskites), and zero-dimensional (0D) perovskite nanocrystals (including quantum dots and quasi-0D nanocubes).58 For three-dimensional (3D) MAPb(BrxCl1−x)3 perovskites, the absorption coefficient can reach 5 × 103–5 × 104 cm−1.
The formula of quasi-2D perovskites is A′2An−1PbnX3n+1, where A′ is a large ammonium organic cation, A is the monovalent inorganic cation, X is a halogen (Cl, Br, I), and n is the number of monolayers of the Pb-centered octahedra. A purely 2D structure or thick 3D bulk perovskites are achieved when n = 1 or ∞. Quasi-2D suggests that there exists a combination of 3D and 2D perovskite layers with multiple phases. Although pure 2D materials showed favorable color purity and EL properties, the exciton binding energy for these materials can reach up to 320 meV due to geometric and dielectric effects. In contrast, quasi-2D PeLEDs combine the advantages of pure 2D materials in the exciton confinement induced high color purity and favorable carrier mobility of 3D bulk structures.
Reducing the size of 0D NCs to approach the bulk Bohr radius of the exciton would induce two effects: (i) quantization of the near band-edge states, instead of a continuous density of states, and (ii) the confinement effect, whereby holes and electrons of an exciton are forced by small dimensions of the material into very close proximity.58 This increases the effective band gap, leading to a blue shift of the first absorption and emission peaks compared to the bulk materials, which is undoubtedly beneficial to achieve short-wavelength emissions.
The photophysical process of perovskite begins with the injection of electrons and holes in CB and VB, respectively, via either optical or electrical sources. The dimensionality and structure of perovskite strongly influence the specific photophysical process. After the initial excitation, charge carriers are effectively recombined at the perovskite layer.59 In quasi-2D structure, the bandgap is in reverse proportion to the number of PbI4 monolayer sheets, leading to the formation of multiple quantum wells (QW), which confines excitons on lower-energy-gap QWs by higher-energy-gap QWs (Fig. 4b).55 Therefore, quasi-2D materials already achieved state-of-the-art PL and EL efficiencies.60 Similar to QDs, perovskite NCs also show impressive PLQY and narrow spectra, as well as size-dependent emission peaks. Perovskite NCs allow for a wider gamut of pure colors than the current high-definition standard. Perovskite NCs must retain good passivation to reduce the interface defects. PLQY values of red and green perovskite materials were already beyond 90%, which are comparable to organic dyes. However, PLQY of blue perovskite materials is still below 50%, and even lower, if further blue-shifted to NUV. Two main approaches were commonly adopted to improve the performance of NUV emissions: (i) employing hybrid structures. For example, by introducing the Cl element into high-PLQY CsPbBr3, the band gap of the mixed halogen perovskite CsPbBr3−xClx can be increased, without sacrificing PLQY; (ii) constructing perovskite QDs. It was shown that the quantum confinement effect can be used to tune emissions from blue emissions from bulky structure to NUV emission of perovskite QDs.61
2.4 Challenges in developing efficient NUV EL materials
In the past decades, NUV EL materials and devices achieved rapid development, giving rise to a dramatic EQE increase from several percentages to beyond 20%, which is already comparable to the state-of-the-art values of visible EL devices (Fig. 5). However, it is noteworthy that emission peaks of most of the efficient NUV materials were centralized in the 400–430 nm range, reflecting the great challenge in combining high color purity and efficiency. The key scientific issues of NUV material development are focused on:
 Fig. 5  EQE versus electroluminescence (EL) peak wavelength of NUV OLEDs reported in the literature. Device data are taken from refs. 
(i) Limited conjugation and twisted configuration for achieving NUV emission simultaneously reduce PLQY and fabricability;
(ii) Large barriers for carrier injection and high triplet energy for exciton confinement complicated device structures, but still limit device efficiencies;
(iii) Characterization approaches of NUV device performance are still insufficient, which mostly underestimate the real EL performance of the materials with emission beyond the visible region.
Regarding these challenges, organic FL materials, including hydrocarbon aromatics, p-type, n-type and bipolar emitters, are superior in realizing high PLQY. Functional fragments can be further introduced to modify electrical properties and remedy intermolecular interaction-induced quenching. Due to the radiation process involving only the singlet state, influences of triplet-correlated processes are negligible. Therefore, FL materials provide a feasible approach for realizing high-efficiency PL NUV emission. In comparison, TADF and HLCT materials show the advantages of triplet exciton harvesting. It is noted that enhancing ICT can facilitate RISC processes, but decrease radiative rate constants of CT states. In this sense, the intrinsic drawback of FL emitters in triplet utilization can be complemented by using TADF or HLCT host matrices for the triplet-to-singlet conversion. Since all the singlet excitons finally converge to FL dopants by FRET, superiorities of FL emitters (high PLQY) and TADF/HLCT molecules (100% exciton harvesting) can be combined. On the other hand, increasing molecular rigidity, especially fixing distortion angles between donor and acceptor groups, can effectively improve the radiation probabilities of TADF/HLCT molecules. For phosphors combining the advantages of high PLQY and 100% EUE, ligand engineering provides the feasibility of realizing the NUV emission.
All-inorganic and perovskite QDs can simultaneously achieve excellent spectral purity and high PLQY. In principle, they can realize efficient NUV emission through decreasing size for the hypochromatic shift. The key issue is how to reduce or even eliminate defects in a limited space. Perovskite NCs already show the dependency of structure and optical properties on organic ligand and halogen. Reducing dimension can not only result in emission blue shift but also lead to excitonic behavior and radiative improvement. A multiple QW structure further offers an effective approach to manipulate charge recombination and radiative processes, which can be used to converge excitons to desired NUV domains.
Therefore, developing not only effective design strategies of materials and devices but also measurement technologies are imperative for realizing commercially applicable NUV systems.
3. NUV organic EL materials
3.1 FL OLEDs

3.1.1 Pure hydrocarbon aromatic FL emitters. 
Pure hydrocarbon aromatics feature highly delocalized conjugated systems, which is beneficial to charge transportation and recombination in OLEDs. Meanwhile, their excited-state energy loss through non-radiative transitions, e.g. internal conversion (IC), and excited-state vibrational relaxation, is effectively limited, leading to increased PLQY. The high rigidity of aromatics further enhances thermal and morphological stabilities, beneficial to improve device duration.
Fluorene is an excellent candidate for NUV chromophore with an optical gap of 3.9 eV, high luminescent efficiencies of 60–80% and abundant substitution positions for functionalization. Therefore, by a simple modification, the fluorine-based structures can achieve NUV emission. But the planar structure of fluorene often leads to serious π–π stacking induced quenching. In comparison, 9,9′-spirobifluorene (SF) can effectively restrain intermolecular interactions with the large steric hindrance of spiro structure, and simultaneously preserve short π-conjugation of fluorine by 9-saturated carbon-insulating linkage, which not only enhances thermal and morphological stabilities but also retains NUV emission and high PLQY.
Wong et al. made a comparison between bi(9,9′-spirobifluorene) B2 (1) and the other two planar bi(9,9-diarylfluorene)s T2 (2) and TB2 (3) (Fig. 6).62 PL emissions of these three emitters contain two main peaks around 370 and 390 nm, accompanied by PLQY of 57–66% in a thin film. By directly using 1–3 as EMLs, the nondoped devices exhibited NUV EL emissions similar to the corresponding PL emissions. In spite of the large energy gaps of 1–3 (∼3.6 eV), their devices achieved rather low turn-on voltages (Von) of 2.5 V. The device employing 1 as the EML gives the highest maximum EQE of 3.6% and the biggest maximum brightness reaching 4890 cd m−2 at 11 V. The NUV OLED was further used to pump conventional red, green and blue (RGB) FL dyes, indicating the potential as an alternative to NUV excitation light source. They simultaneously reported a trimer of 9,9′-spirobifluorene SSS (4) with further extended conjugation, which still exhibits NUV PL and EL emissions consisting of similar vibrational peaks at about 370 and 390 nm and comparable PLQY and EQE of 56% and 2.6%, respectively (Fig. 6).63
 Fig. 6  Chemical structures of fluorene-polyaromatic hydrocarbon-based NUV emitters. Photograph: NUV OLED based on 3 pump solutions of RGB FL dyes. λEL: electroluminescence emission wavelength. CIE: Commission Internationale de L’Eclairage 1931 coordinates. EQEmax: the maximum EQE. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2005, John Wiley & Sons. 
Even incorporating other short conjugated substituents, e.g. naphthyl in 1SBFN (5) and 2SBFN (6), or extending conjugation with conjugated linkers, e.g. BSBFN (7) and TSBFN (8), SF derivatives can still perverse NUV emissions (Fig. 7).64 PL peaks of 5–8 in films were in the range of 369–399 nm, which were in accordance with EL emissions of their OLEDs peaked at 382–395 nm, accompanied by the maximum EQEs of 1.6–2.9%, respectively. Furthermore, HOMO and LUMO energy levels of SF derivatives are about −6.10 eV and −2.60 eV, which can match with ETL materials but have a large gap to HTL. Therefore, HTL materials with deep enough HOMOs and high hole mobility can enhance exciton confinement in EMLs of SF materials to achieve desired NUV emissions. For example, using 4,4′,4′′-tris(carbazol-9-yl)-triphenylamine (TCTA) with the HOMO at −5.7 eV instead of N,N′-bis(naphthalen-1-yl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine (NPB) can get rid of a blue shoulder peak in EL spectra of 6 based OLEDs, rendering a maximum EQE of 2.0%.65
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures of spirobifluorene-polyaromatic hydrocarbon-based NUV emitters. 
Anthracene is another highly emissive chromophore widely used to construct blue EL materials. Considering its main peak at 410 nm, modification of anthracene core should be accurate to avoid a large emission red shift. For example, Wong et al. simply used an aliphatic butoxy group to modify the aggregation behaviour of a 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA) core in BBPA (9) (Fig. 8).669 inherits a high PLQY of ∼90% from the DPA core. NUV EL emission from 9-based OLED was peaked at 412 nm with a small full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 43 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.03). Such a simple molecule already endows its device with an impressive EQE of up to 6.02%.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of anthracene/pyrene-polyaromatic hydrocarbon-based NUV emitters. 
The molecular distortion can be utilized to control the π-conjugation of anthracene derivatives. BD1 (10) as a phenylene-linked DPA dimer revealed two anthracene rings twisted from the central benzene core by dihedral angles 81° and 82°, which effectively interrupt π-conjugation to avoid emission bathochromic shift (Fig. 8).67 The PL emission of a neat film of 10 peaks at 443 nm with a PLQY of 14%. Nonetheless, using 10 as non-doped EML can still achieve deep-blue/NUV emission centered 432 nm, with an FWHM of 52 nm and CIE coordinates of (0.17, 0.03), accompanied by the maximum current efficiency (CE), power efficiency (PE) and EQE of 6.7 cd A−1, 6.2 lm W−1 and 5.6%. Doping 3 wt% 10 in N,N′-dicarbazolyl-4,4′-biphenyl (CBP) induced EL peak blue-shifted to 424 nm with an FWHM of 44 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.05). The maximum EQE was further improved to a state-of-the-art value of 8.9%, which is outstanding among FL devices. Recently, Promarak et al. constructed polyaromatic emitter αNABP (11) using 2,2′-dimethylbiphenyl core substituted with two 9-(naphthalen-1-yl)anthracene groups (Fig. 8).68 Large steric effect of ortho-methyl induces significant distortion of 11, whose adjacent aromatic groups are mutually perpendicular. PLQY of CBP:5 wt% 11 film reached 74%. The corresponding OLED showed an emission peak at 418 nm with a narrow FWHM of 47 nm, accompanied by the maximum luminance and EQE of 1909 cd m−2 and 2.38%, respectively.
Pyrene has comprehensive properties, including a PLQY of 0.60, high thermal stability and good electrical properties, making it competent as an important building block of organic EL molecules. However, the too rigid and planar structure of pyrene worsens self-aggregation-induced quenching. It was shown that modification with host-featured 3,5-diphenylphenyl groups can effectively remedy π–π stacking between pyrene units of DPPP (12) (Fig. 8).69 PL emission of the 12-film peaks at 410 nm with a PLQY of 37%. The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of 12 are −5.65 and −2.55 eV, respectively, matching with HTL and ETL materials. Therefore, non-doped OLED of 12 showed a stable and efficient NUV emission peaking at 396 nm with a narrow FWHM of ∼50 nm and CIE coordinates of (0.160, 0.041) at 100 cd m−2. Furthermore, a favourable maximum EQE of 2.2% was achieved, which remained at 1.6% at the practical luminance of 1000 cd m−2.


3.1.2 p-Type emitter. 
Based on the electron-donating effect of heteroatoms, e.g. N, O, S with a lone pair of electrons, heteroatom compounds, especially arylamines, e.g. carbazole (Cz) and triphenylamine (TPA), possess FL peak wavelengths less than 400 nm and good hole-transporting abilities, in addition to the T1 energy level reaching ∼3.0 eV. Therefore, they are widely adopted as building blocks to construct p-type NUV emitters.
Simply linking two fluorine groups with a phenylamine generated a NUV emitter F2PA (13) (Fig. 9).70 Despite the small molecular structure, 13 achieves a PLQY of 56% and a suitable HOMO–LUMO energy gap of 3.12 eV for balanced carrier injection. 13 has also improved phase stability during device operation, as evidence by a glass transition temperature (Tg) of 82 °C. Owing to the appropriate energy barriers between 13 and the adjacent layers, 13 based OLED exhibited an EL emission peak at 405 nm and a maximum EQE of 1.95%.
 Fig. 9  Chemical structures of star-shaped p-type NUV emitters. 
With good luminescent properties, Cz can be directly used as a chromophore to construct star-shaped MTPC-Me (14)71 and MTPC-Et (15) (Fig. 9).72 1,3,6,8-Tetraphenyl was incorporated to restrain intermolecular π–π stacking between Cz cores. Compared to the Cz core, the electron-donating effect of N-alkyl slightly changed the frontier molecular orbital (FMO) energy levels of 14 and 15 to −5.2 and −2.0 eV, respectively. OLED using pure 14 as EML revealed NUV emission with a maximum at 396 nm and a narrow FWHM of 40 nm, as well as a maximum EQE of 1.2%. The EL emission peak of 15 based OLED was slightly blue shifted to 408 nm, but its maximum EQE was more than doubled to 3.3%.
Linear diamine molecules can also be used as NUV EL emitters. Actually, Shinar et al. demonstrated NUV PL and EL emissions peaked at 390 nm from CBP (16), which is commonly used as a host matrix (Fig. 10).73 A maximum EQE of 1.25% was achieved by 16 based non-doped OLED. They further reported NUV OLED-based TPD (17) as an emitter, which is a conventional HTL material (Fig. 10).12 By using a hole-blocking layer (HBL) of F-TBB with the deeper HOMO level at 6.3 eV, excitons were confined in 17 based EML, giving rise to NUV EL emission from 17 peaking at 404 nm. The OLED realized an impressive maximum luminance of 3960 cd m−2 and a maximum EQE of 1.4%.
 Fig. 10  Chemical structures of linear p-type NUV emitters. 
Kaafarani et al. used tetrahydropyrene as the linker instead of diphenylene in 16 and obtained two NUV emitters (18) and (19) (Fig. 10).74 Compared to pyrene, the influence of tetrahydropyrene on emission color is relatively limited. Therefore, PL peaks of 18 and 19 in N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF) were at 381 and 389 nm, which was markedly blue-shifted by 48 and 61 nm, respectively, compared to pyrene-bridged congeners. PLQY values of 18 and 19 were 49% and 69%, respectively, which were also higher than that of pyrene-bridged derivatives (44% and 42%). OLEDs using 18 and 19 as EMLs showed EL peaks at 422 and 425 nm, corresponding to CIE of (0.159, 0.046) and (0.193, 0.078), respectively.
Besides arylamine, oxygen heterocyclic rings are also electron-rich π-conjugated systems with hole transporting abilities. Ma et al. developed a dibenzo-[d,f][1,3]dioxepin derivative (20), whose intramolecular hydrogen bonds between oxygen bridge and 2,2′-hydrogens enhanced structural planarity and rigidity, giving rise to solid-state PL and EL emissions peaked at 363 and 372 nm, respectively, and a high PLQY of 86% (Fig. 10).75 Dibenzofuran was also directly used to modify phenanthrene chromophore.76 The resulting 21 endowed its OLED with NUV emission peaking at 380 nm.
Introducing heteroatoms into fused rings can simultaneously increase excited energy levels and improve electroactivity. Lee et al. reported an indolo[3,2,1-jk]carbazole-based emitter (22).18 Its nitrogen-centered tripod structure is surrounded by three fused aromatic rings, rendering a rigid multi-resonance structure. Despite FMOs dispersed over the whole molecule, HOMO and LUMO were largely separated by the resonance effect of nitrogen atoms (Fig. 11a). Nevertheless, 22 exhibited a typical 1LE-attributed emission with a peak wavelength of 393 nm and 3 nm of Stokes shift. Furthermore, steric hindrance of peripheral t-butyls retrained intermolecular aggregation and packing. Therefore, 22 achieved a PLQY of 60% in 1 wt% doped film. To balance carrier flux, a mixed host matrix of p-type 3,3-di(9H-carbazol-9-yl)biphenyl (mCBP) and n-type diphenyl(4-(triphenylsilyl)phenyl)phosphine oxide (TSPO1) was used to fabricate 22-based OLED, which revealed NUV emission peak at ∼400 nm with a narrow FWHM of 14 nm, CIE coordinates were 0.164, 0.018 (Fig. 11b) and the maximum EQE was 3.3% (Fig. 11c).
 Fig. 11  (a) The frontier molecular orbital distribution of 22. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum of the 22 devices at 4.5 V. (c) Key information on maximum EQE. Inset: Chemical structures of p-type NUV emitters. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. 


3.1.3 n-Type FL emitter. 
Electron acceptors used in n-type NUV emitters included triazole, pyrazine, oxadiazole, and imidazole, which also served as skeletons. The electron-deficient nature of these heterocyclic groups can improve electron injection and transportation in EMLs. It is noted that rationally managing the LUMO energy level with acceptors is of significance, since the too strong electron-withdrawing effect would deepen the LUMO and narrow ΔEopt, leading to emission red-shift.
A conventional electron transporting material TAZ (23) can be directly used as a NUV emitter (Fig. 12). OLEDs employing 23 as EML realized EL emissions with a maximum at 376–380 nm and a narrow FWHM of 34–40 nm. The maximum EQE values of 23-based devices also reached 2.1–4.6%. Zang et al. compared NUV EL performance of hole-transporting 16 and electron-transporting 23.77 In contrast to 16 with the EL peak at 410 nm, the deeper HOMO (−6.6 eV) of 23 enlarged ΔEopt, rendering the pure NUV EL emission. A trilayer OLEDs using 23 as EML and HBL revealed the maximum radiance of 5.8 mW cm−2 and EQE of 2.1%, accompanied by the emission peak at 380 nm. Wei et al. adopted a double-stacked HIL of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)|MoOx to enhance surface work function for improving hole injection and carrier flux balance in 23-based OLEDs.44,78 Besides the EL emission peak at 377 nm and an FWHM of 35 nm, EQE was further improved to 4.6%, accompanied by a maximum radiance of 12.2 mW cm−2, which is the highest value for 23 and among the best results of true-NUV OLEDs. Other inorganic semiconductors, e.g. MoS2 and vanadium oxide (h-VOx), can also optimize interface work function.43,79 MoS2 and h-VOx supported 23 based devices with the maximum EQE of 4.14% and 2.92% and the radiance of 11.9 mW and 15.3 mW cm−2, respectively.
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures of n-type NUV emitters containing nitrogen cyclic rings and cyano groups. 
1,3,4-Oxadiazole is another conventional five-member heteroatom cyclic acceptor with high electron affinity and mobility, which was commonly used in ETL materials, e.g. PBD (24) (Fig. 12). In 1995, Inganäs et al. firstly reported NUV EL from 24.80 They fabricated bilayer OLEDs using neat 24 as EML, which realized a NUV emission peaking at 394 nm. However, the maximum EQE of this device was only 0.1%, due to unbalanced carrier injection and transportation, and the low transmittance of a glass substrate in the UV region. Therefore, based on a multilayer device structure with improved carrier flux balance and especially a Sb2O3/Ag/Sb2O3 multilayer film with a transmittance >80% in the UV region as an anode. Liu et al. dramatically improved the maximum EQE of 24 to 4.1%, accompanied by a pure-NUV emission peaking at 376 nm with a radiance of 5.18 mW cm−2.42
Phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazole (PI) is a bifunctional group as luminescent phenanthrene chromophore fused electron-transporting imidazole. Furthermore, deprotonation of imidazole group at the NH position can be utilized to involve various substituents with different functions, e.g., large steric hindrance to prevent π–π stacking and other intermolecular interactions, system extension, and so on.81 Tong et al. reported a triangle-shaped molecule PPI-2BI (25) (Fig. 12).82 NUV OLED of 30% 25 doped in CBP realized an emission peak at 432 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.154, 0.047), and the maximum efficiencies of 1.78 cd A−1, 1.45 lm W−1 and 4.12%.
In addition to five-member aromatic rings, six-member electron-deficient cyclic acceptors with favourable electron injection and transport abilities are also widely used in ETL materials. PTCDI (26) is a conventional acceptor unit adopted in OLEDs and solar cells, but also exhibited pure-NUV EL emission peaked at 370 nm (Fig. 12).45 Park et al. developed an indenopyrazine chromophore to construct a NUV molecule p-TP-EPY (27), which was further substituted with two host-featured m-terphenyl groups at ortho positions.83 The HOMO and LUMO energy levels were −6.07 and −2.99 eV, respectively, which can match HTL and ETL. It was shown that emission color purity was related to the substitution position of m-terphenyl groups, and para-substituted 27 showed the shorter peak wavelengths at 415 nm in chloroform and 426 nm in the film with an FWHM of 43 nm, accompanied by a PLQY of 61%. 27 based OLED achieved EL emission with a maximum at 423 nm and a FWHM of 42 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.173, 0.063), and the maximum efficiencies of 0.59 cd A−1, 0.24 lm W−1 and 1.88%.
Besides heterocyclic acceptors, cyano features an electron-withdrawing effect with limited conjugation, therefore deepening LUMO to increase ΔEopt. Jou et al. reported a cyano capped fluorene-ethyne trimer C3FLA-2 (28) (Fig. 12),84 which revealed NUV emission with the peak at 413 nm and PLQY as high as 0.99 in the solution. 28-Based OLED was fabricated by solution processing, which achieved the maximum EQE of 5.8% at 100 cd m−2, the maximum luminance of 1253 cd m−2 and EL emission peaked at 416 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.156, 0.055).
As a cyanation derivative of 11, BD2 (29) in the CBP host matrix with 3 wt% doping concentration could realize EL emission with the peak at 430 nm (Fig. 13a).67 It was shown that introducing a single cyano can deepen HOMO and LUMO energy levels by 0.06 eV and 0.01 eV, respectively, rendering a bathochromic shift of 4 nm but an increased PLQY of 23% compared to 14% of BD1. Based on the same trilayer nondoped structure, 29 increased the efficiencies of its OLED to 4.9 cd A−1, 4.8 lm W−1 and 9.5% (Fig. 13b).
 Fig. 13  (a) Key information on maximum EQE. Inset: Chemical structures of cyano-modified n-type NUV emitters. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum of the 29 devices. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons. 


3.1.4 Ambipolar FL emitter. 
Compared with unipolar p type or n type emitters, ambipolar emitters can be involved in both hole and electron injections and transportation, therefore facilitating carrier recombination and exciton confinement in EML. For nondoped devices, ambipolar emitters improve charge flux balance, further increasing deice efficiencies.
Yang et al. constructed a meta-linked D–A molecule mTPA–PPI (30), in which triphenylamine (TPA) and PI served as D and A groups, respectively (Fig. 14).4630 contained a rotatable phenyl bridge between the imidazole ring at the C-2 position and TPA at the C-4 position. Rigid PI skeleton and rotatable linkage were beneficial to improve thermal and morphological stability without sacrificing electron-transport ability and high triplet energy level that originated from the PI unit. As a result, the decomposition temperature (Td) of 30 reached 467 °C. Simultaneously, PI and TPA units effectively facilitated the electron and hole injections and transportation, through reducing injection barriers at the interface between CTL and EML, improving carrier recombination. Quantum chemical calculations revealed that the meta-linkage structure induced 1LE-featured emission. Despite PLQY of as low as 35%, the non-doped device based on 30 as EML revealed an emission peak at 405 nm with an FWHM of 47 nm, corresponding to a CIE coordinates of (0.161, 0.049), and a maximum EQE of 3.33%.
 Fig. 14  Chemical structures of ambipolar NUV emitters based on phenanthroimidazole (PI), phenylimidazole (PBI) and difluorobenzene as acceptors, and carbazole, triphenylamine and spirofluorene as donors. 
The combination of Cz and PI groups gave rise to two NUV emitters M1 (31) and M2 (32) (Fig. 14).85 In contrast to the D–A structure of 31, one more PI moiety was introduced at the C-3 position of Cz in 32, which provided one more electron transport channel. Nevertheless, slight conjugation extension from Cz to 3-PI groups decreased ΔEopt from 3.24 eV of 31 to 3.18 eV of 32, corresponding to a 7 nm bathochromic shift of emission. Moreover, one more rigid PI moiety increased Td of 32 by ∼100 °C in contrast to 31. Non-doped trilayer devices of 31 and 32 exhibited NUV emissions centered at 420 nm and 428 nm, respectively, with a narrow FWHM of 40 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.17, 0.05). Compared to 0.65 cd A−1, 0.48 lm W−1 and 1.94% of 31 based devices, 32 further improving efficiencies of its device to 1.53 cd A−1, 0.86 lm W−1 and 3.02%. Considering the similar PLQYs of ∼60%, 50% increased EQE of 32 based OLED was mainly attributed to more balanced carrier flux supported by 32 with doubled electron-transporting channels.
Similar to PI, phenylbenzimidazole (PBI) is a common electron-withdrawing group used in ETL materials, e.g. 1,3,5-tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi). Jabbour et al. reported a bipolar material Cz-2pbb (33) as a hybrid of two PBI substituted Cz moieties (Fig. 14).86 The PLQY of 33 in toluene was ∼65%. Despite the emission peak of ∼430 nm in the film due to intermolecular interactions, spin-coated device-based CBP doped 33 revealed an EL peak at 410 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.05). But, the EL peak of the nondoped device at 435 nm was identical to PL emission. EQE of the doped device was 4.1% at the maximum and remained 2.9% at 500 cd m−2.
As an opposite molecular design, PIBCz (34) was a hybrid of two Cz groups linked by a PI-acceptor at C6- and C9-positions, for limiting conjugation extension and ICT interaction (Fig. 14).8734 exhibited high Td of 480 °C, a favorable PLQY of 50% in the film and the appropriate HOMO/LUMO levels (−5.3/−2.1 eV), in addition to NUV emission peaking at 414 nm. The EL emission peak of its non-doped devices was identically at 414 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.05). The improved carrier injection, transportation and recombination in EML further induced a low Von of 2.7 V and maximum efficiencies of 1.28 cd A−1, 1.12 lm W−1 and 2.74%, respectively.
PI and PBI were further mixed and used as groups to form TPA-PPI-NPBI (35) with TPA as a donor (Fig. 14).88 Besides hole and electron transport balance, the asymmetric configuration of 35 remedied intermolecular interaction induced emission quenching. Therefore, 35 achieved PLQYs of 61% and 73% in dichloromethane and the film, respectively. The EL emission of 35 from its non-doped OLED was centered at 429 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.05). In addition to the maximum luminance of 3366 cd m−2, the efficiencies of the device reached 2.60 cd A−1, 2.72 lm W−1 and 5.59% for the maximum, respectively, which remained as 4.18% at 1000 cd m−2.
Instead of heterocyclic A groups, difluorobenzene was incorporated in 2FPPICz (36) to form the D–A–A structure with PI and Cz groups (Fig. 14).89 Besides enhancing the electron-withdrawing effect, the steric hindrance of fluorophenyl at N-position restrained π–π stacking in the solid-state. FL emission from 36 peaked at 430 nm with a PLQY of 53%. Non-doped OLED based on 36 exhibited EL emission centered at 425 nm, accompanied by the maximum luminance of 3835 cd m−2 and the maximum efficiencies of 1.8 cd A−1, 1.7 lm W−1, and 4.3%. In reverse, besides arylamines, large conjugated groups as electron-rich systems can also be used as donors to construct ambipolar NUV emitters. 4-PPI-SBF (37) included PI and SF, respectively, as and D groups (Fig. 14).90 PLQY of 37-film reached 66%. The non-doped device adopting 37 as EML achieved the maximum EQE of 5.29%, along with the emission peak at 424 nm and CIE color coordinates of (0.155, 0.058). As an FL emitter, 37 achieved an unexpected EUE of 40%.
The high planarity of PI makes it easy for aggregation. Therefore, the bulky group is indispensable for improving solid-state emission efficiencies. Tetraphenylbenzene (TPB) was used to modify the PI skeleton at the C-2 position, accompanied by introducing hole and electron transporting groups TPA, CZ, phenyl, pyridinyl and PBI at the N-position of PI (Fig. 15).91 As a result, 38–42, TPB induced emission hypochromatic shift, and reduced π–π stacking in the solid state, rendering high PLQY of 60–92% for 38–42 films. Different substituents at N-position hardly changed ΔEopt of 38–42, which was in the range of 3.17–3.19 eV, leading to similar emissions from non-doped devices of 38–42 with peak wavelengths of 420–430 nm, corresponding to the CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.05). 48 achieved the highest efficiencies with the maxima of 3.22 cd A−1, 2.71 lm W−1 and 5.94%, respectively, and EQE of 4.93% at 1000 cd m−2.
 Fig. 15  Chemical structures of NUV emitters based on PI, tetraphenylbenzene (TPB) and diverse functional groups. 
Lu et al. reported a series of tetraphenylsilane (TPS)-bridged FL emitters, in which CzPySiSF (43) featured TPS bridged Cz, pyridine and SF groups (Fig. 16).92 TPS had a large band gap of 4.0 eV, high thermal stability and good morphological properties. More importantly, TPS insulated the conjugation and electronic communications between Cz, pyridine and SF groups. SF chromophore provided efficient NUV emission; while, Cz and pyridine as D and A groups facilitated carrier injection and transportation balance. 43 revealed nearly identical NUV PL and EL emissions with peaks at 408 nm.
 Fig. 16  Chemical structures of ambipolar NUV emitters containing tetraphenylsilane skeleton and purine acceptors. 
Purines featuring pyrimidine fused imidazole with strong electron-withdrawing ability can be employed as a chromophore of EL emitters. OLEDs based on (44) with dimethylamine as the D group achieved peak emission at 430 nm with a FWHM of 60 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.06), accompanied by the maximum EQE of 3.1% and a low Von of 2.9 V (Fig. 16).93 It was shown that using amino instead of dimethylamine induced a bathochromic shift of 40 nm in (45) film, accompanied by PLQY reduction, which was due to intermolecular hydrogen bond induced aggregation (Fig. 16).94 Doping 5 wt% of 45 in 1,3-bis(9H-carbazol-9-yl)benzene (mCP) host matrix effectively remedied self-aggregation of 45, giving rise to pure-NUV EL emission peaking at 393 nm with EQE up to 1.6%.
TPA was used as a linker to bridge three various fluorinated phenyl groups, giving rise to TPA-T, TPA-(2)-F, TPA-(3)-F, TPA-(4)-F, TPA-(2,4)-F, TPA-(3,5)-CF3 (46–51) (Fig. 17).95 In addition to hole-transporting TPA core, F and CF3 substituents can improve stability and electron transportability by simultaneously decreasing the HOMO and LUMO energy levels, leading to charge flux balance and efficient charge recombination. PL emission peaks of 46–51 films were around 390–419 nm, due to ΔEopt of 46–51 larger than 3.13 eV, accompanied by PLQYs of 11–35%. The nondoped devices of 46–51 exhibited slightly red-shifted emission peaks between 408 and 428 nm, and FWHMs of 41–87 nm. Among them, 47 realized the shortest emission peak wavelength of 408 nm with a maximum CE of 0.38 cd A−1. In reverse, triphenylpyridine was used as an electron-withdrawing linker to form star-shaped (52) with three Cz groups (Fig. 17).9652 endowed its nondoped device with NUV emission peaking at 408 nm and a maximum EQE of 2.56%.
 Fig. 17  Chemical structures of star-shaped ambipolar NUV emitters. 
Owing to its limited conjugation, the cyano group can be combined with chromophores and D groups with larger conjugation for NUV emission. (53) was based on Cz-fluorene hybrid skeleton linked with an acetylene spacer and capped with two cyano groups (Fig. 18).97 The device employing an EML of 1 wt% 53-doped CBP exhibited an emission peak wavelength at 404 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.04). The maximum efficiencies reached 0.8 cd A−1, 0.5 lm W−1 and 3.1%, accompanied by a maximum luminance of 1168 cd m−2. The direct linking of cyanocarbazole with various aryl groups generated a series of NUV emitters (54–58) (Fig. 18).98 PLQYs of 54–58 were in the range of 28–80%. 56–58 revealed a positive solvatochromism effect, reflecting marked CT components in their excited states. 58 with a PLQY of 72% supported NUV emission peaking at 416 nm with an FWHM of 64 nm to its doped OLED, as well as the maximum efficiencies of 1.1 cd A−1, 0.7 lm W−1 and 3.1%, respectively.
 Fig. 18  Chemical structures of linear ambipolar NUV emitters based on Cz skeletons. 
Sulfone and sulfoxide have a strong electron-withdrawing effect. HMAT2SO (59) and HMAT2SO2 (60) feature the structures of sulfone and sulfoxide linked two hexamethylazatriangulene donors (Fig. 19),99 giving rise to an intense FL emission peaking at 392 and 401 nm with narrow FWHMs of 40 and 43 nm, respectively. The employment of sulfoxide significantly enhanced PLQY from 41% to 100%. However, both these emitters had large ΔEST values of 0.57 and 0.42 eV, respectively, excluding their TADF characteristics. Therefore, OLEDs based on 12 wt% 60 doped 2,8-bis(diphenylphosphoryl)dibenzofuran (PPF) exhibited an emission peak at 420 nm, an FWHM of 53 nm and CIE coordinates of (0.159, 0.064). The maximum efficiencies were 0.99 cd A−1, 0.68 lm W−1 and 2.15%, respectively.
 Fig. 19  Absorption (dashed) and emission (solid) spectra in toluene for sulfoxide/sulfone emitters (a) 59 and (b) 60. Inset: Photographs under illumination at 365 nm. 
Phosphine oxide (PO) is widely used in high-energy-gap host100–105 and electron transporting materials,106–109 owing to its insulating and inductive effects and steric hindrance. PO group can efficiently polarize the molecules with an electron-withdrawing effect to enhance electron injection and transportation. Simultaneously, as an insulating linkage, PO blocks intermolecular electronic communications, preserving excited energy levels of chromophores.110 In this sense, PO is an “ideal” A group for constructing ambipolar NUV emitters.
Based on an “indirect linkage” strategy,111 two ternary emitters 9DPNAFSPO (61) and 9TPAFSPO (62) were constructed by combining arylamine donors, diphenylphosphine oxide (DPPO) and fluorene chromophore (Fig. 20).112 The saturated 9-C of fluorene as indirect linkage blocked D–A electronic communications, preserving high excited energy levels of 61 and 62. Both of them exhibited bright NUV emissions in solution with peaks at 435 and 407 nm, respectively. Despite their PLQYs of 19% and 46%, ambipolar characteristics of 61 and 62 balanced carrier injection, transportation, and recombination in their nondoped devices. The recombination efficiency of holes and electrons reached 100% and 60%, respectively. 61 and 62 realized deep-blue EL emissions with CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.07) and (0.16, 0.07), respectively. Both devices had low turn-on voltages of 3.1 and 3.3 V, respectively. In comparison to 1.18 cd A−1, 1.13 lm W−1 and 1.96% of 61-based devices, 62 achieved higher efficiencies with the maxima of 1.50 cd A−1, 2.19 lm W−1 and 2.71%.
 Fig. 20  Chemical structures of DPPO modified ambipolar NUV emitters. 
By virtue of the “multi-insulating” strategy,113 four TPA-DPPO hybrids DPESPOTPA (63), DPESPOTPA2 (64), DPESPOTPA3 (65) and DPEPOTPA (66) were developed by using TPA as a donor, DPPO as acceptor and diphenylether (DPE) as a linker (Fig. 20).114 Taking the advantage of insulating effects for DPPO and DPE linker, 63–66 had large S1 energy levels of 3.47, 3.29, 3.19 and 3.27 eV, respectively, giving rise to their NUV emissions in the film. PL peak wavelengths of 63–66 were 407, 414, 413 and 422 nm, respectively. For 63–65, PLQYs increased from 90% (63) to 100% (65), which is in direct proportion to TPA number. PLQY of 66 with two DPPO groups was the lowest as 40%. Nondoped devices based on 63–66 exhibited NUV emissions with the CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.08), (0.16, 0.06), (0.15, 0.05) and (0.15, 0.07), respectively. The maximum luminance of 2444 cd m−2 was realized by device based on 64, accompanied by the maximum efficiencies of 1.00 cd A−1, 1.01 lm W−1 and 1.70%.
Recently, Wang et al. reported an ambipolar emitter m-PO15NCzDPA (67) employing DPA as chromophore, 1,5-diazarcarbazole as a donor and DPPO as an acceptor, respectively (Fig. 21).115 The mesa-linkage enhanced structural distortion, which restrained intramolecular π–π stacking, resulting in PLQY of as high as 96%. High molecular rigidity of 67 further leads to improved Td and Tg of 452 and 145 °C, respectively. With the balanced carrier transporting abilities, a quasi-single-layer nondoped device using 67 simultaneously as HTL, EML and ETL were fabricated, which revealed an emission peak at 428 nm with an FWHM of 56 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.159, 0.046), and the maximum efficiencies of 2.72 cd A−1, 2.25 lm W−1, and 3.00%, respectively.
 Fig. 21  EQE–luminance relationship of OLEDs based on 67. Inset: Chemical structure and the frontier molecular orbital distributions of 67. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 

3.2 NUV phosphorescent EL materials
It is a challenge to develop NUV phosphors since it is difficult to shift PH from CT-featured triplet states of heavy-metal complexes, e.g. metal-to-ligand CT (3MLCT), to the NUV region. Regarding this issue, carbene-based phosphors have shallow LUMO, leading to enlarged HOMO–LUMO gaps, in addition to moderate triplet lifetime. So, this type of material is promising as deep-blue or NUV PH emitters.
Two carbine-based facial and meridianal isomers fac- and mer-Ir(pmb)3 (68) were developed, whose first triplet transition occurred at 389 nm and 395 nm for fac- and mer-isomers, respectively, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.17, 0.06) (Fig. 22a).116 To confine excitons on 68, a high-energy-gap host p-bis(triphenylsilyly)benzene (UGH2) with the T1 energy level of ∼3.5 eV was adopted, whose HOMO and LUMO energy levels of −7.2 and −2.8 eV were, respectively, deeper than those of 68 (−5.0 and −1.8 eV), which formed hole trap on the PH dopant. But, the electron captured by 68 was energetically unfavorable. Nevertheless, PH OLEDs of 68 still achieved moderate EQE of 2.6% and 5.8% and PE of 0.5 lm W−1, and 1.7 lm W−1, respectively.
 Fig. 22  (a) Chemical structures of NUV phosphorescent materials. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum of the 70 devices. (c) Key information on maximum EQE. Inset: Crystal structure of 70 plotted with 50% probability ellipsoids. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. 
Using pyridoimidazole instead of PBI moiety in 68 generated fac- and mer-Ir(pmp)3 (69) (Fig. 22a).118 The electronegativity of nitrogen in pyridoimidazole decreased the reduction potential of 69 (−2.77 V) relative to that of 68 (−3.19 V). Pyridoimidazole enhanced reduction induced red shift of absorption and emission for 69. Nevertheless, 69 achieved a higher PLQY beyond 75%, in comparison to 37% of 68. PLQY improvement was partially due to the stabilization of the emissive triplet state by the presence of the nitrogen atom in the pyridoimidazol-2-yl moiety, which modulated the LUMO energy level. EQEs of 10.1–14.4% were obtained by devices of 69, in addition to high brightness (>7800 cd m−2) and CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.09).
3-Methyl-1-(3/4-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-1H-3λ4-imidazole was used as a ligand to prepare (70) (Fig. 22b), whose CF3 groups on the para position of C–Ir bond was more electron-withdrawing, leading to 80 mV anodic shift of the first oxidation potential of cyclic voltammetry curve.117 PLQY of 70 in dichloromethane was 72%. Based on a vacuum-deposited OLED, 70 displayed EL emission with the peak at 430 nm and CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.05) (Fig. 22b). EQE reached 13.4% for the maximum and remained at 12.5% at 100 cd m−2 (Fig. 22c).
3.3 NUV TADF EL materials
Due to the contradiction between NUV emission and ΔEST reduction, it is still a challenge to develop NUV TADF emitters with appropriate ICT strength. It is commonly believed that optimizing the D–A combination and regulating their linkage is feasible for achieving NUV TADF emission.
To shift the emission to the NUV region, at least one of the D and A groups should have a not strong electronic effect. Meng et al. reported a high-efficiency NUV TADF emitter TN4T-PCZ (71), which employed a weak Cz donor and a weak pyridine acceptor (Fig. 23).16 To enhance ICT, –CF3 substituents were further introduced at ortho-positions of pyridine to form D–A–A structure. HOMO and LUMO were mostly separated and mainly located on Cz and pyridine moieties, but slightly overlapped on phenyl linker. In the toluene solution, 71 revealed an emission peak at 411 nm with an FWHM of 59 nm, corresponding to ΔEopt of 3.2 eV and CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.03). More importantly, the appropriate ICT reduced ΔEST of 71 to 0.10 eV, but still supported a PLQY as high as 87%. The rigid structure simultaneously endowed 71 with an extremely high Tg beyond 200 °C. The doped-device based on 6 wt% 71 doped (2,6-bis(3-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)pyridine) (2,6-DCzppy) achieved a similar NUV emission peaked at 412 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.03). Compared to HOMO and LUMO energy levels of 71 at −5.76 eV and −2.56 eV, 2,6-DCzppy (HOMO of −6.1 eV and LUMO of −2.6 eV) can effectively confine excitons on the dopants, therefore rendering the maximum CE of 5.01 cd A−1 and the record maximum EQE of as high as 20.4%. It is noteworthy that the EQE roll-off at the practical luminance of 1000 cd m−2 was only 5%, which was outstanding among TADF diodes.
 Fig. 23  EQE vs. luminance curves for the device based on 71. Inset: Chemical structure and the HOMO and LUMO distributions of 71. 
Sulfone is one of the most used acceptors for constructing blue TADF emitters, owing to its appropriate electron-withdrawing effect and non-conjugated structure. It was shown that the electronic effect of sulfone was highly sensitive to its distance to D groups. For CzS1 (72) and CzS2 (73) with a diphenyl linker between sulfone and Cz groups, despite their NUV EL emissions peaking at ∼420 nm with the CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.05), the maximum efficiencies were only 1.89 cd A−1, 1.58 lm W−1 and 4.2% for 72 and 0.82 cd A−1, 0.84 lm W−1 and 2.7% for 73, respectively (Fig. 24a),119 which were comparable to their SF-substituted analog (74).120
 Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structures of sulfone containing NUV emitters 72–74. (b) The relationship between molecular structures, the HOMO/LUMO energy levels and gaps of 75 and 76. (c) EQE–current density curves of 75 and 76 based OLEDs. (d) Electroluminescence spectra and CIE coordinates of 75 and 76 based devices. 
The development of TADF emitters featuring emission peak wavelengths of less than 400 nm is extremely formidable, which requires delicate modulation of the first CT excited state (1CT) characteristics. In 2012, Adachi et al. reported a diphenyl sulfone (DPS)-3,6-di-tert-butylcarbazole (tBCz) hybrid CZ-PS (75) (Fig. 24b).121 Owing to the shallow LUMO of DPS at −2.42 eV, ΔEopt of 75 reached 3.29 eV. Nevertheless, PL peaks of 75 in toluene and its 10 wt% doped bis(2-(diphenylphosphino)phenyl)ether oxide (DPEPO) film were still at 404 and 423 nm, respectively, accompanied by PLQY values of 69% and 80%, respectively. But, its ΔEST was 0.3 eV, which can support RISC, but was still largely higher than the common values (<0.1 eV) for efficient TADF emitters. The doped-OLED using 10 wt% 75:DPEPO matrix as EML realized EL emission peak at 420 nm with the CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.07), and a maximum EQE of 9.9% (Fig. 24c).
Recently, Lu et al. constructed a true-NUV TADF emitter CZ-MPS (76) employing tBCz and 9,9-dimethylthioxanthene-S,S-dioxide (MPS) as D and A groups (Fig. 24b).17 MPS with its two phenyls interlocked by a dimethylmethylene bridge endowed the shallow LUMO energy level of −2.33 eV. The positive solvatochromism further demonstrated the 1CT state of CZ-MPS. The calculated optical bandgap and electrochemical bandgap of 76 were 3.41 and 3.40 eV, respectively, which were remarkably larger than those of 75. However, ΔEST of 76 accordingly increased to 0.46 eV, which was as much as 0.16 eV larger than that of 75. Obviously, the weakened electron-withdrawing effect of MPS simultaneously reduced ICT on singlet–triplet splitting. As a result, PLQY of 10 wt% CZ-MPS-doped 9-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-3,6-bis(triphenylsilyl)-9H-carbazole (CzSi) film was also decreased to 46%. To optimize carrier recombination and suppress the quenching effect, a dual-EML structure was adopted to fabricate the diodes of 76, which exhibited a true-NUV emission peaking at 389 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.175, 0.065), which was identical to PL emission of the film (Fig. 24c). Besides the maximum luminance of 1031 cd m−2, the device achieved the maximum EQE of 9.3% and a EUE beyond 60%. Although additional RISC channels from high-lying triplet states (T2, T3…) to the S1 state were believed to be considerable for facilitating TADF emission from 76, the efficiency of such a model is still not comparable to RISC by T1 → S1 with near-zero ΔEST. Therefore, it is shows that the space for further reducing electronic effects of D/A groups for achieving efficient NUV TADF emitters is rather limited. The combination of TADF characteristics and NUV emission requires a more rational approach for optimizing 1CT states.
Besides sulfone, the combination of Cz/tBCz and benzonitrile was also utilized to realize high-energy-gap TADF emissions,122 among which DCzBN1 (77) and DCzBN3 (78) (Fig. 25) have large ΔEopt values of 3.34 and 3.23 eV, respectively. Meanwhile, the appropriate twist angles (≈65°) between Cz/tBCz and phenyl linker gave rise to a relatively high oscillator strength (f ≈ 0.1). It was shown that in reverse proportional to the electron-donating ability of Cz and tBCz, ΔEST of 77 was 0.31 eV, which was 0.05 eV higher than that of 78. As consequence, 77 was an FL emitter only with prompt emission with a lifetime of 2.6 ns. In contrast, 78 revealed the DF component with a lifetime of 14.5 μs. Therefore, PLQY of 78 in the doped film was up to 76%, compared to 28% for 77. Even due to the small difference between Cz and tBCz, excited-state properties of 77 and 78 were opposite, which verified the high sensitivity of 1CT state on ICT intensity. The doped OLEDs based on 10 wt% 77 and 78 in DPEPO host exhibited EL peaks at 418 and 428 nm with the CIE coordinates of (0.15, 0.05) and (0.16, 0.06), respectively. Owing to triplet harvesting ability, the maximum EQE of 78 as 10.3% was more than four folds of 2.5% for 77.
 Fig. 25  Chemical structures of phenylacetonitrile–Cz hybrid NUV TADF materials. 
3.4 Hot exciton EL materials
On the contrary to TADF emitters requiring a strong ICT effect, hot exciton emitters feature HLCT hybrid excited states, reflecting the weakened ICT interactions between D and A groups. In this sense, the hot exciton mechanism would be relatively advantageous in constructing high-energy-gap emitters.
PCZTZ (79) was constructed with Cz and 1,2,4-triazole as D and A groups, respectively, which were linked by an elongated biphenyl spacer for rationally weakening D–A interactions (Fig. 26a).20 Therefore, 79 possessed a typical HLCT hybrid S1 state, which was further demonstrated by an emission lifetime of 1.64 ns. The involvement of the 1LE component led to a high PLQY of 72%. Furthermore, 1D twisted D–π–A type compound formed a 3D supramolecular H-bonding network, which facilitated carrier exchange between neighboring molecules and rendered high and balanced hole and electron mobility by the level of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Therefore, nondoped OLED of 79 revealed bright NUV emission peaking at 408 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.17, 0.07) and an FWHM of 44 nm. The maximum CE and EQE were achieved as 2.85 cd A−1 and 6.57%, corresponding to a high EUE of 65.7%.
 Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structures of NUV hot exciton materials. (b) Linear correlation of orientational polarization f of solvent media with the Stokes shift for 79–81. (c) Optimized molecular geometry and spatial distributions of the molecular orbitals with DFT calculations at the B3LYP/6-31g(d,p) level. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A longer π-spacer of 9,9-dimethylfluorene was introduced in TFPBI (80) to further modify the contributions of 1LE and 1CT components in its S1 state (Fig. 26a).124 The torsion angles of 80 between fluorene and D/A units were 36° and 30°, respectively, for facile conjugation and large HOMO–LUMO overlap on π-spacers (Fig. 26b). PL peak of the 80-film was at 429 nm, accompanied by a favorable PLQY of 68%. The doped device based on 80 revealed an emission peak at 425 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.157, 0.039), which was blue-shifted in comparison to the non-doped device (435 nm). Ambipolar characteristics of 80 facilitated carrier flux balance, therefore giving rise to the maximum CE and EQE of 1.62 cd A−1 and 4.96%, respectively.
A binaphthyl spacer with larger conjugation was used to tune the excited-state characteristics of TPIBNCz (81) (Fig. 26a).123 Compared to directly adjusting electronic effects of D/A groups, the weak n-type character and distorted structure of binaphthyl provided a more accurate modulation approach for combining NUV emission and HLCT features. As shown in Fig. 26c, for 79–81, the correspondence of orientation polarization (Δf) to Stokes shift (va − vf) displayed two-section linear relationships in the low and high Δf regions, respectively. The resulting two excited-state dipole moments of 79–81 were about 10.0 D and 21.0 D-verified LE and HLCT excited states, respectively. It was shown that the higher dipole moment of 79–81 was in reverse proportion to the conjugated lengths of their π-spacers, reflecting the high sensitivity of the CT component on D–A distance. 81-Based device revealed the emission peak at 424 nm, corresponding to CIE coordinates of (0.158, 0.044), and impressive EQE and PE of up to 5.5% and 1.5 lm W−1.
3.5 Triplet–polaron-interaction based NUV materials
It is known that the cross-section of singlet could be larger than that the triplet in polymers and oligomers. Similarly, in OLEDs, triplet excitons could be converted to singlet states (S0 or S1) via triplet-polaron interactions (TPI). TPI-induced triplet-to-singlet conversion is based on charge exchange between triplet and polaron wither opposite electron spin directions, which generates a singlet state and a new polaron with reversed spin direction (Fig. 27a).
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic diagram for the TPI-induced conversion from triplet to singlet: the TPI between triplet and positive-charge polaron; the TPI between triplet and negative-charge polaron. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons. (b) Chemical structures of TPI-induced NUV materials. 
Li et al. designed a D–A molecule TPA–TAZ (82) composed of two TPA and one Cz donors and one 1,2,4-triazole acceptor (Fig. 27a).125 PL emission of 82-film consisted of a peak at 428 nm, accompanied by a favorable PLQY of 75%. The 82-based non-doped device achieved a maximum EQE of 6.8% and good color purity with CIE coordinates of (0.158, 0.043). Taking the out-coupling ratio of ITO glass as 0.25, the device realized a EUE of 36%, exceeding the simple spin-statistics of 25% in the device. To demonstrate the existence of TPI triplet upconversion, magneto-current (MC) analysis was performed on 82 based diodes. Experimental MC vs. B curves can be well fitted with the TPI model according to eqn (10): MC = αB2/(B + BL)2 + βB2/(B + BH)2(10)in which, B is the magnetic field strength. BL and BH were set as 5 mT and 100 mT, respectively. A proposed process of TPI-induced triplet upconversion was based on “intermolecular heterojunction”, which induced dissociation of triplet excitons and then the recombination of separated charge with adjacent opposite charge. This process provided the possibility of triplet-to-singlet upconversion through the TPI mechanism.
The TPI mechanism was also used to explain the high singlet ratio of TPATZ (83) based OLEDs, which contained TPA and 1,2,4-triazole as D and A groups (Fig. 27b).126 Despite its PL emission peaked at 454 nm in the film with a PLQY of 49%, a non-doped device based on 83 as EML obtained EL emission centered at 430 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.155, 0.047) and an FWHM of 50 nm. The maximum efficiencies reached 2.41 cd A−1, 2.20 lm W−1 and 5.92%. Therefore, the singlet ratio in the device was in the range of 40–60%, exceeding the theoretical limitation of 25%.
It is noted that new EL mechanisms featuring both singlet and triplet exciton harvesting, e.g., TADF, hot exciton, and TPI upconversion, emerged recently. However, the combination of NUV emission and high quantum efficiency is still an imperative challenge. Since all these new mechanisms involving in CT-excited states, the deep insight into the intrinsic character of 1CT state and CT excitons is crucial for the development of high-performance NUV OLEDs. The properties of organic NUV materials and their device performances are summarized in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI†), respectively.
4. NUV QDs and light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
Because a unique class of quantum confinement effect existed in QDs, the wave functions of electrons and holes in QDs are spatially restricted to dimensions that are smaller than the exciton Bohr radius for bulk materials, leading to the excellent emission performance of QDs, e.g. size-dependent emission colors covering NUV, visible, and NIR regions, narrow FWHMs and near-unity luminance efficiencies. EL devices based on QDs, namely QLED, provide another attractive route to harness their superior emission properties for display applications. Although the red and green QDs already achieved PLQYs up to 90%, efficient NUV/blue emissions from QLEDs remain a challenge.
As shown in Fig. 28a, driven with a sinusoidal ac-voltage, a multilayer EL device based on colloidal ZnO QDs showed a NUV emission at 376 nm (3.3 eV), which was identical to the PL spectrum of ZnO QDs.127 In EML, the ZnO QD layer was sandwiched by thin MgO layers to form a quantum well structure. MgO passivated the surface-quenching states of ZnO QDs. The intensity of NUV emission was in direct proportion to the applied voltage from 150 Vpp to 170 Vpp. High-k dielectric electron-blocking material (HfO2) was used to fabricate QLED with the active layers of ZnO QDs/HfO2/p-GaN, which exhibited NUV emission centered at 414 nm.128 It was shown that the incorporation of the HfO2 layer effectively suppressed green-to-red emissions in the range of 550–700 nm, leading to a spectral narrowing effect for decreasing FWHM from 110 nm to 54 nm by increasing the thickness of the high-k dielectric HfO2. However, PLQY of ZnO QDs was quite low (<1%), leading to low EQE of QLEDs of less than 1% (Fig. 28b).
 Fig. 28  (a) EL spectra of ZnO QLEDs under different applied voltages. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (b) Schematic structure of the ZnO QDs/HfO2/p-GaN LED devices. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics. (c) EL spectra of the LED devices under different forward injection currents at room temperature. The insets present the corresponding EL spectra with plotting y-axes in log scale. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics. (d) EL spectra of multilayer QLEDs with PVK as HTL. Inset: Energy-level diagrams of the devices with poly-TPD or PVK as hole transport layer (HTL). Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (e) Schematic of the GaN/Al0.5Ga0.5N QLED structure. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (f) EL under different input current densities. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (g) EL spectra for graded AlGaN layer LED. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics. (h) External quantum efficiencies as a function of the luminance. Inset: Schematic illustration of energy levels for the multilayer QLEDs. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the high excited energy and deep HOMO of NUV ZnSe/ZnS core/shell QDs, the selection of suitable HTL to simultaneously facilitate hole transportation and confine the exciton in the QD layer was significant for improving device performance.129 Compared to poly[bis(4-phenyl)(4-butylphenyl)amine] (poly-TPD) with the shallower HOMO at −5.2 eV, poly(vinylcarbazole) (PVK) with the HOMO energy level of −5.8 eV markedly enhanced hole injection into QD EML (Fig. 28c). Therefore, a NUV emission peaking at 430 nm was realized by QLED with a peak EQE of 0.65% and low roll-off of up to a current density of 500 mA cm−2.
GaN QDs based on true-NUV QLEDs were also demonstrated with the peak at ∼390 nm (Fig. 28d).130 The performance of the devices was strongly influenced by the internal electric field in the QD layer, leading to an emission blue shift from 405 nm to 383 nm and FWHM reduction. Furthermore, by embedding ultrasmall GaN dots in an AlN matrix, tunnel injection of carriers was enabled from n- and p-injection regions.131 Due to the peculiar band structure and band alignments in GaN/AlN system, sub 250 nm middle UV emission can be obtained from GaN QDs (Fig. 28e).
Besides size and composition, surface ligand also significantly influenced the performance of QLED.14 It was demonstrated that using n-octanethiol ligands instead of oleic acid could not only increase electron mobility within the QD film but also improve the charge carrier balance, leading to a 70% increase in quantum efficiency (Fig. 28f). In addition to a maximum luminance of 7600 cd m2, the maximum efficiencies of 1.9 cd A−1, 1.5 lm W−1 and 11% were realized.
Ultrasmall 2.5 nm-sized CdZnS@ZnS ternary core–shell QDs were prepared, whose effective core size is further reduced during the shell growth via the atomic diffusion of interior Cd atoms to the exterior ZnS shell (Fig. 29a).132 The corresponding QLED displayed pure-NUV emissions with irradiance as high as 2.0–13.9 mW cm−2 at the peak wavelengths of 377–390 nm (FWHM values of 21–23 nm). The maximum EQE also reached 0.23%. To further improve the PLQY of ZnSe/ZnS QDs, a high-temperature approach was developed.133 PLQY of the prepared QDs was as high as 83%. The QLED revealed an EL peak at 429 nm with CIE coordinates of (0.169, 0.023) and FWHM values of 12–20 nm. The maximum luminance of up to 2632 cd m−2 and the maximum EQE of 7.83% were realized, accompanied by reduced EQE roll-off (Fig. 29b). Based on the same ZnSe/ZnS QDs, the HTL of the QLEDs was modified to further improve the performance.134 Poly-TPD, poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-N-[4-(3-methylpropyl)]-diphenylamine] (TFB) and PVK were investigated (Fig. 29c). EL spectra showed a slight hypochromatic shift, compared with the PL spectrum of QDs, indicating Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET) between QDs with different sizes. Using TFB–PVK mixed films as HTL can combine the higher hole mobility of TFB and lower HOMO of PVK, leading to the maximum luminance of 2057 cd m−2 and the maximum efficiencies of 1.33 cd A−1 and 7.39%.
 Fig. 29  (a) A schematic representation (left) and a cross-sectional TEM image (right) of the NUV QLEDs. Schematic illustration of the diffusion process of Cd atoms in CdZnS@ZnS NQDs during subsequent ZnS shell growth. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) EQE versus luminance. Inset: Schematic of a layered QLED device, energy-level diagram for the various layers and EL spectra of QLEDs with increasing bias voltage. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Normalized PL and EL spectra of QLEDs for different hole transport materials. Inset: Photograph of a QLED with a pixel size of 2.0 mm × 2.0 mm. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (d) PL spectra of GaN (brown and blue) and Al0.1Ga0.9N (red and green) QD structures were grown on Al0.5Ga0.5N(0001). Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2016, IOP. (e) EL spectra of (0001)-oriented GaN/Al0.5Ga0.5N QD-based LEDs for different QD active regions: from 2.0 nm QD sizes to 1.5 nm QD sizes (from top to bottom spectrum). Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (f) EQE for the InGaN/InAlGaN LEDs without (open circles) and with (open squares) deposition of graphene QDs (GQDs). Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
By means of molecular beam epitaxy on Al0.5Ga0.5N(0001), oriented layers on sapphire substrates and high densities of AlyGa1−yN QDs (y = 0 and 0.1) from 1010 up to near 1012 cm−2 were realized.135 Emissions of the prepared GaN QDs covered NUV and blue regions in the range of 370–430 nm (Fig. 29d). Al0.1Ga0.9N QDs displayed a marked blue-shift of the emission, whose peak was at 314 nm, corresponding to the middle UV region.138 EL spectra measured at room temperature gradually shifted blue from larger to smaller QDs (Fig. 29e), corresponding to a photon energy of 3.26 eV (380 nm) to 3.44 eV (360 nm).136
Different from luminescent QDs, surface coating graphene QDs (GQDs) can remarkably optical and electrical properties of InGaN/InAlGaN NUV LEDs, which is explained by the photon recycling through the light extraction from the waveguide mode and the carrier transfer from GQDs to the active layer.137 The EQE of the diodes was enhanced from 6.9% to 11.8% at the GQD concentration of 0.9 mg mL−1, corresponding to an increase of the EQE by 71% (Fig. 29f). GQDs can also serve as the electroluminescent phosphor in doped LED.139 Nitrogen-doped i GQDs (N-GQDs) had large band gaps of 5.11 and 3.79 eV, corresponding to NUV emissions with peaks of 344–436 nm and PLQY of ∼80%.140 In another way, decreasing dimensions of the GQDs to 2.3–3.8 nm induced 340–430 nm with a maximum PLQY of 21%.141
5. NUV perovskite nanocrystals
Lead halide perovskites are regarded as attractive candidates for PeLEDs by their excellent luminescent properties. To date, tremendous progress has been achieved in controlling the morphology, size, and halide of perovskite films and NCs with PL emission tunable from blue to red. However, NUV perovskites generally suffer from low PLQY, because of defects and surface quenching.
Emission of CsPbCl3 NCs was centered at 3.18 eV (390 nm) as true-NUV but with a PLQY of 1%.142 PL emission peak of CsPbCl3 NCs prepared by the anion-exchange reaction was located at 410 nm with an FWHM of 12 nm and an improved PLQY of 10%.143 Treatment with sodium/ammonium tetrafluoroborate salt also induced 50-fold enhancement of PLQY of CsPbCl3 NCs with an emission peak at 402 nm, owing to removing excess lead atoms from the surface.144
The bandgap of CH3NH3Pb(BrxCl1−x)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) perovskites could be tuned in the range of 2.3 to 3.1 eV by controlling Cl:Br ratios.145 PL emission peak varied from 543 nm to 428 nm, along with chloride content increasing from 0% to 100%. PeLED of CH3NH3PbCl3 was disabled at room temperature, probably ascribed to the optical instability of perovskite film and the low PLQY. However, at 77 K, owing to the suppression of nonradiative recombination, EL emission was observed at 427 nm with an extremely narrow FWHM of 5 nm.
Cs3Bi2Cl9 QDs were demonstrated with an emission peak at 393 nm in the NUV region (Fig. 30a).146 Despite a wider FWHM of 59 nm, PLQY of Cs3Bi2Cl9 QDs sharply increased to 26.4%. Meanwhile, Cs3Bi2Cl9 QDs revealed excellent photostability and moisture stability, due to their all-inorganic composition and effective surface passivation by BiOCl. Cl-Passivation can further improve the PLQY of MA3Bi2Br9 QDs to 54.1% at the wavelength of 422 nm.147 As the concentration of Cl increased, the absorption peak first bathochromic-shifted to 388 nm (33.3% Cl), and then continuously hypochromatic-shifted (50%, 66.7% Cl) until forming MA3Bi2Cl9 completely. It should be noted that further increase in Cl content (>33.3%) led to the increase in Stokes shift, as well as the hypochromatic shift of PL emissions.
 Fig. 30  (a) PL spectra of Cs3Bi2Cl9 QDs. Inset: Unit cell crystal structures of Cs3Bi2Cl9. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) PL spectra of pristine and 10.5 mol% Ca2+–CsPbCl3 NCs. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Absorption and PL spectra of undoped and doped CsPb(Cl, Br)3 NCs. Inset: The photographs of an NC solution under 365 nm illumination. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Representative scheme for exchange of Pb2+ by Cd2+ (up), change in PL on addition of CdCl2, starting from treated CsPbBr3 NCs (left) to increased addition of CdCl2 (bottom). Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Energy-level diagram for the (PEA)2PbBr4 LED devices. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Normalized luminescence of a typical LED device based on (PEA)2PbBr4 nanoplates. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Ion passivation is another effective approach to improve the luminescent performance of CsPbCl3 NCs.148 For example, the use of Ca2+/Sr2+ involved passivation layer can suppress the formation of trap centers. After treatment, the emission peak of CsPbCl3 NCs was still around 405 nm as NUV emission, but PLQY reached as high as 77.1% by incorporating an optimal amount of Ca2+ (Fig. 30b). However, further increasing the feed ratio of CaCl2 to PbCl2 led to a slight decrease of PLQY; while PLQY of 10.5 mol% Ca-containing NCs increased by 100 folds. Similarly, Ni-doping can substantially eliminate the short-range disorder of the lattice induced by halide vacancies.149 By this method, PLQY can be dramatically improved from 1.2% of undoped NCs to 93.1% of 2.2% of Ni-doped NCs (Fig. 30c).
Benzoyl halides can be used as halide sources to synthesize NUV APbX3 NCs (in which A = Cs+, CH3NH3+, or CH(NH2)2+).151 MAPbCl3 NCs exhibited emission peak at 404 nm, accompanied with an FWHM of 15 nm, PLQY of around 5%, and decay lifetime of 5.4 ns. Furthermore, PL emission of MAPbCl3 NCs can be enhanced by increasing the amount of Cl precursor. FAPbCl3 NCs revealed a maximum emission at 407 nm with an FWHM of 16 nm, PLQY of about 2%, and a decay lifetime of 14.8 ns. Post-treatment of CsPbCl3 NCs with CdCl2 at room temperature can dramatically improve the PLQY from 3% to 96% without sacrificing the PL peak position (406 nm) and FWHM (12 nm).150 This spectral window was usually covered by mixed halide perovskites (CsPbClxBr3−x) with variable x (Fig. 30d). The maximum emission showed a gradual hypochromatic shift along with CdCl2 addition.
In 2016, Jin et al. prepared pure violet LEDs based on a two-dimensional perovskite material, namely 2-phenylethylammonium (C6H5CH2CH2NH3+, PEA) lead bromide [(PEA)2PbBr4] (Fig. 30e).15 The EL spectrum had a maximum peak of 410 nm with a narrow bandwidth (14 nm), which is bathochromic-shifted by 3 nm compared to the PL spectrum. While the weak emission of 375 nm was attributed to TPBi (Fig. 30f). Significantly, upon converting the polycrystalline (PEA)2PbBr4 thin films to single-crystal nanoplates via DMF solvent vapor annealing, photophysical properties of this 2D perovskite and the EQE of the LEDs were improved. The corresponding EQE of single-crystal nanoplates LEDs (0.04%) was 20 times higher than that of polycrystalline thin-film LEDs (0.002%). Meanwhile, decreasing perovskite layer thickness benefitted light output and electron–hole recombination. The highest EQE was achieved on the thickness of the perovskite nanoplate of 50 nm. Once thickness was <50 nm, EQE of nanoplate PeLEDs decreased, due to poor coverage on the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate. Moreover, the thickness of HTL/ETL is also crucial to carrier flux balance in EML. All of the reported NUV PeLEDs showed lower efficiencies than their visible-light-emitting congeners, which actually leaves large space for further developing high-efficiency NUV perovskite materials and devices.
6. Potential applications of NUV EL devices
Compared to the existing NUV lighting sources, NUV EL devices discussed above are superior in weight, size, flexibility and integrability. As supplementary to high-power NUV lighting, NUV EL devices can be used as portable NUV sources integrated with small equipment, e.g. flashlight, smartphone, and even clothing. Therefore, they can provide new alternatives in the field of biomedicine, industrial processing, personal electronics, and so on.
Since NUV disinfection was employed at a waterworks in Marseille in 1910, physical disinfection has become the mainstream technology to replace traditional chlorination disinfection. Currently, the ongoing COVID-19 crisis has strengthened disinfection consciousness. NUV disinfection has become a mature and reliable environmental protection technology with high investment benefits. It is increasingly and widely used in the disinfection treatment of all kinds of municipal sewage all over the world. Low-power NUV EL devices can be used for timely personal or small-scale disinfection, which would be safer and more convenient than high-power NUV sources.
Nowadays, healthy, natural, and comfortable lighting sources are developing rapidly. Particularly, in some vital application fields such as photography, cinematography, museums, and art galleries; high-quality light sources are highly demanded. Compared to traditional fluorescent and incandescent lamps, white light-emitting diodes (WLEDs) possess many prominent merits, including high efficiency, low power consumption, short response time and high color rendering index (CRI). Actually, to realize a high CRI value, the emission spectrum needs to be broader. Therefore, the CRI of NUV backlight excited three primary colors dopants is higher than that of blue backlight excited yellow or orange phosphor. For instance, 370 nm-driven WLED could obtain a high CRI of more than 90 by pumping the blue/orange phosphors or blue/green/red phosphors (Fig. 31a).8 Obviously, thin-film-based NUV diodes can bring high-quality lighting sources to more application scenarios with critical requirements on size, shape, flexibility, stability, and so on. NUV light with a wavelength of 365 nm can be used for ore identification, banknote inspection, authentication, barcode, and food security.8 Thin-film NUV EL devices can be easily integrated with the checkbook, barcode scanner, etc., therefore largely offering convenience.
 Fig. 31  Applications of NUV light-emitting devices. (a) EL spectrum of white LED lamp combining a 370 nm NUV chip. (b) Starred bracket designates the tail; double-headed black arrows designate the width measurement. Note that significant tail thinning was observed only with NUV wavelengths. (c) Differential removal maps of incremental calculus removal at five-pulse increments after 5, 10, and 15 irradiation pulses. (d) The structured debris of bone tissue on the grooves after ablation on both areas looks to be the result of electrostatic ablation instead of thermal ablation. (e) Chemical oxygen demand (COD) detection instrument based on 300–400 nm NUV light source. (f) Super-resolution lithography machine. (g) The SEM image of laser machining on sapphire. (h) “Electronic Business Card” Design Drawn onto Wall using Laser System. 
In the area of biology, NUV with a wavelength of around 360 nm conforms to the phototropic response curve of insects, which can provide the light source of the lamp for manufacturing the insect trap. Biologists discovered that planarians possess extraocular photoreception and display an unconventional transient receptor potential channel A1 (TRPA1)-mediated photophobic response to NUV light (405 ± 10 nm) (Fig. 31b).152 The subgingival calculus can be removed under NUV laser ablation (400 nm) (Fig. 31c).153 Hard bone tissue drilling was performed using NUV light beam at 388 nm (Fig. 31d).154 The ablation threshold value of the human mandible bone, which is the hardest bone of the skull, was also determined. It was found that NUV ablation is more precise. 365 nm-NUV could reduce dimer excision in bacteria, and thus the enzyme functions will be inactivated differentially by 365 nm radiation; as such, this radiation has the potential as a probe for taking a closer look at particular components of the various cellular repair systems.155 Likewise, NUV is also important for plant photosynthesis, therefore, NUV EL devices can be used to promote plant growth.
In the medical domain, NUV has the effect of erythema on the human body, which can promote mineral metabolism and vitamin D formation. Besides, NUV can also be applied in the field of identification of body fluid, analysis of protein, and drug or medical light therapy. These treatments need low-power high-safety NUV EL devices.
NUV as a light source can be used to detect substance content by miniaturized instruments. For instance, chemical oxygen demand (COD) is an important indicator of organic matter pollution in water sources and one of the necessary parameters for monitoring water quality. Detecting the COD based on NUV spectrophotometry (300–400 nm) is an important method for online and real-time monitoring of pollution sources (Fig. 31e). In a similar method, the pollution degree of organic matter to the water body is measured by the total organic carbon (TOC), TOC can be monitored in real-time by employing NUV light source, integrated circuit, and sensor. Moreover, circular dichromatic (CD) spectroscopy is the most widely used apparatus for the determination of protein secondary structure. In the NUV region, the spectra are sensitive to the separation and relative orientation of the aromatic side chains. The NUV magnetic CD spectroscopy of the aromatic amino acid bands of hemoglobin was investigated as a potential probe of structural changes at the α1β2 interface during the allosteric transition.156 NUV difference absorption and CD spectra were recorded upon the recombination of synthetic S-peptide analogs. Environmental alterations of Phe-8 in the S-peptide and Tyr-25 in the S-protein, derived from the association process, lead to strong optical signals whose location and magnitude were clearly defined by means of a comparative analysis of the above spectra.157
In the printed circuit board (PCB) industry, pattern transfer of circuits often depends on the film curing after NUV exposure. The region without NUV radiation is easy to remove. It is reported that the lithography machine can make chips at the accuracy of 22 nm scale using NUV light source (365 nm) and even 10 nm scale in combination with the dual exposure technology in the future (Fig. 31f). Therefore, a higher lithographic resolution (0.06 times exposure wavelength) was achieved with a source with a longer wavelength and lower cost. The development of a low-cost PCB printer using a NUV source would be valuable to all electrical engineers since it could reduce turn-around time. Though system on a chip (SOC) production is also employing UV photolithography technique, PCB technology has the focus on reliability, repeatability and thereby suitable accuracy requirement for naked eye differentiates at a micrometer scale, therefore, NUV is the desired light source for the PCB industry. In contrast, high-energy EUV is commonly used in chip manufacturing with relatively high accuracy with nanometer (nm) scale, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) is now using EUV lithography for 5–7 nm processing. Line-cut and raster cut of materials, e.g. sapphire (Fig. 31g), have been achieved by direct programming. Besides, NUV light at 405 nm has been controlled to “draw” out a simple single-sided circuit design (Fig. 31h).9 As an emerging technology, NUV has important strategic significance in the field of communication, especially for the environment of short-distance anti-jamming. These new applications will promote the development and application of personal electronic information technology.
7. Conclusions and outlook
Despite big challenges, nearly all kinds of luminescent materials, including organic molecules, QDs and perovskites, and devices have been involved in the NUV region. In a short time of two decades, the highest EQE value reported is already beyond 20%, and the integral performance of NUV EL devices has been comparable to visible-light congeners. Although FL OLEDs are inferior in efficiencies, compared to TADF and PH OLEDs, it is noted that FL OLEDs still have the superiority in efficiency stability and duration. Pure hydrocarbon aromatics and ambipolar emitters are promising, because of their applicable device performance. For NUV phosphors, carbene is superior to other kinds of ligands, in spite of the shallow LUMO and low PLQY for their complexes. For TADF emitters, the key issue remains how to accurately tune ICT for combining NUV emission and RISC facilitation, which depends on developing more D/A groups with the nuance of electronic effects. Hot exciton emitters should be theoretically advantageous in constructing NUV material, owing to limited CT components of their excited states. Increasing molecular types and improving device performance are necessary for establishing the structure–property relationship of NUV hot exciton emitters. QDs already exhibit unique advantages, especially in the middle UV region. Systematic device engineering of QLEDs is imperative for achieving breakthrough of performance. As the most recently emerging system, the potential of perovskites in NUV EL devices has already been demonstrated. The integration of perovskites and QDs, namely perovskite QDs, is to provide a feasible solution for both NUV PeLEDs and QLEDs. Therefore, the ultimate solution for next-generation NUV lighting sources will not rely on only one kind of system and technology, but on the integration of all alternatives. The important advancements in this exciting area can be expected in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (92061205, 61905070 and U1801258).
Notes and references
H. Shen, Q. Gao, Y. Zhang, Y. Lin, Q. Lin, Z. Li, L. Chen, Z. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Jia, S. Wang, Z. Du, L. S. Li and Z. Zhang, Nat. Photon., 2019, 13, 192–197 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. H. Silver, N. K. Noel, F. Ullrich, B. P. Rand and A. Kahn, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1903252 Search PubMed .
A. Barlev and D. Sen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 526–533 Search PubMed .
M. Galasso, A. Patel, C. Summers, R. Ribeiro, Y. Zhang, A. Ali, A. Gazzalle, M. Liu, S. Keshavjee and M. Cypel, J. Heart Lung Transplant., 2018, 37, S156 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, H. Hingorani, Z. Liu, J. Liu and Q. Ge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10328–10336 Search PubMed .
R. Anastasio, W. Peerbooms, R. Cardinaels and L. C. A. van Breemen, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 9220–9231 Search PubMed .
M. Mutailipu, M. Zhang, Z. Yang and S. Pan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 791–801 Search PubMed .
Y. Fu, P. Xiong, X. Liu, X. Wang, S. Wu, Q. Liu, M. Peng and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 303–312 Search PubMed .

          A. Triano and S. Collins, IEEE Long Island Systems, Applications and Technology Conference,  2013, pp. 1–6 Search PubMed.
M. K. Hiroshi Amano, K. Hiramatsu and I. Akasaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 28, L2112–L2114 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Xing, Y. Zheng, X. Tang, W. Xie, X. Chen, W. Wang and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 883–888 Search PubMed .
K. Okumoto and Y. Shirota, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1231–1233 Search PubMed .
F. Chen, Q. Lin, H. Shen and A. Tang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1340–1365 Search PubMed .
H. Shen, W. Cao, N. T. Shewmon, C. Yang, L. S. Li and J. Xue, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1211–1216 Search PubMed .
D. Liang, Y. Peng, Y. Fu, M. J. Shearer, J. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Zhang, R. J. Hamers, T. L. Andrew and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6897–6904 Search PubMed .
X. Liang, H.-B. Han, Z.-P. Yan, L. Liu, Y.-X. Zheng, H. Meng and W. Huang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4317–4323 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, S. Li, Y. Zhao, C. Li, Z. Pang, Y. Huang, M. Yang, L. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Pu and Z. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2001248,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202001248, .
H. L. Lee, W. J. Chung and J. Y. Lee, Small, 2020, 16, 1907569 Search PubMed .
Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu and H. Gu, Sensors, 2018, 18, 2072 Search PubMed .
S. Xue, X. Qiu, S. Ying, Y. Lu, Y. Pan, Q. Sun, C. Gu and W. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700747 Search PubMed .
Z. Qiu, J. Tan, N. Cai, K. Wang, S. Ji and Y. Huo, Chin. J. Org. Chem., 2019, 39, 679 Search PubMed .
Y. Im, S. Y. Byun, J. H. Kim, D. R. Lee, C. S. Oh, K. S. Yook and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603007 Search PubMed .
S. O. Jeon, K. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, S.-G. Ihn, Y. S. Chung, J. W. Kim, H. Lee, S. Kim, H. Choi and J. Y. Lee, Nat. Photon., 2021, 15, 208–215 Search PubMed .
K. Youssef, Y. Li, S. O'Keeffe, L. Li and Q. Pei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909102 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, R. Liu, D. Zhang and L. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907156 Search PubMed .
S. Sudheendran Swayamprabha, D. K. Dubey, Shahnawaz, R. A. K. Yadav, M. R. Nagar, A. Sharma, F. C. Tung and J. H. Jou, Adv. Sci., 2020, 8, 2002254 Search PubMed .
L. Yao, B. Yang and Y. Ma, Sci. China: Chem., 2014, 57, 335–345 Search PubMed .
W. Xie, B. Li, X. Cai, M. Li, Z. Qiao, X. Tang, K. Liu, C. Gu, Y. Ma and S. J. Su, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 276 Search PubMed .
J. Xue, Q. Liang, R. Wang, J. Hou, W. Li, Q. Peng, Z. Shuai and J. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808242 Search PubMed .
Y. Kondo, K. Yoshiura, S. Kitera, H. Nishi, S. Oda, H. Gotoh, Y. Sasada, M. Yanai and T. Hatakeyama, Nat. Photon., 2019, 13, 678–682 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, D. Zhang, J. Wei, Z. Liu, Y. Lu and L. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16912–16917 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, R. Liu, D. Zhang and L. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907156 Search PubMed .
Y. Im, M. Kim, Y. J. Cho, J.-A. Seo, K. S. Yook and J. Y. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1946–1963 Search PubMed .
C. Li, C. Duan, C. Han and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804228 Search PubMed .
T. Shan, Y. Liu, X. Tang, Q. Bai, Y. Gao, Z. Gao, J. Li, J. Deng, B. Yang, P. Lu and Y. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28771–28779 Search PubMed .
W.-C. Chen, Y. Yuan, Z.-L. Zhu, Z.-Q. Jiang, L.-S. Liao and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700855 Search PubMed .
H. Shin, Y. H. Ha, H. G. Kim, R. Kim, S. K. Kwon, Y. H. Kim and J. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808102 Search PubMed .
W. Li, D. Liu, F. Shen, D. Ma, Z. Wang, T. Feng, Y. Xu, B. Yang and Y. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2797–2803 Search PubMed .
X. Qiu, Y. Xu, C. Wang, M. Hanif, J. Zhou, C. Zeng, Y. Li, Q. Jiang, R. Zhao, D. Hu and Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5461–5467 Search PubMed .
Y. Xu, C. Wang, X. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. Guo, X. Liang, D. Hu, F. Li, D. Ma and Y. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6878–6884 Search PubMed .
Y. Xu, P. Xu, D. Hu and Y. Ma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1030–1069 Search PubMed .
C. Song, N. Zhang, J. Lin, X. Guo and X. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41250 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Li, Z. Ling, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Wang, G. Chen and B. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 926–936 Search PubMed .
Q. Zheng, F. You, J. Xu, J. Xiong, X. Xue, P. Cai, X. Zhang, H. Wang, B. Wei and L. Wang, Org. Electron., 2017, 46, 7–13 Search PubMed .
A. M.-C. Ng, A. B. Djurišić, K.-H. Tam, K. W. Cheng, W.-K. Chan, H. L. Tam, K.-W. Cheah, A. W. Lu, J. Chan and A. D. Rakić, Opt. Commun., 2008, 281, 2498–2503 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Q. Bai, L. Yao, H. Zhang, H. Xu, S. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Gao, J. Li, P. Lu, H. Wang, B. Yang and Y. Ma, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3797–3804 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, P. Cohn, S.-H. Eom, K. A. Abboud, R. K. Castellano and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1 Search PubMed .
M. Kinoshita, H. Kita and Y. Shirota, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 780–786 Search PubMed .
K. Xu, D. Li, Y. Yuan, J. Xu, H. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Lu, L. Liu, Z. Lin and X. Zhang, Opt. Laser Technol., 2020, 131, 106419 Search PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Zhao, C. Luo, F. Lu, S. Tao and Q. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2003–2010 Search PubMed .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 Search PubMed .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607022 Search PubMed .
H. Moon, C. Lee, W. Lee, J. Kim and H. Chae, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804294 Search PubMed .
D. Bera, L. Qian, T.-K. Tseng and P. H. Holloway, Materials, 2010, 3, 2260–2345 Search PubMed .
W. Zou, R. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, N. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Miao, M. Xu, Q. Guo, D. Di, L. Zhang, C. Yi, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 608 Search PubMed .
R. D. Harris, S. Bettis Homan, M. Kodaimati, C. He, A. B. Nepomnyashchii, N. K. Swenson, S. Lian, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12865–12919 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, S. Zhang and S. Chen, Chem. Rec., 2019, 19, 1729–1752 Search PubMed .
C. H. A. Li, Z. Zhou, P. Vashishtha and J. E. Halpert, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6003–6032 Search PubMed .
L. N. Quan, F. P. García de Arquer, R. P. Sabatini and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801996 Search PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, H. Tian, J. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Chen, Y. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. Fu, D. Kong, D. Dai, Y. Jin, G. Li, H. Li, Q. Peng, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–253 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Deng, Z. Chu, Q. Jiang, J. Meng, P. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 570 Search PubMed .
T. C. Chao, Y. T. Lin, C. Y. Yang, T. S. Hung, H. C. Chou, C. C. Wu and K. T. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 992–996 Search PubMed .
K.-T. Wong, Y.-L. Liao, Y.-T. Lin, H.-C. Su and C.-E. Wu, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 5131–5134 Search PubMed .
H. Etori, X. L. Jin, T. Yasuda, S. Mataka and T. Tsutsui, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 1090–1096 Search PubMed .
H. Etori, T. Yasuda, X. L. Jin, K. Fujita, S. Mataka and T. Tsutsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, 5071–5075 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, M. Qiao, Z. Ye, D. Dou, M. Chen, Y. Peng, Y. Shi, X. Yang, L. Cui, J. Li, C. Li, B. Wei and W. Y. Wong, iScience, 2018, 9, 532–541 Search PubMed .
J.-Y. Hu, Y.-J. Pu, F. Satoh, S. Kawata, H. Katagiri, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2064–2071 Search PubMed .
R. Malatong, C. Kaiyasuan, P. Nalaoh, S. Jungsuttiwong, T. Sudyoadsuk and V. Promarak, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 184, 108874 Search PubMed .
Z.-Q. Wang, C.-L. Liu, C.-J. Zheng, W.-Z. Wang, C. Xu, M. Zhu, B.-M. Ji, F. Li and X.-H. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2015, 23, 179–185 Search PubMed .
K. O. a. Y. Shirota, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 699–707 Search PubMed .
H.-F. Xiang, Z.-X. Xu, V. A. L. Roy, C.-M. Che, P. T. Lai, P.-J. Zeng, F.-F. Niu, Y.-W. Liu, W.-Q. Tang, C.-J. He and H.-B. Niu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 073305 Search PubMed .
J. Lian, F. Niu, Y. Liu, P. Zeng and H. Niu, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 295–297 Search PubMed .
L. Zou, V. Savvate’ev, J. Booher, C. H. Kim and J. Shinar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2282–2284 Search PubMed .
B. R. Kaafarani, A. a. O. El-Ballouli, R. Trattnig, A. Fonari, S. Sax, B. Wex, C. Risko, R. S. Khnayzer, S. Barlow, D. Patra, T. V. Timofeeva, E. J. W. List, J.-L. Brédas and S. R. Marder, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1638–1650 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Zheng, G. Yang, L. Ye, Y. Ma, X. Chen, G. Cheng and S. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9571–9573 Search PubMed .
C.-Q. Ye, L.-W. Zhou, C.-B. Fan, G.-L. Dai, X.-M. Wang, X.-T. Tao, P.-Y. Tang and W.-M. Su, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 2044–2052 Search PubMed .
F. You, B. Mo, L. Liu, H. Wang, W. Bin, J. Xu and X. Zhang, Opt. Laser Technol., 2016, 82, 199–202 Search PubMed .
F. Y. Xiaowen Zhang, S. Liu, B. Mo, Z. Zhang, J. Xiong, P. Cai, X. Xue, J. Zhang and B. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 043301 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Li, K. Xu, P. Kang, L. Liu, L. Wang, B. Wei and X. Zhang, Opt. Laser Technol., 2019, 113, 239–245 Search PubMed .
M. Berggren, M. Granströim, O. Inganas and M. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 900–903 Search PubMed .
T. J. Qiu Zhipeng, Cai Ning, Wang Kai, Ji Shaomin and Huo Yanping, Chin. J. Org. Chem., 2019, 39, 679–696 Search PubMed .
B. Liu, Z. L. Zhu, J. W. Zhao, D. He, Z. Y. Wang, C. Y. Luo, Q. X. Tong, C. S. Lee and S. L. Tao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 15566–15571 Search PubMed .
Y. Park, S. Kim, J.-H. Lee, D. H. Jung, C.-C. Wu and J. Park, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 864–871 Search PubMed .
J.-H. Jou, S. Kumar, P.-H. Fang, A. Venkateswararao, K. R. J. Thomas, J.-J. Shyue, Y.-C. Wang, T.-H. Li and H.-H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2182–2194 Search PubMed .
Z. Gao, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, F. Shen, H. Liu, G. Sun, L. Yao, Y. Lv, P. Lu and Y. Ma, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2602–2605 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, S. Zheng, R. Bottger, H. S. Chae, T. Tanaka, S. Li, A. Mochizuki and G. E. Jabbour, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14347–14352 Search PubMed .
D. He, Y. Yuan, B. Liu, D.-Y. Huang, C.-Y. Luo, F. Lu, Q.-X. Tong and C.-S. Lee, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 136, 347–353 Search PubMed .
J.-J. Zhu, Y. Chen, Y.-H. Xiao, X. Lian, G.-X. Yang, S.-S. Tang, D. Ma, Y. Wang and Q.-X. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 2975–2984 Search PubMed .
J. Xin, Z. Li, Y. Liu, D. Liu, F. Zhu, Y. Wang and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 10185–10190 Search PubMed .
Z.-Y. Wang, J.-W. Zhao, B. Liu, C. Cao, P. Li, Q.-X. Tong and S.-L. Tao, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 163, 213–220 Search PubMed .
J.-J. Zhu, W.-C. Chen, Y. Yuan, D. Luo, Z.-L. Zhu, X. Chen, J.-X. Chen, C.-S. Lee and Q.-X. Tong, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 173, 107982 Search PubMed .
X. Tang, L. Yao, H. Liu, F. Shen, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, P. Lu and Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5019–5027 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, P. Cohn, A. L. Dyer, S.-H. Eom, J. R. Reynolds, R. K. Castellano and J. Xue, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3580–3582 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, P. Cohn, S.-H. Eom, K. A. Abboud, R. K. Castellano and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2867–2874 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. Wu, W. Fu, P. Liu, B. Jiao, D. Wang, G. Zhou and X. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20504–20512 Search PubMed .
K. Guo, J. Zhang, T. Xu, X. Gao and B. Wei, J. Disp. Technol., 2014, 10, 642–646 Search PubMed .
V. Joseph, K. R. J. Thomas, M. Singh, S. Sahoo and J.-H. Jou, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017, 6660–6670 Search PubMed .
V. Joseph, K. R. J. Thomas, S. Sahoo, M. Singh and J.-H. Jou, Opt. Mater., 2020, 108, 110159 Search PubMed .
C. M. Tonge, J. Zeng, Z. Zhao, B. Z. Tang and Z. M. Hudson, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5150–5155 Search PubMed .
C. Han, G. Xie, H. Xu, Z. Zhang, L. Xie, Y. Zhao, S. Liu and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2491–2496 Search PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Zhang, H. Xu, J. Li, G. Xie, R. Chen, Y. Zhao and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10104–10108 Search PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Zhang, H. Xu, S. Yue, J. Li, P. Yan, Z. Deng, Y. Zhao, P. Yan and S. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19179–19188 Search PubMed .
J. Li, D. Ding, Y. Tao, Y. Wei, R. Chen, L. Xie, W. Huang and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3122–3130 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, D. Ding, Y. Wei, F. Han, H. Xu and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 479–485 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, Q. Liang, C. Han, J. Zhang and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700553 Search PubMed .
J. Jia, L. Zhu, Y. Wei, Z. Wu, H. Xu, D. Ding, R. Chen, D. Ma and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4890–4902 Search PubMed .
W. Kan, L. Zhu, Y. Wei, D. Ma, M. Sun, Z. Wu, W. Huang and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5430–5439 Search PubMed .
C. Duan, J. Li, C. Han, D. Ding, H. Yang, Y. Wei and H. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5667–5679 Search PubMed .
W. Kan, C. Duan, M. Sun, C. Han and H. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7145–7157 Search PubMed .
C. Han and H. Xu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 663–681 Search PubMed .
D. Yu, F. Zhao, C. Han, H. Xu, J. Li, Z. Zhang, Z. Deng, D. Ma and P. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 509–514 Search PubMed .
D. Yu, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, C. Han, H. Xu, J. Li, D. Ma and P. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6157–6159 Search PubMed .
C. Han, Y. Zhao, H. Xu, J. Chen, Z. Deng, D. Ma, Q. Li and P. Yan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5800–5803 Search PubMed .
C. Han, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, L. Zhu, H. Xu, J. Li, D. Ma and P. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4966–4976 Search PubMed .
S. Ye, Y. Wang, R. Guo, Q. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Duan, P. Leng, S. Sun and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 393, 124694 Search PubMed .
R. J. Holmes, S. R. Forrest, T. Sajoto, A. Tamayo, P. I. Djurovich, M. E. Thompson, J. Brooks, Y. J. Tung, B. W. D’Andrade, M. S. Weaver, R. C. Kwong and J. J. Brown, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 243507 Search PubMed .
A. K. Pal, S. Krotkus, M. Fontani, C. F. R. Mackenzie, D. B. Cordes, A. M. Z. Slawin, I. D. W. Samuel and E. Zysman-Colman, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804231 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, H. F. Chen, T. Batagoda, C. Coburn, P. I. Djurovich, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 92–98 Search PubMed .
J. Ye, Z. Chen, M.-K. Fung, C. Zheng, X. Ou, X. Zhang, Y. Yuan and C.-S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2630–2637 Search PubMed .
X. Ban, H. Xu, G. Yuan, W. Jiang, B. Huang and Y. Sun, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1678–1686 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Li, K. Shizu, S. Huang, S. Hirata, H. Miyazaki and C. Adachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14706–14709 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Chan, L. S. Cui, J. U. Kim, H. Nakanotani and C. Adachi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706023 Search PubMed .
W. C. Chen, Y. Yuan, S. F. Ni, Q. X. Tong, F. L. Wong and C. S. Lee, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3599–3608 Search PubMed .
X. Qiu, S. Ying, C. Wang, M. Hanif, Y. Xu, Y. Li, R. Zhao, D. Hu, D. Ma and Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 592–600 Search PubMed .
A. Obolda, Q. Peng, C. He, T. Zhang, J. Ren, H. Ma, Z. Shuai and F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4740–4746 Search PubMed .
J. Shi, Q. Ding, L. Xu, X. Lv, Z. Liu, Q. Sun, Y. Pan, S. Xue and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11063–11070 Search PubMed .
T. Omata, Y. Tani, S. Kobayashi, K. Takahashi, A. Miyanaga, Y. Maeda and S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 061104 Search PubMed .
X. Mo, H. Long, H. Wang, S. Li, Z. Chen, J. Wan, Y. Feng, Y. Liu, Y. Ouyang and G. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 063505 Search PubMed .
C. Xiang, W. Koo, S. Chen, F. So, X. Liu, X. Kong and Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 053303 Search PubMed .
J. Brault, B. Damilano, A. Kahouli, S. Chenot, M. Leroux, B. Vinter and J. Massies, J. Cryst. Growth, 2013, 363, 282–286 Search PubMed .
J. Verma, S. M. Islam, V. Protasenko, P. Kumar Kandaswamy, H. Xing and D. Jena, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 021105 Search PubMed .
J. Kwak, J. Lim, M. Park, S. Lee, K. Char and C. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3793–3799 Search PubMed .
A. Wang, H. Shen, S. Zang, Q. Lin, H. Wang, L. Qian, J. Niu and L. Song Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2951–2959 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, H. Shen, H. Wang, A. Wang, J. Niu, L. Qian, F. Guo and L. S. Li, Org. Electron., 2015, 25, 178–183 Search PubMed .
J. Brault, S. Matta, T.-H. Ngo, M. Korytov, D. Rosales, B. Damilano, M. Leroux, P. Vennéguès, M. Al Khalfioui, A. Courville, O. Tottereau, J. Massies and B. Gil, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 55, 05FG06 Search PubMed .
J. Brault, S. Matta, T.-H. Ngo, D. Rosales, M. Leroux, B. Damilano, M. A. Khalfioui, F. Tendille, S. Chenot, P. De Mierry, J. Massies and B. Gil, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2016, 55, 95–101 Search PubMed .
T. N. Lin, S. R. M. Santiago, C. T. Yuan, K. P. Chiu, J. L. Shen, T. C. Wang, H. C. Kuo, C. H. Chiu, Y. C. Yao and Y. J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7108 Search PubMed .
S. Matta, J. Brault, T. H. Ngo, B. Damilano, M. Korytov, P. Vennéguès, M. Nemoz, J. Massies, M. Leroux and B. Gil, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 085706 Search PubMed .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734–738 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Yang, G. Wang, R. Mo, P. He, J. Sun, Z. Di, N. Yuan, J. Ding, G. Ding and X. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8810–8816 Search PubMed .
H. Qin, T. Gong, Y. Jin, Y. Cho, C. Shin, C. Lee and T. Kim, Carbon, 2015, 94, 181–188 Search PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 Search PubMed .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635–5640 Search PubMed .
T. Ahmed, S. Seth and A. Samanta, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3633–3637 Search PubMed .
A. Sadhanala, S. Ahmad, B. Zhao, N. Giesbrecht, P. M. Pearce, F. Deschler, R. L. Hoye, K. C. Godel, T. Bein, P. Docampo, S. E. Dutton, M. F. De Volder and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6095–6101 Search PubMed .
M. Leng, Y. Yang, K. Zeng, Z. Chen, Z. Tan, S. Li, J. Li, B. Xu, D. Li, M. P. Hautzinger, Y. Fu, T. Zhai, L. Xu, G. Niu, S. Jin and J. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704446 Search PubMed .
M. Leng, Y. Yang, Z. Chen, W. Gao, J. Zhang, G. Niu, D. Li, H. Song, J. Zhang, S. Jin and J. Tang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6076–6083 Search PubMed .
J.-K. Chen, J.-P. Ma, S.-Q. Guo, Y.-M. Chen, Q. Zhao, B.-B. Zhang, Z.-Y. Li, Y. Zhou, J. Hou, Y. Kuroiwa, C. Moriyoshi, O. M. Bakr, J. Zhang and H.-T. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3974–3983 Search PubMed .
Z. J. Yong, S. Q. Guo, J. P. Ma, J. Y. Zhang, Z. Y. Li, Y. M. Chen, B. B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Shu, J. L. Gu, L. R. Zheng, O. M. Bakr and H. T. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9942–9951 Search PubMed .
N. Mondal, A. De and A. Samanta, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 32–39 Search PubMed .
M. Imran, V. Caligiuri, M. Wang, L. Goldoni, M. Prato, R. Krahne, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2656–2664 Search PubMed .
T. R. Birkholz and W. S. Beane, J. Exp. Biol., 2017, 220, 2616–2625 Search PubMed .
J. E. Schoenly, W. D. Seka and P. Rechmann, J. Biomed. Opt., 2011, 16, 071404 Search PubMed .

          I. Ionita and M. Zamfirescu, 2011 E-Health and Bioengineering Conference,  2011, pp. 1–4 Search PubMed.
R. M. Tyrrell and R. B. Web, Mutat. Res., 1973, 19, 361–364 Search PubMed .
D. J. Vitale, R. A. Goldbeck, D. B. Kim-Shapiro, R. M. Esquerra, L. J. Parkhurst and D. S. Kliger, Biochemistry, 2000, 39, 7145–7152 Search PubMed .
B. Filippi, G. Borin, L. Moroder and F. Marchiori, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Nucleic Acids Protein Synth., 1976, 454, 514–523 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs01580fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Shuo Chen
	Dr Shuo Chen obtained BS and MS degree in Chemistry from Heilongjiang University in 2007 and 2010, respectively. Subsequently, he received PhD diploma in 2014 at Harbin Institute of Technology, after which he did postdoctoral research at Perking University and Shenzhen University, respectively. Afterwards he has served as an associate professor in the group of Prof. Hui Xu at Heilongjiang University since 2019, where he currently studies electroluminescence based on deep-blue organic materials.

Hui Xu
	Prof. Hui Xu received his MS degree in Material Science and PhD degree in Organic Chemistry from the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) and Fudan University under the supervisions of Profs Yudong Huang and Wei Huang, respectively. Then, he joined Heilongjiang University in 2006 and promoted full professor in 2011. From 2011 to 2013, he worked in Prof. Xiaogang Liu's group of National University of Singapore (NUS) as a postdoctoral researcher. He awarded the Humboldt Fellowship for Experienced Researcher in 2017 and worked with Prof. Klaus Meerholz in University of Cologne (UoC). He has published more than 100 peer-reviewed SCI papers. His current research focuses on phosphine-based optoelectronic materials.

 	Fig. 1  Timeline of developments of NUV electroluminescent devices. In 1989, Akaski realized GaN p–n junction LED for the first time. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 1989, IOP. In 2001, Shirota et al. developed a high-performance blue-UV-emitting OLED with EL peaking at 404 nm. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2001, American Institute of Physics. In 2015, Xue report of violet-blue QLEDs with EQE > 10%. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. After one year, Jin et al. reported room-temperature color-pure NUV LEDs based on a two-dimensional lead halide perovskite material [(PEA)2PbBr4]. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. In 2018, Meng et al. fabricated doped devices with state-of-the-art EQE of 20.4% and CIE coordinates of (0.16, 0.03). Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. In 2020, Li et al. demonstrated high quantum efficiency NUV LEDs utilizing InGaN/GaN/AlGaN/GaN multiple quantum wells. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. In the same year, Lu synthesized the NUV TADF emitter CZ-MPS, which exhibits the EL peak of 389 nm along with the EQE of 9.3%, which represents the highest efficiency among the UV-OLED with the wavelength less than 400 nm. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. In 2020, Lee et al. designed a multiresonance-type emitter tDIDCz, which shows a violet emission with narrow full width at half a maximum of 14 nm. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representative molecular segments for fabricating NUV emitters (the emission peak below 430 nm), as reported thus far in the literature. Inset: Schematic principle of conventional absorption and PL for anthracene. The overlap of the two curves represents self-absorption.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  EL mechanisms of OLEDs. Exciton utilization processes of (a) fluorescence (FL); (b) phosphorescence (PH); (c) thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF); (d) hybridized local and charge-transfer (HLCT) based OLEDs. IC: internal conversional, ISC: intersystem crossing, RISC: reverse intersystem crossing, and ΔEST: the singlet–triplet energy splitting; CT: charge transfer, LE: local excited, respectively. Superscripts and subscripts correspond to spin multiplicity and electronic energy-level number, respectively. (e) EL process in OLED, including carrier injection, transportation and recombination, and subsequent energy transfer, exciton conversion and radiation. HIL: hole injection layer; HTL: hole transport layer; HBL: hole blocking layer; EML: emission layer; EIL: electron injection layer; ETL: electron transport layer; EBL: electron-blocking layer; 3MLCT: triplet state metal-to-ligand charger transfer; FRET: Förster energy transfer; DET: Dexter energy transfer.	 
EQEmax = γ × ηST × ηout × ΦPL	(3)
ηout = 1 − (1 − 1/n2)1/2	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
knr ∝ αexp(−βΔEopt)	(7)
EUE = ΦPL × (0.25 + 0.75 × ϕRISC)	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of electrical excitation of QLEDs (a) and perovskite LED (b). CB: conduction band; VB: valence band. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  EQE versus electroluminescence (EL) peak wavelength of NUV OLEDs reported in the literature. Device data are taken from refs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structures of fluorene-polyaromatic hydrocarbon-based NUV emitters. Photograph: NUV OLED based on 3 pump solutions of RGB FL dyes. λEL: electroluminescence emission wavelength. CIE: Commission Internationale de L’Eclairage 1931 coordinates. EQEmax: the maximum EQE. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2005, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures of spirobifluorene-polyaromatic hydrocarbon-based NUV emitters.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of anthracene/pyrene-polyaromatic hydrocarbon-based NUV emitters.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structures of star-shaped p-type NUV emitters.	 

 	Fig. 10  Chemical structures of linear p-type NUV emitters.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The frontier molecular orbital distribution of 22. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum of the 22 devices at 4.5 V. (c) Key information on maximum EQE. Inset: Chemical structures of p-type NUV emitters. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures of n-type NUV emitters containing nitrogen cyclic rings and cyano groups.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Key information on maximum EQE. Inset: Chemical structures of cyano-modified n-type NUV emitters. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum of the 29 devices. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Chemical structures of ambipolar NUV emitters based on phenanthroimidazole (PI), phenylimidazole (PBI) and difluorobenzene as acceptors, and carbazole, triphenylamine and spirofluorene as donors.	 

 	Fig. 15  Chemical structures of NUV emitters based on PI, tetraphenylbenzene (TPB) and diverse functional groups.	 

 	Fig. 16  Chemical structures of ambipolar NUV emitters containing tetraphenylsilane skeleton and purine acceptors.	 

 	Fig. 17  Chemical structures of star-shaped ambipolar NUV emitters.	 

 	Fig. 18  Chemical structures of linear ambipolar NUV emitters based on Cz skeletons.	 

 	Fig. 19  Absorption (dashed) and emission (solid) spectra in toluene for sulfoxide/sulfone emitters (a) 59 and (b) 60. Inset: Photographs under illumination at 365 nm.	 

 	Fig. 20  Chemical structures of DPPO modified ambipolar NUV emitters.	 

 	Fig. 21  EQE–luminance relationship of OLEDs based on 67. Inset: Chemical structure and the frontier molecular orbital distributions of 67. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Chemical structures of NUV phosphorescent materials. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum of the 70 devices. (c) Key information on maximum EQE. Inset: Crystal structure of 70 plotted with 50% probability ellipsoids. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 23  EQE vs. luminance curves for the device based on 71. Inset: Chemical structure and the HOMO and LUMO distributions of 71.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structures of sulfone containing NUV emitters 72–74. (b) The relationship between molecular structures, the HOMO/LUMO energy levels and gaps of 75 and 76. (c) EQE–current density curves of 75 and 76 based OLEDs. (d) Electroluminescence spectra and CIE coordinates of 75 and 76 based devices.	 

 	Fig. 25  Chemical structures of phenylacetonitrile–Cz hybrid NUV TADF materials.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structures of NUV hot exciton materials. (b) Linear correlation of orientational polarization f of solvent media with the Stokes shift for 79–81. (c) Optimized molecular geometry and spatial distributions of the molecular orbitals with DFT calculations at the B3LYP/6-31g(d,p) level. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic diagram for the TPI-induced conversion from triplet to singlet: the TPI between triplet and positive-charge polaron; the TPI between triplet and negative-charge polaron. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons. (b) Chemical structures of TPI-induced NUV materials.	 
MC = αB2/(B + BL)2 + βB2/(B + BH)2	(10)

 	Fig. 28  (a) EL spectra of ZnO QLEDs under different applied voltages. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (b) Schematic structure of the ZnO QDs/HfO2/p-GaN LED devices. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics. (c) EL spectra of the LED devices under different forward injection currents at room temperature. The insets present the corresponding EL spectra with plotting y-axes in log scale. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics. (d) EL spectra of multilayer QLEDs with PVK as HTL. Inset: Energy-level diagrams of the devices with poly-TPD or PVK as hole transport layer (HTL). Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (e) Schematic of the GaN/Al0.5Ga0.5N QLED structure. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (f) EL under different input current densities. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (g) EL spectra for graded AlGaN layer LED. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2014, American Institute of Physics. (h) External quantum efficiencies as a function of the luminance. Inset: Schematic illustration of energy levels for the multilayer QLEDs. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) A schematic representation (left) and a cross-sectional TEM image (right) of the NUV QLEDs. Schematic illustration of the diffusion process of Cd atoms in CdZnS@ZnS NQDs during subsequent ZnS shell growth. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) EQE versus luminance. Inset: Schematic of a layered QLED device, energy-level diagram for the various layers and EL spectra of QLEDs with increasing bias voltage. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Normalized PL and EL spectra of QLEDs for different hole transport materials. Inset: Photograph of a QLED with a pixel size of 2.0 mm × 2.0 mm. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (d) PL spectra of GaN (brown and blue) and Al0.1Ga0.9N (red and green) QD structures were grown on Al0.5Ga0.5N(0001). Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2016, IOP. (e) EL spectra of (0001)-oriented GaN/Al0.5Ga0.5N QD-based LEDs for different QD active regions: from 2.0 nm QD sizes to 1.5 nm QD sizes (from top to bottom spectrum). Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (f) EQE for the InGaN/InAlGaN LEDs without (open circles) and with (open squares) deposition of graphene QDs (GQDs). Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) PL spectra of Cs3Bi2Cl9 QDs. Inset: Unit cell crystal structures of Cs3Bi2Cl9. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) PL spectra of pristine and 10.5 mol% Ca2+–CsPbCl3 NCs. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Absorption and PL spectra of undoped and doped CsPb(Cl, Br)3 NCs. Inset: The photographs of an NC solution under 365 nm illumination. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Representative scheme for exchange of Pb2+ by Cd2+ (up), change in PL on addition of CdCl2, starting from treated CsPbBr3 NCs (left) to increased addition of CdCl2 (bottom). Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Energy-level diagram for the (PEA)2PbBr4 LED devices. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Normalized luminescence of a typical LED device based on (PEA)2PbBr4 nanoplates. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  Applications of NUV light-emitting devices. (a) EL spectrum of white LED lamp combining a 370 nm NUV chip. (b) Starred bracket designates the tail; double-headed black arrows designate the width measurement. Note that significant tail thinning was observed only with NUV wavelengths. (c) Differential removal maps of incremental calculus removal at five-pulse increments after 5, 10, and 15 irradiation pulses. (d) The structured debris of bone tissue on the grooves after ablation on both areas looks to be the result of electrostatic ablation instead of thermal ablation. (e) Chemical oxygen demand (COD) detection instrument based on 300–400 nm NUV light source. (f) Super-resolution lithography machine. (g) The SEM image of laser machining on sapphire. (h) “Electronic Business Card” Design Drawn onto Wall using Laser System.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs01580f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
