Porous organic–inorganic hybrid materials for catalysis, energy and environmental applications  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC06340E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC06340E
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 3429-3460Porous organic–inorganic hybrid materials for catalysis, energy and environmental applications

        
          
            Sayantan 
            Chongdar
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sudip 
            Bhattacharjee
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Piyali 
            Bhanja
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Asim 
            Bhaumik
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Sciences, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Jadavpur, Kolkata – 700 032, India. E-mail: msab@iacs.res.in
bMaterials Chemistry Department, Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar – 751013, Odisha, India
Received 
      10th November 2021
    , Accepted 15th February 2022First published on 15th February 2022AbstractThe introduction of organic functionalities into porous inorganic materials not only makes the resulting hybrid porous framework to be more flexible and hydrophobic, but also provides additional scope for anchoring metal binding sites, which is beneficial for different frontline applications. Furthermore, the nanoscale porosity and high surface area of these organic–inorganic hybrid materials offer a better dispersion of active sites, which greatly enhances their application potential in adsorption, sensing, drug-delivery, energy storage, optoelectronics, light harvesting and catalysis. Easy post-synthetic functionalization of these hybrid materials has widened their application potential. Herein, we highlight several important synthetic strategies to design a wide range of organic–inorganic hybrid porous materials starting from the respective molecular precursors and their task-specific applications in energy and environmental research. We also outline the recent developments in their respective application areas together with various challenges that need to be overcome.
Sayantan Chongdar
Sayantan Chongdar received his Bachelor's Degree in Chemistry from the University of Calcutta and Master's Degree in Chemistry (Materials) from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata. He is currently a Junior Research Fellow at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science under the supervision of Prof. Asim Bhaumik. His research interests focus on hybrid nanoporous materials.
Sudip Bhattacharjee
Sudip Bhattacharjee obtained his BSc Degree in Chemistry from Burdwan University, India and MSc Degree in Chemistry from Bankura University, India. Currently, he is a Junior Research Fellow at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science under the supervision of Prof. Asim Bhaumik. His research interests focus on the catalytic conversion of CO2 to valuable chemicals over supported metal-catalysts and metal–organic frameworks.
Piyali Bhanja
Piyali Bhanja obtained her MSc Degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras. Then she completed her PhD Degree in Chemistry from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science under the supervision of Prof. Asim Bhaumik. Then she was a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellow at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan in 2019–2020. Presently she is working as a Ramanujan Fellow in the Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, India. Her research interests focus on electrochemical energy conversion and CO2 fixation reactions.
Asim Bhaumik
Asim Bhaumik did his PhD in Chemistry from the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune in 1997. Then he was a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellow at the University of Tokyo in 1997–1999. Then he was an Associate Researcher at Toyota Central R & D Labs Nagoya, Japan in 1999–2001. Then he joined the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata as a regular faculty in 2001. His area of research includes designing novel microporous and mesoporous materials for energy and environmental applications, including H2/CO2 storage, adsorptive removal of heavy metal ions, heterogeneous catalysis for the synthesis of fine chemicals, CO2 fixation, biofuel synthesis, and electrochemical/photoelectrochemical water splitting. Prof. Bhaumik is in the Editorial Boards of several journals and a Fellow of The Royal Society of Chemistry, UK.
1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, the fabrication of new ordered porous materials has significantly increased in both the scientific and technological domains. The ability of porous materials to interact with other ions, atoms and molecules not only through their surfaces, but also throughout their bulk, makes them stand out compared to other materials. Traditionally, this class of materials has been employed in selective adsorption,1 catalysis2 and ion exchange.3 However, the application of this fast-growing research field has been considerably extended in areas ranging from medical diagnosis to energy storage.4,5 Based on the dimensions of their pores, porous materials are classified by IUPAC as: microporous: pore size below 2.0 nm, mesoporous: between 2.0 to 50 nm and macroporous: pore dimensions above 50 nm. The performance of a porous material towards a particular application depends directly on its shape, size and void space. Over the years, the demand for monodispersity of the pore size and shape and high void volume has enabled researchers to enhance the application potential of these materials significantly.
Several emerging porous hybrid organic–inorganic materials, such as organo-silicates,6 periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs),7 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),8 metal-organophosphonate frameworks and metal–organic polymer composites9,10 allow precise control of their functional moieties through detailed design of their structures at the molecular level. The hallmark of these materials is the presence of a “molecular scaffold” possessing both inorganic and organic moieties, which is far more extensive than that in other porous materials.11,12
The introduction of organic functionalities in polyoxometalates (POMs),13 which consist of early transition metal polyhedra of different heteroatoms (V, Nb, Ta, Mo, W, etc.) results in a rich family of organic–inorganic hybrids. These hybrid POMs have found utility in various applications such as acid/oxidation catalysis, photocatalysis, and adsorptive removal of pollutants from water. The removal of the highly toxic hexavalent chromium from aqueous contaminants using suitable porous adsorbents is very challenging from an environmental perspective. Zr-MOF functionalized with alkyl thiol groups was successfully utilized for the reductive removal of toxic Cr(VI)14 by virtue of the formation of a Cr(VI)–thiolate complex on the surface of the hybrid framework. Generally, hybrid nanostructures of POM-based sulfonated ionic liquids with a carboxylate MOF exhibited excellent catalytic activity for the synthesis of biofuels via esterification/transesterification reactions.15 By virtue of the fluorescence property associated with organic ligands, MOFs facilitate the energy transfer process, thereby acting as efficient photocatalysts for several organic transformations (oxidation, reduction and C–C coupling reactions).16 Ti-MOF when coupled with an inorganic nanomaterial to form the NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/BiOCl composite, it showed high photocatalytic activity for the decomposition of organic dyes.17
Another fascinating area where these hybrid frameworks have found huge potential is asymmetric catalysis. Through surface functionalization, chiral metal complexes can be anchored over organically functionalized mesoporous silica and the resulting material can be successfully utilized in the enantioselective Friedel–Crafts hydroxyalkylation reaction.18 One of the unique classes of hybrid porous nanomaterials is chiral PMOs (ChiMO),19 where one can achieve high enantioselectivity in catalytic transformations. Here, the bridging organosilane precursor bearing a chiral metal salen complex can be prepared via the Schiff base condensation of aromatic aldehydes with chiral amines followed by complexation with a metal salt, which acts as the chiral centre for carrying out the asymmetric catalysis under liquid-phase reaction conditions.
Chen et al. developed another organic–inorganic hybrid system, where cobalt phosphide nanoparticles were uniformly distributed in N-doped carbon, and the resulting CoP/NMC20 material showed high efficiency in a dye sensitized solar cell. Here, melamine and resorcinol condensed with formaldehyde in the presence of triblock copolymer F127 under hydrothermal conditions together with cobalt phosphate, resulting in the formation of the CoP/NMC nanocomposite under carbothermal reduction. The carbonization of mesoporous nanocomposites is considered one of the versatile strategies for the synthesis of highly reactive nanoparticles stabilized within high surface area carbon-based materials and these heterojunction nanostructures have been intensively studied in several energy conversation processes.21–23 The immobilization of VPO4 nanoparticles over hierarchically porous carbon via the hydrogel-mediated synthesis route resulted in high storage capacity for Li+ and Na+.24 Among the hybrid systems, Zhang et al. threaded polyethylene glycol along the nanochannels of crystalline chalcogenide [Sn3Se7]n2n− layers, where this type of hybrid nanocomposite is in high demand in photoelectrochemical applications.25 Alternatively, Cu(II) can be immobilized at the donor sites of the imine and β-ketoenamine moieties of 2D hexagonal COFs, efficiently catalysing the [2+3] dipolar cycloaddition of different alkynes and azides for the synthesis of value-added 1,2,3-triazoles.26 Organically pillared layered Ti(IV)/Zr(IV) phosphonates27 are another class of organic–inorganic hybrids, which have found several useful applications in adsorption and catalysis. Zirconium phosphonate synthesized with the naturally occurring phosphonate precursor phytic acid, bearing multiple phosphates has been successfully employed as a heterogeneous catalyst for the Meerwein–Ponndorf–Verley reduction of biomass-derived levulinic acid or its ester into γ-valerolactone biofuel.28 Pillaring of the layered metal phosphates using different spacer organic moieties resulted in not only efficient cross-linking, leading to framework stability, but also induced nanoscale porosity, hydrophobicity and chemical functionalization at the pore surface.29 Pillaring of the rigid azo dye 4-((5-chloro-4-methyl-2-sulfophenyl)azo)-3-hydroxy-2-naphthalene-carboxylic acid could enhance the interlayer spacing to as high as 0.86 to 1.72 nm in the case of an Mg–Al-layered double hydroxide (LDH).30 Thus, the choice of organics in the resulting organic–inorganic hybrid material is crucial in directing its chemical and physical properties. In the following sections, we provide a brief account of the synthesis of some of the major classes of organic–inorganic hybrid porous nanomaterials and their frontline applications in the energy, environment and catalysis fields.
2. Synthesis
2.1. Synthesis of organically functionalized mesoporous silicas
Organic functionalization over porous inorganic silica-based materials endows organic–inorganic hybrid molecular sieves with enhanced porosity and multifaceted properties. This class of advanced materials has received a significant amount of attention over the past decade owing to their high specific surface area, narrow pore size distribution, large pore volume and high structural stability together with long-range ordering. The typical synthesis of mesoporous silica materials necessitates “soft-templating” with structure-directing agents (SDAs) such as cationic/anionic surfactants or amphipathic polymers. A silica precursor such as tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS), tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) or sodium silicate is stirred with the SDAs at the desired pH and temperature. The self-assembly of these SDAs results in the formation of surfactant micelles. The silica precursors hydrolyse and condense around the ordered assembly of surfactant micelle templates, resulting in the formation of well-ordered mesostructures. Upon the removal of the templates by either calcination or solvent extraction, a mesoporous silica material with well-organized uniform pore channels are obtained. This pore structure and pore size can be controlled by altering the nature of the SDAs, by varying the nature and amount of silica precursors, pH of the medium, synthesis time and temperature. Organic functionalization of these porous silica frameworks not only endows them with surface polarity/hydrophobicity but also incorporates various functionalities such as acidic, basic, chiral, redox, biomolecules, and drugs, either inside the pore channels or within the pore walls, giving rise to advanced properties in the resulting porous materials. From the perspective of materials scientists, the immobilization of organic moieties on silica surfaces can be performed via two different ways including (i) post-synthesis or grafting (ex situ functionalization) and (ii) co-condensation or direct incorporation (in situ functionalization), as illustrated in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  General approach for the synthesis of organo-functionalized mesoporous silica materials. 

2.1.1. Post-synthesis or grafting (ex situ functionalization). 
The post-synthesis functionalization process is a two-step process, which requires the availability of free and geminal silanol groups to react with organosilanes containing different functional groups. This method is relatively straightforward, and it enhances the possibility of selectively grafting organic groups on the external surface, pore surface or at the pore entrance. Over the years, post-modification with various organic groups including amino, thiol, alkyl, and aryl moieties has been extensively studied. The grafting technique is beneficial to enhance the quality of post-synthetic modification. Immobilization of organic moieties in the mesoporous silica framework can be accomplished with or without solvents. Bourkaib et al. functionalized a silica support (SBA-15 and MMS) with (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) by suspending the silica support in dry toluene, followed by the addition of the requisite amount of APTES under reflux conditions.31 In a water-free environment, APTES reacts only with the surface SiOH groups, forming covalent Si–O–Si bonds, without undergoing self-polymerization. This technique is known as the “solvent approach”. Alternatively, a “solvent-free” approach was introduced by Jaroniec et al., where “as-synthesized” mesostructured silica containing SDA undergoes template displacement by organosilanes (TDS process) through electrostatic interaction between an anionic organosilane and cationic surfactant, resulting in the formation of various organosilane-functionalised mesoporous materials via a one-step procedure.32 In 2009, Gartmann and Brühwiler not only demonstrated that the type of organosilane employed for functionalization strongly determines the degree of pore and/or external surface grafting but also visualized the role of the solvent on the uniform distribution of functional groups.33 The superiority of 3-aminopropyltris(methoxyethoxyethoxy)silane (APTMEES) over the frequently used APTES for the external surface functionalization of mesoporous silicas without blocking the mesopores was attributed to the lower mobility and ability to penetrate the SDA-filled channels of the as-synthesized materials. In 2000, Röser and co-workers extensively studied the surface morphology of MCM-41 with varied pore sizes (2.8 and 3.8 nm), grafted with disilazane reagents of type HN(SiR1R22)2, constituting organic functionalities R1,2 = H, Me, Ph, n-Bu, n-Oct, and vinyl of different longitudinal and lateral extensions.34 They showed that the surface hydroxyl consumption and silylation efficiency depend on the steric bulk/shape of the R group, given that tetramethyldisilazane showed the highest surface coverage and was less sterically hindered compared to the generally used standard hexamethyldisilazane. The selective adsorption of low-concentrated nonylphenol, an endocrine disrupter, on hexagonal mesoporous silica (MPS) grafted with octylsilane (C8-MPS) and dodecylsilane (C12-MPS) was investigated by Inumaru et al.35 The introduction of hydrophobic moieties upon grafting in the inorganic nanospaces proved to be an effective blueprint towards designing molecular selective adsorbents.
 Fig. 1  Structural models of periodic mesoporous benzene-silica. (a and b) Structure optimised using the Universal Force Field. Atoms are represented as ball and stick model. Carbon – ash; silicon – orange; oxygen – red; and hydrogen – white. 
Over the years, our group also extensively explored the surface functionalization of mesoporous silicas via the post-grafting technique with (3-chloropropyl)triethoxysilane followed by SN2 substitution reaction with tungstic acid36 and 5-aminoisophthalic acid.37 Schiff base condensation on APTES post-modified SBA-15 with 4-formyl-benzoic acid,38 furfural,39 and diacetylmonooxime40 resulted in the formation of effective organo-heterocatalysts for the synthesis of xanthenes, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural and one-pot oxidation of olefins, respectively. In 2020, Schulze et al. synthesized an organo-heterocatalyst by post-modifying a silica material (LiChrospher® Si 100, particle size 5 μm) to generate azide-functionalized silica particles, which were further modified by applying click-chemistry with propargyl ether-TEMPO.41 This TEMPO-modified mesoporous silica-based heterocatalyst showed a good performance for the conversion of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde in an HPLC column reactor. However, diacetoxyiodobenzene (DAIB), a mild secondary oxidising agent, was chosen as a co-catalyst to regenerate TEMPO during the reaction. In the same year, Florek and co-workers fabricated several tailor-made 3D-porous, functionalized KIT-6 materials with different chelating ligands such as diglycol-2,4-diamido-propyltriethoxysilane (DGA-N), 3,6-dioxaoctanediamido-propyltriethoxysilane (DOODA-N), and furan-2,4-diamido-propyltriethoxysilane (FDGA-N) for the solid-phase extraction of rare earth metals.42 The metal adsorption selectivity was reflected by the metal and specific surface functional group (N-donor, O-donor, and silanol groups) interactions, highlighting the importance of precise design and grafting of the chelating ligand on the inorganic silica matrix. Recently, in 2021, Marjani et al. synthesized multi-organo-functionalized fibrous silica (MF-KCC-1) containing amine (–NH2), thiol (–SH), and tetrasulfide (–S–S–S–S–) groups via the post-modified technique, which was proven to be a potential adsorbent for the removal of acid fuchsin (AF) and acid orange II (AO) synthetic dyes from water.43 The high surface area of 572 m2 g−1, unique fibrous structure and availability of abundant active surface functional groups increased the attractive interaction of this material with the anionic dye molecules.
 Fig. 2  PMO materials bearing different organosilane moieties in their framework. 
Recapitulating the grafting methodology, its superiority lies in producing hybrid frameworks with more protruding functional groups and well-defined pore sizes. However, the inability to produce a homogeneous distribution of functional moieties throughout the pore channels calls for other suitable approaches (such as co-condensation and direct synthesis). The poor distribution of organic functionalities in the porous matrix can be attributed to the calcination of the as-synthesized material, resulting in the lower availability of silanol groups on the surface, and thus decreased ability to undergo condensation with organosilanes. The possibility of pore blockage after functionalization is also another limitation. Hence, extensive research has been carried out to obtain better textural parameters for porous organic–inorganic hybrid materials than that synthesized by post-synthesis.
 Fig. 3  Various synthetic strategies for the design of MOFs and their versatile applications. 


2.1.2. Co-condensation (in situ functionalization). 
The co-condensation or one-pot synthetic approach involves the functionalization of silica materials by the addition of organosilanes together with silica precursors, resulting in the co-assembly of the organic and inorganic precursors together with SDAs in one pot. This method introduces organic units homogeneously into the porous nanostructures compared to the ex situ technique. This in situ approach of synthesising hybrid porous nanostructures results in the insertion (fossilization) of organic moieties on the internal surface of the mesoporous silica framework without any possibility of pore blockage. However, with an increase in the amount of organosilanes in the initial gel, the crystallinity and the textural parameters of the product decreases. The extent of self-condensation of the functional organosilanes over cross-linking via co-condensation with the silica precursors results in a poor concentration of surface-exposed functionalities compared to the organic functionalities initially used in the synthetic gel composition. In 2003, Lin et al. developed a synthetic strategy to control the multifunctionalization and morphology of hybrid MCM-41-like materials by varying the molar ratio of the organoalkoxysilane precursors.44 Monofunctionalization of mesoporous silicas with 3-[2-(aminoethylamino)ethylamino]propyl-trimethoxysilane (AEPTMS) or 3-cyanopropyl-triethoxysilane (CPTES) was carried out via the base-catalyzed co-condensation route. The authors also synthesised multifunctional mesoporous silicas by co-condensing tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) with AEPTMS and CPTES in the same reaction mixture. It was observed that there was a change in the morphology of the functionalized mesoporous silicas upon changing the molar ratio of the two organosilanes. A change in the shape of the functionalized mesoporous silicas from rod- to sphere-shaped was observed as the relative amount of AEPTMS over CPTES increased. Moreover, the hydrophilic nature of AEPTMS possibly elevated the pore size of the mesoporous materials upon increasing its composition in the reaction mixture. Based on the heat of transfer of different salts from water to 0.1 M cationic cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) solution, an anionic lyotropic series (citrate < CO32− < SO42− < CH3CO2− < F− < OH− < HCO2− < Cl− < NO3− < Br− < CH3C6H4SO3−) was reported by Larsen and Magid,45 which inspired this group to investigate the various electrostatic matching effects of different anionic organoalkoxysilanes with that of CTAB, which govern the extent of organic functionalization on the pore surface of MCM-41-type mesoporous silica nanosphere (MSN) materials via the interfacially devised co-condensation technique.46
Again, in 2003, they investigated the role played by various organoalkoxysilane precursors (containing primary amine, secondary amine, urea, isocyanate, vinyl and nitrile groups) in the base-catalysed co-condensation technique for the synthesis of hybrid mesoporous silicas.47 They revealed that the extent of functionalization and morphology of the particles were determined by the size, concentration and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of the organoalkoxysilane precursors. The hydrophobic (e.g., isocyanate, nitrile or vinyl groups) organoalkoxysilane was effectively condensed in the siliceous framework to produce highly dense functionalization compared to the hydrophilic (e.g., primary amines) organoalkoxysilane, giving rise to small rodlike nanoparticles. In addition, the organoalkoxysilanes with longer organic moieties, irrespective of being hydrophilic or hydrophobic, produced hybrid mesoporous silicas with a larger mesopore diameter. Compared to the standard MCM-41, the strong interaction between the hydrophobic moieties of the functional groups and nonpolar tails of the CTAB molecule at the micelle/water interface resulted in a reduction in the curvature of the self-assembled micelles, producing a smaller particle size. Over the years, in catalytic research field, ferrocene has become a potent candidate, while azobenzene, owing to its excellent photochemical properties due to the reversible isomerization between the trans- and cis-forms of the azo bond, has attracted much attention in the scientific world. In 2018, Abboud et al. synthesised a 2D hexagonal ferrocenylazobenzene-functionalized mesoporous MCM-41 material (Fc-Az-M14) by co-condensing 4-triethoxysilyl-3′-ferrocenylazobenzene (TEFA) and TEOS in CTAB and basic medium, which exhibited the properties of both ferrocene and azobenzene.48 A thorough investigation on the physicochemical properties and catalytic performance of a hydrophobically modified SBA-15, which was synthesised by co-condensing TEOS with propyl-triethoxysilane (PTES), was reported by Zong and co-workers in 2019.49 The change in the pre-hydrolysis time of TEOS resulted in a variation in the distribution of functional moieties in the hybrid SBA-15 material, which was reflected by the change in the pore size in the materials. A combination of high hydrophobicity with largest pore size proved beneficial towards the hydrogenation of AQ (2-ethyl-anthraquinone). Recently, in 2021, Jun et al. employed the co-condensation of undecyl-bipyridyl-linked methallylsilane with TEOS to produce bipyridine-functionalized SBA-15, Methallyl-bpy@Si.50 This material was further loaded with Pd (Pd-bpy@Si) and Rh (Rh-bpy@Si), producing a hybrid catalyst for C–C bond coupling and selective hydrogenation reactions, respectively.
Generally, in contrast to the post-grafting methodology, co-condensation presents a faster and more convenient way to functionalize mesoporous silicas preferably with a homogeneous distribution and higher loading of organic functional moieties. However, with an increase in the concentration of functional groups in the silica network, there is a considerable decrease in the degree of mesoscopic order compared to its pure siliceous counterparts. Also, the co-condensation technique restricts the high-temperature calcination process to preserve the organic functionalities, resulting in a decrease in the hydrothermal stability of the hybrid material.
In recent years, chemists and materials scientists around the world focused on designing advanced functionalized materials comprised of multiple functionalities. Soltani et al., for the first time, reported the synthesis of nano-silica KCC-1 possessing multiple functionalities such as amine (–NH2), thiol (–SH) and tetrasulfide (–S–S–S–S–) groups, for the removal of acid fuchsine (AF) and acid orange II (AO) from water, reflecting a significant advancement in environmental research.51 This group further modified this work by substituting the thiol group with cationic 1-methylimidazolium group, enhancing the anionic AO and AF dyes uptake via effective electrostatic attraction.52 Mesoporous silica aerogels, owing to their ultra-low density and large specific surface area (∼800 m2 g−1), have attracted significant attention worldwide. Surface functionalization of these silica aerogels via various functional moieties and biopolymers assimilates interesting properties, which prove beneficial for numerous applications such as CO2 adsorption, gas purification, and chromatographic applications. Although the concept of molecular imprinting has been known for some time, Saad and co-workers recently for the first time implemented it over porous silica aerogels, which were further phenyl-functionalized to improve their adsorption capacity towards methylxanthines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).53 The authors highlighted the indisputable influence of molecular imprinting towards the selective adsorption of target molecules, thus suggesting a new potential strategy to fabricate porous siliceous materials with wider application.

2.2. Synthesis of periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs) employing bridging organosilanes
A distinction exists in the scientific community between PMO materials and organically functionalised mesoporous silicas, which were mentioned previously. PMOs are a different class of hybrid periodic mesoporous silicas, which are synthesised through a sol–gel process involving bridging organoalkoxysilanes having the general formula (RO)3Si–R′–Si(OR)3 (where R = alkyl group and R′= alkyl/alkenyl group), in the presence of some structure-directing agent (SDA) (Fig. 1). In 1999, three research groups led by Inagaki, Stein and Ozin independently and almost simultaneously reported these porous hybrid frameworks containing ethane (–CH2CH2–) fragments covalently linked with a siliceous matrix.54–56 In a typical synthesis, organo- bridged alkoxysilanes (such as 1,2-bis(trimethoxysilyl)ethane, bis(triethoxysilyl)ethane, bis(triethoxysilyl)ethylene and bis(triethoxysilyl)ethane) alone or together with TEOS are allowed to self-assemble in the presence of a cationic surfactant template in alkaline medium. Upon aging the reaction mixture for hours or days, it is then filtered, and the solvent is extracted to remove the surfactant templates, producing a highly ordered organic–inorganic hybrid PMO material. It is worth mentioning that these organic functional groups (R′) become a part of the framework via covalently bonded non-hydrolyzable Si–C bonds (Fig. 2). In contrast to either co-condensed or post-grafted organo-functionalized mesoporous silicas, where a reduction in surface area occurs with an increase in the extent of functionalization, PMO materials offer higher organo-functionalization without compromising their surface area.
In 2003, Bhaumik et al. synthesised titanium-incorporated ethane-bridged hybrid mesoporous silsesquioxane by mixing 1,2-bis-(trimethoxysilyl)ethane (BTME) and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) in a solution containing octadecyltrimethyl ammonium chloride (C18TMACl) as the surfactant.57 Tetrabutylorthotitanate (TBOT) was used as the titanium source. Compared to the conventional TS-1 and Ti-MCM-41, the increased hydrophobicity upon the insertion of the ethane fragments in this titanium-containing organic–inorganic hybrid mesoporous silica enhanced the oxidation of the bulky organic compounds, leading to improved catalytic activity in this material towards the ammoximation of bulky ketones. Since then, extensive research in the field of PMOs has been carried out by our group. In 2010, Chandra et al. bridged a diimine fluorophore in a solid siliceous framework, producing a highly ordered 2D-hexagonal luminescent organic–inorganic hybrid mesoporous silica (LHMS-2).58 Schiff base condensation between 2,6-diformyl-4-methylphenol (DFP) and (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) was employed to synthesize the a fluorescent organosilane precursor, (EtO)3–Si(CH2)3NCH–C6H2(CH3)(OH)–CHN(CH2)3Si(OEt)3, which was further reacted with TEOS in an acidic medium containing Pluronic F127 and TVCH as the SDA and swelling agent, respectively. This fluorophore-doped PMO material showed high affinity towards metal cations such as Fe3+, Zn2+, Cd2+ and Hg2+, acting as a sustainable adsorbent towards heavy metal ions from wastewater. Phloroglucinol-dialdehyde was reacted with APTES, generating a Schiff base organosilica by Modak and co-workers in 2012.59 This Schiff base organosilica was further condensed with TEOS in basic medium (pH ∼ 12) in the presence of CTAB, followed by hydrothermal treatment at 75 °C for 2 days. This material was solvent extracted using ethanol/dilute HCl to obtain a template-free nanoporous architecture, which was further grafted with Pd by reacting with Pd(OAc)2 in glacial acetic acid under a nitrogen atmosphere. This Pd-grafted PMO material (Pd-LHMS-3) exhibited excellent eco-friendly catalytic activity towards fluoride-free Hiyama cross-coupling reactions, Cu-free Sonogashira couplings with hexamine and cyanide-free cyanations of aryl iodides. In the following year, Sasidharan and Bhaumik developed a post-synthetic strategy to functionalize sulphonic acid moieties in hybrid PMO materials containing carbon–carbon double bonds in the walls of the siliceous framework.60 Hexagonal mesoporous ethenylene-silicas (HMEs) with varying pore sizes were synthesized using triblock copolymer P123 and oligomeric surfactants Brij76 and Brij56 in acidic medium, taking bis(triethoxysilyl)ethylene (BTSE) as the silica source. The epoxidation of the –CC– bond followed by its conversion to bisulfite ions, without using the conventional mercaptol/H2O2 or harsh concentrated H2SO4 reagents draws attention towards its ecological aspect. This sulfonic acid-based PMO material was used to catalyse the esterification of acetic acid with ethanol under liquid-phase reaction conditions.
Recently, in 2020, a novel nitrogen and sulphur-rich PMO material, DMTZ-PMO, bearing thiadiazole and thiol moieties grafted in its pore walls, with a high specific surface area of 971 m2 g−1 was synthesized by Das et al.61 The thiadiazole and thiol-bridged organosilane precursor was synthesized via substitution reaction between 1,3,4-thiadiazole-2,5-dithiol and 3-choloropropyltriethoxysilane, which was further condensed with TEOS in a CTAB-assisted basic medium. The soft-soft interaction between the sulphur centers and Hg2+ ions resulted in the high uptake of Hg2+ (2081 mg g−1), making this material an excellent mercury scavenger.
One neoteric progression in PMO hybrid materials is their functionalization with chiral moieties, generating optically active PMOs. Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) in water form chiral nematic liquid crystals, which were utilized as a template in the condensation of (RO)3SiCH2CH2Si(OR)3 or (RO)3SiC6H4Si(OR)3 to synthesize chiral nematic mesoporous organosilicas (CNMOs).62,63 However, the real challenge is to incorporate long alkylene spacers without destroying the chiral nematic structure. MacLachlan et al. extended this investigation by incorporating a bridging urea group and long alkylene spacers varying from C1–C6 with the aim to modify the properties of (CNMOs).64 The issue of phase separation between the aqueous CNC suspension and organosilica precursors was resolved by either mixing long alkylene-bridged precursors with shorter ones or by using a binary solvent system (water and DMF) during self-assembly. Recently, a chiral bis-organosilane precursor 1,1′-((1R,2R)-1,2-diphenylethane-1,2-diyl)bis(3-(3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl)urea) was condensed in an EtOH/water mixture in the presence of CTAB as an SDA to produce chiral PMO nanoparticles by Reziq and Omar in 2020.65 Furthermore, these chiral PMO were modified with magnetite nanoparticles (NPs) through the oil in water (o/w) emulsion technique to obtain magnetic chiral PMO NPs.
Recently, considering biomedical applications especially drug delivery, significant research has been carried out to design PMO containing degradable organo-bridged alkoxysilanes. These hybrid mesoporous organosilica nanoparticles can undergo degradation on-demand under specific pathological conditions at the cellular level. To preserve the degradable nature of these organosilica nanomaterials, it is crucial to have suitable organic cleavable bridges such as disulphide or oxamide/ester-based alkoxysilanes in the material. Biocompatibility with target delivery enhances the potential of these PMOs as a promising drug delivery nanocarriers.66 In the spectrum of catalysis, obtaining equivalent efficiency in heterogeneous catalysts to that of their homogeneous congeners (transition metal complexes) has been a challenge for material chemists around the globe. The incorporation of metal complexes into functionalized pockets of PMOs via post-synthetic treatment not only maximizes the catalytic performance but also imparts the ease of separation. Recently, Kataoka and Inagaki employed the evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) approach to fabricate a 2,2′-bipyridine-PMO thin film, which later served as framework to affix MoO2Cl2 complexes.67 This new approach to obtain metal complex-grafted PMO thin films can serve as a microreactor for the synthesis of fine chemicals in continuous flow reactors. The versatility in chemical composition offers heterogeneity and idiosyncrasy in the application of PMOs, which is not surprising, given that they were first developed by materials chemists. However, to conduct PMO research for particular applications, synergy between academic and industrial research is crucial.
2.3. Synthesis of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)
The term metal–organic framework (MOF) was first coined by Yaghi et al. in 1995,68 where they reported a solvothermal synthetic route for generating a zeolite-like, crystalline, extended channel system of Cu(4,4′-bpy)1.5·NO3(H2O)1.25. Since then, MOFs have gained immense attention in the field of hybrid porous materials. The robustness of these organic–inorganic hybrid open frameworks, their facile synthetic strategy and flexible network topology with the ability to support permanent porosity make them superior to other hybrid porous systems. Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are a particular class of crystalline hybrid porous materials containing a regular array of metal ions or clusters, forming nodes, and coordinated with organic “linker” molecules, generally ditopic or polytopic organic carboxylates (or other molecule with similar negative charge), together forming a cage-like structure. With the discovery of MOF-5 in 1999 by Yaghi and coworkers, these crystalline microporous polymeric materials have emerged as an interface between molecular coordination chemistry and materials science.69 MOFs epitomize the sophistication of isoreticular chemistry, leading to a versatile framework with varying dimensionalities and topologies. The high surface area, tunable porosity, high pore volume, magnified surface-to-volume ratio, ultra-low densities, and microreactor environment with high guest loading capacities of these hybrid materials make them highly applicable in catalysis,70 CO2 adsorption,71 energy storage,72 sensors,73 drug delivery,74 biomedical sensing,75 and others (Fig. 3).
Traditionally, the hydrothermal or solvothermal technique is employed firstly to overcome the solubility problem of heavier organic ligands, and secondly to initiate a rapid nucleation process to obtain MOF crystals. Banerjee and co-workers synthesized two distinct 2D fluorinated metal organic frameworks (F-MOFs) by solvothermally reacting copper(II) nitrate with 4,4′-(hexafluoroisopropylidene)bis(benzoic acid) and 3-methyl pyridine in N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) and N,N-diethyl formamide (DEF) solvents.76 With a change in the solvents, the extent of deprotonation of H2hfbba under suitable conditions resulted in divergent changes in the resultant porous hybrid frameworks. In pursuit of more stable and chemically-inert frameworks, Férey et al. designed a chromium-terephthalate porous architecture, MIL-101 (MIL stands for Material of Institute Lavoisier).77 MIL-101 is a robust MOF with a surface area greater than 4000 m2 g−1, which is typically synthesised hydrothermally at 220 °C in an autoclave under autogenous pressure for 8 h by reacting a chromium salt with H2BDC assisted by small amount of HF. A 9 Å by 9 Å large square-shaped 3D porous open-framework, HKUST-1, was first reported in 1999 by Williams et al., which was solvothermally synthesized using cupric nitrate and trimesic acid in H2O–EtOH solvent at 180 °C under autogenous pressure for 12 h.78 The weakly coordinated water or solvent molecules to the Cu2+ sites, are removed upon mild activation under vacuum, leaving behind a porous hybrid architecture with open metal sites. The high affinity of zirconium towards oxygen donor ligands is reflected by the unprecedented thermal and chemical stability of the Zr(IV)-based MOF, UiO-66 (UiO stands for University of Oslo), which was first discovered in 2008 by Cavka et al.79 In a typical solvothermal synthesis, ZrCl4 and H2BDC were dissolved in DMF and crystallized under static conditions in a pre-heated oven at 120 °C for 1 day. An inorganic brick with enhanced stability, consisting of Zr6O4(OH)4 in it its inner core, where alternative capping of the triangular faces of Zr6-octahedron by μ3-O and μ3-OH groups was found. In 2002, You et al. came up with a novel 3D MOF having a zeolite-like topology, where imidazole was used as the linker.80 The two coordinating N atoms of the imidazole moiety were oriented at an angle of 144°, which replicates the Si–O–Si angle of 145° in zeolites, resulting a tetrahedral building block. Later, these hybrid porous frameworks became known as zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), and in 2008, Banerjee et al. solvothermally synthesized twenty-five different ZIF crystals using either Zn(II)/Co(II) nitrate and imidazolate/imidazolate-type linkers in DMF or DEF solvent at a temperature in the range of 65 °C to 150 °C for 48 to 100 h.81 In contrast to zeolites, these hybrid ZIFs have much lower densities, as measured by the number of tetrahedral vertices per unit volume (T/V), indicating their more open framework, and hence easier functionalization of their pores. Our group also explored this field considerably, where in 2017 Das et al. solvothermally synthesized a new microporous Ce(III)-based MOF containing multicarboxylate linkers (1,4-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid) in the presence of 4-amino triazole or 5-amino tetrazole.82 The presence of an unpaired electron of Ce(III) resulted in the paramagnetic nature of this MOF. Recently, Chakraborty et al. hydrothermally synthesized a novel tetradentate phosphonate ligand-based MOF, H8L–Co-crystals, by reacting (ethene-1,1,2,2-tetrayltetrakis(benzene-4,1-diyl))tetraphosphonic acid and cobalt nitrate hexahydrate in a Vensil high pressure tube at 353 K for 30 min.83 This Co-based MOF showed very good electrocatalytic activity towards the HER with a low overpotential of 243 mV and low Tafel slope of 102 mV dec−1 in acidic medium.
A faster route for the large-scale production of MOFs is still a challenging task for materials scientists. Microwave dielectric heating-assisted hydrothermal synthesis allows rapid crystallization with a narrow particle size distribution. Molecules such as water and DMSO possess dielectric moments. Heat is generated due to the molecular rotation and collision to align themselves with the alternating electric field of the microwave. In a typical synthesis process, the substrates are dissolved in a suitable solvent, transferred to a quartz or Teflon-lined vessel, sealed and heated in a microwave for the appropriate time. Chang et al., for the first time in 2005 reported Cr-MIL-100, which synthesized by microwave irradiation at 220 °C in aqueous media.84 In comparison to conventional hydrothermal synthesis for 4 days, the authors reported 44% yield of Cr-MIL-100 in just 4 h using the microwave-assisted technique. In the following year, Masel and Ni reported microcrystals of three known MOFs comprising Zn4O clusters and BDC-NH2 (IRMOF-1, IRMOF-2, IRMOF-3) with a uniform size and cubical morphology, synthesized through microwave treatment at 150 W for a few seconds.85 Since the nucleation of all crystals takes place at once, microwave-assisted synthesis results in the formation of particles with a narrow size distribution. Recently, Solís et al. synthesised NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOFs solvothermally under microwave irradiation at a temperature of 200 °C for a reaction time duration of 15 min.86 Briefly, 2-aminoterephthalic acid (ATA) was dissolved in DMF, followed by the addition of titanium(IV) isopropoxide and methanol. The resulting mixture was transferred to a Teflon-lined vessel for microwave heating. They reported that at a temperature below 180 °C, an amorphous-type material was formed, while high exposure to microwave irradiation (i.e., 4 h) resulted in collapse of the MOF framework.
Another methodology for faster and homogeneous nucleation with rapid crystallization of MOFs is the sonochemical method. In 2008, Son and co-workers for the first time utilized the sonochemical method to synthesise high-quality MOF-5 crystals with a size ranging between 5–25 μm within 30 min, by dissolving zinc nitrate hexahydrate and terephthalic acid in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) under an N2 atmosphere.87 The resultant mixture was then transferred to a transparent horn-type tube reactor for ultrasonic treatment, where a temperature of 164 °C was obtained upon increasing the power to 50% of the maximum power, resulting in faster crystallization. Generally, organic solvents with a high vapour pressure reduce the cavitational collapse intensity, which consequently reduces the temperature and pressure.88 However, NMP has a high boiling point (202 °C) and a low vapour pressure, making it suitable for sonochemical synthesis. The conventional solvothermal synthesis of porphyrin-containing MOFs requires a prolonged reaction time with controlled reaction conditions. Recently, Yu and co-workers sonochemically synthesised Zr-based porphyrinic MOF-525 and MOF-545 with high purity and uniform distribution of size, in just 2.5 and 0.5 h respectively.89 Zirconyl chloride octahydrate and tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin (TCPP) were dissolved in DMF and charged in a glass vial for sonication. Benzoic acid and trifluoroacetic acid were used as a modulator for MOF-525 and MOF-545, respectively. The rapid nucleation and crystal growth under a relatively shorter reaction time compared to conventional synthesis resulted in an enhancement in defect sites for the sonochemical method, as estimated by UV-vis spectroscopy.
The researchers at BASF pioneered the electrochemical (EC) synthesis of MOFs in 2005, where anodic dissolution continuously supplies metal ions to the synthesis solution containing organic linkers and a conducting salt.90 [Cu3(BTC)2] MOF crystals were synthesised electrochemically by Ameloot et al., where they applied an anodic voltage to the copper electrode, resulting in the dissolution of Cu(II) ions in the synthesis solution containing 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (BTC) and methyltributylammonium methyl sulfate (MTBS) as the ligand and conducting salt, respectively.91 They reported that upon increasing the voltage, smaller crystals were obtained due to the higher concentration of metal ions near the surface, which favoured nucleation, whereas dilution with water resulted in the formation of less crystals with a larger size. The EC method serves as an eco-friendly route for the synthesis of MOFs. In 2021, Liu et al. electrochemically synthesised a Cu3(HHTP)2 (HHTP: 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene) 2D-MOF film over a single-crystal Cu(100) anode.92 Cu foil served as the anode and cathode, which were submerged in deionised water containing HHTP ligand and ammonia. The applied potential across the electrodes remained proportional to the dissolution of Cu2+ ions into the synthesis solution. Migration of the organic HHTP anions towards the anode took place due to the induced electric field, where the coupling of Cu-HHTP took place via electrostatic forces.
The synergistic effects obtained in the presence of mixed-metals in MOFs have become a hot topic recently in materials science. Various synthetic strategies have been proposed to fabricate mixed-metal MOFs (MM-MOFs). The one-pot synthesis approach involves the suitable selection of metal precursors based on similar Coulombic charge, ionic radius and chemical nature for the facile homogeneous co-incorporation of metal ions into the framework.93 However, this strategy lacks control of the final metal distribution in the framework. Another approach is based on “coordination chemistry”, where metalloligands are used as linkers capable of binding a second metal ion in the satellite positions, apart from that in the lattice nodes. Conventionally, porphyrin-based linkers are widely studied to fabricate these multivariate MOFs. The different arrangements of SBUs in the framework dictate the physical and chemical properties of MM-MOFs.94 In view of the wide applicability of MOFs, the introduction of additional metal ions in the framework will be a growing field of research in the coming years to enhance their performance beyond that of homometallic systems.
2.4. Synthesis of porous metal organophosphonates
Organophosphonate ligands are superior to the traditionally used phosphate tetrahedra due to the presence of an additional functional group. Organophosphonates are prototypical hybrid systems, comprising inorganic building units of phosphite ions together with a flexible organic moiety. The tendency of these organophosphonates to bridge a wide range of metal centers in 2D open frameworks has attracted attention from materials scientists all over the world. The use of surfactants or amines to induce porosity in materials is a common strategy used worldwide. A mesoporous aluminum organophosphonate using methylene diphosphonic acid (HO)2OPCH2PO(OH)2 as the organophosphonate precursor and octadecyltrimethylammonium (C18TMA) as the surfactant was synthesised by Kimura in 2003, which was the first example of a templated non-silica based organic–inorganic hybrid mesoporous framework.95 In a typical synthetic process, the surfactant, tetramethylammonium hydroxide and methylene diphosphonic acid were mixed until a clear solution was formed, which was followed by the addition of aluminium isopropoxide to obtain a white solid product. Calcination of the as-synthesized product for the removal of the template (C18TMA molecules) without decomposing the methylene groups was carried out under N2 flow at 400 °C to obtain an ordered hexagonal matrix. In 2006, Bellezza et al. synthesised an anionic surfactant sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate (AOT)-mediated porous zirconium benzenephosphonate (P-ZrBP), where AOT was first dissolved in deionized water, followed by the addition of zirconyl chloride octahydrate and benzenephosphonic acid.96 The resultant mixture was stirred for 16 h, and then centrifuged and washed with water and EtOH to obtain a white surfactant-free mesostructured hybrid product. They reported that the zirconium metal ions interact with the negatively charged head groups of the spherical micelles, and upon the addition of benzenephosphonic acid, zirconium benzenephosphonate (P-ZrBP) precipitates into a lamellar framework surrounding the supramolecular assembly of self-assembled AOT surfactant. Kimura employed methylene diphosphonic acid as an organophosphorous precursor for the synthesis of a mesoporous aluminum organophosphonate using octadecyltrimethylammonium chloride as the template under hydrothermal conditions.98 However, this hybrid mesoporous material lost its periodicity considerably upon removal of the template molecules during the low-temperature calcination process. The antagonistic relationship between porosity and crystallinity for metal organophosphonate hybrid materials was discussed by Shimizu and co-workers, where they designed a tetrahedral organophosphonate ligand, 1,3,5,7-tetrakis(4-phosphonatophenyl)adamantane (H8L), containing a Cu-organophosphonate having a diamondoid net topology.97 The unprecedented “anti-SBU” approach governs the formation of organophosphonate-based MOFs given that no true SBUs exists, highlighting the structure-directing role of these ligands not only on the overall topology, but also on the geometry of the resultant metal cluster. Recently, in 2021, Bhanja et al. hydrothermally synthesized a template-free microporous hybrid nickel phosphonate (NiPPA).98 In a typical synthesis, a nickel nitrate solution was poured into diethylene-triaminepentakis(methylphosphonic acid) solution, maintaining the pH to 6 using ammonia solution, followed by thermal treatment at 150 °C for 48 h. A green-coloured product was obtained by centrifugation, which was further washed with water and absolute ethanol to remove the unreacted precursors. Microporosity was achieved in the framework given that each phosphonate group coordinating with Ni(II) ions is separated from each other by a short distance. In the same year, a tetraphenylethylene tetraphosphonic acid (H8L)-based Ni-MOF (Fig. 4) was synthesised at 45 °C by reacting the tetradentate phosphonate ligand (H8L) with nickel nitrate in a mixture of solvents containing water, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and dimethylformamide (DMF) in a 2:1:1 molar ratio for 2 days.99 Blue needle-shaped single crystals of Ni-MOF were obtained in the Vensil high pressure tube. However, interestingly, single crystal diffraction revealed that one nickel hexahydrate moiety was located in the cavity of the Ni–H8L framework via H-bonding, which resulted in an enhancement in the proton conductivity of the Ni-MOF upon doping with inorganic acids.
 Fig. 4  2D representation of the H8L-Ni-crystal. 
Although numerous metal organophosphonates have been studied in the past few decades, those involving metalloligands are rare. Thus, the exploration of new metal-metalloligand phosphonates (MMPs) can open plenty of room for materials research. However, the low solubility of the metalloligands possessing more than one phosphonate group makes it difficult to grow single crystals via conventional techniques. Hence, their structures need to be solved via Rietveld refinement utilizing powder X-ray diffraction data. In comparison to the conventional MOFs, metal organophosphonates are economical, and therefore scalable strategies can be implemented for their practical applications, reflecting that this class of porous materials will continue to prosper in the future.
2.5. Synthesis of metal complex-COF/POP hybrids
The incorporation of metal or metal oxide nanoparticles into the porous matrix of COFs/POPs generates a new class of porous inorganic–organic hybrid systems. The encapsulation of the nanoparticles enhances the chemical and physical properties of the material. In comparison to MOFs, the presence of in-built covalent bonds in COFs/POPs serves as better scaffolds for anchoring metal nanoparticles. Metal isolated single-atom sites (ISASs) anchored in COFs have gained immense attention due to their cost effectiveness and ultimate atom efficiency. Recently, Wei et al. reported the synthesis of Fe ISAS-anchored N-rich COFs by condensing 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl) benzene and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxaldehyde, where the protruding N atoms coordinate with the metal ions.100 Upon “COF-absorption-pyrolysis”, the metal ISASs get anchored on the N-doped carbon nanospheres with a homogeneous size distribution, effectively boosting the catalytic performance of Fe-ISAS/CN, not only as an electrocatalyst but also as a catalyst for organic reactions. Salen, N,N′-bis(salicylidene)ethylenediamine, plays a cardinal role in the field of coordination chemistry. Immobilizing salen units into crystalline porous frameworks enables further metalation with different metal ions, forming metallo-salen-based COFs. Li and co-workers reported for the first time the solvothermal condensation of 1,3,5-tris[(5-tert-butyl-3-formyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)ethynyl]benzene and 1,2-ethylenediamine in a mixture of solvents containing 1,4-dioxane, ethanol, and 3 M aqueous acetic acid, producing a highly crystalline salen-COF (Scheme 2).101 Metalation of the salen-COF was performed by either stirring with metal salt solution or via a one-pot reaction, adding metal salt during the initial salen-COF synthesis. The metal ions get attached to the salen pockets, as visualized by the change in the color of the material. The integration of a COF with an MOF generated a new MOF@COF core–shell hybrid material (NH2-MIL-68@TPA-COF), which was first reported by Zhang et al. in 2018.102 In a typical synthesis process, NH2-MIL-68 was first synthesized, and then functionalized by aldehyde (tris(4-formylphenyl)amine), forming NH2-MIL-68(CHO). This NH2-MIL-68(CHO) served as a framework, over which TPA-COF was fabricated through Schiff base condensation, forming the NH2-MIL-68@TPA-COF hybrid porous material. The SEM image revealed the growth of the sheet-like TPA-COF shell with a thickness of about 50–200 nm over the rod-like morphology of NH2-MIL-68 (Fig. 5). This highly crystalline, hierarchical porous hybrid material served as a promising photocatalyst for the degradation of organic pollutants under visible light. Amine-containing MOFs permit direct wrapping of the MOF core with COF shell without further functionalization. Furthermore, metal doping in this type of core–shell MOF@COF results in the formation of a hybrid porous platform for various photocatalytic reactions. Kim et al. fabricated a (Pd)-doped core–shell MOF@COF (Pd/TiATA@LZU1) in a three-step process.103 Firstly, NH2-MIL-125(Ti), denoted as TiATA, was synthesized by reacting 2-aminoterephthalate (H2ATA) and Ti{OCH(CH3)2}4 in anhydrous DMF at 150 °C for 72 h in a Teflon-lined vessel. Secondly, the abovementioned TiATA MOF was suspended in 1,4-dioxane solution containing 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (TFB), which was further acidified with acetic acid, resulting in intensification of the yellow color. p-Phenylenediamine (PDA) solution in 1,4-dioxane was added to the resultant mixture, stirred and sealed in a vial for 3 days at room temperature and left undisturbed. The resultant product was washed with various organic solvents to obtain TiATA@LZU1. Thirdly, the TiATA@LZU1 material was suspended in a solution of dichloromethane (DCM) containing palladium acetate. The loaded Pd2+ ions were further reduced to Pd0 by treatment with cold ethanol solution containing NaBH4 to finally obtain Pd/TiATA@LZU1. This “donor–mediator–acceptor” system of metal-doped MOF@COF showed enhanced photocatalysis for the tandem dehydrogenation of ammonia borane and hydrogenation of olefins, revealing the synergy between the metal center as the active center, MOF core as the electron donor and COF shell as the mediator for the transfer of electrons.
 Scheme 2  Classical synthesis of salen units and one-step fabrication of salen-COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 5  FE SEM images of NH2-MIL-68(CHO) (a) and NH2-MIL-68@TPA-COF (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Scheme 3  Schematic representation of the synthesis of POP immobilized with bimetallic Cu-Pd nanoalloy for bio-fuel upgrading. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Porous organic polymers (POPs) are a special class of highly crosslinked amorphous polymers, possessing void nano-spaces for accommodating metal nanoparticles and serving as hybrid nanoreactors for various heterogeneous catalysis. A novel N-rich benzene-benzylamine based POP (BBA-1) was reported by Mondal et al., which was obtained through the Friedel–Crafts alkylation of benzylamine and benzene using formaldehyde dimethyl acetal and anhydrous FeCl3 as the cross-linker and promoter, respectively.104 A bimetallic CuPd nanoalloy was grafted in the BBA-1 polymer via the co-impregnation method, altering the ratio of both metals. Firstly, both chloride salts were mixed in ethylene glycol and heated at 80 °C under an N2 atmosphere, followed by the addition of BBA-1 suspension in ethylene glycol. An ice-cold aqueous solution of NaBH4 was used as the reducing agent to obtain a black-colored solid product. The authors explained that the synergistic effect between the metals resulted in the modulation of the electronic structure, thus improving the catalytic activity towards the conversion of vanillin with high selectivity for the hydrogenolysis product 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol (Scheme 3). Similar to metal-loaded POPs, our group reported a novel hydroxyl group-rich porous organic network (TpPON) via the acid-mediated condensation reaction of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp) and triphenylamine (TPA) under vacuum at 180 °C for 10 h.105 The bluish-black material was loaded with Ru0-NPs by firstly treating it with an MeOH solution of RuCl3·3H2O, and then reducing it by adding a freshly prepared ice-cooled NaBH4 solution. This Ru@TpPON porous material showed excellent catalytic activity towards the formation of long-chain alkanes (biodiesel) through the hydrogenation of various long-chain fatty acids. Considering coordination chemistry, recently a tetradentate N-donor chelator [2,6-bis(1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)pyridine] (BTP)-based hierarchical POP was synthesized by Cai et al. through the FeCl3-mediated oxidative polymerization of 2,6-bis(1-(3,5-di(thiophen-2-yl)phenyl)-1H-1,2,3-tri-azol-4-yl)pyridine.106 The inherent chelating sites of the polymer effectively coordinate with the Cu salts to produce a hybrid system, CuX-PBPTP (X = Cl, Br), which proved to be a potent heterocatalyst for azide–alkyne cycloaddition in aqueous medium. The amorphous nature and interpenetrating networks of POPs are attributed to their polydispersed pockets, which serve as an efficacious platform for incorporating metal nanoparticles for applications in diverse fields.
Over the last few years, the fabrication of hybrid MOF-COF/POP composite materials in membrane form has been gaining significant attention due to their commercial significance. The synergistic effects of these hybrid materials can overcome the lack of multifunctional performances and poor stability in various environments. However, research in this domain is still in its infancy, and thus the synthesis of multicomponent MOF/COF heterostructures for diverse applications such as catalysis, energy storage and biomedical applications is required in the future. Complicated experiments and computational simulations are required to understand the role of each component in these sophisticated hybrid systems.
2.6. Synthesis of metal nanoparticle–carbon heterostructures
Inorganic–organic hybrid systems comprised of strong metal-support interactions have a negative effect on catalytic performance. Hence, to overcome this profound difficulty, carbon-based supports, such as activated carbon (AC), carbon nanofibers (CNFs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), have emerged as attractive candidates for nanoreactors in various catalytic applications. Recently, the pyrolysis of metal–organic frameworks has been employed to synthesize metal nanoparticles or metal oxides containing nanoporous carbon networks. Hu et al. pyrolysed a Co-based ZIF-67 at 600 °C for 5 h under an N2 atmosphere to obtain thermally reduced Co nanoparticles with a size of 5–9 nm, enveloped inside 3D porous carbon domains containing highly graphitized structures.107 The nanosized ZIF-67 was synthesized by preparing two sets of MeOH solutions, one containing cobalt nitrate and PVP (solution A), while the other contained 2-methylimidazole and triethylamine (solution B). Solution B was added to solution A under high stirring for 10 min, which was further aged for 1 day at room temperature to obtain nanosized ZIF-67. These metal nanoparticle-doped continuous hybrid graphitic networks showed excellent electrochemical performances towards potassium-ion batteries (KIBs) with long cycling stability and good capacity retention at higher rates. This group also reported the synthesis of monocrystalline hollow ZIF-8 nanobubbles by reacting Zn(NO3)2 and 2-methylimidazole in MeOH for 24 h, producing a white precipitate with a monocrystalline framework.108 With the aim to obtain nanobubbles, while preserving the monocrystalline framework, the white material was etched with tannic acid (Fig. 6b). The small size of protons allow etching with nanoscale precision, given that they can diffuse through the pore channels into the core of the mother ZIF-8 material. These hollow ZIF-8 nanobubbles were further pyrolyzed at 600 °C for 5 h under an N2 flow, followed by treatment with concentrated HCl to remove the residual Zn or ZnO, producing hollow carbon nanobubbles (Fig. 6c). Due to the thin shell structure, these nanobubbles result in a shorter diffusion pathway for ions with high accessible areas for Na+/K+ ion intercalation, leading to superior battery performance. A TiO2/C composite hybrid material was reported for the first time by Ma et al. by annealing MIL-125 (Ti).109 MIL-125 (Ti) was synthesized solvothermally by reacting benzenedicarboxylic acid and titanium tetraisopropanolate in a mixture of DMF and MeOH at 150 °C for 15 h. This as-synthesized MIL-125 (Ti) was further annealed in a tube furnace at different temperatures (600 °C, 700 °C, 800 °C, and 900 °C) to obtain the TiO2/C composite as a black powder. It was observed that upon changing the annealing temperature, hybrid composites with different carbon contents and different TiO2 phases were formed. Interestingly, the MIL-125 (Ti) annealed at 800 °C, manifested the highest carbon content with a rutile TiO2 phase, exhibiting the highest dielectric loss, as reflected by its microwave attenuation. Iron-based heterocatalysts with strong metal–support interactions impart a negative effect on the catalysis because of the carbonization of the iron phase and inhibition of reduction. Lin and co-workers reported for the first time the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) synthesis over unique iron oxide@iron carbide core–shell nanoparticles, which were synthesized via the pyrolysis of Fe-BDC (Fe-MIL-88B) and Fe-BDC-NH2 (Fe-MIL-88B-NH2).110 In a typical synthetic procedure, terephthalic acid (BDC) or 2-aminoterephthalic acid (BDC-NH2) was reacted with ferric chloride in DMF at a high pH and 100–110 °C to obtain the corresponding Fe-MOFs. Then, these Fe-MOFs were calcined at 500 °C for 4 h in a tube furnace, followed by reduction under an H2 flow at 400 °C for 4 h, yielding the desired Fe3O4@χ-Fe5C2 core–shell nanoparticles devoid of any strong metal-support interactions. The decarboxylation of the MOF ligands generated capping carbonates, which eventually got converted to CO2 under the reaction conditions, exposing the active sites for increasing the catalytic turnover.
 Fig. 6  (a) Pyrolysis of MOF precursor to synthesise graphitic shell-encapsulated Co nanoparticles on carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Controlled etching to synthesise monocrystalline MOF nanobubbles less than 100 nm in size. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Pyrolysis of MOF nanobubbles producing hollow carbon nanobubbles with Na+/K+ ion intercalation. 
To gain more industrial applicability, nowadays MOFs are transformed into porous carbon either via direct carbonization or post-treatment of carbons (i.e., KOH activation).
However, substantial efforts need to be devoted to scaling up the yields of these MOF-derived carbons to allow their application in various biomedical and heterogeneous catalysis industrially. Moreover, theoretical calculations on this promising hybrid class of materials are limited, and hence the scope of these calculations need to be escalated for their better understanding and design.
3. Applications
3.1. Catalysis
Over time, the evolution of catalysts occurred through a trial-and-error process based entirely on accumulated experiences and chemical knowledge. Today, advanced synthetic strategies with modernized surface-characterization techniques and molecular modelling have enabled the design of tailor-made optimal catalysts, with precision at the molecular level. This is more pronounced in the case of heterogeneous catalysts, given that they allow alteration of single or multiple catalytic sites. Heterogeneous catalysts can be defined as solid materials consisting of a high surface area, where the catalytic sites are embedded, enabling chemical reactions to occur at or near the interface between two phases. The ease of separation of heterogeneous catalysts from the reaction mixture gives them the upper hand over their homogeneous counterparts. Based on porous materials, significant advancements have been made towards the ab initio design of catalysts in both the academic and industrial spheres. Currently, heterogeneous catalysis is considered the mainstay of various chemical and energy industries. However, in contrast to homogeneous catalysts, the lack of in situ information restricts their mechanistic understanding. The synergistic study between theoretical research and experiment may open up a new dimension on the critical impression of heterogeneous catalysts in the near future. In the following sections, we summarize the different catalytic processes over hybrid porous materials.

3.1.1. Catalysis by metal organic frameworks (MOFs). 
Metal organic framework (MOF) nanoparticles have emerged as superb heterogeneous catalyst templates due to their metal nodes, functionalized linker moieties, highly ordered porous structures and uniform pore size distribution with high surface area.111 Furthermore, MOFs are highly crystalline materials with a uniform dispersion of metal sites and polydentate organic ligands, which can be further tuned via post-synthetic modifications, and thus they have attracted ample attention in the field of catalysis.112 Zhang et al. synthesized a Co–ZrO2/N–C nanocatalyst utilizing UiO-66-NH2, Co(NO3)2·6H2O and DABCO via the in situ impregnation method, followed by the pyrolysis of the material at 800 °C under an Ar flow for 3 h.113 This catalyst was employed for the oxidative functionalization of cyclic amines containing 2-aminoarylmethanols to ring-fused quinazolinones, with the assistance of O2. To compare the catalytic activity, they also tested these reactions with various other homogeneous and heterogeneous Co-based catalysts; however, the Co–ZrO2/N–C nanocatalyst produced the best results. The reaction mechanism is shown in Scheme 4. In 2015, Lin and co-workers for the first time reported a chiral diene-based MOF, E2-MOF, which was further metalated with an Rh(I) complex, [RhCl(C2H4)2]2, post synthetically to furnish a highly active and enantioselective single-site solid catalyst for C–C bond formation, particularly the 1,4-addition of arylboronic acids to α,β-unsaturated ketones.114 The 1,2-addition of arylboronic acids to aldimines over E2-MOF-Rh(acac) resulted in up to >99% enantiomeric excess (ee) compared to the homogeneous control catalyst, highlighting the role of enantioselective single-site heterocatalysts. In 2016, Miao et al. designed a Cu3TATAT MOF, which served as a novel bifunctional catalyst for the Cu(II)-promoted aerobic oxidation of aromatic alcohols to aldehyde in a one-pot methodology.115 They proposed that the inherent large surface area and crystallinity of the Cu3TATAT MOF played a role in enhancing the catalytic activity. Generally, the deprotonation of benzylic alcohol at the benzylic position is assisted by a combination of base, Cu(II), TEMPO and molecular oxygen, promoting the aerobic oxidation. Herein, a similar mechanism was materialized towards aerobic oxidation in the absence of various basic additives. The reaction did not proceed in the presence of only TEMPO and base. The as-formed aromatic aldehyde further reacted with the methylene nucleophile via Knoevenagel condensation to produce benzylidenemalononitrile products in good yield and high-selectivity (Scheme 5). The following year, Jagadeesh and Murugesan et al. reported the synthesis of cobalt nanoparticles encapsulated in a graphitic shell nanostructured heterocatalyst, which proved to be an effective catalyst towards the reductive amination of aldehydes.116 Initially, Co nitrate and the organic linkers 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane (DABCO) and terephthalic acid were assembled in DMF at 150 °C to form a Co-based MOF, which was further immobilized on commercial Vulcan XC 72R carbon powder. Pyrolysis of this as-prepared Co-DABCO-TPA MOF for 2 h at 800 °C under an Ar atmosphere generated the graphitic shell-enveloped metallic Co core–shell nanostructures (Fig. 6a). This catalyst was tested with a large number of substrates for the reductive amination of aldehyde and ketones under 40 bar H2 pressure and at 120 °C to yield primary, secondary and tertiary amines. Powers et al. solvothermally synthesized a new family of porous porphyrinic materials (Fe(btp)) containing 2D metalloporphyrin layers together with flexible aliphatic linkers (Fig. 7a and b).117 This catalyst was used for the hydroxylation of cis-decalin (Fig. 7c). The reason for choosing cis-decalin as a substrate for the hydroxylation reaction was that it contained multiple chemically and stereochemically recognizable C-H bonds. After the abstraction of a hydrogen atom (HAA) from C-9 of cis-decalin, a tertiary radical is produced, which can undergo epimerization. The hydroxylation reaction of cis-decalin under Fe(btp) was performed in 2-tert-butyl-sulfonyliodosylbenzene, a soluble oxygen-atom transfer reagent, which resulted in a cis:trans ratio of >100:1. A comparative investigation of the reaction over porous Fe(btp) and non-porous Fe(btp)act was performed, which revealed higher stereospecific oxidation over the porous catalyst, while its non-porous analogs yielded low stereospecificity. The authors explained that the porous Fe(btp) catalyst served as a tight solvent cage, preventing stereochemical scrambling during the hydroxylation reaction.
 Scheme 4  Probable mechanism for the oxidative functionalization of cyclic amines containing 2-aminoarylmethanols to form ring-fused quinazolinones over Co–ZrO2/N–C nanocatalyst. 
 Scheme 5  One pot Knoevenagel condensation reaction using Cu3TATAT MOF. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Crystallographic c-axis of Fe(btp). (b) Crystallographic a-axis of Fe(btp). (c) Catalytic site for the oxidation of cis-decalin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2018, Wei and co-workers synthesized a novel palladium N-heterocyclic bis-carbene dicarboxylate ligand (Pd-NHDC-H2L), from which a hybrid UiO-67 type MOF (UiO-67-Pd-NHDC) was synthesized solvothermally.118 This hybrid UiO-67-Pd-NHC MOF facilitated the Heck cross coupling reaction between various aryl halides and olefins, generating a coupling product with the maximum yield of 98%. This heterocatalyst was also used for benzyne-benzyne-alkene insertion reactions between benzyne and allyl halide. 2-(Trimethylsilyl)phenyl trifluoromethanesulfonate and allyl bromide were chosen as model substrates for optimizing the reaction conditions. Interestingly, the controlled experiment with only UiO-67 as the catalyst did not yield any product, stipulating the need for the Pd-NHDC moiety for the formation of phenanthrene. The effect of pore size on the catalytic reaction was discussed by Xamena et al.119 His group synthesized several types of MOFs (MOF-808, UiO-66) for carrying out the Meerwein–Ponndorf–Verley (MPV) reduction reaction of the biologically active molecule estrone to estradiol (Scheme 6). The result clearly showed that there was only 2% conversion when UiO-66 (pore size 6 Å) was employed as the catalyst. However, for MOF-808 (pore size 14 Å), a catalytic conversion of 91% was observed due to the fact that bulky substrates can smoothly diffuse through the pores of MOF-808, making more contact with the active Zr4+ ions than that with UiO-66, where the catalytic reaction took place only on the external surface of the MOF. Huh and group reported a nitroaldol reaction (Henry reaction) between 4-nitrobenzaldehyde and nitro alkane over the Zn-MOF [Zn(3,3′-TPDC)]·DMF·2H2O.120 The introduction of the DABCO linker in the 1D channel of the MOF increased the Lewis basicity, which enhanced the catalytic activity. The substrate size selection effect governed the conversion of nitroalkanes, given that it was inversely proportional to the molecular size of the nitroalkanes used. Although nitromethane was less acidic compared to other nitroalkanes used, it underwent the highest conversion, highlighting the size effect over electronic effect.
 Scheme 6  MPV reduction of estrone using various Zr-MOFs. 
Our group recently reported a new organic–inorganic hybrid iron-phosphonate material, FePO-1-2, which was synthesized hydrothermally by reacting etidronic acid as the organic phosphonate precursor and FeCl3.121 This porous hybrid material catalyzes the partial oxidation of cyclohexanone to adipic acid in aqueous medium under oxygen flow. Firstly, the iron-oxo species was formed due to the influence from the catalytic aviation of O2 by the Fe(II) sites. This intermediate was converted into a ε-caprolactum, which upon hydrolysis took the form of 6-hydroxo-hexanoic acid. Further oxidation of 6-hydroxo-hexanoic acid yielded the adipic acid (Scheme 7). Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is the most cultivated route to mitigate CO2 emissions. As a C1 source, CO2 is a sustainable feedstock for the production of various value-added chemicals. The synthesis of cyclic carbonate from epoxide via CO2 fixation was reported by our group over two MOFs.122,123 The microporous Ce(III)-based MOF (Ce2NDC3) effectively catalysed the cycloaddition reaction between CO2 and epoxides, forming cyclic carbonates under mild conditions. The authors explained that the high Qst value of the Ce(III) sites accounted for the better interaction with the thermodynamically stable CO2 molecules, while the Lewis acidity favoured interaction with organic epoxides. Alternatively, recently, an La-5-SIP-MOF catalysed the abovementioned reaction under 5 MPa CO2 pressure and at room temperature. The formation of an acid–base adduct between the Lewis acidic La(III) sites and the corresponding epoxide drove the reaction towards cyclic carbonate. In 2020, a series of mesoporous isostructural metal–organic frameworks (M-MOF-184), where M = Mg, Ni, Co, Zn, Cu, and Fe, was reported by Nguyen et al. to investigate their catalytic role towards the conversion of CO2 to cyclic carbonates under mild conditions.124 The higher isosteric heat of CO2 adsorption (Qst) for Co, Mg and Ni compared to Zn facilitated the better interaction of CO2 with the metal centers. However, the infinite Zn-oxo rod units in Zn-MOF-184 imparted strong Lewis acidity to the framework, thus surpassing its Mg and Co counterparts towards catalytic activity. To understand the role of large pores in catalytic activity, a comparative study between Zn-MOF-184 and its analogue Zn-MOF-74 was executed. They explained that the larger aperture of Zn-MOF-184 enabled higher conversion and selectivity towards the formation of various cyclic carbonates. Oxazolidinones are important intermediates for the production of value-added organic heterocyclic compounds, antibiotics and chiral auxiliaries, which can be synthesized via the cyclization reaction between propargylic amines and CO2. Development in the field of homogeneous catalysts has extended their range; however, in the view of industrial production, the facile separation and recyclability of heterogeneous catalysts given them the upper hand. Owing to the highly porous network, tunable pore size and well-dispersed catalytic sites, several MOFs have already reported for the carboxylative cyclization of propargylic amines with CO2. Recently Gu et al. reported a non-noble-metal [Mg3Cu2I2(IN)4(HCOO)2(DEF)4]n MOF, which served as an effective heterocatalyst for the cycloaddition reaction between various propargylic amines with CO2 in the presence of TEA at room temperature.125 The high catalytic behaviour of this material towards the cyclization of propargylic amines with CO2 was suggested to be due to the decentralized [Cu2I2] clusters.
 Scheme 7  Probable mechanistic pathway for the synthesis of adipic acid from cyclohexane over Fe-PO-1-2 catalyst. 


3.1.2. Catalysis by metal-POPs/COFs hybrids. 
Amorphous ill-defined microporous porous organic polymers (POPs) have garnered substantial attention in the field of selective heterogeneous catalysis. The incorporation of metal nanoparticles into the pockets of hyper-cross-linked POPs enhances the number of active catalytic sites in the material, resulting in comparatively higher catalytic activity. Gu et al. reported a novel Pd-loaded porphyrin-based porous organic polymer, PPOP-1, containing bifunctional catalytic sites, which was used to catalyze the tandem C–H arylation and Suzuki coupling reactions.126 In this study, PPOP-1 was designed through [4+2] imine condensation between 5,10,15,20-tetraaminophenyl porphyrin and acenaphthenequinone. Herein, the tetraaminophenyl porphyrin unit with four-amine group was considered as a robust four-connected unit, whereas the acenaphthenequinone unit was considered as the two-connected rigid node. After the formation of PPOP-1, post-synthetic treatment with an MeOH solution of PdCl2 resulted in the coordination of the Pd atoms with the porphyrin units and α-diimine units. The BET surface area of PPOP-1 and PPOP-1(Pd) was calculated to be around 223.76 m2 g−1 and 151.06 m2 g−1, respectively. The Pd-containing PPOP-1 showed high thermal stability up to 300 °C without any decomposition, as confirmed by TGA analysis. The authors explained that the Pd-porphyrin sites and Pd-imine sites present in PPOP-1(Pd) were responsible for catalyzing the Suzuki coupling reactions and triggering the C–H activation reactions, respectively. Xiang et al. synthesized novel Pd-coordinated N-heterocyclic carbene-modified POPs (Pd@POPs-Ph/Pd@POPs-Py) through the Scholl coupling reaction between benzene and N,N′-dibenzylbenzimidazolium chloride/1-benzyl-3-(pyridine-2-ylmethyl)-1H-benzo[d]imidazole-3-ium in the presence of anhydrous AlCl3.127 The BET surface area of POPs-Ph and POPs-Py was 490 and 344 m2 g−1, respectively, and after Pd loading, the surface area decreased to 191 and 116 m2 g−1, respectively. These hybrid materials catalyzed the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling (SMC) reaction of aryl halides with aryl boronic acids, with a very high turnover number (TON) compared to other Pd-containing state-of-art catalysts. Dong and co-workers synthesized a POP containing heteroatoms that can firmly hold metal nanoparticles using the cheap chemical precursors piperazine and cyanuric chloride.128 Pt4+ was incorporated into the organic cages of PC-POP and stabilized by the lone pairs of nitrogen. The anchored Pt4+ ions were further reduced to Pt NPs and confined in the PC-POP material under H2 pressure at 250 °C to form the Pt@PC-POP material. However, the authors reported that the surface area of Pt@PC-POP (321 m2 g−1) surprisingly increased from that of PC-POP (308 m2 g−1) because of the surface area contribution from the ultrafine Pt NPs. This Pt@PC-POP nanocatalyst showed activity for the catalytic hydrogenation of halogenated nitrobenzene to their corresponding halogenated anilines at room temperature and atmospheric H2 pressure. The reduction of CO2 to formic acid or methanol creates an alternative pathway to obtain new energy sources. In 2019, McGrier and co-workers demonstrated a ruthenium porphyrin-based porous organic polymer, Ru-BBT-POP, for hydrosilylative hydrogenation of CO2 to formate.129 The Ru-BBT-POP was synthesized by reacting premetalated Ru(II)-tetrakis(4-formylphenyl)porphyrin (Ru-TFPP) with 2,5-diamino-1,4-benzenedithiol dihydrochloride (DABTD), forming an imine linkage and leading to a high BET surface area of 655 m2 g−1. The CO2 uptake capacity was 105 and 71 mg g−1 at 273 and 298 K, respectively, with a high Qst value, indicating the enhanced binding affinity of the material for CO2. The authors explained that the following result was due to the presence of Lewis acid/base and metal ion⋯quadrupole interactions. The activated CO2 over the hybrid porous heterocatalyst undergoes σ-bond metathesis with Me2PhSiH, producing dimethylphenylsilyl formate. Upon the addition of KF, the fluoride ions cleave the dimethylphenyl silyl group to produce potassium formate.
In 2019, Chakraborty and co-workers designed a 2D-layered hexagonal structured IISERP-COF9 through the Schiff base condensation reaction between triformyl phenol and 4,4′,4′′-pyridine(2,4,6-triyl)trianiline.130 The presence of a large number of basic pyridyl groups and hydroxyl moieties in this IISERP-COF9 facilitated the dispersion of Cu in metallic or low oxidation state via hydrogen bonding. After the confinement of Cu2+ ions into the pores, they were reduced with ascorbic acid to generate “capping agent-free” Cu nanoparticles. This Cu@COF was used to catalyze Glaser–Hay heterocoupling reactions via redox cycles at the Cu centers, leading to the formation of 1,3-diyne-type compounds, which have extensive applications in organic synthesis. The mechanistic pathway for this reaction is shown in Scheme 8. Recently, Kan et al. synthesized a novel covalent organic framework, COF-DM, on the gram-level scale via the aldimine condensation reaction between 1,4-dibenzoylhydrazinyl-2-methylbenzene (DBHMB) and 2,4,6-trihydroxy-1,3,5-benzenetricarbaldehyde (MOP) under mild conditions.131 This yellow crystalline solid COF-DM generated numerous chelating coordination environments inside the solid matrix, which stabilized and bound the Cu2+ ions when treated with a CuCl2 acetonitrile solution, yielding a yellow-brown crystalline Cu(II)@COF-DM. This material showed high catalytic activity for the alkyne-dihalomethane-amine (AHA) coupling reaction with 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene (DBU) and CH3CN as the base and solvent, respectively, producing 99% yield in the model reaction. The authors explained that the presence of Cu species promoted the AHA coupling reactions, while the crystallinity of the COF material accounted for the better reusability. The formation of new C–C bonds is challenging but of substantial importance because of their potential synthetic applications in organic chemistry and drug design. Our group reported a CuO-grafted N-rich porous TRIPTA COF, which was synthesized solvothermally for catalyzing C–C homo coupling reactions.132 The COF was synthesized via the simple Schiff base condensation between 2,4,6-triformylphloroglucinol and 1,3,5-tris-(4-aminophenyl)triazine, which was further metalated with CuO nanoparticles to form CuII-TRIPTA. The calculated BET surface area of the TRIPTA-COF and CuII-TRIPTA-COF was 1014 and 583 m2 g−1, respectively, which suggested the successful decoration of TRIPTA COF with CuO NPs. The high catalytic activity was attributed to the high surface area of the COF given that the catalysis predominantly occurred on the surface of the material. A mechanistic pathway was proposed, which confirmed the formation of CuI from CuII, followed by transmetallation, oxidative addition, and finally reductive elimination through Cu(I)/Cu(III) intermediates. Metal-loaded COF materials are very useful for CO2 fixation reactions, given that CO2 uptake capacity is generally higher than that of other porous materials due to the presence of suitable CO2-phillic moieties and a large pore size with high surface area. In addition to the following features, the easy diffusion of the substrate molecules through the well-defined pore channels of COFs makes them potent candidates as support materials in heterogeneous catalysis. Ghosh et al. synthesized a COF material via the one-pot polycondensation reaction between 2,4,6-triformylphloroglucinol (TFP) and p-phenylenediamine, producing a 2D hexagonal nanostructure, over which silver NPs were impregnated to give Ag@TpPa-1.133 This nanocatalyst proved to be highly effective towards CO2 insertion into propargylic amines, selectively yielding tetramic acid derivatives via intramolecular rearrangement. The authors proposed that the role of Ag NPs was to activate the alkyne molecule to react with the intermediate (carbamate) obtained from the reaction of CO2 with propargylic amine to produce oxazolidinone through ring-closure reaction.
 Scheme 8  Mechanistic pathway of Glaser–Hay heterocoupling reaction utilizing Cu@COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3. Catalysis by periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs). 
Organic–inorganic hybrid materials are an important class of porous material that contains organic functionalities and possesses the mechanical strength of inorganic moieties. Accordingly, periodic mesoporous organosilicas containing a myriad organic bridged functionalities, with pore sizes in the range of 2 to 30 nm have attracted ample attention from materials chemists. Given that the organic moiety in PMOs is a part of their solid matrix, it can be utilized as an effective heterogeneous catalyst by altering the functionalities of the framework. In 2012, Crudden et al. reported a novel bistriethoxysilyl-BINAP functionalized chiral, phosphane-containing PMO for enantioselective catalysis.134 BINAP is an important chiral bidentate phosphane ligand and is beneficial for the enantioselective hydrogenation of alkenes and carbonyls together with Rh and Ru catalysts. The PMO was synthesized via the co-condensation of bistriethoxysilyl-BINAP monomer with biphenylene-bridged siloxane in the presence of Brij-76 SDA. This as-formed PMO was further coordinated with Ru through treatment with [RuCl2(benzene)]2. This new catalytic system, Ru/PMO-BINAP, was investigated for the catalysis of the asymmetric hydrogenation of β-ketoesters. The authors discussed that the Ru/PMO-BINAP showed complete conversion with 93.5% ee, whereas the homogeneous Ru/BINAP system showed 99% ee, where the reduction in was ascribed to the uncoordinated [RuCl2(benzene)]2 on the chiral PMO. Several substrates, irrespective of their sizes, gave considerable yields, highlighting the facile access through the mesoporous channels of the PMO to the active sites. In 2016, Rostamina et al. reported a highly porous periodic mesoporous organosilica based on ionic liquid pore walls, which was synthesized from dialkyl imidazolium bridge, and further doped with Pd ions, forming Pd@IL-PMO.135 The BET surface area of this catalyst was around 703 m2 g−1, with a pore diameter of 8.4 nm. This catalyst showed excellent catalytic activity towards S-arylation reactions through aryl halide coupling with benzylic and aromatic thiols. The authors explained that the oxidative addition of Pd to aryl halides generated the organopalladium species. Alternatively, thiols in the presence of base underwent transmetallation with the Pd catalyst to yield the desired product upon reductive elimination. In 2019, another ionic liquid-based PMO was reported by Shokouhimehr and group.136 In this study, Bipy-PMO was synthesized via the hydrolysis and co-condensation of the as-synthesized 1,1′-bis[3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl]-4,4′-bipyridinium chloride ionic liquid and TEOS, and soft templated with P123 in acidic medium. This dicationic bipyridinium IL-bridge-based PMO showed excellent lipophilicity compared to its pure silica counterpart, which was synthesized under the same reaction conditions. Pd was immobilized on Bipy-PMO (Pd@Bipy-PMO) to catalyze the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction in green aqueous medium. Recently, Doustkhah and co-workers reported a new periodic mesoporous organosilica (PMO) containing mesoporous aluminosilica as a catalyst for green oxidation.137 In this work, the authors at first inserted aluminum ions into thiourea-based PMO (Al/Si-PMO-TU). Then, Cu2+ ions were grafted into the pore channels of this material, which were coordinated through the thiourea units. The BET surface area of Al/Si-PMO-TU was ca. 1030 m2 g−1; however, there was no noticeable change in the surface area after loading Cu2+ ions. These two PMOs (Al/Si-PMO-TU and Cu@Al/Si-PMO-TU) were employed for the aqueous oxidation of dibenzothiophene (DBT) to dibenzothiophene dioxide (DBT-O2). The authors compared the kinetics of CuCl2-Al/Si-PMO-TU and Cu@Al/Si-PMO-TU towards the catalytic oxidation of DBT, which revealed faster kinetics for Cu@Al/Si-PMO-TU compared to CuCl2–Al/Si-PMO-TU, indicating that the Cu(II) ions in the complex form with thiourea were more active than their salt form or aluminosilica form. This study disclosed the synergistic catalytic activity of Cu–thiourea complex with the aluminosilicate structure.
Ammoximation reactions are considered important because of their industrial-scale synthesis of caprolactum or Nylon-66. Bhaumik et al. developed a novel hydrophobic titanium containing ethane-bridged hybrid mesoporous silsesquioxane, which served as an effective catalyst to carry out the ammoximation reaction of bulkier ketones.57 It was observed that the catalytic activity of this novel material was higher than that of the conventional MCM-41-Ti or TS-1, yielding high amounts of oxime products with 100% selectivity. The authors explained that enhancement in hydrophobicity upon ethane bridging in this Ti-incorporated PMO was the key factor for its exceptionally high catalytic activity towards ammoximation.
Recently, Liu et al. reported a novel squaramide-derived periodic mesoporous organo-silica with a high surface area (1036 m2 g−1), containing NH–NH groups as Lewis basic units on the surface of the material, leading to the enhanced adsorption of CO2.138 The synergistic effect between the Lewis basic units and dual hydrogen bond donor moieties facilitated the activation of epoxides. This metal-free, bi-functionalized, robust PMO-SAF-20 showed a high CO2 uptake of 1355–1562 μmol g−1 even at low pressure (≤1 atm), favoring the cycloaddition of CO2 to different epoxides and producing cyclic carbonates with considerable yields and selectivity. The probable mechanistic pathway is shown in Scheme 9.
 Scheme 9  Probable mechanism for CO2 coupling reaction with epoxides over PMO-SAF-20. 


3.1.4. Catalysis by organically functionalized mesoporous silicas. 
2D-Hexagonal mesoporous silicas such as SBA-15 and MCM-41, with a high surface area, large pore size, large pore volume and abundant surface silanol groups, have been surface functionalized through inorganic–organic hybridization to enhance their application in the field of catalysis. The mesoscopic structure with submicrometer-range short channels allows rapid diffusion, high mass transfer of substrates/products and easy accessibility to the catalytic sites. Hence, these functionalized hybrid inert frameworks have potential applications in the promotion of various organic catalysis reactions. In 2002, Chaudhari and co-workers synthesized a novel heterogeneous catalyst carrying a Pd complex, (Pd(pyca)(PPh3)(OTs), in mesoporous solid matrices of MCM-41 and MCM-48.139 The authors explained that 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS) functionalization on MCM-41/MCM-48 enabled donation of the lone pairs from NAPTMS to the Pd atoms of the complex, hence anchoring the complex to the silica support and preventing it from leaching under the reaction conditions. Substrates such as styrene, substituted styrene and p-isobutylphenylethanol (IBPE) were subjected to hydrocarboxylation over this catalyst, yielding almost full conversion (>95%) with >98% regioselectivity. In 2006, Koner's group reported the synthesis of a Cu(II) complex moiety anchored over amine-modified MCM-41 via Schiff base condensation with salicyldehyde.140 This functionalization served as a bidentate ligand to anchor Cu(II) ions, enabling the catalytic epoxidation of various olefinic compounds in the presence of tert-BuOOH as an oxidant. The authors explained that in contrast to other bulkier metal-porphyrinic system, this Cu-MCM-41 offered ample space for alkyl-hydroperoxide to bind the Cu sites in the intermediate stage, favoring nucleophilic attack by the bulky oxidant, and thus enhancing the catalytic activity towards epoxidation reactions.
In 2005, Crudden et al. designed mercaptopropyl trimethoxysilane modified-SBA-15, in which Pd was encapsulated through the sulfur moiety.141 This thiol-modified mesoporous silicate showed excellent Pd scavenging property, which was later investigated to catalyze C–C bond formation via Mizoroki–Heck and Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions. Interestingly, a controlled catalytic experiment with Pd-containing amine functionalized SBA-15 (SBA-15-NH2·Pd) also generated the desired product; however, the considerable Pd leaching of 35 ppm indicated the necessity of thiol grafting on the surface to prevent Pd leaching. Inspired by the abovementioned work, in 2010, Feng and co-workers synthesized a Ph-SBA-15-PPh3–Pd heterocatalyst to promote the Suzuki coupling of 1-bromo-4-nitrobenzene with phenylboronic acid in supercritical CO2.142 The as-synthesized SBA-15 was modified with (MeO)3SiPh on its external surface before the removal of the template, while the internal surface was modified with a sulphur-containing phosphine ligand to tethered Pd ions within the cavity. The authors proposed that the flexible chain between the PPh3 ligand and SBA-15 replicated the homogeneous catalytic environment, thus exhibiting a high catalytic performance towards Suzuki coupling reactions. Kan et al. reported the immobilization of a chloromethyl-containing copper Cu(II) and oxovanadium VO(IV) Schiff base complex over amino-modified SBA-15.143 Subsequently, the catalytic activity towards the oxidation of styrene was checked with fresh Cu–salen–SBA and VO–salen–SBA. The VO–salen–SBA showed 78.6% conversion of styrene, while Cu–salen–SBA showed only 26.9% conversion after 8 h. Additionally, it was observed that Cu–salen–SBA was not as stable as VO–salen–SBA, which showed greater stability by up to 4 times, indicating its superiority over its Cu counterpart. The authors explained that the high catalytic performance of these catalysts was attributed to the synergistic effect between the metal complexes and the SBA-15 matrix.
C–S linkages are of great importance due to their applications in various drug designs, especially for Alzheimer's disease, diabetes and Parkinson's disease. However, C–S coupling reactions generally require a metal-based catalyst and volatile and repugnant smelling thiols, which remains a matter of concern in environmental aspects. In 2012, our group reported for the first time a new furfural imine-functionalized SBA-15, in which Cu(II) was grafted to produce the Cu–F-SBA-15 heterocatalyst.39 The nitrogen and oxygen atom from the imine linkage and furfural unit, respectively, acted like a bidentate ligand to coordinate with the Cu(II) ions, consequently catalyzing the one-pot, odourless thioetherification reaction of aryl halides by reacting benzyl bromides with thiourea in aqueous medium. The conversion of CO2 to fuels and valuable chemicals via methanation or hydrogenation is a challenging task, and for this challenge, several metal-based heterocatalysts have emerged in recent years. Especially, Ni-based catalysts are superior due to their activation at higher temperature compared to other metal-based heterocatalysts. Recently in 2021 Kawi et al. reported a bi-metallic system of Ni–Mg/SBA-15 to enhance the performance and selectivity of hydrogenation of CO2 to CH4.144 The incorporation of Mg in this Ni-based heterocatalyst significantly increased the weak and total basicity of the catalyst. In this work, they compared the catalytic activity of the Ni-based catalyst prepared via wetness impregnation (WI) and ammonia evaporation (AE), revealing the enhanced low-temperature activity and higher CH4 selectivity of the Ni–Mg/SBA-15-AE catalyst. The CO2-TPD analysis showed that Ni–Mg/SBA-15-AE contained more basic sites compared to that of Ni–Mg/SBA-15-WE, which was reflected in the higher TOF value of the former. The smaller Ni nanoparticles, which were well dispersed over Ni–Mg/SBA-15-AE, were responsible for H2 dissociation to form H atomic species, boosting the formation of formate, as confirmed by the DRIFTS study.
In recent years in catalytic chemistry, porous hybrid materials as heterocatalysts not only play a crucial role in lab-scale synthesis but also are a game-changer pertaining to industrial-scale or bulk-scale synthesis. Nowadays, CO2 hydrogenation to methanol, methane or formate using metal nanoparticles immobilized over solid porous hybrid matrices play a key factor in future CO2 utilization strategies. However, the use of non-noble metals for the fabrication of heterocatalysts instead of the expensive noble metals is necessary. Additionally, transfer hydrogenation is an important strategy for the future, given that hydrogen as a future energy source, leaves behind the question whether we can reduce the use of hydrogen. Recently, Liu et al. utilized aqueous glycerol as a liquid-phase hydrogen source for the hydrogenation of CO2 to formaldehyde and lactic acid, which are valuable platform chemicals.145 Among the several hybrid porous materials, MOFs are the most extensively studied materials, and currently, chiral MOFs show prospects in asymmetric catalysis. Thus far, it has been a big challenge to introduce a homogeneous system into MOFs and other microporous hybrid materials for the ease of their use in various asymmetric catalytic reactions. In 2021, Chen et al. constructed a yolk shell MOF, where a homogeneous chiral system was confined in a heterogeneous system, which catalysed the oxidation kinetic resolution of secondary alcohols.146 Additionally, porous hybrid materials can also be explored in catalytic drug synthesis. Recently, Xu and group developed a biocompatible Cu-MOF, which was used as a catalyst for in situ drug synthesis in mitochondria through a site-specific copper-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition reaction.147

3.2. Adsorptive removal of pollutants from water
Unpolluted water is a basic necessity for all living organisms and is considered central to the evolution of human civilization. However, water pollution is a major global problem that not only affects the growth of aquatic organisms but also poses a threat to human health. Rapid industrialization, mining and environmental catastrophes have led to an alarming increase in the presence of toxins in natural water resources worldwide, resulting in global water scarcity. These pollutants are mainly comprised of heavy metals and organic dyes, which are non-biodegradable and chemically stable. The introduction of heavy metals into our environment by various human activities has led to serious health problems upon long-term exposure. Therefore, various techniques such as sorption, ion-exchange and photocatalytic degradation have been developed to address this issue. Among them, adsorption is the easiest, eco-friendly and cost-effective method. Adsorption is basically the accumulation of any compound at the interface between two phases such as liquid–solid and gas-solid. The adsorptive capacity of any adsorbent depends on a few common features such as its functional groups, size of the molecule, polarity and surface chemistry.
MOFs are emerging organic–inorganic hybrid materials for adsorption owing to their highly ordered porous framework, wide functionality and tunable size selectivity. Furthermore, MOFs contain open metal sites, which influence the adsorption mechanism.148 The pore size effect is an important parameter for adsorption capacity and kinetics, where for MIL-53-Cr (pore size <1 nm), the maximum adsorption capacity of methyl orange was 57.9 mg g−1 compared to 114 mg g−1 by MIL-101-Cr (pore size 2.1 nm). The common adsorptive mechanism showed that the presence of electrostatic interactions between the MOF and the adsorbate. Hence, modification of the positive charge on the surface of MIL-101 resulted in rapid and high anionic dye uptake.149 It was also observed that the pH of solution played a significant role in the electrostatic interaction between the adsorbate and the surface of the MOF. The Cu-BTC adsorbent showed a good result for the adsorption of methylene blue (MB) when a negative charge was induced on its surface, elevating the pH. In the pH range of 3–5, the rate of removal of methylene blue was 84%, and upon increasing the pH to 11, the rate of removal of MB increased to 97.2%. The authors explained that deprotonation upon elevating the pH of the carboxylic acid groups enhanced the electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged Cu-BTC and cationic MBdye.150 The other factor involves the π–π interaction between the MOF surface and aromatic compounds, as displayed by MIL-101-Cr and Fe-MIL-100 for the adsorption of bisphenol A (BPA) a highly toxic molecule to human health even at low concentrations, which is generally released from the industrial synthesis of polycarbonates. MIL-101-Cr showed better adsorption compared to MIL-Fe-100 due to its higher BET surface area, larger pore volume and better π–π dispersion interaction between electrons in the aromatic rings of the MOF and the adsorbate.151
Choi's group reported the synthesis of an organic–inorganic hybrid mesoporous silica material, Ph-MS, via the co-condensation of phenyltriethoxysilane and tetraethoxysilane.152 Ph-MS was employed for the selective adsorption of bisphenol A based on the π–π interaction between the aromatic π-electron-rich bisphenol moiety and phenyl moiety of the material. Their work also revealed that besides the π–π interactions, the hydrogen bonding between the hydrophobic phenyl groups of BPA and hydrophilic hydroxyl groups of Ph-MS resulted in higher adsorption compared to the conventional MCM-41. Wang et al. reported for the first time a nitrogen and oxygen-rich TPHH-COF material, in which Ag NPs were loaded to form Ag@TPHH-COF (Scheme 10).153 This Ag-composite material exhibited good activity for the catalytic degradation of four common organic dyes, including methylene blue (MB), methyl orange (MO), Rhodamine B (RhB) and Congo Red (CR). The rapid decolorization of each dye solution over a sodium borohydride solution of Ag@TPHH-COF indicated the hydrogenation reduction of the –NN– and –CN– moieties of the dyes. POPs/COFs are also potent candidates for the photodetoxification of dyes owing to their multi-dimensional rich porous structure, visible light absorbing chromophoric units and π–π interactions with the adjacent layers. The basic mechanism of this visible-light driven chemical transformation begins with absorption of photons of equal or higher energy with respect to the bandgaps of these POPs/COFs. The excited electron from the valence band (VB) jumps to the conduction band (CB), leaving behind a hole in the VB. The excited electron and hole pair (exciton), together with other reactive species such as singlet oxygen (1O2), superoxide radical (O2˙−) and hydroxyl radical (˙OH) participate in the photodetoxification of wastewater. The excited photocatalyst in the presence of O2 produces 1O2 and O2˙−via singlet electron transfer (SET) and energy transfer (ET). The superoxide radical upon reacting with a water molecule generates a hydroxyl radical, whereas the holes get spread over the polymeric surface, facilitating the separation of excitons by further grabbing pollutants.154 Recently, the photocatalytic purification of wastewater via the construction of Z-scheme heterojunctions with two semiconductors influenced the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and increased the photocatalytic activity. Wang et al. reported the synthesis of a 2D/2D heterojunction of layered bismuth oxyhalide BiOBr and TzDA COF (BTDC) via a simple hydrothermal approach.155 This BTDC material was employed for the photocatalytic degradation of single Rhodamine B (10 ppm), Cr(VI) (10 ppm) and a mixture of both. It was observed that the BTDC material could degrade RhB in the pH range of 2.1–8.1 and Cr(VI) at the pH of 2.1 upon irradiation for 90 min. Interestingly, the synergistic effect between RhB and Cr(VI) resulted in the better performance of the BTDC material in the binary mixture solution rather than the single pollutant system. Compared to the pure component systems of BiOBr and TzDa COF, the heterojunction in the BTDC material facilitated the interfacial migration and separation of photo-induced charges, thus outperforming the catalytic activity of pure systems.
 Scheme 10  Solution infiltration process to synthesise Ag@TPHH-COF for NAC and dye degradation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 Copyright 2003, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The presence of highly toxic heavy metals such as lead, arsenic, mercury, cadmium and chromium in water causes multiple organ damage, birth defects and several health problems in human beings. Therefore, various nano-composite hybrid porous materials have been reported for the elimination of heavy metals from water. In this context, in 2008, Yuan et al. reported the synthesis of organic–inorganic hybrid porous titania-phosphonate using organically bridged tetra- or penta-phosphonates, as shown in Fig. 8.156 These claw-molecule-containing hybrid titania-phosphonate materials, T-EDTMPS (containing ethylene diamine tetra(methylene phosphonic acid)) and T-DTPMPA (containing diethylene triamine penta(methylene phosphonic acid)), efficiently removed Cd(II) ions and photodecomposed Rhodamine B dye under UV or visible light irradiation. The adsorption capacity of T-DTPMPA was larger than that of T-EDTMPS due to the presence of a larger organic motif in T-DTPMPA, hence favouring the complexation. The photocatalytic property was attributed to the shortening of the band-gap from 3.1 to 2.26 eV upon the incorporation of organophosphonate in the titania framework. Over the years, various thiol-functionalized mesoporous organo-silicas have emerged due to their high surface area and ordered structures, playing a crucial role in heavy metal uptake from water with high recyclability. In 2017, Voort and co-workers introduced a novel thiol-ethylene-bridged PMO, with a high surface area of 569–696 m2 g−1, which selectively adsorbed Hg2+ from water and showed a maximum Hg2+ adsorption capacity of 1183 mg g−1 for 100SH-PMO, which is comparatively higher than that of a thiol-functionalized PMO, showing the maximum Hg2+ uptake capacity of 464 mg g−1, as reported by Wu and group.157,158 The authors explained that the stereo-coordination chemistry of S with Hg2+ was responsible for the higher uptake value. The uniform porosity of this nSH-PMO resulted in the selective adsorption of Hg2+ in the presence of other M2+ (M2+ = Zn2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, and Cd2+) ions due to the thermodynamic inability of these M2+ ions to coordinate in the confined pore channels. Recently, our group designed a 2D N- and S-rich highly ordered periodic mesoporous organo-silica with a high surface area of 971 m2 g−1, which was synthesized via the condensation of 3,4-thaidiazole-2,5-dithiol and 3-choloropropyltriethoxysilane followed by CTAB-assisted hydrothermal treatment.61 The soft-soft interaction between the Hg2+ and S centers resulted in the highest mercury uptake of 2081 mg g−1, which was almost twice that of thiol-ethylene bridged PMO (nSH-PMO). Ab initio quantum mechanical calculations revealed low ellipticity (ε) values for Hg2+⋯O, Hg2+⋯N and Hg2+⋯S interactions, indicating strong, profound Sigma bonding character, which aided the exceptionally high Hg(II) uptake.
 Fig. 8  Ethylene diamine tetra(methylene phosphonic acid) (EDTMPS) and diethylene triamine penta(methylene phosphonic acid) (DTPMPA) used for the synthesis of metal phosphonates. 
Nowadays, various synthetic methods have been reported, such as thin-film nanocomposite (TFN) membranes, porous mixed matrix, electrodeposition methodology, solvothermal methodology and vacuum filtration technique, to fabricate hybrid porous material-based membranes, particularly MOFs to enhance the water flux, antifouling and solute selectivity. However, significant improvement can be achieved by modifying the following properties: (i) tuning the porosity of the framework to enhance its ion selectivity and increase the water transport process in forward osmosis. (ii) Introducing hydrophilic moieties in the membranes to escalate the water transport process. The incorporation of water-loving moieties into the membranes reduces the contact angle significantly, facilitating the transport of water. Recent studies also showed that the incorporation of graphene oxides (GOs)–Ag in membranes improved their anti-biofouling properties. One can also increase the effective filtration area of the membranes by increasing the surface roughness of the material. Hence in the coming days, the rational design of hybrid porous material-based membranes, center on a systematic understanding of their transport mechanisms, macroscopic fluidic dynamic and host–guest interactions is indispensable.
3.3. Photocatalysis
Utilizing solar energy for visible-light driven catalysis is a propitious strategy for environmental remediation. Generally, the photocatalytic property of a material strongly depends on its distinctive electronic structures, filled valence band (VB) and empty conduction band (CB). Other thermodynamic factors such as better matching of the VB/CB levels with the redox potential and appropriate wavelength of incident light (with energy equal or greater than the band gap of the material, Eg), governs the efficiency of a particular heterogeneous photocatalyst. Typically, heterogeneous photocatalysis involves three main processes, as follows: (1) absorption of incident light and charge excitation, (2) charge separation and transfer and (3) surface charge reactions (oxidation/reduction). A good photocatalyst should have a strong absorption of visible light, excited states with longer lifetime and high charge mobility. The two most notable applications of photocatalysis are water splitting and air/water purification. Porous hybrid materials are potent candidates for photocatalyst design, given that they have tunable band gaps, bringing together the merits of both organic and inorganic chemistry. Moreover, the porous nature of these materials enable better interaction with the substrates throughout their bulk compared to other state-of-art photocatalysts.

3.3.1. Photocatalysis by MOFs. 
Recently, MOFs have attracted significant attention in the field of photocatalysis due to their inbuilt crystalline lattice with delocalized highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). It is worth mentioning that the HOMO/LUMO in MOFs play a similar role to that of the VB/CB in the case of semiconductors.159 In 2014, Lin and co-workers, with the aim to increase the surface catalytic sites and reduce charge recombination, designed for the first time a ternary system comprised of three composite materials, UiO-66/CdS/1% reduced graphene oxide (RGO), for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction.160 The hexagonally crystalline CdS was synthesized via the photo-deposition reaction between S8 and CdCl2. Then, the corresponding amount of UiO-66 and RGO was dispersed under a nitrogen atmosphere. In the absence of light, this composite showed no hydrogen evolution activity. Again, visible-light irradiation on simple UiO-66 and RGO did not produce any hydrogen, indicating that the only photocatalyst among the three systems was CdS. According to the Mott–Schottky measurement, it was observed that UiO-66 was an n-type semiconductor with a LUMO potential of −0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl at 6.6 pH. However, the LUMO potential of UiO-66 was −0.09 V when NHE was used as the standard. Thus, the photogenerated electrons from CdS upon visible-light irradiation could easily move to UiO-66, and finally get transferred to the RGO sheets given that the minimum potential of the conduction band of CdS and Fermi level of RGO with respect to NHE were −0.65 V and −0.08 V, respectively. This ternary heterostructured composite system effectively evolved H2 in aqueous medium in the absence of any sacrificial agent. The following year, Xu et al. reported the visible-light driven CO2 photoreduction over a mesoporous needle-shaped Zr-MOF called PCN-222, which was synthesized by reacting tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (H2TCPP) and ZrCl4.161 This MOF showed excellent CO2 uptake owing to its Zr6 centers, while its visible-light harvesting property was attributed to the H2TCPP ligand in the presence of triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial agent. The high CO2 uptake enabled better interaction with the MOF, which in turn yielded a higher amount of HCOO− through photoreduction. The presence of long-lived electron trap states in PCN-222, as detected by ultrafast transient absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy, suppressed the e−–h+ recombination process, thereby enhancing the photocatalytic activity of this porphyrin-based MOF. In 2018, Jiang et al. reported a novel approach to avoid the formation of O2− in the half-cell reaction during water splitting.162 This work addressed the rapid microwave-assisted solvothermal synthesis of the MOF PCN-777 containing a conjugated 4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tribenzoic acid (H3TATB) ligand to achieve a complete redox cycle via completion of photocatalytic H2 production coupled with the selective oxidation of benzylamine to N-benzylbenzamide in the presence of Pt as a co-catalyst and in the absence of any sacrificial agent. The H2 production took place upon the reduction of protons by the photogenerated electrons, while the holes took part in the organic transformation. The extended π-conjugation in the ligand effectively separated the photogenerated carriers, thus overshadowing the photocatalytic performance of MOF-808 even with a higher Pt doping.


3.3.2. Photocatalysis by metal-POPs/COFs. 
In 2019, Li and co-workers reported the synthesis of a thioether-functionalized TTR-COF material via the solvothermal condensation of 1,3,5-tris(4-formylphenyl)-triazine and 2,5-bis(2-ethylthio)ethoxy)terephthalohydrazide, which was utilized for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from seawater.163 The observed band gap of this TTR-COF was around 2.71 eV. Under 365 nm light, TTR-COF exhibited a yellow photo-luminescence band centered at 557 nm, implying its easy excitation. Subsequently, the photocatalytic activity of TTR-COF was studied in seawater containing triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent for the donation of electrons and 1 wt% Au as a co-catalyst. Interestingly, the thioether moieties present in TTR-COF facilitated the selective capture of Au from a mixture of metal ions (Fe2+, Ni2+, Co2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Na+, K+ and Mg2+), generating a hybrid material that showed H2 evolution of 1720 μmol g−1 in just 4 h. A low rate of H2 evolution was observed by the “metal-free” TTR-COF in the absence of a co-catalyst. However, in comparison to fresh water, the decrease in photocatalytic activity in sea-water was due to the chelation of Mg2+ ions with the framework, as revealed by DFT studies. In the following year, Wang et al. reported a donor–acceptor containing fully conjugated Py-BSZ-COF, which was synthesized via the condensation reaction between 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(4-formylphenyl)pyrene and 4,4′-(benzthiadazole-4,7-diyl)diacetonitrile (Scheme 11a).164 Herein, the pyrene units acted as electron donating centers, while the benzothiazole units acted as electron withdrawing centers (Scheme 11b). This COF material showed excellent photo-stability and enhanced charged separation. Thioamide was converted to 1,2,4-thiadiazole via photocatalytic oxidative amine coupling and cyclization, assisted by the superoxide radical anion (O2˙−) formed upon the exposure of this donor–acceptor Py-BSZ-COF to visible light in air-saturated CH3CN. Recently our group developed a new hybrid system via the combination of crystalline porous ZnO and TRIPTA-COF in a 1:14 ratio, producing NZO-1/TRIPTA-COF, which was utilized for photoelectrochemical water oxidation.165 NZO-1 was synthesized via the hydrothermal approach using metformin, which is an antihyperglycemic drug rich with electron-donating amine and imine moieties, as a template for the first time. The band gap of the porous NZO-1 was found to be 2.91 eV, which was lower than that of the conventional bulk ZnO (3.37 eV), while the band gap of TRIPTA-COF was 2.0 eV. The formation of a heterojunction in the NZO-1/TRIPTA-COF composite was confirmed by UV-vis spectroscopy, which displayed an absorbance at 650 nm (the observed UV-vis absorbance for NZO-1 and TRIPTA-COF was 410 and 497 nm, respectively). In this newly designed catalytic system for photoelectrochemical water oxidation, the 2D-TRIPTA-COF acted as a photosensitizer owing to the presence of π-conjugation in the overall framework. To gain deep insight into its optoelectronic property, another heterojunction system comprised of non-porous wurtzite ZnO and TRIPTA-COF (ZnO-B/COF) was similarly synthesized. The comparative photocatalytic study between ZnO-B/COF and NZO-1/COF showed the significant amplification of the photocurrent from 0.21 mA cm−2 to 0.62 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. RHE. The introduction of defect sites in the crystalline ZnO through nanoporosity resulted in this unique optical and charge transport property. Similarly, porous graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) synthesized via the pyrolysis of small organic molecules coupled with inorganic heterostructures showed much improved photocatalytic efficiency for the degradation of organic dyes under visible light irradiation.166
 Scheme 11  (a) Synthetic route for Py-BSZ-COF. (b) Photocatalytic oxidative amine coupling and oxidative cyclization of thioamides using Py-BSZ-COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 


3.3.3. Photocatalysis by PMOs. 
Over the years, on account of the unique characters of periodic mesoporous organosilicas such as fluorescence, hole-transportation and electron-donating properties, they have emerged at the forefront among light-harvesting hybrid materials. Mesoporosity can largely enhance their catalytic property including photocatalysis. Moreover, anchoring photoactive species in the pore channels of PMO often boosts its photocatalytic activity (Fig. 9).167 Takeda and his group developed a new catalytic system by incorporating a well-known bipyridine-containing rhenium(I) complex, fac-[ReI(bpy)(CO)3(PPh3)]+(OTf)−, into the mesopores of a chromophoric biphenyl PMO, given that this metal complex is known for the two-electron photoreduction of CO2 to CO (Fig. 10).168 The biphenyl ring in the PMO showed light-harvesting property, whereas the bipyridine ring in the rhenium complex acted as a light absorber. Strong fluorescence was observed at around λmax = 380 nm for Bp-PMO, which was due to the presence of biphenyl groups in the framework; however, Re/Bp-PMO showed no emission, while forming a new band at 450–700 nm, accounting for the Re complex. The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 yielded 6.2 μmol of CO after 24 h in the presence of 280 nm monochromatic light. In 2018, Yoshida and his group investigated the photoreduction of H2O by functionalizing PMO with a series of luminescent Pt(II) complexes.169 Interestingly, the presence of both Pt(0) and Pt(II) complex did not catalyse the photoreduction of water. However, Pt(0)/Pt(II)-co-immobilized BPy-PMOs photocatalytically reduced water under a λmax = 300–385 nm xenon lamp in the presence of EDTA·2Na as a sacrificial electron donor, even in the absence of an electron relay, indicating that the co-immobilization enabled rapid electron transfer between the two species, enhancing the reduction of water to H2 by the one-electron reduced species. Pt(II) complexes generally exhibit poor photosensitizing abilities, but their integration with functionalized PMO effectively enhances their photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 9  Light harvesting PMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 Copyright 2009, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
 Fig. 10  Rhenium(I) complex containing PMO as a light-harvesting system mimicking photosynthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2010, the American Chemical Society. 
In photocatalytic CO2 reduction, it is well reported that C3N4 can act as a catalyst alone; however, it has been observed that its modification by incorporating metal nanoparticles can enhance its performance to a greater extent. Recently, Li and group developed graphitic carbon nitride (C3N4) via the pyrolysis of urea, followed by the deposition of Co2+ for CO2 reduction to CO, with a turnover number of more than 200.170 For photocatalytic CO2 reduction, metalated porous organic polymers are an important class of hybrid materials. The high surface area of these hybrid porous materials influences the CO2 adsorption into their surface, promoting the reaction efficiency. Enhancing the surface basicity in the material can facilitate CO2 adsorption, resulting in higher feasibility of the reactions. The higher use of polymeric graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is due to its good chemical stability, excellent optical and electronic properties and low cost. However, challenges such as the high recombination rate of electron–hole pairs with a high exciton binding energy and low surface area strongly restrict the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4. Accordingly, the photocatalytic HER can be developed by constructing 2D porous materials with a high surface area and surface functionality. The ability of heteroatom-containing COFs to bind single metal atoms via coordinate bonds makes them superior photoelectrocatalysts. However, transforming these metal-doped COFs into thin film membranes for artificial photosynthesis is quiet challenging and an area that will flourish in the near future.

3.4. Biomass conversion
The devastating impacts imparted by the over consumption of fossil fuels have made biomass the focus as a clean and sustainable source for the production of platform chemicals, fuels and energy.171 Owing to the high carbon content of biomass, it can be easily converted to contemporary energy systems, guided by economic incentives. Biomass can be generally classified as lignocellulosic and non-lignocellulosic in nature. Lignocellulosic biomass involves vegetal origin, and hence its conversion into valuable chemicals, bio-fuels and bio-gases (e.g., H2, CH4, CO) is cost effective and environmentally sound. In comparison to thermochemical and biological conversion, chemical catalysis is considered as the most effective approach for the transformation of raw lignocellulosic feedstocks into various biopolymers (cellulose, lignin, hemicellulose, etc.). In biomass valorization, the use of heterogeneous catalysts over homogeneous liquid catalysts is of great importance because of their multifaceted physiochemical properties, high stability and systematic recovery for further use. Actually, recently, heterogeneous catalysts have contributed 90% to chemical production, which can also be employed in bulk-scale industrial productions. Currently, biomass conversion processes are largely dominated by hybrid catalysts. Hybrid porous materials play the main role in heterogeneous catalysis owing to their high surface area, tunable pore size, fascinating control over morphology and thermal stability.172
MOF-based acid catalysts had have attracted significant attention in the field of biomass conversion because of their Lewis acid sites, originating from the open metal sites in their framework. Brønsted acidity can be achieved through post-synthetic modification via the encapsulation of acidic moieties such as poly-tungstic acid in the pore channels of MOFs or by modifying organic linkers with acidic moieties such as SO3H groups.173 Phosphotungstic acid (PTA)-encapsulated MIL-101(Cr) was synthesized by Zhang et al. to convert fructose and glucose to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) via dehydration.174 The authors revealed that the yield of 5-HMF increased upon increasing the loading amount of PTA and no conversion was observed with only Cr-MIL-101, suggesting the requirement of Brønsted acid sites for the effective dehydration of carbohydrates. The release of protons from PTA of MIL-101 to the ionic-liquid solvent catalyzed the conversion, while limiting its reusability. Hence, DMSO was chosen as an alternative solvent to check the leaching of protons. The transesterification of vegetable oil (rapeseed oil) with various alcohols to produce alkyl esters using ZIF-8, a zinc 2-methylimidazole-based zeolitic imidazolate framework, as an alternative to zinc aluminate was investigated by Chizallet and co-workers for the first time.175 They revealed that the presence acidic-basic sites on the external surface or at the defects of this material activated the catalytic reaction, as confirmed by the theoretical studies. Precisely, the acidic sites were responsible for activating the electrophilicity in esters, while the basic sites deprotonated the alcohols, thereby activating the nucleophilicity in them. The acid sites were comprised of Zn(II) species (strong Lewis acid) and NH groups (strong Brønsted acid), while the OH and N− moieties accounted for the basic sites in ZIF-8.
For fuel production at the industrial scale, several biomass resources such as lignocellulose-rich materials, which re common wood-based biomass components composed of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, are used. Even though lignocellulose is renewable and abundant biomass feedstock, its complex structure limits its direct use. Previous literature reported the disadvantage of a huge amount of coke and water production, accompanying the formation of higher quality bio-fuel. Thus, to address this problem, several heterogeneous hybrid micro/mesoporous materials containing various metal nanoparticles and basic sites were employed to achieve the selective decarboxylation reaction, favoring a higher yield of bio-fuels, while reducing coke and water byproducts.176 In this context, Zhang et al. explored a phosphotungstate-based solid acid catalyst for the valorization of biomass-derived furfuryl alcohol into versatile chemical alkyl levulinates in very high yields.177 Sulfonated mesoporous materials by virtue of their Brønsted acid sites of –SO3H groups display good catalytic activity in this biomass conversion reaction. Ethane-bridged PMO bearing arenesulfonic acid and phenyl groups having a hollow nanotube particle morphology showed high conversion of LA and FA to LE under mild conditions.178 The large pore size of the mesoporous materials facilitated the diffusion of bulkier substrates through the mesopore channels. Haynes et al. reported the synthesis of a mercapto-containing mesoporous silica nanocapsule (mSN(C)-SH), followed by treatment with H2O2 in methanol to produce mSN(C)–SO3H,179 and the overall scheme is shown in Scheme 12. This mSN(C)–SO3H material acted as an acid catalyst to hydrolyse cellobiose to glucose. To gain deep insight into the catalytic performance of mSN(C)–SO3H, a blank test without catalyst was performed, producing only 15% glucose with only 18% cellobiose conversion, in contrast to the 80% conversion and glucose yield with mSN(C)–SO3H.
 Scheme 12  Synthetic route for the preparation of acidic mesoporous silica (mSN(C)–SO3H) nanocapsules. 
From the viewpoint of renewable energy sources, the formation of DMF from HMF via the selective hydrogenolysis of formyl and hydroxyl groups, without affecting the furan ring is a challenging task. In comparison to the market-leading EtOH, DMF possesses a higher energy density (31.5 MJ L−1) with a higher octane number (119) and low volatility, making DMF a promising bio-fuel. As reported in the literature, various bi-metallic systems could effectively implement this selective hydrogenation. CuRu/C gave 100% HMF conversion with 61% DMF selectivity,180 while PtCo@HSC showed 100% HMF conversion with 92% yield of DMF.181 Nobel such as like Pd, Pt and Ru supported carbon materials also showed good activity towards HMF conversion; however, the leaching of these nanoparticles from the solid support remains a big issue. The synthesis of nanodispersed Ni nanoparticles affixed on N-rich carbon was reported by Borodoloi et al., illustrating the importance of metal-support interfacial interactions, not only for stabilizing the heterocatalyst but also facilitating 100% HMF conversion.182 Glycerol acetals and ketals are important bio-diesel additives, which can be synthesized via the condensation reaction between glycerol and ketones/aldehydes in the presence of a suitable acid catalyst. Patel et al. reported the use of a 12-tungstosilisic acid (TSA)-anchored cubic nanoporous MCM-48 for the synthesis of bio-fuel additives by the valorization of glycerol with benzaldehyde and furfural under moderate reaction conditions.183 Upon the acetalization of glycerol with benzaldehyde, two types of cyclic products, 1,3-dioxolane and 1,3-dioxane, were formed. It was observed that the conversion of glycerol to dioxane increased with an increase in the loading amount of TSA, highlighting the enhancement in the Brønsted acidity of the catalyst.
In the last few years, a large spectrum of state-of-the-art porous hybrid materials has been developed for the conversion of biomass, introducing new properties in materials. Microporous zeolites and functionalized silica materials were modified with heteroatoms. However, despite the impressive advancements in the field of biomass conversion using heterocatalysts, many challenges still need to be solved, especially the leaching of inorganic metals from the porous frameworks, which reduces the efficiency of heterocatalysts. Nowadays, more focus is devoted to the physicochemical properties of hybrid heterogeneous catalysts. In recent years, for the biomass conversion, lignocellulosic has been used extensively given that it has a great potential for producing high value chemicals, which can replace fossil resources. For future perspective, the use of solar energy to cleave the C–O and C–C bonds from lignocellulosic materials will draw ample attention as a result of their many attractive reactive species.184 Hence, the rational design of hybrid porous heterocatalysts containing suitable photosensitizing scaffolds needs to be explored for continuing transformative innovations.
3.5. Selective gas adsorption
Gas adsorption properties are based on molecular sieving, which is very demanding from environmental perspectives. Selectivity originates when there is a difference in the interaction of the adsorbates with the surface of the adsorbent under a particular condition. Pore size and shape are the two major factors that allow the selective adsorption of guest molecules or gases. In addition, the interaction between the guest molecule and the surface of the host plays a crucial role in selective adsorption. In general, a good adsorbent should possess the following salient features: (i) good adsorption capacity, (ii) selectivity, (iii) regenerability and (iv) favourable adsorption kinetics. In the case of hybrid porous materials as adsorbents, preferential adsorption based on polarity, H-bonding, quadrupole moment and surface property of the pores play a vital role in selective adsorption. Moreover, hybrid porous materials allow surface modification and pore size alteration, overcoming the limitations of each material.
In 2003, Kaneko and his group developed a porous lanthanide framework, [Er2(PDA)3], which showed selective adsorption towards CO2 over Ar and N2, indicating a relationship between the pore size of the adsorbent and kinetic diameters of the adsorbates.185 The space-filling model of [Er2(PDA)3] suggested that it possesses a pore window of ca. 3.4 Å, which matched well with the kinetic diameter of CO2 (CO2 = 3.3 Å, Ar = 3.4 Å and N2 = 3.64 Å). Even though the kinetic diameter of CO2 and Ar differed by only 0.1 Å, CO2 was selectively adsorbed over Ar. This unprecedented selectivity was attributed to the dipole-induced-dipole interaction between the electric field of the framework and CO2, together with the interaction between the quadrupole moment of CO2 and electric field gradient of the framework. The authors also mentioned the additional donor–acceptor affinity between the Lewis acidic Er(III) sites and CO2 molecule. The size-selective adsorption of H2 or O2 over CO or N2 was observed using the Mg3(NDC)3 microporous MOF.186 The pore openings for Mg3(NDC)3 varied from 3.46 to 3.64 Å in comparison to the kinetic diameter of 3.46 Å for O2, 3.64 Å for N2 and 3.76 Å for CO. The authors suggested its potential application in the separation of O2 from N2 in air and H2 from CO in fuel cell applications. The substitution of transition metal ions with lighter main group elements results in an enhancement in hydrogen storage capacity. A comparative study was reported by Yang et al. in 2011 between ethanol-extracted and high temperature-calcined SBA-15 to graft amine for selective CO2/N2 adsorption.187 The authors suggested that the surface silanol group density increased from 3.4 OH per nm2 for SBA-15-cal to 8.5 OH per nm2 for SBA-15-ext, showing a steady increase in amine grafting from 2.2 to 3.2 mmol g−1. The enhancement in the surface basicity of the extracted amine-SBA-15 was reflected in its higher CO2 adsorption isotherm. Interestingly, at 298 K, the N2 adsorption for the amine-SBA-15-cal and amine-SBA-15-ext was 0.028 and 0.015 mmol g−1, respectively. Hence, considering the condition pertinent to flue gas, amine-SBA-15-ext showed 2.8-times CO2/N2 selectivity over its calcined counterpart. CO2/CH4 separation has been considered a cutting-edge field of research, with the purpose to make biogas economically viable. The naturally associated high surface area and tunable pore properties of PMO make them one of the prime candidate for selective CO2 adsorption. Ferreira et al. designed a phenylene-PMO, followed by surface modification with Al2O3 using atomic layer deposition (ALD), with the goal to fabricate a novel CO2 adsorbent.188 The surface acidity of this PMO/Al2O3 composite material was elevated by the tetrahedral and bipyramidal Al-sites, which increased the interaction between the CO2 quadrupole and composite, promoting the selective separation of CO2/CH4. Phenylene-PMO also showed very high selectivity for the removal of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as hexanal and butyric acid vapors from air at a low sorbent dose.189
Hydrogen storage for energy carrier application in vehicles is a cutting-edge field of research. Fuel cell applications involve two major schemes, i.e., dissociative adsorption (DA), where the H atoms get dissolved by the metal alloys by dissociating the H–H bonds, and associated adsorption (AA) of hydrogen, where H2 gets bound as a molecule through strong H-bonding.190 The former process has the disadvantage of overcoming a high energy barrier to cleave the H–H bond. The existing metal oxide clusters and organic aromatic linkers in MOFs show significant affinity for H2, illustrating the recent advancement in the AA process. Using density functional theory (DFT) and grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) simulations, Froudakis and co-workers revealed that by doping Li atoms into MOFs, their hydrogen storage capacity could be exceptionally enhanced.191 The observed increase in the interaction energy between the Li atom-affixed MOF and hydrogen molecule induced a strong dipole, resulting in strong binding. The authors explained that 3 H2 molecules strongly interact with 1 Li atom. In 2007, Han and Goddard reported the synthesis of an Li-doped MOF, namely Li-MOF-C-30, which exhibited 5.99 wt% gravimetric H2 uptake at 100 bar and −30 °C, fulfilling the Department of Energy (DOE) 2010 target.190 They also reported that at 300 K and 20 bar pressure, the H2 uptake capacity was 3.89 wt%, which increased to 4.56 wt% at 50 bar pressure. This work suggested that the incorporation of electropositive metal ions is a promising strategy to amplify the H2 uptake capacity.
Modification of MOF surfaces can be used as a better tool to achieve the separation of important and challenging gas mixtures. In the case of almost similar molecules such as propylene and propane, where the difference is only two hydrogens, with almost the same boiling points, separation becomes difficult. Accordingly, MOFs are potential participants among the porous materials that can separate olefins and paraffins based on their thermodynamic mechanism.192 Lately, hierarchical porous hybrid materials are drawing increasing attention because of their long-range pore size distribution. However, gas separation using porous hybrid materials is still in its infancy. Exfoliating 2D porous hybrid materials to obtain monolayer membranes enhances the maximum flux, thus reducing the cost of separation. However, the high price of 2D materials limits their use in large-scale industrial applications. Hence, it still remains an ongoing challenge for material chemists to fabricate cost-effective 2D porous hybrid membranes from a market perspective.
3.6. Fuel cell
The demand for energy in society is ever-increasing, and thus difficult to satisfy. Over the years, material scientists around the world have devoted considerable efforts to designing materials that can convert chemical energy directly into electrical energy through a clean carbon-free system. A fuel cell is comprised of three active components, i.e., an anode or fuel electrode, a cathode or oxidant electrode and an electrolyte. Following the water–hydrogen cycle, H2 and O2 from water splitting can be recombined into water with the generation of energy. However, the energy generated upon the recombination of H2 and O2 is less than that required to split water. Hence, the suitable design of catalysts is required to overcome this hurdle. Desirable features in fuel cell materials/membranes include: (i) high conductivity of protons, (ii) impermeable to water, and (iii) high mechanical and thermal stability. Recently, porous hybrid materials, owing to their strong porous framework, high specific surface areas, tunable pore structures, wide functionalities and excellent mechanical and thermal stability, have gained tremendous attention as potent catalysts in fuel cell applications.
The structural features of MOFs such as open metal sites, ordered pore apertures and presence of organic linker together with desirable functional moieties, have prompted their extensive use in various fuel cell applications. A composite material composed of a Zn-MOF and polyaniline was reported by Guo et al. in 2016 via the in situ oxidative polymerization of aniline monomer bearing a carbonized Zn-MOF suspension.193 This composite material showed a high specific capacitance of 477 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, accounting for the synergistic effect between the carbonized MOF and PANI. The Zn-MOF exhibited good electrical conductivity, while the sandwich-like structure of carbonized Zn-MOF/PANI decreased the electron transport distance and electrolyte diffusion resistance. The authors discussed that the carbonized Zn-MOF did not alter the structure of PANI, during the overall charge–discharge process. In the same year, Wen et al. synthesized another composite material graphene oxide/MOF-5 via a solvothermal process, which was further annealed at 1000 °C to obtain a reduced graphene oxide/carbonized MOF-5 (rGO/CMOF-5) hybrid material.194 The rGO layers were embedded inside the hybrid structure, which acted as an efficient mini-current collector, reducing the electron transportation lengths to increase the conductivity. The high electrical conductivity and excellent electron transport properties of this material facilitated its use as a supercapacitor electrode material. It was observed that the incorporation of rGO increased the electrical performance of the hybrid material, showing a high specific capacitance of 312 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 with a retention of 89% after 5000 cycles, which was higher than that of pure rGO (105 F g−1) and CMOF-5 (206 F g−1). To explore this hybrid material for practical application, a symmetrical supercapacitor was successfully constructed using the rGO/CMOF-5 hybrid (positive and negative electrodes), which was separated by a cellulose paper separator in 6 M KOH electrolyte, giving an energy density of 17.2 W h kg−1 at a power density of 250 W kg−1 with a cycling stability of 81% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles at a current density of 2 A g−1. The demand for active and stable electrocatalysts is growing constantly for commercial fuel cell applications. Recently, Sun and group designed a PtNP-encapsulated ultrathin 2D Co-MOF-derived carbon layer.195 The carbon layer gave extra stability to the NPs, mitigating the leaching problem, which enhanced the stability by nine times that of Pt/C catalysts. Moreover, this novel Pt encapsulated catalyst also showed excellent catalytic activity against the ORR, which is 5.9 and 12 times higher than that of Pt/C and Pt/rGO, respectively. In addition, it also exhibited good catalytic activity toward the HER, with a low overpotential (23.1 mV in acidic media, while 92.1 mV in alkaline media at a current density of 10 mA cm−1) compared to Pt/C catalysts (23.1 mV in acidic media and 92.1 mV in alkaline media).
Duan et al. reported the synthesis of a copper and nitrogen-based carbon hybrid material, a pyrolyzing porphyrin-based MOF in the presence and absence of air (Cu–NC-air and Cu–NC, respectively).196 The authors performed a study on ORR catalytic activity for nitrogen-dopped carbon, revealing an enhancement in its performance upon addition of copper as a co-dopant (Fig. 11). In addition, it was also found that the air-impurities during pyrolysis resulted in a high surface area and higher electron transfer number, owing to the fractional etching of carbon, which generated additional porosity and increased extra sites for ORR activity. The electron transfer number of Cu–NC-air was 3.9, while that for the Cu–NC sample was 3.0, showing good stability up to 5000 cycles for ORR catalysis. In 2020, Feng et al. synthesized a nanocomposite phase change material (PCM) comprised of polyethylene glycol (PEG) as a core low-temperature energy storage material (phase change temperature range of 46–65 °C) and MCM-41 as a solid matrix for advanced thermal energy storage.197 The PCM was synthesized via the solution impregnation method, and –NH2 groups were grafted by replacing the hydroxyl group of MCM-41. No phase transition was observed in differential scanning colorimetry when hydroxyl groups were present in MCM-41 even up to 70% loading of PEG. Interestingly, the phase change was observed after the grafting of amine on MCM-41, and 30% loading of PEG resulted in an increment in the phase change enthalpy from 0 J g−1 to 58.76 J g−1. The authors explained that the conformational transition was the key to the phase transition of the polymer chains, and hence the excessive surface absorption of PEG on MCM-41-OH in contrast to MCM-41-NH2 restricted the conformational transition.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of improved ORR activity in N-doped carbon upon the introduction of air impurities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 
To generate electrochemical devices, materials should have high ionic and electrical conductivities, which can be achieved by employing microporous hybrid systems possessing organic linkers with more than one functionality. Together with the common coordination sites, additional functional groups in organic linkers can act as guest interaction sites. Not only the organic linkers, the electrochemical performance of any porous material depends on its morphology, size and surface area, promoting faster electron transport. The use of multi-metallic systems can also enhance the electronic conductivity of the material. Moreover, further investigations on microporous hybrid materials showing excellent heat transfer ability can be useful in designing various advanced thermal materials. Hydrogen is likely to play an important role in decarbonizing the global energy systems. Recently, various classes of crystalline hybrid porous materials with well-defined pore volumes, high surface area and tunable pore sizes have been modified to form proton exchange membranes for hydrogen fuel cell applications. Lately, two main strategies have been developed to design proton conductive porous membranes for hydrogen fuel cells. Firstly, the incorporation of proton donors (such as sulfonate, imidazole and phenolic hydroxyl) groups in the hybrid porous skeletons, and secondly, post-synthetic treatment of proton carriers such as H3PO4 in the hybrid porous solid matrixes can result in the formation of better proton conducting membranes. Relevant research on the stability of proton conducting membranes can assist in overcoming unfavourable redox reactions and high humid conditions, as witnessed recently. Various post-synthetic strategies can amplify the processability of these materials, leading to the commercialization of these porous hybrid platforms.
3.7. Bio-sensing/biomarkers
Generally, biosensors are specific absorbents that can selectively immobilize analyte-targeted probes, such as aptamers, DNA, and antibodies from a complex environment containing coexisting biomolecules. Recently, hybrid porous nanomaterials have attracted significant attention as sensitizers due to their unique features such as tunable pore size, extended conjugation, high bioaffinity towards a wide number of probes, good fluorescence properties and additional linker effects. Compared to other non-hybrid systems (i.e., single organic/inorganic), the presence of both an extended π-electron system and open metal sites facilitates the detection of various bacteria and biomolecules. The high porosity of these materials allows a high loading of bioactive molecules, while their tunable surface functionalities allow better conjugation of bioactive molecules, both by in situ or post-synthesis, enabling strong binding sites for the targeted analyte.
MOFs are potent candidates as natural enzyme mimetics given that they consist of uniform cavities together with good catalytic activity. Recently, Zheng et al. reported an MOF, [Zr6O4(μ3-OH)4(OH)6(H2O)6(BTC)2]·nH2O, also known as MOF-808, with peroxidase mimetic catalytic activity toward the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) in the presence of H2O2 as an oxidant.198 The conversion was indicated by the formation of a green colour in the pH range of 3–10. The ability to function at both acidic and neutral pH makes this hybrid material suitable for use in biological systems (Scheme 13). The important biological molecule ascorbic acid (AA) has immense applications in the chemical, biological and nutritional domains. The deficiency of AA causes cardiovascular diseases and cancer, while the extra accumulation of AA causes urinary stones, stomach cramps, etc. In 2017, Xian and Chen et al. reported the synthesis of a cerium-based MOF ZJU-136-Ce, which was highly sensitive and showed selective “turn-on” fluorescence activity toward AA.199 It was revealed that in ZJU-136-Ce, the mixed valence state of Ce existed as Ce3+/Ce4+ (Fig. 12). A controlled study was performed to understand the mechanistic pathway by addition of different concentrations of KMnO4 (0–50 μM) to ZJU-136-Ce. Interestingly, the fluorescence intensity of ZJU-136-Ce decreased gradually with an emission spectrum at 917.55 eV, indicating the presence of Ce4+. When 100 μM AA was added to the ZJU-136-Ce MOF, the peak at 917.55 eV totally disappeared, which was attributed to the specific oxidation reaction between Ce4+ and AA.
 Scheme 13  Schematic representation of the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) using MOF-808. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of the detection of ascorbic acid (AA) using ZJU-136-Ce. Here yellow and blue polyhedra represent Ce4+ and Ce3+, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To measure dysfunction in biological systems or to detect the presence of toxic agents or drugs in living systems, biomarkers are quite handy. The detection of the biological phospholipid lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is an important tool in the pathophysiology of ovarian cancer. For the first time, Zaworotko et al. reported the synthesis of Tb-ZMOF, Eu-ZMOF and mixed MZMOF-3, with a zeolite-like topology for the selective detection of LPA in the presence of a mixture of L-proline, urea, NaCl, and glucose.200 To understand the activity of the MOFs toward the detection of LPA, the fluorescence emission spectra were measured in MeOH and it was found that the mixed MOF MZMOF-3 showed the highest sensitivity, which is attributed to the energy transfer mechanism from Tb3+ to Eu3+. In the case of liver cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma can be detected by checking the level of a special type of diagnostic biomarker, cholyglycine (CG) (a combination of glycine and cholic acid) in the serum. Zhao and Yan et al. reported the synthesis of a novel composite material via the in situ growth of polyoxometalate (POM) Eu4W8 in a cationic COF, EB-TFP (formation of imine linkage between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol and ethidium bromide), which was named Eu4W8@EB-TFP.201 This material exhibited a turn-off signal for the detection of CG. CG quenched the characteristic emission of Eu3+ observed at 615 nm in the time-dependent luminescence spectra, which was absent for various other serum components, indicating the weakening of the luminescence of Eu4W8@EB-TFP upon the addition of CG.
Recent studies showed the potential opportunity of porous hybrid materials as electrochemical (EC) aptasensors for biosensing applications.202 The rational fabrication of various conductive hybrid porous materials with mixed metal nodes and electroactive organic moieties can serve as a platform for EC biosensors. The effective interaction between the aptamers and porous framework is important in the design of EC biosensors. For example, the specific binding of Zr(IV) with the phosphate groups of aptamers gives Zr-based materials (UiO-66 and UiO-66-NH2) an upper hand over others.203 With respect to dimensionality, 2D materials have an edge over their 3D counterparts given that they possess high permeability and more exposed active sites. Achieving a uniform size distribution with structural consistency of the hybrid porous materials and controllable doping of aptamers in the porous matrix are few of the major challenges in this domain. Hence, astute, contemporary synthetic strategies such as the use of microwaves and microemulsions in the design of new hybrid porous materials, in collaboration with nanotechnology and crystal engineering, can pave a path to overcome these difficulties.
4. Future perspectives
Here, we demonstrated various important strategies reported till date for the synthesis of organic–inorganic hybrid porous materials, which will largely help in designing new functional frameworks using novel building blocks. Among the frontline applications, these hybrid porous materials offer ample scope that is yet to be fully explored, especially in the adsorptive removal of water pollutants and purification of industrial gases. The ease of post-synthesis surface functionalization of organic moieties has sparked huge opportunity in designing organic–inorganic hybrid porous materials for adsorption, sensing, optical, biomedical and catalytic applications.
The union of both inorganic and organic materials in these porous hybrid systems will open numerous opportunities in cross-disciplinary applications. However, efforts should pursue achieving specific preferred morphologies, such as core–shell, heterostructure hybrids, 2D nanostructures, oriented self-assemblies and composite materials. New protocols have been developed for the synthesis of organometallic precursors, which will promote the synthesis of novel organic–inorganic hybrid porous frameworks in future. Organocatalysis is an emerging area of research today,204,205 where hybrid PMO-based frameworks can be employed as a catalytic platform. Especially, the synthesis of chiral bridging organosilanes will help in designing suitable PMOs, which can contribute significantly in asymmetric organocatalysis. The successful use of fluorophoric building moieties in the hybrid frameworks of PMOs/MOFs and immobilization of transition metals on the surfaces of COFs/POPs can open new opportunities in photocatalysis and related optoelectronic applications. Hybrid porous materials by virtue of their large pore volume and surface functional groups can host photosensitizer molecules in their void spaces, and the resulting composites have huge scope in developing efficient solar cells.
Alternatively, the chemistry of nanoporous metal phosphonates is growing very rapidly and one can expect new applications of these hybrid materials in catalysis and biomedical applications in the future. There is a huge possibility of designing low-cost metal phosphonates using tailor-made bridging phosphonates, which have good potential to be explored as electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution reactions. The pyrolysis of composites of organic and inorganic nanostructured materials under controlled conditions is another challenging area of research in designing highly reactive hybrid porous nanocatalysts for photoelectrochemical water splitting and CO2 reduction reactions. Given that the demand for renewable energy and mitigation of greenhouse gases is continuously increasing, it is expected that these heterojunction nanocomposite materials will be explored intensively in the near future.
Author contributions
Sayantan Chongdar: writing – original draft, methodology, Sudip Bhattacharjee: writing – original draft, Piyali Bhanja: writing – review & editing, Asim Bhaumik: project administration, supervision, writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
SC would like to thank IACS for providing a Junior Research Fellowship. SB would like to acknowledge Indo-German Science & Technology Centre, New Delhi for a Junior Research Fellowship. PB would like to thank DST-SERB, New Delhi for a Ramanujan Fellowship (project no. RJF/2020/000049). AB would like to thank DST-SERB, New Delhi for funding under core research grant (CRG/2018/00230).
Notes and references
J. R. Li, J. Yu, W. Lu, L. B. Sun, J. Sculley, P. B. Balbuena and H. C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 CAS .
C. Perego and R. Millini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3956–3976 RSC .
V. J. Inglezakis, M. M. Loizidou and H. P. Grigoropoulou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 275, 570–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, N. Song, D. Qian, S. Gu, J. Pu, L. Huang, J. Liu and K. Qian, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2021 DOI:10.1021/acsbiomaterials.1c00733 .
J. Zhou and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6927–6945 RSC .
S. Hamoudi, Y. Yang, I. L. Moudrakovski, S. Lang and A. Sayari, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9118–9123 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mizoshita, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 789–800 RSC .
S. L. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 276–288 RSC .
B. M. Ramesha and V. Meynen, Materials, 2020, 13, 5366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dhanalaxmi, R. Singuru, S. Mondal, L. Bai, B. M. Reddy, A. Bhaumik and J. Mondal, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1033–1045 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Perry, Iv, J. A. Perman and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1400–1417 RSC .
R. E. Morris and X. Bu, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 353–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Proust, R. Thouvenot and P. Gouzerh, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1837–1852 RSC .
P. F. Yang, Y. F. Shu, Q. X. Zhuang, Y. S. Li and J. L. Gu, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 16226–16233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Xie and F. Wan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 365, 40–50 CrossRef CAS .
S. Subudhi, D. Rath and K. M. Parida, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 679–696 RSC .
Q. S. Hu, J. Di, B. Wang, M. X. Ji, Y. Chen, J. X. Xia, H. M. Li and Y. P. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 466, 525–534 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, H. Garcia, A. Moussaif, M. J. Sabater, R. Zniber and A. Redouane, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1058–1059 RSC .
C. Baleizao, B. Gigante, D. Das, M. Alvaro, H. Garcia and A. Corma, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1860–1861 RSC .
M. Chen, L.-L. Shao, M.-Y. Dong, X.-W. Lv, Z.-Y. Yuan, X. Qian, Y.-Y. Han and A.-X. Ding, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 17245–17261 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, Q. Wang, P. Han and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700193 CrossRef .
S.-Q. Liu, H.-R. Wen, G. Ying, Y.-W. Zhu, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yang, S. F. Zai, Y. T. Zhou, L. Du and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901949 CrossRef .
D. L. Guo, M. K. Yang, Y. C. Li, Y. W. Xue, G. L. Liu, N. T. Wu, J. K. Kim and X. M. Liu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3812–3819 RSC .
W. W. Xiong, J. W. Miao, K. Q. Ye, Y. Wang, B. Liu and Q. C. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 546–550 CAS .
I. Romero-Muñiz, P. Albacete, A. E. Platero-Prats and F. Zamora, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 54106–54112 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Clearfield and Z. K. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2002, 2937–2947 RSC .
J. L. Song, B. W. Zhou, H. C. Zhou, L. Q. Wu, Q. L. Meng, Z. M. Liu and B. X. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9399–9403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Odobel, B. Bujoli and D. Massiot, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Guo, D. Q. Li, W. F. Zhang, M. Pu, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 4597–4604 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Bourkaib, P. Gaudin, F. Vibert, Y. Guiavarc’h, S. Delaunay, X. Framboisier, C. Humeau, I. Chevalot and J. L. Blin, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 323, 111226 CrossRef CAS .
V. Antochshuk and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2496–2501 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gartmann and D. Brühwiler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6354–6356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Anwander, I. Nagl, M. Widenmeyer, G. Engelhardt, O. Groeger, C. Palm and T. Röser, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3532–3544 CrossRef CAS .
K. Inumaru, J. Kiyoto and S. Yamanaka, Chem. Commun., 2000, 903–904 RSC .
S. K. Kundu, J. Mondal and A. Bhaumik, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 10515–10524 RSC .
P. Bhanja, A. Modak, S. Chatterjee and A. Bhaumik, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2763–2773 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nandi, J. Mondal, K. Sarkar, Y. Yamauchi and A. Bhaumik, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6677–6679 RSC .
J. Mondal, A. Modak, A. Dutta, S. Basu, S. N. Jha, D. Bhattacharyya and A. Bhaumik, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8000–8002 RSC .
L. Paul, B. Banerjee, A. Bhaumik and M. Ali, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 237, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Schulze, J. Migenda, M. Becker, S. M. Schuler, R. C. Wende, P. R. Schreiner and B. M. Smarsly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4107–4117 RSC .
J. Florek, D. Larivière, H. Kählig, S. L. Fiorilli, B. Onida, F. G. Fontaine and F. Kleitz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 57003–57016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Soltani, R. Pelalak, M. Pishnamazi, A. Marjani, A. B. Albadarin, S. M. Sarkar and S. Shirazian, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Huh, J. W. Wiench, B. G. Trewyn, S. Song, M. Pruski and V. S. Y. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2364–2365 RSC .
J. W. Larsen and L. J. Magid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1974, 96, 5774–5782 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Radu, C. Y. Lai, J. Huang, X. Shu and V. S. Y. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1264–1266 RSC .
S. Huh, J. W. Wiench, J. C. Yoo, M. Pruski and V. S. Y. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4247–4256 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abboud, R. Bel-Hadj-Tahar, N. Fakhri and A. Sayari, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 265, 179–184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Ma, Z. Pan and B. Zong, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 34581–34588 RSC .
Y. R. Han, J. S. Kim, W. J. Park, C. H. Lee, J. Cheon and C. H. Jun, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 197–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Soltani, R. Pelalak, M. Pishnamazi, A. Marjani, A. B. Albadarin, S. M. Sarkar and S. Shirazian, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pishnamazi, A. Khan, T. A. Kurniawan, H. Sanaeepur, A. B. Albadarin and R. Soltani, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 338, 116573 CrossRef CAS .
N. Saad, M. Chaaban, D. Patra, A. Ghanem and H. El-Rassy, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 292, 109759 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inagaki, S. Guan, Y. Fukushima, T. Ohsuna and O. Terasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9611–9614 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Melde, B. T. Holland, C. F. Blanford and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3302–3308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asefa, M. J. MacLachlan, N. Coombs and G. A. Ozin, Nature, 1999, 402, 867–871 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhaumik, M. P. Kapoor and S. Inagaki, Chem. Commun., 2003, 470–471 RSC .
D. Chandra, S. K. Das and A. Bhaumik, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 128, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .
A. Modak, J. Mondal and A. Bhaumik, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2840–2855 RSC .
M. Sasidharan and A. Bhaumik, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2618–2625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, S. Chatterjee, S. Mondal, A. Modak, B. K. Chandra, S. Das, G. D. Nessim, A. Majee and A. Bhaumik, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3963–3966 RSC .
K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 867–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Terpstra, K. E. Shopsowitz, C. F. Gregory, A. P. Manning, C. A. Michal, W. Y. Hamad, J. Yang and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1645–1647 RSC .
A. S. Terpstra, L. P. Arnett, A. P. Manning, C. A. Michal, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800163 CrossRef .
S. Omar and R. Abu-Reziq, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 5960 CrossRef CAS .
S. Datz, H. Engelke, C. V. Schirnding, L. Nguyen and T. Bein, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 225, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kataoka and S. Inagaki, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2020, 4083–4087 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Eddaoudi, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 1999, 402, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, X.-Q. Liu, H.-L. Jiang and L.-B. Sun, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 8129–8176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Agarwal, A. K. Gupta and D. De, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 2010–2018 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Guan, A. K. Cheetham and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5268–5288 RSC .
L. J. Small, S. E. Henkelis, D. X. Rademacher, M. E. Schindelholz, J. L. Krumhansl, D. J. Vogel and T. M. Nenoff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2006598 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suresh and A. J. Matzger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16790–16794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Wang, Y. H. Wang and Y. Ding, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 3788–3797 RSC .
P. Pachfule, R. Das, P. Poddar and R. Banerjee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 1215–1222 CrossRef CAS .
G. Férey, C. Mellot-Draznieks, C. Serre, F. Millange, J. Dutour, S. Surblé and I. Margiolaki, Science, 2005, 309, 2040–2042 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Y. Chui, S. M. F. Lo, J. P. Charmant, A. G. Orpen and I. D. Williams, Science, 1999, 283, 1148–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Cavka, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, N. Guillou, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga and K. P. Lillerud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13850–13851 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Tian, C. X. Cai, Y. Ji, X. Z. You, S. M. Peng and G. H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 114, 1442–1444 CrossRef .
R. Banerjee, A. Phan, B. Wang, C. Knobler, H. Furukawa, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2008, 319, 939–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Das, S. Chatterjee, S. Bhunia, A. Mondal, P. Mitra, V. Kumari, A. Pradhan and A. Bhaumik, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 13783–13792 RSC .
D. Chakraborty, A. Chowdhury, M. Chandra, R. Jana, S. Shyamal, M. K. Bhunia, D. Chandra, M. Hara, D. Pradhan, A. Datta and A. Bhaumik, Cryst. Growth Des., 2021, 21, 2614–2623 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jhung, J. H. Lee and J. S. Chang, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2005, 26, 880–881 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni and R. I. Masel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12394–12395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Solís, A. Gómez-Avilés, C. Belver, J. J. Rodriguez and J. Bedia, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106230 CrossRef .
W. J. Son, J. Kim, J. Kim and W. S. Ahn, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6336–6338 RSC .

          P. D. Lickiss, in The New Chemistry, ed. N. Hall, The Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK,  2000, ch. 4, pp. 76–84 Search PubMed .
K. Yu, Y. R. Lee, J. Y. Seo, K. Y. Baek, Y. M. Chung and W. S. Ahn, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 316, 110985 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Mueller, H. Puetter, M. Hesse and H. Wessel, PCT Pat., 049892,  2005 Search PubMed .
R. Ameloot, L. Stappers, J. Fransaer, L. Alaerts, B. F. Sels and D. E. De Vos, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2580–2582 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Wei, M. Liu, Y. Bai, X. Wang, S. Shang, J. Chen and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2887–2891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lammert, C. Glißmann and N. Stock, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 2425–2429 RSC .
Q. Liu, H. Cong and H. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13822–13825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kimura, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3742–3744 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bellezza, A. Cipiciani, U. Costantino and F. Marmottini, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5064–5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Taylor, A. H. Mahmoudkhani and G. K. Shimizu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 795–798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bhanja, Y. Kim, B. Paul, Y. V. Kaneti, A. A. Alothman, A. Bhaumik and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126803 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chakraborty, A. Ghorai, A. Chowdhury, S. Banerjee and A. Bhaumik, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 1562–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei, Y. Wang, W. Chen, Z. Li, W. C. Cheong, Q. Zhang, Y. Gong, L. Gu, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 786–790 RSC .
L. H. Li, X. L. Feng, X. H. Cui, Y. X. Ma, S. Y. Ding and W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6042–6045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, M. Zhao, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Huang, F. Dai, Z. Lai, X. Cui, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705454 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sun, S. Jang, S. J. Yim, L. Ye and D. P. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707110 CrossRef .
S. C. Shit, R. Singuru, S. Pollastri, B. Joseph, B. S. Rao, N. Lingaiah and J. Mondal, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2195–2210 RSC .
S. Mondal, R. Singuru, S. C. Shit, T. Hayashi, S. Irle, Y. Hijikata, J. Mondal and A. Bhaumik, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1610–1619 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, J. Nie, C. Lu, F. Wang, C. Ma, G. Yang, Z. Chen and Y. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 310, 110671 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Wang, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Chen, J. Liu, J. Jiang, Y. Yamauchi and M. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8435–8440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Jiang, Y. Zhao, A. Carné-Sánchez, V. Malgras, J. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Liu, J. Jiang, Y. Yamauchi and M. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3538–3546 RSC .
J. Ma, W. Liu, X. Liang, B. Quan, Y. Cheng, G. Ji and W. Meng, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 728, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. An, K. Cheng, C. Wang, Y. Wang and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3610–3618 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 1438–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zou and D. Liu, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 12, 139–165 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xie, Q. H. Chen, R. Xie, H. Jiang and M. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5869–5874 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sawano, P. Ji, A. R. Mclsaac, Z. Lin, C. W. Abney and W. Lin, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7163–7168 RSC .
Z. Miao, Y. Luan, C. Qi and D. Ramella, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13917–13924 RSC .
R. V. Jagadeesh, K. Murugesan, A. S. Alshammari, H. Neumann, M.-M. Pohl, J. Radnik and M. Beller, Science, 2017, 358, 326–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Cardenal, H. J. Park, C. J. Chalker, K. G. Ortiz and D. C. Powers, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7377–7380 RSC .
Y. L. Wei, Y. Li, Y. Q. Chen, Y. Dong, J. J. Yao, X. Y. Han and Y. B. Dong, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 4379–4386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Mautschke, F. Drache, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel and F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 3610 RSC .
J.-M. Gu, W.-S. Kim and S. Huh, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10826–10829 RSC .
P. Bhanja, K. Ghosh, S. S. Islam, A. K. Patra, S. M. Islam and A. Bhaumik, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 7147–7157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, L. Li, Y. Li, L. Dai, C. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Lv, P. Li and B. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8717–8726 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, A. Ghosh, S. Bhattacharjee, A. Chowdhury, P. Mitra and A. Bhaumik, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 9189–9196 RSC .
Y. B. N. Tran, P. T. K. Nguyen, Q. T. Luong and K. D. Nguyen, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 16747–16759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gu, W. Wang, X. Cheng, T. Hu and Z. Wu, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 13425–13433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shen, W. Zhu, X. Yan, T. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Li, S. Daia and Z.-G. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 822–825 RSC .
H. Lin, X. Gao, H. Yao, Q. Luo, B. Xiang, C. Liu, Y. Ouyang, N. Zhou and D. Xiang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 3676–3680 RSC .
H. Zhao, G. Yu, M. Yuan, J. Yang, D. Xu and Z. Dong, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21466–21474 RSC .
G. M. Eder, D. A. Pyles, E. R. Wolfson and P. L. McGrier, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7195–7198 RSC .
D. Chakraborty, S. Nandi, D. Mullangi, S. Haldar, C. P. Vinod and R. Vaidhyanathan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15670–15679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kan, J.-C. Wang, J.-L. Kan, J.-Y. Shang, H. Qiao and Y.-B. Dong, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 3393–3400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Das, B. K. Chandra, R. A. Molla, M. Sengupta, S. M. Islam, A. Majee and A. Bhaumik, Mol. Catal., 2020, 480, 110650 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, R. A. Molla, U. Kayal, A. Bhaumik and S. M. Islam, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 4657–4666 RSC .
T. Seki, K. McEleney and C. M. Crudden, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6369–6371 RSC .
S. Rostamnia, E. Doustkhah, R. Bulgar and B. Zeynizadeh, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 225, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahadi, S. Rostamnia, P. Panahi, L. Wilson, Q. Kong, Z. An and M. Shokouhimehr, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 140 CrossRef .
E. Doustkhah, H. Mohtasham, M. Hasani, Y. Ide, S. Rostamnia, N. Tsunoji and M. H. N. Assadi, Mol. Catal., 2020, 482, 110676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, P. Zhao, R. Ping, F. Liu, F. Liu, J. Gao and J. Sun, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2020, 399, 125682 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mukhopadhyay, B. R. Sarkar and R. V. Chaudhari, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9692–9693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jana, B. Dutta, R. Bera and S. Koner, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2492–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Crudden, M. Sateesh and R. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10045–10050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, M. Yan, T. Zhang, Y. Liu and M. Bao, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1758–1766 RSC .
Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, S. Hao, J. Guan, H. Ding, F. Shang, P. Qiu and Q. Kan, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 381, 274–281 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hongmanorom, J. Ashok, G. Zhang, Z. Bian, M. H. Wai, Y. Zeng, S. Xi, A. Borgna and S. Kawi, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119564 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng, X. Liu, J. Xu, Z. Zhou, S. Feng, Z. Wang and M. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 5167–5170 RSC .
S. Shi, Y. Zhong, Z. Hu, L. Wang, M. Yuan, S. Ding, S. Wang and C. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 12714–12718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Du, L. Zhang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6987–6992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Abbasi, L. Cseri, X. Zhang, B. P. Ladewig and H. Wang, Sustainable Nanoscale Eng., 2020, 163–194 Search PubMed .
E. Haque, J. E. Lee, I. T. Jang, Y. K. Hwang, J.-S. Chang, J. Jegal and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 181, 535–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ş. Eren, H. Arslanoğlu and H. Çiftçi, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104247 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Qin, S. Y. Jia, Y. Liu, H. Y. Li and S. H. Wu, Desalin. Water Treat., 2015, 54, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Kim, B. Lee, K.-H. Choo and S.-J. Choi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 138, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
R.-L. Wang, D.-P. Li, L.-J. Wang, X. Zhang, Z.-Y. Zhou, J.-L. Mu and Z.-M. Su, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 1051–1059 RSC .
T. Zhang, G. Xing, W. Chen and L. Chen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 332–353 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Shi, T.-T. Lu, D. Chen, Q. Wang and Z. Zhan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 275, 119216 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Zhang, T.-Y. Ma and Z.-Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2003–2010 RSC .
D. Esquivel, J. Ouwehand, M. Meledina, S. Turner, G. V. Tendeloo, F. J. Romero-Salguero, J. De Clercq and P. V. D. Voort, J. Hazardous Mater., 2017, 339, 368–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Wu, C. H. Liao, Y. C. Pan, C. L. Yeh and H. M. Kao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 119, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Q. Gao, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. Nafady and S. Ma, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 300–339 RSC .
R. Lin, L. Shen, Z. Ren, W. Wu, Y. Tan, H. Fu, J. Zhang and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8533–8535 RSC .
H.-Q. Xu, J. Hu, D. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13440–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Xu, D. Li and H.-L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 5477–5481 CrossRef .
L. Li, Z. Zhou, L. Li, Z. Zhuang, J. Bi, J. Chen, Y. Yu and J. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18574–18581 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, L. Li, Y. Li, L. Dai, C. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Lv, P. Li and B. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8717–8726 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee, P. Bhanja, D. Ghosh, P. Kumar, S. K. Das, S. Dalapati and A. Bhaumik, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 408–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liang, Y. M. Zhou, Z. L. Cai and C. G. She, Appl. Organometal. Chem., 2016, 30, 932–938 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inagaki, O. Ohtani, Y. Goto, K. Okamoto, M. Ikai, K. Yamanaka, T. Tani and T. Okada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4042–4046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Takeda, M. Ohashi, T. Tani, O. Ishitani and S. Inagaki, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 4554–4559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoshida, K. Saito, H. Matsukawa, S. Yanagida, M. Ebina, Y. Maegawa, S. Inagaki, A. Kobayashi and M. Kato, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 358, 334–344 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, J. Huang, S. A. Pantovich, A. D. Carl, T. G. Fenton, C. A. Caputo, R. L. Grimm, A. I. Frenkel and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16042–16047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Chheda, G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 119, 7298–7318 CrossRef .
P. Sudarsanam, R. Zhong, S. Van den Bosch, S. M. Coman, V. I. Parvulescu and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8349–8402 RSC .
A. Herbst and C. Janiak, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 4092–4117 RSC .
Y. Zhang, V. Degirmenci, C. Li and E. J. M. Hensen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chizallet, S. Lazare, D. Bazer-Bachi, F. Bonnier, V. Lecocq, E. Soyer, A. Quoineaud and N. Bats, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 35, 12365–12377 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Stöcker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9200–9211 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Zhang, K. Dong and Z. B. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 112–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Song, S. An, Y. N. Sun, P. P. Zhang, Y. H. Guo and D. D. Zhou, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 2037–2048 CrossRef CAS .
T. Haynes, O. Bougnouch, V. Dubois and S. Hermans, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 306, 110400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Román-Leshkov, C. J. Barrett, Z. Y. Liu and J. A. Dumesic, Nature, 2007, 447, 982–985 CrossRef PubMed .
G. H. Wang, J. Hilgert, F. H. Richter, F. Wang, H. J. Bongard, B. Spliethoff, C. Weidenthaler and F. Schüth, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 293–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Goyal, B. Sarkar, A. Bag, N. Siddiqui, D. Dumbre, N. Lucas, S. K. Bhargava and A. Bordoloi, J. Catal., 2016, 340, 248–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patel and D. Pithadia, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 602, 117729 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, N. Luo, S. Xie, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6198–6223 RSC .
L. Pan, K. M. Adams, H. E. Hernandez, X. Wang, C. Zheng, Y. Hattori and K. Kaneko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3062–3067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dincă and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9376–9377 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang and R. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21264–21272 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. O. Lourenço, R. M. Silva, R. F. Silva, N. Pinna, S. Pronier, J. Pires, J. R. B. Gomes, M. L. Pinto and P. Ferreira, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22860–22867 RSC .
M. F. Attia, M. I. Swasy, M. Ateia, F. Alexis and D. C. Whitehead, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 607–610 RSC .
S. S. Han and W. A. Goddard III, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8422–8423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mavrandonakis, E. Tylianakis, A. K. Stubos and G. E. Froudakis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7290–7294 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Lin, Z. Zhang and B. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 3362–3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Guo, Y. Zhu, Y. Y. Yan, Y. L. Min, J. C. Fan, Q. J. Xu and H. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 176 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wen, Z. Li, P. Gong, J. Sun, J. Wang and S. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 13264–13271 RSC .
W. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Lei, X. Wang, Y. Tan, N. Cheng and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10359–10368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Volosskiy, H. Fei, Z. Zhao, S. Lee, M. Li, Z. Lin, B. Papandrea, C. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26769–26774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Feng, Y. Feng, P. Li, Y. Zang, C. Wang and X. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 292, 109756 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Zheng, C. Y. Liu, X. Y. Zeng, J. Chen, J. Lü, R. G. Lin, R. Cao, Z. J. Lin and J. W. Su, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 9096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yue, D. Zhao, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, K. Jiang, X. Zhang, Y. Cui, Y. Yang, B. Chen and G. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11221–11224 RSC .
S. Y. Zhang, W. Shi, P. Cheng and M. J. Zaworotko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12203–12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Xu, L. Zhao and B. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 9492–9498 RSC .
F. F. Su, Q. J. Jia, Z. Z. Li, M. H. Wang, L. H. He, D. L. Peng, Y. P. Song, Z. H. Zhang and S. M. Fang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 275, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Q. Liu, X. M. Du, B. Zhao, Y. Li and W. J. Ruan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1433–1439 RSC .
D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2008, 455, 304–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahlau and B. List, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 518–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Sayantan Chongdar
	Sayantan Chongdar received his Bachelor's Degree in Chemistry from the University of Calcutta and Master's Degree in Chemistry (Materials) from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata. He is currently a Junior Research Fellow at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science under the supervision of Prof. Asim Bhaumik. His research interests focus on hybrid nanoporous materials.

Sudip Bhattacharjee
	Sudip Bhattacharjee obtained his BSc Degree in Chemistry from Burdwan University, India and MSc Degree in Chemistry from Bankura University, India. Currently, he is a Junior Research Fellow at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science under the supervision of Prof. Asim Bhaumik. His research interests focus on the catalytic conversion of CO2 to valuable chemicals over supported metal-catalysts and metal–organic frameworks.

Piyali Bhanja
	Piyali Bhanja obtained her MSc Degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras. Then she completed her PhD Degree in Chemistry from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science under the supervision of Prof. Asim Bhaumik. Then she was a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellow at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan in 2019–2020. Presently she is working as a Ramanujan Fellow in the Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, India. Her research interests focus on electrochemical energy conversion and CO2 fixation reactions.

Asim Bhaumik
	Asim Bhaumik did his PhD in Chemistry from the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune in 1997. Then he was a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellow at the University of Tokyo in 1997–1999. Then he was an Associate Researcher at Toyota Central R & D Labs Nagoya, Japan in 1999–2001. Then he joined the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata as a regular faculty in 2001. His area of research includes designing novel microporous and mesoporous materials for energy and environmental applications, including H2/CO2 storage, adsorptive removal of heavy metal ions, heterogeneous catalysis for the synthesis of fine chemicals, CO2 fixation, biofuel synthesis, and electrochemical/photoelectrochemical water splitting. Prof. Bhaumik is in the Editorial Boards of several journals and a Fellow of The Royal Society of Chemistry, UK.

 	Scheme 1  General approach for the synthesis of organo-functionalized mesoporous silica materials.	 

 	Fig. 1  Structural models of periodic mesoporous benzene-silica. (a and b) Structure optimised using the Universal Force Field. Atoms are represented as ball and stick model. Carbon – ash; silicon – orange; oxygen – red; and hydrogen – white.	 

 	Fig. 2  PMO materials bearing different organosilane moieties in their framework.	 

 	Fig. 3  Various synthetic strategies for the design of MOFs and their versatile applications.	 

 	Fig. 4  2D representation of the H8L-Ni-crystal.	 

 	Scheme 2  Classical synthesis of salen units and one-step fabrication of salen-COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  FE SEM images of NH2-MIL-68(CHO) (a) and NH2-MIL-68@TPA-COF (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic representation of the synthesis of POP immobilized with bimetallic Cu-Pd nanoalloy for bio-fuel upgrading. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Pyrolysis of MOF precursor to synthesise graphitic shell-encapsulated Co nanoparticles on carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Controlled etching to synthesise monocrystalline MOF nanobubbles less than 100 nm in size. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Pyrolysis of MOF nanobubbles producing hollow carbon nanobubbles with Na+/K+ ion intercalation.	 

 	Scheme 4  Probable mechanism for the oxidative functionalization of cyclic amines containing 2-aminoarylmethanols to form ring-fused quinazolinones over Co–ZrO2/N–C nanocatalyst.	 

 	Scheme 5  One pot Knoevenagel condensation reaction using Cu3TATAT MOF.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Crystallographic c-axis of Fe(btp). (b) Crystallographic a-axis of Fe(btp). (c) Catalytic site for the oxidation of cis-decalin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 6  MPV reduction of estrone using various Zr-MOFs.	 

 	Scheme 7  Probable mechanistic pathway for the synthesis of adipic acid from cyclohexane over Fe-PO-1-2 catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 8  Mechanistic pathway of Glaser–Hay heterocoupling reaction utilizing Cu@COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 9  Probable mechanism for CO2 coupling reaction with epoxides over PMO-SAF-20.	 

 	Scheme 10  Solution infiltration process to synthesise Ag@TPHH-COF for NAC and dye degradation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 Copyright 2003, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Ethylene diamine tetra(methylene phosphonic acid) (EDTMPS) and diethylene triamine penta(methylene phosphonic acid) (DTPMPA) used for the synthesis of metal phosphonates.	 

 	Scheme 11  (a) Synthetic route for Py-BSZ-COF. (b) Photocatalytic oxidative amine coupling and oxidative cyclization of thioamides using Py-BSZ-COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Light harvesting PMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 Copyright 2009, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 10  Rhenium(I) complex containing PMO as a light-harvesting system mimicking photosynthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2010, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthetic route for the preparation of acidic mesoporous silica (mSN(C)–SO3H) nanocapsules.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of improved ORR activity in N-doped carbon upon the introduction of air impurities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 13  Schematic representation of the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) using MOF-808. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of the detection of ascorbic acid (AA) using ZJU-136-Ce. Here yellow and blue polyhedra represent Ce4+ and Ce3+, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
