Plasmonic-enhanced self-cleaning activity on asymmetric Ag/ZnO surface-enhanced Raman scattering substrates under UV and visible light irradiation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA00824C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA00824C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7747-7753Plasmonic-enhanced self-cleaning activity on asymmetric Ag/ZnO surface-enhanced Raman scattering substrates under UV and visible light irradiation†

        
          
            Yashu 
            Zang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Yin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xu 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuang 
            Yue
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiming 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Li
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Junyong 
            Kang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics/Pen-Tung Sah Micro-Nano Institute of Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China. E-mail: lijing@xmu.edu.cn; jykang@xmu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-592-2185962
bWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
Received 
      16th February 2014
    , Accepted 26th March 2014First published on 26th March 2014AbstractTwo different asymmetric Ag/ZnO composite nanoarrays were fabricated. These nanoarrays are proposed as highly sensitive and uniform surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrates with plasmonic-enhanced UV-visible photocatalytic properties for self-cleaning. The asymmetric nanostructures are composed of Ag nanoparticles hanging inside or capping on the top of ZnO hollow nanospheres, which allows the generation of a strong local electric field near the contact area owing to the asymmetric dielectric environment. Experimental and simulation results showed that these asymmetric structures are favorable for achieving high photocatalytic activity under UV and visible light irradiation, in addition to improving the SERS performance. The electron transfer model based on band gap alignment was employed to further illustrate the mechanisms of the photocatalytic activity, which was dependent on the wavelength of the irradiation. Given the dramatically improved photocatalytic performance, together with the reproducible and uniform SERS signals verified by the Raman mapping results, the large area ordered asymmetric metal/semiconductor nanoarrays have been demonstrated to be suitable for further applications in multifunctional photoelectrochemical chips.
1. Introduction
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) has been widely investigated as a powerful tool in ultra-sensitive vibrational spectroscopy, leading to wide applications in analytical chemistry, medicine, and the life sciences.1–5 The local electromagnetic field enhancement induced by the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) from noble metal nanostructures is well accepted as the major mechanism for SERS.6 Metal nanostructures have often been designed with roughened surfaces or in the form of nanoparticles (NPs) with the aim of enhancing Raman scattering.2,7 However, from the viewpoint of practical detection, preparing structures with both SERS and self-cleaning functions, which could be used as recyclable sensing chips, is of interest.8–10 A number of approaches have been developed to fabricate multi-functional SERS-photocatalytic substrates by forming composites of noble metals and semiconductor materials, such as Ag or Au/TiO2 (ref. 8 and 9) or Au/ZnO.10 TiO2 has recently been studied with an emphasis on improving its photocatalytic activity in the photodegradation of organic pollutions or in splitting water molecules.11–13 ZnO, a direct wide band gap semiconductor with a large excitation binding energy similar to TiO2, also shows good performance in photocatalytic reactions, in addition to its well-known applications in dye-sensitized solar cells and organic solar cells.14–16 Previous studies have demonstrated that ZnO is more efficient than TiO2 in the photocatalytic degradation of reactive blue 19, 2-phenylphenol, and rhodamine 6G (R6G).17–19 Moreover, the feasibility of synthesizing different ZnO morphologies with high surface-to-volume ratios, such as nanowires,20 nanoflowers,21 and nanotetrapods,22 makes it an ideal candidate for photocatalysis. Unfortunately, the fundamental drawback to ZnO is that it uses very little of the main part of solar energy in the visible region because of its wide band gap of about 3.3 eV, generally resulting in unsatisfactory conversion efficiencies.23 It is acknowledged that, in addition to the SERS function, the geometrical configuration of metal/semiconductor composites can also significantly improve photocatalytic efficiency by: (i) increasing light absorption in the semiconductor when the plasmon resonance energies overlap with the band gap absorption of the semiconductor; (ii) reducing the electron–hole diffusion length in nanostructures; and (iii) forcing the electron–hole separation by transferring the energetic electrons between the metal and the semiconductor.24–27 Therefore designing and fabricating metal/semiconductor composites in different morphologies and contact forms, such as core/shell8,28 or janus nanostructures,13 could be a feasible strategy to accomplish both high SERS sensitivities and enhanced photocatalytic efficiencies on a multi-functional SERS substrate.
In this work, two asymmetric direct contact metal/semiconductor (Ag/ZnO) hybrid nanoarrays in different configurations and contacts were fabricated by the nanosphere lithography technique.29–31 The nanoarrays were then used as SERS-active substrates with self-cleaning functionalities under both UV and visible light irradiation. In addition to highly sensitive SERS phenomena, reproducible plasmonic-assisted self-cleaning properties were realized in these asymmetric Ag/ZnO nanoarray substrates. These are suggested to be caused by the extremely strong local field enhancement near the contact area of the metal/semiconductor. The experimental extinction spectra and simulated near-field distributions in these hybrid nanoarrays provide further evidence of enhanced SPR properties. An electron transfer model combined with band gap alignment was proposed to explain the photocatalytic mechanisms in these geometrically different asymmetric Ag/ZnO nanocomposites under UV and visible light irradiation. Given the simple and Si-compatible fabrication process, these kinds of multi-functional asymmetric metal/semiconductor nanocomposite substrates are fundamentally and technically applicable in practical integrated recyclable sensing chips.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Fabrication of the asymmetric nanostructure arrays
The two different composite nanostructures of Ag NPs hanging inside and capping on ZnO hollow nanospheres (HNSs) were fabricated using polystyrene (PS) nanospheres as templates, followed by radio-frequency magnetron sputtering deposition and a thermal treatment. The fabrication process for the Ag NPs on the top of the ZnO HNSs (AOZ) has been described previously;32 the Ag NPs inside ZnO HNSs (AIZ) were prepared by reversing the order of deposition of the Ag and ZnO films. In brief, the monolayer PS nanospheres (7 wt%) with diameters of ∼360 nm were first self-assembled using the spin-coating method on Si substrates cleaned by wet chemical methods. To obtain a suitable size and distribution of the periodic nanoarrays, the PS template can be manipulated by oxygen plasma etching. The Ag and ZnO films, both with thicknesses of 20 nm, were then successively deposited in the sequence ZnO and Ag, or Ag and ZnO, on the PS templates at room temperature by radio-frequency magnetron sputtering, followed by thermal treatment at 500 °C for 30 min in N2 ambient atmosphere. Two kinds of asymmetric hybrid nanostructures were produced, with Ag NPs either capping on or hanging inside the top surfaces of ZnO HNSs.
2.2 Characterization
The morphologies and structural properties of the composites were investigated using field emission scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-4800). A UV-visible spectrophotometer (Varian Cary 300) was used to collect the extinction spectra of the samples. The SERS characterization of asymmetric Ag/ZnO nanoarrays was performed on a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope using the 532 nm laser excitation source and R6G analyte. The photocatalytic activities of these two samples under UV and visible light irradiation were evaluated by the intensity of the Raman signals of R6G on the corresponding substrates. During the photocatalytic processes, the UV light source was an 18 W Philips UV lamp emitting lines ranging from 340 to 410 nm with the main wavelength at 365 nm. The visible light source was a xenon lamp (500 W) with a UV light filter (cut-off wavelength of 400 nm) with an optical power of 100 mW cm−2. Raman mapping was carried out on a confocal Raman imaging system (WITec Alpha 300 confocal Raman microscope) with a 488 nm laser excitation source.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 As-fabricated asymmetric structures

Fig. 1 shows the SEM images of the hexagonal close-packed ZnO HNSs and two different asymmetric hybrid structures produced using the 360 nm self-assembled PS nanospheres as templates. The size and separation of the PS spheres were adjusted by oxygen plasma etching on the template for 15 s so that the as-produced ZnO HNSs showed an average diameter of 330 nm in periodic arrays (Fig. 1a). The subsequent Ag film deposition and thermal treatment help to aggregate the Ag NPs into an ellipsoid shape with axis sizes of about 190, 190, and 150 nm directly capping on the ZnO HNSs (denoted as AOZ; Fig. 1b and inset). The periodic ZnO HNS arrays with Ag NPs hanging inside (denoted as AIZ; Fig. 1c and d) were fabricated by reversing the deposition sequence of the Ag and ZnO films; similar sizes of ZnO HNSs and Ag NPs can be visualized. It should be noted that the ZnO layer has an important role during the fabrication processes, acting as a supporting template to form the two asymmetric structures, and also creates a different asymmetric dielectric environment.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of (a) ZnO HNS arrays, (b) AOZ arrays, and (c) top and (d) inside morphologies of the AIZ arrays. To obtain information on the inside of the AIZ structures, the arrays on the silicon substrate were lifted off by conductive tape and then the inverted AIZ structure was characterized. 
3.2 SERS-active characterizations
A confocal Raman microscope with a 532 nm laser source was used to measure the SERS spectra of R6G on both asymmetric Ag/ZnO nanocomposites, which exhibit intensive Raman signals (Fig. 2a). The resolved Raman vibration features of R6G, located at around 611, 771, 1361, 1418, 1574, and 1648 cm−1, agree well with previously reported data.33 When reducing the concentration of the R6G probe down to 10−8 M, distinguishable Raman signals can still be identified in the Raman spectra of these two asymmetric nanostructures, indicating their high SERS activities. Understandably, no Raman signal could be detected on the bare ZnO HNS arrays, even with an R6G concentration as high as 10−4 M, due to the lack of the SPR effect in the absence of metal decoration. Notably, the Raman signal intensity on the AIZ substrate is comparable with that on the SERS substrate of AOZ, despite the presence of a 20 nm ZnO isolated layer.34
 Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of the R6G probe at concentrations of 10−4 and 10−8 M on AOZ and AIZ arrays compared with that on the bare ZnO HNS sample at 10−4 M. (b) Simulated near-field distributions of (i) AOZ, (ii) AIZ, and (iii) bare ZnO HNS arrays on Si substrates under 532 nm light illumination (same laser source energy as in the Raman measurements) with the intensity on a log scale. The corresponding incidence of light and the polarization direction are shown. The diameter and shell thickness of the ZnO HNS were set as 330 and 20 nm and the axes sizes of the ellipsoid Ag NP in both nanocomposites were 190, 190 and 150 nm, which are consistent with the experimental parameters. 
To further understand the SERS performances on these asymmetric structures, the near-field distributions of the AOZ, AIZ, and bare ZnO HNS nanostructures under 532 nm light irradiation were simulated by the finite difference time domain method (Fig. 2b). Compared with the bare ZnO HNSs, a strong local field can be visualized around the Ag NPs in both asymmetric Ag/ZnO composite structures. Specifically, there is a much stronger field enhancement at the contact region between the Ag NPs and the ZnO HNSs in both structures, which are known as hot-spots arising from the asymmetric dielectric environment around metal NPs and have been widely used for SERS.13 Exceptionally, on the AIZ hybrid and in addition to a strong localized field in the contact area, a considerable local field enhancement can still penetrate to the outer surface of the ZnO layer, which is believed to be responsible for the Raman signal enhancement. Thus, both AOZ and AIZ are effective SERS-active structures.
3.3 SPR properties of the asymmetric structures

Fig. 3a shows the extinction spectra of the as-prepared AOZ and AIZ nanocomposites on a sapphire substrate compared with the bare ZnO HNS arrays. In the spectrum for the bare ZnO HNS substrate, in addition to the absorption edge at ∼375 nm which is generally attributed to the near band edge absorption of ZnO, another main extinction peak is resolved at ∼424 nm. This is believed to originate from the whispering gallery mode resonances of the ZnO hollow nanocavity arrays.35 After decorating the Ag NPs either on or inside the ZnO shell surface, an obvious extinction enhancement is observed around 375 nm and is suggested to be due to the higher order SPR modes from the larger Ag NPs (diameters > 100 nm).36 A broad LSPR band covering the visible region from 552 to 670 nm in AOZ arrays and centered at 533 nm in AIZ arrays can also be distinguished. Undoubtedly, the different extinction features of the two kinds of Ag/ZnO asymmetric structures should be attributed to the size, shape, and dielectric environment effects of metal NPs, which could possibly affect the plasmonic-assisted photocatalytic activity of the two structures in the visible region.
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-visible extinction spectra of Ag NP on ZnO HNS (AOZ), Ag NP in ZnO HNS (AIZ) and ZnO HNS arrays on sapphire. (b) Simulated near-field distributions of the AOZ (i and ii) and AIZ (iii and iv) nanostructures on Si substrates under visible and UV light illumination, respectively. The intensity is on a log scale. 
Considering the possibility of enhancing the photocatalytic performance by the LSPR effect in these asymmetric structures, the near-field distributions in these two hybrids were simulated using both UV and visible light irradiation at typical incident angles of 90° (Fig. 3b) and 45° (Fig. S1 of ESI†). Under UV light illumination at 375 nm, matching with the band gap energy of ZnO, a strong local field is present near the interface of Ag/ZnO in addition to the field induced by the high-order SPR mode around the Ag NPs in both samples (Fig. 3b, i and iii). This is favorable in improving the photocatalytic properties by enhancing the light absorption in ZnO.13 It should be noted that the local near field in the AIZ hybrid is slightly weaker than that in the AOZ structure, possibly due to the higher intrinsic absorption of ZnO near the band edge in this dielectric shell isolated structure. In the visible region, both the asymmetric structures show a highly enhanced local electrical field related to the dipole mode around Ag NPs (Fig. 3b, ii and iv), which might potentially be applied to enhance the plasmonic-assisted photocatalytic self-cleaning functionality in the visible region.
3.4 Plasmonic-assisted self-cleaning properties
The plasmonic-assisted self-cleaning process was performed on the two asymmetric Ag/ZnO hybrid nanostructures under UV light irradiation and was evaluated by the intensity of the Raman signals. Fig. 4a and b show the SERS spectra of R6G adsorbed on these two substrates as a function of the UV irradiation time from 0 to 120 min. It can be seen that the intensities of the Raman signals of the R6G probe on the geometrically different asymmetric structures both decline as the irradiation time increases, with the AOZ hybrid showing the faster reduction. There is no apparent change on the bare ZnO HNS sample (Fig. S2†). The self-cleaning activities on these two samples were further compared by plotting the degradation rate of the Raman signal η = I/I0 (where η = degradation ratio, and I0 and I respectively represent the relative Raman signal intensity at about 611 cm−1 without and with UV or visible light irradiation for a certain time) (Fig. 4c). This is statistical evidence for the obvious photocatalysis-mediated self-cleaning process in both nanostructures, although a significantly higher photocatalytic activity is accomplished in the AOZ structure. The self-cleaning property of the AOZ structure was also verified by repeated Raman measurements with R6G probe absorption and UV irradiation cycles (Fig. 4d). As a result, good recyclability was still able to be maintained on the as-prepared nanocomposite after five cycles of reuse.
 Fig. 4  SERS spectra of R6G (10−4 M) treated with UV light irradiation on the hybrid structures of the (a) AOZ and (b) AIZ arrays. (c) Self-cleaning activities on the two hybrids for degradation of R6G under UV light irradiation (Raman signal intensity radio η = I/I0). (d) Reversible SERS behavior of R6G (10−4 M) on the AOZ substrate during repeated measurements of UV irradiation cycles. 
The self-cleaning activity of both the AOZ and AIZ SERS substrates under visible light irradiation was also investigated (Fig. 5). In spite of the absence of photo-generated carriers in this wide band gap semiconductor facilitating the photocatalytic process, an effective photodegradation of R6G was still able to be realized on both of the asymmetric structures (Fig. 5a and b). In this circumstance, hot electrons generated from the plasmonic effect are suggested to be the main reason for the photocatalytic degradation of R6G.27,37 However, the statistical degradation rate (Fig. 5c) for the AIZ sample seems to be slightly faster than that for the AOZ sample, which will be explained in the next subsection. The recyclable examination performed on the AOZ composite confirms that it is an acceptable plasmonic-assisted self-cleaning substrate with good recyclability in visible light irradiation (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  SERS spectra of R6G (10−4 M) treated with visible light irradiation on the (a) AOZ and (b) AIZ arrays. (c) Self-cleaning activities on the two hybrids for degradation of R6G under visible light irradiation. (d) Reversible SERS behavior of R6G (10−4 M) on AOZ during repeated measurements of visible irradiation cycles. 
3.5 Photocatalytic mechanisms
To better elucidate the reaction mechanisms in these asymmetric metal/semiconductor nanostructures under UV and visible light irradiation, the electron transfer model combined with band gap alignment was proposed (Fig. 6). As the work function is different for ZnO (5.2 eV with an electron affinity of 4.5 eV) and Ag (4.2 eV), the Ohmic contact of the Ag/ZnO interface can be formed after Fermi level equilibration [Fig. 6a(i) and b(i)].38,39 Under UV light irradiation, the following possible reaction processes on the asymmetric Ag/ZnO samples are proposed:40,41 ZnO + hν → ZnO(ecb− + hvb+)(1) ZnO(ecb−) + Ag → ZnO + Ag(e−)(2) Ag/ZnO(e−) + O2 → Ag/ZnO + ˙O2−(3) ZnO(hvb+) + OH− → ZnO + ˙OH(4) ˙O2− or ˙OH + R6G → degradation of R6G(5)
 Fig. 6  Energy band gap and photocatalytic mechanisms of asymmetric AOZ and AIZ arrays under (a) UV light and (b) visible light irradiation. 
As the energy of the excited light produced using the UV lamp with a main wavelength of 365 nm (3.4 eV) is larger than the band gap (∼3.3 eV) of ZnO,36 the electron will be excited to the conduction band (CB), leaving a vacant state (hole) in the valence band, as in reaction (1). The photo-generated electron–hole pairs will be easily separated at the Ag/ZnO interface in the Ohmic contact type by transferring the excited electrons in the CB of ZnO to the Ag NPs by the force of the intrinsic electric field. The electrons transferred to the Ag NPs and those on the ZnO HNSs can efficiently react with O2 molecules adsorbed on the surface of Ag and ZnO to form ˙O2− according to reactions (2) and (3) [Fig. 6a(ii) and (iii)]. At the same time, the photo-generated holes located on the surface of ZnO can also react with the H2O in air to produce another free radical of ˙OH [reaction (4)]. The reactive oxygen species generated (˙O2− and ˙OH) have a high level of oxidative activity, which can effectively degrade the R6G dyes [reaction (5)].41 These reactions can occur readily both on the Ag NPs and the ZnO layer in the AOZ structure, where the R6G can be adsorbed. However, in the AIZ hybrid, the ZnO shell layer isolates the R6G molecules from Ag NP, thus inhibiting the reaction contributed by the Ag NPs in reaction (3) and therefore reducing the photocatalytic activity of this AIZ structure [Fig. 6a(iii)]. This reasonably explains why a higher photocatalytic activity is present in the AOZ hybrid than in the AIZ composite. The highly localized strong electric field at the Ag/ZnO interface, shown in the finite difference time domain simulation results to enhance the light absorption of ZnO HNS, is, of course, another factor in the improved photocatalytic activity on both the asymmetric Ag/ZnO hybrid structures. In addition to the migration of electrons from ZnO to Ag NPs, a small portion of the hot electrons transfer from the Ag NPs to the ZnO due to the higher order mode LSPRs in Ag NPs under UV irradiation. However, this can be ignored as it is small in quantity compared with the large number of photo-generated carriers.
Under visible light irradiation, the energetic electrons, also called hot electrons, on the Ag NPs can be photoexcited to support the collective electron oscillations (known as the LSPR effect) ([Fig. 6b(i), reaction (6)]).42,43 Hot electrons with sufficient energy can subsequently transfer from the Ag NPs to the CB of ZnO to achieve new thermal equilibrium [reaction (7)]:41 Ag + hν → Ag*(6) Ag* + ZnO → Ag + ZnO(ecb−)(7) ZnO(ecb−) + O2 → ZnO + ˙O2−(8) ˙O2− + R6G → degradation of R6G(9)
The electrons that accumulate on the surface of ZnO can also be captured by adsorbed O2 molecules to yield the highly oxidative radical ˙O2− [reaction (8)] and then degrade the organic molecules of R6G [reaction (9)]. In this case, the photodegradation reaction mainly occurs on the ZnO layer, which explains the minor differences in the degradation rate for the AIZ and AOZ arrays with the Ag NP decoration either on or inside the ZnO surface. However, as shown in Fig. 3a, the differences in the LSPR properties of the two samples should also contribute to the different degradation rates on AIZ and AOZ arrays. The stronger extinction near ∼550 nm (the centre emission line of the visible light source) on the AIZ sample would effectively promote the plasmonic-assisted photodegradation reaction. Thus a slightly faster degradation rate was obtained on the AIZ structure than on AOZ structure (Fig. 5c). As the amounts of electrons transferring from Ag NPs to ZnO under visible light irradiation are much less than those transferring from ZnO to Ag NPs under UV illumination, the photodegradation rate under UV light irradiation is faster than the corresponding rates under visible light on both asymmetric hybrids.
3.6 Uniformity for SERS and self-cleaning
In practical applications, uniformity and a thorough self-cleaning ability on SERS substrates are of considerable importance. These can be characterized by Raman mapping. The Raman mapping image of the AOZ ordered arrays over a large 10 μm × 10 μm area (Fig. 7a) shows strong and uniform Raman signals (Fig. 7b), which is the evidence that the periodic substrate is practically applicable as an SERS substrate. After irradiation by UV and visible light for 90 and 240 minutes, respectively, the Raman intensity of R6G decreases until it becomes invisible (Fig. 7c and d), demonstrating its good uniformity and efficiency for the photodegradation of R6G molecules. Therefore, a recyclable SERS-active substrate with uniform and thorough self-cleaning functionality can be technically fabricated by configuring the Ag/ZnO asymmetric hybrid structure.
 Fig. 7  SEM image of (a) AOZ in an area of 10 μm × 10 μm, and Raman mapping of R6G (10−4 M) on AOZ substrates treated by UV light irradiation for (b) 0 min, (c) 90 min, and (d) visible light irradiation for 240 min. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, two asymmetric Ag/ZnO nanocomposite SERS-active substrates with plasmonic-assisted UV-visible photodegradation properties were designed and fabricated. The asymmetric dielectric environment around the Ag NPs in both structures creates a specific local field enhancement near the contact area of Ag/ZnO, which is not only beneficial for light absorption in the semiconductor, but also favors the separation and migration of charge between the metal and semiconductor. Therefore, in addition to the highly sensitive SERS performance, self-cleaning functionalities were obtained on both asymmetric Ag/ZnO composite structures, with Ag NPs decorated either on or inside the ZnO HNS surfaces. The plasmonic-assisted photocatalysis is realized with different efficiencies depending on the geometrical configuration of the asymmetric Ag/ZnO composite and the energy of the incident light. An electron transfer model based on the band gap alignment was proposed to gain insights into the reaction mechanisms. Based on the highly enhanced photocatalytic performance accompanying the reproducible and uniform SERS property, these large area ordered asymmetric metal/semiconductor nanoarrays have been demonstrated to be potentially applicable as recyclable SERS or integrated recyclable sensing chips. The concepts and fabrication methods demonstrated in this work can be fundamentally and technically extended to other metal/semiconductor composite systems for further research and application.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the MOST of China under the 973 programs (2011CB925600 and 2009CB930704), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61227009, 91321102, 61106118 and 61106008), the Science and Technology Project of Fujian Province of China (2013H0046), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2011121026 and 2011121042).
Notes and references
R. C. Maher, C. M. Galloway, E. C. Le Ru, L. F. Cohen and P. G. Etchegoin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 965 RSC .
M. L. Zhang, X. Fan, H. W. Zhou, M. W. Shao, J. A. Zapien, N. B. Wong and S. T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1969 CAS .
D. Graham, D. G. Thompson, W. E. Smith and K. Faulds, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Camden, J. A. Dieringer, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Michaels, M. Nirmal and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9932 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Feng, Y. Wang, H. Wang, T. Chen, Y. Y. Tay, L. Yao, Q. Y. Yan, S. Z. Li and H. Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, H. L. Hu, D. H. Li, Z. X. Shen, Q. H. Xiong, S. Z. Li and H. J. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2180 CAS .
X. X. Zou, R. Silva, X. X. Huang, J. F. Al-Sharab and T. Asefa, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 382 RSC .
G. Sinha, L. E. Depero and I. Alessandri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2557 CAS .
A. Ramakrishnan, S. Neubert, B. Mei, J. Strunk, L. D. Wang, M. Bledowski, M. Muhler and R. Beranek, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8556 RSC .
X. H. Li, G. Y. Chen, L. B. Yang, Z. Jin and J. H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2815 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, S. H. Liu, M. Low, S. Y. Zhang, Z. L. Liu, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mclaren, T. Valdes-Solis, G. Q. Li and S. C. Tsang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Bernède, Y. Berredjem, L. Cattin and M. Morsli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083304 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lizama, J. Freer, J. Baeza and H. D. Mansilla, Catal. Today, 2002, 76, 235 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Khodja, T. Sehili, J. F. Pilichowski and P. Boule, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 141, 231 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kansal, M. Singh and D. Sud, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 141, 581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Yang, H. Q. Yan, S. Mao, R. Russo, J. Johnson, R. Saykally, N. Morris, J. Pham, R. R. He and H. J. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 323 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263501 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Qiu and S. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1345 CrossRef CAS .
R. Georgekutty, M. K. Seery and S. C. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13563 CAS .
M. D. Xiao, R. B. Jiang, F. Wang, C. H. Fang, J. F. Wang and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5790 CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133 CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Q. Liu and Y. J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2227 RSC .
Y. Li, G. T. Duan, G. Q. Liu and W. P. Cai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3614 RSC .
Y. Li, N. Koshizaki, H. Q. Wang and Y. Shimizu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, N. Koshizaki and W. P. Cai, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, Y. S. Zang, C. Yue, Z. M. Wu, S. T. Wu, J. Li and Z. H. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7902 RSC .
A. M. Michaels, M. Nirmal and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9932 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Li, Y. F. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Yang, S. B. Li, X. S. Zhou, F. R. Fan and W. Zhang, Nature, 2010, 464, 392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, Y. S. Zang, C. Yue, X. He, J. Li, Z. H. Wu and Y. Y. Fang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16874 RSC .
Y. S. Zang, X. He, J. Li, J. Yin, K. Y. Li, C. Yue, Z. M. Wu, S. T. Wu and J. Y. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 574 RSC .
H. Chalabi and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, C. Yue, Y. S. Zang, C. H. Chiu, J. C. Li, H. C. Kuo, Z. H. Wu, J. Li, Y. Y. Fang and C. Q. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4436 RSC .
Z. L. Wang and J. H. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Su, L. Liu, M. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang and C. L. Shao, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3989 RSC .
T. H. Yang, L. D. Huang, Y. W. Harn, C. C. Lin, J. K. Chang, C. I. Wu and J. M. Wu, Small, 2013, 9, 3169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Zheng, L. R. Zheng, Y. Y. Zhan, X. Y. Lin, Q. Zheng and K. M. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Sung-Suh, J. R. Choi, H. J. Hah, S. M. Koo and Y. C. Bae, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 13, 37 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta00824cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of (a) ZnO HNS arrays, (b) AOZ arrays, and (c) top and (d) inside morphologies of the AIZ arrays. To obtain information on the inside of the AIZ structures, the arrays on the silicon substrate were lifted off by conductive tape and then the inverted AIZ structure was characterized.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of the R6G probe at concentrations of 10−4 and 10−8 M on AOZ and AIZ arrays compared with that on the bare ZnO HNS sample at 10−4 M. (b) Simulated near-field distributions of (i) AOZ, (ii) AIZ, and (iii) bare ZnO HNS arrays on Si substrates under 532 nm light illumination (same laser source energy as in the Raman measurements) with the intensity on a log scale. The corresponding incidence of light and the polarization direction are shown. The diameter and shell thickness of the ZnO HNS were set as 330 and 20 nm and the axes sizes of the ellipsoid Ag NP in both nanocomposites were 190, 190 and 150 nm, which are consistent with the experimental parameters.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-visible extinction spectra of Ag NP on ZnO HNS (AOZ), Ag NP in ZnO HNS (AIZ) and ZnO HNS arrays on sapphire. (b) Simulated near-field distributions of the AOZ (i and ii) and AIZ (iii and iv) nanostructures on Si substrates under visible and UV light illumination, respectively. The intensity is on a log scale.	 

 	Fig. 4  SERS spectra of R6G (10−4 M) treated with UV light irradiation on the hybrid structures of the (a) AOZ and (b) AIZ arrays. (c) Self-cleaning activities on the two hybrids for degradation of R6G under UV light irradiation (Raman signal intensity radio η = I/I0). (d) Reversible SERS behavior of R6G (10−4 M) on the AOZ substrate during repeated measurements of UV irradiation cycles.	 

 	Fig. 5  SERS spectra of R6G (10−4 M) treated with visible light irradiation on the (a) AOZ and (b) AIZ arrays. (c) Self-cleaning activities on the two hybrids for degradation of R6G under visible light irradiation. (d) Reversible SERS behavior of R6G (10−4 M) on AOZ during repeated measurements of visible irradiation cycles.	 
ZnO + hν → ZnO(ecb− + hvb+)	(1)
ZnO(ecb−) + Ag → ZnO + Ag(e−)	(2)
Ag/ZnO(e−) + O2 → Ag/ZnO + ˙O2−	(3)
ZnO(hvb+) + OH− → ZnO + ˙OH	(4)
˙O2− or ˙OH + R6G → degradation of R6G	(5)

 	Fig. 6  Energy band gap and photocatalytic mechanisms of asymmetric AOZ and AIZ arrays under (a) UV light and (b) visible light irradiation.	 
Ag + hν → Ag*	(6)
Ag* + ZnO → Ag + ZnO(ecb−)	(7)
ZnO(ecb−) + O2 → ZnO + ˙O2−	(8)
˙O2− + R6G → degradation of R6G	(9)

 	Fig. 7  SEM image of (a) AOZ in an area of 10 μm × 10 μm, and Raman mapping of R6G (10−4 M) on AOZ substrates treated by UV light irradiation for (b) 0 min, (c) 90 min, and (d) visible light irradiation for 240 min.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta00824c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
