Semiconducting graphene : converting graphene from semimetal to semiconductor  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR32453A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR32453A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1353-1368Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSemiconducting graphene: converting graphene from semimetal to semiconductor
Ganhua Lu†
, 
Kehan Yu‡
, 
Zhenhai Wen

 and 
Junhong Chen

*
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53211, USA. E-mail: jhchen@uwm.edu;  Fax: +1 414 229 6958;   Tel: +1 414 229 2615
Received 
25th August 2012
, Accepted 6th December 2012First published on 10th December 2012AbstractInterest in graphene has grown extensively in the last decade or so, because of its extraordinary physical properties, chemical tunability, and potential for various applications. However, graphene is intrinsically a semimetal with a zero bandgap, which considerably impedes its use in many applications where a suitable bandgap is required. The transformation of graphene into a semiconductor has attracted significant attention, because the presence of a sizable bandgap in graphene can vastly promote its already-fascinating potential in an even wider range of applications. Here we review major advances in the pursuit of semiconducting graphene materials. We first briefly discuss the electronic properties of graphene and some theoretical background for manipulating the band structure of graphene. We then summarize many experimental approaches proposed in recent years for producing semiconducting graphene. Despite the relatively short history of research in semiconducting graphene, the progress has been remarkable and many significant developments are highly anticipated.Ganhua LuGanhua Lu received his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in 2007, and worked as a Research Associate in Prof. Junhong Chen's group. His research is focused on synthesis of hybrid nanostructures of nanocarbons (i.e., graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)) decorated with nanocrystals (NCs) and their use for environmental and energy devices. He has demonstrated a SnO2 NC–CNT platform for ambient gas sensing (highlighted in Advanced Materials) and chemical sensors based on reduced graphene oxide. He is currently an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Alaska Anchorage.Kehan YuKehan Yu received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in Physics from Fudan University (China) in 2004 and 2007, respectively. In 2012, he received his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee under the supervision of Prof. Junhong Chen. His research mainly focuses on carbon nanomaterials, especially on vertically oriented graphene, including synthesis and applications in photovoltaics, sensing, and optoelectronics. He is currently a Postdoctoral Scholar at Case Western Reserve University.Zhenhai WenZhenhai Wen received his M.S. degree from Beijing University of Technology in 2004 and Ph.D. degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. He then worked as a lecturer at Nanchang Hangkong University. In 2009, he worked as a Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellow at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Germany. Since 2010, he has been a Postdoctoral Researcher in Prof. Junhong Chen's group at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. His current research interest is mainly in the design and synthesis of functional nanostructures and their applications in electrochemical sensing, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, electrocatalysts, photocatalysts, and dye-sensitized solar cells.Junhong ChenJunhong Chen received his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Minnesota in 2002, followed by postdoctoral research in Chemical Engineering at California Institute of Technology. In 2003, he joined the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee as an Assistant Professor in Mechanical Engineering, and was promoted to Associate Professor and Professor in 2008 and 2011, respectively. His current research interests include synthesis and assembly of nanoparticles, nanocarbons, and their hybrid nanomaterials for sustainable energy and environment (www.uwm.edu/~jhchen/). Dr Chen is also the Director of NSF I/UCRC on Water Equipment and Policy and the founder of NanoAffix Science, LLC.
1 Introduction
The last decade has witnessed explosive interest and growth in the research on graphene,1–3 a flat monolayer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms tightly packed into a two-dimensional (2-D) honeycomb lattice with a thickness of 0.335 nm. The unprecedented enthusiasm about graphene is not at all surprising given the exceptional mechanical,4 thermal,5 optical,6 and electrical1–3 properties of graphene. For example, graphene was reported to outperform carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in room-temperature heat conduction.5 Graphene has extremely high electron mobility at room temperature with a resistivity of 10−6 Ω·cm, which is comparable to or even lower than that of silver (1.62 × 10−6 Ω·cm), a material widely known for its lowest resistivity at room temperature. Moreover, electron transport in graphene remains ballistic up to 0.3 μm at 300 K.3 The extraordinary and outstanding properties of graphene make it a promising candidate for a wide range of applications, including field-effect transistors (FETs),7,8 composite materials,9,10 field emitters,11 chemical sensors,12–17 biosensors,18–20 hydrogen storage media,21–23 and transparent conducting electrodes.24–28 A comprehensive account of the recent history of graphene research can be found in a recent review paper by Ruoff and co-workers.29
Despite its numerous extraordinary properties and huge potential for various applications, one of the greatest challenges in using graphene as an electronic material is the lack of a sizable bandgap. Graphene is intrinsically a zero-gap semiconductor, or a semimetal.30,31 While the semimetal nature does not compromise graphene's capability for use in high-frequency analog electronics32 or transparent conductive films,27 it significantly limits the use of graphene in many applications where semiconducting materials with a suitable bandgap are required. For instance, the potential use of graphene in FETs for digital logic applications has been extensively explored, because of the vast promise held by graphene, including its remarkably high carrier mobility, good transconductance, atomic layer thickness, and mechanical and chemical stability. However, the absence of a bandgap makes it difficult to completely switch off graphene FETs, leading to a low on/off current ratio (typically ∼5 in top-gated graphene FETs).33 While dimensional down-scaling of silicon-based electronics is approaching its limit, semiconducting graphene with a sizable bandgap could potentially replace silicon in the next generation of high-performance electronic devices.34
Researchers have been searching for effective ways to produce semiconducting graphene and have developed various methods to generate a bandgap in graphene, in hopes of harnessing its exceptional properties for semiconductor-based applications. Therefore, a review of the current status of semiconducting graphene materials is necessary. Here we present an overview of the many significant advances that have been made in the pursuit of semiconducting graphene materials in recent years. First we briefly discuss in Section 2 the electronic properties of graphene and some theoretical background for manipulating the band structure of graphene, which could serve as a foundation for understanding various experimental approaches for making semiconducting graphene, as presented in Sections 3–5. We have roughly categorized methods to produce semiconducting graphene into three groups: (1) morphological patterning of graphene sheets into nanoribbons, nanomeshes, or quantum dots to induce quantum confinement and edge effects (Section 3); (2) chemical modification, doping, or surface functionalization of graphene to intentionally interrupt the connectivity of the π electron network (Section 4); and (3) other methods (Section 5), e.g., use of two graphene layers arranged in Bernal stacking (or AB stacking) to break the lattice symmetry, and applying mechanical deformation or strain to graphene.
2 Electronic properties of graphene
Before we turn our focus on the experimental progress in the research of semiconducting graphene, we first briefly review graphene's electronic properties and some theoretical background for opening up a bandgap in graphene, which is helpful for understanding the exciting results experimentally achieved so far. We note a recent review of the electronic structure engineering of graphene.35
As the sixth element in the periodic table, carbon has a 1s22s22p2 ground state electron configuration. For a carbon atom in graphene, the valence orbitals (2s, 2px, 2py, and 2pz) are sp2 hybridized (i.e., the mixing of the single 2s orbital with two 2p orbitals), resulting in three planar σ orbitals separated by 120° with each other and one remaining 2p orbital (2pz) oriented along the axis perpendicular to the graphene plane. Each of the three sp2 orbitals of a carbon atom forms a σ bond with three neighboring carbon atoms, thereby forming the hexagonal structure of graphene with a basis of two atoms (A and B) per unit cell (Fig. 1a). The carbon–carbon σ bonds are strong covalent bonds, which are responsible for the lattice stability and for the elastic properties of graphene. The adjacent interaction among neighboring 2pz orbitals develops into delocalized π (bonding) and π* (anti-bonding) bands, which form the valence band (VB) and the conduction band (CB), respectively (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 1  (a) The hexagonal lattice of graphene has a basis of two carbon atoms (A and B) per unit cell. (b) The π and π* bands in graphene. (c) The linear dispersion and the band structure at the Dirac point. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The unique band structure of graphene was first calculated by Walace in 1947.36 The π and π* bands of graphene are degenerate at the corner (K point, or Dirac point) of the hexagonal Brillouin zone (BZ). For low energies associated with electron transport, the bands have a linear dispersion and the band structure can be regarded as two cones touching at ED (the so-called Dirac crossing energy) (Fig. 1c). Since the VB and the CB touch at ED, graphene has a zero bandgap and is therefore typically labeled as a zero-gap semiconductor.32,37,38
The zero bandgap in graphene is a result of the identical environment of the two carbon atoms in the graphene unit cell.32 Therefore, the key to opening up a bandgap in graphene is to break the lateral, in-plane lattice symmetry by structural and/or chemical modifications. For example, if some carbon atoms are substituted by other atoms (e.g., N) in the hexagonal lattice, the lattice symmetry can break, resulting in the formation of a gap between π and π* bands. The symmetry can also break by stacking two graphene layers arranged in Bernal stacking (or AB stacking). Since the unit cell contains four atoms, a bilayer graphene has two sets of valence and conduction bands. In the presence of a strong electric field perpendicular to the bilayer plane, the upper VB and the lower CB move apart to form a direct bandgap. Another very successful and extensively explored strategy relies on the quantum confinement and edge effects, i.e., patterning 2D graphene sheets into 1D nanoribbons or 0D quantum dots. For example, in a nanoribbon, the edges break the lattice symmetry and the lateral confinement of states produces a bandgap at the Fermi level.
In terms of the electronic structure of a material, there are two extremes: the atomic and molecular limit of discrete density of electronic states at one end, and the bulk crystalline limit of continuous bands at the other end. Semiconducting nanocrystals lie in between these two extremes. As the confining dimension decreases and reaches a certain limit, the bands become discrete, resulting in the size-dependent bandgap. Thus, semiconducting nanocrystals often display strong variations in their electronic properties with size due to transformations in the density of electronic energy levels as a function of the size, which is known as the quantum confinement effect, or quantum size effect. When a graphene nanoribbon (GNR) is narrow enough, 1D confined states are created resembling those of a particle in an infinite potential well. The bandgap of a GNR is inversely proportional to the nanoribbon width.
3 Quantum confinement-induced bandgap in graphene
When the size of a material becomes equivalent to or falls below the characteristic length scale for the motion of its electrons, its properties become dependent on the size and shape of the material.39 Specifically, as the size of a semiconductor crystal is reduced such that it is comparable to the exciton Bohr radius of the bulk material, the boundary significantly modifies electron distribution, leading to size-dependent properties such as a bandgap and energy relaxation dynamics. This phenomenon, known as quantum confinement, has been demonstrated in many semiconductor materials including graphene.
It has been both theoretically predicted and experimentally demonstrated that the morphology of graphene, including its size and shape, can significantly affect its properties. In particular, a sizable energy gap can be opened up in graphene through the quantum confinement effect by patterning graphene in the form of a graphene nanoribbon (GNR), a graphene nanomesh (GNM), or a graphene quantum dot (GQD). Table 1 lists some of these semiconducting graphenes produced using various methods, along with their feature sizes, on/off ratios, and bandgap values.
Table 1 Feature sizes, on/off ratios, and bandgap values of selected semiconducting graphene materials, including GNRs, GNMs, and GQDs, produced based on the principle of quantum confinement effect




 
Fabrication method
Feature size
On/off ratio
Bandgap (eV)
Ref.




GNR
E-beam lithography
∼15 nm
—
∼0.2
 40 


Oxidative unzipping of CNTs
∼100 nm
—
∼0.050
 41 and 42 


Unzipping CNTs by plasma etching
7 nm
>100
—
 43 


E-beam lithography + etching
<5 nm
∼104
∼0.4
 44 


Nanowire lithography
6 nm
∼160
0.1–0.5
 45 


Nanowire lithography
<10 nm
>50
—
 46 


 
 
 
 
 
 


GNM
Block copolymer lithography
5 nm
>100
—
 47 


Block copolymer lithography
<20 nm
40 (RT)
0.1
 48 


200 (105 K)


Nanoimprint
<10 nm
100 (RT)
0.14
 49 


Nanosphere lithography
<20 nm
10
0.05
 50 


 
 
 
 
 
 


GQD
E-beam lithography
100 nm
—
0.5
 51 




3.1 Graphene nanoribbon: 1D semiconducting graphene
Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) are thin, elongated strips of graphene with straight edges. As their width decreases, GNRs can gradually transform from semimetals to semiconductors (i.e., the bandgap of GNRs is inversely proportional to the ribbon width) due to the quantum confinement and edge effects,40,52–54 which provides a promising route to semiconducting graphene materials. The electronic properties of GNRs were studied long before GNRs were experimentally realized. For example, the theoretical work done by Nakada et al.52 in 1996 demonstrated that the quantum confinement is highly significant for determining the relative importance of the edge state in GNRs.
3.1.1 Synthesis of a “small” quantity of GNRs. For research purposes, a small amount of GNRs was produced using several methods, such as e-beam lithography,40,53 nanowire lithography,45,46,55,56 chemical processes,7 and organic synthetic procedures.57 Kim and co-workers40 fabricated GNR devices (Fig. 2a) from individual graphene sheets, which were mechanically exfoliated from bulk graphite.2 Graphene sheets on a SiO2/Si substrate were first contacted with metal electrodes (Cr/Au) and then spin-coated with hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ), which is a negative tone e-beam resist. E-beam lithography was used to pattern HSQ so that an etch mask was formed to define GNR widths (W: 10–100 nm) and lengths (1–2 μm). Unprotected graphene was then etched away by oxygen plasma, leaving the GNR protected underneath the HSQ mask (Fig. 2a). Kim and co-workers studied two types of device sets: (i) devices containing multiple, parallel GNRs with widths ranging from 15–90 nm (P1–P4) (Fig. 2b); and (ii) devices D1 and D2 of GNRs with uniform width but varying relative orientation (Fig. 2c). Fig. 2d shows the overall scaling of the bandgap (Eg) as a function of W for six different device sets. The bandgap of a GNR scales inversely with the channel width (W) at room temperature. Bandgaps as big as ∼200 meV were achieved for GNRs as narrow as W ≈ 15 nm. GNRs with narrower widths may show an even larger bandgap, making them promising to be used as semiconducting device components under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 2  (a) GNRs covered by a protective HSQ etch mask. Devices with parallel GNRs of different widths (b), and GNRs in different crystallographic directions of uniform width (c). (d) Bandgap (Eg) vs. channel width (W): for four devices (P1–P4) of the parallel type and two (D1, D2) with varying orientation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2007 by the American Physical Society. 
The minimum width of GNRs produced using e-beam lithography processes is ∼10–20 nm, limited by lithography resolution. On the other hand, GNRs with a sub-10 nm width are desirable for high on/off ratio FET applications at room temperature. Dai’s group has developed a gas-phase chemical approach, which could further narrow down the width of a lithographically produced GNR by etching the GNR edges without damaging its basal plane.44 They first produced a set of GNRs (or GNR arrays) by e-beam lithography with each GNR of ∼20–30 nm wide, and then used a gas-phase etching process to narrow the ribbons down to <10 nm (Fig. 3). The etching process involved O2 oxidation of graphene into CO or CO2 at high temperatures in a slightly reducing environment by diluting O2 with NH3. During etching, O2 molecules exothermally dissociate and react with dangling carbon atoms at defect sites and the edges of a GNR. The presence of NH3 led to a controlled, slow etching rate (≲1 nm min−1) of GNRs, which could be ascribed to in situ NH3 reduction of oxygen groups formed during graphene oxidation. A high on/off ratio up to ∼104 was obtained at room temperature for FETs made of sub-5 nm wide GNRs produced from lithographic patterning and gas-phase chemical narrowing. This controllable etching method and the lithography process can be considered complementary in terms of achieving GNRs with different widths, since the etching method can further reduce the width of a lithographically fabricated GNR to sub-5 nm regime.
 Fig. 3  AFM images of a set of GNRs: before (a) and after gas-phase chemical etching (b). The GNRs were narrowed down uniformly from ∼20 to ∼8 nm with no obvious breaks. The etching conditions were ∼25 mTorr O2 in the presence of ∼1 Torr 10% NH3 in Ar at 800 °C for 10 min. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Chemistry (ref. 44), copyright (2010). 
Various chemical routes have also been developed to make GNRs. For example, Dai's group developed a chemical method to produce GNRs with widths ranging from ∼50 nm down to <10 nm.7 Commercial expandable graphite was exfoliated by brief heating (60 s) to 1000 °C in a forming gas (3% hydrogen in argon), and the resulting exfoliated graphite was dispersed in a 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) solution of poly(m-phenylenevinylene-co-2,5-dioctoxy-p-phenylenevinylene) (PmPV) by sonication for 30 min to obtain a uniform suspension. After centrifugation, GNRs were stably suspended in solvents with noncovalent polymer functionalization and exhibited smooth edges with possibly well-defined zigzag or armchair-edge structures. Electrical transport measurements indicated that all of the sub-10 nm GNRs were semiconductors, unlike single-walled carbon nanotubes that form as mixtures with one-third of nanotubes being metallic. GNR FETs showed on/off ratios of about 107 at room temperature.
Nanowires (NWs) with controllable sizes (down to 1–2 nm) can be synthesized readily using various methods. NW lithography, in which NWs are used as etch masks, can be readily used for fabricating GNRs in the sub-10 nm regime. For example, by aligning Si NWs on the top of graphene as a physical mask, the underlying graphene layer can be protected from oxygen plasma etching, and GNRs with controllable widths down to 6 nm have been produced in a quite controllable fashion.45 Electrical measurements on an 8 nm GNR-FET showed an on/off ratio ∼160 at room temperature, suggesting appreciable bandgaps arising due to lateral confinement. Other NWs that have been used for GNR fabrication include Si/HfO2 core–shell NWs,55 ZrO2 NWs,56 and CuO NWs.46 In contrast with other NWs, CuO NWs can be synthesized simply by heating a copper foil in air and can be removed by dissolution in mild acids. In addition to its ability to reach the sub-10 nm regime for GNR synthesis, NW lithography is also a relatively easy route compared with sophisticated processes, such as e-beam lithography.

3.1.2 Bulk production of GNRs. The methods presented in the previous section have low yields of GNRs. Efforts have been made for the bulk production of GNRs. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) carried out at 950 °C has successfully produced macroscopic quantity of long, thin, and highly crystalline GNRs (grams per day) with lengths of <20–30 μm, widths of 20–300 nm, and thicknesses of 2–40 layers.58 High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) analyses indicated that those CVD-synthesized GNRs consist of AB stacked layers as in graphite crystals. However, those GNRs had very uneven edges and also exhibited high density of ripples along the length.A carbon nanotube (CNT) can be viewed as a rolled-up piece of graphene; by the same token, a GNR is nothing but an unrolled CNT. For the last twenty plus years, the synthesis, size control, and chiral control of CNTs have been extensively investigated and established.59 Therefore, unzipping CNTs lengthwise offers an efficient way of producing GNRs with a controlled structure and quality. The accumulated knowledge and technologies in CNT research can facilitate the synthesis of GNRs in a more controlled manner. Mass produced CNTs with narrower diameters and chirality distributions can be used to make GNRs with well-defined widths and edge structures. Few-walled CNTs can be used to obtain narrow, sub-10 nm GNRs with bandgaps sufficient for room-temperature FET applications. Aligned CNT arrays could be potentially transformed to GNR arrays. Therefore, the use of CNTs as starting materials could result in large-scale, well-aligned semiconducting GNRs with well controlled structures for practical applications in electronics.
Two papers, one from Tour's group at Rice University41 and the other from Dai's group at Stanford University,43 were published back-to-back in Nature in 2009, independently showing that CNTs can be used as starting materials to obtain GNRs in large quantities. Tour and co-workers used a solution-based oxidative process for producing a nearly 100% yield of GNRs by longitudinally unzipping multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) (Fig. 4a).41 Oxidized nanoribbons with widths ∼100 nm were formed by treating MWCNTs (diameters of 40–80 nm) with permanganate (KMnO4) in concentrated sulphuric acid (Fig. 4b). After separation, the as-produced graphene oxide nanoribbons were highly soluble in water (up to 12 mg ml−1). The unzipping of MWCNTs appeared to occur along a line, providing straight-edged ribbons. Those oxidized nanoribbons had low conductance because of the large number of oxygen functional groups present on the surface. Their conductivity was significantly improved either by chemical reduction using hydrazine or by thermal treatment in H2. However, due to remaining oxidized defect sites, these unzipping-derived GNRs have electronic properties inferior to those of mechanically exfoliated graphene sheets. The same unzipping process could be applied to single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) for producing narrower nanoribbons; however, their subsequent separation is more difficult. Still, cutting CNTs lengthwise provides a preparative route for producing accessible nanoribbons on a large scale. In a follow-up paper, an intrinsic energy bandgap of ∼50 meV was observed in GNRs (∼100 nm wide) fabricated by high-temperature hydrogen-annealing of unzipped CNTs.42 Tour's group also demonstrated that applying the oxidative unzipping procedure to pre-fabricated CNT devices could also lead to a direct conversion of the tube to a ribbon-based device.60 They improved the longitudinal unzipping process by investigating the reaction conditions such as acid content, time, and temperature, and produced graphene oxide nanoribbons with fewer defects and/or holes on the basal plane, while maintaining narrow ribbons <100 nm wide and the high aspect ratio.61 By introducing a second weaker acid into the system, the selectivity of the oxidative unzipping improved. In addition, the optimized graphene oxide nanoribbons exhibited increased electrical conductivity over those chemically reduced nanoribbons produced by previously reported procedures.41
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the lengthwise unzipping of a CNT to form a nanoribbon. (b) TEM images showing the conversion of MWCNTs (left) into oxidized nanoribbons (right). Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 41), copyright (2009). 
Unlike the oxidative procedure developed by Tour's group, Dai and co-workers made bulk quantities of sub-10 nm GNRs by unzipping MWCNTs through plasma etching of nanotubes partially embedded in a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) layer (Fig. 5).43 The exposed part of the CNT was removed by plasma etching, leaving a very thin strip of graphene (i.e., a GNR) on the substrate when the polymer was removed. Depending on the diameter and number of layers of the initial MWCNT and the duration of etching, mono-, bi-, and multi-layer GNRs and GNRs with inner CNT cores could be produced (Fig. 5d–g). The GNRs had smooth edges and a narrow width distribution (10–20 nm) and the FETs based on the produced GNRs showed an on/off ratio greater than 100. In contrast with the oxidative method,41 this plasma etching process requires no reduction step. Unzipping CNTs with well-defined structures in an array will allow for the production of GNRs with controlled widths, edge structures, placement, and alignment in a scalable fashion suitable for device integration.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of producing GNRs from MWCNTs. Varying etching times could result in different products: GNRs with CNT cores after etching for a short time t1 (d); tri-, bi- and mono-layer GNRs after etching for times t2, t3 and t4, respectively (t4 > t3 > t2 > t1; (e–g)). Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 43), copyright (2009). 
GNRs not only have nanoscale regions where the crystal structure of graphene is well developed, but also dangling bonds, sp3 bonded carbons, and functional groups, all affecting their functionality.52 Edge structures have a significant influence on electronic, chemical, and magnetic properties of graphene and GNRs.62 Clean, atomically sharp edges are desirable for designing electronic logic devices, since the presence of disorder on the edges of GNRs could impose difficulties in achieving uniform performance among GNR electronic devices. However, edge atoms could be passivated with donor or acceptor molecules, thereby tuning the electronic properties without affecting the graphitic stem of the GNR. A recent review63 by Dresselhaus and co-workers provides an excellent overview of synthesizing and characterizing graphene edges, with particular emphasis on fabricating and characterizing edges in GNRs. We note that several recent reviews on the topic of GNRs have appeared.63–66

3.1.3 Metal nanoparticles as “scissors” to cut graphene into nanoribbons. It has been demonstrated that few-layer graphene (FLG)67 and single-layer graphene68 can be etched along crystallographic directions using thermally activated metal catalytic nanoparticles (NPs), such as Fe and Ni NPs. This technique relies on the use of individual metal NPs as “scissors” to catalytically “carve out” long, straight trenches in graphene. The angles formed by the cuts (or the trenches) are either 60° or 120° (Fig. 6). Theoretical and experimental results indicate that the edges of the cutting channels can be atomically smooth with zigzag or armchair terminations.69 During the high-temperature etching, carbon from the graphene is hydrogenated into methane by the metal NP catalysts. Interestingly, Ni NPs-induced cuts in single-layer graphene (SLG) were oriented with the same edge-chirality and avoided crossing each other, resulting in continuously connected graphene nanostructures. Using this technique, sub-10 nm nanoribbons and other graphene nanostructures (e.g., equilateral triangles) with edges aligned along a single crystallographic direction have been obtained.68
 Fig. 6  Formation of crystallographically oriented nanoribbons by Ni NP etching. Schematics and AFM images of (a) a nanoribbon created by a NP which turns twice, forming two angles of 120°; (b) a nanoconstriction formed by a NP which turns sharply near another trench to form a 60° angle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Ajayan and co-workers reported a multistage cutting technique to produce well-defined graphene shapes that could be useful in fabricating graphene devices.70 They manually created step edges on large graphene fragments to promote the cutting of graphene. Combining the multistage cutting technique with a lithography technique and graphene transfer method, they demonstrated the possibility of making graphene devices with a better edge and shape control.
Besides cutting graphene sheets, metal NPs (Ni or Co) can also longitudinally etch pure and nitrogen-doped MWCNTs to form GNRs.71 This process could be regarded as a reverse of the CVD growth of CNTs. The metal NPs remove carbon atoms along nanotubes through catalytic hydrogenation of carbon, which results in hydrocarbon species. The as-produced GNRs were typically 15–40 nm wide and 100–500 nm long.71
The use of metal NPs for crystallographic etching of graphene is a potentially powerful technique for achieving further progress in not only GNR fabrication, but also in exciting new graphene device architectures. With better understanding of the metal NP etching process, it could be possible to manipulate the motion of the NPs on graphene, which could enable many far-reaching potential applications, such as a whole-graphene integrated circuit constructed from a single graphene sheet.

3.2 Graphene nanomesh: 2D, perforated semiconducting graphene
Another way to use the quantum confinement effect to create a bandgap in graphene is to “punch” a high-density array of nanoscale holes in a graphene sheet, forming the so-called graphene nanomesh (GNM) (Fig. 7g).47,48 GNMs have some resemblance with GNRs, because a GNM can be regarded as a vastly interconnected network of GNRs. Therefore, analogous to GNRs whose bandgap is closely associated with the ribbon width, the geometrical structure of a GNM is critical for its electronic properties. The two critical structural parameters of a GNM are the “periodicity” and the “neck width,” which are defined as the center-to-center distance and the smallest edge-to-edge distance between two neighboring nanoholes, respectively. These two parameters effectively affect the electronic properties of GNMs. Control over periodicity and neck width is crucial for manipulating GNM electronic properties, since charge transport properties highly depend on the width of the critical conductance pathway. A narrow neck width in a GNM (resembling the thin width of a GNR) helps generate a bandgap for a sufficient gate response and a high on/off ratio. It is worth noting that the dense mesh structure of a GNM can allow higher current delivery than a single GNR.
 Fig. 7  Process to make a free-standing GNM: (a) graphene on a SiO2 substrate; (b) graphene covered with SiOx (as a protecting layer and grafting substrate for the subsequent patterning) and block-copolymer poly(styreneblock-methyl methacrylate) (P(S-b-MMA)); (c) annealing the block-copolymer film to form the porous polystyrene (PS) matrix, which acts as the nanomesh template; (d) SiOx nanomesh hard mask formed by reactive ion etching of the PS film; (e) O2 plasma to etch away graphene uncovered by the SiOx mask; (f) a GNM by removing the SiOx mask with HF; (g) a free-standing GNM by lifting off the underlying SiO2. TEM images of GNMs with varying neck widths and periodicities (scale bars: 100 nm): (h–j) GNMs with a periodicity of 39 nm and neck widths of 14.6 nm (h), 11.2 nm (i), and 7.1 nm (j) and (k) GNM with a periodicity of 27 nm and a neck width of 9.3 nm. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 47), copyright (2010). 
A group of researchers led by Huang and Duan at University of California, Los Angeles prepared highly uniform GNMs with controllable structures using block copolymer lithography (Fig. 7a–g).72 Their synthesis process holds versatility in controlling both the neck width and the periodicity (Fig. 7h–k). The mesh periodicity and neck width can be tuned by choosing block copolymers of different molecular weights and/or through controlled over-etching during the fabrication process. The GNMs can have variable periodicities and neck widths as narrow as 5 nm. At room temperature, FETs based on GNMs can have currents approximately 100 times greater than individual GNR devices, and the on/off ratio is comparable with that of individual GNR devices and can be tunable by varying the neck width.
Using a similar block copolymer lithography process, Arnold and co-workers fabricated GNMs with sub-20 nm features.48 Hexagonal arrays of nanoholes were etched into graphene membranes, leaving the remaining interconnected constrictions between holes to form a GNM. A bandgap of 100 meV was observed in GNMs at 105 K, which indicates the effective modulation of the GNM electronic structure due to quantum confinement, disorder, and localization effects. Fabricated GNM FETs showed on/off ratios of ∼40 and 200 at room temperature and 105 K, respectively. The hole mobility of GNM FETs was measured as 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.
The block copolymer lithography process is a scalable and facile approach to the fabrication of graphene nanostructures; therefore, the synthesis of wafer-scale GNMs could be realized if the block copolymer lithography is combined with techniques for large-area graphene synthesis.73,74 In addition, choosing the appropriate block copolymer templates could facilitate the production of GNMs with tunable dimensions, enabling improved control of the GNM electronic behavior. Particularly, reliable control over the patterning of graphene at the <5 nm scale could further increase the effective energy gap, thereby improving the room-temperature switching performance of GNM devices.
Whereas block copolymer lithography is a powerful technique for fabricating GNMs with sub-100 nm periodicity (typically ranging from 5 to 50 nm),75 it would be beneficial to increase the periodicity to a wider range. Tour's group50 reported an approach (Fig. 8) for making GNMs with larger periodicity. In their method, CVD-grown graphene was patterned using self-assembled monolayers of monodisperse colloidal microspheres, which have sizes ranging from 100 nm to several micrometers and are readily available. The use of colloidal microspheres allowed almost 2 additional orders of magnitude of periodicity in GNMs. The patterning of graphene with monodisperse colloidal microspheres was capable of independently tuning periodicity and neck width in GNMs by controlling colloidal microsphere sizes and the etching duration, respectively, making this method attractive for making GNMs with varied structural characteristics. However, since the self-assembly of colloidal particles inevitably leads to various defects (e.g., vacancies, holes, and domain boundaries), it is difficult to make very large GNMs with defect-free structures (i.e., an enlarged area that has nearly perfect regularity).
 Fig. 8  Schematic for the fabrication of GNMs by patterning graphene with self-assembled monolayers of monodisperse colloidal microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Liang and co-workers fabricated GNMs with sub-10 nm neck width using nanoimprint lithography combined with block-copolymer self-assembly (for high-resolution nanoimprint template patterning) and electrostatic printing of graphene.49 For GNM FETs, reducing the neck width in GNMs led to multiplateaus in the drain current–gate voltage dependence and enhanced the on/off current ratio (∼100 at room temperature with GNM neck width < 10 nm), suggesting the formation of electronic sub-bands and a bandgap in GNMs.
3.3 Graphene quantum dots
Graphene sheets with lateral dimensions smaller than 100 nm are generally called graphene quantum dots (GQDs),51 which exhibit strong quantum confinement and edge effects and are ideal for the construction of nanoscaled optical and electronic devices.
Novoselov et al. used e-beam lithography to sculpt mechanically exfoliated graphene sheets into sizes from over 100 nm to as small as ∼15 nm.51 At large sizes (>100 nm), patterned graphene structures can be used to fabricate conventional single-electron transistors, exhibiting periodic Coulomb blockade peaks. For GQDs smaller than 100 nm, the peaks became highly nonperiodic due to the quantum confinement effect. Short constrictions of only a few nanometers in width stayed conductive and showed a bandgap of up to ∼0.5 eV.
GQDs with sub-10 nm diameter were prepared by hydrothermally treating graphene oxide (GO) sheets.76 During the hydrothermal process, GO sheets were “cut” into surface-functionalized GQDs (∼9.6 nm in diameter), presumably due to the breakup of mixed epoxy chains composed of epoxy and carbonyl pair groups. The functionalized GQDs exhibited bright blue photoluminescence (PL), which could be attributed to the large edge effect shown in the very small GQDs.
Shen et al. reported the preparation of surface-passivated GQDs by reducing GO with hydrazine hydrate.77 Using small GO sheets and polyethylene glycol (PEG) as starting materials, GQDs surface-passivated by PEG (GQDs–PEG) were synthesized using a one-pot hydrothermal reaction.78 The product GQDs–PEG exhibited good luminescence properties and possessed upconversion photoluminescence (UCPL) properties. Therefore, the GQDs–PEG may serve as a new type of fluorescence and upconversion material for bioscience and energy applications. Particularly, the GQDs–PEG showed high photocurrent generation capability. Under the illumination of near-infrared (NIR) laser (808 nm), photoelectrodes made of GQDs–PEG generated a stable photocurrent. Therefore, GQDs–PEG could be a cost-effective dopant material for solar energy conversion, considering the low cost and ease of synthesis.
For precise control over the morphology and the size distribution of GQDs, monodisperse disk-like GQDs of ∼60 nm in diameter and 2–3 nm in thickness have been prepared with unsubstituted hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (HBC) as a precursor by a process of carbonization, oxidization, surface functionalization, and reduction (Fig. 9).79 This method is solution-processable and scalable for producing monodisperse GQDs with well-controlled morphology and size ranging from 10 to 100 nm. Optical property characterization showed the resulting GQDs possess a high photoluminescence efficiency of 3.8%, making those GQDs promising candidates for biolabeled carriers and nanodevices.
 Fig. 9  Schematic for preparing GQDs using HBC as a carbon source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Traditional pitch-based carbon fibers (CFs), which are cheap and commercially available, consist of stacked graphitic submicrometer domains. During the acid treatment and chemical exfoliation, CFs can be easily broken down, leading to the creation of GQDs with different sizes in scalable amounts (Fig. 10).80 The as-produced GQDs with sizes of 1–4 nm had zigzag edge structures and were 1–3 atomic-layers thick. By varying the size of the GQDs by changing process parameters, the photoluminescence of GQDs can be adjusted. Those GQDs could be excellent probes for high-contrast bioimaging and biosensing applications due to their luminescence stability, nanosecond lifetime, biocompatibility, low toxicity, and high water solubility.
 Fig. 10  (a) Scheme of oxidation cutting of a carbon fiber (CF) into GQDs. (b) TEM images of GQDs (inset is the HRTEM of GQDs). (c) AFM image of GQDs. (d) Size and height distributions of GQDs. (e) HRTEM image of the edge of a GQD. (f) Schematic of the relative zigzag and armchair directions in graphene. (g) Schematic of the edge termination of the HRTEM image in (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society600 dpi in TIF format)??>. 
Li and co-workers reported a solution-chemistry-based approach to large, stable colloidal GQDs with uniform size and shape.81 The versatility of solution chemistry based on oxidative condensation reactions allows for tuning the structures of graphene and thus its properties. GQDs showed large extinction coefficients in a wide spectral range from UV to near-infrared, indicating the potential for serving as a new type of light-harvesting media for photovoltaics. The bandgap of the GQDs can be tailored by controlling their sizes and tuning their redox potentials through chemical functionalization.
Doping GQDs with heteroatoms provides an attractive way of further tuning their intrinsic properties and exploiting new phenomena for advanced device applications. Li et al. demonstrated an electrochemical approach for producing nitrogen-doped GQDs (N-GQDs) with oxygen-rich functional groups.82 Unlike their N-free counterparts, the N-GQDs with an N/C atomic ratio of ∼4.3% emitted blue luminescence and showed electrocatalytic activity comparable with that of a commercially available Pt/C catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction in an alkaline medium. The attractive luminescence characteristic of N-GQDs could allow them to be used for biomedical imaging and other optoelectronic applications.
Since every fullerene molecule (C60) has the same size and shape, the controlled fragmentation of fullerene could lead to uniformly sized GQDs. Lu et al. demonstrated that geometrically well-defined GQDs can be synthesized on a ruthenium surface using C60 molecules as a precursor.83 Those GQDs were formed due to the Ru-catalyzed cage-opening of fullerene, which could provide a controllable route to the template-synthesis of GQDs with well-defined geometry.
4 Chemical modification, doping, or surface functionalization of graphene
4.1 From GO to RGO: transforming an insulator to a semiconductor
Graphene oxide (GO), a type of chemically modified graphene, can be mass-produced and is solution-processable.84 Therefore, GO is a promising precursor for the bulk production of graphene-related materials, e.g., semiconducting graphene. The presence of several types of oxygen functional groups (i.e., epoxide (O) and hydroxyl (–OH) groups on the basal plane, and carbonyl (–CO) and carboxyl (–COOH) groups on the sheet edge)85,86 allows GO to interact with a wide range of organic and inorganic materials through non-covalent, covalent and/or ionic interactions, leading to functional hybrids and composites with unusual properties.87 In GO, the majority of carbon atoms bonded with oxygen are sp3 hybridized, which disrupts the extended sp2 conjugated network of the original graphene sheet. The presence of considerable sp3 carbons makes GO electrically insulating. Therefore, GO is an electronically hybrid material containing both conducting π-states from graphitic sp2 hybridized carbons and a large energy gap between the σ-states of its sp3-bonded carbons.
The variation of the sp2 and sp3 carbon fractions by thermal or chemical treatments could be useful for manipulating its bandgap and therefore controllably transforming GO from an insulator to a semiconductor and ultimately to a graphene-like semi-metal.88 Of course, reduction of GO further generates various types of defects in the graphene lattice, which affects the resulting transport properties.
Optical studies indicate the energy gap in GO is tunable by controlling the degree of oxidation or reduction. For example, strong photoluminescence (PL) was observed in single-layer graphene (produced by microcleavage of graphite) after being treated in an oxygen plasma.89 The PL was spatially uniform across the flakes and related to elastic scattering spectra distinctly different from those of pristine graphene with a zero bandgap. The possibility of bandgap engineering in GO is of interest for its implementation in photonic and electronic devices.
The disruption of the π network in graphene due to oxidation can open a direct electronic bandgap for graphene.90 The oxidized sites create strongly repulsive potential barriers for the π-electron wave functions, causing a quantum-confinement-like effect. In the infinite potential limit, a delocalized π-electron wave function will form nodes at these sites, whose spatial distribution will determine the presence or absence of a bandgap.
GO can be chemically or thermally reduced for obtaining graphene-like properties.91 However, residual defects such as remnant oxygen groups, various line and point defects, and holes due to loss of carbon (in the form of CO or CO2) from the basal plane considerably degrade the electronic quality (particularly charge carrier mobility) of reduced GO (RGO) compared with its mechanically exfoliated counterpart.92
Both GO and RGO can be viewed as chemically modified graphene.93 Using high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), researchers have recently revealed that the basal plane of GO consists of scattered graphitic nano-sized regions separated by highly oxidized domains and holes.94 Reduction treatments of GO effectively increase the graphitic area; however, disordered regions and holes remain in RGO.94,95 The defective nature of RGO is directly responsible for the inferior electronic properties of RGO compared with pristine graphene. Attempts have been made to develop new reduction or processing methods for repairing the defects and converting GO to as perfect graphene as possible.96–98 However, the structural imperfection also renders GO and RGO as natural precursors to a mesh-like, porous network of graphene-based materials, or GNMs.17,72
Oxidative etching of graphene flakes was observed to initiate from edges and occasional defect sites in the basal plane, leading to reduced lateral size and a small number of etch pits. In contrast, etching highly defective graphene oxide and its reduced form resulted in rapid homogeneous fracturing of the sheets into smaller pieces. Based on these observations, a team led by Dravid and Huang at Northwestern University designed a slow and controllable etching technique for producing nanoporous RGO sheets by hydrothermal steaming of GO at 200 °C (Fig. 11).72 The degree of etching and the concomitant porosity can be easily tuned by etching time. In contrast with nonporous reduced graphene oxide annealed at the same temperature, the steamed nanoporous graphene oxide exhibited nearly 2 orders of magnitude increase in the sensitivity and improved recovery time when used as a chemiresistor sensor platform for NO2 detection.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic showing the steaming process to produce nanoporous GO. (b and c) AFM images showing the same GO sheet before and after being steamed for 10 h, respectively (scale bars: 2 μm). (d) Height profiles along the white line in (b) and (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Star's group demonstrated holey reduced graphene oxide (hRGO), which was prepared by enzymatic oxidation of graphene oxide followed by chemical reduction using hydrazine hydrate.99 In the presence of low concentrations of hydrogen peroxide, horseradish peroxidase (HRP) catalyzed the oxidation of graphene oxide, resulting in holes on its basal plane. Their computational studies indicated that HRP was favorably attached to the basal plane rather than the edges of GO, facilitating the oxidation of the basal plane. GO flakes were found full of holes (like a slice of Swiss cheese) after 9 days of the enzymatic oxidation. Holey GO could be reduced to form holey reduced graphene oxide (hRGO) using hydrazine hydrate. FET transport measurements indicated that hRGO possessed p-type semiconducting behavior with a positive shift in the Dirac point, unlike the ambipolar transfer characteristic of intrinsic graphene. This p-type behavior could make hRGO a potentially attractive material for FET chemical sensors. Indeed, hRGO decorated with Pt nanocrystals showed improved response to hydrogen gas since the presence of holes in the basal plane created more edges with oxygen functionalities.17 Pt-hRGO devices also possessed high selectivity toward hydrogen gas, which could be further exploited to develop ultrasensitive gas sensors or high efficiency catalyst membranes.
UV-assisted photodegradation of graphene oxide sheets using a vertically aligned ZnO nanorod array as a template resulted in graphene oxide nanomeshes with a pore size of 200 nm.100 Chemical reduction of graphene oxide by hydrazine then led to GNMs with an energy gap of ∼1.2 eV, although charge mobility could be low due to the defective nature of RGO.
4.2 Engineering graphene electronic properties through doping and surface modification
Chemical doping can tune the electronic properties of graphene, such as the bandgap and the type of charge carriers (p-type or n-type). Substitutional doping can be achieved by substituting carbon atoms in the graphene honeycomb lattice with foreign atoms with a different number of valence electrons (e.g., nitrogen, boron, and fluorine). The replacement of carbon atoms with foreign atoms could disrupt the sp2 hybridization of carbon atoms.101
Graphene can react with atomic hydrogen in a cold hydrogen plasma to form hydrogenated graphene.102 Unlike graphene, hydrogenated graphene is an insulator. This hydrogenated graphene derivative is crystalline and retains the hexagonal lattice, but its period becomes markedly shorter than that of graphene. Therefore, graphene can be a robust atomic-scale scaffold, on the basis of which new 2D crystals with designed electronic and other properties could be created by attaching other atoms and molecules. By finely tuning the coverage of hydrogen atoms, it would be possible to modulate the bandgap of hydrogenated graphene.102 Balog et al. constructed periodic structures (i.e., regular patterns of hydrogen-covered regions) to create a confinement potential for the carriers in the pristine graphene regions, thereby leading to a bandgap opening.103 They demonstrated that patterned adsorption of atomic hydrogen onto the Moiré superlattice positions of graphene resulted in a bandgap of ∼0.73 eV.103 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations support that the hydrogenation of graphene leads to a bandgap opening. A large bandgap opening in hydrogen-covered regions will lead to an effective potential barrier for the electrons in the clean parts, analogous to the meshed graphene structure.
When multilayer GO films with intercalated water were annealed in vacuum, it was observed that a 2D phase segregation led to oxidized regions with a high oxygen content coexisting with unoxidized graphene-like regions.104 Interestingly, the resulting oxidized structure, named graphene monoxide (GMO), was found to have a quasi-hexagonal unit cell with two carbon atoms bridged by a double-epoxide pair. Presumably, GMO formation occurs because the large number of layers effectively limits the reduction process, and conversion of the remaining oxygen functional groups to a double-epoxide-type configuration is energetically favorable. GMO was predicted to be a semiconductor with a direct bandgap of ∼0.9 eV.104
Graphene is readily p-doped by adsorbates; but for device applications, it would be useful to access the n-doped material. Dai's group fabricated an n-type graphene FET that could operate at room temperature.105 They covalently functionalized individual GNRs with nitrogen species through high-power electrical Joule heating (e-annealing) of GNRs in ammonia gas, leading to n-type electronic doping. The formation of the carbon–nitrogen bond is speculated to occur mostly at the graphene edges because of the high chemical reactivity at the edges. After e-annealing in NH3, GNR FETs turned from p-type to n-type, with an on current of ∼1 μA, on/off ratio ∼105, and a similar sub-threshold slope as the original p-type GNR FETs. Tuning the electronic properties of graphene by chemistry of the edges and/or defects could have a large impact on graphene properties and applications. The ability to control graphene chemistry is an important step toward controlled graphene electronics. Edge doping can be an approach for doping GNR and affect its bulk properties. This technique, combined with precise control of edge shape (i.e., zigzag or armchair), may lead to precise control of GNR device characteristics in the future.
The treatment of graphene with xenon difluoride has led to a partially fluorinated graphene (fluorographene) with covalent C–F bonding and local sp3 carbon hybridization.106 The structural features of the fluorographene caused a bandgap of 3.8 eV, close to that calculated for fluorinated single layer graphene (CF)n. The fluorographene material luminesces broadly in the UV and visible light regions, and has optical properties similar to diamond, with both excitonic and direct optical absorption and emission features. Fluorographene could be used as a new, easily prepared material for electronic, optoelectronic, and energy-harvesting applications. Spatially controlled fluorine doping of graphene has been realized by transferring BCPs with cylindrical microdomains as protective layers onto graphene FETs, followed by CF4 plasma treatments. This controllable fluorine doping led to the tuning of the electron and the hole conduction of BCP-coated graphene FETs.107
Yavari et al.108 reported a facile technique to open a bandgap in graphene on the basis of water adsorption to the graphene surface. The adsorbed water molecules could break the sublattice and molecular symmetries of graphene, thereby opening a gap. A bandgap of ∼0.206 eV was observed by simply exposing graphene to an absolute humidity of ∼0.31 kg of water per kg of dry air.
5 Other methods
Ohta et al. studied the electronic structure of a bilayer graphene and demonstrated that through selective control of the carrier concentration in the graphene layers, the band structure near the Dirac point can be easily tuned by varying the electric field across the bilayer film.38 A tunable electronic bandgap has been demonstrated in electrically gated bilayer graphene.109 Using a dual-gate bilayer graphene FET and infrared microspectroscopy, Zhang et al. demonstrated a gate-controlled, continuously tunable bandgap of up to 250 meV. Xia et al. also fabricated dual-gated bilayer graphene FETs (Fig. 12).33 The bilayer graphene was supported on a Si/SiO2 wafer, which served as a bottom-gate, and a metal top-gate was fabricated using an NFC/HfO2 gate insulator stack. An on/off current ratio of ∼100 was accomplished at room temperature and a bandgap >130 meV was opened up in the bilayer graphene.33
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of bilayer graphene in Bernal stacking. (b) Schematic of the dual-gate bilayer graphene FET. (c) The room temperature transfer characteristics of a dual-gate bilayer graphene FET. Bottom-gate voltage (Vbg) was varied from −120 to 80 V at steps of 20 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to electric field, bandgap opening in bilayer graphene is also possible by molecular doping. Zhang et al. found that the organic molecule triazine is able to form a uniform thin coating on the top surface of a bilayer graphene, which efficiently blocks the accessible doping sites and prevents ambient p-doping on the top layer.110 The charge distribution asymmetry between the top and bottom layers can then be enhanced simply by increasing the p-doping from oxygen/moisture to the bottom layer. At room temperature, the on/off ratio for a bottom gated bilayer FET increased by at least one order of magnitude and the estimated electrical band gap was ∼111 meV. Chemically modifying both the top and bottom sides of bilayer graphene could offer extra pathways for modulating its electronic structure. Park et al. demonstrated bandgap opening in bilayer graphene with two molecular dopants, or “dual molecular doping” (i.e., n-doping from the bottom side while p-doping from the top side).111 The dual doping-induced perpendicular electric fields with opposite directions increased the on/off current ratio of bilayer graphene FETs.
The atomic thinness of graphene makes it amenable to mechanical deformation, which offers an appealing means to control the electronic structure of graphene by strain.112–116 Interestingly, suitable engineering of local strain profiles on a single graphene sheet could theoretically lead to all-graphene electronics.116 However, the magnitude of strain necessary for opening a sizable bandgap in graphene is still controversial. For instance, first-principles calculations by Ni et al. predicted a bandgap of 300 meV for graphene under 1% uniaxial tensile strain;112 whereas Pereira et al. suggested that opening a bulk bandgap in strained graphene requires threshold deformation in excess of 20%,113 and Choi et al. showed the semimetallic nature of graphene could persist up to a uniaxial strain of 30%.115 Further theoretical and experimental efforts are mandatory before strain can be realistically and effectively employed to manipulate electronic properties of graphene.
When epitaxially grown on silicon carbide substrates, graphene can have an energy gap of ∼0.26 eV.117 This gap decreases as the sample thickness increases and eventually approaches zero when the number of layers exceeds four. The origin of this gap is presumably due to the breaking of sublattice symmetry induced by the graphene–substrate interaction.
Forming a nano-sized constriction in graphene can also create a bandgap in graphene. Feedback-controlled electromigration (FCE) has been used to pattern monolayer graphene to form graphene nanoconstrictions.118 FETs based on the graphene nanoconstriction with critical dimensions less than 10 nm exhibited on/off ratios larger than 1000 at room temperature.
6 Summary and perspective
In this article, recent experimental advances in the research of semiconducting graphene materials have been reviewed. The availability of semiconducting graphene with a sizable or even tunable bandgap is essential for many applications, particularly for electronic applications. Combined with its remarkable electrical transport properties, a tunable bandgap in graphene is highly desirable because it would allow flexibility in designing and optimizing electronic devices and can stimulate excitement in electronics, optoelectronics and photonics, biosensing, and solar energy harvesting. With tremendous potential for widespread applications and the desire to continually promote fundamental research, more efforts in the research of semiconducting graphene materials are certainly predictable. The exploration of semiconducting graphene will also inspire more efforts in many related research areas, such as promising 2D dielectric materials (e.g., hexagonal boron nitride), which have a minimal adverse effect on the excellent charge transport properties of graphene and can be integrated as gate dielectrics into semiconducting graphene-based FETs.
Despite extensive investigation in the laboratory, the production of semiconducting graphene is still facing many challenges. For example, fine control over sizes, shapes, and edges of GNRs, GNMs, and GQDs is still a critical issue for the research community. It is also worth emphasizing that, although opening up a band is crucial for obtaining semiconducting graphene, preserving the exceptionally high carrier mobility of graphene is equally important and deserves more attention. Further improvements in synthesis technologies are mandatory for realizing mass production of high-quality (i.e., defect-free) semiconducting graphene at low cost.
Although the history of research in semiconducting graphene is relatively short, the progress has been remarkable and significant developments are expected to take place in the near future. If one day silicon would be replaced in the semiconductor industry, one of the best bets we have now is probably semiconducting graphene.
Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (IIP-1128158) and the US Department of Energy (DE-EE-0003208).
Notes and references K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS . Y. B. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS . A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS . I. W. Frank, D. M. Tanenbaum, A. M. van der Zande and P. L. McEuen, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct., 2007, 25, 2558–2561 CrossRef CAS . A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS . R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS . X. L. Li, X. R. Wang, L. Zhang, S. W. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS . Y. G. Semenov, K. W. Kim and J. M. Zavada, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 153105 CrossRef . S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS . T. Ramanathan, A. A. Abdala, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, M. Herrera-Alonso, R. D. Piner, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, X. Chen, R. S. Ruoff, S. T. Nguyen, I. A. Aksay, R. K. Prud'homme and L. C. Brinson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 327–331 CrossRef CAS . S. G. Wang, J. J. Wang, P. Miraldo, M. Y. Zhu, R. Outlaw, K. Hou, X. Zhao, B. C. Holloway, D. Manos, T. Tyler, O. Shenderova, M. Ray, J. Dalton and G. McGuire, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 183103 CrossRef . F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS . J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Q. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS . G. H. Lu, L. E. Ocola and J. H. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 083111 CrossRef . J. D. Fowler, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, Y. Yang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 301–306 CrossRef CAS . G. H. Lu, S. Park, K. H. Yu, R. S. Ruoff, L. E. Ocola, D. Rosenmann and J. H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1154–1164 CrossRef CAS . H. Vedala, D. C. Sorescu, G. P. Kotchey and A. Star, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2342–2347 CrossRef CAS . S. Mao, G. H. Lu, K. H. Yu, Z. Bo and J. H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS . Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi and K. Matsumoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18012–18013 CrossRef CAS . J. Balapanuru, J. X. Yang, S. Xiao, Q. L. Bao, M. Jahan, L. Polavarapu, J. Wei, Q. H. Xu and K. P. Loh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6549–6553 CrossRef CAS . S. Patchkovskii, J. S. Tse, S. N. Yurchenko, L. Zhechkov, T. Heine and G. Seifert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10439–10444 CrossRef CAS . N. Park, S. Hong, G. Kim and S. H. Jhi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8999–9003 CrossRef CAS . D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson and A. I. Lichtenstein, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2008, 77, 035427 CrossRef . S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. E. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS . X. Wang, L. J. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS . P. Blake, P. D. Brimicombe, R. R. Nair, T. J. Booth, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, L. A. Ponomarenko, S. V. Morozov, H. F. Gleeson, E. W. Hill, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1704–1708 CrossRef . S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS . S. De, P. J. King, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, E. M. Doherty, Y. Hernandez, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2010, 6, 458–464 CrossRef CAS . D. R. Dreyer, R. S. Ruoff and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9336–9344 CrossRef CAS . K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS . I. Meric, M. Y. Han, A. F. Young, B. Ozyilmaz, P. Kim and K. L. Shepard, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 654–659 CrossRef CAS . P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4285–4294 CrossRef CAS . F. N. Xia, D. B. Farmer, Y. M. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 715–718 CrossRef CAS . K. Kim, J. Y. Choi, T. Kim, S. H. Cho and H. J. Chung, Nature, 2011, 479, 338–344 CrossRef CAS . D. Zhan, J. Yan, L. Lai, Z. Ni, L. Liu and Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4055–4069 CrossRef CAS . P. R. Wallace, Phys. Rev., 1947, 71, 622–634 CrossRef CAS . A. H. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef . T. Ohta, A. Bostwick, T. Seyller, K. Horn and E. Rotenberg, Science, 2006, 313, 951–954 CrossRef CAS . M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 326–333 CrossRef CAS . M. Y. Han, B. Ozyilmaz, Y. B. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef . D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Dimiev, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458, 872–U875 CrossRef CAS . T. Shimizu, J. Haruyama, D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosinkin, J. M. Tour, K. Hirose and K. Suenaga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 45–50 CrossRef CAS . L. Y. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. R. Wang, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877–880 CrossRef CAS . X. R. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 661–665 CrossRef CAS . J. W. Bai, X. F. Duan and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2083–2087 CrossRef CAS . A. Sinitskii and J. M. Tour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 103106 CrossRef . J. W. Bai, X. Zhong, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 190–194 CrossRef CAS . M. Kim, N. S. Safron, E. Han, M. S. Arnold and P. Gopalan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1125–1131 CrossRef CAS . X. G. Liang, Y. S. Jung, S. W. Wu, A. Ismach, D. L. Olynick, S. Cabrini and J. Bokor, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2454–2460 CrossRef CAS . A. Sinitskii and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14730–14732 CrossRef CAS . L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 356–358 CrossRef CAS . K. Nakada, M. Fujita, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 17954–17961 CrossRef CAS . Z. H. Chen, Y. M. Lin, M. J. Rooks and P. Avouris, Physica E, 2007, 40, 228–232 CrossRef CAS . P. Shemella, Y. Zhang, M. Mailman, P. M. Ajayan and S. K. Nayak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 042101 CrossRef . L. Liao, J. W. Bai, R. Cheng, Y. C. Lin, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1917–1921 CrossRef CAS . L. Liao, J. W. Bai, Y. C. Lin, Y. Q. Qu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1941–1945 CrossRef CAS . X. Y. Yang, X. Dou, A. Rouhanipour, L. J. Zhi, H. J. Rader and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4216–4217 CrossRef CAS . J. Campos-Delgado, J. M. Romo-Herrera, X. Jia, D. A. Cullen, H. Muramatsu, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, Z. Ren, D. J. Smith, Y. Okuno, T. Ohba, H. Kanoh, K. Kaneko, M. Endo, H. Terrones, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2773–2778 CrossRef CAS .  Carbon Nanotubes: Advanced Topics in the Synthesis, Structure, Properties and Applications, ed. A. Jorio, M. S. Dresselhaus and G. Dresselhaus,  2008 Search PubMed . Z. X. Zhang, Z. Z. Sun, J. Yao, D. V. Kosynkin and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13460–13463 CrossRef CAS . A. L. Higginbotham, D. V. Kosynkin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Z. Sun and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2059–2069 CrossRef CAS . K. A. Ritter and J. W. Lyding, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 235–242 CrossRef CAS . X. T. Jia, J. Campos-Delgado, M. Terrones, V. Meunier and M. S. Dresselhaus, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 86–95 RSC . J. J. Palacios, J. Fernandez-Rossier, L. Brey and H. A. Fertig, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2010, 25, 033003 CrossRef . S. Dutta and S. K. Pati, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8207–8223 RSC . J. W. Bai and Y. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 70, 341–353 CrossRef . S. S. Datta, D. R. Strachan, S. M. Khamis and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1912–1915 CrossRef CAS . L. C. Campos, V. R. Manfrinato, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, J. Kong and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2600–2604 CrossRef CAS . L. Ci, Z. P. Xu, L. L. Wang, W. Gao, F. Ding, K. F. Kelly, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 116–122 CrossRef CAS . L. J. Ci, L. Song, D. Jariwala, A. L. Elias, W. Gao, M. Terrones and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4487–4491 CrossRef CAS . A. L. Elias, A. R. Botello-Mendez, D. Meneses-Rodriguez, V. J. Gonzalez, D. Ramirez-Gonzalez, L. Ci, E. Munoz-Sandoval, P. M. Ajayan, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 366–372 CrossRef CAS . T. H. Han, Y. K. Huang, A. T. L. Tan, V. P. Dravid and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15264–15267 CrossRef CAS . X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS . W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, M. Ruan, M. Sprinkle, X. B. Li, Y. K. Hu, B. Q. Zhang, J. Hankinson and E. Conrad, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 16900–16905 CrossRef CAS . H. C. Kim, S. M. Park and W. D. Hinsberg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 146–177 CrossRef CAS . D. Y. Pan, J. C. Zhang, Z. Li and M. H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734–738 CrossRef CAS . J. H. Shen, Y. H. Zhu, C. Chen, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2580–2582 RSC . J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Zong, J. Zhang and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 97–101 RSC . R. L. Liu, D. Q. Wu, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15221–15223 CrossRef CAS . J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. H. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. B. Zhan, G. H. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS . X. Yan, X. Cui and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS . Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Q. Shi, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS . J. Lu, P. S. E. Yeo, C. K. Gan, P. Wu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 247–252 CrossRef CAS . S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS . A. Lerf, H. Y. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS . W. Cai, R. D. Piner, F. J. Stadermann, S. Park, M. A. Shaibat, Y. Ishii, D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, S. J. An, M. Stoller, J. An, D. Chen and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2008, 321, 1815–1817 CrossRef CAS . K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1015–1024 CrossRef CAS . G. Eda, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. Kim and M. Chhowalla, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15768–15771 CAS . T. Gokus, R. R. Nair, A. Bonetti, M. Bohmler, A. Lombardo, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and A. Hartschuh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3963–3968 CrossRef CAS . Z. T. Luo, P. M. Vora, E. J. Mele, A. T. C. Johnson and J. M. Kikkawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 111909 CrossRef . D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, G. Bozoklu, S. Park, M. Stoller, R. D. Piner, S. Stankovich, I. Jung, D. A. Field, C. A. Ventrice and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2009, 47, 145–152 CrossRef CAS . A. Bagri, C. Mattevi, M. Acik, Y. J. Chabal, M. Chhowalla and V. B. Shenoy, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 581–587 CrossRef CAS . Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS . K. Erickson, R. Erni, Z. Lee, N. Alem, W. Gannett and A. Zettl, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4467–4472 CrossRef CAS . C. Gomez-Navarro, J. C. Meyer, R. S. Sundaram, A. Chuvilin, S. Kurasch, M. Burghard, K. Kern and U. Kaiser, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1144–1148 CrossRef CAS . X. L. Li, G. Y. Zhang, X. D. Bai, X. M. Sun, X. R. Wang, E. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS . V. Lopez, R. S. Sundaram, C. Gomez-Navarro, D. Olea, M. Burghard, J. Gomez-Herrero, F. Zamora and K. Kern, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4683–4686 CrossRef CAS . C. Y. Su, Y. P. Xu, W. J. Zhang, J. W. Zhao, A. P. Liu, X. H. Tang, C. H. Tsai, Y. Z. Huang and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5285–5292 CrossRef CAS . G. P. Kotchey, B. L. Allen, H. Vedala, N. Yanamala, A. A. Kapralov, Y. Y. Tyurina, J. Klein-Seetharaman, V. E. Kagan and A. Star, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2098–2108 CrossRef CAS . O. Akhavan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4174–4180 CrossRef CAS . H. T. Liu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335–3345 RSC . D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. M. G. Mohiuddin, S. V. Morozov, P. Blake, M. P. Halsall, A. C. Ferrari, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2009, 323, 610–613 CrossRef CAS . R. Balog, B. Jorgensen, L. Nilsson, M. Andersen, E. Rienks, M. Bianchi, M. Fanetti, E. Laegsgaard, A. Baraldi, S. Lizzit, Z. Sljivancanin, F. Besenbacher, B. Hammer, T. G. Pedersen, P. Hofmann and L. Hornekaer, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 315–319 CrossRef CAS . E. C. Mattson, H. H. Pu, S. M. Cui, M. A. Schofield, S. Rhim, G. H. Lu, M. J. Nasse, R. S. Ruoff, M. Weinert, M. Gajdardziska-Josifovska, J. H. Chen and C. J. Hirschmugl, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9710–9717 CrossRef CAS . X. R. Wang, X. L. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, H. L. Wang, J. Guo and H. J. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768–771 CrossRef CAS . K. J. Jeon, Z. Lee, E. Pollak, L. Moreschini, A. Bostwick, C. M. Park, R. Mendelsberg, V. Radmilovic, R. Kostecki, T. J. Richardson and E. Rotenberg, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1042–1046 CrossRef CAS . S. R. Guo, M. Ghazinejad, X. D. Qin, H. X. Sun, W. Wang, F. Zaera, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Small, 2012, 8, 1073–1080 CrossRef CAS . F. Yavari, C. Kritzinger, C. Gaire, L. Song, H. Gullapalli, T. Borca-Tasciuc, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Small, 2010, 6, 2535–2538 CrossRef CAS . Y. B. Zhang, T. T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nature, 2009, 459, 820–823 CrossRef CAS . W. J. Zhang, C. T. Lin, K. K. Liu, T. Tite, C. Y. Su, C. H. Chang, Y. H. Lee, C. W. Chu, K. H. Wei, J. L. Kuo and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7517–7524 CrossRef CAS . J. Park, S. B. Jo, Y. J. Yu, Y. Kim, W. Yang, W. H. Lee, H. H. Kim, B. H. Hong, P. Kim, K. Cho and K. S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 407–411 CrossRef CAS . Z. H. Ni, T. Yu, Y. H. Lu, Y. Y. Wang, Y. P. Feng and Z. X. Shen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2301–2305 CrossRef CAS . V. M. Pereira, A. H. C. Neto and N. M. R. Peres, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 80, 045401 CrossRef . F. Guinea, M. I. Katsnelson and A. K. Geim, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 30–33 CrossRef CAS . S. M. Choi, S. H. Jhi and Y. W. Son, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2010, 81, 081407 CrossRef . V. M. Pereira and A. H. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 046801 CrossRef . S. Y. Zhou, G. H. Gweon, A. V. Fedorov, P. N. First, W. A. De Heer, D. H. Lee, F. Guinea, A. H. C. Neto and A. Lanzara, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 770–775 CrossRef CAS . Y. Lu, B. Goldsmith, D. R. Strachan, J. H. Lim, Z. T. Luo and A. T. C. Johnson, Small, 2010, 6, 2748–2754 CrossRef CAS . 
Footnotes† Current address: Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alaska Anchorage, Anchorage, AK 99508, USA.‡ Current address: Department of Chemical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Ganhua Lu	Ganhua Lu received his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in 2007, and worked as a Research Associate in Prof. Junhong Chen's group. His research is focused on synthesis of hybrid nanostructures of nanocarbons (i.e., graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)) decorated with nanocrystals (NCs) and their use for environmental and energy devices. He has demonstrated a SnO2 NC–CNT platform for ambient gas sensing (highlighted in Advanced Materials) and chemical sensors based on reduced graphene oxide. He is currently an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Alaska Anchorage.
Kehan Yu	Kehan Yu received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in Physics from Fudan University (China) in 2004 and 2007, respectively. In 2012, he received his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee under the supervision of Prof. Junhong Chen. His research mainly focuses on carbon nanomaterials, especially on vertically oriented graphene, including synthesis and applications in photovoltaics, sensing, and optoelectronics. He is currently a Postdoctoral Scholar at Case Western Reserve University.
Zhenhai Wen	Zhenhai Wen received his M.S. degree from Beijing University of Technology in 2004 and Ph.D. degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. He then worked as a lecturer at Nanchang Hangkong University. In 2009, he worked as a Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellow at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Germany. Since 2010, he has been a Postdoctoral Researcher in Prof. Junhong Chen's group at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. His current research interest is mainly in the design and synthesis of functional nanostructures and their applications in electrochemical sensing, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, electrocatalysts, photocatalysts, and dye-sensitized solar cells.
Junhong Chen	Junhong Chen received his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Minnesota in 2002, followed by postdoctoral research in Chemical Engineering at California Institute of Technology. In 2003, he joined the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee as an Assistant Professor in Mechanical Engineering, and was promoted to Associate Professor and Professor in 2008 and 2011, respectively. His current research interests include synthesis and assembly of nanoparticles, nanocarbons, and their hybrid nanomaterials for sustainable energy and environment (www.uwm.edu/~jhchen/). Dr Chen is also the Director of NSF I/UCRC on Water Equipment and Policy and the founder of NanoAffix Science, LLC.

 	Fig. 1  (a) The hexagonal lattice of graphene has a basis of two carbon atoms (A and B) per unit cell. (b) The π and π* bands in graphene. (c) The linear dispersion and the band structure at the Dirac point. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

GNR	E-beam lithography	∼15 nm	—	∼0.2	 40 
Oxidative unzipping of CNTs	∼100 nm	—	∼0.050	 41 and 42 
Unzipping CNTs by plasma etching	7 nm	>100	—	 43 
E-beam lithography + etching	<5 nm	∼104	∼0.4	 44 
Nanowire lithography	6 nm	∼160	0.1–0.5	 45 
Nanowire lithography	<10 nm	>50	—	 46 
 	 	 	 	 	 
GNM	Block copolymer lithography	5 nm	>100	—	 47 
Block copolymer lithography	<20 nm	40 (RT)	0.1	 48 
200 (105 K)
Nanoimprint	<10 nm	100 (RT)	0.14	 49 
Nanosphere lithography	<20 nm	10	0.05	 50 
 	 	 	 	 	 
GQD	E-beam lithography	100 nm	—	0.5	 51 

 	Fig. 2  (a) GNRs covered by a protective HSQ etch mask. Devices with parallel GNRs of different widths (b), and GNRs in different crystallographic directions of uniform width (c). (d) Bandgap (Eg) vs. channel width (W): for four devices (P1–P4) of the parallel type and two (D1, D2) with varying orientation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2007 by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  AFM images of a set of GNRs: before (a) and after gas-phase chemical etching (b). The GNRs were narrowed down uniformly from ∼20 to ∼8 nm with no obvious breaks. The etching conditions were ∼25 mTorr O2 in the presence of ∼1 Torr 10% NH3 in Ar at 800 °C for 10 min. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Chemistry (ref. 44), copyright (2010).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the lengthwise unzipping of a CNT to form a nanoribbon. (b) TEM images showing the conversion of MWCNTs (left) into oxidized nanoribbons (right). Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 41), copyright (2009).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of producing GNRs from MWCNTs. Varying etching times could result in different products: GNRs with CNT cores after etching for a short time t1 (d); tri-, bi- and mono-layer GNRs after etching for times t2, t3 and t4, respectively (t4 > t3 > t2 > t1; (e–g)). Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 43), copyright (2009).	 

 	Fig. 6  Formation of crystallographically oriented nanoribbons by Ni NP etching. Schematics and AFM images of (a) a nanoribbon created by a NP which turns twice, forming two angles of 120°; (b) a nanoconstriction formed by a NP which turns sharply near another trench to form a 60° angle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Process to make a free-standing GNM: (a) graphene on a SiO2 substrate; (b) graphene covered with SiOx (as a protecting layer and grafting substrate for the subsequent patterning) and block-copolymer poly(styreneblock-methyl methacrylate) (P(S-b-MMA)); (c) annealing the block-copolymer film to form the porous polystyrene (PS) matrix, which acts as the nanomesh template; (d) SiOx nanomesh hard mask formed by reactive ion etching of the PS film; (e) O2 plasma to etch away graphene uncovered by the SiOx mask; (f) a GNM by removing the SiOx mask with HF; (g) a free-standing GNM by lifting off the underlying SiO2. TEM images of GNMs with varying neck widths and periodicities (scale bars: 100 nm): (h–j) GNMs with a periodicity of 39 nm and neck widths of 14.6 nm (h), 11.2 nm (i), and 7.1 nm (j) and (k) GNM with a periodicity of 27 nm and a neck width of 9.3 nm. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 47), copyright (2010).	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic for the fabrication of GNMs by patterning graphene with self-assembled monolayers of monodisperse colloidal microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic for preparing GQDs using HBC as a carbon source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Scheme of oxidation cutting of a carbon fiber (CF) into GQDs. (b) TEM images of GQDs (inset is the HRTEM of GQDs). (c) AFM image of GQDs. (d) Size and height distributions of GQDs. (e) HRTEM image of the edge of a GQD. (f) Schematic of the relative zigzag and armchair directions in graphene. (g) Schematic of the edge termination of the HRTEM image in (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society600 dpi in TIF format)??>.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic showing the steaming process to produce nanoporous GO. (b and c) AFM images showing the same GO sheet before and after being steamed for 10 h, respectively (scale bars: 2 μm). (d) Height profiles along the white line in (b) and (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of bilayer graphene in Bernal stacking. (b) Schematic of the dual-gate bilayer graphene FET. (c) The room temperature transfer characteristics of a dual-gate bilayer graphene FET. Bottom-gate voltage (Vbg) was varied from −120 to 80 V at steps of 20 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnotes
† Current address: Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alaska Anchorage, Anchorage, AK 99508, USA.
‡ Current address: Department of Chemical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
