The role of molecular fluorophores in the photoluminescence of carbon dots derived from citric acid: current state-of-the-art and future perspectives  ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR03176K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR03176K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 14368-14384The role of molecular fluorophores in the photoluminescence of carbon dots derived from citric acid: current state-of-the-art and future perspectives†

        
          
            Wiktor 
            Kasprzyk
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Tomasz 
            Świergosz
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Piotr P. 
            Romańczyk
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jochen 
            Feldmann
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Jacek K. 
            Stolarczyk
          
          
        
      cd
aDepartment of Biotechnology and Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Cracow University of Technology, Warszawska 24, 31-155 Kraków, Poland. E-mail: wiktor.kasprzyk@pk.edu.pl
bDepartment of Chemical Technology and Environmental Analysis, Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Cracow University of Technology, Warszawska 24, 31-155 Kraków, Poland
cChair for Photonics and Optoelectronics, Nano-Institute Munich, Department of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Königinstrasse 10, Munich, 80539, Germany
dSmoluchowski Institute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, Łojasiewicza 11, 30-348 Krakow, Poland
Received 
      9th June 2022
    , Accepted 15th September 2022First published on 15th September 2022AbstractCarbon dots (CDs), an emerging class of nanomaterials, have attracted considerable attention due to their intriguing photophysical properties. Despite their indisputable potential of utilization in many fascinating areas of research and life, some fundamental aspects concerning their structure and the origin of their photoluminescence (PL) properties still await clarification. The mechanism of PL emission of CDs is associated with their structure, which is dependent on the carbonization process. At the initial stages of CD synthesis via a bottom-up approach, molecular fluorophores are considered to dominate the optical characteristics of the resulting nanomaterials. In this review, the recent progress in the use of molecular state theory for explanation of the structure–property relationship in CDs is summarized. This review focuses exclusively on the molecular fluorophores existing in nanomaterials prepared from citric acid (CA) as one of the most frequent carbon sources reported for the bottom-up synthesis of CDs. Consequently, the most relevant transformations of CA and the history of molecular fluorophores derived from it are described, followed by an in-depth discussion on their relevance in understanding the specific photophysical properties of blue-, green-, and red-emitting CDs. Finally, the challenging issues and future perspectives of molecular state PL mechanism exploration in CDs are highlighted.Wiktor KasprzykWiktor Kasprzyk is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology at the Cracow University of Technology. He received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Cracow University of Technology in 2016. Currently, his research interests are focused on the design and synthesis of novel fluorophores and carbon dots as well as on the development of biodegradable polymers for vascular tissue engineering. He is a member of the Polish Chemical Society, the Polish Society of Biomaterials and the Association for Microwave Power in Europe for Research and Education.Tomasz ŚwiergoszTomasz Świergosz (1986–2022) was a Researcher of Materials, Environmental and Engineering Science at the Cracow University of Technology in the Department of Analytical Chemistry, Poland. His research interests were in the area of active organic and macromolecular materials, particularly the supramolecular chemistry of functional dyes and π-conjugated systems, molecular self-assembly, nanostructures, and molecular probes, and synthesis and characterization of polymers for environmental applications.Piotr P. RomańczykPiotr P. Romańczyk is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology at the Cracow University of Technology. He received his MSc in chemistry from Jagiellonian University, followed by a PhD from the Cracow University of Technology in 2007, and in 2016 he completed his habilitation (DSc) at the Gdańsk University of Technology. His research interests are in the areas of computational chemistry, noncovalent interactions, molecular electrochemistry, (bio)coordination chemistry, and recently, optical properties of organic dyes and fluorophores. He enjoys classical music, theatre, and photography.Jochen FeldmannJochen Feldmann received his PhD in physics from the Philipps-Universität in Marburg, Germany. He holds the Chair of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the Dept. of Physics at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität in Munich and since 2012 he has been a member of the German Academy of Science (Leopoldina). His research focuses on understanding and applying the interaction of tailored nanosystems with light, e.g. dynamics of optically excited charge carriers in hybrid semiconductor nanocrystals, solar water splitting and nano- and bioplasmonics.Jacek K. StolarczykJacek K. Stolarczyk received his PhD in chemistry from the Silesian University of Technology in Gliwice, Poland. He carried out postdoctoral research at University College Dublin and Dublin City University in Ireland. He then became a group leader in the Chair of Photonics and Optoelectronics in the Department of Physics at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU). Recently, he joined Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Poland as a professor at the Dept. of Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science. His research interests include inorganic and organic nanoparticles and in particular photocatalytic solar fuel generation and other green energy applications with semiconductor nanocrystals.
Introduction
Carbon dots (CDs) are fluorescent nanoparticles of size typically <20 nm, first discovered in 2004 by Xu et al. as a side product during the electrophoretic separation of carbon nanotubes.1 Surface passivation of these CDs with nonfluorescent amino-PEG resulted in nanomaterials exhibiting intriguing photophysical properties.2 Since then CDs have started to slowly gain more and more attention, until a breakthrough in 2008 when the first bottom-up approaches for their synthesis from CA salts were successfully elaborated.3,4 The latter caused almost an exponential increase in the number of reports published on the synthesis methods and optical properties of CDs, making them one of the hottest research topics in nanoscience.5 Furthermore, CDs have been proven to perform well in many applications (e.g., bioimaging,6 selective sensing,7 theranostics,8,9 production of LEDs,10 energy conversion,11,12 and photocatalyzed hydrogen evolution13–15) paving the path for more environmentally-benign alternatives to the traditional semiconductor nanocrystal quantum dots.16
In 2016, Cayuela et al. classified CDs into three categories in terms of their structures and methods used for their synthesis – graphene quantum dots (GQDs), carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and carbon nanodots (CNDs);17 in addition, polymer dots (PDs) and carbonized PDs were introduced.18,19 GQDs and CQDs typically show a fingerprint of the crystal lattice and both can be obtained via top-down and bottom-up methods, while CNDs and PDs exhibit amorphous structures and can be prepared through the solvothermal treatment of small organic molecules.19
Among a great number of possible precursors studied in the bottom-up synthesis of CDs, CA and its salts have been the most frequently reported due to their high availability and ease of preparing materials exhibiting interesting luminescence properties.20–24 In the early stages of CD development, a vast number of published works were focused mainly on the synthesis of CDs emitting in the blue range of the electromagnetic spectrum with the highest fluorescence quantum yields reaching near-unity.25,26 The relatively quick progress in the synthesis of blue-emitting CDs prompted the researchers working in this field to further improve the optical properties of the resulting nanomaterials. Thus, pushing the PL emission of CDs increasingly into red and infrared regions became the intuitive direction enabling further advancement of the field. Indeed, over the last few years, CDs exhibiting green, orange, red and infrared PL emission have been frequently reported.19,27–31 All the recent developments in the elaboration of CDs with red-shifted absorption and PL emission might become a milestone for more advanced applications of CDs in the biomedical field, catalysis and energy conversion.32–34
Despite the indisputable potential of CDs for utilization in many fascinating areas of research and life, some fundamental aspects concerning their structure and the origin of their luminescence properties remain to be clarified. At the moment, the insufficient knowledge about the structure–property relationships of CDs seems to be the most serious barrier hindering the successful design and further progress of these promising nanomaterials. The goal might appear easily achievable at a glance; however, having in mind the huge diversity of precursors and synthetic and purification protocols reported for the bottom-up synthesis of CDs on the one hand, and the number of different hypotheses concerning the mechanism of their optical properties on the other, the situation turns out to be more complex. Among the mechanisms of CDs’ PL emission, the most frequently studied ones include the quantum confinement effect,35 the role of surface/edge states,35,36 formation of J- or H-aggregates of polyaromatic hydrocarbons37,38 (for expanded theory of H- and J-molecular aggregates see the review by Hestand and Spano),39 the crosslink enhanced emission effect (CEE) and the presence of molecular fluorophores or their aggregates.40–42 Molecular fluorophores have been proven to be formed in situ during the initial synthesis steps of numerous blue- and green-emitting CA-based CDs,38 and the most recent literature indicates that similar low molecular weight compounds might impart the optical properties of red-emitting CDs prepared from CA and specific amine precursors.21,43,44
The main aim of this review is to summarize the recent literature related to the influence of molecular fluorophores formed in situ during the synthesis of CA-based CDs on the optical properties of the resulting nanomaterials. In the beginning, we describe shortly the most appreciated theories of the mechanism of PL emission from CDs. Then, we focus on the identity of the molecular fluorophores reported as an origin of the optical features of CA-based CDs on the one hand, and we look closer at the progress in their synthesis stimulated by the development of the CD field on the other. This review concludes by presenting the most interesting perspectives on the development of fluorophores and molecular dyes regarding the elucidation of the structure–property relationship in CDs.
PL mechanisms of CDs
A comprehensive understanding of the structure of the CDs in relation to their optical properties is still missing. The large diversity of precursors used for the bottom-up synthesis of CDs, the variety of purification protocols and a number of other factors pose a formidable challenge. Thus far, five different mechanisms of fluorescence emission from CDs have been considered most frequently (Fig. 1):18,35–38,42,45–52
 Fig. 1  PL mechanisms of CDs commonly considered in the literature (see the text for references). 
(i) the quantum confinement effect of conjugated π-domains resulting from carbon core formation.35,53 In principle, in GQDs the whole dot could be the confining regime, but PL is typically found to be dominated by other factors, e.g. defects, substituents or stacking.54 Nonetheless, the size of the sp2-hybridized domains embedded within an amorphous or molecular matrix is often a critical parameter affecting the optical properties of the CDs;53,54
(ii) the surface/edge state regulated by the carbon skeleton hybridization and the bonded chemical groups;35
(iii) the crosslink-enhanced emission effect (CEE) in non-conjugated systems referring to the enhancement in the PL emission intensity originating from the decreased vibration and rotation of cross-linked polymer chains within polymeric dots;55,56
(iv) self-trapping of an exciton in the polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) network resulting in a notable Stokes shift and selective excitation of a collection of different PAHs within each CD;37
(v) molecular state, characterized exclusively in terms of the fluorescent molecules attached to the surface or embedded in the CD.40–42
It is important to note that due to the structural heterogeneity of single CDs, the actual mechanism of their PL emission may be a combination of several contributing mechanisms (e.g., related to the core, surface and molecular states, as typical of CNDs). The excited state phenomena of CDs examined both experimentally and computationally have recently been reviewed.57–60
Citrate-based molecular fluorophores (CBMFs) in CDs
Due to the efforts of many research groups, the maximum PL emission wavelength of CDs has been red-shifted markedly over time; from violet-blue in the first years, through green and finally to the red and near-infrared regions more recently. As indicated previously, the hypotheses describing the PL mechanism of CDs have been evolving in several directions and still remain an open question. At this point, it is instructive to consider what kinds of molecular fluorophores, chemically or non-covalently bonded to the surface of CDs or embedded inside their core, might account for the emission over such a broad range of wavelengths. Below we present an overview of a variety of CBMFs suggested as a molecular origin of high QY PL emission from CDs.
CBMFs – a historical perspective
CA is one of the most prominent biologically occurring carboxylic acids. Chemically, CA is a weak tricarboxylic acid that can be transformed to itaconic, aconitic, citraconic and mesaconic acid through thermal dehydration and/or decarbonylation.61 Due to the formation of five- and six-membered anhydrides upon heating (even in aqueous solution) it reacts readily with alcohols and amines to form esters and polyesters, amides and polyamides, as well as cyclic imides.62 CA by itself is nonfluorescent; however, due to the high diversity of possible transformations, it can be reacted with specific amines to form a rich gallery of highly fluorescent compounds (Scheme 1). The first and the most profoundly studied compound is blue-emitting citrazinic acid – a product of thermal condensation of a six-membered anhydride of CA and ammonia elaborated in 1892 by Sell and Easterfield.63 It is worth pointing out that citrazinic acid is susceptible to photo- and chemical oxidation which leads to the formation of indigoidine derivatives, first described by Kuhn et al. in 1964.64 The latter are considered as blue/violet nonfluorescent dyes that can be synthesized by specific bacteria via known biosynthetic gene clusters.64,65 In the 1970s CA was reacted with aliphatic and aromatic β-amino thiols to give highly fluorescent blue-emitting derivatives of ring-fused dihydrothiazolo 2-pyridones.66,67 The following derivatives were an inspiration for our group in elucidating the chemical structures of fluorophores responsible for the luminescence properties of biodegradable photoluminescent polymers (2013).68 Then, in 2015 a more general scheme for the preparation of fluorescent dyes via thermal condensation of CA and α,β-diamines, β-amino thiols and β-amino alcohols was reported giving access to numerous derivatives of ring-fused 2-pyridones.69 Accordingly, the number of reports on the synthesis of novel derivatives of blue-emitting 2-pyridones have increased noticeably over the years. These compounds were successfully studied in several applications.70–74
 Scheme 1  Summary of low molecular compounds formed from CA; (i) upon thermal treatment and (ii) in reaction with specific nitrogen precursors. 
In 2018, it was found that upon heating of mixtures of urea and citric or citrazinic acid under anhydrous conditions, a green-emitting fluorophore can be readily obtained, identified as (4-hydroxy-1H-pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine-1,3,6(2H,5H)-trione – HPPT).40 This discovery led to many applications based on green emitting carbon dots containing HPPT on their surface.15,20,75–81 Recently, the above-mentioned 2-pyridone-based fluorophores have played an important role in the explanation of the fluorescence properties of numerous bottom-up synthesized CDs prepared from CA as a precursor, which will be further elaborated in the next sections. At this point, it is important to note the synergistic effect of the development of the CD field on the evolution of CA-based fluorescent dyes and their applications.
CBMFs in blue-emitting CDs
In the early stages of CD development, researchers attempted to increase the PL QY of blue-emitting bottom-up synthesized CDs via N-doping. Typically, it was realized through the addition of amine-containing compounds prior to the hydrothermal treatment of carbon dot-forming precursors (CA in the majority of cases). It was found that using specific amines as dopants it is possible to increase the PL QY of the resulting products up to ∼90%.25,26 Later, our group indicated that the reason for this extremely high PL QY-build up is associated with the formation of highly fluorescent 2-pyridone derivatives during the thermal treatment of CA in the presence of α,β-diamines, β-amino thiols, β-amino alcohols, α,γ-diamines, γ-amino thiols or γ-amino alcohols.69 A similar conclusion was drawn by Bai Yang's group after systematic studies on CDs obtained from CA and ethylenediamine82,83 and from CA and o-phenylenediamine.84 Furthermore, Shi et al. confirmed the presence of similar 2-pyridone dyes during the synthesis of CDs from CA and L-cysteine.85 Then, Rogach's group proved that citrazinic acid is the main fluorophore responsible for the blue fluorescence of CDs prepared from CA and urea (recent reports also indicate the presence of oligomeric ureas, 5-oxopyrrolidine-3-carboxylic acid and other blue PL emitting species in these materials).86–89 After careful evaluation of the optical properties of CDs obtained at different reaction times, it was concluded that at the initial stages of CD synthesis molecular fluorophores dominate their absorption and fluorescence characteristics, while for CDs prepared at longer reaction times more and more pronounced contribution of carbonized species becomes apparent (Fig. 2).38 The above studies served as a starting point for investigations on the evaluation of the contribution of CBMFs on the luminescence properties of CDs.21,83,90,91 Despite the presence of 2-pyridone derivatives being established as an elegant explanation for the high PL QY of many CA-based CDs, they fail to rationalize excitation-dependent fluorescence emission commonly observed for CDs. Therefore, a number of research studies have been focused on the possible formation of stacked structures of these CBMFs within the CDs, since it is known that the formation of J- and/or H-aggregates of dyes leads to substantial shifts in their absorption and PL emission spectra.42,45–52,92
 Fig. 2  Frequently reported scenarios of CA-based molecular fluorophores binding within the CD matrix. (A) Covalent bond or adsorption onto the surface of CD: CD1 and CD2 are obtained by solvothermal pyrolysis of CA with amine precursors polyethyleneimine and 2,3-diaminopyridine, respectively. During the reaction, amide bonds and carbonization reactions are considered to affect the surface chemistry of the CDs. The selection of the amine precursor directly affects the occurrence and number of functional groups and fluorescent moieties (fluorophores) in the CD products CD1 and CD2 and at their surface; thereby, changing their optical properties and their response to pH changes.23 Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (B) Aggregates of molecular fluorophores within the π–π stacked graphitic domains of CDs: molecular dynamics simulations showed self-assembly of molecular fluorophores and functionalized PAHs in an aqueous solution, forming quasi-spherical like CDs. Coloring scheme: C-black and cyan; O-red; N-blue; H-white. Water is omitted for clarity.59 Reprinted from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022. (C) Location of molecular fluorophores within the edge domains: excitation and absorption spectra of CDs obtained from CA/UA and the collective explanation for the origin of PL in CDs in the literature, invoking core, edge, and surface bands.48 Reprinted with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
Thus, in 2016 Zhang et al. reported the synthesis of CDs showing strong excitation-independent PL emission in solution (PL QY ∼66%) and strongly attenuated excitation-dependent fluorescence in the solid phase (PL QY ∼1.5%).45 It was stated that the origin of the high PL QY of CD solutions lies in the self-assembly of a CBMF namely 5-oxo-2,3-dihydro-5H-[1,3]thiazolo[3,2-a]pyridine-7-carboxylic acid. In that work, the molecular fluorophore was separated from self-assembled fluorophore-based CDs via dialysis membranes and the PL QY of the free-floating fluorophore fraction was determined to be ∼88%. Photoemission mechanism considerations indicated that CBMF fluorescence in solution follows the push–pull emission mechanism since the CBMF molecule represents a typical donor–π-conjugated-acceptor structure, in which the sulphur-related ring group and the carboxyl group are bridged by the π-conjugated six-membered 2-pyridone ring. On the other hand, time-dependent density functional theory calculations of fluorophore dimers and trimers were performed to rationalize the optical characteristics owing to the molecular aggregation effect in the solid state. Simulations indicated possible π–π stacking interactions between the molecules of 2-pyridone resulting in energy level splitting which in turn decreases the HOMO–LUMO energy gap and suppresses the photoemission. The excitation-dependent PL emission feature of these CDs in the solid phase was rationalized by the substantial reduction in vibrational modes in aggregated systems, which explains the breaking of Kasha's rule.45
In 2017, Sharma et al. for the first time recognized aggregation-induced spectral splitting like molecular fluorophores for CDs.48 They studied the optical properties of both citrazinic acid and CDs at various temperatures, using protic and aprotic polar solvents. Based on these experiments they came up with the conclusion that the generally perceived high energy core-state transitions, involving sp2-networked carbogenic domains shielded from external environments, need to be reassessed since they fail to rationalize the observed fluorescence quenching and spectral shift. Consequently, in accordance with the recorded temperature-dependent PL with excitation at blue- and red-shifted excitation maxima they argued for the simultaneous presence of weak and strong H-aggregates of CDs responsible for their excitation-dependent PL emission in the ensemble.48
Formation of an excimer by two chromophore units leads to exciton self-trapping, observed in molecular crystals and dimers. Accordingly, the exciton distorts or induces reorientation of the molecular geometry. As illustrated in Fig. 3A, this creates a polaron which localizes and stabilizes (traps) the exciton, lowering its energy potentially by hundreds of meV. It was shown by Fu et al. that such an effect, even involving simple polyaromatic hydrocarbons, e.g., pyrene or perylene, could account for a significant Stokes shift observed in many CDs derived from CA.37
 Fig. 3  The proposed models of exciton self-trapping processes in (A) pyrene dimers and (B) H-aggregate as the light-emissive functionality of CDs. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (B) Adapted from ref. 93 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Reckmeier et al. studied the formation of molecular aggregates of citrazinic acid during the ammonothermal synthesis of CDs.52 In the reported experiment, citrazinic acid was formed as a product of the thermal condensation of CA and supercritical ammonia. It was shown that the optical properties of the reaction products obtained in aqueous reaction media correspond to those of citrazinic acid. Meanwhile, for the product derived from ammonothermal mediated reactions, in which supercritical ammonia served both as the substrate and the reaction medium, the absorption, PLE and fluorescence spectra showed distinct features. Thus, the blue-shift of the main absorption peak (from 345 nm for citrazinic acid to 333 nm for the reaction product), significantly increased absorption of the valley at 280 nm together with a clear shoulder of the main absorption peak at 380 nm were all observed. The above new features became even more apparent in the PLE spectra while the PL emission spectra show both single (blue) and double emission peaks (blue and green) depending on the excitation wavelength used. All the above intriguing optical characteristics were ascribed to the formation of π–π stacked aggregates of citrazinic acid ammonium salts as further indicated by FTIR, XPS and TEM analyses. Thus, the distinct features of the absorption and PL excitation spectra were rationalized by the presence of an energy transfer state (295 nm) as well as a higher and lower aggregate state (370 and 435 nm, respectively). Consequently, the average emission lifetimes of aggregated citrazinic acid suggested the existence of three PL emission mechanisms: a trapping mechanism prolonging PL lifetimes in a high energy aggregate state, an energy transfer process from a narrow high energy transfer band to a low energy aggregate state and intrinsic emission from the low energy aggregate state.52
The above works of Sharma et al. and Reckmeier et al. prompted the studies towards a more detailed characterization of the optical properties of possible J and H aggregates formed by citrazinic acid and its derivatives in solution.42,48–51 Thus, experimental data and computational studies demonstrated that citrazinic acid can form in-line aggregates whose spectral features can account for the measured shift and widening of the UV 340 nm absorption band. Consequently, the feasibility of aggregation mediated by H-bonding interaction was rationalized.42
To some extent, the above considerations concerning the formation of H-aggregates complement the PL mechanism proposed by Demchenko et al. who postulated that a fluorescent H-aggregate is formed by side-to-side stacking of aromatic groups resulting in their π-electronic coupling at the particle shell (Fig. 3B).93 As a consequence of the proposed structure, light absorption is a collective event, so H-aggregates of molecular fluorophores located within the shell of CDs act as one excitonic unit exhibiting its characteristic features (strong one-photon absorption, gigantic absorption of multiple photons, short-wavelength position of the absorption band and high transition dipole moment). Among many possible pathways of the propagating exciton relaxation, the emissive electron–hole recombination at the self-trapped site is considered the fastest and the most efficient. The above process favors high efficiency of energy conversion and emission on the one hand and allows the avoidance of dissipative processes associated with the diffusive trapping of excitation energy in weak H-aggregates on the other.93
The above mechanism of PL fluorescence of CDs although very elegant and probable still awaits rigorous confirmation in experimental data especially in terms of the role and specific location of the fluorophore aggregates within the CD structure. There are several reports which attempted the characterization of the specific location of fluorophores in CDs but collectively they do not provide a consistent answer to this important question. Accordingly, Righetto et al. studied the optical properties of CDs synthesized from CA and ethylenediamine using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (TREPR) techniques. They indicated that the highly fluorescent moiety (5-oxo-1,2,3,5-tetrahydroimidazo[1,2-a]pyridine-7-carboxylic acid – IPCA) should not be considered as a part of the CD structure, but rather as a free-floating by-product of the reaction.94 A similar result was obtained by Ramirez-Barroso and co-authors after FCS analyses of the same kind of CD.95 At a glance, the latter conclusion put into question the CD formation mechanisms presented by other groups which suggested the formation of carbon cores at the expense of molecular dyes.38,82,83 In contrast, Das et al. upon consideration of several possible scenarios of the fluorophore (5-oxo-2,3-dihydro-5H-[1,3]oxazolo[3,2-a]pyridine-7-carboxylic acid, the most probable) binding to the CD structure pointed out that it is located inside the non-rigid structure of CDs.96 The conclusion was drawn based on fluorescence anisotropy decay dynamics measurements conducted in solvents of different viscosities and resonance energy transfer dynamics performed with Rhodamine 123 as an electron acceptor.96 Similarly, for dual-emitting CDs prepared from CA and urea various possible locations of the chromophore units were considered, i.e., (i) inside the rigid/amorphous CD matrix, (ii) separately attached on the CD surface by covalent bonds, and (iii) completely isolated free chromophore units.97 The chromophore units within the CDs were ascribed to citrazinic acid (blue PL emission) and HPPT (green PL emissive centers). After analysis of the time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy data and the hydrodynamic diameter of the chromophore centers, it was suggested that blue-emitting units are located inside the interior domain of CDs, while the green one is located at the exterior of the CDs.97
The most recent computational studies performed by the Otyepka group have shed light on the possible influence of the fluorophore location within the carbon dots on the emission characteristics of the nanosystem. Firstly, they indicated that the IPCA fluorophore formed from CA and ethylenediamine during the synthesis of the CDs is able to spontaneously form a flexible π–π dimer (see Fig. 6C) in an aqueous solution with vertical emission energies exhibiting stronger red-shifts compared to the monomer.98 Then, the results of classical all-atom molecular dynamics simulations indicated that IPCA molecules rapidly self-assemble in an aqueous solution into π–π stacked structures, serving as aggregation centers for bottom-up synthesized CDs. Consequently, the interaction and incorporation of IPCA into graphitic CD building blocks (polyaromatic hydrocarbons – PAHs) via π–π stacking were also considered highly probable (Fig. 2B). Thus, it was inferred that the stacked structures formed by self-assembled fluorophores might further be physically incorporated into CDs and finally covalently interlinked via the carbonization process during CD growth.99 In the latest work on this subject, Langer et al. employed a DFT-based hybrid quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical method with electrostatic embedding (QM/MM/EE) to rationalize the optical characteristics of CD structures containing embedded molecules of IPCA. Thus, the simulated PL emission spectra for several CD models in which IPCA was embedded in different locations (Fig. 4) of the CD matrix revealed moderate variations in the PL peak positions (between 400 and 480 nm). This is in line with the experimentally observed broad excitation-independent PL attributed to the presence of molecular fluorophores in the CDs. Moreover, the PL intensity is related to the arrangement of the embedded MFs, and more intense emission was found in the case of H-bonded dimers rather than π–π dimers or single fluorophore molecules.92 Although many efforts have been made to establish both the specific locations of CBMFs within the CD structure and their actual role in the explanation of the photophysical mechanisms governing the optical properties of CDs, the comprehensive and accurate picture of these phenomena is still an open question. One of the most serious reasons for that is associated with frequent insufficient purification protocols aimed at the separation of CDs from free CBMF.100 Not surprisingly, the huge increase in the number of reports on CDs was accompanied by a host of critical issues and misconceptions substantially hindering elucidation of the true nature and rational design of these nanomaterials. In order to stress and address this urgent need Baker et al. proposed highly rigorous dialysis and ultrafiltration methods for purification of the CDs synthesized from CA and urea from CBMFs (such as citrazinic acid and HPPT).101 The authors showed that both the appropriate size of the pores of the dialysis membranes used and the duration of the dialysis process have tremendous impact on the optical and structural characteristics of the resulting retentates and dialysates.101
 Fig. 4  Neutral IPCA inside various CD models used in QM/MM/EE calculations. (a) Monomer embedded in the CDs and partly exposed to water, (b) H-bonded and water-exposed dimers embedded in the CDs, (c) water-exposed dimer in a layer of H-bonded IPCA molecules embedded in the CDs, (d) monomer embedded in a central cavity, (e) stacked dimer embedded in a central cavity, and (f) two H-bonded and water-exposed stacked dimers embedded in the CDs. IPCA molecules in QM regions are depicted using ball-and-sticks, while those in MM regions are drawn as sticks. Color scheme: cyan, green, and grey—C; blue—N; red—O; and white—H atoms. Water is omitted for clarity. Pictograms show the approximate positions of the IPCA molecules of interest (green bars) in the CDs (circles) and the nature of their interactions with other IPCA molecules (black bars). Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
A similar conclusion was drawn after high-pressure liquid chromatography analyses of dialysis fractions obtained at different time intervals where CA-based CDs were subjected to purification.95,102 As a matter of fact, chromatography is another powerful and most promising technique to be used for the purification and separation of CDs.87,97 Accordingly, Michaud et al. conducted detailed studies on the chromatographic separation of the as-synthesized CDs obtained through the hydrothermal reaction of CA and DL-cysteine.103 By applying a gradient mode in column normal-phase and HPLC techniques it was possible to achieve six well-separated fractions from the initial reaction mixture. The most hydrophobic fractions were ascribed to the amorphous carbon cores, followed by less hydrophobic by-products, the free CBMF (5-oxo-2,3-dihydro-5H-[1,3]thiazolo[3,2-a]pyridine-7-carboxylic acid and 5-oxo-2,3-dihydro-5H-[1,3]thiazolo[3,2-a]pyridine-3,7-dicarboxylic acid) and ending up with the most hydrophilic fractions containing fluorophore polymers and CBMFs bound to the carbon cores. The latter was supported by transmission electron microscopy images and steady-state optical characterization of the collected fractions.103 Although the above approach of CD purification still needs further improvements and upscaling in order to be applicable to a variety of different CDs, it seems the most reasonable first step in the adequate characterization of structure–property correlations in CDs. This conclusion is even more prominent in light of recent reports indicating that small molecular by-products and CBFMs such as itaconic acid and TPDCA (5-oxo-2,3-dihydro-5H-[1,3]thiazolo[3,2-a]pyridine-3,7-dicarboxylic acid) can self-organize into nanoparticles upon drying, resulting in the presence of nanoobjects resembling crystalline CDs in TEM images (Fig. 5).47 The crystal structure of TPDCA (Fig. 5D and E) shows, aside from a hydrogen/chalcogen bond network, π–π dimers with a parallel-displaced geometry. The calculations performed by us (Fig. 6, see also footnote‡) reveal similar bonding energies of the TPDCA dimer in both conformations, i.e., in parallel displaced geometry allowing pure π–π interactions and an H-bonded/π–π structure, and the IPCA dimer in the conformation regarded in ref. 98 as the most stable. All these dimers are predicted to be thermodynamically stable (ΔbindG°) at least in the gas phase. In aqueous solution, the estimated ΔbindG° values are only slightly negative for structures shown in panels B and C in Fig. 6 (unpublished results).
 Fig. 5  Self-assembly interactions of CA-based small molecular compounds and fluorophores in solution and in the solid state. (A) Normalized autocorrelation curve for itaconic acid in solution which corresponds to an approximate hydrodynamic diameter of ∼0.9 nm according to the Stokes–Einstein equation. (B) Transmission electron micrograph showing a uniform size distribution with a mean diameter of 3.65 nm of nanoparticles formed upon drying of itaconic acid solution on a TEM grid. The scale bar is 100 nm. HRTEM shows the lattice fringes of the crystalline nanoparticles. Fast Fourier transform analysis of the diffraction pattern shows a d-spacing of 0.21 nm between the lattice fringes. (C) Nanocrystals of TPDCA formed on the TEM grid during the drop drying process resembling commonly observed carbon nanoparticles. The nanocrystals have an average diameter of 7.5 nm and show crystallinity in HRTEM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (D and E) ORTEP packing diagrams of the X-ray TPDCA crystal structure indicating π–π interactions (side view with planes defined by aromatic rings and top view showing the parallel displaced conformation of the π–π dimer) and intramolecular O–H⋯O hydrogen and C–S⋯O chalcogen bonding networks; distances are given in Å. 
 Fig. 6  CAM-B3LYP-D3(BJ)/def2-TZVP gas-phase-optimized geometries of TPDCA and IPCA dimers (side and top views, distances in Å) and bonding energies (in kcal mol−1) calculated using the high-level DLPNO-CCSD(T)/TightPNO/CBS(T-Q) method, see footnote‡. (A) TPDCA dimer in the same arrangement as in its crystal structure (see Fig. 5D and E), (B) TPDCA and (C) IPCA dimers in conformations allowing both H-bond formation and π–π interactions. The starting geometry of the IPCA dimer was taken from ref. 98. Given are electronic and Gibbs energies in gas-phase (or in aqueous solution, in parentheses). Unpublished results. 
CBMFs in green-emitting CDs
CA as a carbon source and urea as a nitrogen dopant form one of the most common pairs of precursors in the bottom-up synthesis of CDs. These materials exhibited high PL quantum yield both in blue and green regions of the electromagnetic spectrum depending on the molar ratio of the reactants and reaction conditions applied for their synthesis. The debate concerning the molecular origin of their efficient luminescence gained much attention after the first reports were published in 2014 by Strauss et al. showing their possible contribution to the optical characteristics of CDs. It was indicated that under high pressure blue emitting CDs are formed exclusively while under atmospheric pressure synthesis of dual-emissive CDs becomes possible.30 Schneider et al. ascribed the origin of high PL quantum yield blue-emission to citrazinic acid and its derivatives.86 However, the explanation of the influence of synthetic conditions on the optical properties of the resulting CDs had remained unknown until our group elucidated the chemical structure of the green emitting fluorophore formed under atmospheric pressure.40 Generally, we showed that in the course of the reaction conducted under ambient pressure, water is being evaporated which enables the transformation of citrazinic acid to HPPT. We depicted two possible reaction mechanisms governing the formation of HPPT molecules, i.e., (i) formation of citrazinic acid or its amide, the addition of isocyanic acid in position 3 of the pyridine ring, and the final imide ring closure or (ii) the formation of citrazinic acid, intermolecular amide formation with urea, and intramolecular condensation and cyclisation with the exclusion of ammonia. In both cases, the presence of water inhibits HPPT formation through the inactivation of specific reactive species characteristic of each of the proposed mechanisms that explain the effect reaction conditions used in the synthesis of blue and green CDs from CA and urea.40
The goal of HPPT structure elucidation was only possible to be achieved through the separation of molecular fluorophores from CDs via dialysis and further purification of the resulting filtrate using preparative reversed-phase HPLC (Fig. 7). Interestingly, it was shown that both the retentate and the filtrate fractions exhibit the strongest PL emission in the green region, thus we inferred that the HPPT fluorophore is likely bound to CDs via non-covalent interactions or covalent bonds.40 Indeed, Bhattacharyya et al. confirmed that green-emitting domains (HPPT most likely) are bound to CDs.97 Firstly, it was shown that both the blue and green emissive domains of the CDs show time-resolved polarized emission, which implies that only specific locations and not the whole CDs are fluorescent. Then, the PL anisotropy decay curves were analyzed which indicated that the green-emitting domain of the CDs showed single exponential decay with a rotational correlation time of 120 ps while the approximated anisotropy decay time for unbound HPPT should not exceed 50 ps.97 The above results directly confirmed the assumption concerning the HPPT location within the structure of CDs. Furthermore, the same group depicted that HPPT units within the CDs are prone to solvatochromism and protonation/deprotonation effects.105 Therefore, it was concluded that green chromophore HPPT molecules are most likely located within the exterior domains of the CD structure.97,105
 Fig. 7  (A) Scheme of the synthesis and purification steps of blue (bCDs) and green-emitting CDs (gCDs).40 (B) HMBC 1H–13C NMR spectrum of the HPPT ammonium salt; the most stable tautomer structure104 is shown with NMR assignments. Adapted from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Detailed studies on the thermal reaction between CA and urea reported by Strauss et al. in 2020 revealed that the composition of reaction products is strongly dependent on the reaction parameters (temperature, time, and the molar ratio of reagents).87 Three main reaction products were reported, i.e., (i) HPPT, (ii) a mixture of blue-emitting conjugated oligomeric ureas or isolated CN ring structures, and (iii) non-fluorescent carbonaceous particles. For example, the highest concentration of HPPT was determined for samples synthesized at 180 °C, 20 min in a 1:3 molar ratio (CA/urea).87 Accordingly, Dutta et al. reported that a further increase in the HPPT concentration within the CDs can be achieved upon addition of acetic acid during synthesis.106 It was assumed that acetic acid reacts with urea to form N-carbamoylacetamide. The latter undergoes a secondary reaction with citrazinic acid resulting in an intermediate molecule that subsequently forms the PL emissive keto isomer of HPPT.106
In terms of optical properties, HPPT shows a strong absorption band at around 405 nm and efficient fluorescence emission in the green region.40 It is worth emphasizing that HPPT is a moderately strong acid in water or methanol,104 and the observed maxima at λabs = 405 nm and λem = ca. 530 nm are in fact due to the [HPPT–H]− monoanion rather than its protonated form (HPPT), as is assumed in the literature.87,106 The absorption band of the latter species is blue-shifted by 55 nm and its emission band is red-shifted by ca. 40 nm (resulting in yellow photoluminescence and a remarkable Stokes shift of over 200 nm) with respect to the monoanion.104 Interestingly, PL QY values determined for pure HPPT differ markedly from those reported for green-emitting fractions collected after the chromatographic separation of CDs (in which the presence of HPPT as the main component was confirmed via NMR experiments). Thus, the PL QY of pure HPPT in aqueous solutions was determined to be in the range of 0.09–0.15 (0.29 in MeOH),40,107 while for the green-emitting fraction it was reported to be around 0.27 (0.70 in MeOH).87 This increase in emissive behavior could be clarified by the possible non-covalent interactions of HPPT with other components of CDs or simply by its immobilization inside the CD decreasing the vibrational modes and thus the nonradiative relaxation rate. Accordingly, Mura et al. suggested surface modification of HPPT containing CDs with organosilane precursors as an effective way for PL QY build-up. It was found that the passivation of green-emitting CDs with an ethanolic solution of 3-(aminopropyl)triethoxysilane inhibits the aggregation of the resulting CDs and gives rise to nanomaterials exhibiting PL QY near unity (in EtOH). In this form, the CDs were found suitable to be integrated into the sol–gel processing of hybrid organic–inorganic transparent films showing intense luminescence.108
Due to the suitable optical properties of HPPT such as relatively high PL QY and broad emission covering a wide range of the visible spectrum, Miller et al. have employed it as a so-called stealth fluorophore in the formation of a supraparticle-based five-level-identification tag.109 The principle behind this idea is that HPPT molecules spray-dried with luminescent lanthanide-doped CaF2 nanoparticles conceal the information encoded with lanthanide metals (Tm, Tb, Dy, Sm). Then in order to read out the encrypted data the formulation is exposed to thermal energy input (temperature or mid-infrared laser irradiation) that decomposes the stealth fluorophore and reveals the PL signals originating from the lanthanides. This strategy provides the next generation of material-based security tags with a high data density and security level that switch information upon readout and can be, therefore, used as a seal of quality.109
CBMFs in red-emitting CDs
Synthesis of CDs emitting in the red or near-infrared regions has recently become a hot topic.110 A lot of effort has been made during the last few years to shift the PL emission of CDs into the so-called biological transparency window since this approach opens new pathways for specialized applications of the CDs especially in photoacoustic imaging, photothermal therapy, photodynamic therapy, bioimaging and drug delivery. The most frequently used precursors for the synthesis of red-emitting CDs include phenylenediamines, aminophenol, resorcinol, CA and formamide/urea mixtures.32
Accordingly, the first red-emitting CDs synthesized from CA were elaborated in 2016 by Sun and co-authors. It was found that applying a microwave-assisted solvothermal treatment of CA solution in formamide and a simple purification protocol facilitates the preparation of CDs emitting at around 640 nm with a respectable PL QY of ∼0.23. Furthermore, the above CDs exhibit low cytotoxicity, two-photon excited fluorescence, a high photothermal conversion efficiency (43.9% under irradiation of a 671 nm laser) and were found suitable for bioimaging of specific organelles in cells, photothermal cancer therapy and specific drug delivery.110 Then, other research groups reported further improvements in the optical properties of red-emitting CDs which enabled them to enter even more specialized and advanced applications of the resulting nanomaterials. The modulation of the optical characteristics of the CDs was achieved by manipulating the reaction conditions, using different or additional amine sources, and by post-synthetic surface modifications.27,28,34,111–120 The latest advancements in the synthetic strategies toward red-emitting CDs, their luminescence properties, and biomedical applications can be found in a recent review article by Li and co-authors.32
Although the quest for elaboration of efficient synthetic protocols for the preparation of red/near-infrared emissive CDs has shown substantial success lately, the principal rules governing both the influence of synthetic parameters on the photophysical characteristics as well as the origin and the types of emissive domains within those intriguing nanomaterials still need clarification. Although, as previously described for blue and green emitting CDs enlarging sp2 conjugation,31,121 increasing the surface oxidation degree36 and doping with heteroatoms28,122 enable a bathochromic shift of PL emission of the resulting CDs markedly. Furthermore, numerous post-synthetic strategies such as surface modification, assembly and exfoliation were also established as efficient strategies in realization of red-shifted CDs.123,124 Despite a certain number of synthetic paths allowing the fabrication of red/near-infrared emissive CDs have been established, the key enabling precise control of their optical properties is far from being achieved since the PL emission of CDs varies depending on their chemical structures, contributions from carbon cores and surface groups and the possible presence of molecular fluorophores.
Red emitting CDs synthesized from CA as the main precursor are the youngest group among the bottom-up synthesized CDs; therefore, the possible presence of molecular fluorophores within their structure contributing to their overall luminescence properties has not been confirmed to date. Nevertheless, the existence of these kinds of emitting centers within the above CDs shall not be neglected taking into account previous experiences with their blue and green-emitting counterparts and recent reports about molecular fluorophores in red-emitting CDs synthesized from phenylenediamines (quinoxalino[2,3-b]phenazine-2,3-diamine).44 Indeed, Liang et al. suggested that the commonly observed absorption and PL emission bands ascribed to red-emitting CDs originate from molecular chromophores formed during the thermal reaction of specific precursors.43 The latter conclusion was drawn after analysis of the absorption spectra of reaction mixtures obtained after the thermal treatment of CA with urea or formamide or with their partially methylated or permethylated derivatives for the carbonization process under conditions similar to and beyond those frequently reported for the synthesis of red-emitting CDs. It was inferred that the long-wavelength absorption and PL emission of the resulting mixtures could only be achieved in the reactions of CA with precursors containing unsubstituted amide groups. Thus, samples with absorption bands above 600 nm were prepared from primary amides as nitrogen precursors (urea and formamide), those with absorption >500 nm were synthesized from secondary amides (N,N,N′-trimethylurea and N-methylformamide), while for mixtures where tertiary amides (N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylurea and dimethylformamide) had been used for the synthesis no distinct absorption bands over 500 nm could be detected. These clear dependencies highlighted above are counter to the principles of carbonization which should generally be less easily affected by minor variations in the chemical structures of the precursor organic molecules (Fig. 8A). Moreover, it was found that after adjustment of the reaction temperature over 260 °C (for CA/formamide and CA/urea reactions), aimed at upturning the carbonization degree, the absorption bands over 500 nm could not be detected which was explained as an effect of carbonized material formation on the expense of molecular fluorophores.43 The latter is in line with the results published by Ehrat et al. for blue-emitting CDs highlighting the fact that at lower synthesis temperatures the emission spectra are dominated by molecular fluorophores.38 However, in order to definitively confirm the thesis proposed by Liang and co-authors, it would be necessary to separate the target molecular fluorophores and elucidate their chemical structures. This would cost substantial efforts due to the extremely high complexity of the reaction mixtures obtained through the chemical treatment of CA and urea/formamide compositions. The following was pointed out by Liang et al.43 and can be observed in LC-DAD (liquid chromatography with a diode array detector) chromatograms prepared in the course of our investigations (Fig. 8B) (unpublished data).
 Fig. 8  (A) Molecular structures of the nitrogen precursors involved in the thermal processing of red-emitting CA-based CDs, with the key functional groups highlighted (green, blue, orange). Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) LC-DAD chromatogram of the post-synthesis mixture of red-emitting CDs; synthesis was conducted according to the reaction conditions elaborated by Sun et al.110 (unpublished data). Color coding of the chromatogram: absorption from the highest to lowest – red/green/blue/violet. (C) Preparation of the photo-oxidized CZA materials and evolution of the steady-state absorption spectra during the transformation of CZA (black) into oCZA-1 (blue, left) and of oCZA-1 into oCZA-2 (brown, right), in air-equilibrated water under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
The possible clue about the chemical structure of the above red-emitting dyes synthesized from CA and urea has been provided recently by Jana et al.15 They reported extraordinarily high photocatalytic dihydrogen generation (15.15–19.70 mmol(H2) g(catalyst)−1 h−1) catalyzed by photochemically altered CDs without any external photosensitizer or cocatalyst. It was inferred that the photooxidation of the CD materials is centered on the citrazinic acid fluorophores, which are present in the CDs and which strongly interact with the carbon dot nanoparticles. It was suggested that upon photooxidation, citrazinic acid gets transformed to indigoidine derivatives within the CDs, which in turn demonstrates their crucial role in boosting the photocatalytic HER activity of CD materials (Fig. 8C).15 It is important to note that indigoidine (nonfluorescent blue dye) exhibits absorption characteristics similar to red-emitting CDs synthesized from CA and urea. At this moment it is difficult to judge whether some unknown indigoidine derivatives are able to emit light in the red/near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum or not but certainly this might be considered as an interesting starting point for future systematic studies.
Effects of pH and the local environment
The photoluminescence properties of CBMFs are affected by pH or solvent properties. Shi et al. tested 5-oxo-2,3-dihydro-5H-[1,3]thiazolo[3,2-a]pyridine-7-carboxylic acid (TPCA) and TPDCA fluorophores in terms of pH-dependent PL emission. Both fluorophores have carboxyl groups attached to their six-membered 2-pyridone rings, while TPDCA has, in addition, a carboxyl group on the five-membered ring (see Fig. 5E). Presumably, the TPCA anion and the TPDCA dianion are the species which give rise to the bright and stable fluorescence in neutral and alkaline aqueous solutions. Protonation leads to a substantial decrease in the PL emission intensity (60–80%) and bathochromic shifts of the PL spectrum (∼30 nm). In the same report, the optical properties of CBMFs were compared with those of CDs obtained from CA and L-cysteine. The authors postulated that TPCA and TPDCA are the origins of fluorescence of the CDs. Indeed, after careful comparison of a variety of optical properties it was concluded that these compounds strongly contribute to the CD characteristics.85 In 2020 Meierhofer et al. studied CDs obtained from CA in which polyethyleneimine (CD1) or 2,3-diaminopyridine (CD2) were used as dopants. Similarly as above, derivatives of 2-pyridone were attributed to the molecular origin of PL emission; however, the optical characterization of the CD solutions indicated some differences in protonation/deprotonation processes in comparison with TPCA and TPDCA. The CDs showed the highest PL QY under slightly acidic conditions (at pH ∼5 PL QY was ∼50% for CD1 and at pH ∼6 it was 55% for CD2), while both increasing and decreasing the pH resulted in lower PL emission intensities. The PL emission spectra exhibited a 20–30 nm red-shift at low pH for both CDs, while under alkaline conditions only CD2 showed a bathochromic shift of 31 nm. It was assumed that the pH dependent properties may be ascribed to the carboxylic, phenolic, and secondary and tertiary amine groups present in the studied CDs and CBMFs.23 The influence of the solvent environment on the luminescent centers within the CDs was also analyzed by Stepanidenko et al. in 2020.125 Although CBMFs were not considered as components of the studied CDs in that report, the work delivers interesting findings about the optical properties of materials obtained in the hydrothermal reaction between CA and ethylenediamine (as indicated by Song et al. where the IPCA fluorophore forms under similar conditions).82 The pH-dependence of the PL emission spectra of the CDs was measured at different excitation wavelengths. It was found that the PL emission spectra of the sample excited at 350 nm show a bathochromic shift of 22 nm with the change of pH from 11 to 1, accompanied by a constant decrease in the PL emission intensity. On the other hand, the PL bands excited at 450 nm show the maximum PL QY at pH 4 and only a minor red-shift of the PL emission spectrum. For solvatochromism studies it was found that the peak position of the PL emission spectrum excited at 350 nm shifts from 445 to 402 nm with decreasing solvent polarity, and significant changes in the shape of the spectrum were observed. Meanwhile, when the band at 405 nm was excited, the PL emission remained almost unchanged. The above observations indicate that the shorter and the longer wavelength emissions of the CDs originate from different PL centers. Interestingly, no influence of hydrogen bonding on the optical properties of the CDs was reported after comparison of the respective spectra in water and acetonitrile. For chlorinated solvents, significant changes in the optical spectra of the CDs were observed. Thus, the PL excitation spectra recorded at 440 and 560 nm were found to change from a non-structured shape for shorter wavelengths to well-structured profiles for lower energy bands which were ascribed to the CD surface states. The above features were claimed as the fingerprint of the presence of PAHs within the structure of the CD. It was concluded that these observations indicate that chlorine-containing molecules can penetrate the surface layers of CDs, resulting in the change of the distance between the luminescent centers. Consequently, a structural model of CA-based CDs was suggested according to which CDs are composed of an sp3-matrix of hydrogenated amorphous carbon with sp2-domains formed by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and their derivatives responsible for their emission.125
Although the studied species differ in the nature and location of PL centers in CDs, the conclusion may be drawn that fluorophores present within the structure of CDs are sensitive to the surrounding environment in terms of their optical characteristics.
Fate of CBMFs during CD synthesis
Spontaneous formation of CBMFs during the synthesis of many kinds of CDs is a relatively well-established fact. However, the answer to a question whether CBMFs bind to CDs remains open. It is assumed that at lower synthesis temperatures CBMFs dominate the optical properties of the reaction mixture, while the presence of carbonized species starts to be more apparent with the progress of carbonization at higher temperatures. This implies that CBMFs are being partly decomposed and serve as seeds during a graphitic core formation stage or are thermally decomposed during carbonization and do not take part in CD formation. An alternative scenario involves covalent or noncovalent binding of CBMFs to carbonized species or polymers. Assuredly, the problem is complicated, and it might happen that only one scenario is true but it is also imaginable that they are all correct. The first thing that should be considered before choosing the scenario is whether a particular CBMF formed during the synthesis of CDs is able to withstand the synthetic conditions necessary to obtain specific species in thermal reactions and/or to react with them. The answers to these questions are not straightforward since there are several amine precursors being reported for the synthesis of CDs leading to different CBMFs and by-products, which in turn gives rise to differences in the chemical reactivity and thermal stability of the reaction components. For example, for simple β- and γ-aminoalcohols (e.g., ethanolamine) and α,β- and α,γ-diamines (e.g., ethylenediamine) reacted with CA at ∼140 °C, the target CBMFs (e.g. 5-oxo-2,3-dihydro-5H-[1,3]oxazolo[3,2-a]pyridine-7-carboxylic acid and IPCA) can be detected and isolated, while at moderately high temperatures (up to ∼250 °C) their presence might be only confirmed as the building blocks of oligomers and polymers which dominate the reaction products. On the other hand, when simple β-aminothiols are used as amine precursors, the formation of CBMFs is much more specific and leads mainly to target free fluorophores at temperatures below 200 °C (with yields up to 60–70%).126,127 Similarly, when aromatic β-amines are used in the reaction, the yield of the resulting CBMFs can also be relatively high. However, the above syntheses should be conducted under reduced pressure or under an inert atmosphere otherwise substantial oxidation of aromatic amines will lead to the derivatives of phenazines, phenoxazines and their polymers. Oxidation can also impart the optical properties of aminothiol-based CBMFs, in which sulfur in the five-membered ring may be transformed to non-fluorescent sulfoxides.127 In addition, citrazinic acid and some of its derivatives known to be formed during the synthesis of CDs might undergo oxidation resulting in colored indigoidine derivatives and polymers. The chemical reactivity is characteristic of specific CBMFs. Generally, the formation of ester and amide bonds of CBMFs possessing carboxyl group(s) was previously confirmed, thus fluorescent oligomer and polymer fractions might be observed in CD reaction mixtures.68,103 The same functional group of blue-emitting CBMFs can take part in the formation of benzoxazole, benzimidazole and benzothiazole rings in a reaction with specific aromatic β-amines.69 On the other hand, decarboxylation of the above CBMFs may occur at a high temperature and give rise to less hydrophilic compounds.126 From our experience, the green-emitting fluorophore HPPT can react via multiple reaction sites with the components of the CD reaction mixture. Thus, a scenario involving covalent bonding of HPPT to CDs, oligomers and/or polymers also appears feasible. A great majority of CBMFs are relatively thermally stable, e.g., HPPT is stable up to a temperature of 300 °C, TPDCA up to ∼250 °C (decarboxylation), and TPDCA oligoesters up to ∼320 °C.87,126 On the other hand, no strict temperature necessary to give rise to carbonized species in the bottom-up approach is specified in the literature. One may refer to the work of the Giannelis group from 2011, who indicated that in the reaction of CA and ethanolamine profound carbonization was observed at 300 °C but the first signs of graphitization could be detected as low as at 230 °C.128
Taking all the above observations into consideration, no obvious hindrances for CBMFs’ covalent bonding or non-covalent interactions with different components of the CD reaction mixture exist. More importantly, it is true for syntheses conducted in a wide range of temperatures. The covalent bonding and/or non-covalent interactions with carbonized species might dramatically impart the optical properties of CBMFs.
Conclusion and perspectives
The number of reports concerning new molecular fluorophores obtained from CA has grown markedly over the past few years, owing to the discovery of their substantial contribution to the luminescence properties of bottom-up-synthesized carbon dots. Indeed, many structures of these fluorophores were suggested as the origin of high PL QY emission of a great variety of blue and green CDs. Despite multitude of publications on this topic, there are still many questions waiting to be answered. The main challenges to be conquered in the field may be encompassed into three interdependent categories, i.e., (i) tools, (ii) design and structure, and (iii) properties.
(i) Tools. Post-synthetic purification of bottom-up fabricated CDs from CBMFs, low-molecular byproducts and unreacted precursors is crucial for reliable characterization of the obtained nanomaterials. Dialysis and chromatography are the most common and the most trusted methods of choice. The selection of filtration membranes with an appropriate molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) and chromatographic gradients is of utmost importance to achieve good separation of the components. These methods are time-consuming and finding more efficient protocols of CD purification would be of great significance, e.g., specific precipitation techniques (used for decades for polymer fractionation) could be an alternative to methods currently in use. To obtain a good material for further characterization its purity needs to be confirmed. The importance of purity evaluation comes from the fact that a vast number of efficient fluorophores show the highest emission intensity at very low concentrations. Commonly, absorption, fluorescence or NMR spectra are being reported as sufficient proof of a thorough purification of CDs from CBMFs; however, sensitivity and/or selectivity of these methods for this purpose is questionable (using standard protocols). Consequently, chromatographic methods coupled with mass spectrometry, UV-vis and/or fluorescence or diode array detectors seem to be the most reasonable solutions. Using appropriate purification and verification methods with caution avoids problems associated with the presence of multiple emission centers or the formation of “ghost” nanoparticles on TEM substrates upon drying, while accessing reliable starting nanomaterial for characterization, comparison and optimization purposes.
(ii) Design and structure. The quest to elucidate the molecular origin of high quantum yield PL emission from citric acid-based CDs showed that this simple and common molecule may still hold undiscovered or forgotten potential for transformation into fascinating fluorescent compounds and (nano)materials. We believe that elaborating efficient synthetic protocols accessing low energy PL emission (yellow, orange, red and NIR) emitters is a natural next step in the CBMF development and could be of the highest importance to elucidate the luminescence properties of red-emitting CDs. Recently, a lot of attention has been devoted to the photophysical consequences of possible J- and H-aggregate formation of citrazinic acid molecules. Expanding these investigations to lower energy emitting CBMFs would complete and confirm the picture of CDs represented as packets of aggregated molecular dyes. Consequently, a comprehensive recognition of the mechanism of aggregation would lead to improvements in the synthetic strategies of the fabrication of nanoemitters exhibiting designed optical characteristics. Although the contribution of CBMFs to the photophysical properties of CDs has been well established, only a few reports give more detailed information about their prospective location on the CD surface/interior and investigate the photophysical consequences of their possible binding modes with CDs. Accordingly, it would be necessary to assess the influence of the specific location of a particular CBMF within a single CD on the absorption and emission wavelengths as well as on the PL QY and lifetime of the resulting systems. The nature of CBMFs binding to CDs should also be explained since two possible scenarios are plausible, i.e. noncovalent interactions and covalent bonding. Actually, the noncovalent binding scenario was frequently suggested in terms of J- and H-aggregation of citrazinic acid in solution as a model CBMF; however, considering the structural plethora of CBMFs it is rather difficult to assume its validity for the whole family of CBMFs. On the other hand, all of the discussed CBMFs can form hydrogen bonds (which collectively may approach the strength of covalent bonds) and influence the absorption and PL emission of a particular emitter. Obviously, the optical properties of CDs depend not only on the photophysics of a CBMF but also on the interactions between different CBMFs located in the same CD as well as on the interactions between CBMFs and the frequently reported aromatic and aliphatic domains.
(iii) Properties. Considering a vast number of published reports on the potential applications of CA-based carbon dots in biomedicine, analytical chemistry, photocatalysis and related fields, it would be of great importance to review the obtained results in terms of the possible contribution of CBMFs. In some cases, it might happen that the intriguing properties of these CDs come specifically from the CBMFs. Thus, systematic studies on the optical properties of CBMFs at different pH values and local environments (solvent effects), their redox and photocatalytic properties, and biological responses need to be compared with those performed on the properties of CDs. Moreover, each CBMF isolated from the post-reaction mixture should be investigated in terms of the possible aggregation phenomenon, photostability (a comparison of a pure CBMF to a CBMF closed in host–guest complexes and to a particular CD) and thermostability (confirmation or exclusion of CBMF's ability to withstand the harsh conditions necessary for the formation of the frequently reported graphitic core of CDs). Finally, the optical properties of polar oligomers and polymers with CBMFs covalently bound to their backbone should be compared with those in which CBMFs were bound via hydrogen bonding (especially important for purified materials in which the formation of carbonized structures was not confirmed). Solving these puzzles may give further insight into the structure–emission property relationship of CDs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange – The Bekker Programme No. PPN/BEK/2018/1/00460/U/00001. It was also supported by the Bavarian State Ministry of Science, Research, and Arts through the grant “Solar Technologies go Hybrid (SolTech)” and by the Strategic Program Excellence Initiative at the Jagiellonian University ‘SciMat’ (Grant U1U/W17/NO/01.04). This work was supported in part by the PLGrid Infrastructure (part of computations was performed on the Ares supercomputer, ACC Cyfronet AGH, Krakow).
References
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S.-Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, V. Georgakilas and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4539–4541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 44, 362–381 RSC .
V. Sharma, P. Tiwari and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8904–8924 RSC .
W. W. Zhao, X. D. Yu, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17407–17414 RSC .
S. Bayda, E. Amadio, S. Cailotto, Y. Frión-Herrera, A. Perosa and F. Rizzolio, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 5183–5221 RSC .
J. Wan, X. Zhang, K. Fu, X. Zhang, L. Shang and Z. Su, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 17236–17253 RSC .
P. He, Y. Shi, T. Meng, T. Yuan, Y. Li, X. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fan and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4826–4832 RSC .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .
C. Hu, M. Li, J. Qiu and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2315–2337 RSC .
H. Luo, Q. Guo, P. Á. Szilágyi, A. B. Jorge and M.-M. Titirici, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 623–637 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, T. Debnath, S. Bhattacharyya, M. Döblinger, J. Feldmann and J. K. Stolarczyk, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5179 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jana, Y. Reva, T. Scharl, V. Strauss, A. Cadranel and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 20122–20132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Huang, W. Cao, B. Mao, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1586–1613 RSC .
A. Cayuela, M. L. Soriano, C. Carrillo-Carrión and M. Valcárcel, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1311–1326 RSC .
S. Tao, T. Feng, C. Zheng, S. Zhu and B. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5182–5188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhi, X. X. Yao, Y. Cui, G. Orr and C. L. Haynes, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20411–20428 RSC .
W. Tomal, T. Świergosz, M. Pilch, W. Kasprzyk and J. Ortyl, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 3661–3676 RSC .
D. Qu and Z. Sun, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 400–420 RSC .
R. Ludmerczki, S. Mura, C. M. Carbonaro, I. M. Mandity, M. Carraro, N. Senes, S. Garroni, G. Granozzi, L. Calvillo, S. Marras, L. Malfatti and P. Innocenzi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 11963–11974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meierhofer, F. Dissinger, F. Weigert, J. Jungclaus, K. Müller-Caspary, S. R. Waldvogel, U. Resch-Genger and T. Voss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 8894–8904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, L. Malfatti and P. Innocenzi, C, 2020, 7, 2 Search PubMed .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, L. Zhang, H. Zhao, Z. Xie, X. Jing, R. E. Haddad, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, D. Roy, M. Mandal, C. Jaiswal, M. Ta and P. K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5092–5099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Miao, D. Qu, D. Yang, B. Nie, Y. Zhao, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
K. Holá, M. Sudolská, S. Kalytchuk, D. Nachtigallová, A. L. Rogach, M. Otyepka and R. Zbořil, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12402–12410 CrossRef .
S. Qu, X. Wang, Q. Lu, X. Liu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 12381–12384 CrossRef .
V. Strauss, J. T. Margraf, C. Dolle, B. Butz, T. J. Nacken, J. Walter, W. Bauer, W. Peukert, E. Spiecker, T. Clark and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17308–17316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qu, D. Zhou, D. Li, W. Ji, P. Jing, D. Han, L. Liu, H. Zeng and D. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3516–3521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, E. V. Ushakova, A. L. Rogach and S. Qu, Small, 2021, 17, 2102325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Y. Yang, S. Lin and L. Xiao, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 15632–15638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, W. Su, H. Wu, T. Yuan, C. Yuan, J. Liu, G. Deng, X. Gao, Z. Chen, Y. Bao, F. Yuan, S. Zhou, H. Tan, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, J. Zhu, A. T. Chen, F. Liu, Y. Zhou, M. Li, X. Zhai and J. Zhou, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2020, 4, 704–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, J. Wang, H. Wan, Y. Zhang and Y. Ning, Nano Today, 2017, 13, 10–14 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, S. B. Yu, J. S. Wei and H. M. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 484–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fu, F. Ehrat, Y. Wang, K. Z. Milowska, C. Reckmeier, A. L. Rogach, J. K. Stolarczyk, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6030–6035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ehrat, S. Bhattacharyya, J. Schneider, A. Löf, R. Wyrwich, A. L. Rogach, J. K. Stolarczyk, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7710–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7069–7163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kasprzyk, T. Świergosz, S. Bednarz, K. Walas, N. V. Bashmakova and D. Bogdał, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13889–13894 RSC .
M. Distaso, V. Hinterberger, D. M. Guldi and W. Peukert, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 24771–24780 RSC .
A. Cappai, C. Melis, L. Stagi, P. C. Ricci, F. Mocci and C. M. Carbonaro, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 4836–4845 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liang, P. Wang, M. J. Meziani, L. Ge, L. Yang, A. K. Patel, S. O. Morgan and Y.-P. Sun, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 4186–4195 RSC .
N. Soni, S. Singh, S. Sharma, G. Batra, K. Kaushik, C. Rao, N. C. Verma, B. Mondal, A. Yadav and C. K. Nandi, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 3615–3626 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Yuan, J. Jiang and S. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4367–4374 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Demchenko and M. O. Dekaliuk, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14057–14069 RSC .
S. Khan, A. Sharma, S. Ghoshal, S. Jain, M. K. Hazra and C. K. Nandi, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 175–180 RSC .
A. Sharma, T. Gadly, S. Neogy, S. K. Ghosh and M. Kumbhakar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1044–1052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mura, L. Stagi, L. Malfatti, C. M. Carbonaro, R. Ludmerczki and P. Innocenzi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 197–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mocci, C. Olla, A. Cappai, R. Corpino, P. C. Ricci, D. Chiriu, M. Salis and C. M. Carbonaro, Materials, 2021, 14, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Stagi, S. Mura, L. Malfatti, C. M. Carbonaro, P. C. Ricci, S. Porcu, F. Secci and P. Innocenzi, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 10958–10964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Reckmeier, J. Schneider, Y. Xiong, J. Häusler, P. Kasák, W. Schnick and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10352–10361 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, Y. Y. Lin, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. A. Chen, I. S. Chen, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 505–509 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Budyka, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 207, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, J. Yu, Z. Jiang, Z. Zhao and Y. Xia, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 27514–27521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, L. Wang, N. Zhou, X. Zhao, Y. Song, S. Maharjan, J. Zhang, L. Lu, H. Wang and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13845–13848 RSC .
Y. Xiong, J. Schneider, E. V. Ushakova and A. L. Rogach, Nano Today, 2018, 23, 124–139 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ai, Y. Yang, B. Wang, J. Chang, Z. Tang, B. Yang and S. Lu, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 839–856 CrossRef CAS .
M. Langer, M. Paloncýová, M. Medveď, M. Pykal, D. Nachtigallová, B. Shi, A. J. A. Aquino, H. Lischka and M. Otyepka, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 22, 100924 CrossRef .
F. Mocci, L. de Villiers Engelbrecht, C. Olla, A. Cappai, M. F. Casula, C. Melis, L. Stagi, A. Laaksonen and C. M. Carbonaro, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 13709–13799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bednarz, M. Lukasiewicz, W. Mazela, M. Pajda and W. Kasprzyk, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 119, 3511–3520 CrossRef CAS .
F. Koper, T. Świergosz, A. Żaba, A. Flis, M. Trávníčková, L. Bačáková, E. Pamuła, D. Bogdał and W. P. Kasprzyk, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 6425–6440 RSC .
T. H. Easterfield and W. J. Sell, J. Chem. Soc. Trans., 1892, 61, 1003–1012 RSC .
R. Kuhn, H. Bauer, H.-J. Knackmuss, D. A. Kuhn and M. P. Starr, Naturwissenschaften, 1964, 51, 409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wehrs, J. M. Gladden, Y. Liu, L. Platz, J. P. Prahl, J. Moon, G. Papa, E. Sundstrom, G. M. Geiselman, D. Tanjore, J. D. Keasling, T. R. Pray, B. A. Simmons and A. Mukhopadhyay, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 3394–3406 RSC .
M. Hori, T. Kometani, H. Ueno and H. Morimoto, Biochem. Med., 1974, 11, 49–59 CrossRef CAS .
U. Olthoff, R. Hüttenrauch and K. Matthey, Tetrahedron, 1971, 27, 3447–3455 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kasprzyk, S. Bednarz and D. Bogdał, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6445–6447 RSC .
W. Kasprzyk, S. Bednarz, P. Żmudzki, M. Galica and D. Bogdał, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34795–34799 RSC .
W. Kasprzyk, T. Świergosz and F. Koper, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 8386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kasprzyk, F. Koper, A. Flis, D. Szreder, E. Pamuła, D. Bogdał, S. Wybraniec, J. Ortyl and T. Świergosz, Analyst, 2021, 146, 1897–1906 RSC .
X. Ran, Q. Zhou, J. Zhang, S. Wang, G. Wang, H. Yang, X. Liu, Z. Wang and X. Yu, Org. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 3631–3638 RSC .
P. Kasak, M. Danko, S. Zavahir, M. Mrlik, Y. Xiong, A. B. Yousaf, W. Lai, I. Krupa, J. Tkac and A. L. Rogach, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 15080 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jung, D. Choi, C. Sim, Y. Kim, S. Kang, S. H. Nam, J. Jang, D. Kim, M. S. Chang, J. U. Park and Y. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2019, 56, 74–77 RSC .
C. Nollmann, C. Wimmenauer, S. Fasbender and S. Mayer, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 26303–26310 RSC .
H. Liang, H. Liu, B. Tian, R. Ma and Y. Wang, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187, 484 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nesakumar, J. Immanuel, D. Xiong and Y. Rok, Process Biochem., 2020, 88, 113–119 CrossRef .
M. Thakur and A. Dan, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 3410–3422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yen, Y. Lin, T. Chen, S. Chyueh and H. Chang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 305, 127441 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Ban, R. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Li, C. Fang and M. Yu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 443–446 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. R. Bogireddy, R. C. Silva, M. A. Valenzuela and V. Agarwal, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 386, 121643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, S. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y. Fu, L. Wang, X. Zhao and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5976–5984 RSC .
S. Zhu, X. Zhao, Y. Song, S. Lu and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, J. Li, D. Liu, M. Yang, W. Wang, S. Zhu and B. Yang, iScience, 2020, 23, 100982 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, J. H. Yang, H. B. Zeng, Y. M. Chen, S. C. Yang, C. Wu, H. Zeng, O. Yoshihito and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14374–14378 RSC .
J. Schneider, C. J. Reckmeier, Y. Xiong, M. von Seckendorff, A. S. Susha, P. Kasák and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2014–2022 CrossRef CAS .
V. Strauss, H. Wang, S. Delacroix, M. Ledendecker and P. Wessig, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8256–8266 RSC .
X. Yao, Y. Wang, F. Li, J. J. Dalluge, G. Orr, R. Hernandez, Q. Cui and C. L. Haynes, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 9516–9525 RSC .
M. Otten, M. Hildebrandt, R. Kühnemuth and M. Karg, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 6148–6157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, S. Zhu, T. Feng, M. Yang and B. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, V. Gude, D. Roy, T. Chatterjee, C. K. De and P. K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9634–9641 CrossRef CAS .
M. Langer, T. Hrivnák, M. Medved’ and M. Otyepka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 12140–12148 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Demchenko, C, 2019, 5, 71 CAS .
M. Righetto, A. Privitera, I. Fortunati, D. Mosconi, M. Zerbetto, M. L. Curri, M. Corricelli, A. Moretto, S. Agnoli, L. Franco, R. Bozio and C. Ferrante, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2236–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ramírez-Barroso, A. Jacobo-Martín, I. Navarro-Baena, J. J. Hernández, C. Navio, I. Rodríguez and R. Wannemacher, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 16935–16944 RSC .
A. Das, D. Roy, C. K. De and P. K. Mandal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 2251–2259 RSC .
R. Bhuyan, K. Bramhaiah and S. Bhattacharyya, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 605, 364–372 CrossRef CAS .
F. Siddique, M. Langer, M. Paloncýová, M. Medved’, M. Otyepka, D. Nachtigallová, H. Lischka and A. J. A. Aquino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 14327–14337 CrossRef CAS .
M. Langer, M. Paloncýová, M. Medved’ and M. Otyepka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 8252–8258 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Verma, A. Yadav and C. K. Nandi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2391 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Essner, J. A. Kist, L. Polo-Parada and G. A. Baker, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1878–1887 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chen, Y. H. Tsai and C. W. Chang, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 6153–6159 RSC .
V. Michaud, J. Pracht, F. Schilfarth, C. Damm, B. Platzer, P. Haines, C. Harreiß, D. M. Guldi, E. Spiecker and W. Peukert, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 13116–13128 RSC .
A Carbon Dot Switchable Green Emitting Dye And Its Phenomenal Properties, T. Świergosz, P. P. Romańczyk, S. S. Kurek and W. Kasprzyk, Manuscript in Preparation.
F. Pschunder, M. A. Huergo, J. M. Ramallo-López, B. Kommula, F. G. Requejo and S. Bhattacharyya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 1121–1128 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta, S. T. Y. Trolles-Cavalcante, A. Cleetus, V. Marks, A. Schechter, R. D. Webster and A. Borenstein, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 716–724 RSC .
N. V. Bashmakova, Y. O. Shaydyuk, A. M. Dmytruk, T. Świergosz, O. D. Kachkovsky, K. D. Belfield, M. V. Bondar and W. Kasprzyk, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2021, 22, 5592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mura, R. Ludmerczki, L. Stagi, S. Garroni, C. M. Carbonaro, P. C. Ricci, M. F. Casula, L. Malfatti and P. Innocenzi, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 4770 CrossRef CAS .
F. Miller, S. Wintzheimer, J. Prieschl, V. Strauss and K. Mandel, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2001972 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, L. Zhang, K. Jiang, A. Wu and H. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8659–8668 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J.-S. Wei, N. Zhong, Q.-Y. Gao and H.-M. Xiong, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 12635–12642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, D. Wang, X. Zhao, W. Xi, A. Zebibula, N. Alifu, J.-F. Chen and J. Qian, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1343–1350 RSC .
J. Zhu, S. Sun, K. Jiang, Y. Wang, W. Liu and H. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 97, 150–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, K. Jiang, S. Qian, Y. Wang and H. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 5542–5548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, J. He, Z. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Hu, M. Zheng, H. Dong, J. Zhuang and B. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2495–2501 RSC .
L. Qiao, S. Qian, Y. Wang, S. Yan and H. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4703–4709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khan, N. C. Verma, C. Rao and C. K. Nandi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 483–487 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, M. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Yuan, X. Liang, W. Xiang and Y. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 324, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, X. Bai, X. Chen, Z. Xie, Y. Zhu, G. Pan, Y. Zhai, H. Zhang, B. Dong and H. Song, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 3811–3818 RSC .
D. Li, P. Jing, L. Sun, Y. An, X. Shan, X. Lu, D. Zhou, D. Han, D. Shen, Y. Zhai, S. Qu, R. Zbořil and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705913 CrossRef .
F. Yuan, T. Yuan, L. Sui, Z. Wang, Z. Xi, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, Z. Tan, A. Chen, M. Jin and S. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2249 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, R. Su, J. Zhong, L. Fei, W. Cai, Q. Guan, W. Li, N. Li, Y. Chen, L. Cai and Q. Xu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 815–821 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, C. Liang, E. V. Ushakova, M. Sun, X. Huang, X. Zhang, P. Jing, S. J. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Liu, W. Zhang, L. Jing, G. Xing, W. Zheng, Z. Tang, S. Qu and A. L. Rogach, Small, 2019, 15, 1905050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, D. Han, S.-N. Qu, L. Liu, P.-T. Jing, D. Zhou, W.-Y. Ji, X.-Y. Wang, T.-F. Zhang and D.-Z. Shen, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Stepanidenko, I. A. Arefina, P. D. Khavlyuk, A. Dubavik, K. V. Bogdanov, D. P. Bondarenko, S. A. Cherevkov, E. V. Kundelev, A. V. Fedorov, A. V. Baranov, V. G. Maslov, E. V. Ushakova and A. L. Rogach, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 602–609 RSC .
H. Chen, H. Liu, M. Chen, P. Ge, S. Chen and H. Yuan, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 1939–1949 RSC .
Q. Fang, Q. Wang, W. Lin, X. You, Y. Dong and Y. Chi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 244, 771–776 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 747–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Grimme, S. Ehrlich and L. Goerigk, J. Comput. Chem., 2011, 32, 1456–1465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Marenich, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 6378–6396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Frisch, et al., Gaussian 16. Revision C.01, Gaussian Inc., Wallingford CT.,  2016 Search PubMed .
F. Neese, F. Wennmohs, U. Becker and C. Riplinger, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 224108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Dedication: In memory of Tomasz Świergosz – our beloved friend and the most passionate and inspiring scientist we have ever known.‡ We used a computational protocol similar to that reported in ref. 98 with some modifications: (i) in DFT geometry optimizations, we employed the D3(BJ) dispersion correction with Becke–Johnson damping;129; (ii) energies were obtained with the cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis sets, and then extrapolated to the complete basis set (CBS) limit; (iii) Gibbs energies were estimated by adding thermal corrections and SMD130 solvation free energies (both taken from DFT) to the extrapolated DLPNO-CCSD(T) energies. The DFT and DLPNO-CCSD(T) calculations were performed with Gaussian 16131 and ORCA 5.0,132 respectively.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Wiktor Kasprzyk	Wiktor Kasprzyk is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology at the Cracow University of Technology. He received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Cracow University of Technology in 2016. Currently, his research interests are focused on the design and synthesis of novel fluorophores and carbon dots as well as on the development of biodegradable polymers for vascular tissue engineering. He is a member of the Polish Chemical Society, the Polish Society of Biomaterials and the Association for Microwave Power in Europe for Research and Education.
Tomasz Świergosz	Tomasz Świergosz (1986–2022) was a Researcher of Materials, Environmental and Engineering Science at the Cracow University of Technology in the Department of Analytical Chemistry, Poland. His research interests were in the area of active organic and macromolecular materials, particularly the supramolecular chemistry of functional dyes and π-conjugated systems, molecular self-assembly, nanostructures, and molecular probes, and synthesis and characterization of polymers for environmental applications.
Piotr P. Romańczyk	Piotr P. Romańczyk is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology at the Cracow University of Technology. He received his MSc in chemistry from Jagiellonian University, followed by a PhD from the Cracow University of Technology in 2007, and in 2016 he completed his habilitation (DSc) at the Gdańsk University of Technology. His research interests are in the areas of computational chemistry, noncovalent interactions, molecular electrochemistry, (bio)coordination chemistry, and recently, optical properties of organic dyes and fluorophores. He enjoys classical music, theatre, and photography.
Jochen Feldmann	Jochen Feldmann received his PhD in physics from the Philipps-Universität in Marburg, Germany. He holds the Chair of Photonics and Optoelectronics at the Dept. of Physics at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität in Munich and since 2012 he has been a member of the German Academy of Science (Leopoldina). His research focuses on understanding and applying the interaction of tailored nanosystems with light, e.g. dynamics of optically excited charge carriers in hybrid semiconductor nanocrystals, solar water splitting and nano- and bioplasmonics.
Jacek K. Stolarczyk	Jacek K. Stolarczyk received his PhD in chemistry from the Silesian University of Technology in Gliwice, Poland. He carried out postdoctoral research at University College Dublin and Dublin City University in Ireland. He then became a group leader in the Chair of Photonics and Optoelectronics in the Department of Physics at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU). Recently, he joined Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Poland as a professor at the Dept. of Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science. His research interests include inorganic and organic nanoparticles and in particular photocatalytic solar fuel generation and other green energy applications with semiconductor nanocrystals.

 	Fig. 1  PL mechanisms of CDs commonly considered in the literature (see the text for references).	 

 	Scheme 1  Summary of low molecular compounds formed from CA; (i) upon thermal treatment and (ii) in reaction with specific nitrogen precursors.	 

 	Fig. 2  Frequently reported scenarios of CA-based molecular fluorophores binding within the CD matrix. (A) Covalent bond or adsorption onto the surface of CD: CD1 and CD2 are obtained by solvothermal pyrolysis of CA with amine precursors polyethyleneimine and 2,3-diaminopyridine, respectively. During the reaction, amide bonds and carbonization reactions are considered to affect the surface chemistry of the CDs. The selection of the amine precursor directly affects the occurrence and number of functional groups and fluorescent moieties (fluorophores) in the CD products CD1 and CD2 and at their surface; thereby, changing their optical properties and their response to pH changes.23 Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (B) Aggregates of molecular fluorophores within the π–π stacked graphitic domains of CDs: molecular dynamics simulations showed self-assembly of molecular fluorophores and functionalized PAHs in an aqueous solution, forming quasi-spherical like CDs. Coloring scheme: C-black and cyan; O-red; N-blue; H-white. Water is omitted for clarity.59 Reprinted from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022. (C) Location of molecular fluorophores within the edge domains: excitation and absorption spectra of CDs obtained from CA/UA and the collective explanation for the origin of PL in CDs in the literature, invoking core, edge, and surface bands.48 Reprinted with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  The proposed models of exciton self-trapping processes in (A) pyrene dimers and (B) H-aggregate as the light-emissive functionality of CDs. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (B) Adapted from ref. 93 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Neutral IPCA inside various CD models used in QM/MM/EE calculations. (a) Monomer embedded in the CDs and partly exposed to water, (b) H-bonded and water-exposed dimers embedded in the CDs, (c) water-exposed dimer in a layer of H-bonded IPCA molecules embedded in the CDs, (d) monomer embedded in a central cavity, (e) stacked dimer embedded in a central cavity, and (f) two H-bonded and water-exposed stacked dimers embedded in the CDs. IPCA molecules in QM regions are depicted using ball-and-sticks, while those in MM regions are drawn as sticks. Color scheme: cyan, green, and grey—C; blue—N; red—O; and white—H atoms. Water is omitted for clarity. Pictograms show the approximate positions of the IPCA molecules of interest (green bars) in the CDs (circles) and the nature of their interactions with other IPCA molecules (black bars). Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Self-assembly interactions of CA-based small molecular compounds and fluorophores in solution and in the solid state. (A) Normalized autocorrelation curve for itaconic acid in solution which corresponds to an approximate hydrodynamic diameter of ∼0.9 nm according to the Stokes–Einstein equation. (B) Transmission electron micrograph showing a uniform size distribution with a mean diameter of 3.65 nm of nanoparticles formed upon drying of itaconic acid solution on a TEM grid. The scale bar is 100 nm. HRTEM shows the lattice fringes of the crystalline nanoparticles. Fast Fourier transform analysis of the diffraction pattern shows a d-spacing of 0.21 nm between the lattice fringes. (C) Nanocrystals of TPDCA formed on the TEM grid during the drop drying process resembling commonly observed carbon nanoparticles. The nanocrystals have an average diameter of 7.5 nm and show crystallinity in HRTEM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (D and E) ORTEP packing diagrams of the X-ray TPDCA crystal structure indicating π–π interactions (side view with planes defined by aromatic rings and top view showing the parallel displaced conformation of the π–π dimer) and intramolecular O–H⋯O hydrogen and C–S⋯O chalcogen bonding networks; distances are given in Å.	 

 	Fig. 6  CAM-B3LYP-D3(BJ)/def2-TZVP gas-phase-optimized geometries of TPDCA and IPCA dimers (side and top views, distances in Å) and bonding energies (in kcal mol−1) calculated using the high-level DLPNO-CCSD(T)/TightPNO/CBS(T-Q) method, see footnote‡. (A) TPDCA dimer in the same arrangement as in its crystal structure (see Fig. 5D and E), (B) TPDCA and (C) IPCA dimers in conformations allowing both H-bond formation and π–π interactions. The starting geometry of the IPCA dimer was taken from ref. 98. Given are electronic and Gibbs energies in gas-phase (or in aqueous solution, in parentheses). Unpublished results.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Scheme of the synthesis and purification steps of blue (bCDs) and green-emitting CDs (gCDs).40 (B) HMBC 1H–13C NMR spectrum of the HPPT ammonium salt; the most stable tautomer structure104 is shown with NMR assignments. Adapted from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Molecular structures of the nitrogen precursors involved in the thermal processing of red-emitting CA-based CDs, with the key functional groups highlighted (green, blue, orange). Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) LC-DAD chromatogram of the post-synthesis mixture of red-emitting CDs; synthesis was conducted according to the reaction conditions elaborated by Sun et al.110 (unpublished data). Color coding of the chromatogram: absorption from the highest to lowest – red/green/blue/violet. (C) Preparation of the photo-oxidized CZA materials and evolution of the steady-state absorption spectra during the transformation of CZA (black) into oCZA-1 (blue, left) and of oCZA-1 into oCZA-2 (brown, right), in air-equilibrated water under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnotes
† Dedication: In memory of Tomasz Świergosz – our beloved friend and the most passionate and inspiring scientist we have ever known.
‡ We used a computational protocol similar to that reported in ref. 98 with some modifications: (i) in DFT geometry optimizations, we employed the D3(BJ) dispersion correction with Becke–Johnson damping;129; (ii) energies were obtained with the cc-pVTZ and cc-pVQZ basis sets, and then extrapolated to the complete basis set (CBS) limit; (iii) Gibbs energies were estimated by adding thermal corrections and SMD130 solvation free energies (both taken from DFT) to the extrapolated DLPNO-CCSD(T) energies. The DFT and DLPNO-CCSD(T) calculations were performed with Gaussian 16131 and ORCA 5.0,132 respectively.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
