Emerging investigator series: design of hydrogel nanocomposites for the detection and removal of pollutants: from nanosheets, network structures, and  ...  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EN00552D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EN00552D
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 2216-2240Emerging investigator series: design of hydrogel nanocomposites for the detection and removal of pollutants: from nanosheets, network structures, and biocompatibility to machine-learning-assisted design

        
          
            Xuan 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Mu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fang 
            Chen
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Xiangang 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria (Ministry of Education)/Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. E-mail: huxiangang@nankai.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 022 66229562;   Tel: +86 022 23507800
bTianjin Key Laboratory of Agro-environment and Safe-product, Key Laboratory for Environmental Factors Control of Agro-product Quality Safety (Ministry of Agriculture), Institute of Agro-environmental Protection, Ministry of Agriculture, Tianjin 300191, China
cSchool of Resources and Materials, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao 066004, Hebei, China
Received 
      24th May 2018
    , Accepted 9th September 2018First published on 10th September 2018AbstractDue to serious pollution of the world's water resources and the increasing need for clean water sources worldwide, effective methods for the detection and removal of pollutants must be developed. Given the remarkable advantages of low cost, trace detection limits and high removal rates of hydrogel nanocomposites, we focus on the most important and emerging issues in recent research into hydrogel nanocomposites for the detection and removal of pollutants. Such issues include visual detection, enzyme-based biosensors, visible-light photocatalysis, design of 3D network structures, 4D printing and multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogels. The shortcomings and challenges in the practical application of hydrogel nanocomposites are also discussed. Finally, an outlook for future work is proposed, including regeneration of hydrogels promoting commercial and practical applications, extending hydrogels to soil-water systems, improving nanomaterial biocompatibility and advancing machine-learning-assisted materials discovery. This review provides comments and suggestions for the preparation and applications of hydrogel nanomaterials for the detection and treatment of contaminates.Xiangang HuXiangang Hu earned his Ph.D. degree in environmental chemistry in 2012 and is now an associate professor at Nankai University, China. From March 2016, to March 2017, he was a visiting scholar in the group of Kenneth A. Dawson in the Department of Chemistry, University College Dublin, Ireland. Now, he is a full professor in Nankai University. He is the Associate Director of the Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria (Ministry of Education) and has been a project leader for applications of nanomaterials in environmental pollution. His interests are 2D nanomaterial applications and environmental risk assessment.

Environmental significance
Hydrogel nanocomposites are attracting much attention in the detection and removal of pollutants. The present review focuses on the most important and emerging issues in recent research into hydrogel nanocomposites for the detection and removal of pollutants, for example, visual detection, enzyme-based biosensors, visible-light photocatalysis, design of 3D network structures, 4D printing and multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogels. The shortcomings and challenges in the practical application of hydrogel nanocomposites are also discussed. Finally, an outlook for future work is proposed, including regeneration of hydrogels promoting commercial and practical applications, extending hydrogels to soil-water systems, improving nanomaterial biocompatibility and advancing machine-learning-assisted materials discovery. Hydrogel nanomaterials would play an important roles in the detection and treatment of contaminates.

1. Introduction
As the global population continues to grow, the demand for clean water sources rises.1 However, water contamination is exacerbated by numerous traditional and emerging pollutants discharged into the natural water cycle.2 Water pollution incidents occur frequently, especially in developing countries. Representative incidents of water contamination that occurred in China from 2005 to 2017 are listed in Fig. 1a. Over the past few years, passive sorption-based techniques for sample enrichment have commonly been used to measure pollutants in water environments but require large amounts of organic solvent during the sample enrichment step and back-extraction stage, leading to high cost and secondary contamination.3–5 Therefore, methods with low cost and high efficiency must be developed to detect or treat pollutants.
 Fig. 1  Water contamination and published papers related to hydrogel nanocomposites. a, Representative incidents of water contamination that occurred in China from 2005 to 2017; b, trends of published papers related to hydrogel nanocomposites in the past 10 years on Web of Science. 
Hydrogels are moderately crosslinked polymers that can swell significantly but cannot be dissolved in water. Porous hydrogels have abundant interior space to load various matter into holes through Coulombic attraction.6 Given their excellent water retention and porous structure, hydrogel-based biomaterials can mimic critical properties of natural cellular environments.7,8 Hydrogels have been shown to provide a dynamic and permissive microenvironment supportive of native-like extracellular matrix functions,9 to exhibit non-hemolytic behavior and to be biocompatible toward animal cells in numerous animal studies.10 Based on the aforementioned properties, hydrogels have been widely studied and applied as in vivo drug release agents,9 antimicrobial materials11 and sensors.12,13 Due to their aforementioned unique properties (e.g., a porous structure, water retention ability and excellent biocompatibility), hydrogels have attracted substantial attention.14 When nanostructured materials are incorporated into the swelled crosslinked polymer network, hydrogel nanocomposites are formed.15,16 Most reported hydrogels are engineered materials and exhibit strong potential for use in various applications. Fig. 1b shows the trends of papers published over the past 10 years on Web of Science. The search date was April 22, 2018. The search topics were “hydrogel” and “nano*” or “nanocomposite”, and the range of publication years was set from 2007 to 2017. Hydrogel nanocomposites have been shown to sensitively detect or effectively remove pollutants via a sensitive response to an external stimulus such as temperature, pH, ionic strength or light.17–22 Hydrogel nanocomposites are now studied worldwide. Numerous approaches (e.g., aptamer/DNA functionalization,23 enhancement by microfluidic devices,24 designed network structures25 and 3D printing12) have been examined for the fabrication of hydrogel nanocomposites.
By utilizing the complementary advantages of hydrogels and nanomaterials, researchers can detect or remove trace concentrations of contaminants. For example, a portable visual quantitative detector of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) based on a target-responsive hydrogel was prepared using an AFB1 aptamer; it exhibited a detection limit of 1.77 nM (0.55 ppb).26 Hydrogels were prepared using an AFB1 aptamer and two short complementary DNA strands of AFB1 as crosslinkers. Similar strategies have frequently been proposed in the field of biological detection.27 For example, AgBr nanoparticle (AgBr NP)-anchored 3D nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogel nanocomposites were prepared by a simple hydrothermal approach and displayed a linear response toward Escherichia coli (E. coli) at an extremely low detection limit of 0.17 cfu mL−1 (S/N).28 The introduction of nitrogen into the graphene framework provided hydrogels with good conductivity and a high loading volume for immobilizing luminol. With the rapid development of hydrogel nanocomposites (Fig. 1b), a critical review is necessary to organize the reported accomplishments and prospects for future work. Herein, an overview of the most recent achievements relating to the application of hydrogel nanocomposites for the detection and removal of contaminants is provided. The present review highlights and discusses new strategies in the design of hydrogel nanocomposites and the reasons behind the improved properties of the composites. Challenges and perspectives, as well as comments and suggestions, for the design and applications of hydrogel nanocomposites in the detection and removal of contaminants in the environment are also discussed.
2. Designing DNA/aptamer hydrogels for sensitive detection and pollutant removal
Recently, target stimuli-responsive DNA hydrogels have attracted substantial attention as a portable, sensitive, selective and cost-effective detection platform.29,30 In a typical DNA hydrogel, cargoes are first caged in the hydrogel with a synthetic polymer as a scaffold and a functional DNA (such as an aptamer or DNAzyme) as a crosslinker. The presence of a target triggers the dissociation of the hydrogel and the release of cargoes to generate a signal for sensitive detection.31 Huang et al. designed and synthesized a DNAzyme-crosslinked hydrogel containing AuNPs for the quantitative detection of UO22+.32 In the presence of UO22+, the DNAzyme strand was activated, and the hydrogel became unstable. The release of the initially encapsulated AuNPs turned the supernatant from colorless to red. The color of the supernatant deepened as the concentration of UO22+ increased, with a detection limit of 37 × 10−9 mol L−1. Most importantly, the DNAzyme-crosslinked hydrogels had no color-signal response to other cations.
DNA hydrogels hold great potential for biological and biomedical applications owing to their programmable nature and macroscopic sizes. However, most previous studies have involved spontaneous and homogenous gelation procedures in solution, which often lack precise control. DNA hydrogels with aptamer-toehold-based analysis were proposed to precisely recognize targets. A clamped hybridization chain reaction (C-HCR)-based strategy has been developed to guide DNA self-assembly to form macroscopic hydrogels using hairpin strands and initiator strands.33,34
Presumably due to a lack of simple, quantitative tools with which to measure gel responsiveness, however, the literature describing these materials remains largely qualitative. By employing trace amounts of fluorophore–quencher-labeled crosslinkers and the rheology of entrapped fluorescent particles, dissolution at molecular, hundred-nanometer, and hundred-micron length-scales were simultaneously measured.35 The above method is constructive to the design and applications of aptamer-connected DNA hydrogels. A target-responsive aptamer-crosslinked hydrogel was designed and synthesized for the portable and visual quantitative detection of the toxin ochratoxin A (OTA), which occurs in food and beverages.36 The hydrogel network forms by hybridization between one designed DNA strand containing the OTA aptamer and two complementary DNA strands grafted onto linear polyacrylamide chains. Upon the introduction of OTA, the aptamer binds with OTA, leading to dissociation of the hydrogel, followed by release of the preloaded AuNPs, which could be observed by the naked eyes.36 OTA could be detected at concentrations as low as 1.27 nM (0.51 ppb), which satisfies the test requirement (2.0 ppb) of the European Commission. A colorimetric logic system based on an aptamer-crosslinked colloidal crystal hydrogel (CCH) was developed.37 With incorporation of the Hg2+ and Ag+ responsive aptamers (A1 and A2) onto hydrogels, the reversible binding between the specific target ion (Hg2+ and Ag+) could induce the conformational change of the aptamer and thus trigger shrinkage of the hydrogels with different contents. With the input stimuli of Hg2+ and Ag+ at a concentration of 0.1 μM, the CCH displayed a shrinking response and color change corresponding to a logical “OR” and “AND” gate, as shown in Fig. 2. The visualization of the logic output signals was realized.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of visual logic signals triggered by two different input targets (Hg2+ and Ag+).37 A, aptamer; T, target; L, logic; SiNP, silica nanoparticles. 
For the water remediation techniques based on adsorption, the long-standing contradiction between selectivity and multiple adsorptivities, as well as between affinity and recyclability, has put this approach on the defense amid an increasingly severe environmental crisis. A pollutant-targeting hydrogel scavenger was reported for water remediation with both high selectivity and multiple adsorbing abilities for several pollutants, as well as with strong affinity and good recyclability, through the rational integration of the advantages of multiple functional materials.38 In the scavenger, aptamers folded into binding pockets to accommodate the molecular structure of pollutants to afford perfect selectivity, and Janus nanoparticles with an antibacterial function, as well as anisotropic surfaces to immobilize multiple aptamers, allowed for the simultaneous handling of different kinds of pollutants. The final hydrogel scavenger was prepared by entrapping aptamer-functionalized Janus nanoparticles into a porous cellulose hydrogel. The number of porous structures in the hydrogel scavenger provided sufficient space for water retention, thus allowing for unimpeded diffusion of pollutants toward binding aptamers.38 Our group reported an aptamer column for the removal of trace (ng L−1) pharmaceuticals in drinking water.23 5′-Amino-modified DNA aptamer bound to CNBr-Sepharose as sorbent was packed into a column to simultaneously remove cocaine and diclofenac in drinking water. Cocaine and diclofenac were chosen as model molecules to test the aptamer column that presented a high removal capacity, selectivity, and stability. The removal of pharmaceuticals was as high as 88–95%. The aptamer column was reusable and achieved a high removal efficiency from 4 to 30 °C at normal cation ion concentrations (5–100 mg L−1) for multiple pollutants without cross effects and secondary pollution. This work indicated that aptamers, as a new sorbent, can be used in the removal of persistent organic pollutants, biological toxins, and pathogenic bacteria from surface, drinking, and ground water. The contaminations of peptide toxins in drinking water lead directly to sickness and even death in both humans and animals. A smart RNA as an aptamer was covalently immobilized on graphene oxide (GO) to form a polydispersed and stable RNA-GO nanosheet. RNA-GO nanosheets can resist nuclease and natural organic matter and specifically adsorb trace peptide toxin (microcystin-LR) in drinking water.39 Compared with other chemical and biological sorbents, RNA-GO nanosheets present specific and competitive adsorption and are easily synthesized and regenerated. Covalently immobilized aptamer (RNA) on GO nanosheets is a potentially useful tool in recognizing, enriching and separating small molecules and biomacromolecules in the purification of contaminated water and the preparation of samples. Similarly, a photocatalyst, aptamer-functionalized GO (GO-aptamer), was covalently synthesized and characterized as being composed of photosensitive GO and a target-recognition aptamer.40 The aptamer-enhanced photocatalytic activities of GO were studied under broad-spectrum visible light. The complex photocatalyst effectively inactivated viruses and damaged the protein capsid and nucleic acids of viruses upon irradiation. GO-aptamer is a smart photocatalyst to selectively photocatalyze nucleic acids and proteins, which is attractive for environmental protection.
3. Designing metallic nanomaterial hydrogels
3.1 Noble-metal nanoparticle hydrogels
Metallic nanoparticles such as AgNPs,41 CuNPs42 and AuNPs43 have already been investigated in numerous studies. Such nanoparticles are often combined with 2D nanosheets to enhance their electronic transfer, stability and specific surface areas to effectively detect or remove pollutants.44 Furthermore, hybridization with 2D nanosheets can form planned 3D network structures, which benefit recycling and avoid the aggregation of nanoparticles. For example, AuNPs entrapped within a tannic acid (TA)-functionalized graphene hydrogel (AuNPs@TA-GH) was used to catalytically remove methylene blue (MB).45 The preparation method involved the reduction of GO in the presence of TA to form a TA-functionalized graphene hydrogel, followed by loading and in situ reduction of AuCl4− ions in the graphene hydrogel network. Immobilizing AuNPs onto a carbon support is considered an approach to enhance the catalytic performance and recyclability of AuNPs. The Au@TA-GH composites acted as an electron relay system and a reaction carrier. In the presence of an excess of NaBH4, electrons were transferred from the donor borohydride anions (BH4−) to the graphene hydrogel via AuNPs. MB was reduced to leucomethylene blue by accepting electrons from the graphene hydrogel. During this catalytic reduction process, nearly 100% of the MB was reduced.
The incorporation of photoresponsive molecules within soft materials can provide spatiotemporal control over bulk properties and address challenges in mechanical variability. However, the kinetics of in situ photochemical reactions are often slow and typically employ ultraviolet wavelengths. To expand their applications, Ru-hydrogels were also processed into microgels using a microfluidic platform as a sensor of pollutants.46 Smart optical polymers show interesting color changes either in absorption (chromogenic) or in emission (fluorochromic) in response to external stimuli. There is profound interest in developing new chromogenic and fluorochromic materials for a broad range of applications in sensors, light-emitting probe materials, and photomodulators. A photoluminescent hydrogel incorporating lanthanide ions and carbon dots (CDs) into a network of polyacrylamide and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) was obtained by tuning the balance of blue-light-emitting CDs to green- and red-light-emitting lanthanide ions.47 Exploiting the combined specific sensitivities of the different emitters, the luminescent hydrogel showed a chromic responsiveness to multiple stimuli, including pH, organic vapors, transition metal ions, and temperature, as shown in Fig. 3. This photoluminescent hydrogel could be a versatile and multifunctional material for chemical and environmental sensing. A new design of Eu-containing polymer hydrogels showing fast self-healing and tunable fluorochromic properties in response to five different stimuli, including pH, temperature, metal ions, sonication, and force, was reported.48 The d–f transition of Eu enables an intense metal-center luminescence, particularly when incorporating sensitizing ligands in the first coordination sphere, known as the “antenna effect.”49 Iminodiacetate (IDA) ligands were used as binding motifs (Fig. 4a) to coordinate Eu3+ ions that further acted as crosslinkers to construct hydrogel networks. When unbound at low pH, the Eu3+ ions with IDA ligands and hydrogel undergo a sol–gel transition along with the switching OFF of the luminescence of Eu3+ ions due to the hydration effect from water and the loss of the weak “antenna effect” (Fig. 4b). The dynamic nature of metal coordination also enables the reversible form and dissociation of the coordination upon stimuli (Fig. 4c). New fluorochromic materials that reversibly change their emission properties in response to their environment are of interest for the development of sensors and light-emitting materials.
 Fig. 3  Stimuli responsiveness of the white-light-emitting hydrogel to pH, vapor, metal ions and temperature.47 
 Fig. 4  Fabrication process of Eu-containing polymer hydrogels and schematic of the stimulus response. a) Chemical structures of P(DMA290-co-IDHPMA96) and Eu3+ complex. b) Schematic illustration of fluorescence ON/OFF process and sol–gel transition driven by dynamic metal–ligand coordination. c) Pictures showing the fluorochromic response and the sol–gel transition of the hydrogel upon stimuli.49 
3.2 Noble nanoparticles hybridized with 2D nanosheets as efficient photocatalysts
Photocatalysis has been taken as one of the most hopeful techniques in both solar energy conversion and pollutant elimination. In the process of looking for excellent and robust light-induced photocatalysts, semiconductor catalysts, such as TiO2,50–52 MoS2,53,54 CdS,55,56 AgX (X = Cl, Br, I)57 and Ag3PO4,58 have shown promise for the degradation of a wide range of organics into readily biodegradable compounds. However, pure photocatalysts exhibit low separation efficiencies and high recombination rates of photogenerated charges.59 Beyond that, the most serious “bottleneck” is that these substances remain too difficult to reuse, since it is difficult to separate materials of the nanometer size from the reaction system. Therefore, new techniques are urgently needed to meet this demand. Combining hydrogels with semiconductors improves the properties of the photocatalysts. Moreover, with the addition of a semiconductor, hybrid hydrogels have shown enhanced performance in the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants under visible light via synergistic effects of adsorption and photocatalysis.60 Some of the degraded compounds were eventually mineralized to CO2 and H2O, making this an efficient and environmentally friendly technology.61 Semiconductors, such as CdS quantum dots (QDs) derivatives, have been investigated to degrade pollutants utilizing solar energy. However, CdS QDs produced toxic products during repeated catalytic cycles, which limits their application.62 Moreover, the performance of a photocatalyst depends greatly on its chemical and physical structure. A 3D hierarchical structure is robust and stable, making the composite hydrogel separation-free and easy to recycle, and this approach is regarded as one of the most outstanding and excellent strategies among others.63 Polyaniline (PANI)/carbon nitride nanosheets (CNNs) composite hydrogels with 3D hierarchical nanostructure were synthesized via in situ polymerization.64 The CNNs were obtained by thermal oxidation etching of bulk carbon nitride and were dispersed in the mixed solution of aniline and phytic acid. After ammonium persulfate was added, coral-like PANI nanofibers were formed in situ between layers of the CNNs via the polymerization of aniline, which constructed the 3D hierarchical structure of the composite hydrogel. Pollutants (such as MB) were adsorbed and concentrated into the 3D hierarchical nanostructure of the composite hydrogel. The degradation proportion of MB was approximately 15.8%, and the overall removal rate was 27.5%. The pollutants were oxidized in situ via photocatalysis. The 3D hierarchical structure exposed more active sites for the catalytic surface reaction because of its large accessible surface area. Moreover, the 3D hierarchical structure remained robust and stable during the whole photocatalytic reaction, making the photocatalysts easy to recycle.
Among semiconductor catalysts, TiO2 NPs have attracted much attention because of their high activity and low cost. However, TiO2 has the disadvantages of low quantum efficiency and facile recombination of electron–hole pairs.65 To solve the abovementioned shortcomings, graphene was proposed as a support material for nanoparticle loading due to its high surface area and good conductivity. Zhang et al. synthesized a TiO2/graphene hydrogel (TiO2–GH) with a 3D network structure as an electrode for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants.66Fig. 5a shows the process for the preparation of the TiO2–GH electrode. However, TiO2 nanoparticles with a large forbidden band gap (approximately 3.2 eV) cannot utilize visible light to generate a catalytic reaction.50 Some studies have indicated that metal sulfide semiconductor catalysts (e.g., MoS2 and CuS) can use visible light to degrade organic pollutants. MoS2 nanosheets have a suitable band gap of approximately 1.8 eV, rendering them of practical significance for visible-light harvesting.67 However, the high recombination rate of photogenerated electron–hole pairs limits the practical applications of MoS2 nanosheets. A recent report showed that combining MoS2 nanosheets with exfoliated GO via a hydrothermal hydrogel method could improve the photocatalytic activity (Fig. 6).68 GO and MoS2 were mixed in different ratios (total volume, 20 mL; total weight, 50 mg) and sonicated for 30 min. The mixture was then placed into a 50 mL Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave and heated at 180 °C for 12 h. The MoS2–GO hydrogel nanocomposite maximized the degradation of MB to 99% under solar-light irradiation within 60 min. The introduction of 10 wt% MoS2 improved the photocatalytic degradation ability of MoS2–GO, lowered the rate of electron–hole pair recombination and increased the electron transfer ability. However, an excess of MoS2 nanosheets in the composite hydrogel might reduce the photocatalytic performance. One of the main reasons was that MoS2 was unevenly distributed, resulting in an increase in the probability of electron–hole recombination.54
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagrams for the preparation and application of TiO2–GH. a) Process for the preparation of the TiO2–GH electrode. b) Electron transfer in TiO2–GH and the degradation mechanism of BPA under UV irradiation.69 
 Fig. 6  Synthesis of the MoS2–GO composite hydrogel.68 Mechanism of the solar-light-induced formation of electron–hole pairs in MoS2 nanosheets in the presence of pollutants. 
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is a metal-free semiconductor material with a visible-light response (Eg = 2.7 eV). However, pure g-C3N4 on the nanoscale is difficult to separate from water. Thus, g-C3N4-based hybrid hydrogels were produced that exhibited a visible-light response, simple recycling and excellent adsorption properties. Wang et al. synthesized a g-C3N4/graphene hydrogel (g-C3N4/GH) at low temperature via the stacking effect of nanosheets and π–π conjugation and used it to remove Cr6+.70 A large amount of Cr6+ was rapidly adsorbed onto the surface of the graphene sheets, and the highly toxic Cr6+ was removed via the high in situ photocatalytic activity of the g-C3N4 nanosheets. The composites could also be well separated, recycled and regenerated. After 8 cycles, the removal rate was still above 80%, and the recovery rate was up to 95%. In a continuous flow reaction, the full and effective treatment of low concentrations (2 mg L−1) of Cr6+ was achieved within 25 h. The above treatment met the requirements of the World Health Organization's drinking water regulations, as well as the recommended concentration of Cr6+ in water by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Ag3PO4 and AgX (X = Cl, Br, l) are new semiconductor photocatalysts. Ag3PO4 can utilize visible light with wavelengths less than 550 nm.58 Under visible light, the quantum yield of Ag3PO4 for oxygen evolution from water could reach 90%.71 By embedding Ag3PO4 in GH, the hybrid hydrogel Ag3PO4/GH efficiently adsorbed and photocatalytically degraded BPA. GH has a high specific surface area (180 m2 g−1) and a rich spatial network structure, which is conducive to the adsorption and photocatalytic processes of hybrid hydrogels. The addition of Ag3PO4 increased the specific surface area of Ag3PO4/GH to 325 m2 g−1, leading to the maximum BPA adsorption capacity (15 mg g−1) of Ag3PO4/GH (containing 11% GH).72 BPA (100 mL, 10 ppm) could be completely removed under visible light within 12 min. Chen et al. developed a hybrid AgBr@rGO graphene hydrogel (GH–AgBr@rGO) with enhanced the surface adsorption properties and the ability to inhibit AgBr photocorrosion.59 AgBr was encapsulated by rGO to form a core–shell-structured composite (AgBr@rGO), which was further incorporated into graphene to form GH–AgBr@rGO hydrogels. The π-conjugated structure of rGO and AgBr hybridization with graphene both increased the migration and separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs. The core–shell structure of AgBr@rGO-stabilized AgBr and inhibited the growth of AgBr particles, achieving a narrow size distribution (500–600 nm). GH–AgBr@rGO could achieve 90% BPA (50 mL, 20 ppm) degradation after five repeated cycles.
In summary, combining semiconductor catalysts with hydrogels is an efficient way to achieve the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants. Both the visible-light catalytic activity and adsorption performance of the semiconductor hydrogel composite are enhanced. GH is widely used due to its high specific surface area and rich spatial network structure. At the same time, the abundant micropores of GH enable the fast transport of pollutants to the catalytically active composites, greatly decreasing the time required to reach saturated adsorption.59 Moreover, the introduction of GH can reduce the charge transfer resistance and solid-state interface resistance, which allows charges to transfer rapidly and diffuse in multiple directions, further improving the photocatalytic performance of the composites. The layered structure of the composites also helps transfer the electrons and holes in different directions, which makes the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants more thorough than that of pure hydrogels.73
4. Designing 3D network structures
4.1 Hybridization with carbon/nitrogen nanomaterials
Carbon and nitrogen are the most significant elements in the linking of fundamental macromolecules, such as base pairs for nucleic acids and peptide bonds for proteins in living systems. The interfacial interactions among these macromolecules have been extensively studied, and the involved mechanisms have been applied to develop controllable assembly and nanostructures and networks with exciting properties.74 The 3D network structures of hydrogel nanocomposites are widely used materials for water purification and can not only provide convenient mass transfer channels but also prevent the nanomaterials from dispersing or aggregating in water, greatly simplifying the separation of the materials from water. 3D porous GH has been developed as a super-adsorbent to remove different pollutants (antibiotics, dyes, and heavy ions) for water purification. Due to its highly porous structure and high content of water, GH has also demonstrated its capabilities for adsorbing and removing different pollutants (antibiotics, dyes, and heavy ions) from those removed by conventional graphene aerogel.75 A magnetically separable and pH-responsive GO/nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) bead was applied as an excellent adsorbent for enrofloxacin (ENR) removal from water.76 Ninety-nine percent of the ENR was removed in 5 min at pH 6.6. The GO/nZVI composites were regenerated by ozonization under strongly alkaline conditions (pH > 9). Most importantly, GO was not consumed in the suspension, making this a promising strategy. The GO/nZVI possesses a fluffy structure, and its apparent volume was approximately 3.75 times greater than that of nZVI alone. In addition, 3D graphene foam (GF) has been widely applied in water purification. GF is derived from GO, which has a high specific surface area and a unique porous structure. Tetraethylenepentamine-modified GF (TEPA-GF) was synthesized via a one-step hydrothermal method using GO and TEPA as raw materials. TEPA provided additional active sites for adsorbing Pb2+. The adsorption capacity for Pb2+ from aqueous solution by TEPA-GF was maintained at 305 mg g−1, which was significantly higher than that of pure GF.77
Compared to the most widespread absorbent materials, such as active carbon and graphene, a proposed 3D C3N4 nanofiber hydrogel not only exhibited a competitive absorption capacity (maximum absorption capacity of MB of up to 402 mg g−1) but also overcame typical deficiencies, such as poor selectivity and high energy-consuming regeneration.74 C3N4 has increasingly attracted interest as an organic semiconductor catalyst with exciting visible-light activity and excellent thermal and chemical stability.69 The agar-C3N4 hybrid hydrogel photocatalysts with a 3D network structure were prepared via thermoreversible phase transition of agar.60 Agar and g-C3N4 nanoparticle hydrosol was transformed into hybrid hydrogel with 3D network structure by a heating–cooling polymerization process (Fig. 7). The phenol and MB removal abilities of the hybrid hydrogel were approximately 1.3 and 4.5 times greater than those of pure g-C3N4, respectively. To avoid the use of precious metals or heavy metals, graphene hydrogel-loaded carbon quantum dots (C-dots/3DGH) and g-C3N4 with excellent photoelectrochemical (PEC) activity and matched potential were prepared. In the presence of targets, the binding of E. coli with aptamer distinguished the cathodic current generated by C-dots/3DGH and the anodic current generated by g-C3N4 due to an increase of the steric hindrance. The concentration of E. coli can be quantified by the ratio of cathodic current to anodic current, which can effectively eliminate these analyte-independent factors and provide a more precise analysis. In addition, this ratiometric PEC biosensor showed a good sensitivity and a wide linear range (2.9 cfu mL−1 to 2.9 × 106 cfu mL−1).78
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the preparation of C3N4–agar hybrid hydrogel.60 
4.2 Hybridization with natural fibers
Combining natural fibers with synthetic polymers is considered an effective way to synthesize nanocomposites because of natural fibers' high adsorption capacity and low cost. Natural jute, cellulose and hemicellulose have abundant phenolic functional groups (–OH, –COOH and –NH2) on their surface, and these groups contribute to the high performance of these materials as adsorbents.79–81 Jute fiber contains numerous –OH, –COOH and –NH2 functional groups and can be easily crosslinked with hydrogels to form complex networks.69 Zhou et al. prepared a double-network jute/PAA hydrogel via a simple free-radical polymerization of acrylic acid in jute aqueous solution and used the hydrogel for the adsorption of metals (Pb2+ and Cd2+) from melting wastewater.82 Approximately 97% of Pb2+ and 89% of Cd2+ were removed. The jute/PAA hydrogels exhibited extraordinary mechanical properties and ductility for reusability due to the high elasticity of the crosslinks between –COOH and other functional groups in jute. Functional groups in lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose play a major role in pollutant adsorption. Chitin and chitosan (CS), extracted from crustaceans, have attracted much attention as biosorbents.83,84 CS can be degraded by the CS enzyme and microorganisms, making the material biodegradable and environmentally friendly.85 Due to its high content of amine and hydroxyl functionalities, CS exhibits good adsorption and special structural properties for the removal of heavy metals and dyes.80,83 Under neutral conditions, the exposed amino and hydroxyl groups in CS can adsorb metal cations.86,87 CS–iron oxide beads were synthesized without using toxic glutaraldehyde to remove both As5+ and As3+ from treated water without pre-oxidizing As3+. Nanometer-sized particles (approximately 250 nm × 50 nm × 10 nm) of goethite (α-FeOOH) were homogenously distributed in the chitosan polymer, which exhibited a high adsorption capacity. Under the experimental conditions, the beads could purify synthetic high-arsenic water (0.5 mgAs L−1) to world drinking standard levels (<0.01 mgAs L−1).88
5. From 3D to 4D printing of hydrogel nanocomposites
3D printing has drawn tremendous attention from both academia and industry with its potential for application in various fields. 3D printing represents a family of flexible manufacturing techniques that enables the fast and accurate fabrication of structures with highly organized and functional 3D tissue constructs in a broad range of sizes, from sub-micrometer to several meters.89 For example, a lithium-chloride-containing hydrogel printing ink was developed and printed onto treated polyacrylamide and poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) with no visible signs of delamination and geometrically scaling resistance under moderate uniaxial tension and fatigue.90 Moreover, 3D printing technologies will impact the biosensor community in the near future, at both the sensor prototyping level and the sensing layer organization level. The development of multiplex sensing layers, printed separately and assembled on demand, has allowed for the creation of complex sensing systems,91 as shown in Fig. 8a and b. Three-dimensional bioprinting technology has the potential to create 3D tissue constructs in vitro endowed with in-vivo-like biological functionality, in contrast to conventional microfabrication strategies such as micromolding, biotextiles, and photolithography. Using a rapid 3D printing platform, microscale continuous optical printing (μCOP), a hydrogel microfish featuring biomimetic structures, locomotive capabilities, and functionalized nanoparticles was engineered. The μCOP system could print complex 3D structures within seconds at high resolution (∼1 μm) across multiple orders of magnitude in scale. The 3D-printed microfish exhibited propulsion that was highly efficient, chemically powered, and magnetically guidable.92 The 3D-printed microfish could be applied in sensors and environmental conservation. Another approach by stereolithographic printing (light-based 3D printing) using sodium alginate, photoacid generators and various combinations of divalent cation salts, could tune the hydrogel degradation kinetics, pattern fidelity, and mechanical properties,93 which would reduce the environmental and health risks of the hydrogel nanocomposites.
 Fig. 8  From 3D to 4D bioprinting of hydrogel nanocomposites. a) Schematic illustration of the printing of uniform and multiplex layers by the 3D bioprinting technique, including two independent crosslinking steps. b) Top and 3D μCT reconstructions of the final bioprinted 3D structure. c) A diagram of 4D printing with complex functions.91,94 
Research into 4D printing has attracted unprecedented interest since 2013 when the idea was first introduced.95,96 The concept is based on 3D printing technology but requires an additional stimulus and stimulus-responsive materials.95,97 Based on certain interaction mechanisms among stimuli and smart materials, as well as the appropriate design of multi-material structures from mathematical modeling, 4D printed structures evolve as a function of time and exhibit intelligent behavior. The 4D bioprinting strategy is based on the integration of stimuli-responsive biomaterials within the sphere of 3D bioprinting technology for the fabrication of biologically active constructs that can alter their shapes upon desired stimulation, as shown in Fig. 8c.97 Unlike 3D printing, 4D printing is time dependent, printer independent, and predictable; furthermore, it targets shape/property/functionality evolution. This method allows for self-assembly, multifunctionality, and self-repair, which may solve various challenges during their prospective applications.98
6. Design of multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogels
Compared with preparation processes for most supramolecular hydrogels, which strongly rely on tedious and time-consuming procedures such as sonication and repeated heating/cooling cycles, multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogels exhibit ultrafast and moldable phase transitions in response to a variety of external stimuli.99–104 Multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogels exhibit sensitive responses under complex environmental conditions, thus making them more suitable for use in practical applications.48,104 Developing materials that can respond to more than one stimulus either simultaneously or independently is always desirable because it will provide more effective control over the functioning of the materials under diverse conditions.105 A new type of multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogel crosslinked by metal ions and biopolymers has been reported. By mixing the biopolymer CS with a variety of metal ions at the appropriate pH values, Sun et al. obtained a series of transparent and stable hydrogels within a few seconds through supramolecular complexation.106 Interestingly, the CS–Ag hydrogel exhibits sharp phase transitions in response to multiple external stimuli, including pH, chemical redox reactions, cations, anions and neutral species. This soft matter could serve as a sensitive tool for environmental measurements.106 Cao et al. developed a temperature and pH double-controllable oil/water separation material through photoinitiated free-radical polymerization.107 The multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogel contains poly(dimethylamino)ethylmethacrylate (DMAEMA) monomer, N,N′-methylene bisacrylamide (BIS) as the chemical crosslinker, and polyacrylamide (PAM) as a thickener. Stainless steel mesh coated with poly-DMAEMA hydrogel by simple immersion was withdrawn horizontally from the solution and exposed to UV light to induce in situ free-radical polymerization. Due to the double responsiveness, the as-prepared mesh selectively separated water from oil/water mixtures when the temperature or pH was appropriately adjusted. Oil was stored on the mesh when the temperature was less than 55 °C at pH 7 or when the pH was less than 13 at 25 °C. After water was completed removed, oil permeated through the mesh when the temperature was greater than 55 °C or the pH was greater than 13.
7. Rapid and sensitive detection of contaminants in water by imaging and biosensors
The rapid and sensitive detection of pollutants is an important application of hydrogel nanocomposites. Due to the low concentrations of pesticides, heavy metal ions and organic pollutants in environmental samples, existing detection methods involving extraction, such as chromatographic, fluorimetric, and spectrophotometric methods, are often time consuming, use a large amount of chemical reagents and cause sample loss. However, emerging detection methods based on nanohydrogel composites avoid such complex preparations and potential sample loss while greatly reducing the testing time and cost.108 In this section, visual inspections of contaminants using hydrogel nanocomposites and the design of hydrogel nanocomposites on microfluidic devices are discussed. Then, enzyme-based biosensors are reviewed. Finally, the shortcomings of the related studies are discussed.
7.1 Visual detection of contaminants
Since hydrogels are transparent and present a low background signal for optical detection, they provide little interference. By taking advantage of these excellent properties, hydrogels can be widely used in the visual detection of contaminants.109 The surface area of hydrogels determines the catalytic ability of hydrogels by providing more binding sites. In addition, micropores can increase the specific surface area of hydrogels somewhat. For example, an Fe–polyaniline-ethylenediamine hydrogel presented a high specific area (as high as 1400 m2 g−1) dominated by micropores (pore width < 0.8 nm) and a porous network structure. Smaller micropores in the hydrogel played an indispensable role in facilitating the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).63 During the preparation of the hydrogel, probes immobilized on the hydrogel network could bind to the substrate and detect contaminants either directly or indirectly.110 Due to the low cost, high speed and simplicity of visual detection, it has become an attractive method for analysis in poorly equipped rural areas.
Nanosize probes can specifically bind with a substance without interference from other substances in the sample. A functional hydrogel-based strip-like strategy was developed to directly detect Cu2+.109 A strip-like hydrogel with a uniform microporous structures was prepared through caging poly(thymine) (poly T) as a probe, which effectively templated the formation of fluorescent copper nanoparticles (CuNPs) in the presence of the reductant (ascorbate) and Cu2+. After the Cu2+ sample was injected into the micropores, fluorescent CuNPs were in situ templated by poly T in the hydrogel within several minutes, with a detectable minimum concentration of 20 μM. Under UV light, a red fluorescent signal was observed by the naked eyes within 5 min and recorded by a common digital camera (Fig. 9a).63 In this strategy, hydrogel networks protected nucleic acid probes from being hydrolyzed by nucleases. Similarly, a functional gold nanorod (AuNR)-based DNA-crosslinked hydrogel was developed for the sensitive and visual detection of Pb2+, with a detectable minimum concentration of 55 μM.89 The method is based on a functional DNA-crosslinked hydrogel encapsulating glucoamylase for molecular recognition and signal amplification, and AuNRs as a multicolor substrate. The color variation of the AuNR suspension was correlated with the concentration of the targets. The addition of H2O2 to the AuNRs in the presence of a high concentration of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide resulted in the etching of AuNRs along the longitudinal direction, leading to AuNRs with different aspect ratios and different colors.
 Fig. 9  Typical methods for visual detection based on fluorescence changes. a) In the presence of Cu2+, fluorescent CuNPs were rapidly synthesized with poly-thymine and ascorbic acid.63 b) Detection was achieved by the selective binding of Hg2+ between two thymine bases, inducing a hairpin structure. Green fluorescence was observed after the addition of SYBR Green I dye.115 
Hg2+ has been shown to mediate the pairing of T–T bases in DNA, which are more stable than T–A Watson–Crick pairing.111–113 A polyacrylamide-hydrogel-based sensor functionalized with a thymine-rich DNA simultaneously detected and removed Hg2+ from water.114 Detection was achieved by selective binding of Hg2+ between two thymine bases, inducing a hairpin structure; upon addition of SYBR Green I dye, green fluorescence was observed. The naked-eye detection limit in a 50 mL water sample was 10 nM Hg2+. In the absence of Hg2+, yellow fluorescence caused by the interactions between the DNA and dye was observed (Fig. 9b).115 Most importantly, the T–T pairing-based biosensor showed satisfactory selectivity. In the presence of Hg2+, the intensity of the detection signal of the biosensor was five-times higher than when other metal ions were present.111
Semiconductor QDs, as one of the most important fluorescent labels, have been widely used in biological fields such as in vitro and in vivo cell imaging.116 Chen et al. first used QDs as selective metal-ion probes in aqueous samples.117 They found that thioglycerol-capped CdS QDs could specifically detect copper ions in samples and that L-cysteine-capped CdS QDs could specifically detect zinc ions. The detection limits were 0.8 μM and 0.1 μM for the thioglycerol- and L-cysteine-capped CdS QDs, respectively. The luminescence of the thioglycerol-capped CdS QDs was quenched by 30% in a solution containing 100 μM Cu2+. In the presence of Cu2+, excited electrons (e−) in the conduction band recombined non-radiatively with holes (h+) in the valence band, resulting in effective quenching and red shifting of the luminescence of the QDs. In contrast, the luminescence intensity of the L-cysteine-capped QDs increased two-fold in a solution containing 100 μm Zn2+ due to the formation of a zinc-cysteine complex.117 QDs are also used to image phenol in samples. Researchers fabricated a miniature device for detecting phenol by encapsulating tyrosinase–QD conjugates in poly-2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (PHEMA) hydrogels.108 The molecularly imprinted polymerized ionic liquid hydrogel film was prepared on a glassy carbon electrode surface for sensing. AuNPs and ZnCdHgSe QDs were incorporated into the imprinted film as active photoelectric materials. In the presence of phenol, the fluorescence intensity of the QDs decreased because quinone was produced from the enzymatic reaction between tyrosinase and phenol.108
7.2 Hydrogel nanocomposites on microfluidic devices
Microfluidic devices confer a high throughput while increasing manipulability and control over experimental conditions and have been proposed and applied to environmental and biological analyses. Point-of-care testing (POCT) with the advantages of speed, simplicity, portability, and low cost is critical for the measurement of analytes in a variety of environments where access to laboratory infrastructure is lacking. While qualitative POCTs are widely available, quantitative POCTs present significant challenges. Zhu et al. described a method that integrated Au core/Pt shell nanoparticles (Au@PtNPs) encapsulated in a target-responsive hydrogel with a volumetric bar-chart chip (V-Chip) for quantitative POCTs, as shown in Fig. 10.118 The chip with a low cocaine concentration of 0.6 μm showed little response in 15 min. Upon introduction of the target, the hydrogel immediately dissolved and released Au@PtNPs, which efficiently catalyzed the decomposition of H2O2 to generate a large volume of O2 to move of an ink bar in the V-Chip. The traveling distance of the ink bar was visually read to quantify the concentration of the introduced target. This method has the potential to be used for the portable and quantitative detection of a wide range of targets without any external instrumentation. Another disposable, equipment-free, versatile POCT platform, microfluidic distance readout sweet hydrogel integrated paper-based analytical device (μPAD), was developed for the portable quantitative detection of different types of targets.98 The platform relies on a target-responsive aptamer-crosslinked hydrogel for target recognition, cascade enzymatic reactions for signal amplification, and microfluidic μPADs for a visual distance-based quantitative readout. Upon target introduction, the hydrogel decomposes to release glucoamylase, which catalyzes amylose to produce a large amount of glucose. With a simple folding of the μPAD, the sample solution containing glucose product wicks and diffuses in parallel to each test zone to carry out homogeneous assays, where glucose is used for brown color visualization through multiple enzymatic and chemical cascade reactions. Because the target-induced cascade reaction is triggered by aptamer/target recognition, this method is widely suitable for different kinds of targets. With the advantages of low cost, ease of operation, general applicability, and disposability with quantitative readout, the hydrogel integrated PAD holds great potential for the portable detection of trace targets in environmental and biological monitoring.119 The μPAD system can be extended to the detection of various targets by incorporating the corresponding aptamer into the hydrogel. The reported μPAD system provides a new platform for the portable, disposable and visual detection of a wide range of targets.98 In addition, microfluidics could be used to study the interactions between nanoparticles (pollutants) and nanoparticles. A simple one-inlet–one-outlet device was operated by the effective combination of several techniques, including particle clustering, the interactions among engineered particles, two-phase partitioning and dehydration control of aqueous plugs, and shape/color-based particle identification.120 One challenge for the application of microfluidic devices is the control design.
 Fig. 10  The working principle of the au@PtNPs encapsulated in a target-responsive hydrogel with a volumetric bar-chart chip readout for visual quantitative detection.118 
7.3 Enzyme-based biosensors for contaminant detection using hydrogel nanocomposites
Electrochemical enzyme biosensors, which manage to judiciously combine the fast and sensitive electrochemical method with the intrinsic chemical specificity and signal amplification functions of the enzyme, are considered one of the most important biosensors.121 Special materials, such as nanomaterials,122 biopolymers,123 and surfactants,84 are commonly applied to the electrode to modify the protein-based sensors. Modifying proteins with special materials can provide an appropriate and stable micro-environment, maintain the activities of the proteins and enhance electron transfer between the proteins and electrode. Fenugreek gum has the advantages of high moisture content, good swelling performance and nontoxicity and has been innovatively applied to drug delivery systems and enzyme immobilization. When fenugreek was used to immobilize AuNPs and acetylcholinesterase, the resultant biosensor quickly and specifically determined the concentration of carbamates, with limits of detection less than 250 × 10−9 mol L−1.124 Immobilization of acetylcholinesterase onto the membrane resulted in a high enzyme retention efficiency (92%) and a prolonged shelf life of the enzyme (half-life, 55 days). For a single pesticide, the limit of detection was below the international maximum residual limit (MRL). Enzyme-mimicking nanomaterials (nanozymes) were more cost-effective and robust than protein enzymes, but lacked specificity. Molecularly imprinted polymers were grown on Fe3O4 nanozymes with peroxidase-like activity. The introduction of charged monomers then led to a nearly 100-fold increase in specificity for the imprinted substrate over that for bare Fe3O4, as shown in Fig. 11.125 The same method was also successfully applied for imprinting on AuNPs (peroxidase mimicry) and nanoceria (oxidase mimicry). Molecular imprinting furthers the functional enzyme-mimicking aspect of nanozymes, and such hybrid materials will find applications in biosensor development, separation and environmental remediation.
 Fig. 11  Photographs showing the activity and specificity of a) Fe3O4 NPs, b) T-MIPneg and c) A-MIPpos nanogels for the oxidation of TMB and ABTS, with or without H2O2. Fe3O4 NPs (50 μg mL−1, free or in nanogels) were used in all experiments oxidizing 0.5 mM substrate with 10 mM H2O2 in buffer A (20 mM acetate, pH 4.0) for 30 min at room temperature. d) A schematic for the imprinting of TMB on Fe3O4 NPs.125 
7.4 Challenges in the synthesis of biocompatible and biodegradable nanomaterials for contaminant detection
The potential toxicity of hydrogel nanocomposites used in the actual environment should be considered, especially that of the incorporated nanomaterials. Among the nanomaterials mentioned above, the negative effects of QDs deserve special attention, for example, cadmium selenide (CdSe) QDs. CdSe QDs typically consist of a core (CdSe) and a protective coating (e.g., zinc sulfur (ZnS)) that acts as a shell. The cytotoxicity of CdSe QDs is mainly caused by the leaching of toxic Cd2+ ions in the core.126 Zhang et al. studied the acute toxicity of CdSe QDs on late-pregnancy mice.127 The results showed that CdSe QDs caused the most serious aberrations, including severe malformations of the placenta and fetus, changes in placental hormone secretion levels, and changes in gene expression levels. However, conjugating QDs with biological and low-cytotoxicity ligands (such as antibodies, peptides, sugars and polymers) partly reduced their toxicity. The polymeric network neutralized the toxic ions (Cd2+) to inhibit the toxicity to a certain degree. In this way, the cytotoxicity of the hydrogel nanocomposites was below the acceptable limit.128
The toxicity of GO is attracting increasing attention.129,130 GO at a concentration of 1–100 mg L−1 was found to have adverse effects on zebrafish embryos. Severe delays in hatching and decreased heart rates were detected in embryos treated with 100 mg L−1 GO compared with untreated embryos. As the concentration of GO increased from 0.001 to 100 mg L−1, the malformation rate significantly increased from 6.2% to 26.0%.130
Metallic nanoparticles, such as CuNPs, AgNPs and AuNPs, are common components in hydrogel nanocomposites. Because copper is an important essential micronutrient for all living animals and plants, CuNPs in trace amounts are safer than other heavy metal nanoparticles at similar concentrations.21 However, due to certain particularities of nanosized copper, CuNPs can adversely affect human health and ecosystems. Due to the developmental toxicity of certain nanomaterials, potential risks should be thoroughly considered before nanomaterial-related hydrogel nanocomposites are used in the environment.
It is urgent to explore effective strategies to control the unintentional effects of nanoparticles. Although many methods for the synthesis of biocompatible and biodegradable nanomaterials have been reported, strategies for controlling nanotoxicity remains in their infancy.131 The strategies to control nanotoxicity at least include structural modification and surface modification, as well as improvements in suitable and uniform particle sizes and safe aspect ratios. For example, a small and inexpensive biomolecule, L-cysteine, was covalently immobilized onto GO to form L-cysteine-GO (CysGO), which has the advantageous properties of GO, exhibits excellent biocompatibility, acts as a breathable coating and antidote, and is suitable for use in various applications.132 A recent work used next-generation DNA sequencing and metagenomic analysis to provide powerful tools for the environmentally friendly design of nanoparticles.133 Disadvantages of high-throughput sequencing are the high cost and requirements for instruments and operation.
For visual detection, the stability of the fluorescence is very important. High salt concentrations and continuous UV radiation may affect the fluorescence of SYBR Green I. Liu et al. found that the fluorescence of free SYBR Green I was weakened with increasing salt concentration and continuous UV radiation treatment.134 In contrast, DNA gelatin SYBR Green I covered by a thin silica shell showed excellent fluorescence stability. Thus, dense silica shell coverage had a positive effect on the fluorescence stability of SYBR Green I. Then, the release of daily products used in large quantities, such as pharmaceutical and personal care products (PPCPs), has become a critical environmental issue.135,136 Aquatic and terrestrial organisms can experience biological effects even when small amounts of PPCPs are released into the environment.137,138 Nanocomposite hydrogels are considered to be effective materials for detecting PPCPs. Tetracycline is a typical, widely used antibiotic and has been detected in various environmental matrices. A fluorescence sensing platform based on GO hydrogels showed a rapid and sensitive response to oxytetracycline. The hydrogel has high mechanical strength and thermal stability, with a linear response to oxytetracycline over a range of 25–1000 μg L−1.139
Substances in real samples that are similar to the target contaminant can affect the detection results. In the detection of Hg2+ and Pb2+ with dithizone on a poly(acrylamide-co-methylenbisacrylamide) nanocomposite, the coexistence of metal ions (Cu2+, Ag+, Co2+, Cd2+ and Pd2+) in real samples has a slight impact on the quantitative determination of the target ions (Hg2+ and Pb2+). Competitive cations adsorb on the sensor, producing positive errors (+5% at λmax for each metal ion) in the absorbance signal.140 However, the adsorption of interfering ions only slightly affects the detection results of the target ions under the optimum pH and adsorption time. Therefore, precise control of the pH and adsorption time is particularly important. For pesticide detection, pesticides at equivalent concentrations severely interfere with detection, similar to the interfering effect in ion detection.124
8. Summary and outlook
Hydrogel nanocomposites are relatively new materials that have shown promise in the detection and treatment of pollutants. In this review, hydrogel nanocomposites were investigated as replacements for existing conventional materials used in the detection and treatment of pollutants. The combination of nanomaterials and hydrogels makes the composites superior to the single materials in terms of mechanical properties, viable pH range, adsorption properties and cost reduction, among other factors. Moreover, wastewater emission, leaks from landfills, and broken transmission lines for petrochemical feedstocks can lead to the pollution of surface and ground water, further exacerbating the global water shortage. Therefore, it must be determined whether hydrogel nanocomposites can be applied in the actual environment. Most of the reported studies were performed under laboratory simulation conditions, and the impact of complex environments on practical applications needs further attention. Practical applications of hydrogel nanocomposites also need careful consideration of their ecological risk. In addition, biological effects can occur even when small amounts of PPCPs are released into the environment.137,138 Typical preparation methods for hydrogel nanocomposites and their applications in the detection and removal of pollutants are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. Further research into the detection and removal of emerging contaminants (e.g., PPCPs and organic phosphorus flame retardants) is needed. Some specific issues that have not been well investigated but should be highlighted in future work are given in the following section.
Table 1 Summary of typical preparation methods of hydrogel nanocomposites and their applications in the detection of pollutants




Hydrogel nanocomposites
Preparation method
Detection of pollutants
Reference




Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) aptamer-based hydrogels
Hydrogels were prepared using an AFB1 aptamer and two short complementary DNA strands of AFB1 as crosslinkers
Aflatoxin B1, with a detection limit of 1.77 nM (0.55 ppb)

26



AgBr-anchored 3D nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogels
The hydrogels were synthesized via a simple hydrothermal approach

E. coli, at an extremely low detection limit of 0.17 cfu mL−1 (S/N)

28



DNAzyme-crosslinked hydrogel containing AuNPs
A UO22+-dependent DNAzyme complex composed of substrate strand and enzyme strand was utilized to crosslink DNA-grafted polyacrylamide chains to form a DNA hydrogel
UO22+, with a detection limit of 37 × 10−9 mol L−1

32



Target-responsive aptamer-crosslinked hydrogel
The hydrogel network forms by hybridization between one designed DNA strand containing the Ochratoxin A (OTA) aptamer and two complementary DNA strands grafted onto linear polyacrylamide chains
As low as 1.27 nM (0.51 ppb) OTA can be detected

36



Colorimetric logic system based on an aptamer-crosslinked colloidal crystal hydrogel
With incorporation of the Hg2+- and Ag+-responsive aptamers on hydrogels, the reversible binding between the specific target ion and the aptamer could cause the aptamer to conformationally change and thus trigger shrinkage of the hydrogel with different contents
Visual logic signals can be triggered by two kinds of pollutants (Hg2+ and Ag+) at a concentration of 0.1 μM

37



Functional hydrogel-based strip-like strategy
A strip-like hydrogel with uniform microporous structures was prepared through caging poly(thymine) (poly T) as probes, which can effectively template the formation of fluorescent copper nanoparticles (CuNPs) in the presence of the reductant (ascorbate) and Cu2+
Cu2+, with a detectable minimum concentration of 20 μM

109



Functional gold nanorods (AuNRs)-based DNA-crosslinked hydrogel
The method is based on a functional DNA-crosslinked hydrogel encapsulating glucoamylase for molecular recognition and signal amplification and AuNRs as a multicolor substrate
Pb2+, with a detectable minimum concentration of 55 μM

89



Polyacrylamide hydrogel-based sensor functionalized with a thymine-rich DNA
Detection was achieved by selective binding of Hg2+ between two thymine bases, inducing a hairpin structure where, upon addition of SYBR green I dye, green fluorescence was observed
Using the naked eyes, the detection limit in a 50 mL water sample is 10 nM Hg2+

114



Au@Pt nanoparticle encapsulated target-responsive hydrogels
Hydrogels were prepared via a method that integrated au core/Pt shell nanoparticles (au@PtNPs) encapsulated in a target-responsive hydrogel with a volumetric bar-chart chip (V-Chip) for quantitative point-of-care testing (POCTs), as shown in Fig. 10
Cocaine, with a limit of detection of 0.06 μM

108



Integration of target-responsive hydrogels with microfluidic paper-based analytic devices (μPADs) for POCTs
The platform relies on a target-responsive aptamer-crosslinked hydrogel for target recognition, cascade enzymatic reactions for signal amplification, and microfluidic μPADs for a visual distance-based quantitative readout
The detection limit of cocaine and adenosine was 4.5 μM and 15.7 μM, respectively

98



Fenugreek gum-based biosensor
When fenugreek was used to immobilize AuNPs and acetylcholinesterase, the subsequent biosensor could quickly and specifically determine the concentration of carbamates
The type of carbamate, such as carbofuran, oxamyl, methomyl, or carbaryl, could be detected with limits of detection of 2 × 10−9, 21 × 10−9, 113 × 10−9, and 236 × 10−9 mol L−1, respectively

124





Table 2 Summary of typical preparation methods, removal of pollutants of hydrogel nanocomposites




Hydrogel nanocomposites
Preparation method
Removal of pollutions
Reference




Reusable aptamer column
5′-Amino-modified DNA aptamer binding into CNBr-Sepharose as sorbent was packed into a column to simultaneously remove pharmaceuticals in drinking water
88–95% trace pharmaceuticals (ng L−1) was removed in drinking water

23



AuNPs entrapped within a tannic acid (TA)-functionalized graphene hydrogels
The preparation method involved the reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of TA to form TA-functionalized graphene hydrogel, followed by loading and in situ reduction of AuCl4− ions in the graphene hydrogel network
Nearly 100% methylene blue was (MB) reduced

45



Polyaniline (PANI)/carbon nitride nanosheets (CNNs) composite hydrogels
CNNs were dispersed in the mixed solution of aniline and phytic acid. After ammonium persulfate was added, coral-like PANI nanofibers were formed in situ between layers of the CNNs by polymerization of aniline, which constructed the 3D hierarchical structure of the composite hydrogel
The degradation proportion of MB was approximately 15.8%, and the overall removal rate was 27.5%

64



TiO2/graphene hydrogel

Fig. 5a shows the process for the preparation of the TiO2-GH electrode
100% BPA (20 mg L−1) was removed in 5 h

69



A MoS2-GO hydrogel
The hydrogel nanocomposites were synthesized via a hydrothermal hydrogel method
99% MB was degraded under solar-light irradiation within 60 min

68



g-C3N4/graphene hydrogel
Hydrogels were synthesized at low temperatures via the stacking effect of two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets and π–π conjugation
100% Cr6+ (2 mg L−1) was removed within 25 h

70



Ag3PO4/graphene hydrogels
The hydrogel nanocomposites were synthesized via a hydrothermal hydrogel method
BPA (100 mL, 10 ppm) could be completely removed under visible light within 12 min

72



Hybrid AgBr@rGO graphene hydrogel
AgBr was encapsulated by rGO to form a core–shell structure composite (AgBr@rGO), which was further incorporated into graphene to form GH–AgBr@rGO hydrogels
90% BPA (50 mL, 20 ppm) was removed

59



GO/nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) beads
The GO/nZVI was prepared by mixing nZVI nanoparticles with highly dispersed GO sheets in ultrapure water at pH <7
99% antibiotic ENR was removed in 5 min in a pH 6.6 aqueous solution

75



Agar–C3N4 hybrid hydrogels
Agar and g-C3N4 nanoparticle hydrosol was transformed into a hybrid hydrogel with 3D network structure by a heating–cooling polymerization process (Fig. 7)
The hydrogels' ability to remove phenol and MB is approximately 1.3 and 4.5 times greater than that of pure g-C3N4, respectively

60



Double-network jute/poly acrylic acid (PAA) hydrogel
Jute/PAA hydrogels were synthesized via a simple free-radical polymerization of acrylic acid in jute aqueous solution
Nearly 97% Pb2+ and 89% Cd2+ were removed

82





8.1 Regeneration of hydrogels
The regeneration of adsorbents is currently a difficult issue. Over long operation periods, hydrogel nanomaterials adsorb a large amount of impurities and gradually become saturated, and thus, fail to meet the expected effluent quality requirements. Since most of the contaminants on the adsorbent cannot be degraded or converted, the elution of contaminants may cause secondary contamination.141 At the same time, abandoned adsorbents will lead to a significant waste of resources. If adsorbents could be returned to a condition near that of the initial material, recovery could be effectively achieved, providing an environmentally friendly method. In most of the above studies, the solvent regeneration method was adopted to recover and recycle the adsorbent. Acid or alkali solutions are common solvents for regenerative treatments by exchanging ions with adsorbates. The electrostatic repulsion is enhanced, and eventually, the adsorbed materials are desorbed. Inorganic acids (e.g., HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4) have been widely used in the desorption of heavy metal ions.142–144 A thymine-rich DNA-functionalized polyacrylamide hydrogel was regenerated by soaking in 1 mL 1% HCl.114 Magnetic amino-modified CoFe2O4 nanoparticles were regenerated using a 0.2 mol L−1 NaOH solution, with only a 12% reduction in the Pb2+ adsorption capacity.145 Organic complexing agents, such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and thiourea, have also been used as adsorbents. EDTA complexes with metal cations, such as Pb2+, Cd2+, Ni2+ and Cu2+, desorbing ions from the hydrogel. The metal-ion desorption rates of 0.1 mol L−1 EDTA were 93.2%, 94.3%, 92.1% and 90.3% for Pb2+, Cd2+, Cu2+ and Cr3+, respectively. After three cycles, the adsorption capacity of the hydrogel was still more than 85%.146 In addition, some low-cost attempts have been widely applied to enhance the desorption of adsorbents. The addition of magnetic iron materials into hydrogel nanocomposites is quite common.19,146 The future challenges mainly focus on how to deal with the pollutants desorbed from hydrogels and thereby avoid secondary pollution.
8.2 Promoting commercial and practical applications
The treatment of industrial and municipal wastewater with high concentrations of organic pollutants is a major commercial application of hydrogel nanocomposites. Membrane separation technology is the key to water treatment systems. Pressure-driven membranes have been phased out because of membrane fouling and high initial energy consumption. Forward osmosis (FO) membrane technology has become a promising technology due to its low primary energy demand and excellent antifouling capability.147 Numerous studies have been conducted to develop commercial FO membranes by coating nanomaterials such as SiO2 NPs,148 TiO2 NPs149 and carbon nanotubes150 onto a selective layer (e.g., polyamide). However, these surface modifications did not make the selective layer especially resistant to fouling and only marginally improved the performance. Qin et al. developed a hydrogel FO membrane consisting of a hydrogel selective layer and a GO-polymer 3D support layer (Fig. 12).147 When fed with 2000 mg L−1 of a typical organic foulant (alginate), the fouling extent of the hydrogel FO membrane and commercial FO membrane were 7.7% and 14.5%, respectively, which proved the excellent antifouling capability of the hydrogel FO membrane. Hydrogel FO membranes are a new and efficient material that can be used to directly treat high concentrations of wastewater.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagrams of the effect of the degree of crosslinking on both the antifouling capability and separation efficiency of the hydrogel FO membrane. a) Insufficient crosslinking of the hydrogel selective layer results in severe leakage of the drawn solute. b) Optimal crosslinking of the hydrogel selective layer provides both excellent antifouling capability and a high retention of the drawn solute. c) Excessive crosslinking of the hydrogel selective layer results in severe membrane fouling.147 
Because of the global freshwater shortage crisis, methods to obtain more freshwater have gradually attracted the attention of researchers worldwide. Seawater desalination technology provides a very promising method for solving the global freshwater shortage crisis. Recently, Zhao et al. demonstrated a hierarchically nanostructured gel (HNG) based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polypyrrole (PPy) that served as an independent solar vapor generator.151 An energy confinement strategy was present based on water management through hierarchical water pathways in a hydrogel, which consisted of internal gaps, micron channels and molecular meshes (Fig. 13a). A high water evaporation rate of 3.2 kg m−2 h−1 was achieved under 1 sun solar radiation (1 kW m−2) with excellent stability and durability, indicating its potential for scalable manufacturing for practical applications in the future. As demonstrated by a prototype solar water purification system (Fig. 13b–d), the HNG was able to produce fresh water with a daily yield of 18–23 m−3 under natural sunlight.
 Fig. 13  Schematics of highly efficient solar vapor generation and outdoor solar water purification using HNGs in natural sunlight. a) The HNG consists of hierarchical porous structures, including internal gaps, micron channels and molecular meshes, wherein the solar absorber (PPy) penetrates the polymeric PVA network of the gel. b) Photograph of a large-scale HNG sheet. c) and d) Schematic of a water receiver based on an HNG for a prototype solar water purification system simulating the practical water purification equipment.151 
8.3 Extending to soil-water systems
In addition to applications in water, hydrogels and hydrogel nanocomposites could be extended to the treatment of contaminated soil-water systems. In recent studies, superabsorbent natural polymers-based hydrogels have been shown to be promising soil humidity conditioners and carrier molecules in slow-release fertilizers (SRFs) due to their ability to absorb large amounts (swelling ratio > 100) of water.152 Because of their low cost, high abundance, and good renewability and biodegradability, superabsorbent hydrogels incorporating natural polymers have attracted increasing attention. Natural polymers, especially polysaccharides, zeolites and bentonite, could be added to the adsorbents, enhancing the adsorption properties via van der Waals forces between their silicon hexahedra and aluminum octahedra.153 However, superabsorbent hydrogels exhibit poor mechanical properties. The introduction of inorganic nanomaterials, such as montmorillonites and CS, overcomes the poor mechanical strength and enhances the functionality of the material. Elbarbary et al.154 and Zhou et al.155 synthesized fertilizer-loaded hydrogel nanocomposites and arrived at similar conclusions that the introduction of inorganic nanomaterials enhanced the water absorbency, slow-release properties and mechanical strength. Furthermore, soil pollution is an urgent global problem arousing widespread concern. For example, excessive NH4+ is released into soil by anthropogenic activities (fertilizer application) and can flow into water and cause eutrophication. With an initial NH4+ concentration of 1 mM, the removal rate by a PAA/calcite hydrogel composite reached 80%, corresponding to only ∼200 μM ammonium ions left in the soil.156 After long accumulation periods, organic pollutants in soil, such as organochlorine pesticides (OCPs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), pose substantial risks to the ecological functions of the soil, to plant growth, and to human health through the food chain.157
Due to high costs and negative environmental impacts, existing physical, chemical and biological technologies are rarely applied to large-scale soil remediation. Hydrogel-based adsorption is an emerging method to control pollution. Recently, an amphiphilic diblock copolymer platform of photosensitive core–shell nanoparticles was used to extract pollutants from water and soil (Fig. 14).158 Adsorption onto nanoparticles can be exploited to efficiently remove hydrophobic pollutants from water and contaminated soil. Preliminary in vivo experiments suggest that treatment with photocleavable nanoparticles can significantly reduce the teratogenicity of BPA, triclosan and 17a-ethinyl estradiol without generating clearly toxic byproducts. Small-scale pilot experiments on wastewater, thermal printing paper and contaminated soil demonstrated the applicability of the approach. Hydrogel nanocomposites may act as adsorbents for soil sorption in the future, reducing costs and improving efficiency.
 Fig. 14  Nanoparticles with photoinduced precipitation for the extraction of pollutants from water and soil. Photocleavable copolymers are used to prepare nanoparticles with inducible precipitation. a) Photocleavable PEG-b-PLA copolymers can be synthesized using a photolabile linker. b) The light-induced cleavage of the polymer into smaller chains can be followed by gel permeation chromatography. c) Nanoparticles can be prepared using different ratios of photocleavable to non-cleavable copolymers. Upon ultraviolet irradiation, these core–shell nanoparticles lose their PEG corona proportionally to the content of photocleavable copolymer.158 
8.4 Improving nanomaterial biocompatibility
Although many methods for the synthesis of biocompatible and biodegradable nanomaterials are reported, the control strategy of nanotoxicity remains in its infancy.131,159 Surface modification is a convenient strategy to improve nanomaterial biocompatibility. However, the advantageous properties would be affected by the surface modifications in most of cases. Ideally, the nanomaterials achieved by optimization of synthesis conditions would be biodegradable and the degraded products would be easily excreted from biological systems. Notably, suitable and uniform particle rather than large or small particle sizes are critical to nanomaterial biocompatibility.160,161 The size and shape of nanomaterials can also be modified through components in vivo, which should be further understood. Many studies in nanotoxicology have been conducted but do not reflect the actual hazards posed by nanomaterials. Biological or environmental matrices, exposure conditions (e.g., exposure pathway, time and concentrations), and transgenerational effects are the issues ignored in nanotoxicology.162,163 In addition, some concerns have not been studied well, such as unintended releases, nanomaterial lifecycle, occupational exposure and methodology.
8.5 Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery
Machine learning addresses the question of how to build computers that improve automatically through experience. It is one of today's most rapidly growing technical fields, lying at the intersection of computer science and statistics, and at the core of artificial intelligence and data science. The adoption of data-intensive machine-learning methods can be found throughout science, technology and commerce, leading to more evidence-based decision-making across many walks of life, including health care, manufacturing, education, financial modeling, policing, and marketing.164 Inorganic–organic hybrid materials have been studied for decades; nevertheless, the formation of these compounds is not fully understood, and the development of new compounds relies primarily on exploratory syntheses. Simulation- and data-driven approaches provide an alternative to experimental trial-and-error. Machine-learning models outperformed traditional human strategies, and successfully predicted conditions for new organically templated inorganic product formation with a success rate of 89 percent. Inverting the machine-learning model revealed new hypotheses regarding the conditions for successful product formation.165 There is much work to be done for the machine-learning approach in forecasting experimental design for pollutant removal in water treatment. There are at least three strategies: simulation-based predictions of physical properties to identify promising target candidates for synthetic efforts; determination of the structure–property relationship from large bodies of experimental data, enabled by integration with high-throughput synthesis and measurement tools; and clustering on the basis of similar outcomes. Machine learning provides insights to guide the next generation of materials discovery or design.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 21722703, 31770550, 21577070 and 41501514), the Ministry of Education (People's Republic of China) as an innovative team rolling project (grant no. IRT_17R58), the 111 program (grant no. T2017002) and the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin City (grant no. 18JCYBJC23600).
References
S. R. Lewis, S. Datta, M. Gui, E. L. Coker, F. E. Huggins, S. Daunert, L. Bachas and D. Bhattacharyya, Reactive nanostructured membranes for water purification, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 8577–8582 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Katija, C. A. Choy, R. E. Sherlock, A. D. Sherman and B. H. Robison, From the surface to the seafloor: How giant larvaceans transport microplastics into the deep sea, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700715 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Albright, Y. Takeshita, D. A. Koweek, A. Ninokawa, K. Wolfe, T. Rivlin, Y. Nebuchina, J. Young and K. Caldeira, Carbon dioxide addition to coral reef waters suppresses net community calcification, Nature, 2018, 555, 516 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. L. Weng, Z. Z. Weng, Z. Y. Liang, H. X. Lyu, Z. Y. Zhuang and Y. Yu, Mesoporous Ca-Mn-O as an efficient scavenger toward organic pollutants and heavy metals: ion exchange provoking ultrafast Fenton-like reaction based on the synergy of alkaline earth/transition metals, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9528–9538 RSC .
S. Endo and Y. Matsuura, Characterizing sorption and permeation properties of membrane filters used for aquatic integrative passive samplers, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 2118–2125 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, Y. F. Poon, W. Li, H. Y. Zhu, S. H. Yeap, Y. Cao, X. Qi, C. Zhou, M. Lamrani and R. W. Beuerman, A polycationic antimicrobial and biocompatible hydrogel with microbe membrane suctioning ability, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 149–156 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Chaudhuri, L. Gu, D. Klumpers, M. Darnell, S. A. Bencherif, J. C. Weaver, N. Huebsch, H.-p. Lee, E. Lippens and G. N. Duda, Hydrogels with tunable stress relaxation regulate stem cell fate and activity, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 326–334 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mehrali, A. Thakur, C. P. Pennisi, S. Talebian, A. Arpanaei, M. Nikkhah and A. Dolatshahi-Pirouz, Nanoreinforced hydrogels for tissue engineering: biomaterials that are compatible with load-bearing and electroactive tissues, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603612 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Annabi, A. Tamayol, J. A. Uquillas, M. Akbari, L. E. Bertassoni, C. Cha, G. Camciunal, M. R. Dokmeci, N. A. Peppas and A. Khademhosseini, 25th anniversary article: Rational design and applications of hydrogels in regenerative medicine, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 85–123 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Othman, B. P. Cillero, S. R. Van and P. Habibovic, Understanding interactions between biomaterials and biological systems using proteomics, Biomaterials, 2018, 167, 191–204 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Li, X. Du and B. Xu, Supramolecular biofunctional materials, Biomaterials, 2017, 129, 1–27 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu and L. Li, Ultra-stretchable and self-healing double network hydrogel for 3d printing and strain sensor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26429–26437 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, L. B. Huang, M. C. Wong, L. Chen, G. Bai and J. Hao, Self-powered sensors: Environmentally friendly hydrogel-based triboelectric nanogenerators for versatile energy harvesting and self-powered sensors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601529 CrossRef .
X. H. Qin, X. Wang, M. Rottmar, B. J. Nelson and K. Maniura-Weber, Near-infrared light-sensitive polyvinyl alcohol hydrogel photoresist for spatiotemporal control of cell-instructive 3D microenvironments, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705564 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Wang, B. Li, L. Ma, L. Shi, Y. Xiong and H. Xu, Novel iron/cobalt-containing polypyrrole hydrogel-derived trifunctional electrocatalyst for self-powered overall water splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606497 CrossRef .
S. Merino, C. Martín, K. Kostarelos, M. Prato and E. Vázquez, Nanocomposite hydrogels: 3D polymer-nanoparticle synergies for on-demand drug delivery, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4686–4697 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yue, C. Shi, X. Yang, B. Shen, Y. Sun, C. Yang, X. Xu, H. Sun, K. Yu and Y. Bai, pH- and temperature-sensitive hydrogel nanoparticles with dual photoluminescence for bioprobes, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5856 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Maity, W. E. Hendriksen, J. H. van Esch and R. Eelkema, Spatial structuring of a supramolecular hydrogel by using a visible-light triggered catalyst, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 998–1001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Basuki, F. Qie, X. Mulet, R. Suryadinata, A. V. Vashi, Y. Y. Peng, L. Li, X. Hao, T. Tan and T. C. Hughes, Photo-modulated therapeutic protein release from a hydrogel depot using visible light, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 986–991 CrossRef .
C. Mao, Y. Xiang, X. Liu, Z. Cui, X. Yang, Y. Kwk, H. Pan, X. Wang, P. K. Chu and S. Wu, Photo-inspired antibacterial activity and wound healing acceleration by hydrogel embedded with Ag/Ag@AgCl/ZnO nanostructures, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9010–9021 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Mao, Z. Qing, T. Qing, F. Xu, L. Wen, X. He, D. He, H. Shi and K. Wang, Poly (thymine)-templated copper nanoparticles as a fluorescent indicator for hydrogen peroxide and oxidase-based biosensing, Anal. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 87, 7454–7460 Search PubMed .
L. Han, K. Liu, M. Wang, K. Wang, L. Fang, H. Chen, J. Zhou and X. Lu, Mussel-inspired adhesive and conductive hydrogel with long-lasting moisture and extreme temperature tolerance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704195 CrossRef .
X. Hu, L. Mu, Q. Zhou, J. Wen and J. Pawliszyn, ssDNA aptamer-based column for simultaneous removal of nanogram per liter level of illicit and analgesic pharmaceuticals in drinking water, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 4890–4895 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Gumuscu, A. S. Haase, A. M. Benneker, M. A. Hempenius, V. D. B. Albert, R. G. H. Lammertink and J. C. T. Eijkel, Desalination by electrodialysis using a stack of patterned ion-selective hydrogels on a microfluidic device, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8685–8693 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Q. Chen, W. Jiang, Z. Wei and Y. Zhu, Separation-free TiO2-graphene hydrogel with 3D network structure for efficient photoelectrocatalytic mineralization, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 106–113 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Y. Mao, D. Huang, Z. He, J. Yan, T. Tian, Y. Shi, Y. Song, X. Li and Z. Zhu, Portable visual quantitative detection of aflatoxin B1 using a target-responsive hydrogel and a distance-readout microfluidic chip, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 3097–3104 RSC .
X. Zhu, X. Mao, Z. Wang, C. Feng, G. Chen and G. Li, Fabrication of nanozyme@DNA hydrogel and its application in biomedical analysis, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 959–970 CrossRef .
N. Hao, X. Zhang, Z. Zhou, R. Hua, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, J. Qian, H. Li and K. Wang, AgBr nanoparticles/3D nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogel for fabricating all-solid-state
luminol-electrochemiluminescence Escherichia coli aptasensors, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 97, 377–383 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Huang, Z. M. Huang, H. Y. Xiao, Z. K. Wu, L. J. Tang and J. H. Jiang, Protein scaffolded DNA tetrads enable efficient delivery and ultrasensitive imaging of miRNA through crosslinking hybridization chain reaction, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4892–4897 RSC .
B. Guo, B. Wen, W. Cheng, X. Y. Zhou, X. L. Duan, M. Zhao, Q. F. Xia and S. J. Ding, An enzyme-free and label-free surface plasmon resonance biosensor for ultrasensitive detection of fusion gene based on DNA self-assembly hydrogel with streptavidin encapsulation, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 112, 120–126 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, S. S. Jia, H. M. Zhang, Y. L. Ma, Z. C. Guan, J. X. Li, Z. Zhu, T. H. Ji and C. J. Yang, Integrating target-responsive hydrogel with pressuremeter readout enables simple, sensitive, user-friendly, quantitative point-of-care testing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22252–22258 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, L. Fang, Z. Zhu, Y. Ma, L. Zhou, X. Chen, D. Xu and C. Yang, Design and synthesis of target-responsive hydrogel for portable visual quantitative detection of uranium with a microfluidic distance-based readout device, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 496–502 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Song, D. Ye, X. Zuo, J. Li, J. Wang, H. Liu, M. T. Hwang, J. Chao, S. Su and L. Wang, DNA hydrogel with aptamer-toehold-based recognition, cloaking, and decloaking of circulating tumor cells for live cell analysis, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5193–5198 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Chao, H. Liu, S. Su, L. Wang, W. Huang, I. Willner and C. Fan, Clamped hybridization chain reactions for the self-assembly of patterned dna hydrogels, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 2203–2207 CrossRef .
A. J. Simon, L. T. Wallssmith, M. J. Freddi, F. Y. Fong, V. Gubala and K. W. Plaxco, Simultaneous measurement of the dissolution kinetics of responsive dna hydrogels at multiple length scales, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 461–468 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Jia, M. Gao, J. Li, H. Zhang, D. Xu, M. Wu and Y. Chen, Design and synthesis of target-responsive aptamer-cross-linked hydrogel for visual quantitative detection of ochratoxin A, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6982–6990 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ye, H. Wang, H. Ding, Y. Zhao, Y. Pu and Z. Gu, Colorimetric logic response based on aptamer functionalized colloidal crystal hydrogels, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7565–7568 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Shen, X. Hu, Y. Li, Z. Li, J. Xu, X. Song, H. Zeng and Q. Yuan, A targeted “capture” and “removal” scavenger toward multiple pollutants for water remediation based on molecular recognition, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500289 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, L. Mu, J. Wen and Q. Zhou, Covalently synthesized graphene oxide-aptamer nanosheets for efficient visible-light photocatalysis of nucleic acids and proteins of viruses, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2772–2781 CrossRef .
D. F. Li, W. D. Hu, J. Wang, Q. W. Zhang, X. M. Cao, X. Ma and H. Tian, White-light emission from a single organic compound with unique self-folded conformation and multistimuli responsiveness, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5709–5715 RSC .
X. Zeng, D. T. McCarthy, A. Deletic and X. Zhang, Silver/reduced graphene oxide hydrogel as novel bactericidal filter for point-of-use water disinfection, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4344–4351 CrossRef .
T. Y. Klein, J. Wehling, L. Treccani and K. Rezwan, Effective bacterial inactivation and removal of copper by porous ceramics with high surface area, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 1065–1072 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Vijayan, S. Joseph and B. Mathew, Indigofera tinctoria leaf extract mediated green synthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles and assessment of their anticancer, antimicrobial, antioxidant and catalytic properties, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2017, 46, 861–871 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Sui, Q. Meng, X. Zhang, R. Ma and B. Cao, Green synthesis of carbon nanotube-graphene hybrid aerogels and their use as versatile agents for water purification, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8767–8771 RSC .
J. Luo, N. Zhang, J. Lai, R. Liu and X. Liu, Tannic acid functionalized graphene hydrogel for entrapping gold nanoparticles with high catalytic performance toward dye reduction, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 300, 615–623 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Rapp, C. Highley, B. Manor, J. Burdick and I. J. Dmochowski, Ruthenium-crosslinked hydrogels with rapid, visible-light degradation, Chemistry, 2017, 24, 2328–2333 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhu, L. Zhang, K. V. Van, A. Miserez and N. Holtenandersen, White light-emitting multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogel with lanthanides and carbon dots, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10409–10418 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Weng, S. Thanneeru and J. He, Dynamic coordination of Eu-iminodiacetate to control fluorochromic response of polymer hydrogels to multistimuli, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706526 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Pan, Q. Y. Yang, L. Fu, K. Li, S. C. Wei and C. Y. Su, Dual-emission from a single-phase Eu–Ag metal–organic framework: An alternative way to get white-light phosphor, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1954–1960 CrossRef .
S. Z. You, Y. Hu, X. C. Liu and C. H. Wei, Synergetic removal of Pb(II) and dibutyl phthalate mixed pollutants on Bi2O3-TiO2 composite photocatalyst under visible light, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 288–298 CrossRef .
Y. Choi, M. S. Koo, A. D. Bokare, D.-h. Kim, D. W. Bahnemann and W. Choi, Sequential process combination of photocatalytic oxidation and dark reduction for the removal of organic pollutants and Cr(VI) using Ag/TiO2, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 3973–3981 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cui, J. He, H. Wang, J. Hu, L. Liu and Y. Liang, Polyaniline hybridization promotes photo-electro-catalytic removal of organic contaminants over 3D network structure of rGH-PANI/TiO2 hydrogel, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 232–245 CrossRef .
X. F. Liu, Z. P. Xing, Y. Zhang, Z. Z. Li, X. Y. Wu, S. Y. Tan, X. J. Yu, Q. Zhu and W. Zhou, Fabrication of 3D flower-like black N-TiO2-x@MoS2 for unprecedented-high visible-light-driven photocatalytic performance, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 119–127 CrossRef .
N. Shao, J. N. Wang, D. D. Wang and P. Corvini, Preparation of three-dimensional Ag3PO4/TiO2@MoS2 for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity and anti-photocorrosion, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 964–978 CrossRef .
M. Y. Xing, B. C. Qiu, M. M. Du, Q. H. Zhu, L. Z. Wang and J. L. Zhang, Spatially separated cds shells exposed with reduction surfaces for enhancing photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702624 CrossRef .
B. Wang, W. H. Feng, L. L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Y. Huang, Z. B. Fang and P. Liu, In situ construction of a novel Bi/CdS nanocomposite with enhanced visible light photocatalytic performance, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 510–519 CrossRef .
D. Xu, W. Shi, C. Song, M. Chen, S. Yang, W. Fan and B. Chen, In-situ synthesis and enhanced photocatalytic activity of visible-light-driven plasmonic Ag/AgCl/NaTaO3 nanocubes photocatalysts, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 191, 228–234 CrossRef .
T. J. Yan, J. Tian, W. F. Guan, Z. Qiao, W. J. Li, J. M. You and B. B. Huang, Ultra-low loading of Ag3PO4 on hierarchical In2S3 microspheres to improve the photocatalytic performance: The cocatalytic effect of Ag and Ag3PO4, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 84–94 CrossRef .
F. Chen, W. An, L. Liu, Y. Liang and W. Cui, Highly efficient removal of bisphenol A by a three-dimensional graphene hydrogel-AgBr@ rGO exhibiting adsorption/photocatalysis synergy, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 65–80 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, W. Jiang, D. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Photodegradation of phenol via C3N4-agar hybrid hydrogel 3D photocatalysts with free separation, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 263–268 CrossRef .
M. N. Chong, B. Jin, C. W. Chow and C. Saint, Recent developments in photocatalytic water treatment technology: a review, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2997–3027 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Malato, P. Fernández-Ibáñez, M. I. Maldonado, J. Blanco and W. Gernjak, Decontamination and disinfection of water by solar photocatalysis: recent overview and trends, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 1–59 CrossRef .
Z. Qiao, H. Zhang, S. Karakalos, S. Hwang, J. Xue, M. Chen, D. Su and G. Wu, 3D polymer hydrogel for high-performance atomic iron-rich catalysts for oxygen reduction in acidic media, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 629–639 CrossRef .
W. Jiang, W. Luo, R. Zong, W. Yao, Z. Li and Y. Zhu, Polyaniline/carbon nitride nanosheets composite hydrogel: a separation-free and high-efficient photocatalyst with 3D hierarchical structure, Small, 2016, 12, 4370–4378 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hussain, G. Tocci, T. Woolcot, X. Torrelles, C. L. Pang, D. S. Humphrey, C. M. Yim, D. C. Grinter, G. Cabailh and O. Bikondoa, Structure of a model TiO2 photocatalytic interface, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 461 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Cui, W. An, L. Liu, Y. Liang and Y. Zhu, Combination of photoelectrocatalysis and adsorption for removal of bisphenol A over TiO2-graphene hydrogel with 3D network structure, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 36–46 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, P. Bampoulis, A. N. Rudenko, Q. Yao, H. A. Van, B. Poelsema, M. I. Katsnelson and H. J. Zandvliet, Erratum: Structural and electronic properties of germanene on MoS2, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 059902 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, Y. Zhou, W. Nie and P. Chen, MoS2-GO nanocomposites synthesized via a hydrothermal hydrogel method for solar light photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 357, 1606–1612 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Yin, E. Liu, Y. Ma, J. Wan, J. Fan and X. Hu, In situ growing Bi2MoO6 on g-C3N4 nanosheets with enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and disinfection of bacteria under visible light irradiation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 321, 183–192 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Liang, W. An, J. Hu, Y. Zhu and W. Cui, Removal of chromium (VI) by a self-regenerating and metal free g-C3N4/graphene hydrogel system via the synergy of adsorption and photo-catalysis under visible light, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 53–62 CrossRef .
Z. Yi, J. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. Ouyang, H. Stuart-Williams, H. Yang, J. Cao, W. Luo and Z. Li, An orthophosphate semiconductor with photooxidation properties under visible-light irradiation, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559–564 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Mu, Y. Zhang, W. Cui, Y. Liang and Y. Zhu, Removal of bisphenol A over a separation free 3D Ag3PO4-graphene hydrogel via an adsorption-photocatalysis synergy, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 212, 41–49 CrossRef .
J. Yang, D. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang and Y. Zhu, 3D-3D porous Bi2WO6/graphene hydrogel composite with excellent synergistic effect of adsorption-enrichment and photocatalytic degradation, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 228–237 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, Q. Zhou, J. Wang, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Reversible assembly of graphitic carbon nitride 3D network for highly selective dyes absorption and regeneration, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9036–9043 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ma, Y. Sun, M. Zhang, M. Yang, X. Gong, F. Yu and J. Zheng, Comparative study of graphene hydrogels and aerogels reveals the important role of buried water in pollutant adsorption, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 12283–12292 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Ma, C. Shen, Y. Wen and W. Liu, A pH-responsive and magnetically separable dynamic system for efficient removal of highly dilute antibiotics in water, Water Res., 2016, 90, 24–33 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wei, X. Peng and Z. Xu, Understanding water permeation in graphene oxide membranes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5877–5883 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Hua, N. Hao, J. Lu, J. Qian, Q. Liu, H. Li and K. Wang, A sensitive potentiometric resolved ratiometric photoelectrochemical aptasensor for escherichia coli detection fabricated with non-metallic nanomaterials, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 106, 57–63 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, Y. Huang, R. Sun and M. Tu, The strong association of condensed phenolic moieties in isolated lignins with their inhibition of enzymatic hydrolysis, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4276–4286 RSC .
M. I. Shariful, T. Sepehr, M. Mehrali, B. C. Ang and M. A. Amalina, Adsorption capability of heavy metals by chitosan/poly(ethylene oxide)/activated carbon electrospun nanofibrous membrane, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 45851 CrossRef .
K. Markstedt, A. Escalante, G. Toriz and P. Gatenholm, Biomimetic inks based on cellulose nanofibrils and cross-linkable xylans for 3D printing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40878–40886 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhou, J. Luo, C. Liu, L. Chu and J. Crittenden, Efficient heavy metal removal from industrial melting effluent using fixed-bed process based on porous hydrogel adsorbents, Water Res., 2018, 131, 246–254 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, L. Yang, Z. Yang, H. Yang, A. Li and R. Cheng, Preparation of chitosan/poly(acrylic acid) magnetic composite microspheres and applications in the removal of copper(II) ions from aqueous solutions, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 371, 229–230 Search PubMed .
P. A. Nishad, A. Bhaskarapillai and S. Velmurugan, Enhancing the antimony sorption properties of nano titania-chitosan beads using epichlorohydrin as the crosslinker, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 334, 160–167 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang and S. H. Neau, In vitro degradation of chitosan by bacterial enzymes from rat cecal and colonic contents, Biomaterials, 2002, 23, 2761–2766 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Habiba, A. M. Afifi, A. Salleh and B. C. Ang, Chitosan/(polyvinyl alcohol)/zeolite electrospun composite nanofibrous membrane for adsorption of Cr6+, Fe3+ and Ni2+, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 322, 182–194 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shen, J. L. Shamshina, P. Berton, G. Gurau and R. D. Rogers, ChemInform abstract: Hydrogels based on cellulose and chitin: Fabrication, properties, and applications, Green Chem., 2015, 18, 53–75 RSC .
J. He, F. Bardelli, A. Gehin, E. Silvester and L. Charlet, Novel chitosan goethite bionanocomposite beads for arsenic remediation, Water Res., 2016, 101, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mao, J. Li, J. Yan, Y. Ma, Y. Song, T. Tian, X. Liu, Z. Zhu, L. Zhou and C. Yang, A portable visual detection method based on a target-responsive DNA hydrogel and color change of gold nanorods, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6375–6378 RSC .
K. Tian, J. Bae, S. E. Bakarich, C. Yang, R. D. Gately, G. M. Spinks, H. P. M. In, Z. Suo and J. J. Vlassak, 3D printing of transparent and conductive heterogeneous hydrogel-elastomer systems, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604827 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Mandon, L. J. Blum and C. A. Marquette, Adding biomolecular recognition capability to 3D printed objects, Anal. Chem., Int. Edit., 2017, 27, 10767–10772 Search PubMed .
W. Zhu, J. Li, Y. J. Leong, I. Rozen, X. Qu, R. Dong, Z. Wu, W. Gao, P. H. Chung and J. Wang, 3D-printed artificial microfish, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4411–4417 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Valentin, S. E. Leggett, P. Y. Chen, J. K. Sodhi, L. H. Stephens, H. D. Mcclintock, J. Y. Sim and I. Y. Wong, Stereolithographic printing of ionically-crosslinked alginate hydrogels for degradable biomaterials and microfluidics, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 3474–3488 RSC .
C. Colosi, S. R. Shin, V. Manoharan, S. Massa, M. Costantini, A. Barbetta, M. R. Dokmeci, M. Dentini and A. Khademhosseini, Microfluidic bioprinting of heterogeneous 3D tissue constructs using low viscosity bioink, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 677–684 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Gladman, E. A. Matsumoto, R. G. Nuzzo, L. Mahadevan and J. A. Lewis, Biomimetic 4D printing, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 413–418 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, R. Jiang, J. Wu, J. Song, H. Bai, B. Li, Q. Zhao and T. Xie, Ultrafast digital printingtoward 4D shape changing materials, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605390 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kirillova, R. Maxson, G. Stoychev, C. T. Gomillion and L. Ionov, 4D biofabrication using shape-morphing hydrogels, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703443 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tian, X. Wei, S. Jia, R. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, Z. Lin and C. J. Yang, Integration of target responsive hydrogel with cascaded enzymatic reactions and microfluidic paper-based analytic devices (μPADs) for point-of-care testing (POCT), Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 537–542 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Kang, Z. Cheng, D. Yang, P. A. Ma, M. Shang, C. Peng, Y. Dai and J. Lin, Design and synthesis of multifunctional drug carriers based on luminescent rattle-type mesoporous silica microspheres with a thermosensitive hydrogel as a controlled switch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1470–1481 CrossRef .
M. Ni, Z. Ning, X. Wei, W. Xuan, C. Yao, L. Xin, X. Y. Hu, L. Chen and L. Wang, Dramatically promoted swelling of a hydrogel by pillar[6]arene-ferrocene complexation with multistimuli responsiveness, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6643–6649 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Leo, Z. Wei, Y. Zhang, Y. Ni, H. Jiang, C. Jones, J. Peng, V. Basile and C. Taylor, Chromogenic photonic crystal sensors enabled by multistimuli-responsive shape memory polymers, Small, 2018, 14, 1703515 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Habault, H. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Light-triggered self-healing and shape-memory polymers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7244–7256 RSC .
G. Qing and T. Sun, Chirality-driven wettability switching and mass transfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 930–932 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Song, Y. M. Wang, B. Wang, X. Y. Liang, Z. Y. Chang, B. J. Li and S. Zhang, Super Tough, Ultrastretchable hydrogel with multistimuli responsiveness, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15021–15029 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Dutta and S. De, Smart responsive materials for water purification: an overview, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22095–22112 RSC .
Z. Sun, F. Lv, L. Cao, L. Liu, Y. Zhang and Z. Lu, Multistimuli-responsive, moldable supramolecular hydrogels cross-linked by ultrafast complexation of metal ions and biopolymers, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 7944–7948 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Liu, C. Fu, K. Li, L. Tao, L. Feng and Y. Wei, Thermo and pH dual-responsive materials for controllable oil/water separation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2026–2030 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Ye, Z. Wang, T. Wu, Y. Wang and C. Li, Molecularly imprinted photoelectrochemical sensor for human epididymis protein 4 based on polymerized ionic liquid hydrogel and gold nanoparticle/ZnCdHgSe QDs composite film, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 12391–12398 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qing, Z. Mao, T. Qing, X. He, Z. Zou, D. He, H. Shi, J. Huang, J. Liu and K. Wang, Visual and portable strategy for copper(II) detection based on a striplike poly (thymine)-caged and microwell-printed hydrogel, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 11263–11268 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tsitsilianis, Responsive reversible hydrogels from associative “smart” macromolecules, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2372–2388 RSC .
J. Jia, H. G. Chen, J. Feng, J. L. Lei, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, A regenerative ratiometric electrochemical biosensor for selective detecting Hg2+ based on Y-shaped/hairpin DNA transformation, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2016, 908, 95–101 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yamaguchi, J. Šebera, J. Kondo, S. Oda, T. Komuro, T. Kawamura, T. Dairaku, Y. Kondo, I. Okamoto and A. Ono, The structure of metallo-DNA with consecutive thymine-HgII-thymine base pairs explains positive entropy for the metallo base pair formation, Nucleic Acids Res., 2014, 42, 4094–4099 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kondo, T. Yamada, C. Hirose, I. Okamoto, Y. Tanaka and A. Ono, Crystal structure of metallo DNA duplex containing consecutive Watson-Crick-like T-Hg(II)-T base pairs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2385–2388 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Dave, M. Y. Chan, P.-J. J. Huang, B. D. Smith and J. Liu, Regenerable DNA-functionalized hydrogels for ultrasensitive, instrument-free mercury (II) detection and removal in water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12668–12673 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu, Q. Zhang, X. Chu, H. Wang, G. Shen and R. Yu, Ultrasensitive electrochemical sensor for mercury (II) based on target-induced structure-switching DNA, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1025–1031 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, J. Ma, T. Yang, L. Chen, P. F. Gao and C. Z. Huang, A portable RGB sensing gadget for sensitive detection of Hg2+ using cysteamine-capped QDs as fluorescence probe, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 98, 36–40 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen and Z. Rosenzweig, Luminescent CdS quantum dots as selective ion probes, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 5132–5138 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Z. Guan, S. Jia, Z. Lei, S. Lin, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, Z. Q. Tian and C. J. Yang, Au@Pt nanoparticle encapsulated target-responsive hydrogel with volumetric bar-chart chip readout for quantitative point-of-care testing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12503–12507 Search PubMed .
X. Wei, T. Tian, S. Jia, Z. Zhu, Y. Ma, J. J. Sun, Z. Lin and C. J. Yang, Microfluidic distance readout sweet hydrogel integrated paper-based analytical device (μDiSH-PAD) for visual quantitative point-of-care testing, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 2345–2352 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, S. Lee, W. Lee and J. Kim, High-density microfluidic particle-cluster-array device for parallel and dynamic study of interaction between engineered particles, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701351 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wen, W. Wen, X. Zhang and S. Wang, Highly sensitive amperometric biosensor based on electrochemically-reduced graphene oxide-chitosan/hemoglobin nanocomposite for nitromethane determination, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 894–900 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang and W. Chen, Recent advances in graphene-based nanomaterials for fabricating electrochemical hydrogen peroxide sensors, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 249–268 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hussain, A. T. S. Semeano, S. I. C. J. Palma, A. S. Pina, J. Almeida, B. F. Medrado, A. C. C. S. Pádua, A. L. Carvalho, M. Dionísio and R. W. C. Li, Tunable gas sensing gels by cooperative assembly, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700803 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Kestwal, D. Bagal-Kestwal and B.-H. Chiang, Fenugreek hydrogel-agarose composite entrapped gold nanoparticles for acetylcholinesterase based biosensor for carbamates detection, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 886, 143–150 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Liu and J. Liu, Molecular imprinting on inorganic nanozymes for hundred-fold enzyme specificity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5412–5419 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ambrosone, M. Roopin, B. Pelaz, A. M. Abdelmonem, L. M. Ackermann, L. Mattera, M. Allocca, A. Tino, M. Klapper and W. J. Parak, Dissecting common and divergent molecular pathways elicited by CdSe/ZnS quantum dots in freshwater and marine sentinel invertebrates, Nanotoxicology, 2017, 11, 289–303 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, L. Yang, H. Kuang, P. Yang, Z. P. Aguilar, A. Wang, F. Fu and H. Xu, Acute toxicity of quantum dots on late pregnancy mice: Effects of nanoscale size and surface coating, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 318, 61–69 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Oh, R. Liu, A. Nel, K. B. Gemill, M. Bilal, Y. Cohen and I. L. Medintz, Meta-analysis of cellular toxicity for cadmium-containing quantum dots, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 479–486 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Kang and L. Mu, Aqueously released graphene oxide embedded in epoxy resin exhibits different characteristics and phytotoxicity of Chlorella vulgaris from the pristine form, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 5425–5433 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Zhou, W. Zou and X. Hu, Molecular mechanisms of developmental toxicity induced by graphene oxide at predicted environmental concentrations, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 7861–7871 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, A. Sun, W. Kang and Q. Zhou, Strategies and knowledge gaps for improving nanomaterial biocompatibility, Environ. Int., 2017, 102, 177–189 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, G. Yue and X. Hu, l -Cysteine: A biocompatible, breathable and beneficial coating for graphene oxide, Biomaterials, 2015, 52, 301–311 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Metch, N. D. Burrows, C. J. Murphy, A. Pruden and P. J. Vikesland, Metagenomic analysis of microbial communities yields insight into impacts of nanoparticle design, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 253–259 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. Zhang, X. Li and D. Wu, A self-monitored fluorescence DNA anti-counterfeiting system based on silica coated SYBR Green I/DNA gelatin nanoparticles, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5939–5948 RSC .
S. M. Ahmad, A. H. Ide, N. R. Neng and J. M. F. Nogueira, Application of bar adsorptive microextraction to determine trace organic micro-pollutants in environmental water matrices, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2017, 97, 484–498 CrossRef .
S. Valsecchi, S. Polesello, M. Mazzoni, M. Rusconi and M. Petrovic, On-line sample extraction and purification for the LC-MS determination of emerging contaminants in environmental samples, Trends Environ. Anal. Chem., 2015, 8, 27–37 CrossRef .
C. H. Brower, S. Mandal, S. Hayer, M. Sran, A. Zehra, S. J. Patel, R. Kaur, L. Chatterjee, S. Mishra and B. Das, The prevalence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli in poultry chickens and variation according to farming practices in Punjab, India, Environ. Health Perspect., 2017, 125, 077015 CrossRef PubMed .
T. P. Van Boeckel, E. E. Glennon, D. Chen, M. Gilbert, T. P. Robinson, B. T. Grenfell, S. A. Levin, S. Bonhoeffer and R. Laxminarayan, Reducing antimicrobial use in food animals, Science, 2017, 357, 1350–1352 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tan, H. Zhao, L. Du, X. Gan and X. Quan, A versatile fluorescent biosensor based on target-responsive graphene oxide hydrogel for antibiotic detection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 83, 267–273 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sedghi, B. Heidari and M. Behbahani, Synthesis, characterization and application of poly (acrylamide-co-methylenbisacrylamide) nanocomposite as a colorimetric chemosensor for visual detection of trace levels of Hg and Pb ions, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 285, 109–116 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gao, W. Zhou, J. Huang, S. He, Y. Yan, W. Zhu, S. Wu and X. Zhang, Nitrogen removal by the enhanced floating treatment wetlands from the secondary effluent, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 234, 243–252 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kołodyńska, J. Krukowska and P. Thomas, Comparison of sorption and desorption studies of heavy metal ions from biochar and commercial active carbon, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 307, 353–363 CrossRef .
Q. Zhu, Y. Wang, M. Li, K. Liu, C. Hu, K. Yan, G. Sun and D. Wang, Activable carboxylic acid functionalized crystalline nanocellulose/PVA-co-PE composite nanofibrous membrane with enhanced adsorption for heavy metal ions, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 186, 70–77 CrossRef .
C.-H. Yen, H.-L. Lien, J.-S. Chung and H.-D. Yeh, Adsorption of precious metals in water by dendrimer modified magnetic nanoparticles, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 322, 215–222 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, L. Ji, P.-C. Ma, Y. Shao, H. Zhang, W. Gao and Y. Li, Development of carbon nanotubes/CoFe2O4 magnetic hybrid material for removal of tetrabromobisphenol A and Pb (II), J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 265, 104–114 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Hua and Z. Li, Sulfhydryl functionalized hydrogel with magnetism: Synthesis, characterization, and adsorption behavior study for heavy metal removal, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 249, 189–200 CrossRef .
D. Qin, Z. Liu, Z. Liu, H. Bai and D. D. Sun, Superior antifouling capability of hydrogel forward osmosis membrane for treating wastewaters with high concentration of organic foulants, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 1421–1428 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ngang, A. Ahmad, S. Low and B. Ooi, Preparation of thermoresponsive PVDF/SiO2-PNIPAM mixed matrix membrane for saline oil emulsion separation and its cleaning efficiency, Desalination, 2017, 408, 1–12 CrossRef .
F. Shao, C. Xu, W. Ji, H. Dong, Q. Sun, L. Yu and L. Dong, Layer-by-layer self-assembly TiO2 and graphene oxide on polyamide reverse osmosis membranes with improved membrane durability, Desalination, 2017, 423, 21–29 CrossRef .
M. Huang, Y. Chen, C.-H. Huang, P. Sun and J. Crittenden, Rejection and adsorption of trace pharmaceuticals by coating a forward osmosis membrane with TiO2, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 279, 904–911 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Highly efficient solar vapour generation via hierarchically nanostructured gels, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Senna and V. R. Botaro, Biodegradable hydrogel derived from cellulose acetate and EDTA as a reduction substrate of leaching NPK compound fertilizer and water retention in soil, J. Controlled Release, 2017, 260, 194–201 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Song, G. Yang, H.-L. Song, D. Wang and X.-Q. Wang, Preparation of Ag/TiO2-zeolite adsorbents, their desulfurization performance, and benzothiophene adsorption isotherms, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 91, 390–397 CrossRef .
A. M. Elbarbary, H. A. A. El-Rehim, N. M. El-Sawy, E.-S. A. Hegazy and E.-S. A. Soliman, Radiation induced crosslinking of polyacrylamide incorporated low molecular weights natural polymers for possible use in the agricultural applications, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 176, 19–28 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhou, Y. Wang, S. Huang and Y. Zhao, Synthesis composite hydrogels from inorganic-organic hybrids based on leftover rice for environment-friendly controlled-release urea fertilizers, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 615, 422–430 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, N. Hamdan, L. Shen, H. Nan, A. Almajed, E. Kavazanjian and X. He, Biomimetic hydrogel composites for soil stabilization and contaminant mitigation, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 12401–12410 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-H. Wu, H.-M. Lo, J.-C. Wang, S.-Y. Yu and B.-D. Yan, Electrochemical detection of heavy metal pollutant using crosslinked chitosan/carbon nanotubes thin film electrodes, Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 15–24 CrossRef .
F. Brandl, N. Bertrand, E. M. Lima and R. Langer, Nanoparticles with photoinduced precipitation for the extraction of pollutants from water and soil, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7765 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fadeel, L. Farcal, B. Hardy, S. Vázquezcampos, D. Hristozov, A. Marcomini, I. Lynch, E. Valsamijones, H. Alenius and S. Kai, Advanced tools for the safety assessment of nanomaterials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 537–543 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Vidanapathirana, L. C. Thompson, M. Herco, J. Odom, S. J. Sumner, T. R. Fennell, J. M. Brown and C. J. Wingard, Acute intravenous exposure to silver nanoparticles during pregnancy induces particle size and vehicle dependent changes in vascular tissue contractility in Sprague Dawley rats, Reprod. Toxicol., 2018, 75, 10–22 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chávez-Calderón, F. Paraguay-Delgado, E. Orrantia-Borunda and A. Luna-Velasco, Size effect of SnO2 nanoparticles on bacteria toxicity and their membrane damage, Chemosphere, 2016, 165, 33–40 CrossRef PubMed .
I. S. Sohal, K. S. O'Fallon, P. Gaines, P. Demokritou and D. Bello, Ingested engineered nanomaterials: State of science in nanotoxicity testing and future research needs, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2018, 15, 29 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, D. Li and Y. Gao, L. Mu and Q. Zhou, Knowledge gaps between nanotoxicological research and nanomaterial safety, Environ. Int., 2016, 94, 8–23 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects, Science, 2015, 349, 255–260 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Raccuglia, K. C. Elbert, P. D. F. Adler, C. Falk, M. B. Wenny, A. Mollo, M. Zeller, S. A. Friedler, J. Schrier and A. J. Norquist, Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery using failed experiments, Nature, 2016, 533, 73–76 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Xiangang Hu	Xiangang Hu earned his Ph.D. degree in environmental chemistry in 2012 and is now an associate professor at Nankai University, China. From March 2016, to March 2017, he was a visiting scholar in the group of Kenneth A. Dawson in the Department of Chemistry, University College Dublin, Ireland. Now, he is a full professor in Nankai University. He is the Associate Director of the Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria (Ministry of Education) and has been a project leader for applications of nanomaterials in environmental pollution. His interests are 2D nanomaterial applications and environmental risk assessment.

Environmental significance
Hydrogel nanocomposites are attracting much attention in the detection and removal of pollutants. The present review focuses on the most important and emerging issues in recent research into hydrogel nanocomposites for the detection and removal of pollutants, for example, visual detection, enzyme-based biosensors, visible-light photocatalysis, design of 3D network structures, 4D printing and multi-stimuli-responsive hydrogels. The shortcomings and challenges in the practical application of hydrogel nanocomposites are also discussed. Finally, an outlook for future work is proposed, including regeneration of hydrogels promoting commercial and practical applications, extending hydrogels to soil-water systems, improving nanomaterial biocompatibility and advancing machine-learning-assisted materials discovery. Hydrogel nanomaterials would play an important roles in the detection and treatment of contaminates.


 	Fig. 1  Water contamination and published papers related to hydrogel nanocomposites. a, Representative incidents of water contamination that occurred in China from 2005 to 2017; b, trends of published papers related to hydrogel nanocomposites in the past 10 years on Web of Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of visual logic signals triggered by two different input targets (Hg2+ and Ag+).37 A, aptamer; T, target; L, logic; SiNP, silica nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 3  Stimuli responsiveness of the white-light-emitting hydrogel to pH, vapor, metal ions and temperature.47	 

 	Fig. 4  Fabrication process of Eu-containing polymer hydrogels and schematic of the stimulus response. a) Chemical structures of P(DMA290-co-IDHPMA96) and Eu3+ complex. b) Schematic illustration of fluorescence ON/OFF process and sol–gel transition driven by dynamic metal–ligand coordination. c) Pictures showing the fluorochromic response and the sol–gel transition of the hydrogel upon stimuli.49	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagrams for the preparation and application of TiO2–GH. a) Process for the preparation of the TiO2–GH electrode. b) Electron transfer in TiO2–GH and the degradation mechanism of BPA under UV irradiation.69	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthesis of the MoS2–GO composite hydrogel.68 Mechanism of the solar-light-induced formation of electron–hole pairs in MoS2 nanosheets in the presence of pollutants.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the preparation of C3N4–agar hybrid hydrogel.60	 

 	Fig. 8  From 3D to 4D bioprinting of hydrogel nanocomposites. a) Schematic illustration of the printing of uniform and multiplex layers by the 3D bioprinting technique, including two independent crosslinking steps. b) Top and 3D μCT reconstructions of the final bioprinted 3D structure. c) A diagram of 4D printing with complex functions.91,94	 

 	Fig. 9  Typical methods for visual detection based on fluorescence changes. a) In the presence of Cu2+, fluorescent CuNPs were rapidly synthesized with poly-thymine and ascorbic acid.63 b) Detection was achieved by the selective binding of Hg2+ between two thymine bases, inducing a hairpin structure. Green fluorescence was observed after the addition of SYBR Green I dye.115	 

 	Fig. 10  The working principle of the au@PtNPs encapsulated in a target-responsive hydrogel with a volumetric bar-chart chip readout for visual quantitative detection.118	 

 	Fig. 11  Photographs showing the activity and specificity of a) Fe3O4 NPs, b) T-MIPneg and c) A-MIPpos nanogels for the oxidation of TMB and ABTS, with or without H2O2. Fe3O4 NPs (50 μg mL−1, free or in nanogels) were used in all experiments oxidizing 0.5 mM substrate with 10 mM H2O2 in buffer A (20 mM acetate, pH 4.0) for 30 min at room temperature. d) A schematic for the imprinting of TMB on Fe3O4 NPs.125	 

Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) aptamer-based hydrogels	Hydrogels were prepared using an AFB1 aptamer and two short complementary DNA strands of AFB1 as crosslinkers	Aflatoxin B1, with a detection limit of 1.77 nM (0.55 ppb)	
26

AgBr-anchored 3D nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogels	The hydrogels were synthesized via a simple hydrothermal approach	
E. coli, at an extremely low detection limit of 0.17 cfu mL−1 (S/N)	
28

DNAzyme-crosslinked hydrogel containing AuNPs	A UO22+-dependent DNAzyme complex composed of substrate strand and enzyme strand was utilized to crosslink DNA-grafted polyacrylamide chains to form a DNA hydrogel	UO22+, with a detection limit of 37 × 10−9 mol L−1	
32

Target-responsive aptamer-crosslinked hydrogel	The hydrogel network forms by hybridization between one designed DNA strand containing the Ochratoxin A (OTA) aptamer and two complementary DNA strands grafted onto linear polyacrylamide chains	As low as 1.27 nM (0.51 ppb) OTA can be detected	
36

Colorimetric logic system based on an aptamer-crosslinked colloidal crystal hydrogel	With incorporation of the Hg2+- and Ag+-responsive aptamers on hydrogels, the reversible binding between the specific target ion and the aptamer could cause the aptamer to conformationally change and thus trigger shrinkage of the hydrogel with different contents	Visual logic signals can be triggered by two kinds of pollutants (Hg2+ and Ag+) at a concentration of 0.1 μM	
37

Functional hydrogel-based strip-like strategy	A strip-like hydrogel with uniform microporous structures was prepared through caging poly(thymine) (poly T) as probes, which can effectively template the formation of fluorescent copper nanoparticles (CuNPs) in the presence of the reductant (ascorbate) and Cu2+	Cu2+, with a detectable minimum concentration of 20 μM	
109

Functional gold nanorods (AuNRs)-based DNA-crosslinked hydrogel	The method is based on a functional DNA-crosslinked hydrogel encapsulating glucoamylase for molecular recognition and signal amplification and AuNRs as a multicolor substrate	Pb2+, with a detectable minimum concentration of 55 μM	
89

Polyacrylamide hydrogel-based sensor functionalized with a thymine-rich DNA	Detection was achieved by selective binding of Hg2+ between two thymine bases, inducing a hairpin structure where, upon addition of SYBR green I dye, green fluorescence was observed	Using the naked eyes, the detection limit in a 50 mL water sample is 10 nM Hg2+	
114

Au@Pt nanoparticle encapsulated target-responsive hydrogels	Hydrogels were prepared via a method that integrated au core/Pt shell nanoparticles (au@PtNPs) encapsulated in a target-responsive hydrogel with a volumetric bar-chart chip (V-Chip) for quantitative point-of-care testing (POCTs), as shown in Fig. 10	Cocaine, with a limit of detection of 0.06 μM	
108

Integration of target-responsive hydrogels with microfluidic paper-based analytic devices (μPADs) for POCTs	The platform relies on a target-responsive aptamer-crosslinked hydrogel for target recognition, cascade enzymatic reactions for signal amplification, and microfluidic μPADs for a visual distance-based quantitative readout	The detection limit of cocaine and adenosine was 4.5 μM and 15.7 μM, respectively	
98

Fenugreek gum-based biosensor	When fenugreek was used to immobilize AuNPs and acetylcholinesterase, the subsequent biosensor could quickly and specifically determine the concentration of carbamates	The type of carbamate, such as carbofuran, oxamyl, methomyl, or carbaryl, could be detected with limits of detection of 2 × 10−9, 21 × 10−9, 113 × 10−9, and 236 × 10−9 mol L−1, respectively	
124


Reusable aptamer column	5′-Amino-modified DNA aptamer binding into CNBr-Sepharose as sorbent was packed into a column to simultaneously remove pharmaceuticals in drinking water	88–95% trace pharmaceuticals (ng L−1) was removed in drinking water	
23

AuNPs entrapped within a tannic acid (TA)-functionalized graphene hydrogels	The preparation method involved the reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of TA to form TA-functionalized graphene hydrogel, followed by loading and in situ reduction of AuCl4− ions in the graphene hydrogel network	Nearly 100% methylene blue was (MB) reduced	
45

Polyaniline (PANI)/carbon nitride nanosheets (CNNs) composite hydrogels	CNNs were dispersed in the mixed solution of aniline and phytic acid. After ammonium persulfate was added, coral-like PANI nanofibers were formed in situ between layers of the CNNs by polymerization of aniline, which constructed the 3D hierarchical structure of the composite hydrogel	The degradation proportion of MB was approximately 15.8%, and the overall removal rate was 27.5%	
64

TiO2/graphene hydrogel	
Fig. 5a shows the process for the preparation of the TiO2-GH electrode	100% BPA (20 mg L−1) was removed in 5 h	
69

A MoS2-GO hydrogel	The hydrogel nanocomposites were synthesized via a hydrothermal hydrogel method	99% MB was degraded under solar-light irradiation within 60 min	
68

g-C3N4/graphene hydrogel	Hydrogels were synthesized at low temperatures via the stacking effect of two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets and π–π conjugation	100% Cr6+ (2 mg L−1) was removed within 25 h	
70

Ag3PO4/graphene hydrogels	The hydrogel nanocomposites were synthesized via a hydrothermal hydrogel method	BPA (100 mL, 10 ppm) could be completely removed under visible light within 12 min	
72

Hybrid AgBr@rGO graphene hydrogel	AgBr was encapsulated by rGO to form a core–shell structure composite (AgBr@rGO), which was further incorporated into graphene to form GH–AgBr@rGO hydrogels	90% BPA (50 mL, 20 ppm) was removed	
59

GO/nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) beads	The GO/nZVI was prepared by mixing nZVI nanoparticles with highly dispersed GO sheets in ultrapure water at pH <7	99% antibiotic ENR was removed in 5 min in a pH 6.6 aqueous solution	
75

Agar–C3N4 hybrid hydrogels	Agar and g-C3N4 nanoparticle hydrosol was transformed into a hybrid hydrogel with 3D network structure by a heating–cooling polymerization process (Fig. 7)	The hydrogels' ability to remove phenol and MB is approximately 1.3 and 4.5 times greater than that of pure g-C3N4, respectively	
60

Double-network jute/poly acrylic acid (PAA) hydrogel	Jute/PAA hydrogels were synthesized via a simple free-radical polymerization of acrylic acid in jute aqueous solution	Nearly 97% Pb2+ and 89% Cd2+ were removed	
82


 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagrams of the effect of the degree of crosslinking on both the antifouling capability and separation efficiency of the hydrogel FO membrane. a) Insufficient crosslinking of the hydrogel selective layer results in severe leakage of the drawn solute. b) Optimal crosslinking of the hydrogel selective layer provides both excellent antifouling capability and a high retention of the drawn solute. c) Excessive crosslinking of the hydrogel selective layer results in severe membrane fouling.147	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematics of highly efficient solar vapor generation and outdoor solar water purification using HNGs in natural sunlight. a) The HNG consists of hierarchical porous structures, including internal gaps, micron channels and molecular meshes, wherein the solar absorber (PPy) penetrates the polymeric PVA network of the gel. b) Photograph of a large-scale HNG sheet. c) and d) Schematic of a water receiver based on an HNG for a prototype solar water purification system simulating the practical water purification equipment.151	 

 	Fig. 14  Nanoparticles with photoinduced precipitation for the extraction of pollutants from water and soil. Photocleavable copolymers are used to prepare nanoparticles with inducible precipitation. a) Photocleavable PEG-b-PLA copolymers can be synthesized using a photolabile linker. b) The light-induced cleavage of the polymer into smaller chains can be followed by gel permeation chromatography. c) Nanoparticles can be prepared using different ratios of photocleavable to non-cleavable copolymers. Upon ultraviolet irradiation, these core–shell nanoparticles lose their PEG corona proportionally to the content of photocleavable copolymer.158	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
