Observation of charge transfer cascades in α-Fe 2 O 3 /IrO x photoanodes by operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP08053G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP08053G
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5715-5720Observation of charge transfer cascades in α-Fe2O3/IrOx photoanodes by operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy†

        
          
            Alessandro 
            Minguzzi
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Alberto 
            Naldoni
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ottavio 
            Lugaresi‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Elisabetta 
            Achilli
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            D'Acapito
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Malara
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Cristina 
            Locatelli
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Alberto 
            Vertova
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Sandra 
            Rondinini
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Paolo 
            Ghigna
          
        
      bd
aDipartimento di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Milano Via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy. E-mail: alessandro.minguzzi@unimi.it
bIstituto Nazionale di Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali – INSTM, Via Giusti 9, Firenze, Italy
cCNR-Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari, Via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy
dDipartimento di Chimica, Università di Pavia, Viale Taramelli 16, 27100, Pavia, Italy
eCNR-Istituto Officina dei Materiali (IOM)-OGG, c/o ESRF-71, Avenue des Martyrs, 38043 Grenoble, France
Received 
      24th November 2016
    , Accepted 27th January 2017First published on 27th January 2017AbstractElectrochemical devices for energy conversion and storage are central for a sustainable economy. The performance of electrodes is driven by charge transfer across different layer materials and an understanding of the mechanistics is pivotal to gain improved efficiency. Here, we directly observe the transfer of photogenerated charge carriers in a photoanode made of hematite (α-Fe2O3) and a hydrous iridium oxide (IrOx) overlayer, which plays a key role in photoelectrochemical water oxidation. Through the use of operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), we probe the change in occupancy of the Ir 5d levels during optical band gap excitation of α-Fe2O3. At potentials where no photocurrent is observed, electrons flow from the α-Fe2O3 photoanode to the IrOx overlayer. In contrast, when the composite electrode produces a sustained photocurrent (i.e., 1.4 V vs. RHE), a significant transfer of holes from the illuminated α-Fe2O3 to the IrOx layer is clearly demonstrated. The analysis of the operando XAS spectra further suggests that oxygen evolution actually occurs both at the α-Fe2O3/electrolyte and α-Fe2O3/IrOx interfaces. These findings represent an important outcome for a better understanding of composite photoelectrodes and their use in photoelectrochemical systems, such as hydrogen generation or CO2 reduction from sunlight.
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting represents one of the most promising energy conversion processes from renewable energy sources allowing the direct production of high purity hydrogen from sunlight. In a typical configuration,1 UV-Vis photons incident on a semiconductor promote electrons from the valence to the conduction band, generating electron–hole pairs. In the case of an n-doped semiconductor and thanks to the space charge generated within the semiconductor when in contact with an electrolyte, holes migrate towards the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and oxidize water to oxygen, while electrons are driven through an external circuit to a counter electrode where water is reduced to hydrogen. The efficiency of the entire process depends on the semiconductor features: (i) correct energy position of band edges with respect to water reduction and oxidation equilibrium potentials, (ii) kinetics of hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions (HER and OER), (iii) small band gap (possibly in the visible range), (iv) low internal resistance for rapid migration of photogenerated charge carriers towards the current collector or the electrolyte, (v) negligible recombination of photogenerated charge carriers, (vi) high stability, (vii) chemical formula based on abundant and low-cost elements. In the particular case of photoanodes, the reaction kinetics is considered critical since OER is a slow process due to the complexity of 4e−/4H+ transfers for generating one O2 molecule. To improve the kinetics, semiconductors can be covered with overlayers, most often selected among the most active OER electrocatalysts. For example, decoration of α-Fe2O3, i.e. a prototypical photoanode material, with Ni(II),2 Co(III)3 and Ir(IV)4–6 oxides (or oxyhydroxides) yields very high photocurrents and reduced bias, and both effects are attributed to the catalytic activity of the overlayers. Nevertheless, mechanistic investigations have recently revealed that behind these improvements there is more than just the electrocatalytic activity of the overlayer. Transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS)3 indicated that the overlayer reduces the electron density in the α-Fe2O3 layer, while electro-chemical impedance spectroscopy7 suggested that the overlayer acts as a storehouse for holes, thus improving their lifetime and reducing the recombination with electrons. A similar conclusion was reached more recently by Lin et al. using a bipotentiostat based method for demonstrating the adaptive behavior of hydrous, amorphous overlayers with respect to crystalline materials:8 the bulk redox activity of the former allows the generation of a potential difference between the semiconductor and the overlayer that is not possible with other materials and can in principle be beneficial for the separation of photogenerated hole/electron couples. TiO2-based systems were also studied by means of photoluminescence, which highlighted the role of the overlayer in improving the charge separation efficiency and acting as a hole scavenger.9 Another possible function of the overlayers is to passivate the semiconductor surface states3,10–12 or retardation of back electron/hole recombination across the space-charge layer.13 After these works, the role of overlayers became ambiguous and this might explain the previous unexpected results, such as the higher OER activity shown by Pt with respect to IrO2.14 Overall, the behaviour of photoelectrochemical architectures and the role of overlayers are still not understood, also because charge transfers at the semiconductor/overlayer interface are not unequivocally related to the recorded photocurrents. The use of spectroelectrochemical methods such as operando TAS or X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is thus required for the direct detection of charge transfers between the photoelectrode components. In this work we report the direct observation of the charge transfer cascade between an α-Fe2O3 photoanode and a hydrous IrOx overlayer through operando XAS, the latter being conveniently adopted for studying ex situ charge transfers in semiconductor-based systems15–19 and whose potentialities include the element selectivity, the possibility of studying the local structure and the oxidation state of the selected element. In our work, the study of α-Fe2O3/IrOx was carried out in a broad potential window that is much wider than that where water splitting is observed. This approach allows shining light on the electronic junction between the two oxides and clarifies the behaviour of this photoelectrode architecture.
In this work, we adopted a spectro-PEC setup based on the use of XAS to observe the Ir charge state and the occupancy of the Ir 5d state when the IrOx overlayer is deposited onto a α-Fe2O3 layer and the system is illuminated by visible light (400 nm), as pictorially described in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Pictorial representation of the spectro-PEC setup. 
The α-Fe2O3 photoanode used in this work is composed of α-Fe2O3 hierarchical nanoplatelets,6 while the overlayer is made of an electrodeposited IrOx film because of its complete ion permeability (sometimes referred to as “bulk activity”), which represents an ideal choice for XAS experiments.20–22 This bilayer architecture is deposited onto a conductive oxide glass (FTO) and used as the working electrode in a three-electrode custom cell built using a 3D printer.23 The cell contains the electrolyte solution with a controlled thickness (about 1 mm) and has a frontal window that allows illumination by both visible and X-ray photons (Scheme 1). XAS spectra are collected at the Ir-LIII edge. In a typical spectrum (e.g. the one reported in Fig. 1), in addition to a step like structure (edge) due to the transitions from the Ir 2p to continuum states, the near-edge structure is dominated by an intense peak (White Line, WL) caused by the photoexcitation of 2p electrons to the Ir 5d empty band. This gives direct access to the observation of 5d occupancy, and therefore to the charge and oxidation states of Ir: the edge and WL position in energy are affected by the chemical shift, which is in turn due to the decrease of the screening of the Coulombic potential of the initial 2p states due to the valence electrons by increasing the oxidation state.
 Fig. 1  Full Ir-LIII edge XANES spectra recorded in the presence (red line) and in the absence (blue line) of a UV-Vis light source and the relative difference (black line) at 1.4 V (RHE) in aqueous 1 M K2HPO4. The right side inset represents the magnification of the XANES region. The left side inset represents a typical series of dark/light steps as recorded during XAS spectra acquisition. 
We first screened the value of the X-ray absorption coefficient (μ) of Ir at fixed energy through the newly developed Fixed Energy X-ray Absorption Voltammetry (FEXRAV).22 Here, FEXRAV was applied in a PEC configuration for the first time by modulating the applied potential (cyclic voltammetry) of the photoelectrode in 1 M K2HPO4, pH = 9.8, a good compromise for ensuring the stability of both IrOx and α-Fe2O3 and with good buffer power to avoid any local pH change caused by prolonged proton production during the OER. The results, obtained by fixing the energy of the incident X-ray beam at 11221 eV (the energy position of the WL for Ir(IV)22), are reported in Fig. S1 (ESI†) and point to a higher μ when anodic photocurrents are observed. In order to better understand this finding, Ir-LIII XANES spectra are recorded in the presence and in the absence of light under different applied potentials.
Experiments were carried out at the LISA-BM08 beamline24 at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility. In order to minimize possible systematic errors, for each energy value the acquisition was performed both in the presence (“light”) and in the absence (“dark”) of UV-Vis light before stepping the monochromator to a higher energy value. This ensures that for each energy value the absorption coefficient under light and dark conditions is measured under the same instrumental conditions. The reliability of this method was proved by control experiments (Fig. S2, ESI†): differential spectra on pure IrOx electrodes (without the presence of α-Fe2O3) or dark–dark tests on the composite photoelectrode showed no appreciable differences, indicating that pure IrOx spectra are not modified by the illumination and that no instrumental effects influence the differential spectra.
The most striking difference between the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) recorded under visible light illumination and in the dark for the α-Fe2O3/IrOx system is indeed observed at 1.4 V (vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE), i.e. at a bias at which a sustained photocurrent (left side inset) is observed. As is evident from Fig. 1, both the XANES and the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) regions present a dependence on illumination.
In the EXAFS region (i.e. for E > 11235 eV), μ slightly and rigidly increases upon illumination: as discussed in the ESI,† the reasons behind this observation are not included in the subjects investigated in the present paper. More relevant to the present discussion is the XANES region (below 11235 eV), which retains a noticeable difference since the peak area under the WL is significantly higher under illumination than in the dark. An increased WL peak area means that the 2p to 5d transition of the Ir atoms is more probable. It should be noted that any charge density accumulation at the different interfaces may induce variations in the Helmholtz double layer, which in turn may change the local chemical environment of Ir. However, as demonstrated by the difference in the EXAFS region, showing a flat straight line within the noise level, the local structure of the Ir centers remains unchanged. Therefore, the sensible variation in the amplitude of the WL under illumination can only be attributed to a less filled 5d band. Therefore, under illumination, holes transfer from the excited α-Fe2O3 to the IrOx overlayer. This experimental observation represents direct proof of the existence of an electronic relation between the two oxides, that can lead to hole transfer at a sufficiently high bias (i.e., where band bending is significant and the semiconductor is under surface depletion). On the basis of these observations, we extended the investigation at lower potentials, including a lower bias (0.8 V), a condition (0.4 V) close to the flat band potential which is 0.5 V, as determined by Mott–Schottky analysis (see Fig. S3, ESI†), and a potential (0.1 V) at which electron accumulation is likely to be established. The differential (light–dark) XANES spectra are reported in Fig. 2, while the magnification of the non-subtracted XANES regions and the relevant peak energies are reported in the ESI† (Fig. S4).
 Fig. 2  (Light–dark) difference XAS spectra for different applied potential values on α-Fe2O3/IrOx photoanodes in aqueous 1 M K2HPO4. The differences were calculated after normalization of the original spectra. 
The data of Fig. 2 are obtained after normalization of the parent spectra, for avoiding errors due to different amounts of Ir centres in the X-ray beam. Very interestingly, all difference spectra at E ≤ 0.8 V are characterized by an increase in the spectral weight at low energies (below 11221 eV) and a decrease in the spectral weight at high energies (over 11221 eV) that indicate the partial decrease in the oxidation state of Ir. Therefore, and considering that no significant photocurrents (ascribable to water oxidation/reduction) are observed under these conditions, the photoelectrons injected in the overlayer from the hematite are able to partially fill the empty 5d band of Ir, that is directly observed at the Ir LIII edge.
These observations point to the presence of charge transfer phenomena between α-Fe2O3 and IrOx that are not limited to hole jumping from the semiconductor to the overlayer. In the present case, the observation of electron transfer at the lowest potentials is justified by the right overlap between the semiconductor and IrOx electronic states. Note that a rapid change of sign in the overlayer potential (i.e. a redox transition) with dependence on the bias at the semiconductor was previously recorded under illumination and interpreted by means of the bulk redox activity of the overlayer.7 As summarized in the introduction, the beneficial effects of the overlayer in terms of anticipated photocurrents (reduced bias) have been explained considering a pseudo-catalytic effect that is not directly related to an improved reaction kinetics but rather to a modification of the energetics of the semiconductor (band bending,3 position of surface states10) induced by the presence of the overlayer. This is consistent with the effectiveness shown not only by materials previously known as good OER catalysts (e.g., IrO2, Co-based catalysts, Ni oxohydroxides) but also by materials not presenting any electrocatalytic activity (e.g., Ga2O3 and Al2O3).3 In fact, as suggested on the basis of TAS experiments, the overlayer effectiveness may not be due to a true catalytic effect but to an induced depletion of electron density in the semiconductor.3 This effect requires charge transfer between the two systems. Indeed, the Δμ spectrum at 1.4 V is characterized by an intense and positive peak in correspondence with the WL of the Ir-LIII edge. This means that the WL is more intense under illumination than in the dark. As anticipated above, the WL at the Ir-LIII edge is due to the 2p → 5d transitions, and therefore a positive peak in the Δμ spectrum can only be found if the density of 5d empty states is larger under illumination than in the dark. Therefore, we conclude that the photocurrent observed at 1.4 V occurs in parallel or in series to hole transfer between the Fe2O3 and the IrOx layers. The hole transfer observed by XAS at 1.4 V can also be related to the influence of the overlayer on PEC activity. In fact, the photocurrent recorded during the acquisition of the spectra reported in Fig. 1 was dramatically low, about 2 μA, (see the inset), especially compared to that given by a pure α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode, the corresponding cyclic voltammogram of which, recorded in the dark and under illumination, is reported in Fig. S4 (ESI†). As will be explained, this is likely related to the relatively high loading of IrOx required for attaining a good XAS signal-to-noise ratio. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), light absorption at 400 nm by the IrOx layer cannot account for such a decreased activity, which can appear in disagreement with the expected improved performance, especially considering the α-Fe2O3/IrOx junction as “adaptive”8 thanks to the bulk redox activity of IrOx, that is likely to store holes and prevent their recombination with photogenerated electrons. Moreover, in the case of the electrodeposited overlayer, the possible unfavourable effect of monomeric iridium(III/IV) aquo complexes was ruled out.25 Still, it should be considered that the overlayer, in this case, consists of a highly conductive oxide capable of pseudocapacitive (redox) activity and with an extended density of states. In addition, and according to the models proposed for the working mechanism of IrOx as a water oxidation electrocatalyst, the oxide should accumulate enough oxidative equivalents for its complete oxidation before reaching the suitable conditions for the threshold of the catalytic cycle (vicinal Ir(V) sites).21,26–29 Before this condition is attained, the photo-generated holes are accumulated in the overlayer and lose energy, thus decreasing the occupancy of the Ir 5d band. In this scenario, IrOx behaves as a hole trap. This description is not adequate to explain the negative influence of a highly loaded overlayer: in principle, after enough holes are trapped, the conditions for the OER should subsist. An alternative explanation can be thus found considering that the insertion of holes in IrOx is accompanied by the transfer of electrons (as directly observed for E ≤ 0.8 V). In other words, it is likely that the observed charge transfer is the result of a combination of both electron and hole transfers always occurring at the same time: therefore, in this picture, IrOx acts as a recombination site.
Note that similar results were obtained adopting a similar setup to study a Mn-oxide/Nb:SrTiO3 photoelectrode.30 Interestingly, a positive shift of the Mn edge under illumination and upon the application of a potential high enough to have a charge transport controlled photocurrent was observed.
However, this occurs only when a Mn oxide film was used. Instead, the same experiment carried out adopting Mn oxide particles also showed the formation of Mn(III) sites, likely indicating the simultaneous transfer of both electrons and holes from the semiconductor to the overlayer. From this discussion, we can suggest that the undesired recombination of charges can be limited by deposition of overlayers with very low thickness, likely of the order of a few nanometers.2 Another possible explanation for this lack of activity improvement (that can occur in parallel to the previous one) could be related to the at least partial bypass of the IrOx layer for the oxygen evolution reaction. This was evidenced for BiVO4 photoelectrodes covered with electrodeposited CoPi,31 where oxygen evolution was proven to occur prevalently on the semiconductor surface rather than on the overlayer one. The main evidence for this conclusion was the very low amount of Co(III) observed under operation conditions at the CoPi layer, which was not compatible with a fully operative CoPi electrocatalyst. Quite similarly, in the present case, we could estimate, by integration of the difference peak (pink line in Fig. 2) and in comparison with the one recorded in the dark, that the fraction of Ir involved in the charge transfer observed at 1.4 V is about 5%. This has to be compared with previous observation on the electrochemical properties of hydrous IrOx,21 where almost all the electrodeposited material was involved in the reaction. This could suggest a non-ideal electron transfer between α-Fe2O3 and IrOx, with the charge transfer occurring in part at the α-Fe2O3/electrolyte interface, which is possible because of the high ionic permeability of the IrOx layer.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have shown that through our operando XAS strategy, it is possible to directly observe electron and hole transfers between the semiconductor and the overlayer to be dependent on the applied potential. A wide potential window that includes conditions for (i) the existence of an accumulation layer at the semiconductor, (ii) quasi-flat bands, and (iii) slightly or (iv) strongly bended energy bands (depletion) has been considered. While under the first three conditions (Fig. 3a) electron transfer is observed, the last one (Fig. 3b) clearly coincides with hole transfer. These findings improve the present understanding of photoelectrode architectures for solar water splitting especially in view of the design and engineering of new materials. The observed charge transfers between the semiconductor and the overlayer shed light on the ambiguous role of the overlayer. The electronic interaction between the two materials implies electron transfer at potentials where photocurrent from water oxidation is not observed. In contrast, when significant photocurrent is produced, hole accumulation in the overlayer is observed, but to a much lesser extent than that observed while studying the electrocatalytic properties of IrOx, which might suggest that part of the oxygen evolution reaction actually occurs at the hematite/electrolyte interface. Our findings demonstrate the complex and equivocal role of the overlayer in semiconductor/overlayer photoelectrodes for solar water splitting. We foresee that the present observation of charge transfers and their implication in the understanding of these complex composite materials can be extended to several other photoelectrochemical systems for solar fuel production.
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the energy diagram of the α-Fe2O3/IrOx/electrolyte junctions at different applied potentials ((a) 0.1, 0.4 and 0.8 V and (b) 1.4 V vs. RHE) and the relevant change of the Ir LIII XANES peak. 
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca (MIUR) Futuro in Ricerca 2013, project RBFR13XLJ9 and Università degli Studi di Milano, Piano di Sostegno alla Ricerca 2015/2017 Linea 2 – Dotazione annuale per attività istituzionali, Azione A – Fondi di ricerca da assegnare a giovani ricercatori a tempo determinato e indeterminato for funding and the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility for provision of beamtime at beamline LISA-BM08 (experiment CH-4209). The use of instrumentation purchased through the Regione Lombardia – Fondazione Cariplo joint SmartMatLab Project (Fondazione Cariplo grant 2013-1766) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Malara, A. Minguzzi, M. Marelli, S. Morandi, R. Psaro, V. Dal Santo and A. Naldoni, ACS Catal., 2015, 5(9), 5292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barroso, C. Mesa, S. R. Pendlebury, J. Cowan, T. Hisatomi, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109(39), 15640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49(36), 6405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bledowski, L. Wang, S. Neubert, D. Mitoraj and R. Beranek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(33), 18951 CAS .
M. Marelli, A. Naldoni, A. Minguzzi, M. Allieta, T. Virgili, G. Scavia, S. Recchia, R. Psaro and V. Dal Santo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(15), 11997 CAS .
L. Badia-Bou, E. Mas-Marza, P. Rodenas, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, S. Gimenez, E. Peris and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(8), 3826 CAS .
F. Lin and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(1), 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Z. Ji, W. Zou, X. Gu, Y. Deng, F. Gao, C. Tang and L. Dong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3(9), 2052 CrossRef CAS .
L. Steier, I. Herraiz-Cardona, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(48), 7681 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2(4), 737 RSC .
F. Malara, F. Fabbri, M. Marelli and A. Naldoni, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, F. Le Formal, A. Kafizas, S. R. Pendlebury and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20649–20657 CAS .
H. Ye, H. S. Park and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(25), 12464 CAS .
M. H. Rittmann-Frank, C. J. Milne, J. Rittmann, M. Reinhard, T. J. Penfold and M. Chergui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(23), 5858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Santomauro, A. Lübcke, J. Rittmann, E. Baldini, A. Ferrer, M. Silatani, P. Zimmermann, S. Grübel, J. A. Johnson, S. O. Mariager, P. Beaud, D. Grolimund, C. Borca, G. Ingold, S. L. Johnson and M. Chergui, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baran, M. Fracchia, A. Vertova, E. Achilli, A. Naldoni, F. Malara, G. Rossi, G. S. Rondinini, P. Ghigna, A. Minguzzi and F. D'Acapito, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 207, 16 CrossRef CAS .
A. Braun, K. Sivula, D. K. Bora, J. Zhu, L. Zhang, M. Grätzel, J. Guo and E. C. Constable, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(32), 16870 CAS .
L. Amidani, A. Naldoni, M. Malvestuto, M. Marelli, P. Glatzel, V. Dal Santo and F. Boscherini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 5413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mo, I. C. Stefan, W. B. Cai, J. Dong, P. Carey and D. Scherson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106(14), 3681 CrossRef CAS .
A. Minguzzi, O. Lugaresi, E. Achilli, C. Locatelli, A. Vertova, P. Ghigna and S. Rondinini, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5(9), 3591 RSC .
A. Minguzzi, O. Lugaresi, C. Locatelli, S. Rondinini, F. D'Acapito, E. Achilli and P. Ghigna, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85(15), 7009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Achilli, A. Minguzzi, A. Visibile, C. Locatelli, A. Vertova, A. Naldoni, S. Rondinini, F. Auricchio, S. Marconi, M. Fracchia and P. Ghigna, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2016, 23(2), 622 CrossRef PubMed .
F. D'Acapito, A. Trapananti, S. Torrengo and S. Mobilio, Not. Neutroni e Luce di Sincrotrone, 2014, 19, 14 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, M. E. Strayer, N. S. McCool, M. E. Pandelia, T. P. Saunders, J. R. Swierk, J. F. Callejas, L. Jensen and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(27), 8749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Minguzzi, C. Locatelli, O. Lugaresi, E. Achilli, G. Cappelletti, M. Scavini, M. Coduri, P. Masala, B. Sacchi, A. Vertova, P. Ghigna and S. Rondinini, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5104 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Sanchez Casalongue, M. L. Ng, S. Kaya, D. Friebel, H. Ogasawara and A. Nilsson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arroyo-Curras and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(15), 8147 CAS .
P. Steegstra, M. Busch, I. Panas and E. Ahlberg, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20975–20981 CAS .
M. Yoshida, T. Yomogida, T. Mineo, K. Nitta, K. Kato, T. Masuda, H. Nitani, H. Abe, S. Takakusagi, T. Uruga, K. Asakura, K. Uosaki and H. Kondoh, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49(71), 7848 RSC .
Y. Ma, A. Kafizas, S. R. Pendlebury, F. Le Formal and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4951–4960 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Sample preparation, FEXRAV scans and XANES spectra, flat band potential determination and cyclic voltammetries. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp08053g‡ Present address: Industrie De Nora S.p.A. Via Bistolfi, 35 – 20134 Milan, Italy.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Pictorial representation of the spectro-PEC setup.	 

 	Fig. 1  Full Ir-LIII edge XANES spectra recorded in the presence (red line) and in the absence (blue line) of a UV-Vis light source and the relative difference (black line) at 1.4 V (RHE) in aqueous 1 M K2HPO4. The right side inset represents the magnification of the XANES region. The left side inset represents a typical series of dark/light steps as recorded during XAS spectra acquisition.	 

 	Fig. 2  (Light–dark) difference XAS spectra for different applied potential values on α-Fe2O3/IrOx photoanodes in aqueous 1 M K2HPO4. The differences were calculated after normalization of the original spectra.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the energy diagram of the α-Fe2O3/IrOx/electrolyte junctions at different applied potentials ((a) 0.1, 0.4 and 0.8 V and (b) 1.4 V vs. RHE) and the relevant change of the Ir LIII XANES peak.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Sample preparation, FEXRAV scans and XANES spectra, flat band potential determination and cyclic voltammetries. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp08053g
‡ Present address: Industrie De Nora S.p.A. Via Bistolfi, 35 – 20134 Milan, Italy.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
