Soft landing of bare PtRu nanoparticles for electrochemical reduction of oxygen  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR03154K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR03154K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12379-12391Soft landing of bare PtRu nanoparticles for electrochemical reduction of oxygen

        
          
            Grant E. 
            Johnson
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Colby†
b, 
      
        
          
            Mark 
            Engelhard
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Daewon 
            Moon
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Julia 
            Laskin
          
        
      a
aPhysical Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, P. O. Box 999, MSIN K8-88, Richland, WA 99352, USA. E-mail: Grant.Johnson@pnnl.gov
bEnvironmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, P. O. Box 999, Richland, WA 99352, USA
cDaegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology, Daeju, Korea
Received 
      13th May 2015
    , Accepted 25th June 2015First published on 30th June 2015AbstractMagnetron sputtering of two independent Pt and Ru targets coupled with inert gas aggregation in a modified commercial source has been combined with soft landing of mass-selected ions to prepare bare 4.5 nm diameter PtRu nanoparticles on glassy carbon electrodes with controlled size and morphology for electrochemical reduction of oxygen in solution. Employing atomic force microscopy (AFM) it is shown that the nanoparticles bind randomly to the glassy carbon electrode at a relatively low coverage of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 and that their average height is centered at 4.5 nm. Scanning transmission electron microscopy images obtained in the high-angle annular dark field mode (HAADF-STEM) further confirm that the soft-landed PtRu nanoparticles are uniform in size. Wide-area scans of the electrodes using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) reveal the presence of both Pt and Ru in atomic concentrations of ∼9% and ∼33%, respectively. Deconvolution of the high energy resolution XPS spectra in the Pt 4f and Ru 3d regions indicates the presence of both oxidized Pt and Ru. The substantially higher loading of Ru compared to Pt and enrichment of Pt at the surface of the nanoparticles is confirmed by wide-area analysis of the electrodes using time-of-flight medium energy ion scattering (TOF-MEIS) employing both 80 keV He+ and O+ ions. The activity of electrodes containing 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of bare 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles toward the electrochemical reduction of oxygen was evaluated employing cyclic voltammetry (CV) in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4 solutions. In both electrolytes a pronounced reduction peak was observed during O2 purging of the solution that was not evident during purging with Ar. Repeated electrochemical cycling of the electrodes revealed little evolution in the shape or position of the voltammograms indicating high stability of the nanoparticles supported on glassy carbon. The reproducibility of the nanoparticle synthesis and deposition was evaluated by employing the same experimental parameters to prepare nanoparticles on glassy carbon electrodes on three occasions separated by several days. Surfaces with almost identical electrochemical behavior were observed with CV, demonstrating the highly reproducible preparation of bare nanoparticles using physical synthesis in the gas-phase combined with soft landing of mass-selected ions.
Introduction
Sub-nanometer clusters1,2 and larger nanoparticles3,4 are a subject of widespread research due to their highly tunable structural, electronic, optical, and magnetic properties. The wide-ranging characteristics of nanoparticles make them promising materials for use in a number of cutting-edge applications. For example, metal nanoparticles have been used recently as photocatalysts for the preparation of alternative liquid fuels5 and heterogeneous catalysts for hydrogenation reactions.6 Nanoparticles are also employed in composite materials as sensors for the detection of explosives7 and chemical warfare agents.8 Biomedical applications9 of nanoparticles include targeted delivery of drugs,10 cellular imaging,11 cancer diagnosis,12 and photo-thermal treatment of tumors.13 Nanoparticles also hold promise in plasmon-enhanced photovoltaic devices for the direct high-efficiency conversion of solar energy to electricity.14 In addition, nanoparticle inks have been employed in the rapid and environmentally benign printing of low cost electronic circuits15 as well as in larger scale additive manufacturing processes (3-dimensional printing).16
Metal nanoparticles find widespread use in the chemical sciences, particularly in heterogeneous catalysis.17,18 Nanoparticles expose much larger active surface areas than extended flat substrates and may be synthesized from a wide range of elements in selected morphologies that express crystal facets that may be catalytically active and selective towards a certain chemical reaction.19 The ability to control the elemental composition, size, shape, density, and support-interaction of nanoparticles immobilized on surfaces is critical to the development of next generation materials with tailored properties for catalysis and energy storage.20 This is demonstrated elegantly by the extensively studied example of the platinum-catalyzed oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) which occurs at the cathode in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs).21 Studies of single-crystals of Pt have shown that their activity toward the ORR varies considerably at different crystal facets.22 Consequently, nanoparticles of specific size and shape that expose a large surface area of certain facets have been found to exhibit superior catalytic activity (higher reduction potential and larger limiting current per active surface area) compared to particles that are smaller or larger.23 Nevertheless, for PEMFCs to compete commercially with combustion engines, it is estimated that the Pt-mass activity, the ratio of the catalytic activity to the mass of Pt at the cathode, has to be improved by a factor of ∼4.24 Alloying of Pt with other base transition metals has been demonstrated to be a promising approach for producing active catalysts with reduced Pt loading.25 For example, studies of bulk surfaces have demonstrated that bimetallic Pt3M (M = Fe, Co, Ni) alloys offer impressive activity for the ORR compared to pure Pt.26 However, alloy nanoparticles with controlled composition, size, and shape are far more likely to yield functional catalysts than extended bulk alloys due to their larger exposed surface area.27 While it is possible to synthesize nanoparticles from single metals in solution with a great deal of control over the size and shape distribution,3 achieving the same level of control in alloy nanoparticles containing two or more metals remains challenging. In addition, solution-based methods require the use of organic capping ligands to arrest particle growth at a certain size and promote the formation of desired crystal facets. Many applications of nanoparticles, however, require that these capping layers be removed to expose the underlying active metal surface.
Magnetron sputtering combined with inert gas-aggregation has become a versatile method of generating bare ionic nanoparticles and clusters over a broad range of sizes and elemental compositions. Haberland and co-workers first demonstrated this physical synthesis technique in 1991 to study the creation of thin films on surfaces through energetic cluster deposition.28 A different design was introduced in 2005 by Palmer and co-workers which allowed both sputtering of insulating target materials as well as a variable aggregation distance for more accurately size-controlled formation of ionic clusters and nanoparticles.29 Recently, modified versions of this source design have emerged which enable room temperature direct current (DC) sputtering,30 pulsed sputtering,31,32 and sputtering of multiple independent targets in one region of gas aggregation.33–39 Together, these different source configurations have been employed to prepare a wide range of nanoparticles and clusters on surfaces for studies in catalysis,40,41 photovoltaics,42,43 magnetism,44–46 cluster–surface interactions and self-assembly,47–49 as well as hydrophobic coatings.50 All of these sources, however, produce a broad distribution of ionic nanoparticles that must be filtered in the gas-phase with mass-spectrometry techniques to prepare a precisely-defined (mass-selected) beam of ionic particles for controlled deposition onto surfaces.
Soft landing of mass-selected ions enables unprecedented control over the size, composition, and charge state of complex molecules immobilized on surfaces.38,51–55 The idea of soft landing ions to modify surfaces was demonstrated almost 40 years ago by Cooks and co-workers by depositing small sulfur-containing ions onto metal substrates.56 Soft landing of larger polyatomic ions onto surfaces intact with retention of ionic charge was reported by the same group several years later.57 A number of subsequent studies have shown that a wide range of complex ions including peptides,58 proteins,59–61 protein assemblies,62 viruses,63 organometallic complexes,64 clusters,52,54,65–68 and nanoparticles51,69–73 may be soft landed onto a variety of substrates intact, even at ambient conditions.74,75 For example, in our laboratory we recently demonstrated that both the size and ionic charge state of ligated cationic gold clusters may be controlled by soft landing them onto selected self-assembled monolayers on gold (SAMs) at controlled coverage.51,52,54 In addition, it was shown that the charge retention of negatively charged polyoxometalate clusters is controlled primarily by their electron binding energy rather than the electron transfer properties of the underlying surface.65 In comparison to species that are deposited from solution, soft landing avoids any contamination resulting from the presence of neutrals, residual reactants, solvent molecules, and counterions.53 Therefore, soft landing of mass-selected ions offers a number of advantages over conventional methods of immobilizing nanoparticles on surfaces.
Herein, we employ magnetron sputtering and inert gas aggregation coupled with mass-selection and ion soft landing for the preparation of bare PtRu nanoparticles on glassy carbon electrodes with controlled size and composition for the electrochemical reduction of O2. Ruthenium was selected as the second metal due to its substantially lower price ($50/oz) compared to Pt ($1134/oz) and its previously demonstrated activity towards O2 reduction in Pt-based alloys.76,77 The size and coverage of the bare soft landed nanoparticles were characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and high resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy in the high-angle annular dark field imaging mode (HAADF-STEM). Both techniques indicate that the particles are uniform in size and bind randomly to the surface. The elemental composition of the particles was characterized using both X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and time-of-flight medium energy ion scattering (TOF-MEIS). Both techniques, which sample a wide area of the surface, reveal a higher atomic concentration of Ru compared to Pt. Deconvolution of the XPS data further indicates the presence of oxidized Pt and Ru. Despite the substantially lower atomic concentration of Pt than Ru the nanoparticles exhibited a pronounced O2 reduction peak during cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments performed in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4. In addition, the voltammograms did not evolve during repeated electrochemical cycling indicating that the particles are stable towards decomposition in a potential range relevant for O2 reduction. The reproducibility of the magnetron sputtering/gas aggregation nanoparticle synthesis method and ion soft landing for controlled preparation of electrodes was confirmed by preparing identical samples on separate days using the same experimental parameters which yielded highly consistent CV results. This approach, therefore, is a versatile alternative method for reproducibly preparing stable bare nanoparticles on electrodes for electrochemical applications.
Experimental section
Gas-phase synthesis and soft landing of bare anionic PtRu nanoparticles
A detailed description of the modified commercial Nanogen-Trio nanoparticle source and the Q-Prep 500 deposition system that were purchased from Mantis Deposition Ltd (Oxfordshire, U.K.) is provided in a previous publication.38 Briefly, the Nanogen-Trio source employs three separate circular 1′′ targets mounted on the same linear translator within one region of inert gas aggregation. Each 1′′ magnetron has an independent power supply which allows the sputtering current applied to the different targets to be adjusted separately, thereby providing control over the mole fraction of metals incorporated into the nanoparticles. In addition, the gas ports on the Nanogen-Trio source are designed so that the flow of sputtering gas (Ar) is directed from the outside of the targets towards their center. This inward direction of gas flow sweeps Ar across the sputtering surfaces and ensures early mixing of the metal vapors generated over the different targets.
Bare metal nanoparticles of Pt and Ru were prepared by DC magnetron sputtering of separate Pt and Ru targets (circular, 1′′ diameter, 0.15′′ thick, 99.95% purity) obtained from Plasmaterials (Livermore, CA) in a controlled flow of ultra-high purity (UHP) argon and helium (99.999% purity) gas purchased from Matheson Tri-Gas (Newark, CA). The sputtering currents applied to each metal target, the flow rates of argon and helium, and the position of the linear translator in the aggregation region were adjusted to optimize the production (total anion current) of the PtRu nanoparticles. The values of these parameters are provided in Table 1.
Table 1 Source parameters employed for the soft landed nanoparticles reported in this study. The spot size for every deposition was 25 mm2




Sample
Size (nm)
Ar (sccm)
He (sccm)
Sputtering current Pt (ma)
Sputtering current Ru (ma)
Source position (mm)
Ion current (pa)
Deposition time (min)
Number of ions deposited per μm2




PtRu
4.5
10
25
30
55
35
310
25
7 × 104




After exiting the aggregation region the distribution of anionic PtRu nanoparticles (typically FWHM ∼2 nm) passes through a 5 mm diameter skimmer and into the MesoQ frequency scanning quadrupole mass filter.78 The mass-selected anionic PtRu nanoparticles (typically FWHM ∼0.25 nm) transmitted by the MesoQ filter are extracted and focused onto the surface using a set of two custom-built einzel lenses in series. The einzel lenses focus the divergent beam of anionic nanoparticles exiting the quadrupole filter to a circular spot on the surface approximately 2.5 cm in diameter. Typical potentials applied to the entrance and exit elements of each einzel lens are +100 V. The center elements vary more but are generally set at a potential of around −5 V. The spatially focused nanoparticles are soft landed onto substrates held at ground potential and rotated at 20 rotations per minute (RPM) throughout the deposition. The kinetic energy of the ions is determined by the potential difference between the exit aperture of the gas aggregation region and the surface. Both of these elements were held at ground potential during all the experiments described herein. The kinetic energy of the ions, therefore, is imparted by the gas flow through the exit aperture and is estimated to be <1 eV which is well below the threshold for soft landing.79 The amount of soft landed material is determined by monitoring the ion current during deposition at a wire mesh grid at the exit of the MesoQ quadrupole filter and at the surface with a Keithley 6485 piccoammeter (Cleveland, OH). The wire mesh consistently captures ∼5% of the ion current that is measured at the surface. It is assumed that all of the anionic nanoparticles deposited in these experiments are singly charged.
Preparation of electrode surfaces
Glassy carbon substrates, 10 mm × 10 mm, 2 mm thick, with both sides lapped and one side diamond polished to <50 nm surface roughness were purchased from HTW Hochtemperatur-Werkstoffe GmbH (Thierhaupten, Germany). All surfaces were ultrasonically washed in 99.5% acetone obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) for 20 min. The sonicated surfaces were dried with a stream of pure nitrogen gas and placed in an ultraviolet cleaner (Boekel Scientific, Feasterville, PA) for 20 minutes. The surfaces were loaded into the instrument and degassed in vacuum (base pressure 10−9 Torr) at a temperature of 800 °C for 20 min and allowed to return to room temperature. The surfaces were then sputtered with argon radiofrequency plasma at a power of 50 W in a background pressure of 10−2 Torr of UHP argon for 1 min. Lacey thin carbon film coated copper microscopy grids (400 mesh) were purchased from Pacific Grid Tech (San Francisco, CA) and used as received. Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite surfaces (HOPG), 10 mm × 10 mm, 1.5 mm thick, ZYB quality were obtained from NT-MDT (Moscow, Russia).
Characterization of soft landed nanoparticles
AFM employing an Asylum MFP-3D BIO microscope (Santa Barbara, CA) was used to characterize the surface coverage and monodispersity in height of soft landed nanoparticles. The scope was operated in the tapping mode with 330 kHz tips that were purchased from Nanosensors (Neuchatel, Switzerland). The AFM data was converted to 3- and 2-dimensional color map images and line profiles and surface topography distributions were extracted from the AFM data using the WSxM software available for free from Nanotech Electronica (Madrid, Spain).80
TEM and HAADF-STEM were used to characterize the size and morphology of the bare PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto the carbon grids placed adjacent to the glassy carbon surfaces. Images were collected with a probe-corrected FEI Titan 80–300 operated at 300 kV.
XPS measurements were performed with a Physical Electronics Quantera Scanning X-ray Microprobe, which employed a focused monochromatic Al Kα X-ray (1486.7 eV) source for excitation and a spherical section analyzer. The instrument has a 32 element multichannel detection system. A 100 W X-ray beam focused to 100 μm diameter was rastered over a 1.3 × 0.1 mm rectangle on the sample. The X-ray beam was incident normal to the sample and the photoelectron detector was at 45° off-normal. High-energy resolution spectra were collected using a pass energy of 69.0 eV with a step size of 0.125 eV and a ±20° analyzer acceptance angle. XPS measurements were acquired at different spots on the electrode surface with multiple measurements at each spot. Spectra were referenced to an O 1s binding energy of 530.7 eV in all cases. All measurements were performed with the sample at room temperature. The peak fitting parameters used for Pt are as follows: The ratio of the doublets arising through spin–orbit splitting (Pt 4f5/2, Pt 4f3/2) was locked at 3:4. The Pt 4f7/2 and Pt 4f5/2 were located at 3.3 eV separation. The Shirley background subtraction method was employed with a FWHM = 1.3 eV for Pt(0) and 1.9 eV for Pt(II) and Pt(IV) with 80% Gaussian, 20% Lorentz lineshapes.81 The peak fitting parameters used for Ru are as follows: The ratio of the doublets arising through spin–orbit splitting (Ru 3d5/2 and Ru 3d3/2) was locked at 2:3. The separation between the Ru 3d5/2 and Ru 3d3/2 peaks was locked at 4.17 eV. The Shirley background subtraction method was employed with a FWHM = 0.92 eV and 70% Gaussian lineshapes.
TOF-MEIS with 80 keV He+ and O+ ions at a 90° scattering angle was also employed for quantitative composition analysis and to achieve a sampling depth larger than the diameter of the PtRu nanoparticles. The ion beams were focused on a 10 μm diameter spot on the sample and scattered. A 500 × 750 μm2 area was sampled to compensate for any non-uniform deposition of nanoparticles on the substrate, and the TOF-MEIS spectra were obtained with 0.8–1.5 μC. The nanoparticles were soft landed onto HOPG substrates to minimize the TOF-MEIS background compared to substrates prepared by solution drop casting and air drying. The coverage of nanoparticles on the substrate was submonolayer.
CV measurements were performed using a Princeton Applied Research (PAR) potentiostat (VersaStat4, Princeton, NJ) in a three-electrode configuration with Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode in saturated KCl, a platinum wire as the counter electrode, and the prepared PtRu nanoparticles on glassy carbon as the working electrode. The working electrode was placed in a modified plate material evaluation cell (catalog no. 011951, ALS, Japan). The liquid electrolyte consisted of 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in deionized water obtained from an Ultrapure Milli-Q system (resistivity: 18.2 MΩ cm at 25 °C). The electrolyte solution was purged with UHP argon or oxygen gas before and during the measurements. A minimum of 10 cycles were acquired for each of the surfaces at scan rates of 50 and 100 mV s−1 in the potential range of 1.5 to −0.1 V versus the regular hydrogen electrode (RHE). All experiments were conducted at room temperature.
Results and discussion
Diamond polished glassy carbon (1 cm2) was utilized as a representative flat conductive electrode surface for ion soft landing experiments due to its well-validated ability to serve as a surrogate for commercial gas-diffusion electrodes used in PEMFCs.82 AFM characterization of the as-received glassy carbon substrates revealed features with an average height of ∼5 nm, as reported previously.72 The cleaning procedure described in the Experimental section reduced the surface roughness of the bare glassy carbon to ∼1 nm. Therefore, the nanoparticles soft landed in this study (size ∼4.5 nm diameter) were readily observed on the surface of clean glassy carbon with AFM. Representative AFM results for an electrode prepared by soft landing 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of bare mass-selected 4.5 nm anionic PtRu nanoparticles onto clean glassy carbon are presented in Fig. 1. The bare PtRu nanoparticles were prepared by DC sputtering one 1′′ Pt target at a current of 30 mA and one 1′′ Ru target at a current of 55 mA in a flow of 10 standard cubic centimeters per minute (sccm) of Ar sputtering gas and 25 sccm of He carrier gas. The linear translator was set at a position of 35 mm in the gas aggregation region with respect to the exit aperture. These source conditions produced an ion current of 310 pA of mass-selected singly charged nanoparticles measured at the surface for a duration of 25 min. The source parameters are provided in Table 1. The PtRu nanoparticles were prepared using a relatively low combined flow rate of Ar and He gas and a reduced aggregation length, which results in a shorter residence time in the aggregation region and the formation of smaller size particles. The sputtering currents employed at each target are also relatively low due to the large sputtering yields of both Pt and Ru.83 The high magnification (1 μm2) 3-dimensional AFM rendering presented in Fig. 1a reveals the formation of a partial layer of PtRu nanoparticles on the glassy carbon electrode at low surface coverage. The particles are also observed to bind randomly to the electrode. This random binding arrangement is consistent with the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results obtained previously by Arenz and co-workers for smaller Pt clusters on glassy carbon electrodes and with our recently reported findings for larger soft landed V nanoparticles.72,84 In an effort to increase the number of potential nanoparticle binding sites on the electrode surface, the cleaning procedure used prior to deposition involved sputtering of glassy carbon with a RF Ar plasma.85 Previous reports have shown that plasma sputtering of carbon surfaces may result in the formation of a disordered layer at the surface which contains carbon atoms in a number of non-equivalent sites which may serve as anchors for supported nanoparticles.86,87 In a similar vein, ultrananocrystalline diamond surfaces with highly tunable chemical and physical properties, including nanoscale surface roughness, have been employed recently by Vajda and co-workers to prepare stable supported palladium and cobalt oxide clusters through ion soft landing that are resistant to sintering.88,89 In the current work, RF plasma sputtering in vacuum is employed directly prior to nanoparticle deposition to increase the surface roughness and defect density to achieve better stabilization of the PtRu nanoparticles under electrochemically active conditions in acidic solution.
 Fig. 1  3-Dimensional high magnification (1 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon. 2-Dimensional image (1 μm2) (c) and height profile (d) through selected PtRu nanoparticles. Note the monodispersity in height and random spatial distribution of PtRu nanoparticles on the surface of glassy carbon. 
In reasonable agreement with the size of the anionic PtRu nanoparticles that was selected using the quadrupole mass filter (∼4.5 nm), it is shown in Fig. 1b that the surface topography distribution obtained with AFM is centered at 4.5 nm in height with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of ∼4 nm. The distribution in height measured with AFM may result from different structural isomers of the nanoparticles in the gas-phase as well as different binding geometries to distinct sites on the surface. In addition, the 2-dimensional (1 μm2) AFM rendering presented in Fig. 1c confirms the low coverage of PtRu nanoparticles on the glassy carbon electrode and reveals the presence of additional smaller and larger features that are not as evident in the 3-dimensional image. A line profile obtained through selected features on the glassy carbon electrode (white line in Fig. 1c) is presented in Fig. 1d and shows 10 adjacent particles with a mode height of ∼5 nm along with smaller shoulder features that are ∼2 nm as well as a larger feature that is ∼7 nm in height. There are two possible explanations for the observation with AFM of a small amount of features on the surface that are smaller or larger than the size of the selected nanoparticles. The first possibility is contamination of the ion beam by different size neutral clusters that cannot be mass-selected using the quadrupole mass-filter. As discussed in detail in a previous publication,72 cationic nanoparticles formed at the source are rejected by the positive DC potential applied to the quadrupole rods and einzel lenses. Neutral nanoparticles, however, cannot be removed from the beam of anionic species and may, therefore, impinge on the surface. Analysis of a large number of nanoparticle depositions indicates that the size observed with AFM (height) and electron microscopy (diameter) is consistent with the mass selected using the quadrupole mass-filter. This correspondence in size suggests that larger or smaller neutral species comprise only a minor portion of the material that reaches the substrate. The second possibility is that several structural isomers of the anionic PtRu nanoparticles may exist in the ion beam or are formed on the surface through interaction with different binding sites. For example, recent studies by Palmer and co-workers demonstrated that varying the aggregation length and magnetron sputtering power of a gas-aggregation source enables the deposition of Au clusters with different structures.90 Therefore, a distribution of structural isomers originating at the nanoparticle source cannot be excluded. In another study, the same group showed that Au nanoparticles subjected to electron beam irradiation undergo substantial structural transformations.91 This suggests that a number of energetically similar structural isomers may exist for a given size nanoparticle. It is also well established that different binding sites on the surface may result in distinct structures of supported clusters and nanoparticles. For example, it was shown by Getzlaff and co-workers using AFM that 12 nm nanoparticles may exhibit a reduced height when soft landed on certain surfaces due to the strength of the particle-support interaction.92
Representative STEM and TEM images of samples prepared by soft landing 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of bare mass-selected 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles onto a continuous carbon electron microscopy grid are presented in Fig. 2. The nanoparticles in Fig. 2a were analyzed directly following deposition while those in Fig. 2b–d were imaged following exposure to mild oxidizing conditions. The low magnification STEM image presented in Fig. 2a reveals the presence of a partial layer of PtRu nanoparticles with low coverage on the flat continuous carbon surface. The particles are observed to bind randomly to the surface of the grid with minor aggregation but no substantial coalescence into larger species. In reasonable agreement with the size of the PtRu nanoparticles that were selected in the gas-phase using the quadrupole mass filter (∼4.5 nm) and the average nanoparticle height measured with AFM (∼4.5 nm), the mean particle diameter obtained from STEM is around 5.3 nm, as may be seen in the intermediate magnification image presented in Fig. 2b. The slightly larger diameter observed with STEM compared to the height measured with AFM may result from the nanoparticles impacting to some depth in the surface, which would reduce their height. This STEM image further confirms the relatively low coverage of PtRu nanoparticles on the continuous carbon grid and also excludes the deposition of substantially smaller or larger species that may exist as neutrals in the beam of nanoparticles produced at the source. A total of nine individual particles are present in Fig. 2b, four of which are lying partially on top of each other and five of which are isolated. It is possible that the particles lying on top of each other may have aggregated on the surface or alternatively been stuck together prior to landing. It is illustrated in Fig. 2b that bare mass-selected PtRu nanoparticles may be soft landed onto continuous carbon microscopy grids at room temperature with retention of size and without substantial agglomeration into larger species.
 Fig. 2  Low (a), intermediate (b), and high (c) magnification scanning and intermediate (d) transmission electron microscopy images obtained for 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of 4.5 nm mass-selected anionic PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid. The nanoparticles in (a) were analyzed directly following deposition while (b–d) were imaged following exposure to mild oxidizing conditions. 
While polished glassy carbon is the technologically relevant electrode material used for PEMFC applications, it is much more straightforward to analyze metal nanoparticles deposited onto thin carbon grids using TEM than onto thick carbon surfaces which requires extensive sample preparation.93 Ion soft landing, therefore, offers a unique advantage in that identical nanoparticles prepared at the same time and experimental conditions may be deposited simultaneously onto glassy carbon electrodes for electrochemical analysis and continuous carbon microcopy grids for structural characterization with STEM. Combined with mass-selection using the quadrupole mass-filter this approach enables structure–activity relationships to be explored in a systematic manner. In addition, the bare PtRu nanoparticles presented in Fig. 2 are free of contamination resulting from capping ligands. In fact, no cleaning of the samples was necessary prior to analysis with TEM.
A high magnification STEM image of two adjacent nanoparticles is presented in Fig. 2c. Here the morphology of the individual particles is more discernible and suggests a mixture of two metals within the nanoparticles. To further characterize the morphology of the PtRu nanoparticles an intermediate magnification phase contrast TEM image was also obtained and is presented in Fig. 2d. Here the nanoparticles appear to be predominately lighter in contrast (Ru) and contain speaks of a darker material (Pt) throughout. In a previous study by Lee and co-workers, Pt52Ru48 alloy nanoparticles of similar size but different composition were synthesized using a microwave-assisted polyol process and found to exhibit comparable morphologies to those prepared in this study.94 The TEM data presented herein is also consistent with a number of previous studies of PtRu nanoparticles prepared using traditional solution-phase techniques. For example, a recent study by Serp and co-workers employed TEM to examine the morphology of PtRu nanoparticles supported on carbon nanotubes.95 The nanoparticles were found to contain separate crystal domains consistent with both the face-centered-cubic structure of Pt and the hexagonal-close-packed structure typical of Ru. Another study by Manthiram and co-workers confirmed the presence of Pt and Ru crystalline domains in alloy nanoparticles 5 nm in diameter.96
To characterize the elemental composition of the bare PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon electrodes XPS measurements were performed on selected areas of the samples. A representative wide energy scan photoelectron spectrum is presented in Fig. 3a. Even at this relatively low energy resolution multiple features corresponding to both Pt and Ru are clearly visible after deposition of only 7 × 104 ions μm−2 onto glassy carbon. Importantly, aside from the peaks observed for carbon and oxygen, which originate from the surface, no other elements are present with substantial abundance. This observation demonstrates the high purity of both the PtRu nanoparticles as well as the underlying glassy carbon electrode. In a previous investigation of soft landed nanoparticles contamination of the surfaces by the element comprising the sample holder (Mo) was observed following excessive cleaning using an RF Ar plasma.85 In the current study, the duration of plasma cleaning was substantially reduced enabling the removal of adventitious hydrocarbons from the glassy carbon surface and creation of additional nanoparticle binding sites without causing deposition of metals from the materials adjacent to the sample. The percent atomic concentrations of the different elements were extracted from the XPS data and are presented in Table 2. As expected from the sputtering currents that were applied to the Pt and Ru targets during nanoparticle synthesis and deposition, the elemental composition of the surface is determined to be 9% Pt and 33% Ru.
 Fig. 3  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy wide energy scan (a) of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of 4.5 nm mass-selected anionic PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon. High energy resolution scans of (b) the Pt 4f and (c) Ru 3d regions of the photoelectron spectrum. 
Table 2 Percent atomic concentrations of Ru and Pt determined with XPS at three different sampling regions for 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon. Relative atomic concentrations of different Ru (Ru(0), Ru(IV), and Ru(VI)) and Pt (Pt(0), Pt(II), and Pt(IV)) determined from fitting of the XPS data




Sample
Ru 3p3
Ru 3d5/2 (280.2 eV) Ru(0)
Ru 3d5/2 (281.0 eV) Ru(IV)
Ru 3d5/2 (282.2 eV) Ru(VI)
Pt 4f
Pt 4f7/2 (71.7 eV) Pt(0)
Pt 4f7/2 (72.5 eV) Pt(II)
Pt 4f7/2 (72.5 eV) Pt(IV)




Area 1
32.1
5.3
3.8
0.9
9.0
50.3
38.3
11.5


Area 2
30.6
6.4
2.5
1.1
8.9
52.5
37.0
10.5


Area 3
36.9
7.0
3.2
1.0
9.9
50.4
38.5
11.1


Average
33.2
6.2
3.2
1.0
9.3
51.1
37.9
11.0




Further insight into the chemical state of the two elements comprising the nanoparticles is provided by high energy resolution scans of the Pt and Ru regions of the photoelectron spectrum presented in Fig. 3b and c. Deconvolution of the high resolution XPS data using the method described in the Experimental section enables extraction of the percent compositions of the different oxidation states of both Pt and Ru. These values are also provided in Table 2 and indicate that Pt is present as 51% Pt(0), 38% Pt(II), and 11% Pt(IV). At the same time, Ru is present as 6% Ru(0), 3% Ru(IV), and 1% Ru(VI). Both metals, therefore, are oxidized to some extent which is to be expected due to the bare metallic surfaces of the nanoparticles which likely react with O2 in the ambient environment upon removal from vacuum. For example, an XPS study by Zhang and co-workers of 5 nm Pt nanoparticles supported on graphite found that the surfaces of the particles were oxidized.81 Similarly, oxidation of 3 nm Ru nanoparticles following exposure to air was reported by Miao and co-workers.97
While XPS is the workhorse technique for characterization of the elemental composition and chemical state of surfaces and nanoparticles the information it provides can, in some instances, be biased toward the first few layers of material. This is due to the small inelastic mean free path (typically a few atomic layers) of the emitted photoelectrons, which is also dependent on the elemental composition.98 Therefore, to further analyze the whole composition of the soft landed PtRu nanoparticles rather than the surface layer we applied a complementary characterization technique, TOF-MEIS, employing both 80 keV He+ and O+ ions as described in the Experimental section. The spectrum obtained using He+ ions is presented in Fig. 4a. Three intense features are observed which correspond to carbon (∼42 kV), Ru (∼74 kV), and Pt (∼77 kV). Similar to the results obtained with XPS, the peak corresponding to Ru is 2.7 times more intense than the peak resulting from Pt in the TOF-MEIS spectrum. The lack of separation between the adjacent Ru and Pt peaks in Fig. 4a led to additional TOF-MEIS experiments employing 80 keV O+ ions. This spectrum is presented in Fig. 4b and exhibits a larger separation between the two metal peaks. Nevertheless, the two peaks were still not separated completely. Due to the insufficient separation of the two peaks, detailed simulations of the MEIS spectra were not possible. Assuming Coulomb scattering cross sections, the MEIS peak intensity is proportional to the square of the atomic number. Based on this approximate calculation, the ratio of Pt/Ru composition of the nanoparticles is estimated to be 0.10 from Fig. 4a and 0.11 from Fig. 4b, respectively. The ratio of Pt/Ru composition obtained from XPS is 0.27. The XPS ratio, which is more surface sensitive, is 2.7 times higher than that obtained from MEIS. This difference suggests that the Pt composition at the surface may be higher due to Pt segregation in the PtRu nanoparticles.
 Fig. 4  (a) 80 keV He+ and (b) 80 keV O+ time-of-flight medium energy ion scattering spectra of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto highly oriented pyrolytic graphite. 
Following characterization with AFM and XPS, the glassy carbon electrodes containing bare PtRu nanoparticles were mounted in a modified electrochemical plate testing cell to examine their activity towards the reduction of O2 in acidic solution-phase conditions. The cell utilizes the glassy carbon surface containing PtRu nanoparticles as the working electrode, a Pt-wire counterelectrode, and a Ag/AgCl in saturated KCl reference electrode. A 0.7 mL volume of the electrolyte solution, containing either weakly interacting 0.1 M HClO4 or strongly interacting 0.5 M H2SO4, is loaded on top of the working electrode which also forms the bottom of the cell. Two different electrolytes are employed in this study because it has been established that the stronger adsorption of sulfate anions (SO42−) on Pt(111) surfaces versus on Pt(100) deactivates the former towards O2 adsorption and activation.21 At the same time, ClO4− anions are only weakly adsorbed on Pt(111) making this surface more active than Pt(100). A comparison of the activity in these two electrolytes, therefore, provides insight into the surface facets that are present on the nanoparticles. After purging the electrolyte solutions for 15 min with Ar gas a series of ten sequential CVs were recorded between potential limits of −0.1 and 1.5 V versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The CV curves for 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of bare 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon in 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte purged with Ar gas are presented as black lines in Fig. 5a. A maximum current of ∼50 μA is observed for all ten cycles with little evolution of the CV curves following repeated electrochemical cycling of the surface. The same sample was also analyzed following purging of the solution with O2 for 15 min. These results are presented as red lines in Fig. 5a. In comparison to the solution purged with Ar, the oxygenated solution exhibits a strong reduction wave starting at 0.5 V which results in a maximum current of −225 μA at an applied potential of 0.2 V. The CV curves were consistent for all ten cycles in oxygenated HClO4 indicating stability of the supported nanoparticles toward dissolution and aggregation in this range of potentials. To examine the performance of the supported nanoparticles in a strongly interacting electrolyte solution, CV curves were also obtained in 0.5 M H2SO4 with both Ar and O2 purging. The results obtained during purging with Ar are presented as black lines in Fig. 5b and bear a very close resemblance to the curves obtained with HClO4 in Fig. 5a. With HClO4, however, the maximum current observed was slightly larger than with H2SO4. During purging with O2 a strong reduction wave is observed in 0.5 M H2SO4 starting at 0.6 V and resulting in a maximum current of −150 μA at an applied potential of 0.3 V. The slight shift in reduction potential and change in current observed between 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4 is evident in Fig. 6a.
 Fig. 5  Cyclic voltammograms of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon in 0.1 M HClO4 (a) and 0.5 M H2SO4 (b) with argon purging (black line) and O2 purging (red line), scan rate = 100 mV s−1, temperature = 20 °C. 
 Fig. 6  Cyclic voltammograms (a) of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon in 0.5 M H2SO4 (black line) and 0.1 M HClO4 (red line) with O2 purging. Cyclic voltammograms (b) of identical nanoparticles soft landed on 3 separate days (black, red, and blue lines) in 0.5 M H2SO4 with O2 purging, scan rate = 100 mV s−1, temperature = 20 °C. 
For any synthesis method to be widely applicable it is crucial that it be consistent and reproducible at the same experimental conditions. Bimetallic nanoparticles are particularly challenging in this regard because the different metals have distinct reduction potentials. Moreover, the presence of the second element makes additional outcomes possible such as the formation of separate Pt and Ru particles, homogeneous alloy nanoparticles, core–shell structures, as well as cluster-in-cluster motifs. To investigate whether the magnetron sputtering gas aggregation technique can reproducibly prepare electrodes coated with bimetallic nanoparticles, three samples were prepared at identical experimental conditions on three separate days. These surfaces were then tested electrochemically to determine how much variation was present in their oxygen reduction activities. The CV curves obtained for the three surfaces in 0.5 M H2SO4 purged with O2 are presented in Fig. 6b. In the potential range of interest the curves are found to be virtually identical indicating that bare PtRu nanoparticles of identical size, morphology, and surface coverage were delivered to the glassy carbon surfaces in three separate experiments.
Several strategies are currently being pursued in an effort to improve the efficiency of the ORR in PEMFCs. The chemisorption properties of oxygen species (O, OH, and OOH) on metal surfaces have been identified as a promising research subject because the reduction of molecularly adsorbed O2 is the rate limiting step in the ORR.99–101 On pure Pt surfaces, oxygen molecules are adsorbed sufficiently strongly to be stable at high potentials preventing the proton and electron transfer processes that are necessary for reduction of O2. The strong oxygen binding energy leads to unacceptably high overpotentials that are necessary to drive O2 reduction. These problems of Pt are further compounded at extremely small particle sizes where a greater number of low-coordinated Pt sites are present at the surface and bind oxygen more strongly. In addition to the strong O2 binding energy, which is about 0.2 eV too high, small Pt NPs are prone to poisoning, dissolution, and coalescence under fuel cell operating conditions, which limits their operational lifetime.21
It follows that lowering the oxygen binding energy may destabilize surface-bound oxygen species and increase the rate of reaction. The binding energies of oxygen species are controlled primarily by long-range geometric lattice strain and short-range charge-transfer effects.102 Alloying Pt with early transition metals has been shown to reduce the d-band center of the material, thereby lowering the adsorption of blocking species such as OH− and opening up sites for O2 adsorption and activation.21 In core–shell particles, a similar reduction of binding energy may result from compression of the Pt-lattice in the shell surrounding a core comprised of smaller metal atoms. The composition of the alloy core has also been predicted to influence the oxygen binding energy and properties of the surrounding Pt shell.100 Large alloy nanoparticles, however, have been demonstrated to become nanoporous through dissolution of the less-noble metal (leaching). Therefore, alloy particles less than 10 nm in diameter are desirable for O2 reduction applications.102 In addition, alloy nanoparticles that are stable towards repeated electrochemical testing in the potential range of 0.6–1.05 V (vs. RHE) in O2 saturated solutions are highly sought after.21 Size- and shape-controlled synthesis of complex alloy nanoparticles such as these remains challenging in solution. Moreover, alloys that are synthesized in solution are typically passivated by a layer of capping ligands that must be removed prior to use.
To the best of our knowledge, the results presented herein demonstrate, for the first time, that physical synthesis employing magnetron sputtering and gas aggregation may be used to reproducibly synthesize bare anionic PtRu nanoparticles in the gas-phase for mass-selection and soft landing onto glassy carbon electrode surfaces. The soft landed PtRu particles are shown to be size-focused and to have uniform composition and morphology. Without any activation or pretreatment steps the glassy carbon supported PtRu nanoparticles, which are substantially enriched in Ru, exhibited pronounced O2 reduction peaks in two different acidic electrolytes purged with oxygen. The supported particles were also shown to be stable and exhibit very little evolution between repeated CV cycles. While the reduction potentials observed for these novel particles are modest, their stability over a potential range of −0.1 to 1.5 V, which is far in excess of what is required for O2 reduction, is remarkable and indicates the reproducible preparation of particularly stable bare nanoparticles on a technologically relevant electrode material.
Three main approaches are currently being pursued to tune metal nanoparticle catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. (1) Shape controlled synthesis of Pt nanoparticles, (2) synthesis of MPt alloy nanoparticles, and (3) formation of Pt-based core–shell nanoparticles.21 For example, shape controlled synthesis to form tetrahedral, cubic, or octahedral Pt nanoparticles may be achieved in aqueous solution by reduction of a platinum salt (K2PtCl4) in the presence of different concentrations of polyacrylate and polyvinylpyrrolidone polymers.103 In particular, cubic nanoparticles containing a large fraction of Pt(100) surface facets have been shown to exhibit lower overpotentials and larger current densities for O2 reduction compared to polyhedral and truncated cubic particles.104 However, to remove the organic capping layers for application in O2 reduction the nanoparticles are subjected to multistep cleaning processes involving dispersal in and washing with several solvents and exposure to harsh ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
Chemical synthesis of MPt alloy nanoparticles in solution is complicated by the presence of two metals with different redox properties which may lead to the formation of a mixture of Pt and M particles rather than integrated nanoalloys.21 Employing controlled thermal decomposition of metal carbonyls and reduction of Pt(acac)2 (acac = acetylacetone) in the presence of oleic acid and oleyamine MPt alloy nanoparticles have been synthesized with both controlled size and composition.105 These nanoparticles may be prepared for O2 reduction by removal of the capping ligands using several methods that exert a varying influence on the catalytic performance of the final material.106 In particular, NiPt3 alloy nanoparticles with octahedral geometries have been shown to exhibit a specific activity 6.5 times that of cubic Pt particles towards oxygen reduction.107
Core–shell nanoparticles containing a thin shell of Pt around a core of a less-noble metal derive a substantial advantage from the reduced loading of precious Pt as well as lattice compression effects that lower the d-band center resulting in lower binding energies of reaction intermediates.21 Galvanic replacement, seed-mediated growth, and surface dealloying are popular approaches for the preparation of core–shell species which may exhibit activities well in excess of pure Pt nanoparticles.
As described above, a common theme of all solution-phase routes to synthesis of metal nanoparticles is that the materials, which have been so painstakingly prepared with specific size, shape, and composition, must be treated following synthesis to remove capping ligands and expose the active metal surface underneath. The cleaned particles must also be immobilized on an electrode surface without agglomeration. Therefore, an advantage of the magnetron sputtering ion soft landing approach described herein is that bare particles are formed in the gas phase through the condensation of metal vapors without the presence of any ligands or solvent. The particles are electrochemically active directly following synthesis and deposition without the need for any cleaning procedure. This avoids uncertainty in the properties of the nanoparticles which may be introduced during removal of ligands and immobilization on a support. It also reduces the use of solvents and harsh chemicals. In addition, because multiple targets may be sputtered simultaneously at independently controlled rates the particles may be formed with controlled elemental composition.72 Moreover, by varying the gas flow rates, sputtering current, and aggregation distance, it is possible to control the morphology of the nanoparticles in the gas phase without sophisticated step-by-step procedures such as those used in solution.90
Conclusion
A customized commercial magnetron sputtering gas aggregation nanocluster source has been employed to prepare bare mass-selected PtRu nanoparticles on glassy carbon electrode surfaces. Complementary characterization techniques including AFM, STEM, XPS, and TOF-MEIS have been used to examine the size, coverage, and morphology of the supported nanoparticles while CV has been employed to investigate their activity toward the reduction of oxygen in aqueous solutions. On flat glassy carbon and continuous carbon surfaces at relatively low coverage it is demonstrated with AFM and STEM that the soft landed nanoparticles bind randomly to the substrate. Wide-area elemental analysis of the supported nanoparticles using both XPS and TOF-MEIS indicates that the particles contain a much larger atomic percentage of Ru compared to Pt and that Pt may be enriched at the surface. Despite the relatively low loading of Pt, CV scans performed in both 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4 reveal pronounced reduction peaks during purging of the electrolyte solutions with O2 that are not present during purging with Ar. The supported nanoparticles are stable toward repeated electrochemical cycling as evidenced by no substantial changes to the CV curves following the first and last cycles. The reproducibility of the nanoparticle synthesis and soft landing conditions is demonstrated by depositing samples prepared at identical instrumental conditions on three separate days. All three surfaces are shown with CV to exhibit identical electrochemical behavior. Together, the results presented herein demonstrate that magnetron sputtering and gas aggregation in a modified commercial source is a valuable complementary method for preparing highly dispersed bare nanoparticles on surfaces that are free of the contaminants resulting from synthesis in solution with organic ligands.
Acknowledgements
GEJ acknowledges support from the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). JL acknowledges support from the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences & Biosciences of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). RC acknowledges support from the William R. Wiley postdoctoral fellowship. This work was performed using EMSL, a national scientific user facility sponsored by the Department of Energy's Office of Biological and Environmental Research and located at PNNL. PNNL is operated by Battelle for the U.S. DOE.
References
W. A. Deheer, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 611–676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brack, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 677–732 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, Y. J. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Bratlie, H. Lee, K. Komvopoulos, P. D. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3097–3101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Enkin, E. Sharon, E. Golub and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4918–4922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Q. Liu, C. H. Lu and I. Willner, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7278–7286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Giljohann, D. S. Seferos, W. L. Daniel, M. D. Massich, P. C. Patel and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3280–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rana, A. Bajaj, R. Mout and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 200–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Lee, H. Koo, I. C. Sun, J. H. Ryu, K. Kim and I. C. Kwon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2656–2672 RSC .
A. Llevot and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 242–257 RSC .
A. M. Alkilany, L. B. Thompson, S. P. Boulos, P. N. Sisco and C. J. Murphy, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 190–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Shen, X. P. Zhang, Q. J. Huang, Q. S. Xu and W. J. Song, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1622–1628 RSC .
M. Layani, I. Cooperstein and S. Magdassi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3244–3249 RSC .
P. Herves, M. Perez-Lorenzo, L. M. Liz-Marzan, J. Dzubiella, Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5577–5587 RSC .
M. Stratakis and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4469–4506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Li and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2289–2295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Shin, D. H. Lee, H. S. Moon, S. J. Jeong, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Mun, H. Cho, S. Park and S. O. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 250–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Guo, S. Zhang and S. H. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Markovic, H. A. Gasteiger and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 3411–3415 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wu and H. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mani, R. Srivastava and P. Strasser, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2770–2778 CAS .
I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, U. Gronbjerg, J. Rossmeisl and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6744–6762 CAS .
C. Wang, D. G. Li, M. F. Chi, J. Pearson, R. B. Rankin, J. Greeley, Z. Y. Duan, G. F. Wang, D. van der Vliet, K. L. More, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1668–1673 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
H. Haberland, M. Karrais and M. Mall, Z. Phys. D: At., Mol. Clusters, 1991, 20, 413–415 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pratontep, S. J. Carroll, C. Xirouchaki, M. Streun and R. E. Palmer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 045103.
A. Majumdar, D. Kopp, M. Ganeva, D. Datta, S. Bhattacharyya and R. Hippler, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 095103.
V. Stranak, S. Block, S. Drache, Z. Hubicka, C. A. Helm, L. Jastrabik, M. Tichy and R. Hippler, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2011, 205, 2755–2762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Zhang, H. Tsunoyama, H. Akatsuka, H. Sekiya, T. Nagase and A. Nakajima, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 10211–10217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Llamosa, M. Ruano, L. Martinez, A. Mayoral, E. Roman, M. Garcia-Hernandez and Y. Huttel, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13483–13486 RSC .
M. Benelmekki, M. Bohra, J. H. Kim, R. E. Diaz, J. Vernieres, P. Grammatikopoulos and M. Sowwan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3532–3535 RSC .
M. Benelmekki, J. Vernieres, J. H. Kim, R. E. Diaz, P. Grammatikopoulos and M. Sowwan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 151, 275–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Martinez, M. Diaz, E. Roman, M. Ruano, D. Llamosa and Y. Huttel, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11241–11249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, C. Cassidy, P. Grammatikopoulos, F. Djurabekova, K. Nordlund and M. Sowwan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13869–13875 CAS .
G. E. Johnson, R. Colby and J. Laskin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3491–3503 RSC .
A. Mayoral, D. Llamosa and Y. Huttel, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8442–8445 RSC .
C. Yin, E. Tyo, K. Kuchta, B. von Issendorff and S. Vajda, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140 CAS  , 174201.
C. Strebel, S. Murphy, R. M. Nielsen, J. H. Nielsen and I. Chorkendorff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8005–8012 RSC .
M. W. Majeski, I. L. Bolotin and L. Hanley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12901–12908 CAS .
H. M. Al Dosari and A. I. Ayesh, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 054305.
B. Balamurugan, R. Skomski, X. Z. Li, V. R. Shah, G. C. Hadjipanayis, J. E. Shield and D. J. Sellmyer, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 07A707.
D. L. Perez, A. Espinosa, L. Martinez, E. Roman, C. Ballesteros, A. Mayoral, M. Garcia-Hernandez and Y. Huttel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3101–3108 Search PubMed .
E. Verrelli, D. Tsoukalas, K. Giannakopoulos, D. Kouvatsos, P. Normand and D. E. Ioannou, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 1994–1997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Wepasnick, X. Li, T. Mangler, S. Noessner, C. Wolke, M. Grossmann, G. Gantefoer, D. H. Fairbrother and K. H. Bowen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12299–12307 CAS .
M. A. Gracia-Pinilla, E. Perez-Tijerina, J. A. Garcia, C. Fernandez-Navarro, A. Tlahuice-Flores, S. Mejia-Rosales, J. M. Montejano-Carrizales and M. Jose-Yacaman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13492–13498 CAS .
J. Tang, E. Verrelli and D. Tsoukalas, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20 Search PubMed  , 365605.
A. Serov, A. Choukourov, I. Melnichuk, A. Shelemin, A. Kuzminova, O. Kylian, J. Hanus, J. Kousal, M. Drabik, D. Slavinska and H. Biederman, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 254, 319–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Johnson, C. Wang, T. Priest and J. Laskin, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8069–8072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Johnson, T. Priest and J. Laskin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 573–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Johnson, Q. C. Hu and J. Laskin, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2011, 4, 83–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Johnson, T. Priest and J. Laskin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24977–24986 CAS .
G. Verbeck, W. Hoffmann and B. Walton, Analyst, 2012, 137, 4393–4407 RSC .
V. Franchetti, B. H. Solka, W. E. Baitinger, J. W. Amy and R. G. Cooks, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes, 1977, 23, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Miller, H. Luo, S. J. Pachuta and R. G. Cooks, Science, 1997, 275, 1447–1450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Laskin, P. Wang and O. Hadjar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1079–1090 RSC .
Z. Ouyang, Z. Takats, T. A. Blake, B. Gologan, A. J. Guymon, J. M. Wiseman, J. C. Oliver, V. J. Davisson and R. G. Cooks, Science, 2003, 301, 1351–1354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mazzei, G. Favero, M. Frasconi, A. Tata, N. Tuccitto, A. Licciardello and F. Pepi, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5937–5944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Deng, N. Thontasen, N. Malinowski, G. Rinke, L. Harnau, S. Rauschenbach and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2452–2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Mikhailov, T. H. Mize, J. L. P. Benesch and C. V. Robinson, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 8321–8328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Siuzdak, B. Bothner, M. Yeager, C. Brugidou, C. M. Fauquet, K. Hoey and C. M. Chang, Chem. Biol., 1996, 3, 45–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagaoka, K. Ikemoto, K. Horiuchi and A. Nakajima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18719–18727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. D. Gunaratne, G. E. Johnson, A. Andersen, D. Du, W. Y. Zhang, V. Prabhakaran, Y. H. Lin and J. Laskin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27611–27622 CAS .
G. E. Johnson, N. M. Al Hasan and J. Laskin, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2013, 354, 333–341 CrossRef PubMed .
B. L. Walton and G. F. Verbeck, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 8114–8120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Proch, M. Wirth, H. S. White and S. L. Anderson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3073–3086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kahle, Z. T. Deng, N. Malinowski, C. Tonnoir, A. Forment-Aliaga, N. Thontasen, G. Rinke, D. Le, V. Turkowski, T. S. Rahman, S. Rauschenbach, M. Ternes and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 518–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Ayesh, N. Qamhieh, H. Ghamlouche, S. Thaker and M. El-Shaer, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 034317.
S. Duffe, T. Irawan, M. Bieletzki, T. Richter, B. Sieben, C. Yin, B. Issendorff, M. Moseler and H. Hovel, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2007, 45, 401–408 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Johnson, R. Colby and J. Laskin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3491–3503 RSC .
S. J. Davila, D. O. Birdwell and G. F. Verbeck, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 034104.
A. Y. Li, Z. Baird, S. Bag, D. Sarkar, A. Prabhath, T. Pradeep and R. G. Cooks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12528–12531 CAS .
A. Y. Li, Q. J. Luo, S. J. Park and R. G. Cooks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3147–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jackson, V. Viswanathan, A. J. Forman, A. H. Larsen, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 67–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stojmenovic, M. Momcilovic, N. Gavrilov, I. A. Pasti, S. Mentus, B. Jokic and B. Babic, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 130–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Baker, S. C. Thornton, A. M. Keen, T. I. Preston, C. Norris, K. W. Edmonds and C. Binns, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1997, 68, 1853–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bromann, C. Felix, H. Brune, W. Harbich, R. Monot, J. Buttet and K. Kern, Science, 1996, 274, 956–958 CrossRef CAS .
I. Horcas, R. Fernandez, J. M. Gomez-Rodriguez, J. Colchero, J. Gomez-Herrero and A. M. Baro, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 013705.
G. X. Zhang, D. Q. Yang and E. Sacher, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 565–570 CAS .
Y. Gu, J. St-Pierre, A. Joly, R. Goeke, A. Datye and P. Atanassov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B485–B492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Seah, Thin Solid Films, 1981, 81, 279–287 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nesselberger, M. Roefzaad, R. F. Hamou, P. U. Biedermann, F. F. Schweinberger, S. Kunz, K. Schloegl, G. K. H. Wiberg, S. Ashton, U. Heiz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and M. Arenz, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 919–924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Baer, M. H. Engelhard, G. E. Johnson, J. Laskin, J. F. Lai, K. Mueller, P. Munusamy, S. Thevuthasan, H. F. Wang, N. Washton, A. Elder, B. L. Baisch, A. Karakoti, S. V. N. T. Kuchibhatla and D. Moon, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31 CAS  , 050820.
B. Rousseau, H. Estrade-Szwarckopf, A. L. Thomann and P. Brault, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2003, 77, 591–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Murphy, R. M. Nielsen, C. Strebel, M. Johansson and J. H. Nielsen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 376–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Ferguson, C. R. Yin, G. Kwon, E. C. Tyo, S. Lee, J. P. Greeley, P. Zapol, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, S. Vajda and L. A. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24027–24034 CAS .
G. Kwon, G. A. Ferguson, C. J. Heard, E. C. Tyo, C. R. Yin, J. DeBartolo, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, A. J. Kropf, J. Greeley, R. L. Johnston, L. A. Curtiss, M. J. Pellin and S. Vajda, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5808–5817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Plant, L. Cao and R. E. Palmer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7559–7562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Wang and R. E. Palmer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 245502 CrossRef CAS .
M. Getzlaff, A. Kleibert, R. Methling, J. Bansmann and K. H. Meiwes-Broer, Surf. Sci., 2004, 566, 332–336 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Giannuzzi and F. A. Stevie, Micron, 1999, 30, 197–204 CrossRef .
Z. L. Liu, X. Y. Ling, X. D. Su and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8234–8240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Teddy, A. Falqui, A. Corrias, D. Carta, P. Lecante, I. Gerber and P. Serp, J. Catal., 2011, 278, 59–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiong and A. Manthiram, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 385–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Miao, Z. M. Liu, B. X. Han, J. Huang, Z. Y. Sun, J. L. Zhang and T. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 266–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Seah, Surf. Interface Anal., 2012, 44, 497–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Bing, H. S. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2184–2202 RSC .
L. Zhang, R. Iyyamperumal, D. F. Yancey, R. M. Crooks and G. Henkelman, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9168–9172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Balbuena, R. Callejas-Tovar, P. Hirunsit, J. M. M. de la Hoz, Y. Ma and G. E. Ramirez-Caballero, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 322–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oezaslan, F. Hasche and P. Strasser, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3273–3291 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Ahmadi, Z. L. Wang, T. C. Green, A. Henglein and M. A. ElSayed, Science, 1996, 272, 1924–1926 CAS .
C. Wang, H. Daimon, T. Onodera, T. Koda and S. H. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3588–3591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989–1992 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Li, C. Wang, D. Tripkovic, S. H. Sun, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1358–1362 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Z. Yang, J. Y. Fang and S. Z. Zou, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 638–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Now at ExxonMobil Research and Engineering Company, Corporate Strategic Research, Annandale, NJ 08801, USA.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

PtRu	4.5	10	25	30	55	35	310	25	7 × 104

 	Fig. 1  3-Dimensional high magnification (1 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon. 2-Dimensional image (1 μm2) (c) and height profile (d) through selected PtRu nanoparticles. Note the monodispersity in height and random spatial distribution of PtRu nanoparticles on the surface of glassy carbon.	 

 	Fig. 2  Low (a), intermediate (b), and high (c) magnification scanning and intermediate (d) transmission electron microscopy images obtained for 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of 4.5 nm mass-selected anionic PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid. The nanoparticles in (a) were analyzed directly following deposition while (b–d) were imaged following exposure to mild oxidizing conditions.	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy wide energy scan (a) of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of 4.5 nm mass-selected anionic PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon. High energy resolution scans of (b) the Pt 4f and (c) Ru 3d regions of the photoelectron spectrum.	 

Area 1	32.1	5.3	3.8	0.9	9.0	50.3	38.3	11.5
Area 2	30.6	6.4	2.5	1.1	8.9	52.5	37.0	10.5
Area 3	36.9	7.0	3.2	1.0	9.9	50.4	38.5	11.1
Average	33.2	6.2	3.2	1.0	9.3	51.1	37.9	11.0

 	Fig. 4  (a) 80 keV He+ and (b) 80 keV O+ time-of-flight medium energy ion scattering spectra of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto highly oriented pyrolytic graphite.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cyclic voltammograms of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon in 0.1 M HClO4 (a) and 0.5 M H2SO4 (b) with argon purging (black line) and O2 purging (red line), scan rate = 100 mV s−1, temperature = 20 °C.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cyclic voltammograms (a) of 7 × 104 ions μm−2 of mass-selected anionic 4.5 nm PtRu nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon in 0.5 M H2SO4 (black line) and 0.1 M HClO4 (red line) with O2 purging. Cyclic voltammograms (b) of identical nanoparticles soft landed on 3 separate days (black, red, and blue lines) in 0.5 M H2SO4 with O2 purging, scan rate = 100 mV s−1, temperature = 20 °C.	 
Footnote
† Now at ExxonMobil Research and Engineering Company, Corporate Strategic Research, Annandale, NJ 08801, USA.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
