High-air-flow-velocity assisted intermediate phase engineering for controlled crystallization of mixed perovskite in high efficiency photovoltaics   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA02144A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA02144A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8860-8867High-air-flow-velocity assisted intermediate phase engineering for controlled crystallization of mixed perovskite in high efficiency photovoltaics†

        
          
            Shi 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunyang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yulin 
            Feng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yingying 
            Shao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Yan
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Qingshun 
            Dong
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Junxue 
            Liu
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Beichen 
            Hu
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Shengye 
            Jin
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Yantao 
            Shi
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China. E-mail: shiyantao@dlut.edu.cn
bSchool of Physics, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China
cSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China
dDepartment of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
eState Key Laboratory of Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China
fKey Laboratory of Materials Modification by Laser, Ion and Electron Beams, Ministry of Education, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China
Received 
      7th March 2018
    , Accepted 15th April 2018First published on 16th April 2018AbstractMixed-composition perovskites (m-perovskites) are emerging as one of the hottest materials in the field of photovoltaics. However, a satisfactory m-perovskite film cannot always be attained even through a standard operating procedure. The formation of a m-perovskite film during transitory one-step spin-coating is a train of complex dynamic processes which are intimately bound up with solvent evaporation and anti-solvent interdiffusion. In these processes, many underappreciated variables that will greatly alter the mode of solvent behavior have rarely been taken into serious consideration. In this paper, the air flow velocity during spin-coating is proved to be a very important factor. A precise control over the formation as well as the decomposition of the intermediate phase can be realized through high-air-flow-velocity assisted spin-coating, which guarantees a subsequent controllable and high-quality crystallization of the m-perovskite. Finally, the planar-structured device exhibits the best efficiency of 20.24% (19.58% stabilized) with alleviated hysteresis and better long-term stability.
Nowadays, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) at the frontier of photovoltaics are enjoying a rocket ride to stardom due to the vigorous growth of their power conversion efficiency (PCE) achieved within a few years.1–6 From the perspective of practical application, the facile solution processibility and low cost enable PSCs to be more attractive as a promising candidate for next generation photovoltaics. The outstanding performance of PSCs actually benefits from the excellent attributes of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials, where the emerging mixed-composition perovskites (m-perovskites) are gradually predominating in the field by virtue of their tunable optoelectronic properties and superior stability compared with mono-cation and mono-anion perovskites.7 To date, state-of-the-art PSCs based on m-perovskites have achieved high PCEs of over 22.0%, whereas, the controllable formation of the m-perovskite film remains an issue worthy of systematic research.8,9
So far, many strategies have been undertaken to prepare high quality m-perovskite films, including compositional engineering,10 additive modulation,11 intra-molecular exchange,12 and so on. It should be highlighted here that anti-solvent assisted crystallization (first introduced in 2014) has been widely accepted as an effective method to prepare perovskite films with a pure and stable crystal phase and excellent surface coverage.13 In practice, however, the adoption of this method does not always give satisfactory results even if one fully copies the procedures in the literature. Due attention should be given to exploring why so many groups struggle to reproduce results with seemingly the same procedures and protocols. For example, Johansson et al. strictly followed the preparation procedure of m-perovskites reported by Correa-Baena,14 but initially an unexpected non-uniform and translucent intermediate phase was obtained.15 A broad consensus has been reached that, for anti-solvent assisted crystallization, the presence of a uniform intermediate phase is indispensable for preparing high-performance perovskite films. This phenomenon indicates that some underestimated factors which haven't gotten enough attention yet are hindering the widespread achievements of qualified m-perovskite films. We should be conscious that the formation mechanism of m-perovskite films during the transitory one-step spin-coating is a train of complex dynamic processes and these processes have to be intimately bound up with solvent evaporation and interdiffusion. In this context, apart from the extensively investigated and elaborately regulated operating procedures such as the precursor composition, the speed and duration of spinning, and the moment of anti-solvent quenching, we would like to emphasize that many underappreciated variables in spin-coating will also influence the critical processes in the formation of crystallized perovskite films. They will alter the mode of evaporation and interdiffusion to a great extent leading to an entirely different film morphology and interfacial contacts, finally causing an uneven efficiency distribution and low reproducibility.16
As one of the important variables, the air flow velocity (AFV) around the substrate during spin-coating will undoubtedly have a noticeable impact on the crystallization of perovskites by changing the solvent volatilization and anti-solvent diffusion. However, to the best of our knowledge, this issue has long been overlooked. Herein, we would like to underline the important role of AFV specifically in the ambient air right above the substrate during spin-coating. We modified the spin-coating machine by using a home-made metal disk with fan blades to produce strong air turbulence. Such a method of high-air-flow-velocity assisted spin-coating was found to be very effective for precise and robust control over the formation and simultaneously the decomposition of the intermediate phase which could facilitate the grain boundary (GB) migration. Undesirable interfacial and bulk defects were passivated and trap-induced recombination was suppressed remarkably. An average PCE of 19.42% and the best PCE of 20.24% (a stabilized PCE output of 19.58%) were finally attained with alleviated hysteresis and better stability.
The schematic illustrations of the modified and unmodified spin-coating machines can be seen in Fig. 1, in which their corresponding aerodynamic models are presented likewise. It is noteworthy that we have tried to induce an even stronger air turbulence by adding more fans on the disk but the m-perovskite film based on this is always far from satisfactory. The corresponding explanation can be found in the ESI.† Thus we consider that the one shown in Fig. 1 is the best choice. To analyze the air flow, the Navier–Stokes equation was applied in the model considering the effect of rotation at a speed of 4000 rpm. The simulation was based on the finite element method and the weighted residual approach with the weak solution form was adopted. In addition, the boundary condition of “no slip” was used and the surface roughness of the disk was neglected. The directions of pink/yellow arrows in the aerodynamic models indicate the simulated flow directions while the thicknesses of these arrows stand for the magnitude of simulated velocities. According to the simulation results, a high AFV (HAFV) with an order of magnitude enhancement can be generated during rotation by means of our specific modification (Fig. 1a), while the unmodified machine produces low AFV (LAFV) in comparison (Fig. 1b). Additionally, we confirm the existence of a gradient pressure distribution over the plane of the customized metal disk during rotation, which is in sharp contrast to the normal case with a uniform pressure distribution shown in Fig. 1b. Additionally, the quantitative pressure distributions based on HAFV and LAFV can be found in Fig. S1.† Such a pressure gradient distribution along the radial direction will generate a consecutive air flow from the surrounding area to the center point of our sample and spontaneously an evident negative pressure zone is formed in the very center of the disk where our sample locates. It can be imagined that HAFV accompanied by a central negative pressure zone can significantly facilitate the evaporation of solvent molecules during spin-coating, which in turn will remarkably polish the kinetic processes as to the formation of the m-perovskite.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the spin-coating machine (a) with the customized metal substrate and the corresponding aerodynamics model (b) without the customized metal substrate and the corresponding aerodynamics model. 
The precursor solution for preparing m-perovskite films contains PbI2, CH3NH3Br (MABr), CsI, HC(NH2)2I (FAI) and PbBr2 with a specific molar ratio according to previous research.17 The surface morphologies of the resultant m-perovskite films through HAFV assisted spin-coating are characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as shown in Fig. 2. Evidently, a compact and uniform film with an increased grain size (Fig. 2a) is obtained in the case of HAFV, which can be further supported by the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images in Fig. 2c and d and the grain size distributions in Fig. S2a and S2b.† So far, a widely accepted conclusion has been reached that large crystal domains of the perovskite film can reduce the energy loss caused by charge traps and defects that are apt to form at the grain boundaries (GBs) serving as the pathway of non-radiative recombination and ion movements.18 From the cross-sectional images we can further confirm that GBs have been indeed decreased under HAFV. The spin-coating process based on HAFV yields a thicker m-perovskite film with several clear GBs nearly perpendicular to the substrate (Fig. 2e), while the sample prepared under LAFV has much more GBs with rather irregular orientations (Fig. 2f). Additionally, compared with Fig. 2b, an evident increase in the quantity of a parasitic phase (seen in white contrast) that locates around GBs can be found in Fig. 2a. Previous studies have validated that the “white” phase is a PbI2-rich region which comes from the decomposition of perovskites by heating. The enrichment of PbI2 in the m-perovskite film prepared by HAFV assisted spin-coating can also be identified by using the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns shown in Fig. S2c,† where the apparent peak at around 12.7° is assigned to PbI2.9,19 The existence of a moderate amount of PbI2 usually has a positive effect because it can effectively passivate the surface/GB defects and reduce energy loss.20 The improved crystallinity of the HAFV based m-perovskite film and the surface passivation effect induced by residual PbI2 are further manifested by the stronger absorption and the enhanced photoluminescence (PL) excitation intensities, as shown in Fig. S2d and S2e,† respectively.
 Fig. 2  SEM surface images of perovskite films based on (a) HAFV and (b) LAFV. AFM images of perovskite films based on (c) HAFV and (d) LAFV. Cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films based on (e) HAFV and (f) LAFV. 
Since the HAFV assisted spin-coating had a noticeable effect on the quality of m-perovskites, we managed to conduct a systematic research on the mechanism. Generally, the overall procedure of the anti-solvent assisted spin-coating can be separated into two rapid subprocesses with distinct dominant dynamics, and the moment of anti-solvent quenching can be viewed as a demarcation line. We mark each sample on the basis of the AFV as well as the durations of the two subprocesses. For example, the sample of “LAFV-(20 s + 5 s)” implies low air flow velocity, 20 seconds for the first subprocess (FSP) prior to the dripping of anti-solvent and 5 seconds for the second subprocess (SSP). All the characterizations are presented in Fig. S3 and S4,† to be concise and to the point, we only discuss in detail the most representative results summarized in Fig. 3. The XRD patterns of the unheated samples prepared under different conditions are presented in Fig. 3e–h. Obviously, Fig. 3e and f both display a set of intermediate phase peaks at 6.64°, 13.26°, 26.64°, 33.48°, and 44.48° which will totally disappear after annealing (Fig. S2c†), wherein their intensities of HAFV-(20 s + 5 s) are notably stronger than those of LAFV-(20 s + 5 s). Thus, it can be elucidated that the FSP is mainly dominated by the formation of an intermediate phase during which HAFV makes a big difference. We attempt to explain such crystallinity enhancement of the intermediate phase by using the popular LaMer model.21 Basically, there are two types of competitive crystallization processes in film formation, named colloid based hetero-seeded and solution based homogeneous nucleation and growth.22 Under LAFV, because there is almost no air disturbance or pressure difference above, the concentration of the precursor is far from saturation in the FSP and the major colloid-based hetero-seeded nuclei will give rise to localized solution accumulation and consumption after anti-solvent quenching, resulting in the formation of a rod-shaped intermediate phase (Fig. 3a). HAFV getting involved in the FSP enormously boosts the evaporation of solvent molecules at the very beginning, which causes much quicker oversaturation of precursor solution. A smaller-sized intermediate phase will precipitate from solution in the FSP and uniformly distribute on the substrate taking the dominant place of large-sized colloidal nuclei, which consequently produces a large number of island-shaped intermediate phases with enhanced crystallinity and better coverage (Fig. 3c). This explanation is further supported by the infrared spectroscopy (IR) results shown in Fig. S5.† With regard to the function of AFV in the SSP, it can be found from the comparative results between Fig. 3f and h that the intensities of the characteristic diffraction peaks of the intermediate phase decrease evidently. We can draw the conclusion that in the SSP, AFV acts as a driving force in the transformation from an intermediate phase to perovskite crystals and HAFV should be a favorable condition due to the need of removing the gaseous products. The AFV induced intermediate phase decomposition process yields many seed perovskite crystals spreading over the substrate and such small crystals will act as seeds for coarsening under the subsequent annealing process. Needless to say, the production mode and distribution of these seed crystals must have a close relationship with the quality of the final perovskite film and its correlative interfacial contacts.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of unheated perovskite films based on (a and b) LAFV and (c and d) HAFV with different post-spinning times. XRD patterns of unheated perovskite films based on (e and g) LAFV and (f and h) HAFV with different post-spinning times. Schematic illustrations of film formation processes based on (i) LAFV and (j) HAFV. 
In light of the above discussions, a comprehensive analysis can be proposed now. As shown in the schematic illustration in Fig. 3i, the m-perovskite film based on LAFV-(20 s + 45 s) suffers from limited formation of the intermediate phase in the FSP. In the SSP, since the major colloid based hetero-seeded intermediate phase is obtained from a variety of colloidal particles with different compositions and structures, it inclines to produce various seed crystals with various orientations and a highly random arrangement on the substrate.23 They will grind against each other under coarsening resulting in a suppressed crystallization with lots of voids and disordered GBs. Such a growth pattern will inevitably introduce numerous surface defects detrimental to charge extraction and transport. As for the perovskite film based on HAFV-(20 s + 45 s) in Fig. 3j, the formation of the solution based homogeneous intermediate phase is extraordinarily facilitated in the FSP, which combined with an adequate decomposition in the SSP will yield a large number of highly ordered seed crystals. Such seed crystals with a uniform preferential orientation as well as an even distribution on the substrate trend to produce a compact m-perovskite film with better coverage, larger crystal grains, and less bulk and surface defects. Photogenerated carriers can move freely both in the vertical and horizontal directions without the serious interruption of GBs. Comparisons of the morphology of the final perovskite films in Fig. 2 and S6† as well as the PCEs summarized in Table S1† can further support our discussions. The infeasibility of HAFV-(20 s + 90 s) can also be seen in the ESI.† All in all, it cannot be overemphasized that the precise control over the intermediate phase through HAFV assisted spin-coating is an essential precondition for high-quality perovskite film.
The transient absorption (TA) spectrum was used to study the dynamics of carrier trapping and recombination within the bulk and interface based on HAFV-(20 s + 45 s) and LAFV-(20 s + 45 s) m-perovskite films. Two-dimensional color maps and their corresponding time versus normalized intensity curves are shown in Fig. 4a–f. Pump-induced carriers occupy the conduction band giving rise to a transient band edge bleach at 745 nm (central yellow signal). The variation of the bleach signal intensity is equal to the variation in the excited carrier concentration as a function of time and a slow decay is an indicator of retarded non-radiative charge recombination. In Fig. 4a–c an unexpected phenomenon appears for the perovskite film on the bare FTO substrate where HAFV and LAFV make no difference to the decay behavior of the bleach signal meaning that our deliberate control over the film formation does not decrease the defect concentration validly. It has been reported that point defects are localized within the bulk crystal while extended defects occur at surfaces and GBs. Without proper management, top and bottom surface charge recombination will be more harmful to the carrier lifetime.24 In this context, the high surface roughness of FTO is considered to be the chief culprit.25 Seed crystals spreading over the irregular FTO surface, even with a uniform distribution as we discussed, will still undergo discrepant growth owing to the uneven crystal layout, leaving structural disorders such as vacancies at the FTO/perovskite interface as a large source of carrier recombination. The introduction of a thin SnO2 ETL can significantly alleviate the problem because most of the FTO surface indentations are filled with SnO2 providing a smoother flat plane for deposition of the uniform seed crystal monolayer. Hence, only under the modification of the ETL, whether a precise control over the film morphology and interfacial contact through HAFV assisted spin-coating is employed or not will make a big difference. The results in Fig. 4c and f as direct evidence demonstrate that irrespective of AFV, all the FTO/SnO2/perovskite samples perform slower signal decay than FTO/perovskite samples within 7 ns. In addition, HAFV further prolongs the carrier lifetime as shown in Fig. 4f implying a lower fraction of non-radiative recombination pathways. Time-resolved PL spectra were also obtained to acquire quantitative information on the dynamics of carrier recombination. The PL decays for perovskite films deposited on FTO and FTO/SnO2 under HAFV and LAFV are shown in Fig. 4g and h. Consistent with TA results, the FTO/perovskite samples possess similar decay behaviors, while an obvious distinction can be found for the FTO/SnO2/perovskite samples. The PL decay curves in Fig. 4h were fitted to a bi-exponential rate law. We assign τ1 as a decay component originating from charge extraction by the ETL and τ2 to the lifetime of unquenched carriers in the bulk perovskite. A1 and A2 are the relative amplitudes.26 Table S2† summarizes the detailed fitting data. Given that the same ETL is involved, similar τ1 and A1 values are attained, being 25.26 ns for HAFV and 24.72 ns for LAFV, respectively. In contrast, the HAFV sample gives τ2 = 289.43 ns and mean lifetime τm = 216.13 ns both higher than τ2 = 255.49 ns and τm = 162.30 ns based on LAFV suggesting a superior electronic quality for the HAFV perovskite film with suppressed bulk and interface defect induced recombination.
 Fig. 4  Two-dimensional TA spectra of FTO/perovskite films based on (a) HAFV, (b) LAFV, and (c) their corresponding time versus normalized intensity curves. Two-dimensional TA spectra of FTO/SnO2/perovskite films based on (d) HAFV, (e) LAFV, and (f) their corresponding time versus normalized intensity curves. (g) Time-resolved PL spectra of FTO/perovskite films based on HAFV and LAFV. (h) Time-resolved PL spectra of FTO/SnO2/perovskite films based on HAFV and LAFV. (i) Dependence of open-circuit voltage on the light intensity of HAFV and LAFV based PSCs. 
To evaluate the dynamics of carrier recombination occurring in device operation, we measured the open-circuit voltage (VOC) as a function of light intensity. Under open-circuit conditions, all the photogenerated carriers cannot be transferred but recombine within the device. By linearly fitting VOCversus log-scale light intensity, a slope of 1.34 kBT/q is acquired for the HAFV-(20 s + 45 s) based PSC and 1.74 kBT/q for the LAFV-(20 s + 45 s) based PSC (where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elementary charge). Ideally, the n value extracted from the slope (nkBT/q) would be equal to unity when the device only possesses radiative recombination pathways, and the value will approach 2 as long as trap induced recombination dominates the process. Therefore, the small n value of 1.34 for the HAFV based device could be attributed to the markedly reduced defect density both in the bulk and at the ETL/perovskite interface via our precise control over the aerodynamics. Consequently, with these consistent results, we can confirm that the precise control through HAFV endows the perovskite film with an enlarged grain size, reduced GBs, robust ETL/perovskite interface, and high crystallinity bulk, which synergetically passivates the trap induced charge recombination that dominates in LAFV based devices.
We have already conducted several photophysical characterizations as strong evidence. Additionally, for a sound understanding of the dynamic processes that occur in the low frequency to the high frequency domain and their relationship with bulk and interface variations in the device, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is employed to extract dynamic operating parameters on a complete device.27Fig. 5a is the Nyquist plots of HAFV and LAFV based devices in the dark and 0.2 V forward bias. Fig. 5b is the corresponding capacitance–frequency (C–f) plots where the impact of variations on internal charge dynamic processes will be directly reflected.28 We can comprehend from Fig. 5b that the capacitances in the low frequency region (0.1–10 Hz) exhibit obvious distinctions between HAFV and LAFV, while the curves in the intermediate region (10–104 Hz) differ slightly and those in high frequency regions (104–106 Hz) nearly superpose each other. It has been reported that the impedance response in the high frequency region arises from charge transfer from the perovskite to the counter electrode, while the impedance response in low and intermediate frequency regions is highly associated with the charge dynamic processes at the ETL/perovskite interface and in the bulk perovskite, respectively.29 As a result, the capacitance difference in the low frequency region should derive from the distinct ETL/perovskite interfacial attribute. As the forward bias is applied in the dark, the inner charge dynamics can be treated as an electron back-transfer process where electrons are injected from an external circuit to the ETL, and then pass through the ETL/perovskite interface to the bulk just opposite to the flowing direction in operation. The larger capacitance of the HAFV based device implies a more serious interfacial charge accumulation indicative of large electron back transfer resistance. This attribute will make a contribution to suppressing the interfacial recombination caused by electron back-transfer, which reveals that a better ETL/perovskite interfacial electronic attribute is attained through HAFV. As for the charge dynamics with respect to the photogenerated carriers of the device under light, Fig. 5c demonstrates the Nyquist plots of the device under light and short-circuit conditions; meanwhile, Fig. 5e shows those under light and open-circuit conditions. Fig. 5d and f are the respective C–f plots. First we suggest that the impedance responses in Fig. 5c and d are designed to simulate the actual conditions of PSC operation on purpose. A decreased overall resistance and capacitance in the Nyquist plots and C–f plots introduce an enhanced charge output capacity with fewer carriers being trapped by bulk and interfacial defects. Then we pay our attention to the synchronous increment of integral capacitance especially in high and low frequency regions for the HAFV based device in Fig. 5f. As we mentioned above, all the photogenerated carriers cannot be transferred but recombine in the device under open-circuit conditions. A larger capacitance proves that not only more carriers are excited by HAFV owing to the thicker perovskite film with higher crystallinity, but also more charges accumulate at top and bottom perovskite surfaces without combining, indicating that the non-radiative pathways are significantly reduced. Through all of those EIS results, it has been illustrated that an elaborate modification of AFV is a simple approach to substantially restrain defect induced charge recombination.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Nyquist plots and C–f plots of HAFV and LAFV based devices in the dark and 0.2 V forward bias. (c and d) Nyquist plots and C–f plots of HAFV and LAFV based devices under illumination and short-circuit conditions. (e and f) Nyquist plots and C–f plots of HAFV and LAFV based devices under illumination and open-circuit conditions. 
After the optimization of aerodynamics in the one-step anti-solvent procedure, we obtained our best planar devices with less hysteresis and better stability. Fig. 6a shows the best PCEs based on HAFV where an VOC of 1.10 V, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 23.15 mA cm−2, a FF of 79.4%, and a PCE of 20.24% under a reverse scan are obtained. It shows a VOC of 1.06 V, a JSC of 23.27 mA cm−2, a FF of 74.8%, and a PCE of 18.52% under a forward scan. The corresponding stabilized PCE is measured by applying a constant bias voltage taken from the maximum power point and a steady-state efficiency of 19.58% is demonstrated in Fig. 6d. However, the best PCEs for the LAFV based device only reaches a value of 16.68% under a reverse scan and 12.98% under a forward scan (Fig. 6b). A relatively inferior FF is obtained, representing a serious internal charge recombination in conformance with the conclusions drawn from the photophysical and electrochemical characterizations. Incident photon to current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) of the HAFV and LAFV based PSCs are presented in Fig. 6c. The integrated current density calculated from the IPCE is 21.32 mA cm−2 for HAFV and 20.63 mA cm−2 for LAFV, which further suggests more efficient charge transfer and collection in the HAFV based devices.
 Fig. 6  
J–V curves of (a) HAFV based, and (b) LAFV based best-performance PSCs. (c) IPCE of HAFV and LAFV based PSCs. (d) Stabilized PCE of the HAFV based best-performance PSC. PCE distributions in the reverse scan direction of (e) HAFV based, and (f) LAFV based PSCs. (g) Long-term stability of PSCs based on HAFV and LAFV, respectively. 
We also investigated the impact of AFV on the reproducibility of PSCs. Fig. 6e and f display the histogram data of efficiencies based on HAFV and LAFV, respectively, each prepared in the same batch. The average VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE for each of the 34 devices are 1.11 V, 22.67 mA cm−2, 77.5%, and 19.42% for HAFV and 1.06 V, 21.58 mA cm−2, 66.1%, and 15.23% for LAFV. All the photovoltaic parameters, particularly the FF, are improved via the involvement of HAFV and a corresponding narrow PCE distribution rising to a higher level can be seen after comparison. Eventually, a long-term stability test was conducted. After 60 days of storage in the dark and under ambient air with an average humidity of about 38%, the results in Fig. 6g demonstrate that the LAFV based device without encapsulation shows an apparent degradation with 75% PCE maintained in striking contrast to the superior stability of the HAFV based device which maintains nearly the same PCE.
Last but not least, we would like to reveal the alleviation effect of HAFV on the notorious hysteresis. The origin of hysteresis is still under debate and it has been linked to various factors such as interfacial charge accumulation, ferroelectric effects and so on.30–33 Among them, Huang et al. underlined that the hysteresis effect derived from the charge trapping/detrapping process occurred on the surface and GBs of the perovskite materials.34 In this context, the prominent reduction in GBs and interfacial defect density through HAFV assisted spin coating seems to be responsible for the alleviation of hysteresis. From another point of view, a connection between the hysteresis behavior and the capacitance in the low frequency region has been suggested in many literature studies.35–37
That is to say, the electronic structure of the ETL/perovskite interface will make a big difference to the hysteresis. EIS measurement was employed again to estimate the quality of the ETL/perovskite interface. Fig. S7† exhibits the impedance response in the dark and different biases related to HAFV and LAFV based PSCs. Compared with the LAFV based devices, in the low frequency region, a relatively small variation in capacitance for HAFV can be seen in Fig. S7b† indicating a more robust ETL/perovskite interface with less sensitivity to applied voltages. It is acknowledged that the applied voltage in the dark plays a similar role to illumination which decides the carrier concentration in an integrated device. A robust interface with low sensitivity can always guarantee timely and efficient charge transfer at different carrier concentrations, which will try its best to inhibit interfacial charge accumulation. Consequently, the efficient extraction and collection through HAFV further prevent the accumulation of excess capacitive charges that will influence the band bending and give rise to anomalous hysteresis.
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated the vital role of air flow around the substrate during spin-coating which has been long overlooked. The HAFV assisted spin-coating modifies the formation and decomposition of the intermediate phase by facilitating the solvent evaporation and interdiffusion, consequently producing a robust bulk and interface with decreased defect density and enhanced charge transfer ability. A PCE of up to 20.24% has been achieved for the planar-structured PSC with alleviated hysteresis and better long-term stability. Our work opens a new avenue for improving the properties of m-perovskite films and further we suggest that more attention should be paid to those underappreciated variables to guarantee a satisfactory reproducibility of high-performance photovoltaics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51402036 and 51773025) and the International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (Grant No. 2013DFA51000).
Notes and references
P. Qin, S. Paek, M. I. Dar, N. Pellet, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8516–8519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 2812–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z. H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, Y. Chen, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5714–5729 RSC .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Z. Chu, P. Wang, X. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1703852 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, N. Liu, Z. Xu, Q. Chen, X. Wang and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8804–8813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, C. Xiao, C. Wang, B. Saparov, H.-S. Duan, D. Zhao, Z. Xiao, P. Schulz, S. P. Harvey, W. Liao, W. Meng, Y. Yu, A. J. Cimaroli, C.-S. Jiang, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, G. Fang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5214–5221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Wang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862–9868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 126, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
J. P. C. Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. S. Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 Search PubMed .
K. Sveinbjörnsson, K. Aitola, J. Zhang, M. B. Johansson, X. Zhang, J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16536–16545 Search PubMed .
J. P. C. Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T. B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H. S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ding, Y. Li, S. Huang, Q. Chu, C. Li, C. Li and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6840–6848 CAS .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4460–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, W. Rehman, F. Pulvirenti, J. B. Patel, N. K. Noel, M. B. Johnston, S. R. Marder, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1607039 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, G. Kang, L. Pyeon, C. Lim, G.-Y. Lee, T. Park and J. Choi, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2667–2673 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .

          N.-G. Park, M. Grätzel and T. Miyasaka, Organic–inorganic Halide Perovskite Photovoltaics, Springer, Basel, Switzerland,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, K. Hou, Y. Xing, Q. Dong, K. Wang, Y. Lv and Y. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2117–2123 CAS .
Q. Dong, M. Wang, Q. Zhang, F. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Bian, T. Ma, L. Wang and Y. Shi, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 358–367 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 CAS .
M. De Bastiani, G. Dell'Erba, M. Gandini, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Neutzner, A. R. S. Kandada, G. Grancini, M. Binda, M. Prato, J. M. Ball, M. Caironi and A. Petrozza, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1501453 Search PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahnb and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1645–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta02144aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the spin-coating machine (a) with the customized metal substrate and the corresponding aerodynamics model (b) without the customized metal substrate and the corresponding aerodynamics model.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM surface images of perovskite films based on (a) HAFV and (b) LAFV. AFM images of perovskite films based on (c) HAFV and (d) LAFV. Cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films based on (e) HAFV and (f) LAFV.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of unheated perovskite films based on (a and b) LAFV and (c and d) HAFV with different post-spinning times. XRD patterns of unheated perovskite films based on (e and g) LAFV and (f and h) HAFV with different post-spinning times. Schematic illustrations of film formation processes based on (i) LAFV and (j) HAFV.	 

 	Fig. 4  Two-dimensional TA spectra of FTO/perovskite films based on (a) HAFV, (b) LAFV, and (c) their corresponding time versus normalized intensity curves. Two-dimensional TA spectra of FTO/SnO2/perovskite films based on (d) HAFV, (e) LAFV, and (f) their corresponding time versus normalized intensity curves. (g) Time-resolved PL spectra of FTO/perovskite films based on HAFV and LAFV. (h) Time-resolved PL spectra of FTO/SnO2/perovskite films based on HAFV and LAFV. (i) Dependence of open-circuit voltage on the light intensity of HAFV and LAFV based PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Nyquist plots and C–f plots of HAFV and LAFV based devices in the dark and 0.2 V forward bias. (c and d) Nyquist plots and C–f plots of HAFV and LAFV based devices under illumination and short-circuit conditions. (e and f) Nyquist plots and C–f plots of HAFV and LAFV based devices under illumination and open-circuit conditions.	 

 	Fig. 6  
J–V curves of (a) HAFV based, and (b) LAFV based best-performance PSCs. (c) IPCE of HAFV and LAFV based PSCs. (d) Stabilized PCE of the HAFV based best-performance PSC. PCE distributions in the reverse scan direction of (e) HAFV based, and (f) LAFV based PSCs. (g) Long-term stability of PSCs based on HAFV and LAFV, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta02144a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
