Record high thermoelectric performance of expanded graphite/carbon fiber cement composites enhanced by ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromid ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC05595F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC05595F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3682-3691Record high thermoelectric performance of expanded graphite/carbon fiber cement composites enhanced by ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide for building energy harvesting

        
          
            Jian 
            Wei
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xueting 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bing 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shishuai 
            Qiao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Zhang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Fei 
            Xue
          
        
      
College of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi'an 710055, China. E-mail: weijian@xauat.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 29 82205245;   Tel: +86 29 82205245
Received 
      27th November 2020
    , Accepted 11th February 2021First published on 11th February 2021AbstractThe expanded graphite/carbon fiber-reinforced cement composite (EGCFRC) is a new type of intelligent structural material that can directly transform thermal energy into electric energy for large-scale energy harvesting in urban areas and roads. Although using cement composites can harvest energy widely, there is also the big challenge of increasing thermoelectric properties. In this work, the thermoelectric properties of cement composites significantly increased by introducing the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (IL [Bmim]Br) into composite interfaces. The absolute value of the EGCFRC-Seebeck coefficient increased greatly with increasing [Bmim]Br content while keeping a relatively higher electrical conductivity. The modified EGCFRC demonstrated the highest power factor value (94.3 μW m−1 K−2) and dimensionless figure of merit (ZT) value (2.208 × 10−3) when filled with 3 wt% IL [Bmim]Br. The durability of EGCFRC was also evaluated and the maximum absolute Seebeck coefficient value (746 μV K−1) was obtained after 10 freezing–thawing cycles at 80 °C. The enhanced mechanism of [Bmim]Br on thermoelectric properties was carefully investigated and attributed mainly to the migration and rearrangement of the anions and cations of [Bmim]Br in composite interfaces.
1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid development of urbanization and the massive emissions of greenhouse gases have further exacerbated the heat island effect. One of the most efficient pathways to reduce and mitigate the effects of the urban heat island effect is through thermoelectric technology by collecting and converting waste heat from urban roads and building surfaces into other forms of energy.1,2 Thermoelectric materials with excellent performance are the key issue in the application of aforementioned technologies, which can directly convert a temperature difference into an electrical potential change.3–5 To date, a series of thermoelectric materials have been exploited, such as telluride, half-Heuslers and silicides, to improve the thermoelectric potential.6–10 Nevertheless, traditional thermoelectric materials with the disadvantages of high material processing costs, thermoelectric material size limitations, difficulty in expanding production scale, and insufficient mechanical properties, are relatively hysteretic for the widespread application of building energy harvesting.
Owing to the natural temperature difference between the surface and the ground, the thermoelectric concept was introduced into cement. The thermoelectric cement matrix composites directly to pavements to form thermoelectric pavements, from which streets can directly convert solar radiation heat and shallow geothermal energy into electrical energy. Simultaneously, it can reduce the surface temperature of the pavement, thereby reducing the amount of heat released into the atmosphere, and thus the urban heat island effect to some extent. A significant amount of thermal energy in excess of the input power can be released through the thermoelectric cement-based composites for snow removal in winter, through gathering the heat stored in subgrade and Joule heat by current flow. Thermoelectric cement-based materials have the characteristics of zero energy consumption and environmental protection, which are convenient for combination with buildings, superior mechanical performance and low cost. The expanded graphite/carbon fiber cement composite (EGCFRC) has outstanding properties of high stretch and bendability, low drying shrinkage, low thermal conductivity, high Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity, thereby possessing the capabilities to promote the possibility of collecting outdoor heat in the summer, along with shallow geothermal energy, and effectively convert the heat accumulated on the surface of concrete material into electric energy while keeping the excellent mechanical properties of the cement-based materials.11,12 Wei et al. studied the thermoelectric performance of carbon fiber reinforced cement-based composites (CFRC) with 1 wt% carbon fiber, the solar thermal energy simulation experiment was carried out via the Seebeck effect of CFRC. It was found that thermal energy radiation was maintained by CFRC at 68 °C for up to 7 h, which could capture 8.40 × 10−6 J of heat per square meter.13
Sun et al. firstly reported the thermoelectric effect in CFRC.14 Wen et al. enhanced the Seebeck coefficient of CFRC from 5.5 μV °C−1 to 21.2 μV °C−1via employing bromine-intercalated carbon fiber.15,16 Zuo et al. improved the Seebeck coefficient to 23.5 μV °C−1 by adding carbon nanotubes to CFRC.17 Demirel et al. incorporated silica fumes on carbon fiber-reinforced lightweight concrete, which obtained the absolute Seebeck coefficient of 127 μV °C−1.18 Yao and Xia demonstrated that a greater Seebeck coefficient of 35.5 μV °C−1 could be gained by adding micro-sized Bi2Te3 particles to the CFRC.19 Wei et al. improved the thermoelectric properties of CFRC through incorporating micron-sized Fe2O3 and Bi2O3 particles and obtained a huge Seebeck coefficient of 92.57 and 100.28 μV °C−1.20 The absolute Seebeck coefficient (11.59 μV °C−1) was gained in an expanded graphite/carbon fiber cement composite.21 Nonetheless, the Seebeck coefficient currently obtained is too low to commonly use in fields such as environmental energy harvesting. To enhance the Seebeck coefficient of cement composites by an order of magnitude, an innovative and effective method was proposed.
Solid thermoelectric materials have some significant shortcomings of lack of flexibility and portability, which are definite limitations to use. Liquid materials essentially have some fascinating merits involving superb deformability, ease of bonding and self-healing capabilities as compared to solid materials.4,22,23 Ionic liquids (ILs) are green solvents, which are a class of electrically conducting fluids. ILs consist of bulky organic cations and the corresponding anions.24 They have multiple unique properties such as weak volatility, favorable thermal stability, electrochemical stability, powerful solubility, negligible volatility, and flame retardancy.25,26 The application of ionic liquid composites with redox couple additives in thermoelectric materials has attracted intense research interest.27,28 The ordinary tendency of a greater Seebeck coefficient for the thermoelectrochemical cells was developed for harvesting residual heat by using ionic liquids as the electrolyte.29 The absolute Seebeck coefficient as high as 1000 μV K−1 could be observed in IL-based thermoelectric generators.24,30 The Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS membrane was simultaneously heightened via incorporating ionic liquids; the largest electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient of the PEDOT:PSS/IL membrane attained 174 S cm−1 and 30 μV K−1, respectively, which were many times higher than the pure PEDOT:PSS membrane.31,32 Because of the use of ionic liquids with exceptional thermoelectricity, a high Seebeck coefficient can be obtained as reported in the above-mentioned literature. Therefore, not only ionic liquids have a significant effect on the thermoelectric performances of the above application areas, but also cement-based composites. However, to our best knowledge, there has been no report using ILs [Bmim]Br to enhance the thermoelectric performances of cement material.
In this work, ILs [Bmim]Br were added to EGCFRC. The conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, and power factor with different [Bmim]Br content were measured and calculated. The influence of the [Bmim]Br content on the thermoelectric properties EGCFRC was studied in detail, and the strengthening mechanism of [Bmim]Br on EGCFRC thermoelectric properties was investigated. A higher Seebeck coefficient and power factor were observed as compared to EGCFRE without incorporating ILs [Bmim]Br. It is essential to explore the effect of the ambient temperature load on the thermoelectric properties of materials to further promote the practical application for thermoelectric cement materials; thus, the influences of freeze–thaw cycles on the thermoelectric properties of EGCFRC-doped ILs [Bmim]Br and their mechanisms were fully studied.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials
The cement employed was sulfate-aluminate cement purchased from Jinlong Cement Factory of China. The carbon fibers are polyacrylonitrile (PAN), obtained from Jindeli Carbon Co. Ltd (Shandong, China), with a diameter of 7 μm and length of 5 to 7 mm. The amount of carbon fiber used was 1.2 wt% by mass of cement in the composites. The expanded graphite with 80 mesh from Qingdao Shun Ming graphite products Co. Ltd was mixed into the cement matrix in the quantity of 5 wt% by mass of cement, with density 1.85 cm3 g−1, owing to the high specific area for scattering carriers to enhance the thermoelectric performance of cement-based composites.12 The ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (ILs [Bmim]Br) utilized was obtained from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics.
2.2. Sample fabrication
The chopped carbon fibers were pre-dispersed in monofilament using a planetary sand mixer, and the expanded graphite was heated to 800 °C in a medium temperature furnace for 30 minutes to inflate fully. Sulfoaluminate cement was dry-milled in a planetary ball mill for 8 h to reduce the cement particle size. Afterwards, the monofilament carbon fiber, expanded graphite and cement powder with volume fractions of 1.8%, 7.4%, 90.8%, respectively, were poured into a planetary mortar mixer and stirred for 10 min, then the ionic liquid [Bmim]Br was added to the mixture and stirred for 1 h. The prepared admixture was poured into a roller-type sand mixer and stirred for 20–30 minutes until a uniform color was obtained. The well-mixed mixture was put into a square steel mold under a molding pressure of 60 MPa, to obtain the initial sample. The samples were heat-treated at 80 °C for 4 h, then cooled and cured in air at ambient temperature (95% relative humidity) for 36 h, and subsequently, immersed in water for 3 days. The samples were dried in an oven at 60 °C for 24 h to remove the moisture, thereby reducing the influence of moisture on the test results of conductivity and Seebeck coefficient. For comparison, the control sample was directly cured without heat treatment at 80 °C.
In the above preparation process, the raw materials of all EGCFRC samples were fixed, except for the ILs [Bmim]Br with different weight percentages of 1 wt%, 2 wt% and 3 wt%.
2.3. Characterization methods
In this work, the temperature-dependent conductivity and Seebeck coefficient of EGCFRC were measured by a homemade thermoelectric test device. The schematic diagram and digital photograph are shown in Fig. 1. The four-electrode method was used to gauge the volume resistance of the specimen in the range of 30–80 °C. First of all, the prepared specimen end faces (10 × 10 mm2) were burnished with sandpaper and smeared with conductive silver serum, then placed in an insulated container to avoid lateral heat loss. One end of the specimen was heated at a rate of 0.6 °C min−1 using a tiny electric resistance heater, and the surrounding temperature was continuously heated to ensure a temperature difference of 3–5 °C was maintained between the two ends of the specimen. The temperature was monitored by two thermostats with a thermocouple at 10.00 mm from both ends of the specimen to gauge the temperature at the two internal electrodes. The thermoelectric potential ΔV, and the temperature difference ΔT were obtained. Notably, no pressure was applied to the silver paint electrical contacts at the two ends of the specimen. Copper was used as the wire for the Seebeck voltage measurement, and the Seebeck voltage drop along the wire has been considered in this paper.
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the apparatus for measuring the Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity of the cement-based composites; (b) digital photo of the experimental setup. 
The EGCFRC-Seebeck coefficient is equal to the ratio of the thermoelectric potential between two external electrodes to the temperature difference. The electrical conductivity of the EGCFRC specimen was determined by the formula σ = Rnl/s, where l and s are the distance between the two internal electrodes and the cross-sectional area of the specimen, respectively.
The EGCFRC-thermal conductivity (κ) at room temperature was tested by the laser flash diffusion method in a Netzsch LFA 427 instrument. The sizes of all specimens were 10 × 10 mm2 and the thickness was approximately 3 mm.
2.3. Freeze–thaw cycle test
In practical engineering, the temperature and humidity of the environment change throughout the seasons and during the day and night. Cement-based materials can withstand the freeze–thaw load due to the resulting temperature difference, which will modify the internal state of the material and directly affect the performance of the material. However, there is currently not much research on the effects of the thermoelectric properties of cement materials. To further promote the practical applications of thermoelectric cement materials, it is essential to explore the effects of ambient temperature loading on the material; thus, the effects of the freeze–thaw cycling on the mechanical and thermoelectric properties of ILs [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC were investigated.
In this text, the specimen was cooled at a low temperature (−30 °C) for 30 minutes after wrapping it in tin foil. The specimen was taken out and kept at room temperature for 5 min, then placed in a high-temperature (95 °C) environment for 30 min to exert a thermal load, and then removed and cooled to room temperature. In the freeze–thaw experiment of EGCFRC, the frequencies of freeze–thaw cycles were 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 times, respectively.
3. Results and discussion
The changes in the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and power factor of EGCFRC mixed with 0, 1, 2, 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br with increased temperature are shown in Fig. 2. Negative carriers (electrons) will make it more negative, so the larger the absolute value, the larger the Seebeck coefficient.12 The Seebeck coefficient slightly decreased with the increasing temperature for the control sample without [Bmim]Br in Fig. 2a. However, a significant increase in the Seebeck coefficients was observed as the temperature increased after incorporating [Bmim]Br. As shown in Fig. 2b, the electrical conductivity of the EGCFRC without [Bmim]Br first increased and then slightly decreased when the temperature increased, with a maximum value of 0.079 S cm−1 at around 50 °C. The temperature had almost no significant effect on the electrical conductivity for 1, 2 and 3 wt% [Bmim]Br samples. The electrical conductivity decreased with increasing [Bmim]Br content. The electrical conductivity of EGCFRC with a doping amount of 3 wt% was 0.0064 S cm−1, which was about 12 times lower than that of the sample without incorporation. The thermoelectric power factor (P) was determined by the formula P = S2σ, where S is the Seebeck coefficient and the σ is electrical conductivity. From Fig. 2c, the power factor of the EGCFRC without [Bmim]Br decreased slightly with increasing temperature, while the power factor increased exponentially with increasing temperature as 1, 2 and 3 wt% [Bmim]Br was incorporated. When the temperature exceeded 50 °C, the power factor of EGCFRC significantly increased with the increase of [Bmim]Br content. When the [Bmim]Br content was 3 wt%, the sample had a maximum power factor of 8.08 μW m−1 K−2 at 72 °C, which was about 26 times larger than that of the unincorporated [Bmim]Br sample.
 Fig. 2  Temperature dependence of the (a) Seebeck coefficient, (b) electrical conductivity, (c) power factor for EGCFRC mixed with 0, 1, 2, 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br. 

Fig. 3a demonstrates the changes in the Seebeck coefficient of EGCFRC with 0, 1, 2, 3 wt% [Bmim]Br content after heat treatment at 80 °C. A higher [Bmim]Br content contributed to a larger Seebeck coefficient. When 1 wt% [Bmim]Br content was incorporated, the curve of the Seebeck coefficient of EGCFRC with changing temperature almost coincided with that of the control sample. The absolute values of the Seebeck coefficients of EGCFRC with the [Bmim]Br contents of 2 wt% and 3 wt% firstly decreased and then increased significantly with increasing temperature. The maximum absolute Seebeck coefficient of 568 μV K−1 was obtained at 72 °C for the 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br specimen. It is worth noting that the increase in the Seebeck coefficient was more evident with the increase in the [Bmim]Br content. As demonstrated in Fig. 3b, the four curves of electrical conductivity were approximately parallel to the temperature axis and decreased with increasing [Bmim] Br content. The electrical conductivity of the 3 wt% [Bmim]Br sample was reduced to about 1/26th that of the control sample. Variations in the EGCFRC power factors with 0, 1, 2, and 3 wt% [Bmim]Br as the temperature changed are shown in Fig. 3c. The power factor of EGCFRC without [Bmim]Br linearly decreased with increasing temperature but just showed a slight decline. The power factor of EGCFRC increased slightly with increasing temperature for the sample with the incorporation of 1 wt% [Bmim]Br. Notably, when 2 wt% and 3 wt% [Bmim]Br were added to the composites respectively, the power factor curves of EGCFRCs presented a U-shape by the increasing temperature. The inset of Fig. 3c shows that the power factor of EGCFRC was less than the control sample when doped with 1 wt% [Bmim]Br. Although the absolute value of the EGCFRC Seebeck coefficient slightly increased when 1 wt% of [Bmim]Br was incorporated, the conductivity greatly decreased. This is responsible for the lower power factor of EGCFRC with 1 wt% [Bmim]Br. The power factor of EGCFRC was greatly improved by the 2 wt% and 3 wt% [Bmim]Br content at the higher temperature. The power factor of EGCFRC reached a maximum value of 94.3 μW m−1 K−2 at 72 °C when the [Bmim]Br content was 3 wt%.
 Fig. 3  Temperature dependence of the (a) Seebeck coefficient; (b) electrical conductivity; (c) power factor for EGCFRC mixed with 0, 1, 2, 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br with curing after heat treatment. 
As shown in Fig. 4a, the thermal conductivity (κ) of EGCFRC with 1, 2 and 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br at room temperature were 5.273, 4.030 and 3.296 W m−1 K−1, respectively. The κ of all specimens were higher than that of the pure cement paste (0.53 W m−1 K−1) and decreased with increasing ILs [Bmim]Br content.33 The dimensionless figure of merit (ZT) can be used to determine the thermoelectric conversion efficiency and is defined as: ZT = S2σT/κ, (where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electrical conductivity and T is temperature), of EGCFRC with 1, 2 and 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br are shown in Fig. 4b. The curves for the temperature dependence of the ZT values for ILs [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC are consistent with the power factor curves. The ZT reached the highest value of 2.060 × 10−3 at 72 °C when the [Bmim]Br content was 3 wt%.
 Fig. 4  (a) The thermal conductivity for EGCFRC with 1, 2 and 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br at room temperature. (b) The temperature dependence of the ZT value of EGCFRC with 1, 2 and 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br, with curing after heat treatment. 
It is essential to explore the effect of the ambient temperature load on the thermoelectric properties of materials to further promote the practical application in thermoelectric cement materials. Thus, the effects of freeze–thaw cycles on the thermoelectric properties of EGCFRC-doped [Bmim]Br were studied. Here, the EGCFRC with 3 wt% [Bmim]Br was used for the freeze–thaw cycle test. Fig. 5a displays the curves for the Seebeck coefficient with freezing–thawing 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 times. The recorded curves demonstrate the highest absolute Seebeck coefficient value after freezing–thawing 10 times, and the obtained maximal value was 746 μV K−1 at 80 °C. It was also observed that the Seebeck coefficient value decreased with more freezing–thawing times, even lower than that of no freezing–thaw cycles. This is evidence that the electrical conductivity of the sample with no freezing–thawing is higher than that after freezing–thawing; the values always declined followed by the increase of freezing–thawing times (Fig. 5b). As illustrated in Fig. 5c, a similar pattern of power factor appeared as compared with the curves of the Seebeck coefficient, with the largest value of 155 μW m−1 K−2 with freezing–thawing 10 times at 80 °C.
 Fig. 5  Temperature dependence of the (a) Seebeck coefficient; (b) electrical conductivity; (c) power factor for [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC under 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 freezing–thawing times. 
The enhanced mechanism of the EGCFRC Seebeck coefficient via ionic liquid [Bmim]Br is shown in the schematic illustration in Fig. 6. IL[Bmim]Br consists entirely of imidazolium cation [Bmim]+ and anion Br−. The curing process of EGCFRC requires a large amount of water; when [Bmim]Br is incorporated into EGCFRC, the anions and cations from [Bmim]Br interact with water. The hydrophilicity of [Bmim]Br is ascribed to the superior hydrophilic properties of Br−. The Br− anion and water molecules possess two modes of action: (1) the Br− interacts with a water molecule to form a hydrogen bond with a bond length of 2.416 Å and bond energy of −55.96 kJ mol−1; (2) two Br− ions interact with two water molecules to form a hydrogen bond with a bond length of 2.690 Å and bond energy of 59.18 kJ mol−1.34 On the other hand, there is still a strong hydrogen bond between the cation [Bmim]+ and the water molecule, and the bond energy ranges from 50.00 to 100.00 kJ mol−1. The hydrogen bond energy promotes the dissociation of the anions and cations of the ionic liquid.35 In the process of testing the thermoelectric properties of EGCFRC, the temperature difference exists at both ends of EGCFRC. The dissociation of the [Bmim]Br cation at the heating end is larger than that of the anion causing the electric potential to rise. On the contrary, the electric potential is reduced because the dissociation of the [Bmim]Br anion is greater than the cation at the low-temperature end. Eventually, the thermoelectric potential is increased at both ends of the EGCFRC and leads to an increase in the Seebeck coefficient.4,36 Furthermore, the ILs [Bmim]Br adsorbs on the exterior of the carbon fiber and expanded graphite, and the imidazole ring of the [Bmim]+ cation is arranged on the surface of the carbon fiber and expanded graphite, and the carbon chain is oriented away from the surface of the carbon fiber and expanded graphite. The [Bmim]Br IL is present on the surface of the hydration product and pores of the cement matrix. The extremely high value of the Seebeck coefficient is produced by ILs with the [Bmim]+ cation21,36 and consequently, the Seebeck effect of EGCFRC is enhanced with more ILs [Bmim]Br content.
 Fig. 6  The schematic of the influence mechanism for the ILs [Bmim] Br on the Seebeck coefficient of expanded graphite and carbon fiber-reinforced cement composites. 
A large number of solid/solid interfaces and liquid/solid interfaces were pulled in the EGCFRC matrix with the introduction of ILs [Bmim]Br, including the ILs [Bmim]Br/cement interface, carbon fiber/cement interface, expanded graphite/cement interface, ILs [Bmim]Br/carbon fiber interface, ILs [Bmim]Br/expanded graphite interface, interface among ILs [Bmim]Br and the vapor-solid interface of micro-sized cracks and pores.34,37,38 The high-density defect interface in EGCFRC will inevitably impact carrier transport, which can be derived from the microscopic perspective of carrier transport that affects the Seebeck effect.39–41 The interface defects will form an energy barrier in the direction of carrier motion that will enhance the Seebeck effect under the scattering and energy filtering.21,42–44
We found that the sample can be cured after heating at 80 °C for 3 h, which can significantly enhance the EGCFRC-Seebeck effect. Fig. 6a demonstrates the influence of the [Bmim] Br content on the EGCFRC-Seebeck coefficient at 60 °C after heat-treatment curing and direct curing. The Seebeck coefficient drastically increased as compared to the sample without heat-treatment when 2 wt% and 3 wt% of ILs [Bmim]Br content. In the preparation process of EGCFRC, the dispersion of [Bmim]Br in the matrix was only achieved by the mechanical action in the mixing process. On heat-treatment, [Bmim]Br was completely transformed from a crystalline state to a molten state when [Bmim]Br was heated to 80 °C. It achieved rearrangement by thermal movement in the cement matrix and even infiltrated the pores and interface of the cement matrix. These promoted the more uniform dispersion of IL [Bmim]Br in the cement matrix (Fig. 7b), which drastically increased the interface density in EGCFRC, and enhanced the carrier scattering at the interface. The EGCFRC-Seebeck effect of IL[Bmim]Br was primarily aroused by the rearrangement and migration of ions in the cement matrix.
 Fig. 7  (a) The curve of Seebeck coefficient with [Bmim]Br content at 60 °C curing immediately and curing after heat-treatment. (b) Typical SEM image of [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC and EDS mappings of Br. 
The absolute value of the EGCFRC-Seebeck coefficient increased as the temperature increased. The temperature increase could excite the carrier concentration and weaken the Seebeck effect, which is also beneficial for promoting the migration and rearrangement of the anion and cation of [Bmim]Br on the electrode surface and increases the thermoelectric potential of EGCFRC.
The result of the freezing–thawing experiment indicated that the absolute value of the Seebeck coefficient of the EGCFRC first increased and then decreased as the frequency of the freeze–thaw cycles increased (Fig. 5). The number of microcracks generated by internal stress in the freezing–thawing process gradually increased along with the freezing–thawing time. This enhanced the scattering of carriers at the interface and further heightened the absolute value of the Seebeck coefficient by increasing the density of the vapor–solid interface of micro-sized cracks and pores in the EGCFRC matrix.21 Meanwhile, the positive impact of the Seebeck coefficient is attributed to the filling of partial microcracks or pores in the cement matrix with the ionic liquid [Bmim] Br, which was in a molten state above its fusion point of 76 °C. It was also demonstrated from Fig. 8 that the microcracks and porosity of EGCFRC were significantly reduced via 10 freeze–thaw cycles; therefore, the compressive strength of EGCFRC also increased. The EGCFRC was prepared by pressure forming, which has comparatively large internal residual stress. After 10 freeze–thaw cycles, the strength of the EGCFRC was increased so that the residual stress inside the composite was released and the internal crack of the material was partially healed. The frequency of the freeze–thaw cycles continuously increased after the residual stress was released. The internal cracks of the material increased remarkably and the microstructure was changed. Hence, the compressive strength was decreased with the increase in the frequency of the freeze–thaw cycles.
 Fig. 8  Typical SEM image of [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC at different freezing–thawing times. (a) No freeze–thaw cycles; (b) 10 freeze–thaw cycles; (c) 30 freeze–thaw cycles; (d) 50 freeze–thaw cycles. (e) Porosity and compressive strength of EGCFRC with [Bmim]Br added at different numbers of freeze–thaw cycles. 
The Seebeck effect was also enhanced due to the filling of the ILs [Bmim]Br increasing the interfacial concentration among the various components of the EGCFRC and the carrier scattering. However, the conductivity of [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC showed a decreasing trend as the frequency of the freeze–thaw loads increased, which is also because of the increase in the microcracks inside the matrix and the increase of interface density caused by [Bmim]Br. In summary, ILs could be a novel effective method to enhance the thermoelectric performances of cement-based materials. The influence of [Bmim]Br on the EGCFRC-Seebeck effect is mainly attributed to the migration and rearrangement of the anion and cation of [Bmim]Br. The freeze–thaw cycle test showed that the durability was better and the thermoelectric properties of the material were appropriately improved.
4. Conclusion
The reinforced effect of the ILs [Bmim]Br on the thermoelectric performances of EGCFRC has been researched. The absolute value of the EGCFRC-Seebeck coefficient increased and electrical conductivity decreased with more [Bmim]Br content. The top values were obtained as EGCFRC was cured after heat treatment with 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br at 72 °C, which yielded Seebeck coefficient, power factor and ZT value of 568 μV K−1, 94.3 μW m−1 K−2, and 2.060 × 10−3 respectively. As shown in Fig. 9, the power factor (94.3 μW m−1 K−2) achieved in this work is much higher than other recently reported cement composites.2,3,6,7,12,21 The thermoelectric effect of the EGCFRC was enhanced with a certain extent of freeze–thaw load, but the thermoelectric performances of the sample eventually decreased as the frequency of freeze–thaw cycles increased. The highest absolute Seebeck coefficient value for 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC was 746 μV K−1 at 80 °C after freezing–thawing 10 times. The EGCFRC-Seebeck effect was enhanced by promoting the migration and rearrangement of the anion and cation of [Bmim]Br on the electrode surface and increasing the thermoelectric potential at both ends of EGCFRC. This study underscores the effectiveness of heightening EGCFRC-thermoelectricity with ILs [Bmim]Br.
 Fig. 9  Advances in the power factor merit for cement composites. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51578448, 51308447), Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (Program No. 2017ZDJC-18), Scientific Research Program Funded by Shaanxi Provincial Education Department (Grant/Award Number: 20JY042) and Technology Foundation for Selected Overseas Chinese Scholar, Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security of the People's Republic of China (Shan Ren She Han [2016]789).
References
L. Tzounis, M. Liebscher, R. Fuge, A. Leonhardt and V. Mechtcherine, P- and n-type thermoelectric cement composites with CVD grown p- and n-doped carbon nanotubes: demonstration of a structural thermoelectric generator, Energy Build., 2019, 191, 151–163 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, S. Harish, M. Ohtaki and B. B. Saha, Enhanced figure of merit of cement composites with graphene and ZnO nanoinclusions for efficient energy harvesting in buildings, Energy, 2020, 198, 117396 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, Q. Zhang, L. L. Zhao, L. Hao and C. L. Yang, Enhanced thermoelectric properties of carbon fiber reinforced cement composites, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 11568–11573 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Jia, X. L. Tao and Y. P. Wang, Flexible and Self-Healing Thermoelectric Converters Based on Thermosensitive Liquids at Low Temperature Gradient, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Ghosh, S. Harish, M. Ohtaki and B. B. Saha, Thermoelectric Figure of Merit Enhancement in Cement Composites with Graphene and Transition Metal Oxides, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 100492 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, S. Harish, K. A. Rocky, M. Ohtaki and B. B. Saha, Graphene enhanced thermoelectric properties of cement based composites for building energy harvesting, Energy Build., 2019, 202, 109419 CrossRef .
J. Wei, Y. Fan, L. Zhao, F. Xue, L. Hao and Q. Zhang, Thermoelectric properties of carbon nanotube reinforced cement-based composites fabricated by compression shear, Ceram Int., 2018, 44, 5829–5833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gelbstein and J. Davidow, Highly efficient functional GexPb1−xTe based thermoelectric alloys, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20120–20126 RSC .
Y. Gelbstein, J. Tunbridge, R. Dixon, M. J. Reece, H. P. Ning and R. Gilchrist, 
            et al., Physical, mechanical, and structural properties of highly efficient nanostructured n- and p-silicides for practical thermoelectric applications, J. Electron. Mater., 2014, 43, 1703–1711 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, W. Zhu, Z. P. Guo and Y. Deng, High-performance flexible Bi2Te3 films based wearable thermoelectric generator for energy harvesting, Energy, 2019, 175, 292–299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aljaghtham and E. Celik, Design optimization of oil pan thermoelectric generator to recover waste heat from internal combustion engines, Energy, 2020, 200, 117547 CrossRef .
J. Wei, L. L. Zhao, Q. Zhang, Z. Nie and L. Hao, Enhanced thermoelectric properties of cement-based composites with expanded graphite for climate adaptation and large-scale energy harvesting, Energy Build., 2018, 159, 66–74 CrossRef .
J. Wei, Z. B. Nie, G. P. He, L. Hao, L. L. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Energy harvesting from solar irradiation in cities using the thermoelectric behavior of carbon fiber reinforced cement composites, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48128–48134 RSC .
M. Sun, Z. Li, Q. Mao and D. Shen, Study of the hole conduction phenomenon in carbon fiber-reinforced concrete, Cem. Concr. Res., 1998, 28, 549–554 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wen and D. D. L. Chung, Enhancing the Seebeck effect in carbon fiber-reinforced cement by using intercalated carbon fibers, Cem. Concr. Res., 2000, 30, 1295–1298 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wen and D. D. L. Chung, Seebeck effect in carbon fiber reinforced cement, Cem. Concr. Res., 1999, 29, 1989–1993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zuo, W. Yao, X. Liu and K. Wu, Sensing properties of carbon nanotube-carbon fiber/cement nanocomposites, J. Test. Eval., 2012, 40, 838–843 CAS .
B. Demirel and S. Yazicioglu, Thermoelectric behavior of carbon fiber reinforced lightweight concrete with mineral admixtures, New Carbon Mater., 2008, 23, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yao and Q. Xia, Preparation and thermoelectric properties of bismuth telluride-carbon fiber
reinforced cement composites, J. Funct. Mater., 2014, 45, 15134–15137 CAS .
J. Wei, L. Hao, G. P. He and C. L. Yang, Enhanced thermoelectric effect of carbon fiber reinforced cement composites by metallic oxide/cement interface, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40(6), 8261–8263 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, Q. Zhang, L. L. Zhao, L. Hao and Z. B. Nie, Effect of moisture on the thermoelectric properties in expanded graphite/carbon fiber cement composites, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 10763–10769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, J. M. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. S. Qiao, H. Zhang and T. X. Li., Synergistic optimization of thermoelectric performance in cementitious composites by lithium carbonate and carbon nanotubes, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 1–14 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Jia, X. L. Tao and Y. P. Wang, Flexible and Self-Healing Thermoelectric Converters Based on Thermosensitive Liquids at Low Temperature Gradient, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 1600136 CrossRef .
P. Péreza, S. Uhlb, E. Lauxb, P. Sanglarda and R. Martia, 
            et al., Synthesis and Structure modification of Ionic Liquids to optimize their Thermoelectric Properties, Sci. Direct, 2018, 5, 10298–10305 Search PubMed .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Ionic-liquid materials for the electrochemical challenges of the future, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 62 CrossRef .
T. Torimoto, T. Tsuda, K. Okazaki and S. Kuwabata, New Frontiers in Materials Science Opened by Ionic Liquids, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1196 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Abraham, D. R. Macfarlane and J. M. Pringle, High Seebeck coefficient redox ionic liquid electrolytes for thermal energy harvesting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2639–2645 RSC .
M. Bonetti, S. Nakamae, B. T. Huang and T. J. Salez, Thermoelectric energy recovery at ionic-liquid/electrode interface, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 244708 CrossRef .
R. Koervera, D. R. MacFarlanea and J. M. Pringleb, Evaluation of Electrochemical Methods for Determination of the Seebeck Coefficient of Redox Electrolytes, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 184, 186–192 CrossRef .
H. Keppner, S. Uhl, E. Laux, L. Jeandupeux, J. Tschanz and T. Journot, Ionic Liquid-based Thermoelectric Generator: Links between Liquid Data and Generator Characteristics, Sci. Direct, 2015, 2, 680–689 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. H. Jia, Q. L. Jiang, F. X. Jiang, C. C. Li and X. D. Wang, 
            et al., Highly Conductive Hydrogel Polymer Fibers toward Promising Wearable Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44033–44040 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Liu, J. K. Xu, B. Y. Lu, R. R. Yue and F. F. Kong, Simultaneous Increases in Electrical Conductivity and Seebeck Coefficient of PEDOT:PSS Films by Adding Ionic Liquids into a Polymer Solution, J. Electron. Mater., 2012, 41, 639–645 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Baldenebrolopez, J. H. Castorenagonzalez, J. A. Baldenebrolopez, J. I. Velazquezdimas and J. E. Ledezmasillas, Cement-matrix composites reinforcedwith carbon fibers as a multifunctional material, Microsc. Microanal., 2014, 20, 1880–1881 CrossRef .
S. Diamond, The microstructure of cement paste and concrete a visual primer, Cem. Concr. Res., 2004, 26, 919–933 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Zhou, H. Matsumoto and K. Tatsumi, Structure and Properties of New Ionic Liquids Based on Alkyl- and Alkenyltrifluoroborates, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1324–1332 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Abraham, R. D. MacFarlane and M. J. Pringle, Seebeck coefficients in ionic liquids prospects for thermo-electrochemical cells, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6260–6262 RSC .
J. Xu, W. H. Zhong and W. Yao, Modeling of conductivity in carbon fiber-reinforced cement-based composite, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 3538–3546 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Fan, Y. C. Zhang, C. Y. Guo and G. M. Chen, Toward high thermoelectric performance for polypyrrole composites by dynamic 3-phase interfacial electropolymerization and chemical doping of carbon nanotubes, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 183, 107794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisschop and J. G. M. Mier, Effect of aggregates and microcracks on the drying rate of cementitious composites, Cem. Concr. Res., 2008, 38, 1190–1196 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Song, L. M. Wu and S. Liang, Giant Seebeck coefficient thermoelectric device of MnO2 powder, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 85401–85404 CrossRef .
J. Wei, Y. Wang, X. T. Li, Z. Y. Jia, S. S. Qiao and Q. Zhang, Effect of porosity and crack on the thermoelectric properties of expanded graphite/carbon fiber reinforced cement-based composites, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 6885–6893 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu and X. Y. Qin, Enhanced thermoelectric performance through energy-filtering effects in nanocomposites dispersed with metallic particles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 132103–132104 CrossRef .
G. P. Moriarty, J. N. Wheeler, C. Yu and J. C. Grunlan, Increasing the thermoelectric power factor of polymer composites using a semiconducting stabilizer for carbon nanotubes, Carbon, 2012, 50885–50895 Search PubMed .
T. Ji, X. Zhang and W. Li, Enhanced thermoelectric effect of cement composite by addition of metallic oxide nanopowders for energy harvesting in buildings, Constr. Build. Mater., 2016, 115, 576–581 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the apparatus for measuring the Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity of the cement-based composites; (b) digital photo of the experimental setup.	 

 	Fig. 2  Temperature dependence of the (a) Seebeck coefficient, (b) electrical conductivity, (c) power factor for EGCFRC mixed with 0, 1, 2, 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br.	 

 	Fig. 3  Temperature dependence of the (a) Seebeck coefficient; (b) electrical conductivity; (c) power factor for EGCFRC mixed with 0, 1, 2, 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br with curing after heat treatment.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The thermal conductivity for EGCFRC with 1, 2 and 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br at room temperature. (b) The temperature dependence of the ZT value of EGCFRC with 1, 2 and 3 wt% ILs [Bmim]Br, with curing after heat treatment.	 

 	Fig. 5  Temperature dependence of the (a) Seebeck coefficient; (b) electrical conductivity; (c) power factor for [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC under 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 freezing–thawing times.	 

 	Fig. 6  The schematic of the influence mechanism for the ILs [Bmim] Br on the Seebeck coefficient of expanded graphite and carbon fiber-reinforced cement composites.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The curve of Seebeck coefficient with [Bmim]Br content at 60 °C curing immediately and curing after heat-treatment. (b) Typical SEM image of [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC and EDS mappings of Br.	 

 	Fig. 8  Typical SEM image of [Bmim]Br-EGCFRC at different freezing–thawing times. (a) No freeze–thaw cycles; (b) 10 freeze–thaw cycles; (c) 30 freeze–thaw cycles; (d) 50 freeze–thaw cycles. (e) Porosity and compressive strength of EGCFRC with [Bmim]Br added at different numbers of freeze–thaw cycles.	 

 	Fig. 9  Advances in the power factor merit for cement composites.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
