Monocrystalline perovskite wafers/thin films for photovoltaic and transistor applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA08823G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA08823G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24661-24690Monocrystalline perovskite wafers/thin films for photovoltaic and transistor applications

        
          
            Kai 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Congcong 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yuchen 
            Hou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Yang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shashank 
            Priya
          
          
        
      *
      Materials Research Institute, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: kaiwang@psu.edu; cuw635@psu.edu; spriya@psu.edu
Received 
      12th August 2019
    , Accepted 13th September 2019First published on 13th September 2019AbstractHigh-purity monocrystalline silicon has a long history in the development of photovoltaics; so far, it has dominant applications in modern computers with its profound implementations in transistors and chips. The success of silicon has shown that monocrystalline wafers/thin films of semiconducting materials with superior electronic properties are a good platform for optoelectronic and electronic applications. Recently, the newly emerging semiconducting materials of halide perovskites (HPs) have attracted considerable attention owing to their continuing success in high-efficiency solar cells. The demonstrated optoelectronic properties of HPs indicate that it could be a promising alternative to the silicon-based semiconducting industry. However, the prerequisite of high-efficiency devices is the material accessibility of monocrystalline HPs (mono-HPs), as per the lessons learned from monocrystalline silicon. Current HPs-based technologies, in terms of research areas such as solar cells, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers, and transistors, suffer a bottleneck in manufacturing mono-HP wafers/thin-film materials; hence, exciting results involving mono-HP devices are absent. State-of-the-art optoelectronic HP-based devices are exclusively built using polycrystalline thin films, which are limited in their performance due to issues such as grain-boundary defects, large trap density, and inhomogeneous charge transport. However, these issues can be resolved by utilizing mono-HPs. In this review, we provide in-depth analyses and discussions on the potential of mono-HPs in photovoltaics and transistor applications, and we present the remaining challenges, as well as promising research strategies, to provide a direction for future programs.Kai WangDr Kai Wang is currently Research Assistant Professor in the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University. Kai received his PhD in Polymer Engineering from The University of Akron in 2017 and joined Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS), Virginia Tech as a Postdoctoral Associate in the same year. His research interests include halide perovskite photovoltaics, photodetectors and photothermal applications, 2D MQW physics, and biological materials-based electronics.Congcong WuDr Congcong Wu is currently a Professor in Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University, China. He received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2007 and 2014, respectively. From 2014 to 2018, he worked as a Research Associate in the CEHMS at Virginia Tech, United States. Then he worked as an Associate Research Professor in Materials Science and Engineering, the Pennsylvania State University, United States, from 2018 to 2019. His research interests include photovoltaic materials and device, 2D inorganic–organic hybrid materials, flexible electronics, biomimetic materials and devices etc.Dong YangDr Dong Yang worked with Professor Shengzhong (Frank) Liu in Shaanxi Normal University, China since 2014 and became a full professor in 2017. Dong joined Virginia Tech in 2017 and moved to Pennsylvania State University in the fall of 2018 as Research Assistant Professor. His research interests include solar cells, semiconductor materials, materials science, and engineering of graphene carbon materials.Shashank PriyaDr Shashank Priya currently serves as the Associate Vice President for Research and Director, Strategic Initiatives at Pennsylvania State University. He is a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Pennsylvania State University and Adjunct Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Virginia Tech. Priya's research focuses on the intersection of multifunctional materials, bio-inspired systems and technologies, and energy harvesting and storage. As the principal investigator, he leads multiple programs targeting the development of thermoelectrics, photovoltaics, piezoelectrics, and other emerging energy-conversion and storage devices.
1. Introduction
Owing to its great abundance and mature infrastructure, silicon-based solar panels/modules have dominated photovoltaic (PV) technology with over 90% market share.1,2 High-purity monocrystalline silicon (mono-Si) forms the foundation for transistors,3 which serve as the basic building blocks of modern computers. Today, silicon-based semiconductor technology is at the heart of the $1 trillion global electronics industry and is vital in many other areas representing the $33 trillion global economy.4 However, silicon is reaching saturation in many application areas, and it is more obvious in PVs and transistors. Exploring novel semiconductors with superior optoelectronic properties for these platforms is essential for maintaining progress. Recent research progress involving halide perovskites (HPs) has provided a new dimension for fabricating novel semiconductors. The implementation of HPs in PVs has demonstrated solar power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the order of 25%.5 This PCE magnitude surpasses that of polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) PVs (22.3%). HPs provide pathways for reaching closer to the Shockley–Queisser limit for single-junction solar cells with theoretical maximum efficiency of 33.7%.6
Currently, polycrystalline HP (poly-HP) thin films have been utilized in demonstrating various applications including PVs and transistors. However, the presence of grain boundaries (GBs), large trap density (ntrap), and small grain sizes can compromise the electronic properties. In comparison, GB-free monocrystalline hybrid perovskites (mono-HPs) possess ultralong carrier diffusion lengths of up to ∼3 mm,7 which is 4 orders of magnitude higher than their polycrystalline counterparts (e.g., 90 nm in typical poly-HP thin films8). The trap density of mono-HPs is of the level of 1010 cm−3, which is significantly lower than that of 1017–1019 cm−3 for poly-HPs9,10 and even lower than those of typical semiconductor materials such as poly-Si, CdTe/CdS, copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), and organics (Fig. 1). The existence of these trap states results in the scattering and trapping of charge carriers, thereby reducing charge transport through the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination (or the so-called “trap-assisted recombinations”). Even in state-of-the-art perovskite PV devices, SRH recombinations contributes toward major energy loss.6 Another problem of heat generation caused by hot-carrier thermalization and energy dissipation from SRH recombinations has been often neglected in the literature. This becomes a significant issue in real applications. For example, certain HP materials (e.g., methylammonium lead perovskites) exhibit a high thermal expansion coefficient (αv = 1.57 × 10−4 K−1).11 Therefore, the temperature-induced phase transition during the day–night cycle could deteriorate the device performance.12,13 Heat generated from SRH recombinations can be reduced by using mono-HPs, which yield a much lower trap density. In transistor applications, heat generation has also become a prominent issue that degrades the performance and lifetime. In the electronics industry, the heat generated from hundreds of millions of transistors integrated on a single chip could result in reduced power density and degrade the computing power. Thermal cooling has become an important factor in maintaining Moore's law.14,15 Therefore, the qualification of potential applications in transistors or even on chips, a monocrystalline material is significant as compared to its polycrystalline counterparts. Mono-HP wafer/thin films with ultralow trap density and its GB-independent nature, coupled by its superior optoelectronic properties (such as direct bandgap, excellent charge transport properties, easy material engineering involving large doping space and various compositional modifications, and convenient solution processability, etc.), make it a promising platform for constructing next-generation ultrahigh-performance devices.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of trap densities between typical semiconductors such as amorphous silicon (a-Si),16 poly-Si,17 mono-Si,18 CdTe/CdS,19 CIGS,20 mono-rubrene,21 pentacene,22 poly-HP,9 and mono-HP,23 along with their microscopic images. Credits are given to various sources.6,24–30 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. Copyright © 2002 Elsevier Inc. Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. John Wiley & Sons, 2017, © Copyright 2019 IEEE, © 2007 American Physical Society, © 2002 American Institute of Physics. Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019. Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. © 2019 Zentrum für Sonnenenergie- und Wasserstoff-Forschung Baden-Württemberg. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. Trans Tech Publications, Ltd. Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. 
2. Fundamental merits of mono-HPs
2.1 HP vs. typical organic and/or inorganic semiconductors
The “perovskite” structure is named in honor of the Russian mineralogist Lev Perovski who reported the calcium titanium oxide (CaTiO3, XIIA2+VIB4+X32−) mineral and its unique crystal structure. In the early 1890s, Wells introduced the HP family of lead- and tin-based alkali-metal halides synthesized by Campbell, Walden, and Wheeler.31 Later, in 1978, Weber synthesized an organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite, namely, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), by the substitutional doping of alkali metal by an organic cation, namely, methylammonium (CH3NH3+), at the crystallographic A-site of the perovskite.32 During the earlier years, the focus of research was on transistor and light-emitting applications, but they were limited by material synthesis and characterization procedures.33,34 In 2009, Miyasaka's team implemented HP into a dye-sensitized solar cell35 (DSSC, or “Grätzel cell”). After that, within a decade, HP-based solar cells have exhibited a phenomenal rise in device efficiency from 3% to over 24%.36 The efficiency of HP-based solar cells is higher than those reported for organic PV (OPV) (16.6%) and inorganic PV such as CdTe (22.1%) and CIGS (22.9%).36 This high efficiency can be ascribed to the superior optoelectronic properties of HPs. Their direct band structure provides a higher light extinction coefficient (η = 105 cm−1vs. 103 cm−1 of silicon) and small effective mass of electrons and holes (originating from the strong s–p antibonding in the crystal corresponding to vs. 0.29 of silicon). This enables super electrical and bipolar transport (high mobility, μ, up to 102 cm2 V−1 s−1vs. 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 of organics). Further, HPs exhibit high flexibility in material engineering that allow the tuning of the bandgap (by substitutional doping) to be near the ideal bandgap of 1.34 eV, in accordance with the Shockley–Queisser theory. Detailed discussions on the materials' physics can be found elsewhere.37 HP is a highly crystalline material that enables the engineering of GBs, trap density, crystal orientation, phase purity, crystal grain size, etc. in order to tune the combination of electronic parameters.
2.2 Mono-HPs vs. poly-HPs
The record solar cell efficiency (25.2%, KRICT/MIT) of HP PVs involves poly-HP thin films. It is widely agreed that monocrystalline semiconductors have an advantage over polycrystalline semiconductors due to the lower disordered energetic states. Taking mono-HP as an example, due to the elimination of GBs, the trap density can be reduced to ntrap = 109 cm−3 (vs. 1017 cm−3 in poly-HPs, as shown in Fig. 1),9,23 carrier mobility can be increased to μ = 200 cm2 V−1 s−1 (vs. 0.4–40 cm2 V−1 s−1 in poly-HPs),38,39 carrier lifetime can be increased to τ = 500 ms (vs. 4.5–1000 ns in poly-HPs),40 and carrier diffusion length can be increased to LD = 3 mm (vs. 90 nm in poly-HPs).7,8 These features mitigate parasitic issues in solar cell devices, such as photocurrent hysteresis, ion migration, and degradation inherent in typical polycrystalline devices. Overall, these features have raised the question whether a mono-HP PV can exhibit better device performance than that of its polycrystalline counterparts or not. A positive answer for mono-Si PV gives us a hint of optimism since mono-Si PVs display record PCE of 26.7%, in contrast to that of poly-Si PVs (22.3%).6 Taking inspiration from mono-Si PVs and building upon the achievements of poly-HPs, we expect that mono-HP PVs can create opportunities to further enhancing the efficiency. Recent discoveries involving ferroelectric electron–hole channels,41,42 highly conductive layered-edge states,43 slower hot-carrier cooling,44 and photon recycling processes45 have inspired proof-of-concept mono-HP devices with improved PCEs. To understand this, the slow hot-carrier cooling in mono-HPs has been predicted to result in a potential PCE value of 66%,44 which is far higher than the Shockley–Queisser limit of 33.7% for typical single-junction PVs.
2.3 Mono-HP membrane (mono-HP wafer/thin film) vs. mono-HP bulk
During the past few years, mono-HP bulk materials with dimensions ranging from a few millimeters to several inches have been grown and applied in optoelectronic applications such as PVs,46 detectors,47 and light emitters.48 However, typical bulk single crystals have larger geometric dimensions as compared to their maximum charge diffusion length. For example, for sample handling and actual implementation, a bulk mono-HP needs to have a dimension of the order of centimeters, which is significantly larger than its maximum carrier diffusion length (e.g., 175 μm for MAPbI3 (ref. 49)). In most of the cases, the depletion width also needs to be taken into consideration to ensure higher charge collection efficiencies.50 Hence, in the case of bulk mono-HPs-based PVs, the photogenerated charge carriers traveling beyond the maximum diffusion length and/or the depletion width typically contribute toward energy loss via the recombination process. To minimize these recombination losses, reducing the thickness of mono-HPs to comply with the diffusion and/or depletion limit is imperative. Consequently, mono-HP wafers/thin films with suitable thickness can provide a solution to rectify efficiency losses. As shown in Fig. 2, mono-HP wafers/thin films are expected to deliver better performance in PVs and transistors.
 Fig. 2  A “Mesoamerican pyramid” showing the relationship between mono-HP wafers/thin films, mono-HPs, and HPs, as well as their comparison with mono-HP bulk, poly-HPs, and other typical semiconductors. 
3. Techniques for growing mono-HP wafers/thin films
Although the advantages of mono-HP wafers/thin films have been recognized, the realization of product-oriented mono-HP wafers/thin films that meets device requirements remains to be achieved. These requirements include large aspect ratio (i.e., large basal area but small thickness), smooth surface, low surface trap density, controllable crystal facet orientation, and good compatibility with the target substrate. In terms of device construction, both wafers and thin films could be utilized, as solar cells and transistors can be either built from free-standing mono-HP wafers by coating functional layers on both the sides (analogous to the manufacturing of mono-Si PVs) or from mono-HP thin films that are grown on FTO and/or ITO electrodes followed by metal electrode deposition. Several methods have been proposed in the literature to provide mono-HP wafers/thin films. These include the (i) floating method, (ii) space-limited growth method, (iii) vapor-phase epitaxy (VPE), and (iv) bulk crystal dicing. In this section, we will discuss these techniques that can be used for growing mono-HP wafers/thin films emphasizing on the crystallization mechanisms and growth processes.
3.1 Floating method
The driving force for the precipitation of a solid phase from a supersaturated solution is quantified as the chemical potential difference (Δμ) of a molecule between the solution and bulk crystal phase: Δμ = μs − μc(3.1)where μs and μc are the chemical potential of a molecule in solution and in the bulk crystal, respectively. Eqn (3.1) can also be thermodynamically expressed as Δμ = kTlnS(3.2)where k, T, and S are the Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature, and supersaturation ratio, respectively. The initiation of supersaturation can be achieved through temperature adjustment (cooling), concentration changes (concentrating), or by altering the solution activity coefficients as those in the solvent/antisolvent method (denoted by purple dashed arrow in Fig. 3a) according to the temperature–composition phase behavior shown in Fig. 3a. Evidently, the solubility curve represents thermodynamic equilibrium between the phases. For most perovskite systems with compositions and temperatures below the solubility curve, a stable “unsaturated zone” (blue region in Fig. 3a) exists. Typical systems have a positive correlation between solubility and temperature; hence, reducing the temperature of a saturated solution can trigger crystallization. However, some HP solutions have an “inverse” dependence between solubility and temperature. For example, the solubility of MAPbI3 in a GBL solution increases with temperature.51 Here, a higher temperature is required to induce supersaturation. In any case, beyond this solubility limit, the liquid might not be in thermodynamic equilibrium with respect to the formation of its solid phase, which is termed as the “metastable zone” (green region in Fig. 3a). In this region, spontaneous nucleation is difficult to occur, but crystal growth is easy, implying that this is the perfect region for growing a larger crystal from a smaller one. Typically, in order to initiate the formation of a solid phase, heterogeneous nucleation sites need to be introduced. Beyond the boundary of the “metastable zone,” these nucleation seeds are no longer required, and the region becomes the “supersaturated zone” (red region in Fig. 3a), which is neither stable nor in equilibrium; therefore, it is subject to spontaneous nucleation and rapid crystal growth.
 Fig. 3  Crystallization theory. (a) Solubility curve and metastable zone plotted against temperature and concentration. (b) Total free energy versus cluster size, (c) reaction coordinate diagram, and (d) crystal growth rate versus energy difference between the initial and crystal states, showing that the surface tensile stress contributes toward both lower nucleation barrier and faster crystal growth rate. 
Initiating nucleation requires overcoming the free energy barrier (ΔGT), which is set by the free energy difference between the system in its final and initial states (Δμ) plus a surface-tension-related term (4πr2σ):52 (3.3)where r, σ, and V are the radius of the nucleus, surface free energy, and volume of each molecule, respectively. Fig. 3b shows the ΔGT value as a function of r. Evidently, this relation elucidates the manner in which the function reaches the maximum, representing the fact that the energy barrier (ΔG*) should be overcome to initiate nucleation. The magnitude of ΔGT heavily depends on the surface free energy (σ), so any process that could change this value would have a significant effect on the nucleation process. A classic example is the introduction of foreign seeds; this has been utilized in the “Czochralski method”.53 In the case of HPs, the nucleation can first occur at the “solution/substrate” interface as the presence of a foreign substrate can decrease the surface energy σ, reducing ΔGT by a factor of f(θ) according to the following equation:52 ΔGsolution/substrate = ΔGhetero = ΔGhomof(θ)(3.4) (3.5)where θ is the contact angle of the solution on an alien substrate surface. A wetting substrate has a higher probability of inducing nucleation as it has a smaller contact angle and resultant smaller value of f(θ) is closer to 0, which renders a lower energy barrier (ΔG*). The “solution/air” interface is often neglected, where the existence of surface tension can reduce the energy barrier. In our recent study,54 we have developed a simplified model to illustrate the surface energy contribution to facilitate nucleation at the water–air interface. The analysis considered to involve a type of precursor molecule (A) that can exist in the form of (i) free precursor molecule “A,” (ii) “A-cluster” nucleus, and (iii) solvated complex “A − jS,” where A is intermolecularly bonded with j solvent molecules (S) having complex binding energy EC. We derived the free energy difference expressions for nucleation in either a bulk solution or at the “solution/air” interface. In contrast to the bulk solution, the molecules at the “solution/air” interface experience extra tensile elastic stress (surface energy contribution) that increases the energy of the precursor molecules by χ (>0) and results in a reduced energy barrier by contributing χ to the denominator, as shown in the following equation: (3.6)where ξ (>0) is the cohesive energy of the precursor molecules in the cluster, ξA (>0) is the energy of the precursor molecules, σ is the surface tension coefficient, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and MS and MA are the total molar concentrations of the solvent and precursor molecules, respectively. Fig. 3b shows a comparison of the free energy differences with and without the tensile elastic stress. Clearly, at the “solution/air” interface, there is a contribution from the surface energy/tensile elastic stress toward reducing the energy barrier (ΔG*), which enhances the probability of nucleation (blue line in Fig. 3b).
In terms of crystal growth, particularly for growing a large single crystal, the crystal growth needs to be controlled in the “metastable zone” (Fig. 3a) to eliminate other nuclei seeds and hence only one nucleus grows into a larger single crystal. In the solution, the crystal can grow in any direction to achieve larger dimensions. In order to confine the resultant crystal into having wafer/thin film geometry, a strategy relying on the surface energy has been developed.54,55 Fundamentally, the crystal growth rate (Ψ) can be determined by the rate of competition between the molecular attachment and detachment:54 (3.7) ΔG′ + ΔGC = Δ(3.8) ΔG′ = Ga − Gi(3.8a) ΔGC = Gf − Gi(3.8b) Δ = Gf − Ga(3.8c)where Γ is a geometric factor; ν is the attempt frequency; and ΔG′, ΔGC, and Δ are the free energy differences between the initial (Gi) and activated (Ga), between initial (Gi) and final (Gf), and between activated (Ga) and final states (Gf), respectively, as shown in Fig. 3c. As compared to the inner solution, at the “solution/air” interface, the additional surface tensile stress contributes toward higher energy in the initial state (blue line in Fig. 3c). Therefore, according to eqn (3.7), a larger crystal growth rate (Ψ) can be achieved. Fig. 3d shows the relationship between the crystal growth rate (Ψ) and free energy difference between the initial and final states (ΔGC). Larger ΔGC renders higher Ψ. As a result, faster lateral growth along the solution/air interface against vertical growth is expected in the inner solution.
Relying on this mechanism, mono-HP wafers/thin films can be fabricated by using the floating method. Several groups have fabricated free-standing mono-HP wafers by exploiting the solution/air interface. Fig. 4a shows an example of mono-HP wafer growths for two-dimensional (2D), quasi-2D, and three-dimensional (3D) perovskites of BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1, where n = 1 (2D), 2, 3, … (quasi-2D), ∞ (3D).54 Here, BA is n-butylammonium (CH3(CH2)3NH3+) and MA is methylammonium (CH3NH3+). It should be noted that the BA+ cation is an amphiphilic long molecule comprising a hydrophilic ammonium cation head and a hydrophobic alkyl chain. Such an amphiphilic molecule can align itself with a head-down pattern at the water–air interface. Further, the ammonium cation head can act as a template for the molecular assembly underneath to direct facet orientation during crystal growth. By controlling the chemical composition, i.e., the ratio between BA and MA in the solution, the final crystal can be tuned from a 2D multi-quantum-well (MQW) structure to a 3D perovskite.54 Similarly, for other 2D perovskite systems such as (PEA)2PbI4 (PEA is phenylethylammonium, i.e., C6H5(CH2)2NH3+)), free-standing single crystals can be obtained from the floating method. From Fig. 4b, it is evident that Liu et al. reported single-crystal synthesis floating at the solution surface.56 By tuning the temperature, the aspect ratio can be controlled, too. Other 3D perovskite materials, such as MAPbBr3, MAPbI3, and MASnBr3, can also be fabricated by using a similar method. Fig. 4c–f show the corresponding 3D mono-HP wafers/thin films obtained from different groups.55,57
 Fig. 4  Various mono-HP wafers/thin films synthesized using the floating method. (a) BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1, where n = 1, 2, 3, …, ∞, adapted from reference.6,54 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) (PEA)2PbI4.56 Copyright © 2019 Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (c) MAPbBr3, (d) MAPbI3, and (e) MASnBr3.55 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society (f) photograph of 1.5 cm-long MAPbI3 single-crystal piece of wafer.57 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Notably, the advantages of the floating method include the ability to control the crystal facets, as the spontaneous alignment of an amphiphilic nanotemplate can direct the assembly in a predictive pattern. Understanding the operating mechanism of a surfactant monolayer that adapts to the perovskite precursive ions at the solution/air interface and guides the epitaxial growth of nanosheets can bring more insights into this field. Similar attempts have been successfully made in growing ZnO nanosheets, which is also termed as the adaptive ionic layer epitaxy (AILE) method.58 In addition, scaling up the mono-HP wafer by enlarging the area of the solution surface may boost the development of mono-HP-based applications. Coincidently, an analogical methodology called the “float glass process” for manufacturing flat glasses in the industry has been developed and widely applied. Actively utilizing these learnings from the related fields of glass manufacturing may further accelerate the development of mono-HP-wafers-/thin-films-based optoelectronics.
3.2 Space-limited growth method
In order to obtain a flat single crystal with a large aspect ratio, the floating method takes the advantage of “energy confinement”, where the surface energy contribution confines the crystal growth along the solution/air interface. A more straightforward way is to use “space confinement”, or the “space-limited growth method.” In this case, the crystal growth occurs in a geometrically designed “container” that has a flat chamber (Fig. 5a). The technologies for typical bulk crystallization such as solution temperature lowering,59 inverse temperature crystallization,51,60 antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization,61 and melt crystallization62,63 can be easily adopted for the space-limited growth method. The flexibility in designing a “container” and accommodating it into a narrow crevice helps in achieving flat mono-HP wafers/thin films with large aspect ratios. For example, by shrinking the gap between two substrates, the thickness of the membrane can be tuned from 13 nm to 4.5 mm.64 Chen et al. employed two clean flat substrates clipped together, which were subsequently vertically dipped in a perovskite-saturated solution.64 The capillary pressure drives the solution such that it fills the gap between the substrates. The gap can be modulated by the clipping force. Upon heating the bottom precursor solution to reach the saturated state, the top solution can be tuned into a supersaturated state through the top-seeded solution growth (TSSG) method.49 Hence, the crystal can be grown from a slit (Fig. 5b). Liu et al. also demonstrated the early MAPbI3-single-crystal wafer (thickness: 150 μm) by fabricating an ultrathin-geometry-defined dynamic-flow reaction system.65 Rao et al.66 demonstrated a mono-HP thin film of CH3NH3PbBr3 on an FTO glass substrate with a large area of 120 cm2 and controllable thickness of 100–800 mm. To reduce this thickness, an optimized module with a smaller laminar distance of 16 μm and mass-transport circulating flow to supply the precursors has been developed. This can render a mono-HP thin film with a larger aspect ratio.67 As the nucleation process takes place in a narrow channel, the adhesion of precursor molecules on the substrate surface can lead to unbalanced local concentrations, inducing multiple nuclei and transforming the structure into a polycrystalline film.68 Chen et al. introduced hydrophobic coaters (e.g., PTAA) on the substrate to facilitate the microflow and obtained millimeter-sized mono-HP thin films of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 with thicknesses in the range of tens of micrometers.68
 Fig. 5  Examples of space-limited growth methods. (a) Basic experimental setup for the space-limited growth method. (b) Schematic illustration of a spatially confined crystal grown in a narrow crevice constructed by two flat substrates.6 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. (c) Photograph of a MAPbBr3 crystal thin film grown from this method, with a thickness of 0.4 mm and area of 120 cm2.78 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Fluorescence microscopy images of MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbCl3 single-crystal flakes grown by using the space-limited growth method.71 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (e) A schematic illustration of the capping method, coupled with the photographs of the resultant single-crystal flakes.76 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of the GC-LCG method.77 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. 
As mentioned above, the surface energy can have a huge impact on the nucleation barrier. Yang et al.69 employed substrates that already underwent surface treatment to modulate the energy barrier. Briefly, hydrophobically treated silicon and hydrophilically treated ITO glass were used as the two substrates for crystal growth. The nucleation energy barrier was reduced on the ITO glass for supporting the selective growth of MAPbBr3 mono-HP thin films. A thickness of 365 nm and lateral size of >600 nm were obtained in this way. Normally, the solubility increases with the temperature. In certain perovskite solution systems, such as MAPbI3 in GBL, the solubility reaches the maximum at 60 °C and further increasing the temperature can significantly decrease the solubility.70 Relying on this phenomenon, inverse temperature crystallization51,60 has been applied in growing bulk crystals. Introducing the inverse temperature crystallization51,60 into the space-limited growth method can simplify the experimental procedure, as nucleation can be triggered only by elevating the solution temperature. Yu et al.71 showed (Fig. 5d) that the space-limited growth method coupled with inverse temperature crystallization yields the successful synthesis of mono-HP thin films of MAPbX3, X = Cl, Br, or I, with tunable lateral sizes ranging from micrometers to millimeters. Yue et al.72 also applied a similar strategy for growing MAPbI3. They demonstrated that unlike MAPbBr3, MAPbI3 is more difficult to be synthesized through the space-limited growth method due to the distinct solubilities of MAI and PbI2 in GBL. A MAPbI3 seed crystal is then employed to bypass the nucleation barrier and obtain a mono-HP thin film of MAPbI3 with thicknesses of 50 μm and lateral dimensions of up to 2 mm.72
Instead of immersing the two-substrate chamber into the saturated solution in Fig. 5a, the derivatives of the space-limited growth method could take advantage of the evaporation of solvent molecules to concentrate the solution, thereby reaching the supersaturation zone, as shown in Fig. 3a. Therefore, the method of “cast capping” has been attempted in which the wet saturated solution is capped by a coverslip followed by the evaporation of solvents in order to grow the mono-HP thin film.68,73,74 Yanagi's group has reported this method to grow millimeter-sized mono-HP thin films for laser and light-emitting diode (LED) applications.73,75 It should be noted that in order to optimize the crystallization process, several experimental conditions such as environmental atmosphere, solvent evaporation rate, temperature, and saturated vapor pressure need to be tuned during the process. A successful example is the growth of (PEA)2PbI4 mono-HP thin film by Liu et al.76Fig. 5e shows an illustration of the experimental procedure. Briefly, one drop of the prepared precursor solution [PbI2:PEA (1:2 molar ratio) was dissolved in GBL at 80 °C at a concentration of 2.12 M] is pipetted onto a glass substrate preheated to 80 °C. A second glass slide with a smaller size is then placed onto the solution drop that pushes the solution to evenly spread in the channel. After maintaining the system at 80 °C in an enclosed oven, the evaporation of the solvent from the edge can concentrate the solution into an oversaturated zone and successively lead to nucleation and crystal growth. With an optimal temperature ramp rate, the resultant (PEA)2PbI4 mono-HP thin film exhibited a size of >73 × 35 mm2 and a thickness of 0.6 μm; this was the first time that a large mono-HP thin film was fabricated with an area exceeding 2500 mm2 but a thickness lower than 10 μm.76
Another innovation building upon the space-limited growth method can be obtained in combination with the roll-to-roll printing technology. Lee et al.77 demonstrated the wafer-scale patterned mono-HP thin film by using the “geometrically confined lateral crystal growth (GC-LCG)” method. Fig. 5f shows the schematic of the manufacturing setup. A spatially limited microchamber was constructed for crystal growth with a cylindrical metal roller wrapped with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mold. It exhibited a periodic array of wide and shallow channels with a width of 10 mm, depth of 200 nm, and a narrow distance of 400 nm between the channels. Initially, a roller mounted with an ink supplier, which is filled with a perovskite precursor ink, is placed in contact with the preheated substrate. At the open end of the channel, crystallization occurs instantly when the ink comes into contact with the hot substrate due to rapid solvent evaporation. With an optimal rolling speed of the mold, the seed crystals at the end can direct crystal growth from the solution near the end. The crystal growth in the vertical direction is confined within the mold, and the lateral crystal growth is also regulated by the channel; hence, misaligned growth can be avoided. Patterned (10 mm-wide and 200 nm-thick strips with 400 nm-wide spacing) mono-HP thin films (3 × 3 in2) on the SiO2 substrate could obtained using this process. The striking feature of this technology is the fast and large-scale production, as well as the ability to control the crystal growth direction.77
The “space-limited growth method” offers a straightforward way for growing mono-HP thin films using these strategies for bulk crystals. Nevertheless, several open questions need to be resolved before moving onto the next stage: (i) the first difficulty lies in the appropriate construction of an optimal container with a large aspect ratio on the inch scale in a basal plane but on the nanometer scale in height with satisfactory inner surface homogeneity, as the surface morphology of the single-crystal membrane grown inside the container is largely dependent on the nanostructures of the container surface; (ii) the post-processing of exfoliating the crystal from the container remains to be another challenge, since the physical release can inevitably induce structural damage during the mechanical cleavage between perovskite and container wall; (iii) careful facet growth control needs to be reconsidered as the charge behavior may anisotropically depend on the reciprocal lattice orientation, particularly in lower-dimensional perovskites, whereas the “space-limited growth method” cannot govern facet orientation due to random nucleation inside the narrow space.
3.3 VPE
VPE is a ubiquitously powerful technique for growing IIIA-VA semiconductors such as GaAs, GaP, InP, GaAsP, and InGaAsP. Fig. 6a shows a simple setup of the VPE method, where the vapor-phase precursors are transported into the reaction chamber to trigger and directly grow a single-crystal thin film on a susceptor. The VPE has been documented previously to be a successful technique for growing p-type GaN for blue LEDs.79 This method can provide high phase purity and yield ultrathin single-crystal thin films with thicknesses at the monolayer level.80 Nevertheless, the major challenges are difficulties in finding a compatible substrate whose lattice constant and expansion coefficient could match well with that of the objective materials. Meanwhile, to vaporize the precursor molecules, temperature control and material stability—particularly for organic ammonia that has a lower thermal stability—also need to be taken into consideration. So far, there has been a hindrance in applying this method to grow organic–inorganic mono-HP thin films.
 Fig. 6  VPE method for growing mono-HP thin films. (a) A simple VPE reactor prototype. (b) Schematic drawing showing the different atomistic processes on a conventional (yellow) and VDW (green) substrate in terms of adsorption energy (Ead), diffusion barrier (Ed), and nuclei sizes. (c) Schematic drawing of the manner in which Ead changes with thickness for three types of materials. (d) Electron diffraction pattern of mono-HPs on a mica substrate. (e) Optical image of an individual large-scale ultrathin mono-HP sheet (inset showing the atomic force microscopy measurement of the film thickness).80 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (f) Illustration of the heterostructure of a mono-HP thin film grown on a NaCl substrate. SEM images of (g) CsSnBr3 and (h) CsPbBr3 mono-HP thin films on a NaCl substrate, coupled with the photograph of a real sample.82 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (i) Optical microscopy and (j) SEM image of CsPbBr3 nanoplates grown on a STO (100) substrate. (k) Representative AFM images and (l) top-down SEM image of CsPbBr3 mono-HP thin film (thickness: 7 μm). (m) Cross-sectional SEM images and photographs of CsPbBr3 mono-HP films with varying thicknesses of 1, 2, 5, and 7 μm.83 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
It was not until recently that Shi's group achieved VPE-assisted mono-HP thin-film growth on a van der Waals (VDW) substrate.80 As shown in Fig. 6b, they compared the atomistic nucleation between a conventional and VDW epitaxy process. For the conventional case, the strong chemical bond between the adatom and the substrate leads to a very small critical nucleus (down to a single atom) and a large diffusion barrier (Ed). However, for the VDW case, the inert substrate is free from dangling bonds and only small dipole moments are present. Therefore, the adsorption energy (Ead) is small in this case, which leads to a more difficult nucleation process since more “simultaneous” collisions of adatoms on the substrate are needed. In addition, the higher-energy VDW bonding state makes the diffusion barrier (Ed) extremely low according to several simulations.81 By quantifying the lifetime of adatoms (τa) during the nucleation process by (3.9)where ν is the vibration frequency and k is the Boltzmann constant, and by performing an analysis using the Walton's model, the nucleation barrier (ΔG*) can be calculated by using either the conventional or VDW epitaxy process. For HPs with extremely low cohesive energy and strong ionic character, a significant proportion of large-scale monolayer growth under proper growth conditions is expected (Fig. 6c). They obtained MAPbCl3 mono-HPs with large-scale ultrathin sheets and high crystalline phase purity (Fig. 6d and e).80 By adjusting the substrate and target material in terms of lattice constant, mono-HP thin films of CsSnBr3 and CsPbBr3 have been grown on NaCl substrates. Fig. 6f–h show an illustration of the heterostructure and the corresponding SEM images. The obtained mono-HP thin films exhibit smooth surfaces with uniform and adjustable thicknesses from ∼200 nm to ∼7 mm.82 Moreover, SrTiO3 (STO) can also act as a good susceptor substrate, due to a the low lattice mismatch factor with CsPbBr3.83 By increasing the reaction temperature to 450 °C, atomic diffusion is accelerated to foster nucleation and crystal growth. Large-area continuous mono-HP thin films of CsSnBr3 with good single crystallinity and orientation (Fig. 6i and j) can be readily grown on the (100) facet of STO substrates, with adjustable thicknesses from 80 nm (Fig. 6k) to 7 μm (Fig. 6m). In particular, this method can be specially used for synthesizing all-inorganic perovskite materials; however, for organic–inorganic perovskites (such as MAPbI3 and FAPbI3), the high reaction temperature (over 400 °C) can significantly degrade the organic moieties.
3.4 Bulk-crystal slicing
Earlier, we discussed the current technologies for growing mono-HP wafers/thin films starting from a solution. The geometric features such as flatness, large basal size, and small thickness are limited either by the energetics barriers (surface energy in the floating method; adhesion and diffusion energies in the VPE method) or spatial objects (narrow channel in the space-limited growth method). On the other hand, industrial mono-Si wafer manufacturing either for solar panel or chip industry applications can be exclusively based on the bulk-crystal slicing technology, which follows a top-down procedure. Fig. 7a shows the simplified manufacturing flowchart comprising a mono-Si ingot pulling process and a Si-wafer-forming process. Briefly, raw materials (such as silica) are smelted and refined into polycrystalline silicon, which is further manufactured into a monocrystalline silicon ingot through the Czochralski method that uses chunks of virgin polycrystalline silicon. These chunks are melted and placed in a quartz crucible along with small quantities of dopants (e.g., boron for p-type doping; phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony for n-type doping). After heating to ∼1420 °C (above the melting temperature of Si), a seed is put on the top to nucleate the Si and direct the orientation of the crystal. By modulating the pulling speed, the mono-Si ingot with minimum defects can be obtained. Wafer manufacturing starts by slicing into a raw wafer with the specified dimensions, followed by lapping, polishing, and cleaning processes (Fig. 7a). In accordance with the SEMI® standard, the ultraflat disk needs to be ultraclean, virtually free of microparticles or other impurities, and polished to have a mirror-like surface. With regard to Si PVs, the material needs to have high purity of 99.9999% (wt%); for chip applications, this value is 99.999999999%.84
 Fig. 7  Bulk-crystal dicing technology. (a) Industrial mono-Si wafer-manufacturing scheme showing the mono-Si ingot pulling process from multicrystalline silicon (multi-Si), through melting, seeding, and pulling. A Si wafer is formed from bulk mono-Si ingot dicing, lapping, polishing, and cleaning. Dicing technology for mono-HP wafer processing starting from (b) single HP bulk,98 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc., through (c) dicing by a diamond wire saw.6 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. (d) An actual photograph showing a sliced mono-HP wafer of MAPbI3.85 Copyright © 2017, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany. (e) Optical and AFM images of the exfoliated (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3) 2D perovskite microplates for different thicknesses.96 © 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd. (f) AFM image with the height profile of an exfoliated layer. The layered structure of a Br-based perovskite with n = 1 is evident with a monolayer step of 1 nm, as shown in the inset.97 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (g) Side-view SEM of a (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 4) 2D mono-HP crystal.54 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (h) A C-AFM setup detecting the layered edge of a 2D mono-HP crystal and (i) an example of C-AFM current mapping showing the conductive layered edge.43 © 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
For manufacturing mono-HP wafers, attempts relying on the bulk-crystal slicing technology have been reported since 2016. A large perovskite crystal (Fig. 7b) was sliced into thin wafers (Fig. 7d) at Xi'an LONGI Silicon Materials by Liu's group.85 When compared with other slicing methodologies, such as laser cutting, inner circle slicing, multiple wire slicing, etc., which usually crack or burn the crystal into fragments, a diamond wire sawing machine exhibited good compatibility to fabricate a complete mono-HP wafer. They optimized the conditions by using a diamond wire with a dimeter of 0.08 mm, and MAI-saturated IPA solution as the coolant, at a sawing speed of 20 m s−1 and feeding rate of 0.7 mm min−1, yielding thin mono-HP wafers with a lateral size of 120 mm and thickness of ∼100 μm.85 It should be noted that perovskite materials have a lower Young's modulus (∼19 GPa)86 than that of Si (140–180 GPa)87 and are extremely sensitive to moisture. These require particular protection when used for slicing perovskite materials. In particular, typical wire cutting and mechanical polishing could shrink the thickness of mono-HP wafers to ∼200 μm. However, further polishing upon this thickness level could easily cause mechanical damage due to its high fragility. Lv et al.88 developed a wet-etching method to engineer the wafer thickness. They used the residual mother liquor that was used to grow the crystal to etch the surface of a mono-HP wafer. By immersing ∼200 μm-thick MAPbI3 wafers in the etching solution by modulating the immersion time, temperature, and concentration, a desired thickness down to 15 μm could be achieved.88 Similar wet-etching strategies can also be seen in the field of mono-Si wafer fabrication. For example, Lin et al.89 reported the fabrication of a 30 μm-thick mono-Si chip using a chemical-etching method. Li et al.90 obtained 18 μm-thick free-standing mono-Si membranes by the wet-etching of a 500 μm-thick wafer. Taking the advantage of mature slicing techniques used in the mono-Si field, such as its ability in controlling the crystal-facet orientation, flexibility in product dimension, technical maturity with streamlined and high throughput processes, and good compatibility with existing manufacturing market, transferring this technology to mono-HP wafer fabrication can be a promising direction. Nevertheless, several fundamental problems need to be taken into consideration before this transition, namely, (i) slicing- and lapping-caused surface defects; (ii) shortage of proper materials for surface treatment, such as damage etching, atomic-scale polishing, and ultrapure cleaning; (iii) concerns regarding the high sensitivity toward oxygen and moisture of perovskites; (iv) dynamic material degradation, cracking, brittle fracture, and poor mechanical properties; and (v) kerf loss.
On the other hand, following the nature of slicing a crystal in the mechanical aspect, another derivative is mechanical exfoliation, which has been widely employed in the field of traditional 2D materials, such as graphene and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). Lower-dimensional perovskites, such as the well-known BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 (ref. 54) and PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1,91 have good compatibility with this technique because of their unique VDW heterostructures.92,93 The inorganic [PbI6]4− octahedral layer can be separated by the organic bilayers of BA or PEA, and the intermolecular interaction between the neighboring organic layers is the VDW bond, the bonding energy of which is several orders of magnitude lower than those of covalent and ionic bonds. This facilitates the exfoliation of several single-crystal layers from the bulk crystal. Peng et al.94 prepared a 2D mono-HP wafer of (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4·(CH3NH3PbI3)n−1 (n = 1, 2, and 3) using this method. Similarly, Niu et al.95 reported mono- and few-layer-thick 2D mono-HP wafers of (C6H9C2H4NH3)2PbI4. In particular, they found a clear difference in the exciton properties between the “bulk” (>15 layers) and very thin (<8 layers) regions, and they ascribed this to the structural rearrangement of the organic molecules around the inorganic sheets. Since mechanical exfoliation typically cannot yield a large complete sample with uniform layers, a hierarchical terrace-like feature with a planar inner terrace region and layered edge region is usually observed (Fig. 7e).96 From Fig. 7f, it is evident that the exfoliated 2D perovskite exhibits a layered edge step,97 quantified by the unit thickness multiplied by the number of layers. A side-view example of a (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 4) 2D mono-HP crystal is shown in Fig. 7g.54 These layered edges have been observed to have a conductive feature by means of conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) measurements (Fig. 7h).43 A topographical “insulating/conductive/insulating” feature across the layered edge (Fig. 7i) suggests potential applications in microscopic electronics.43 Overall, in spite of these exciting findings involving 2D mono-HP thin films prepared from the mechanical exfoliation method, the inherent drawbacks such as low reproducibility, small area, and low homogeneity limit its scale-up applications.
4. Mono-HP PVs
The absence of GB and the significantly minimized trap densities in single crystals leads to the superb charge transport property and a scenario of approaching and even breaking the Shockley–Queisser limit. For example, recent investigations have revealed the below-bandgap absorption in mono-HP PVs, which could be expected to break the limit by taking advantage of photons in the NIR to IR region via an indirect band transition.68 The findings of intrinsic twin domains in tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 HPs by Rothmann et al.99 also provided additional room for relaxing the stress and strain within the perovskite lattice to improve the device performance. The persistent ferroelectric domains in MAPbI3 mono-HPs, as confirmed by Garten et al.,100 provided the necessary evidence for making early conjectures on the contribution from ferroelectric domain walls,41,42,100 which can provide charge transport highways for photocarriers as well as the opportunity for “ferroelectric PVs” to surpass the Shockley–Queisser limit with the contributions from the ferroelectric domain wall.101,102 Multiphoton excitations,103,104 nonlinear optical properties,105 and upconversion106 phenomena observed in mono-HPs suggest their potential in taking the advantage of photons with longer wavelengths beyond the absorption edge. Recent discoveries involving photon recycling are analogous to a solar concentration effect,45 and hot-carrier cooling to use the hot carriers before thermalization44 in HPs can yield a potential PCE value of 66%. With regard to mono-HP PVs, designing and constructing device architecture that can maximize these effects is imperative to obtain proof-of-concept ultrahigh-performance devices.
4.1 Lateral mono-HP PVs
A solar cell can be constructed in either lateral or vertical architectures depending on the alignment between the photocarrier transport direction and illumination direction. Fig. 8 shows two examples of device architectures: lateral and vertical devices. Normally, in any solar cell, an internal electrical potential gradient (e.g., “p–n junction” in a Si solar cell;107 “electron donor–acceptor heterojunction” in an organic solar cell108) is required to form a depletion region that can be used to separate the photogenerated charge carriers and/or driving each type of carriers to their corresponding electrodes. This internal electrical field can be provided by the work function difference of the electrode materials, heterostructures-induced potential gradient, dipole, space charge, and interfacial effects by various buffer layer materials.109 Meanwhile, to passivate the surface traps, minimizing the Schottky barrier at the interface, with the help of various n-type and p-type interfacial modification materials, has been widely attempted in solar cells, photodetectors, and LEDs. Similarly, for mono-HP PVs, n-type buffer layers such as TiOx,108,110 ZnO,111 SnO,112 C60,111 PCBM,111,113etc., and p-type buffer layers such as PEDOT:PSS,114 NiOx,115 Spiro-OMeTAD,116 P3HT,117etc., can also be used. Fig. 8a shows an example of a lateral device, where a mono-HP is supported by a SiO2 substrate, and different electrodes (coupled with/without buffer layers) are separately deposited on the crystal, leaving an open channel area for receiving the photons. Such a design enables the fabrication of an entire device only on one side of the crystal; hence, the issues involving crystal thickness or the deposition of a transparent electrode can be ignored. However, one major drawback is the low usage of the light exposure area. As shown in Fig. 8c, there is a shading area of the electrode that can block light absorption, leaving a smaller uncovered open channel such that the effective device area becomes L × W. In addition, such an area is limited by the charge-carrier diffusion length of mono-HPs. For example, when the channel length L exceeds the diffusion length (hyper-microscale), the photogenerated charge carriers are prone to recombination to result in energy loss before arriving at the electrodes. Meanwhile, the deficiency of back-contact reflection also leads to a large optical transmission loss (Fig. 8c). A combination of these factors leads to low PCEs for lateral mono-HP PVs. An early attempt for lateral mono-HP PVs relies on a piezoelectric poling effect to induce device asymmetry.118 Dong et al.118 reported a strong piezoelectric effect in MAPbI3 mono-HPs (Fig. 9a), which enables poling within single crystals under a nonuniform electric field. The strain-generated GBs provide paths for ion migration and finally form a p–i–n structure (Fig. 9b). As a result, a lateral Au/mono-HP/Au device with sufficient poling treatment exhibits a VOC value of 0.61 V, JSC value of 2.28 mA cm−2, and PCE value of 1.88% (Fig. 9c). In spite of its low PCE value, the lateral mono-HP PV device can form a new route toward fabricating efficient low-cost solar cells due to its simple device configuration of metal/mono-HP/metal. Such a design eliminates the need for more expensive transparent electrodes. Meanwhile, instead of electrical poling, intentionally doping the mono-HP and/or introducing n-type and p-type buffer layers at the cathode and anode, respectively, to preserve longer carrier depletion length is a good way to improve the PCE. By modifying the buffer layer interface, Lee et al.77 designed a mono-HP solar cell using metal electrodes with different work functions and a n-type cathode buffer layer of PCBM (Fig. 9e and f). The best lateral mono-HP device exhibits a JSC value of 18.33 mA cm−2, VOC value of 0.801 V, fill factor (FF) value of 0.329, and PCE value of 4.83%, which is significantly higher than the polycrystalline lateral device with a maximum PCE value of 0.194% (Fig. 9f). This can be ascribed to the higher mobility, i.e., 45.64 cm2 V−1 s−1, of mono-HPs as compared to that of polycrystalline films (0.2512 cm2 V−1 s−1). Similarly, Liu et al.57 constructed an analogous device structure using C60/BCP as the cathode buffer layer (Fig. 9g–i). The lateral device exhibits a PCE value of 5.9% under sunlight of 0.25, yielding a JSC value of 5.06 mA cm−2, VOC value of 0.66 V, and FF value of 0.44. As the single crystal has an extremely low trap density within its crystal, SRH recombination losses may still occur at the crystal surface. Technically, the surface trap is the major reason for such low efficiencies in terms of recombination losses. Modifications on the mono-HP surface to minimize the trap density using learnings from various interfacial modification cases is expected to improve the device efficiency.
 Fig. 8  Two examples of device architectures for mono-HP solar cells. (a) A lateral device structure where the photocarrier transport direction in the mono-HP is perpendicular to the direction of incident photons. (b) A vertical device structure where the photocarrier transport direction in the mono-HP is parallel to the direction of incident photons. Photoactive areas of the (c) lateral device and (d) vertical device. 
 Fig. 9  Lateral mono-HP device and performance. Piezoelectric poling strategy for antisymmetric devices. (a) Image of MAPbI3 lateral structure single-crystal device. (b) Scheme of electromechanical-strain-generated GBs and ion migration in mono-HPs. (c) Switchable PV effect of a MAPbI3 lateral mono-HP solar cell with positive and negative poling.118 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Buffer layer strategy for antisymmetric devices. (d) Two-dimensional X-ray diffraction (2D XRD) image of a mono-HP thin film. (e) Optical microscopic image of a lateral mono-HP solar cell with metal electrodes. The light brown and dark brown lines indicate mono-HPs and spaces, respectively. (f) J–V curves of single-crystalline (red) and polycrystalline (black) perovskite thin films with lateral mono-HP cells. The inset shows a schematic device structure of a lateral perovskite solar cell and the direction of illumination.77 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. (g) SEM images of the cross-section of a MAPbI3 mono-HP wafer. (h) Scheme of MAPbI3 mono-HP lateral-structure solar cell. (i) J–V curve showing a PCE value of 5.9%.57 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
With diffusion lengths of several micrometers (e.g., 175 μm in the prototype MAPbI3 single crystal), a thinner wafer is imperative in terms of depletion width and diffusion length, either of which can set up the limit distance for charge traveling before recombinations. Otherwise, a thicker film can cause charge loss in the region beyond the limit distance. However, handling an ultrathin wafer with micrometer-scale thickness seems to be practically challenging. Alternatively, enhancing the diffusion length/depletion width by proper doping may provide solutions to this thickness issue. Since the ultimate goal is to secure sufficient charge carriers reaching the electrodes and thereby minimizing charge loss from recombinations, an introduction of a localized electrical field, particularly at the interface, can sufficiently adjust the depletion region and regulate the drift–diffusion balance, which can sufficiently improve the device performance. For example, the employment of an ionic liquid in light-emitting electrochemical (LEC) cells,119,120 can provide mobile ions that are driven to the boundaries under bias at elevated temperatures and frozen at room temperature to yield an ion-generated electrical field. This electrical field can help charge separation and transport in the device. A similar mechanism facilitating the charge separation, extraction, transport, and collection can be found in OPVs, where such a localized electric field can be provided by the interfacial “dipoles”,121 coercive electrical field from functional nanoparticles,122 and functional ferroelectric interlayers.123 In the case of perovskites, constructing a p–i–n structure by perovskite self-doping is a worthwhile attempt to break the electrode symmetry and simplify the device architecture by eliminating the necessity for expensive transparent conductive electrodes (TCEs). Typical methods that include electrical poling induced by ion migration and self-doping dominantly rely on the GB that provide the ion migration path in polycrystalline perovskites.124 However, in single-crystal perovskites, since the energy barrier for ion migration within the single-crystal domain is twice that at the GB, ion-assisted self-doping seems to be difficult to realize in single-crystal perovskites. However, a primitive demonstration on the self-doping of a single-crystal perovskite through the “piezoelectric poling” effect118 can be a good attempt.
Alternatively, since the “space-limited growth method” enables direct perovskite crystal growth on a transparent conductive substrate, building the device upon these single-crystal membranes coated with transparent electrodes can be considered to be promising. Therefore, various strategies growing mono-HPs on FTOs and/or ITO substrates and constructing the solar cell device upon it have been reported, which turns out into a “vertical device”.
4.2 Vertical Mono-HP PVs
To better accommodate the crystal dimensions with the carrier diffusion length, a vertical mono-HP device design incorporating mono-HPs with microscale thickness or smaller has been proposed, which can eventually yield higher efficiency. The earliest mono-HP vertical device was built based on a bulk single crystal of MAPbI3 with millimeter thickness49 (such a device is shown in Fig. 10a). Bearing the maximal diffusion length of 175 μm for MAPbI3 single crystals, such a large thickness causes dramatic charge carrier recombinations during vertical transport through the bulk single crystal.98,125 Furthermore, to induce electrical asymmetry for separate electron and hole collections, different metals, such as Ga and Au, were used as the electrodes. This design is not compatible for solar cell applications as no light path can pass through any electrode; rather, it is good for gamma-voltaic applications.49 Using an intense cesium-137 source, a gamma-voltaic PCE value of 1.73% can be achieved. Constructing solar cell devices based on mono-HPs requires a small crystal thickness. A study focusing on the PCE dependence on mono-HP thickness in mono-HPs of MAPbBr3 was reported by Peng et al.126 As shown in Fig. 10b, they tuned the mono-HP thickness from 4 to 60 μm, and modified the cathode side with an n-type buffer layer, namely, TiO2. The device with mono-HPs of smaller thicknesses delivered higher PCE due to the significantly improved FF. This is because FF is closely correlated with the charge carrier mobilities in the device. A larger FF in a thinner mono-HP device yields improved carrier mobilities. Using a simple ITO/mono-HP/Au structure without any buffer layers, a nearly 100% internal quantum efficiency (IQE) and PCE > 5% can be obtained.126 In fact, modifying the electrode further improves the PCE value to 6.5% with a remarkable VOC value of ∼1.4 V.126 The positive role of interface engineering has been evidenced in the mono-HP device. It should be noted that the MAPbBr3 mono-HPs have a cubic crystal structure at room temperature and they are easier to grow than MAPbI3 mono-HPs. Hence, several early attempts involving mono-HP devices were made for fabricating on the MAPbBr3 material. Rao et al.66 also utilized MAPbBr3 mono-HPs to construct solar cells (Fig. 10c). In particular, they modified both cathode and anode with different buffer layers, i.e., TiO2 and spiro-MeOTAD, respectively, to minimize the Schottky barrier. A MAPbBr3 mono-HP with a thickness of 16 μm and a size of 6 × 8 mm2 exhibits the highest PCE value of 7.11%. Another milestone for mono-HP devices can be seen in (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 mono-HPs.127 Such a mixed mono-HP is believed to deliver high photocurrents due to the smaller bandgap of FAPbI3. With NiOx and TiOx interfacial modification layers (Fig. 10d), the device has better extraction and anticharge blocking effect, yielding a PCE value of 12.18%. Later, in 2017, Chen et al.68 fabricated the MAPbI3 mono-HP solar cell with a decent PCE value of 17.8%. By adjusting the thickness at the level of tens of micrometers, they found that the spectral response of MAPbI3 mono-HP solar cells could be extended to 820 nm, which is 20 nm broader than the corresponding polycrystalline thin-film solar cells. They ascribed these phenomena to the indirect bandgap absorption or Urbach band tail, which may challenge the Shockley–Queisser limit by the utilization of additional photons. The highest PCE value of mono-HP devices was reported in 2019, with an efficiency of 21.09% (ref. 128) for MAPbI3 mono-HP devices. By decreasing the thickness to ∼20 μm and employing a device structure of ITO/poly(triarylamine) (PTAA)/MAPbI3 mono-HP/C60/BCP/Cu, a JSC value of 23.46 mA cm−2, VOC value of 1.076 V, and FF value of 83.5% could be achieved. It should be noted that such values are measured in an inert nitrogen atmosphere. They observed that the performance could drastically deteriorate when the measurements were performed under ambient conditions (22 °C, 50–55 RH), particularly with respect to the JSC value.128 Overall, the mono-HP device seems to be more promising in achieving ultrahigh device performance as compared to their polycrystalline counterparts. However, current studies have revealed a generally lower PCE value of mono-HP solar cells as compared to poly-HP devices. The major reason is the thickness of the mono-HP layer, which is extremely difficult to control at the sub-micrometer scale, notwithstanding the surface homogeneity and surface traps of the mono-HPs.
 Fig. 10  Milestone vertical mono-HP device and performance. (a) Schematic device structure of the MAPbI3 mono-HP devices. Normalized EQE values of 3 mm-thick and 200 mm-thick MAPbI3 mono-HP devices as compared to that of a thin-film device.49 Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) MAPbBr3 mono-HP devices with/without a cathode buffer layer and device performance of the device based on MAPbBr3 mono-HPs of different thicknesses.126 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of MAPbBr3 mono-HP devices with the highest PCE value of 7.11%.67 © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. (d) Band alignment and J–V curve of the highest PCE value of mono-HP devices using ITO/NiOx/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/TiO2/Ag.127 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) Device structure and J–V curve of single-crystal devices using MAPbI3 mono-HPs with different thicknesses. A PCE value of 17.8% has been obtained.68 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of a MAPbI3 mono-HP device with J–V curves showing a record PCE value of 21.09%.128 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Clearly, beyond this concern regarding thickness, buffer layers that can induce a depletion region, extract charge carriers, and select/block and transport/collect electrons or holes, are also crucial to the overall PCE. The functionality of these buffer or interfacial modification layers is similar to those already applied in photoelectronics when using polycrystalline perovskite thin films.108 Besides traditional small-area devices, incorporating a perovskite single crystal into a large-area solar module has also been researched. A good attempt can be seen in the wafer-scale mono-HP patterned thin films based on geometrically confined lateral crystal growth, which involves a 3 × 3 in2 solar module with a PCE value of 4.83%.77 It should be mentioned that the (i) lateral device structure with long lateral distance between electrodes and (ii) improper contact with a direct electrode without a buffer layer may act as the main reasons for the insufficient PCE. In addition, other device structures fabricated by different manufacturing methods, such as “top-down approaches”,129 atomic scissoring,130 molecular bonding, self-assembled monolayer (e.g., APTES)-assisted bonding,47 and “sandwiching of two slides”,131 may bring additional insights into the processing requirements. Overall, however, only sophisticated techniques capable of growing homogeneous, flat, surface-trap-free, thin, and large mono-HP wafers/thin films have been developed because of which the efficiencies could further compete with those of poly-HP devices.
4.3 Ultrahigh PCE
Although, in principle, single-crystal devices could outperform their polycrystalline counterparts because of the absence of GB and minimal defect density, the current device performance is still unsatisfactory. Table 1 summarizes the performance parameters of the state-of-the-art single-crystal perovskite solar cells proposed in last three years. The PCE values are in the range from 0.75% to 21.09%, where most of the works reported PCE < 10%, which is clearly lower than the typical value of their polycrystalline counterparts (ca. 18% from various current studies). The inferiority in PCE can be associated with several factors: (i) surface trap. Although the bulk trap density is several orders of magnitudes lower in single crystals, it should be noted that a large density of surface traps still exist,132 which can induce ionic charges due to the uncoordinated sites on the surface. To finely tune the surface properties, methods such as surface passivation by fullerene,133 ionomer,134 ionic liquid,120 and Lewis base,135 as well as compositional regulation by argon plasma treatment (APT),136 have been applied. In addition, the structural asymmetry at the surface can induce nontrivial physical properties, particularly in lower-dimensional perovskite materials. Recently, we found highly conductive crystal edges in 2D BA2PbI4 perovskite MQW structures exhibiting a super high carrier density of 1020 cm−3, approaching those observed in metals. As several intrinsic surface properties of perovskite crystals still remain unclear, further physical and chemical investigations may bring new insights. (ii) Surface hydration. Structural asymmetry can yield terminal crystallographic ions that are vulnerable to various environmental stimuli, such as moisture and oxygen.137 Definitely, single-crystal devices with hydrated facets form poor contact with electrodes, resulting in higher leakage currents and severe resistive losses despite their excellent bulk properties. Overcoming the integration challenges associated with hydrated or degraded interfaces require a profound understanding of the surface characteristics and eventual chemical transformation.138 (iii) Buffer layer. In any solar cell, the buffer layer is crucially important for efficient extraction and transport of certain types of charges to the electrodes. In this context, the energy level, mobility, transparency (front layer), and stability need to be basically considered. Various relevant studies involving OPVs, DSSCs, Si, and GIGC solar cells can be revisited taking into consideration buffer layer materials.108 (iv) Thickness tradeoff. Thicker single-crystal wafers enable indirect band absorption (and therefore higher photocurrent) and can facilitate handling and processing, but they can also introduce more traps and increase recombination loss. Therefore, balancing the potential risk in recombination loss by designing a suitable thickness of mono-HP needs to be carefully considered.
Table 1 Performance parameters of state-of-the-art mono-HP devices




Device type
Device architecture
Light source
Thickness

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.





a Average PCE.
b Champion PCE.
c Obtained at 170 K.
d Obtained at room temperature.





Vertical
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag paste or Al




0.04
0.55
34.1
0.75

129



Vertical
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO/Al
AM 1.5 G
300 nm–3 mm
8.69
0.52
0.38
1.73

139



Vertical
Ga/MAPbI3/Au
Intense cesium-137 source
3 mm






3.90

49



Vertical
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag
AM 1.5 G
50 μm
22.15
0.75
0.27
4.40

140



Vertical
ITO/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
1 μm
7.39
1.25
0.59
5.49

126



Vertical
ITO/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
4 μm
7.42
1.24
0.58
5.37


Vertical
ITO/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
7 μm
7.19
1.11
0.46
3.7


Vertical
ITO/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
12 μm
7.09
1.03
0.39
2.82


Vertical
ITO/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
60 μm
2.27
0.94
0.31
0.65


Vertical
FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
1 μm
6.69
1.36
0.69
6.53


Vertical
FTO/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
16 μm
7.77
0.65
0.39
1.98

67



Vertical
FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3/Au
AM 1.5 G
16 μm
8.35
0.91
0.53
4.08


Vertical
FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3/HTM/Au
AM 1.5 G
16 μm
8.77
1.31
0.62
7.11


Vertical
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
AM 1.5 G


22.283
0.668
0.59
8.78

141



Vertical
ITO/NiOx/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/TiOx/Ag
AM 1.5 G
24.5 μm
23.14
1.03
0.51
12.18

127



Vertical
ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PCBM/C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/Cu
AM 1.5 G
10 μm
21
1.08
0.786
17.80

68



Vertical
ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu
AM 1.5 G
15 μm
21.2
1.05
0.73
16.30

136



Vertical
ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu, w/APT treatment for 2 s
AM 1.5 G
15 μm
22.5
1.11
0.816
20.40


Vertical
ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu
AM 1.5 G
∼20 μm
23.46
1.076
0.835
21.09

128



Lateral
Au/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au
AM 1.5 G


3.84
0.802


4.83a, 6.6b

77



Lateral
Au/MAPbI3/Au, piezoelectric poling treatment
25 mW cm−2 (0.25 sun)


2.28
0.82


5.36c, 1.88d

118



Lateral
Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Au
25 mW cm−2 (0.25 sun)


5.06
0.66
0.44
5.9

57





4.4 Device stability
The public acceptance of HP PV technology is based on its reliability not only in terms of higher efficiency but also satisfactory lifetime. HP materials suffer from low stability against moisture, heat, and radiation.142 The stability problem can be resolved by understanding mono-HP devices.
Moisture is usually regarded as the chief culprit for device degradation involving HP PVs. In the presence of moisture, various degradation mechanisms, such as the formation of hydrate products of (MA)4PbI6·2H2O,143 phase transition from α to δ in FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 systems,144,145etc., have been researched. Moisture infiltration into the inner perovskite typically starts from the GBs146 and a high trap density can facilitate moisture-induced degradation via an ion migration mechanism.146,147 Because of the virtue of ultralow trap density and absence of GBs, mono-HPs are expected to have years of stability in air. For example, an unencapsulated MAPbI3 mono-HP device can endure for 30 days in dark air (23 °C and 30% RH), showing no degradation.68 A mono-HP device using the structure of FTO/TiOx/mono-HP/spiro-MeOTAD/Au has been reported to maintain 93% of its initial PCE after aging for 1000 h.66 The all-inorganic CsPbBr3 mono-HP device exhibits 3 month stability in air with 20% RH at room temperature.83 It should be noted that all these devices are freshly made and no further encapsulation techniques need to be applied. Recent wrapping methods, such as atomic-level protection using the fluorination treatment,148 can also be used for these mono-HP devices for prolonging their lifetime.
In addition to moisture, heat can also induce stability issues, such as phase transitions and chemical decomposition. For example, MAPbI3 can experience phase transition from the tetragonal (I4cm) to cubic (Pmm, Z = 1) phase when the temperature increases up to 327 K (∼54 °C).149 In poly-HPs, the decomposition at the GBs can be triggered at relatively lower temperatures and accelerated at elevated temperatures due to the corrosive contaminants that are typically stored in the voids and GBs. For example, the MAPbI3 poly-HP thin film usually exhibits a decomposition temperature of ∼150 °C, while mono-HP wafers can sustain themselves at far higher temperatures (up to 240 °C).65 Similarly, mono-HP wafers of MAPbCl3, MAPbBr3, and FAPbI3 have been reported to have higher decomposition temperatures of 214, 257, and 300 °C, respectively.46 In addition, for the all-inorganic perovskite of CsPbI3, this temperature can go up to 567 °C until melting, which not only exhibits good thermal stability but also provides a potential way for casting a crystal film using the “melting method”.150,151
Photoinduced-degradation processes can prove to be another mechanism that can induce the degradation of HP devices, as the ions in mono-HPs can be activated upon photon radiation and the migration of these ions and photocatalytic effects can trigger damaged contacts at the interfaces between the different layers.152–154 The GBs and trap states are known to accelerate ion migration by providing percolation pathways,147,155–158 which together with photon energy that activates the ions, can lead to photodegradation processes in poly-HP devices. In contrast, the mono-HP can be a good platform to reduce and/or eliminate ion migration and hence mass-transport-induced material degradation. In particular, for (quasi-)2D perovskite materials that have extremely low in-plane and out-of-plane ion migration properties,159 the degradation induced by mass transport (ion migration) can be circumvented.
5. Mono-HP transistors
HP materials display extremely low effective mass of electrons and holes and hence large carrier mobilities as well as ambipolar transport characteristics,160–162 which makes them a good candidate for use in field-effect transistors (FETs). However, a limited number of research efforts have been conducted along this direction due to device unreliability. Ion migration and accumulation at the interface of the dielectric layer and gate-field screening effect in HP polycrystalline films158,163 can substantially reduce the charge carrier mobility that damages the normal functionality of a transistor device. Minimizing ion migration in poly-HP materials via the application of mono-HPs can be a promising solution to mitigate or even overcome such gate-field screening effects.
5.1 Ion migration influence
The protype HP material, MAPbI3, with experimentally determined large intrinsic charge carrier mobility and ambipolar conductivity seems to be a good material for transistor applications. However, several studies from different research teams have coincidently found that MAPbI3-poly-HP-based devices only exhibit FET characteristics at very low temperatures, but no FET behavior can be observed at room temperature.164–166 Building upon MAPbI3 poly-HP thin films, Chin et al.164 fabricated the first light-emitting FET in 2015 (Fig. 11a). Using a bottom contact/bottom gate (BC/BG) device configuration and spin-coated MAPbI3 poly-HP film on prepatterned Au/Ni (50 nm/10 nm) electrodes, tunable electroluminescence was observed in a lower temperature range from 78 to 178 K via the mechanism of recombination of balanced electron and hole injection from the opposite metal electrodes. The linear regime in the drain-to-source voltage, Vd = ± 20 V, was obtained at 78 K, while both electron and hole mobilities drop quickly upon temperature increase (Fig. 11a(iv)); no transistor characteristics were observed at room temperature. They attributed the absence of room-temperature transistor characteristics to the ion screening effects, which were associated with the presence of ions accumulated at the perovskite/dielectric interface that block further charge injection.164 Similarly, Labram et al.165 fabricated a top contact/bottom gate (TC/BG) FET using spin-coated MAPbI3 poly-HP films with aluminum electrodes on top, as shown in the inset of Fig. 11b. They found that the electrical characteristics exhibited low source–drain currents and no field-induced current modulation at room temperature, but there was a field effect below 220 K and the drain current continued to increase as the temperature further decreased. This might be linked to the temperature dependence of charge carrier mobility (Fig. 11b(ii)). Further, a screen mechanism was provided, as the MAPbI3 might exhibit substantial polarization susceptibility to an electric field through mobile ions or alignment of the dipolar molecular cation; further, these polarization responses would lead to an electronic screen layer that electrically block that field (see Fig. 11b(iii)). Such a mechanism is expected to result in a screening of the applied gate voltage in the FETs, thereby inhibiting carrier accumulation and electrical conductivity of the channel. Both polarization due to local molecular motion and diffusion of ionic species in the HP solid are expected to be temperature-activated.167–169 Simultaneously, ion migration is closely related with the activation energy of the ions; further, in poly-HP films with high GB and trap densities, such active ions and vacancy can be considerably higher. This induces a higher ionic contribution to poorer-quality poly-HP films. Inversely, the optimization of poly-HP films to reduce the GB and trap density can be an avenue to fabricate efficient FET devices. For example, Senanayak et al.163 reported that through the optimization of the microstructure of a poly-HP film, as well as making modifications at the source–drain contact, it is possible to significantly minimize the instability and hysteresis in FET characteristics and demonstrate an electron field-effect mobility value of 0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature. Briefly, they employed a Pb(Ac)2-based precursor mixture and acquired a uniform thin film with a small root-mean-square (RMS) roughness value of ∼5.4 nm. By optimizing the device by tuning the grain size from 38 to 150 nm by adjusting the precursor concentrations, modifying the gold source–drain contacts with self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of pentafluorobenzenethiol (PFBT, ∼1 nm), and polymer surface modification layer of polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE, ∼2 nm), excellent room-temperature n-type transfer behavior could be realized in a MAPbI3 FET device, showing negligible hysteresis.163 Similarly, Zeidell et al.170 employed the solvent vapor annealing method to adjust the microscopic structure of poly-HP films. As shown in Fig. 11d(i), vapor annealing treatment can foster crystal formation with needle-like features. Further, by controlling the experimental conditions, a significant morphological change can be induced, where the preferential orientation can be modulated and grain size can be drastically increased with healing of GBs into intermediate phases upon the solvent molecules. As a result, they demonstrated high-performance ambipolar perovskite FETs that exhibited mobilities greater than 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature. Representative (ID–VGS) characteristics for both hole and electron transports in the saturation regime (drain–source voltage, VDS = ±40 V) are shown in Fig. 11d(iii) and (iv), respectively.170
 Fig. 11  Poly-HP FETs. (a) MAPbI3 poly-HP film (i) and corresponding FET device configuration (ii). Transfer characteristics obtained at 78 K (iii). Temperature dependence of the field-effect electron and hole mobilities (iv).164 Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature. (b) Transfer curves of MAPbI3 poly-HP FETs measured at various temperatures between 150 and 250 K. The device has a length and width of 200 and 2600 μm, respectively, and the geometric capacitance of the dielectric was 23 nF cm−2. Inset: schematic representation of the FET. Si labels the silicon gate electrode; SiO2, 150 nm silicon oxide dielectric; (MA)PbI3, the semiconductor layer; and Al, the aluminum source and drain electrodes (i). Approximate field-effect mobility evaluated using the gradual-channel approximation as a function of measurement temperature (ii). Schematic illustration of the proposed polarization mechanism of mobile ionic species in MAPbI3 poly-HP under the influence of externally applied gate field (iii).165 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of an optimized MAPbI3 mono-HP film fabricated from 0.75 M precursor solutions (i). Schematic of the top-gate bottom-contact poly-HP FETs summarizing the different sources of disorder mechanisms prevalent in a perovskite (left: vibrations of inorganic cage; middle: defect migration; right: MA+ polarization disorder) (ii). Transfer characteristics at 100 K for different source–drain contact modifications (iii) and 300 K for PEIE-treated Au contacts (iv).163 © 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Optical microscopic image of the MAPbI3−xClx poly-HP film in the channel region after 20 min of solvent exposure; note the formation of large needle-shaped crystals (i). Poly-HP FET geometry (ii). Representative plot of ID–VGS characteristics (VDS = ±40 V) for holes (iii) and electrons (iv), respectively. The values of channel lengths and widths are shown in the inset.170 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Overall, any strategy that can minimize charged point defects located at the GBs, decrease polarization fluctuations of the ions with larger grains and optimize contact to induce highly crystalline order, as well as isolate the source–drain electrode from the perovskite, can be effective in fabricating efficient FET devices. Certainly, mono-HPs with extremely low defect density, high mobility, independence from GBs, and higher structural order form a better platform. However, corresponding investigations based on mono-HP FET devices have been rarely reported. Until recently, Li et al.166 reported a FET based on MAPbI3 mono-HP microplates. They grew mono-HP microplates adopting a method of patterned growth of regular arrays of perovskite microplate crystals.171 Meanwhile, they also incorporated the mono- and bilayer graphene stripes as source–drain contact electrodes for mono-HP FETs, for not only tuning the barrier height at the interface of graphene/mono-HPs but also reducing the contact profile to enable the fabrication of a smooth device capable of being fully encapsulated by a boron nitride (BN) layer for higher device stability (Fig. 12a(i)). By examining the field effect, they found that the temperature could modulate the doping type of MAPbI3 mono-HPs. At lower temperatures, the material exhibited p-type behavior, which gradually diminished when the temperature increased and finally vanished at around 180 K (Fig. 12a(iii)). At lower temperatures (2 K), the p-type behavior was retained and the source–drain current continuously increased with decreasing temperatures, as shown in Fig. 12a(iv)).166 It should be noted that as the device is built upon mono-HP crystals, the electron mobility determined from such FET devices displays a large value of 4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K, which is dramatically larger than those in poly-HP FET devices. Yu et al.71 demonstrated high-performance FET devices based on MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) mono-HPs with both BGTC and BGBC device configurations (Fig. 12b). The on/off current ratio ranging from 103 to 105 could be readily achieved at room temperature. These devices showed operating voltages lower than 5 V; in fact, the BCBG design exhibited the lowest voltages <2 V. The maximum room-temperature mobilities of 2.6–4.7 and 0.26–2.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 could be obtained for electron and holes, respectively. Interestingly, as the MAPbCl3 has a wide bandgap, the device is almost transparent in the visible range, making it a promising candidate for applications in transparent and imperceptible electronics.71 On the other hand, the form of mono-HP also enables people to understand its anisotropy in charge transport. For example, Lv et al.172 constructed a MAPbI3 mono-HP FET device (Fig. 12c(i)). They built a vertical-structured FET device using MAPbI3 mono-HP with specific crystal directions (i.e., [100], [112], and [001]) parallel to the out-of-plane direction of the device and investigated its ambipolar field-effect characteristics in the dark along these directions. As compared to the [100] and [112] orientations, charge carriers have lower mobility along the [001] direction.172 Certain materials exhibit birefringence, which differentiates the moving speed of photons along the different directions in crystals. This birefringence can be used for time-resolved double-slit experiments with entangled photons.173 Analogously, the electrical anisotropy in mono-HPs might be a good platform for similar time-resolved double-slit experiments involving electrons.
 Fig. 12  Mono-HP FETs. (a) Schematic of the back-gate, back-contact MAPbI3 mono-HP FET built on a 300 nm SiO2/Si substrate with monolayer graphene as the contact, covered by a BN layer (i). The optical image of the BN-covered device with graphene (red dashed line), perovskite (black dashed line), and BN (dark yellow dashed line) highlighted by different color lines. The mono-HP thickness is ∼150 nm (ii). The temperature-dependent transfer characteristics in the low-temperature (iii) and ultralow-temperature (iv) ranges.166 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Schematic representation of a bottom-gate, bottom-contact FET device (i). The mono-HP is MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I). A representative transfer characteristic of MAPbCl3 mono-HP FET device (ii) using forward/reverse gate voltage sweeps from −10 to 10 V at the rate of 0.05 V s−1, where VDS = −2 V. Inset: the linear regime of the respective devices. Field-effect hole mobility distribution for 20 devices fabricated and tested for each HP (iii).71 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Sketch of a vertical-structured mono-HP FET of MAPbI3 (i). Views of the crystal structure along the [100], [112], and [001] orientations and the corresponding FET mobilities for each direction (ii).172 © Copyright 2019 IEEE. 
5.2 CsPbX3 mono-HP-based FETs
Earlier, we discussed ion migration issues in most MAPbI3-based HP FETs. However, besides the low activation energy of MA+ from the lattice, an organic cation is also sensitive to moisture and heat. Comparatively, replacing the A-site organic cation with inorganic alkalis can provide stronger moisture and thermal stabilities. Considering the ion size as well as tolerance factor174 that describes the geometric stability of the crystal lattice, CsPbX3 represents the principle inorganic perovskite material for optoelectronic applications.175–177 Meanwhile, several other HPs, e.g., Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)1−xPb(Br0.17I0.83)3,160 using mixed components have also been reported. For example, Huo et al.178 reported CsPbBr3 mono-HP-based FETs (Fig. 13a(i) and (ii)). A CsPbBr3 mono-HP microplatelet was obtained by VDW epitaxy, and it was transferred to the FET substrate using the pick-up method (with no liquid involved); hence, there was no surface damage to the platelets. Field-effect hole mobility (μh) of 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on–off ratio of 6700 at room temperature, as well as μh of 1.04 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on–off ratio >104 at 237 K, could be obtained (Fig. 13a(iv)). The mobility in CsPbBr3 mono-HP FETs is still determined by the interaction between the charge carriers, ions, and phonons at the semiconductor–dielectric interface. However, ion migration plays an important role in the electrical transport process at relatively higher temperatures (above ∼237 K); further, the interaction between charge carriers and phonon scatterings dominates at lower temperatures (below ∼237 K). The CsPbBr3 mono-HP devices also displayed one-month ambient stability, owing to the material's intrinsic robust stability in addition to the potential functionality of the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) film coated outside the perovskite.178 In addition, they further constructed a heterojunction of mono-HP and traditional 2D materials such as graphene, MoS2 (Fig. 13b(i)), and hexagonal BN (h-BN).179 Such a CsPbBr3 mono-HP/2D material (graphene, MoS2, and h-BN) heterostructures were achieved by VDW epitaxy.178 As MoS2 exhibits the best energy level alignment with CsPbBr3 mono-HPs, CsPbBr3/MoS2 heterojunction FET (Fig. 13b(ii)) exhibits the best device performance in this study. Using a channel length of 100 μm, the FET exhibits hole mobility of 0.08 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the dark and that of 0.28 cm2 V−1 s−1 under 442 nm laser illumination at an intensity of 0.2 mW cm−2 driven by a low voltage of 0.5 V at room temperature in ambient air. Such a VDW heterojunction of perovskite/2D material combines the excellent properties of both perovskite and 2D materials and reduces the resistance loss into heat because of a minimized Schottky barrier, which may help to minimize the device size and corresponding power dissipation.179 In addition, CsPbX3-based quantum dot (QD) materials that are nanometer sized or smaller and coated with organic ligands have also been employed in the FET, particularly for LED applications. The confinement energy in smaller QDs due to the split in the energy levels increases the total emission energy and emissions at various wavelengths. Further, the organic ligands are supposed to protect the QDs against moisture. Such HP-QD light-emitting FETs have been reported in the field of quantum LEDs (QLEDs), QD displays, etc.180–182 Beyond these 0D (QD) and 2D (microplate) mono-HPs, one-dimensional (1D), i.e., nanowire (NW) HP, is another type of material for FET applications. In particular, 1D HPs have been demonstrated to exhibit many interesting properties, attracting various potential applications, such as optical communication, computing, imaging, Fabry–Perot cavity, and gain medium for optical amplification.183–186 Recently, Meng et al.187 developed a CsPbX3 1D mono-HP FET device. They employed the catalytic vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth method for growing CsPbX3 1D NWs. Fig. 13c(i) shows the schematic illustration of the VLS growth process of CsPbX3 NW (X = Cl, Br, or I) using Sn catalysts. The SEM image of vertical CsPbBr3 NWs grown on SiO2/Si substrates and tilted SEM images of different individual CsPbBr3 NWs grown with Sn catalytic seeds are shown in Fig. 13c(ii). A FET device is constructed by bridging the CsPbBr3 NW between two electrodes (Fig. 13c(iii)). The corresponding transfer characteristics using the logarithm of the y-coordinate is shown in Fig. 13c(iv)). Upon illumination in the visible regime, CsPbX3 1D mono-HP opto-FET devices exhibit responsivity exceeding 4489 A W−1 and detectivity over 7.9 × 1012 Jones. A dark FET exhibits superior field-effect mobility of 3.05 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature. The VLS-grown perovskite NWs seem to be versatile platforms for exploring the fundamentals and potential applications on the basis of 1D mono-HPs.187
 Fig. 13  CsPbX3 mono-HP FETs. (a) FET based on VDW-grown and dry-transferred CsPbX3 mono-HP ultrathin platelets. Photoluminescence image of a CsPbBr3 mono-HP ultrathin platelet; inset: AFM image showing the cross-section profile (i). Output characteristic of CsPbBr3 mono-HP FETs at room temperature; inset: an optical image of the FET device (ii). Temperature dependence of FET mobility (iii).178 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) FET based on CsPbBr3/2D crystal VDW heterojunctions. Optical images of typical CsPbBr3 thin platelets on MoS2 (i). Schematic illustration of a CsPbBr3 mono-HP/MoS2 heterojunction FET (ii). Isd–Vsd curves of the heterojunction in darkness; inset: an optical image of the corresponding device (iii).179 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) 1D NW CsPbX3 mono-HP FET. Schematic diagram showing the VLS growth process of CsPbX3 NWs (X = Cl, Br, or I) using Sn catalysts (i). SEM and tilted SEM image of CsPbBr3 NWs (ii). SEM image of the as-fabricated NW FET (iii). Transfer characteristics of the typical single VLS-grown CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NW FETs using the logarithm of the y-coordinate (iv).187 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Quasi-2D mono-HP-based FETs
Compositionally, the prototype HP has the chemical formula ABX3, where A denotes small organic cations and/or alkali metal cations (such as Cs+), B denotes bivalent metals (such as Pb2+ and Sn2+), and X is a halogen. The size of the ions at each crystallographic site needs to accommodate the tolerance factor,174, where rA, rB, and rC denote the radii of ions at the A-, B-, and X-sites, respectively. As t gets close to 1, the crystal maintains a 3D structure; however, as rA increases, t becomes larger than 1 and the crystal will have lower structural dimensionality, such as that in layered two-dimensional (2D) HPs. The 2D HP has the generic formula (RNH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1BnX3n+1, where R is an alkyl or aromatic moiety, B is a metal cation, and X is a halide.6 An organic layer consists of a large organic moiety, namely, RNH3+, which is typically insulating and plays the role of a barrier layer, while the inorganic layer, namely, [(CH3NH3)n−1BnX3n+1]2−, is semiconducting in nature. As the thickness of each layer is scaled down to the angstrom and nanometer levels, quantum effects take place in these 2D HPs. Hence, the 2D HP structure is also termed as a MQW structure, as shown in Fig. 14a. The inorganic layer comprises the quantum well, which confines the charge carriers in the inorganic plane by quantum and dielectric confinement.188 Hence, typically, 2D HP is not a good material for use in solar cells, as the photogenerated electron–hole pair is strongly connected with a large exciton binding energy (up of 0.5 eV),189 which is dramatically higher than the thermal energy at room temperature (0.025 eV). Moreover, a 2D HP has an anisotropic charge transport property. In the out-of-plane direction, the organic insulating layer can block the charge transport, and the quantum tunneling probability is fairly low. In the in-plane direction, the charges are easier to move within each inorganic plane such that the magnitude of the in-plane electrical conductivity is higher than that of the out-of-plane one.6 For example, for BA2PbI4 2D HPs, the in-plane hole mobility is 8.2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is over one order of magnitude higher than the out-of-plane mobility (4.7× 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1).6 Hence, taking advantages of such an anisotropic transport property, 2D mono-HP FET devices can be of considerable interest.
 Fig. 14  2D mono-HP-based FETs. (a) A general molecular structure of a 2D mono-HP material, showing the MQW structure with an energy diagram revealing the organic layer as the quantum barrier and inorganic layer as the quantum well layer. (b) and (c) (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP and FET. (b) Low-magnification TEM image of a (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP. (c) From left to right: optical images of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP grown on 300 nm SiO2/silicon substrate before and after the dry transfer of the graphene film. Within the white dotted line, the 2D crystals are covered by a graphene film, whereas the outside area remains uncovered. Optical images of graphene-protected (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP before cutting out a channel and after installing graphene electrodes.199 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of the exfoliated (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 2D mono-HP with Ag contacts, with the schematic illustration of the 2D mono-HP of different quantum well layer thicknesses, i.e., n = 1, 2, and 3.200 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) Optical image of a FET device based on (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3) 2D mono-HP plates with a thickness of around 20 nm.96 Iop Publishing, Ltd. (f) Optical image of a FET device based on (PEA)2CsSn2I7 2D mono-HP.201 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) Optical image of a FET device based on (PEA)2PbI4 2D mono-HP.204 © 2018 Elsevier Inc. 
2D HP materials have been employed into FET applications since early times. For example, by replacing the A-site cation with large aromatic and aliphatic cations, 2D HPs, such as phenylethyl ammonium tin iodides ((PEA)2SnI4) or ((C6H5C2H4NH3)2SnI4)190,191 and alkyl ammonium tin iodides ((CnH2n+1NH3)2SnI4 (n = 4–12)),192 have been introduced into FETs. Notably, (PEA)2SnI4 (ref. 193) was the first HP material to be utilized in a FET device, which was initially intended for channel materials. The reported field-effect mobility of (CnH2n+1NH3)2SnI4 (n = 4–12) is very low (∼10−3 to 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1). Recently, Matsushima et al.194 demonstrated a record μh value of up to 15 cm2 V−1 s−1 for (PEA)2SnI4 at room temperature by resolving the aforementioned issues of low perovskite quality, high carrier trap density, and inefficient carrier injection, via the surface treatment of the substrate with a self-assembled monolayer in combination with the adoption of a top-contact/top-gate (TC/TG) structure with hole-injection layers. Further, field-effect electron mobility (μe) of 2.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 was reported for this 2D (PEA)2SnI4 poly-HP thin film.195 It should be noted that MASnI3 mono-HP has been observed to have ultrahigh mobility of 2320 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is significantly higher than its poly-HP thin-film counterparts.196 Hence, (PEA)2SnI4 mono-HP is also expected to have extra room for higher mobilities.194 However, most Sn-2D HP FETs are built upon poly-HP thin films using the spin-casting method for sample preparation, and their monocrystalline devices are rarely reported due to the instability of Sn-2D HP materials (Sn2+ in Sn-2D HP can be easily oxidized into Sn4+). Comparatively, Pb-2D HP materials tend to have higher ambient stability.197 So far, most studies involving Pb-2D HP materials have concentrated on poly-HP thin films, while there are limited reports focusing on ultrathin 2D mono-HP-based FETs.166,171,198 Only a few photoresponse FETs based on 2D mono-HPs have been reported. For example, Tan et al.199 demonstrated the first 2D mono-HP-based photodetectors with a FET structure, assisted with the protection and electric contact of monolayer graphene. Fig. 14b shows the low-magnification TEM image of a thin (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 crystal at the micrometer scale. These devices show promising optoelectronic properties, such as high current on–off ratio up to 103 and low dark current of ∼10−10 A, yielding high photodetection efficiency. In particular, they used a sub-millimeter-sized single-crystal graphene film as the medium to convey the as-synthesized 2D perovskite crystals onto the channel between the two electrodes of the FET device (Fig. 14c). Another well studied material, (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1, known as a Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) HP, has also been investigated for use in FETs. Li et al.200 demonstrated a series of 2D mono-HP FETs based on high-quality exfoliated 2D (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 crystals with varying n values (Fig. 14d) under different temperatures. They found that unipolar n-type transport dominated the electrical properties of all these (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 2D RP mono-HPs. The transport behavior exhibits strong dependence on the n value; further, the mobility substantially increases as n increases. The corrected FET mobility values for n = 1, 2, and 3 are 2 × 10−3, 8.3 × 10−2, and 1.25 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K, respectively. In addition, by correlating the temperature-dependent electrical transport and optical measurements, it is found that the origin of carrier mobility dependence on the phase transition is different between 2D and 3D mono-HPs.200 Li et al.96 also constructed their FET on the basis of the same (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 2D RP mono-HPs. Fig. 14e shows the optical image of a FET device based on (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3) 2D mono-HP plates. In particular, they also controlled the phase purity by the mechanical exfoliation method. Using this exfoliation method, 2D mono-HP microplates with a thickness of around 20 nm could be obtained, which yields several repeating unit layers in such mono-HPs. By integration with other 2D layered materials (such as BN) and getting transferred to prefabricated electrodes, photoresponsive FET devices can be obtained.96 In addition, FETs using 2D mono-HP materials with different large organic cations at the A-site have also been investigated. For example, Shen et al.201 reported a new type of 2D lead-free mono-HP, namely, (C6H5C2H4NH3)2CsSn2I7, with millimeter size and high field-effect hole mobility. They used X-ray diffraction and low-temperature photoluminescence studies to verify the crystalline quality and phase purity, and energy-dispersive spectrometry measurements were used to confirm the presence of elemental Cs but the absence of Sn4+ (usually, Sn2+ can be easily oxidized into Sn4+; therefore, the absence of Sn4+ indicates high material purity). Using the as-synthesized 2D mono-HP, high electrical conductivity and high hole mobility (up to 34 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K) could be achieved. In terms of photoresponse, the corresponding FET device (Fig. 14f) also exhibits good performance, owing to the excellent optical properties and high electrical conductivity of 2D mono-HPs. Further, it should be noted that the reported (C6H5C2H4NH3)2CsSn2I7 mono-HP is free of elemental lead, suggesting a less-risk material for optoelectronic applications.201 So far, 2D mono-HP FETs have shown promising charge carrier mobility values; further, due to the incorporation of large hydrophobic organic cations, 2D mono-HPs are expected to have greater stability.202,203 Recently, Zhao et al.204 revealed the spontaneous iodide loss process in 2D mono-HPs, which acts as an important degradation pathway of the crystal, inducing n-type doping of the perovskite semiconductor by generating positively charged iodide vacancies. Moreover, they demonstrated that covering 2D mono-HPs with graphene could sufficiently suppress this iodide loss, significantly improving the perovskite stability. Fig. 14g shows the photo-FET with a graphene/2D mono-HP/graphene structure, which shows no degradation for 75 days. This, together with the above studies from different groups, implies that the design using 2D mono-HPs onto other conventional 2D materials (such as graphene and BN) can be a promising sensitive diagnostic tool for fabricating stable and efficient FET devices.
5.4 Future of mono-HP FETs
The outstanding electronic structure of HP materials allows them to possess excellent electronic properties, such as large intrinsic charge carrier mobilities and ambipolar conductivity. These characteristics have imparted success in applications such as solar cells, with some figure-of-merit values approaching or even surpassing those of Si- or organic-semiconductor-based counterparts. Mono-HPs can be designed to exhibit features such as ultralow trap density, larger charge carrier diffusion length, longer carrier lifetimes, higher stability, etc. Currently, state-of-the-art FET devices based on HP materials still have issues such as intrinsic ion migration and hence induced ion-screening effects. Mono-HPs with reduced GBs and lower concentration of polar mobile ions, as well as 2D mono-HPs with minimized ion migration probability, can provide good platforms for mitigating such screening effects. The strong optical response of mono-HP materials coupled with novel FET designs can provide newer opportunities for launching a new wave of research efforts in terms of novel integrated on-chip light sources, wave guides, phototransistors, and electrically pumped semiconductor lasers. The ion-based optoelectronic behavior can also trigger applications such as memristors,97,205 artificial synaptic connections,206,207etc. Rapid progress is being made in developing growth techniques for mono-HPs, scalable processing of mono-HPs, and improving FET performance. Therefore, it is expected that many of the abovementioned materials and device issues will be resolved in the near future. Further, many new applications will be developed in related fields such as microprocessors, chip industry, complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) processing, etc.
6. Outlook
Single crystals are a highly appealing platform for investigating the fundamental, intrinsic, and natural properties of a material. Mono-HPs offer the potential to significantly enhance our understanding of the fundamental nature of materials by removing factors such as GBs, defects, and disordered morphologies. Mono-HPs provide a pathway toward achieving ultrahigh device performance due to the reduced energy losses through these imperfections. The compositional tunability of HP materials also enables the adjustment of multiple properties to satisfy specific application-platform-related requirements. Building upon the current understanding of HP materials, including an in-depth understanding of the basic materials' nature, various applications can be conceived that could not be considered earlier. The availability of single-crystal data can drive the development of theory and models in elucidating the underlying mechanisms controlling the physical response of such materials. This, in turn, can drive the design and development of synthesis techniques for mono-HP materials in order to achieve tailored responses for not only mono-HP PVs and FETs but also various other applications.
State-of-the-art poly-HP PVs have set the new PCE record (>25%). A straightforward projection suggests that the minimized Shockley–Read–Hall loss in mono-HP PVs could lead to superior efficiency than those obtainable using current poly-HP PVs, as well as a higher theoretically achievable PCE maximum value (30.5%). This implies that mono-HP PVs have the potential to outperform commercial Si PVs. Newly discovered nontrivial physics in mono-HPs, such as ferroelectric electron–hole channels, conductive edge states, photon recycling, and slower hot-carrier cooling phenomena, are shedding new light on the promise of PCE breaking through the Shockley–Queisser limit. The ongoing research on manufacturing of mono-HP wafers/thin films covering a variety of growth methods, such as floating, space-limited growth, VPE, and bulk-crystal slicing, are good examples of the possibility of fabricating materials with the desired quality and quantity to further explore these phenomena. In order to boost the PCE values of mono-HP PVs, several problems need to be resolved: (i) purity. Even though the HP material is expected to be defect-tolerant, a material with higher crystal phase purity can yield superior electrical properties. For example, efficient Si PVs require higher purity of Si (99.9999 wt%) to achieve reliable device efficiency. Taking into consideration the complex chemical-composition- and solution-based routes for the synthesis of HP materials, applying traditional purification processes are challenging, such as vaporization followed by chemical decomposition, to fabricate HP materials. The surface trap, morphological, and/or topographical control can present issues for mono-HP devices. (ii) Mechanics. HP materials are mechanically “soft” and “brittle”. Typical processing techniques used for Si-based devices can damage HP materials. Therefore, specialized processes need to be developed for handling such HP materials. (iii) Stability. HP materials are very sensitive to the ambience, where moisture, heat, and radiation can cause damage. Therefore, dry rooms are required for quality control on the fabrication process of HP materials, as well as multifunctional coatings that can simultaneously improve the hydrophobicity and reduce surface traps. (iv) Toxicity. Mono-HP PVs consist of heavy metals that exhibit certain health concerns. Proper encapsulation can be fairly helpful at the device level, but contaminations occurring during material manufacturing and recycling need to be addressed. Material design based on ion exchange that provides a substitute for elemental lead with suitable nontoxic replacements can provide transformative progress. Reducing the thickness of mono-HPs and properly designing the device structure with efficient electron–hole extraction/blocking layers are important at the current stage of R&D involving mono-HP PVs.
Transistors and conductive lines are routinely fabricated upon silicon wafers to design electronic chips that drive our smartphones, laptops, and all other electronic gadgets. The manufacturing of typical chips and functional diodes is based on high-purity Si wafers that are processed using hi-tech, complex, and costly manufacturing processes. Industries have long sought cost-effective and alternative substrates on which the next generation of electronics can be built. Alternatives such as Si thin films and other semiconducting materials have been attempted for manufacturing transistors and similar devices. However, the rather complicated manufacturing techniques are challenging, particularly that involving high vacuum conditions and high purity processes. In contrast, mono-HP materials processed using solution-based approaches are much simpler platforms. The success of mono-HPs in the field of solar cells shows promise in providing an alternative to Si in certain select applications. The design of HP PVs is maturing, and significant progress is being made in developing HP-based FETs. In FET devices, charge carriers need to travel at the micrometer scale; therefore, the transport properties of the channel material play a critical role. Considering the trap density, GBs, charge mobility, and diffusion length, mono-HP materials can be a promising solution. Current research on mono-HP FETs is at the beginning stage. The proof-of-concept mono-HP FET devices reported recently still require high voltage to drive the gate, which are much higher than those for practical FETs. Therefore, more research is needed in this area to advance the implementation.
In conclusion, mono-HP wafers/thin-film materials are potentially promising platforms for fabricating ultrahigh-performance PVs and FETs. However, continued research is needed to resolve the pending issues starting from the crystal growth process to device construction. There is great momentum in the community to continue advancing mono-HP PVs and FETs, and it has become imperative for research agencies and industry to preserve this excitement.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. H. and D. Y. acknowledge the support from AFOSR Biophysics and Natural Materials programs through award number FA9550-18-1-0233. K. W. and S. P. acknowledge the support from Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-17-1-0341. K. W. also acknowledges the financial support from IEE Stewardship Seed Grant Program. C. W. acknowledges the financial support from the Office of Naval Research (I. Perez) through grant number N000141613043.
References

          A. Leblebici, P. Mayor, M. Rajman and G. De Micheli, in Nano-Tera.ch, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2019, pp. 109–137 Search PubMed .
D. Ginley, M. A. Green and R. Collins, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 355–364 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Celler and S. Cristoloveanu, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 4955–4978 CrossRef CAS .

          National Research Council, Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, Board on Physics, Astronomy and Physics Survey Overview Committee, Physics in a New Era: An Overview, National Academies Press, Washington, DC,  2001 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 27, 565–575 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, D. Yang, C. Wu, J. Shapter and S. Priya, Joule, 2019, 3, 311–316 CrossRef .
X. Gong, Z. Huang, R. Sabatini, C.-S. Tan, G. Bappi, G. Walters, A. Proppe, M. I. Saidaminov, O. Voznyy, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1591 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Landi, H. C. Neitzert, C. Barone, C. Mauro, F. Lang, S. Albrecht, B. Rech and S. Pagano, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700183 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, L. J. Schwan, M. Ottosson, A. Hagfeldt and T. Edvinsson, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 10678–10685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
M. V. Khenkin, K. M. Anoop, I. Visoly-Fisher, Y. Galagan, F. Di Giacomo, B. R. Patil, G. Sherafatipour, V. Turkovic, H.-G. Rubahn, M. Madsen, T. Merckx, G. Uytterhoeven, J. P. A. Bastos, T. Aernouts, F. Brunetti, M. Lira-Cantu and E. A. Katz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 739–743 RSC .
S. Krishnan, S. V. Garimella, G. M. Chrysler and R. V. Mahajan, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag., 2007, 30, 462–474 Search PubMed .
M. M. Waldrop, Nature, 2016, 530, 144–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. J. H. M. Van Sark, Thin Films Nanostruct., 2002, 30, 1–215 CAS .

          S. A. Kalogirou, McEvoy's Handbook of Photovoltaics, 3rd edn, Elsevier,  2018 Search PubMed .

          A. Reinders, P. Verlinden, W. van Sark and A. Freundlich, Photovoltaic Solar Energy: From Fundamentals to Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2017 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Arredondo, F. Mesa, E. Romero and G. Gordillo, Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, WCPEC-3 Organizing Committee,  2011 Search PubMed .

          L. L. Kerr, S. S. Li, T. J. Anderson, O. D. Crisalle, S. Johnston, J. Abushama and R. Noufi, DLTS Characterization of CIGS Cells, National Renewable Energy Lab, Golden, CO. (United States),  2003 Search PubMed .
C. Krellner, S. Haas, C. Goldmann, K. P. Pernstich, D. J. Gundlach and B. Batlogg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 245115 CrossRef .
Y. S. Yang, S. H. Kim, J.-I. Lee, H. Y. Chu, L.-M. Do, H. Lee, J. Oh, T. Zyung, M. K. Ryu and M. S. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1595–1597 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, M. Li, P. Siffalovic, G. Cao and J. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 518–549 RSC .
G. Beaucarne, P. Choulat, B. T. Chan, H. Dekkers, J. John and J. Poortmans, Photovoltaics Int., 2008, 1, 66–71 RSC .
J. Sakabe, N. Ohta, T. Ohnishi, K. Mitsuishi and K. Takada, Commun. Chem., 2018, 1, 24 CrossRef .
L. Ion, I. Enculescu, S. Iftimie, V. Ghenescu, C. Tazlaoanu, C. Besleaga, T. L. Mitran, V. A. Antohe, M. M. Gugiu and S. Antohe, Chalcogenide Lett., 2010, 7, 521–530 CAS .

          M. Powalla, ZSW: Thin-film solar cells and modules, https://www.zsw-bw.de/en/research/photovoltaics/topics/thin-film-solar-cells-and-modules.html#c460, accessed 19 May 2019 Search PubMed.
X. Ye, Y. Liu, Q. Han, C. Ge, S. Cui, L. Zhang, X. Zheng, G. Liu, J. Liu, D. Liu and X. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 420 Search PubMed .
T. Tippo, C. Thanachayanont, H. Nakajima, P. Songsiriritthigul, M. Hietschold and A. Thanachayanont, Adv. Mater. Res., 2013, 802, 27–31 Search PubMed .
D. Yang, R. Yang, K. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhu, J. Feng, X. Ren, G. Fang, S. Priya and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3239 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Wells, Am. J. Sci., 1893, 45, 121 CrossRef .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch. B, 1978, 33, 1443–1445 Search PubMed .
C. R. Kagan, D. B. Mitzi, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1999, 286, 945–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chondroudis and D. B. M. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3028–3030 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          NREL, Research Cell Record Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/pv-efficiency-chart.20190103.pdf, accessed 25 April 2019 Search PubMed.
K. Wang, D. Yang, C. Wu, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 100580 CrossRef .
Y. Takahashi, R. Obara, Z.-Z. Lin, Y. Takahashi, T. Naito, T. Inabe, S. Ishibashi and K. Terakura, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5563 RSC .
J. Chen, S. Zhou, S. Jin, H. Li and T. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11–27 RSC .
L. Ma, F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, B. T. Phelan, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14750–14755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar and L. Jan Anton Koster, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 331–338 RSC .
H. Röhm, T. Leonhard, M. J. Hoffmann and A. Colsmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 950–955 RSC .
K. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Jiang, D. Yang, K. Wang and S. Priya, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau3241 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, J. Fu, Q. Xu and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1802486 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi-Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vrućinić, M. Alsari, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Science, 2016, 351, 1430–1433 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-S. Rao, W.-G. Li, B.-X. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602639 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wei, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, H. Wei, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng, T. Li, A. Gruverman, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 315–321 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Zhang, PhD thesis, Iowa State University,  2017, https://lib.dr.iastate.edu/etd/16301 .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. Cubillas and M. W. Anderson, Zeolites and Catalysis, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2010 Search PubMed .

          F. P. Miller, A. F. Vandome and M. John, Czochralski Process, VDM Publishing,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Wu, D. Yang, Y. Jiang and S. Priya, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4919–4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Zhumekenov, V. M. Burlakov, M. I. Saidaminov, A. Alofi, M. A. Haque, B. Turedi, B. Davaasuren, I. Dursun, N. Cho, A. M. El-Zohry, M. De Bastiani, A. Giugni, B. Torre, E. Di Fabrizio, O. F. Mohammed, A. Rothenberger, T. Wu, A. Goriely and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1782–1788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Ye, Y. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. Yuan, H. Wu, G. Zhao, Z. Yang, J. Tang, Z. Xu and S. (Frank) Liu, Matter, 2019, 1, 465–480 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, Y. Deng and J. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1807707 CrossRef .
F. Wang, J.-H. Seo, G. Luo, M. B. Starr, Z. Li, D. Geng, X. Yin, S. Wang, D. G. Fraser, D. Morgan, Z. Ma and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6373–6378 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, G. Maculan and O. M. Bakr, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17658–17661 RSC .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, J. A. Peters, Z. Liu, M. Sebastian, J. Im, T. C. Chasapis, A. C. Wibowo, D. Y. Chung, A. J. Freeman, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2722–2727 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kobayashi, K. Omata, S. Sugimoto, Y. Tamagawa, T. Kuroiwa, H. Asada, H. Takeuchi and S. Kondo, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2008, 592, 369–373 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Chen, Q.-Q. Ge, Y. Shi, J. Liu, D.-J. Xue, J.-Y. Ma, J. Ding, H.-J. Yan, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16196–16199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. Ren, L. Pang and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9204–9209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Rao, W.-G. Li, B.-X. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602639 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-S. Rao, B.-X. Chen, X.-D. Wang, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5163–5166 RSC .
Z. Chen, Q. Dong, Y. Liu, C. Bao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, S. Tang, Q. Wang, X. Xiao, Y. Bai, Y. Deng and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1890 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, Y. Deng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Chen, S. Yang, J. Khurgin, N. X. Fang, X. Zhang and R. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704333 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, G. Maculan and O. M. Bakr, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17658–17661 RSC .
W. Yu, F. Li, L. Yu, M. R. Niazi, Y. Zou, D. Corzo, A. Basu, C. Ma, S. Dey, M. L. Tietze, U. Buttner, X. Wang, Z. Wang, M. N. Hedhili, C. Guo, T. Wu and A. Amassian, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5354 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-L. Yue, H.-H. Sung and F.-C. Chen, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700655 CrossRef .
V.-C. Nguyen, H. Katsuki, F. Sasaki and H. Yanagi, J. Cryst. Growth, 2017, 468, 796–799 CrossRef CAS .
V.-C. Nguyen, H. Katsuki, F. Sasaki and H. Yanagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 261105 CrossRef .
V.-C. Nguyen, H. Katsuki, F. Sasaki and H. Yanagi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57, 04FL10 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, H. Ye, J. Feng, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, R. Munir, J. Liu, P. Zuo, Q. Li, M. Hu, L. Meng, K. Wang, D.-M. Smilgies, G. Zhao, H. Xu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, J. Li, K. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5302 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lee, J. Baek, K. S. Park, Y.-E. Lee, N. K. Shrestha and M. M. Sung, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Rao, W.-G. Li, B.-X. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602639 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Denbaars, Proc. IEEE, 1997, 85, 1740–1749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, G. Xin, J. Lian and J. Shi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 4741–4749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Alaskar, S. Arafin, D. Wickramaratne, M. A. Zurbuchen, L. He, J. McKay, Q. Lin, M. S. Goorsky, R. K. Lake and K. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6629–6638 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Sun, Z. Chen, Y.-Y. Sun, S. Zhang, T.-M. Lu, E. Wertz and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702643 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, D. J. Morrow, Y. Fu, W. Zheng, Y. Zhao, L. Dang, M. J. Stolt, D. D. Kohler, X. Wang, K. J. Czech, M. P. Hautzinger, S. Shen, L. Guo, A. Pan, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13525–13532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
What is silicon wafer?|SUMCO CORPORATION, https://www.sumcosi.com/english/ir/glance/wafer.html, accessed 24 May 2019.
Y. Liu, X. Ren, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. Yang, F. Yu, J. Sun, C. Zhao, Z. Yao, B. Wang, Q. Wei, F. Xiao, H. Fan, H. Deng, L. Deng and S. F. Liu, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 1367–1376 CrossRef CAS .
A. Létoublon, S. Paofai, B. Rufflé, P. Bourges, B. Hehlen, T. Michel, C. Ecolivet, O. Durand, S. Cordier, C. Katan and J. Even, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3776–3784 CrossRef PubMed .

Properties: A Background to Silicon and its Applications, https://www.azom.com/properties.aspx?ArticleID=599, accessed 24 May 2019 Search PubMed.
Q. Lv, Z. Lian, W. He, J.-L. Sun, Q. Li and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4464–4470 RSC .
C.-C. Lin, Y.-J. Chuang, W.-H. Sun, C. Cheng, Y.-T. Chen, Z.-L. Chen, C.-H. Chien and F.-H. Ko, Microelectron. Eng., 2015, 145, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, P. Fu, R. Li, M. Li, Y. Luo and D. Song, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 366, 494–498 CrossRef CAS .

          H. I. Karunadasa, I. Smith and M. D. McGehee, U.S. Pat. 9,564,593,  2017 .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, 9439 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Peng, J. Yin, K.-T. Ho, O. Ouellette, M. De Bastiani, B. Murali, O. El Tall, C. Shen, X. Miao, J. Pan, E. Alarousu, J.-H. He, B. S. Ooi, O. F. Mohammed, E. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4759–4767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, A. Eiden, G. Vijaya Prakash and J. J. Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 171111 CrossRef .
J. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, G. Lin, X. Xiong, W. Zhou, H. Luo and D. Li, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 021001 CrossRef .
H. Tian, L. Zhao, X. Wang, Y.-W. Yeh, N. Yao, B. P. Rand and T.-L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12247–12256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan, F. Yu, X. Zhang, C. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. U. Rothmann, W. Li, Y. Zhu, U. Bach, L. Spiccia, J. Etheridge and Y.-B. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Garten, D. T. Moore, S. U. Nanayakkara, S. Dwaraknath, P. Schulz, J. Wands, A. Rockett, B. Newell, K. A. Persson, S. Trolier-McKinstry and D. S. Ginley, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 9311 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, H. Han, J. H. Lee, J. W. Choi, J. C. Grossman, H. M. Jang and D. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6566–6571 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 134–135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, L. Q. Phuong, N. Maruyama, H. Nishimura, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10456–10459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Siu, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, D. Yang, X. Xu, S. Pan and S. F. Yu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 225101 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, J. Fan, X. Zhang, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Mai, T. Xu, J. Wang and H. J. Snaith, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, T. Aharen and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 24601 CrossRef CAS .
V. Naumann, C. Hagendorf, S. Grosser, M. Werner and J. Bagdahn, Energy Procedia, 2012, 27, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Liu, T. Meng, C. Yi and X. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2937–2975 RSC .
A. Godoy, L. Cattin, L. Toumi, F. R. Díaz, M. A. del Valle, G. M. Soto, B. Kouskoussa, M. Morsli, K. Benchouk, A. Khelil and J. C. Bernède, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
T. Meng, C. Liu, K. Wang, T. He, Y. Zhu, A. Al-Enizi, A. Elzatahry and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1876–1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stubhan, M. Salinas, A. Ebel, F. C. Krebs, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 532–535 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, E. Zheng, J. Bian, X.-F. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10837–10844 RSC .
J. Seo, S. Park, Y. Chan Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon and S. Il Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2642–2646 RSC .
K. Wang, C. Yi, X. Hu, C. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Hou, Y. Li, J. Zheng, S. Chuang, A. Karim and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13201–13208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jošt, T. Bertram, D. Koushik, J. A. Marquez, M. A. Verheijen, M. D. Heinemann, E. Köhnen, A. Al-Ashouri, S. Braunger, F. Lang, B. Rech, T. Unold, M. Creatore, I. Lauermann, C. A. Kaufmann, R. Schlatmann and S. Albrecht, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 583–590 CrossRef .
M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, Y.-G. Yang, Y. Hu, S.-L. Feng, J.-M. Wang, X.-Y. Gao and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601156 CrossRef .
R. A. Nawrocki, E. Pavlica, N. Ćelić, D. Orlov, M. Valant, D. Mihailović and G. Bratina, Org. Electron., 2016, 30, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, J. Song, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, S. Ducharme and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2816–2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Meier, D. Tordera, A. Pertegás, C. Roldán-Carmona, E. Ortí and H. J. Bolink, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 217–223 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, H. Guo, K. Wang and X. Liu, Org. Electron., 2017, 41, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 CrossRef .
K. Wang, C. Yi, C. Liu, X. Hu, S. Chuang and X. Gong, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, T. J. Reece, P. Sharma, S. Poddar, S. Ducharme, A. Gruverman, Y. Yang and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 296–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, D. Ju, S. Xia, H. Xia and X. Tao, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 3508–3511 CrossRef .
W. Peng, L. Wang, B. Murali, K.-T. Ho, A. Bera, N. Cho, C.-F. Kang, V. M. Burlakov, J. Pan, L. Sinatra, C. Ma, W. Xu, D. Shi, E. Alarousu, A. Goriely, J.-H. He, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3383–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Zhang, J. J. Sun, X. Wang, J. J. Sun, Q. Chen, C. Pan and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800224 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, C. Yang, X. Zheng, I. Gereige, A. AlSaggaf, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 1258–1259 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schlipf, A. M. Askar, F. Pantle, B. D. Wiltshire, A. Sura, P. Schneider, L. Huber, K. Shankar and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 4906 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wu, H. Li, Y. Yan, B. Chi, K. M. Felice, R. B. Moore, B. A. Magill, R. R. H. H. Mudiyanselage, G. A. Khodaparast, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800052 CrossRef .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, M. Lee, M. Song, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2922–2927 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Liu, C. Yi, L. Chen, J. Zhu, R. A. Weiss and X. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6875–6884 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, C. Bao, Y. Fang, J. Dai, B. R. Ecker, C. Wang, Y. Lin, S. Tang, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Zheng, Y. Gao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705176 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Murali, S. Dey, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, E. Alarousu, A. R. Kirmani, N. Cho, S. P. Sarmah, M. R. Parida, M. I. Saidaminov, A. A. Zhumekenov, J. Sun, M. S. Alias, E. Yengel, B. S. Ooi, A. Amassian, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1119–1126 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Petrus, Y. Hu, D. Moia, P. Calado, A. M. A. Leguy, P. R. F. Barnes and P. Docampo, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2699–2707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ye, W. Fu, J. Wu, Z. Yu, X. Jin, H. Chen and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1214–1217 RSC .
H.-L. Yue, H.-H. Sung and F.-C. Chen, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700655 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, G. Kong, S. Chen, Q. Li, B. Huang, Z. Liu, X. San, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhen, H. Wen, P. Gao and J. Li, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1173–1176 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paci, A. Generosi, J. Wright, C. Ferrero, A. Di Carlo and F. Brunetti, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700066 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, C. Wu, S. K. Jha, Z. Li, K. Zhu and S. Priya, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, J. Li, W. Li, N. Lin, L. Wang and J. Qiao, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 800–805 RSC .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 RSC .
V. Nandal and P. R. Nair, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11505–11512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, K. Wang, X. Feng, Y. Jiang, D. Yang, Y. Hou, Y. Yan, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1251–1259 CrossRef PubMed .
W. A. Saidi and J. J. Choi, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 145, 144702 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, J. Almutlaq, S. Sarmah, X.-H. Miao, R. Begum, A. A. Zhumekenov, I. Dursun, N. Cho, B. Murali, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600704 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, Z. Zheng, Q. Fu, Z. Chen, J. He, S. Zhang, L. Yan, Y. Hu and W. Luo, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 6797–6803 RSC .
J. Xing, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, Y. Fang and J. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30484–30490 RSC .
D. Wei, T. Wang, J. Ji, M. Li, P. Cui, Y. Li, G. Li, J. M. Mbengue and D. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1991–1998 RSC .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, Z. Dai and Y. Yang, Mater. Today Energ., 2018, 7, 149–160 CrossRef .
O. S. Game, G. J. Buchsbaum, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and A. I. Kingon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606584 CrossRef .
E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, J. Dai, Y. Fang, J. Zhao, X. Zheng, S. Tang, P. N. Rudd, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 684–688 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Bin, M. Yusoff, H. P. Kim, X. Li, J. Kim, J. Jang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602940 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238 CrossRef PubMed .
G. R. Yettapu, D. Talukdar, S. Sarkar, A. Swarnkar, A. Nag, P. Ghosh and P. Mandal, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4838–4848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, B. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601935 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Labram, D. H. Fabini, E. E. Perry, A. J. Lehner, H. Wang, A. M. Glaudell, G. Wu, H. Evans, D. Buck, R. Cotta, L. Echegoyen, F. Wudl, R. Seshadri and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3565–3571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, G. Wang, H. Wu, Q. He, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601959 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Bazant, K. Thornton and A. Ajdari, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2004, 70, 021506 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Zeidell, C. Tyznik, L. Jennings, C. Zhang, H. Lee, M. Guthold, Z. V. Vardeny and O. D. Jurchescu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800316 CrossRef .
G. Wang, D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Li, C.-Y. Chen, A. Yin, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H. Wu, Q. He, M. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500613 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lv, Z. Wang, G. Dong and Q. Yan, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2018, 39, 1389–1392 CAS .

          P. Kolenderski, C. Scarcella, K. D. Johnsen, D. R. Hamel, C. Holloway, L. K. Shalm, S. Tisa, A. Tosi, K. J. Resch and T. Jennewein, Time-resolved double-slit Exp. with entangled photons,  2013, arXiv Prepr. arXiv1304.4943.
I. M. Reaney, E. L. Colla and N. Setter, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 33, 3984–3990 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Xu, T. Wang, J. Song, J. Chen, J. Xue, Y. Dong, B. Cai, Q. Shan, B. Han and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603885 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-C. Wang, S.-Y. Lin, A.-C. Tang, B. P. Singh, H.-C. Tong, C.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Lee, T.-L. Tsai and R.-S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7924–7929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Huang, C. Zou, C. Mao, K. L. Corp, Y.-C. Yao, Y.-J. Lee, C. W. Schlenker, A. K. Y. Jen and L. Y. Lin, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2281–2289 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huo, X. Liu, X. Song, Z. Wang and H. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4785–4792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huo, X. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800152 CrossRef .
A. N. Aleshin, I. P. Shcherbakov, E. V. Gushchina, L. B. Matyushkin and V. A. Moshnikov, Org. Electron., 2017, 50, 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Chu, X. Wu, W. Ou-Yang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704062 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Tao, W. Kuang, Q. Huang, Q. Li, J. Chen and W. Lei, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2017, 38, 1270–1273 CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Z. Ning, Phys. Status Solidi, 2010, 247, 774–788 CAS .
R. Yan, D. Gargas and P. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Ding, J. Wang, M. G. Kanatzidis, X. Zhu and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7963–7972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, C. Lan, F. Li, S. Yip, R. Wei, X. Kang, X. Bu, R. Dong, H. Zhang and J. C. Ho, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 6060–6070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, T. Ishihara and A. V Nurmikko, Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 45, 6961–6964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Blancon, A. V. Stier, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traoré, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, F. Katsutani, G. T. Noe, J. Kono, S. Tretiak, S. A. Crooker, C. Katan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. J. Crochet, J. Even and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2254 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yasuda, K. Fujita and H. Nakashima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, 1199 CrossRef .
D. B. Mitzi, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, J. Rosner, D. R. Medeiros, Z. Xu and C. Noyan, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1772–1776 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, K. Chondroudis and C. R. Kagan, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 29–45 CAS .
A. Dodabalapur, L. Torsi, H. E. Katz, A. Callegari and J. M. Shaw, Science, 1995, 268, 270–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsushima, S. Hwang, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, C. Qin, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10275–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsushima, F. Mathevet, B. Heinrich, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, C. Qin, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, J.-C. Ribierre and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 253301 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, C.-C. Chueh, S. B. Jo, B. Liu, T. Zhao and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8990–8997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Cheng, G. Wang, D. Li, Q. He, A. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. Ding, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 367–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tan, Y. Wu, H. Hong, J. Yin, J. Zhang, L. Lin, M. Wang, X. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Liu and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16612–16615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-K. Li, T.-P. Chen, Y.-F. Lin, C. M. Raghavan, W.-L. Chen, S.-H. Yang, R. Sankar, C.-W. Luo, Y.-M. Chang and C.-W. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1803763 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shen, J. Li, H. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 7–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, H. Tian, S. H. Silver, A. Kahn, T.-L. Ren and B. P. Rand, Joule, 2018, 2, 2133–2144 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Huang, A. Gheno, S. Vedraine, L. Pedesseau, J. Boucle, J. Even, A. Rolland, J. B. Puel and M. Gueunier-Farret, in 2018 International Conference on Numerical Simulation of Optoelectronic Devices (NUSOD), IEEE,  2018, pp. 135–136 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600100 CrossRef .
S. Li, F. Zeng, C. Chen, H. Liu, G. Tang, S. Gao, C. Song, Y. Lin, F. Pan and D. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5292 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Kai Wang	Dr Kai Wang is currently Research Assistant Professor in the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University. Kai received his PhD in Polymer Engineering from The University of Akron in 2017 and joined Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS), Virginia Tech as a Postdoctoral Associate in the same year. His research interests include halide perovskite photovoltaics, photodetectors and photothermal applications, 2D MQW physics, and biological materials-based electronics.
Congcong Wu	Dr Congcong Wu is currently a Professor in Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University, China. He received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2007 and 2014, respectively. From 2014 to 2018, he worked as a Research Associate in the CEHMS at Virginia Tech, United States. Then he worked as an Associate Research Professor in Materials Science and Engineering, the Pennsylvania State University, United States, from 2018 to 2019. His research interests include photovoltaic materials and device, 2D inorganic–organic hybrid materials, flexible electronics, biomimetic materials and devices etc.
Dong Yang	Dr Dong Yang worked with Professor Shengzhong (Frank) Liu in Shaanxi Normal University, China since 2014 and became a full professor in 2017. Dong joined Virginia Tech in 2017 and moved to Pennsylvania State University in the fall of 2018 as Research Assistant Professor. His research interests include solar cells, semiconductor materials, materials science, and engineering of graphene carbon materials.
Shashank Priya	Dr Shashank Priya currently serves as the Associate Vice President for Research and Director, Strategic Initiatives at Pennsylvania State University. He is a professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Pennsylvania State University and Adjunct Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Virginia Tech. Priya's research focuses on the intersection of multifunctional materials, bio-inspired systems and technologies, and energy harvesting and storage. As the principal investigator, he leads multiple programs targeting the development of thermoelectrics, photovoltaics, piezoelectrics, and other emerging energy-conversion and storage devices.

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of trap densities between typical semiconductors such as amorphous silicon (a-Si),16 poly-Si,17 mono-Si,18 CdTe/CdS,19 CIGS,20 mono-rubrene,21 pentacene,22 poly-HP,9 and mono-HP,23 along with their microscopic images. Credits are given to various sources.6,24–30 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. Copyright © 2002 Elsevier Inc. Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. John Wiley & Sons, 2017, © Copyright 2019 IEEE, © 2007 American Physical Society, © 2002 American Institute of Physics. Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019. Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. © 2019 Zentrum für Sonnenenergie- und Wasserstoff-Forschung Baden-Württemberg. Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. Trans Tech Publications, Ltd. Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  A “Mesoamerican pyramid” showing the relationship between mono-HP wafers/thin films, mono-HPs, and HPs, as well as their comparison with mono-HP bulk, poly-HPs, and other typical semiconductors.	 
Δμ = μs − μc	(3.1)
Δμ = kTlnS	(3.2)

 	Fig. 3  Crystallization theory. (a) Solubility curve and metastable zone plotted against temperature and concentration. (b) Total free energy versus cluster size, (c) reaction coordinate diagram, and (d) crystal growth rate versus energy difference between the initial and crystal states, showing that the surface tensile stress contributes toward both lower nucleation barrier and faster crystal growth rate.	 
	(3.3)
ΔGsolution/substrate = ΔGhetero = ΔGhomof(θ)	(3.4)
	(3.5)
	(3.6)
	(3.7)
ΔG′ + ΔGC = Δ	(3.8)
ΔG′ = Ga − Gi	(3.8a)
ΔGC = Gf − Gi	(3.8b)
Δ = Gf − Ga	(3.8c)

 	Fig. 4  Various mono-HP wafers/thin films synthesized using the floating method. (a) BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1, where n = 1, 2, 3, …, ∞, adapted from reference.6,54 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) (PEA)2PbI4.56 Copyright © 2019 Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (c) MAPbBr3, (d) MAPbI3, and (e) MASnBr3.55 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society (f) photograph of 1.5 cm-long MAPbI3 single-crystal piece of wafer.57 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Examples of space-limited growth methods. (a) Basic experimental setup for the space-limited growth method. (b) Schematic illustration of a spatially confined crystal grown in a narrow crevice constructed by two flat substrates.6 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. (c) Photograph of a MAPbBr3 crystal thin film grown from this method, with a thickness of 0.4 mm and area of 120 cm2.78 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Fluorescence microscopy images of MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbCl3 single-crystal flakes grown by using the space-limited growth method.71 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (e) A schematic illustration of the capping method, coupled with the photographs of the resultant single-crystal flakes.76 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic of the GC-LCG method.77 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  VPE method for growing mono-HP thin films. (a) A simple VPE reactor prototype. (b) Schematic drawing showing the different atomistic processes on a conventional (yellow) and VDW (green) substrate in terms of adsorption energy (Ead), diffusion barrier (Ed), and nuclei sizes. (c) Schematic drawing of the manner in which Ead changes with thickness for three types of materials. (d) Electron diffraction pattern of mono-HPs on a mica substrate. (e) Optical image of an individual large-scale ultrathin mono-HP sheet (inset showing the atomic force microscopy measurement of the film thickness).80 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (f) Illustration of the heterostructure of a mono-HP thin film grown on a NaCl substrate. SEM images of (g) CsSnBr3 and (h) CsPbBr3 mono-HP thin films on a NaCl substrate, coupled with the photograph of a real sample.82 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (i) Optical microscopy and (j) SEM image of CsPbBr3 nanoplates grown on a STO (100) substrate. (k) Representative AFM images and (l) top-down SEM image of CsPbBr3 mono-HP thin film (thickness: 7 μm). (m) Cross-sectional SEM images and photographs of CsPbBr3 mono-HP films with varying thicknesses of 1, 2, 5, and 7 μm.83 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
	(3.9)

 	Fig. 7  Bulk-crystal dicing technology. (a) Industrial mono-Si wafer-manufacturing scheme showing the mono-Si ingot pulling process from multicrystalline silicon (multi-Si), through melting, seeding, and pulling. A Si wafer is formed from bulk mono-Si ingot dicing, lapping, polishing, and cleaning. Dicing technology for mono-HP wafer processing starting from (b) single HP bulk,98 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc., through (c) dicing by a diamond wire saw.6 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. (d) An actual photograph showing a sliced mono-HP wafer of MAPbI3.85 Copyright © 2017, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany. (e) Optical and AFM images of the exfoliated (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3) 2D perovskite microplates for different thicknesses.96 © 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd. (f) AFM image with the height profile of an exfoliated layer. The layered structure of a Br-based perovskite with n = 1 is evident with a monolayer step of 1 nm, as shown in the inset.97 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (g) Side-view SEM of a (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 4) 2D mono-HP crystal.54 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (h) A C-AFM setup detecting the layered edge of a 2D mono-HP crystal and (i) an example of C-AFM current mapping showing the conductive layered edge.43 © 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  Two examples of device architectures for mono-HP solar cells. (a) A lateral device structure where the photocarrier transport direction in the mono-HP is perpendicular to the direction of incident photons. (b) A vertical device structure where the photocarrier transport direction in the mono-HP is parallel to the direction of incident photons. Photoactive areas of the (c) lateral device and (d) vertical device.	 

 	Fig. 9  Lateral mono-HP device and performance. Piezoelectric poling strategy for antisymmetric devices. (a) Image of MAPbI3 lateral structure single-crystal device. (b) Scheme of electromechanical-strain-generated GBs and ion migration in mono-HPs. (c) Switchable PV effect of a MAPbI3 lateral mono-HP solar cell with positive and negative poling.118 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Buffer layer strategy for antisymmetric devices. (d) Two-dimensional X-ray diffraction (2D XRD) image of a mono-HP thin film. (e) Optical microscopic image of a lateral mono-HP solar cell with metal electrodes. The light brown and dark brown lines indicate mono-HPs and spaces, respectively. (f) J–V curves of single-crystalline (red) and polycrystalline (black) perovskite thin films with lateral mono-HP cells. The inset shows a schematic device structure of a lateral perovskite solar cell and the direction of illumination.77 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. (g) SEM images of the cross-section of a MAPbI3 mono-HP wafer. (h) Scheme of MAPbI3 mono-HP lateral-structure solar cell. (i) J–V curve showing a PCE value of 5.9%.57 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 10  Milestone vertical mono-HP device and performance. (a) Schematic device structure of the MAPbI3 mono-HP devices. Normalized EQE values of 3 mm-thick and 200 mm-thick MAPbI3 mono-HP devices as compared to that of a thin-film device.49 Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) MAPbBr3 mono-HP devices with/without a cathode buffer layer and device performance of the device based on MAPbBr3 mono-HPs of different thicknesses.126 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of MAPbBr3 mono-HP devices with the highest PCE value of 7.11%.67 © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. (d) Band alignment and J–V curve of the highest PCE value of mono-HP devices using ITO/NiOx/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/TiO2/Ag.127 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) Device structure and J–V curve of single-crystal devices using MAPbI3 mono-HPs with different thicknesses. A PCE value of 17.8% has been obtained.68 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of a MAPbI3 mono-HP device with J–V curves showing a record PCE value of 21.09%.128 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.	 


Vertical	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag paste or Al	
	
	0.04	0.55	34.1	0.75	
129

Vertical	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO/Al	AM 1.5 G	300 nm–3 mm	8.69	0.52	0.38	1.73	
139

Vertical	Ga/MAPbI3/Au	Intense cesium-137 source	3 mm	
	
	
	3.90	
49

Vertical	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag	AM 1.5 G	50 μm	22.15	0.75	0.27	4.40	
140

Vertical	ITO/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	1 μm	7.39	1.25	0.59	5.49	
126

Vertical	ITO/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	4 μm	7.42	1.24	0.58	5.37
Vertical	ITO/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	7 μm	7.19	1.11	0.46	3.7
Vertical	ITO/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	12 μm	7.09	1.03	0.39	2.82
Vertical	ITO/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	60 μm	2.27	0.94	0.31	0.65
Vertical	FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	1 μm	6.69	1.36	0.69	6.53
Vertical	FTO/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	16 μm	7.77	0.65	0.39	1.98	
67

Vertical	FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3/Au	AM 1.5 G	16 μm	8.35	0.91	0.53	4.08
Vertical	FTO/TiO2/MAPbBr3/HTM/Au	AM 1.5 G	16 μm	8.77	1.31	0.62	7.11
Vertical	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	AM 1.5 G	
	22.283	0.668	0.59	8.78	
141

Vertical	ITO/NiOx/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/TiOx/Ag	AM 1.5 G	24.5 μm	23.14	1.03	0.51	12.18	
127

Vertical	ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PCBM/C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/Cu	AM 1.5 G	10 μm	21	1.08	0.786	17.80	
68

Vertical	ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu	AM 1.5 G	15 μm	21.2	1.05	0.73	16.30	
136

Vertical	ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PC61BM/C60/BCP/Cu, w/APT treatment for 2 s	AM 1.5 G	15 μm	22.5	1.11	0.816	20.40
Vertical	ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu	AM 1.5 G	∼20 μm	23.46	1.076	0.835	21.09	
128

Lateral	Au/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au	AM 1.5 G	
	3.84	0.802	
	4.83a, 6.6b	
77

Lateral	Au/MAPbI3/Au, piezoelectric poling treatment	25 mW cm−2 (0.25 sun)	
	2.28	0.82	
	5.36c, 1.88d	
118

Lateral	Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Au	25 mW cm−2 (0.25 sun)	
	5.06	0.66	0.44	5.9	
57


 	Fig. 11  Poly-HP FETs. (a) MAPbI3 poly-HP film (i) and corresponding FET device configuration (ii). Transfer characteristics obtained at 78 K (iii). Temperature dependence of the field-effect electron and hole mobilities (iv).164 Copyright © 2015, Springer Nature. (b) Transfer curves of MAPbI3 poly-HP FETs measured at various temperatures between 150 and 250 K. The device has a length and width of 200 and 2600 μm, respectively, and the geometric capacitance of the dielectric was 23 nF cm−2. Inset: schematic representation of the FET. Si labels the silicon gate electrode; SiO2, 150 nm silicon oxide dielectric; (MA)PbI3, the semiconductor layer; and Al, the aluminum source and drain electrodes (i). Approximate field-effect mobility evaluated using the gradual-channel approximation as a function of measurement temperature (ii). Schematic illustration of the proposed polarization mechanism of mobile ionic species in MAPbI3 poly-HP under the influence of externally applied gate field (iii).165 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of an optimized MAPbI3 mono-HP film fabricated from 0.75 M precursor solutions (i). Schematic of the top-gate bottom-contact poly-HP FETs summarizing the different sources of disorder mechanisms prevalent in a perovskite (left: vibrations of inorganic cage; middle: defect migration; right: MA+ polarization disorder) (ii). Transfer characteristics at 100 K for different source–drain contact modifications (iii) and 300 K for PEIE-treated Au contacts (iv).163 © 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Optical microscopic image of the MAPbI3−xClx poly-HP film in the channel region after 20 min of solvent exposure; note the formation of large needle-shaped crystals (i). Poly-HP FET geometry (ii). Representative plot of ID–VGS characteristics (VDS = ±40 V) for holes (iii) and electrons (iv), respectively. The values of channel lengths and widths are shown in the inset.170 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  Mono-HP FETs. (a) Schematic of the back-gate, back-contact MAPbI3 mono-HP FET built on a 300 nm SiO2/Si substrate with monolayer graphene as the contact, covered by a BN layer (i). The optical image of the BN-covered device with graphene (red dashed line), perovskite (black dashed line), and BN (dark yellow dashed line) highlighted by different color lines. The mono-HP thickness is ∼150 nm (ii). The temperature-dependent transfer characteristics in the low-temperature (iii) and ultralow-temperature (iv) ranges.166 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Schematic representation of a bottom-gate, bottom-contact FET device (i). The mono-HP is MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I). A representative transfer characteristic of MAPbCl3 mono-HP FET device (ii) using forward/reverse gate voltage sweeps from −10 to 10 V at the rate of 0.05 V s−1, where VDS = −2 V. Inset: the linear regime of the respective devices. Field-effect hole mobility distribution for 20 devices fabricated and tested for each HP (iii).71 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Sketch of a vertical-structured mono-HP FET of MAPbI3 (i). Views of the crystal structure along the [100], [112], and [001] orientations and the corresponding FET mobilities for each direction (ii).172 © Copyright 2019 IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 13  CsPbX3 mono-HP FETs. (a) FET based on VDW-grown and dry-transferred CsPbX3 mono-HP ultrathin platelets. Photoluminescence image of a CsPbBr3 mono-HP ultrathin platelet; inset: AFM image showing the cross-section profile (i). Output characteristic of CsPbBr3 mono-HP FETs at room temperature; inset: an optical image of the FET device (ii). Temperature dependence of FET mobility (iii).178 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) FET based on CsPbBr3/2D crystal VDW heterojunctions. Optical images of typical CsPbBr3 thin platelets on MoS2 (i). Schematic illustration of a CsPbBr3 mono-HP/MoS2 heterojunction FET (ii). Isd–Vsd curves of the heterojunction in darkness; inset: an optical image of the corresponding device (iii).179 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) 1D NW CsPbX3 mono-HP FET. Schematic diagram showing the VLS growth process of CsPbX3 NWs (X = Cl, Br, or I) using Sn catalysts (i). SEM and tilted SEM image of CsPbBr3 NWs (ii). SEM image of the as-fabricated NW FET (iii). Transfer characteristics of the typical single VLS-grown CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NW FETs using the logarithm of the y-coordinate (iv).187 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  2D mono-HP-based FETs. (a) A general molecular structure of a 2D mono-HP material, showing the MQW structure with an energy diagram revealing the organic layer as the quantum barrier and inorganic layer as the quantum well layer. (b) and (c) (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP and FET. (b) Low-magnification TEM image of a (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP. (c) From left to right: optical images of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP grown on 300 nm SiO2/silicon substrate before and after the dry transfer of the graphene film. Within the white dotted line, the 2D crystals are covered by a graphene film, whereas the outside area remains uncovered. Optical images of graphene-protected (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 2D mono-HP before cutting out a channel and after installing graphene electrodes.199 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of the exfoliated (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 2D mono-HP with Ag contacts, with the schematic illustration of the 2D mono-HP of different quantum well layer thicknesses, i.e., n = 1, 2, and 3.200 Copyright © 1999–2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) Optical image of a FET device based on (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3) 2D mono-HP plates with a thickness of around 20 nm.96 Iop Publishing, Ltd. (f) Optical image of a FET device based on (PEA)2CsSn2I7 2D mono-HP.201 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) Optical image of a FET device based on (PEA)2PbI4 2D mono-HP.204 © 2018 Elsevier Inc.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
