Earth-abundant Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE02397C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02397C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3269-3306Earth-abundant Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting†

        
          
            Changli 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jingfu 
            He
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yequan 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yanbo 
            Li
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jean-Jacques 
            Delaunay
          
          
        
      *c
aSchool of Materials, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. E-mail: lichli5@mail.sysu.edu.cn; hejf27@mail.sysu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China. E-mail: yanboli@uestc.edu.cn
cSchool of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. E-mail: jean@mech.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Received 
      28th July 2020
    , Accepted 9th September 2020First published on 10th September 2020AbstractPhotoelectrochemical (PEC) solar-fuel conversion is a promising approach to converting energy from sunlight into storable chemical fuels. The development of low cost, highly efficient, and stable semiconductor-based photoelectrodes is a key step in realizing economically viable PEC energy conversion on a global scale. The p-type Cu-based metal oxides possess a wide range of bandgap values and favorable band edges relative to the water splitting redox couples, thus providing promising candidates for PEC solar conversion applications. However, the improvement of the PEC performance for the binary and ternary copper-based metal oxides is severely hindered by the chemical instability and/or unsatisfactory optoelectronic properties. Thus, a fundamental understanding of the key limitations, improvement strategies, and progress of these materials is critical to design high performance and stable photocathodes. Here, we outline the development of p-type binary and ternary Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes, discuss the merits and major challenges of these p-type materials, and present the latest research effort in modifying the materials towards high-performance photocathodes. The critical strategies that have been successfully employed for Cu2O-based solar cells and photocathodes are emphasized to offer guidelines to advance emerging Cu-based photocathodes. Emphasis is placed on the determination of the faradaic efficiency and onset potential of hydrogen generation for the modified photocathodes to properly evaluate the performance and design tandem devices that achieve bias-free solar water splitting. Furthermore, perspectives regarding emerging issues yet to be addressed for the development of Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes with high photocurrent and photovoltage are also presented.
Changli Li
Changli Li is an Associate Professor at the School of Materials, Sun Yat-sen University, China. He received his PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from The University of Tokyo, Japan, in 2015. After Post-Doctoral studies at Tsinghua University and The University of British Columbia, he began his independent career as faculty member at Sun Yat-sen University. His research activities focus on the synthesis of nanostructured materials and semiconductor heterojunctions for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical energy conversion.
Jingfu He
Jingfu He is currently an associate professor in School of Materials, Sun Yat-sen University. He received his PhD in 2012 from University of Science and Technology of China. He joined Berlinguette group at the University of British Columbia as a postdoctoral associate in 2015 and conducted research on film synthesis and CO2 electrocatalysis. His current research interests include photoelectrochemistry and electrochemistry for CO2 reduction, water splitting and in situ synchrotron radiation spectrum.
Yequan Xiao
Yequan Xiao is a PhD student in the Institute of Fundamental & Frontier Sciences at University of Electronic Science & Technology of China, under the supervision of Prof. Yanbo Li. He obtained his master's degree from China Three Gorges University in 2017. During his master's study, he was a visiting student at Tsinghua University working on graphene and solar cells. His research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of tantalum (oxy)nitride-based photoanode materials for solar-driven water splitting.
Yanbo Li
Yanbo Li is a Professor at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Science, UESTC. He received his PhD degree in Engineering Synthesis from The University of Tokyo (UT) in 2010. He then conducted Postdoctoral research at UT and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory until 2016. His research interests focus on materials and devices for solar energy conversion, including artificial photosynthesis and solar cells.
Jean-Jacques Delaunay
Jean-Jacques Delaunay is an Associate Professor at the School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo. He received his PhD degree from the Strasbourg University. He has worked for research institutions in the fields of nanotechnology and solar energy in France, Germany, and Japan. He conducts research on the synthesis of micro/nanomaterials with controlled structures and functionalities for sensing and energy conversion. He has co-authored more than 100 scientific publications.

Broader context
Cu-Based metal oxides possess a wide range of bandgap values and favorable band edges relative to the water splitting redox couples, thus providing promising candidates for PEC solar conversion applications. Among the Cu-based metal oxides, Cu2O is the most successful photocathode with outstanding PEC performance obtained by introducing buried p–n junctions, protective layers, and nanostructures. However, the other important and emerging binary and ternary Cu-based photocathodes still have limited PEC performance mainly due to low carrier mobility, surface states induced Fermi level pinning, and difficulty in forming high-quality p–n junctions. Moreover, chemical instability, which is a common issue to Cu-based photocathodes, leads to a very low faradaic efficiency and electrode surface degradation during measurement of bare Cu-based photocathodes. In this review, we emphasize the importance of faradaic efficiency in the characterization of surface stability, provide a fundamental understanding of the key limitations of these materials, and highlight recent strategies that have proven successful in overcoming these limitations. A perspective regarding the future direction for the design of heterojunctions, interface engineering, and surface/bulk defects passivation is also presented.

1. Introduction
The demand for decreasing reliance on fossil fuels has prompted tremendous interest in the development of technologies for utilizing renewable energies, especially solar energy. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting offers a promising method to convert and store solar energy via hydrogen production.1,2 Specifically, hydrogen and oxygen can be produced on (photo)cathode and (photo)anode, respectively, by using sunlight and H2O at a semiconductor/liquid junction (SCLJ) via PEC reduction/oxidation processes. The energy input needed for water reduction/oxidation could be considerably reduced by the generation of a photovoltage at the semiconductor/liquid junction under sunlight illumination. Semiconductors such as Si,1,2 InP,3 CdTe,4 CuInxGa1−xSe2,5,6 CuInS2,7 CuGa3Se5,8 and CuGaSe29,10 have been demonstrated as efficient photocathodes for PEC water reduction. However, the observed photovoltages generated by these photocathodes are still relatively low (<750 mV) since the total thermodynamic potential to reduce water to hydrogen and to oxidize water to oxygen is 1.23 V. The development of photocathodes with high photovoltages is highly desired for constructing highly-efficient two-electrode tandem devices together with a high-performance photoanode (e.g., BiVO4) for bias-free water splitting. Furthermore, the scarcity of In and Ga, as well as the toxicity of cadmium in CdTe, motivate the exploration of metal oxide-based photocathodes that can be made from earth-abundant and non-toxic elements through cost-effective and scalable processes.
Compared to the IV, III–V, and I–III–VI group p-type semiconductors, Cu-based binary and ternary metal oxides are promising absorber materials for PEC water reduction. The Cu-based metal oxides possess a wide range of bandgap values, ranging from 1.2 to >3 eV, providing a large number of candidates as efficient light absorbers for solar energy conversion applications.11,12 Moreover, most of the conduction band edges of the Cu-based metal oxides are higher than the hydrogen evolution potential, thus the water reduction reaction is thermodynamically favorable. The binary oxides Cu2O and CuO have suitable band gaps (2.0 and 1.2–1.5 eV) for efficient sunlight utilization, however, significant photocorrosion is observed on these photocathodes. The photocorrosion can be ascribed to the unfavorable position of the redox couple for the reduction of Cu2O and CuO that lies within the band gap of these semiconductors.13 Thus, a rational protective strategy should be introduced for these materials, and the engineering of the interface, band alignment, and carrier transport should play an important role in enhancing the PEC performance of binary Cu-based heterojunction photocathodes.13–16 Cu-based ternary oxides provide more possibilities to tune the band structure and optoelectronic properties of materials compared with the Cu-based binary oxides. Among the Cu-based ternary oxides, the ternary oxide CuBi2O4 is a promising photocathode material capable of utilizing visible light and producing high photovoltage.17 The band gap of ∼1.8 eV and onset potential of ∼1 V vs. RHE make this material an ideal candidate for the top absorber in two-electrode tandem PEC devices.18 The valence and conduction band edges of CuBi2O4 are constituted by Bi 6s and Cu 3d orbitals, respectively. Thus, similar to the Cu2O self-reduction, photocorrosion can be found in CuBi2O4 photocathodes and is thought to originate from the trapping of photoelectrons in the Cu 3d band.19 Limited by the chemical instability, hydrogen generation could barely be observed on bare CuBi2O4 photocathodes so that a protective process similar to that used for the Cu2O photocathodes is necessary.20 Cu-containing delafossites with a general formula of CuMO2 (M = Fe, Rh, Cr, Al, Ga, In, and Sc) have the potential to serve as photocathodes with increased stability. The valence band and conduction band edges of Cu-containing delafossites are composed of primarily Cu 3d and M d- or s-orbitals, respectively, limiting the reduction of Cu(I) through Cu 3d → M d/s electron photoexcitation.12,21 Moreover, depending on the type of the cation M, the light absorption of Cu-containing delafossites can span a large range of the solar spectrum, including CuFeO2 (∼1.55 eV), CuRhO2 (∼1.9 eV), and β-CuGaO2 (∼1.5 eV) with narrow bandgaps, and CuAlO2, CuCrO2, CuInO2, and CuCoO2 with bandgaps larger than 3 eV. Among them, CuFeO2 is a very promising material for solar water splitting due to the favorable band edges, positive onset potential, and earth-abundant elements.22,23 Although there are many advantages, the PEC performance of CuFeO2 photocathodes is mainly impeded by the Fermi level pinning induced by surface states, resulting in a low photovoltage <350 mV.22 It is also difficult to measure hydrogen generation on bare CuFeO2 photocathodes due to the very low photocurrent under water reduction conditions.23 Furthermore, under an intensive illumination (ca. 400 mW cm−2), the photocorrosion also occurred on the CuFeO2 photocathode due to the poor interfacial charge transfer kinetics. With appropriate surface modification, the photoactivity and stability of CuFeO2 can be improved, but the issue of the low photocurrent in the positive potential region still needs to be addressed.24,25 Besides Cu-containing delafossites, group V copper oxides such as copper vanadates (1.2–1.4 eV), copper niobates (1.26–2.0 eV), and copper tantalates (2.4–2.7 eV) also represent promising candidates for the construction of efficient photocathodes.12 However, few reports related to these semiconductors are available, likely due to the inherent difficulty in synthesizing pure-phase high-quality thin films with the desired optoelectronic properties.26 The obtained photocathodes of the group V copper oxides exhibit a low photocurrent and obvious dark currents,12 suggesting an inefficient interfacial charge transfer and a self-reduction reaction taking place on these photocathodes.
In recent years, remarkable achievements have been obtained with Cu2O-based photocathodes by constructing buried p–n junctions and introducing nanostructures.27 A high photocurrent of 10 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, a positive onset potential of ∼1 V vs. RHE, and stable operation for 100 h were achieved on a nanostructured FTO/Au/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode.28 Moreover, the bias-free tandem devices composed of the FTO/Au/CuSCN/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode and a perovskite solar cell yielded a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of 4.55%.15 However, for other binary and ternary Cu-based photocathodes, the improvement of the PEC performance has been impeded by many limitations including low carrier mobility, Fermi level pinning induced by surface states, and difficulty in forming high-quality p–n junctions. Chemical instability is a common issue for the Cu-base photocathodes as evidenced by the observed photocorrosion of some ternary Cu-based oxides that are expected to be stable.19,23,29 Indeed, many groups reported that hydrogen production could not be detected on the bare Cu-based photocathodes.13,16,20,23 Nevertheless, a rational stabilization procedure and rigorous hydrogen generation test are usually absent from many studies that are aimed at improving the “photoactivity” of Cu-based photocathodes. Thus, it is essential to highlight the importance of surface stabilization and measurement of faradaic efficiency during the characterization of the photocathodes, which are critical steps in the design of highly efficient and stable photocathodes. Since most of the p-type semiconductors with narrow bandgaps suffer from photocorrosion during the PEC operation, the surface protection strategy that concurrently establishes a buried p–n junction has become a standard process to form highly efficient photocathodes. The interface/surface modification and band alignment engineering are usually employed to improve the charge separation and catalytic kinetics of the photocathodes. Thus, the design principles described in this contribution can also be applied to other systems, such as Cu-based chalcogenides (CuInxGa1−xSe2,5,6 CuInS2,7 CuGa3Se5,8 CuGaSe2,9,10 BaCu2Sn(S,Se)4,30 Cu2BaSnS4,31 Cu2ZnSnS4,32 CuSbS233), CdTe,4 Sb2Se3,34–36 Sb2S3,37 and single-crystalline Si1,2 based photocathodes.
Despite several existing reviews on metal oxide photoanodes and/or photocathodes,12,26,27,38–42 a review dedicated to the modification techniques and design strategies for the important Cu-based binary and ternary photocathodes is still highly desired so that the key limitations of this class of materials can be addressed. In this review, we focus on Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes and outline the latest effort to modify the materials towards high-performance photocathodes. The merits and limitations of these p-type materials are outlined, and the related strategies for addressing the bottlenecks of these materials are classified. We summarize the key techniques that have been successfully applied to Cu2O-based solar cells and photocathodes to give valuable implications for other emerging Cu-based photocathodes. Also, the necessity of determining hydrogen production and faradaic efficiency for the photocathodes is especially emphasized due to the instability of these materials. Furthermore, a perspective regarding the future directions for the design of heterojunctions, interface engineering, and surface/bulk defects passivation is also presented.
2. PEC water splitting concept
In general, a PEC cell consists of three components, a working photoelectrode, a counter electrode, and an electrolyte. A common strategy is to use photoactive semiconductors as the working electrode to produce photo-excited electron–hole pairs with one or both electrodes made of semiconductor materials. In this type of systems, the oxidation of water (oxygen evolution) occurs at the photoanode, and the reduction of protons (hydrogen production) occurs at the photocathode under sunlight illumination with the assistance of a small external bias, as shown in Fig. 1a and b.43 When a semiconductor is immersed in an electrolyte, charge transfer takes place across the semiconductor/electrolyte junction to maintain electrostatic equilibrium. When electronic equilibrium is reached, the Fermi level of the electrons in the semiconductor and the redox potential of the electrolyte are aligned at the interface of the semiconductor/electrolyte junction, which leads to a downward band bending in a p-type semiconductor and an upward band bending in an n-type semiconductor. The schematic diagram for a p-type photocathode in an electrolyte is shown in Fig. 1a. Under dark conditions, the charge transfer produces a space-charge layer on the p-type semiconductor side, and a compact (Helmholtz) layer followed by a diffuse (Gouy–Chapman) layer is formed on the electrolyte side.44 Under illumination, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs are separated by the space-charge field and the electrons travel to the semiconductor–electrolyte interface where they are consumed in the reduction reaction, while the holes travel to the counter electrode and participate in the water oxidation reaction. Also, a photovoltage is generated under illumination because of the splitting of the initial Fermi level into two separate quasi-Fermi levels for electrons (EF,n) and holes (EF,p). The maximum achievable photovoltage (Vph) is determined by the degree of the band bending. Therefore, to obtain a semiconductor/electrolyte junction with a high photovoltage in water splitting, the valence band of the p-type semiconductor must be close to the oxygen evolution level so that a large degree of band bending is made possible.
 Fig. 1  (a) Principle of operation of PEC cells based on bias-assisted p-type semiconductor, (b) bias-assisted n-type semiconductor, and (c) bias-free tandem structure consisting of p- and n-type photoelectrodes. 
The change in the Gibbs free energy for the splitting of H2O into H2 and 1/2O2 under standard conditions is ΔG0 = 237.2 kJ mol−1. Based on the Nernst equation, this corresponds to the standard reversible potential ΔE0 of 1.23 V. Thus, photon energy larger than 1.23 eV (λ < 1000 nm) is needed to drive the water-splitting reaction with sunlight.45 The equations for oxygen evolution (OER) and hydrogen evolution (HER) are listed below H2O(l) + 2h+ → 1/2O2(g) + 2H+(aq),(1-1) 2H+(aq) + 2e− → H2(g),(1-2) H2O(l) → 1/2O2(g) + H2(g).(1-3)The overall water splitting process must generate four electron–hole pairs for the production of two hydrogen molecules and one oxygen molecule. To drive this reaction, the conduction band position of the semiconductor needs to be more negative than the reduction potential of water E(H+/H2), while the valence band position needs to be more positive than the oxidation potential of water E(O2/H2O).
To choose a semiconductor for efficient solar water splitting, many requirements should be considered. Ideally, the semiconductor should possess the properties of stability, low-cost, narrow bandgap, efficient interfacial charge transfer, and have a conduction band-edge energy and valence band-edge energy that straddle the water redox potentials. First, the semiconductor should be stable in aqueous solution. It is reported that the thermodynamics of cathodic reduction of semiconductors by electrons and anodic oxidation by holes are related to the free energy of electrons and holes in illuminated semiconductor electrodes,46 as presented in Fig. 2. The inadequate energy correlation between the band edges and Fermi energies of the electrode reactions leads to corrosion of some materials in aqueous solutions such as Si, CdS, and Cu2O. The photodecomposition of a semiconductor (MX) can be represented by the following reactions:47 Cathodic decomposition: MX + ne− → M + Xn−,(1-4) Anodic decomposition: MX + nh+ → Mn+ + X,(1-5)where n is the number of electrons or holes. In the case of the standard hydrogen electrode, Edecomp,n and Edecomp,p are the cathodic decomposition potential and anodic decomposition potential, respectively. The criteria for the stability of photoelectrode against photocorrosion should fulfill E(H+/H2) > Edecomp,n and E(O2/H2O) < Edecomp,p.46–48 The decomposition of unstable semiconductors can be inhibited by the selection of redox reactions with suitable positions for their redox potentials and rapid reaction rates.46 Considering that the redox potentials are fixed in a water splitting reaction, stabilizing semiconductors with a protective overlayer offers a promising way to prevent the decomposition. It should be noted that although the thermodynamic schemes provide valuable guidance for the design of photoelectrodes, this approach cannot predict the decomposition rate of the semiconductor layers. The development of photocorrosion models and experimental methods to study the kinetic behavior of semiconductors are also crucial for the design of stable photoelectrodes.49–54 For instance, Haussener's group proposed a simplified model to better understand the impact of semiconductor properties and operating conditions on the competition behavior between photostability and OER. This model explains the mismatch between the predicted instability based on thermodynamic aspects and the observed photostability.55 Thus, the comprehensive consideration of thermodynamic and kinetic schemes should provide powerful means to understand the photostability of photoelectrodes. Second, the bandgap of the semiconducting materials should be small enough to absorb a large portion of the sunlight. However, considering the energy needed for overall water splitting (1.23 eV) and the overpotential for both oxygen and hydrogen evolution, the energy required for photoelectrolysis at a semiconductor electrode is, therefore, higher and frequently reported to be 1.6–2.4 eV.45 Third, the conduction band of the semiconductor should be more negative than the hydrogen evolution potential and the valence band should be more positive than the oxygen evolution potential so that it is thermodynamically possible to drive water splitting with photogenerated electrons and holes. Fig. 3 shows the band positions of several Cu-based metal oxides and other semiconductor candidates for solar water splitting.
 Fig. 2  Typical correlations between energy band positions and decomposition potentials. Controlling thermodynamic stability against photodecomposition: (a) stable, (b) anodic decomposition, (c) cathodic decomposition, and (d) unstable. Adapted with permission from ref. 46, Copyright (1977) Elsevier. 
 Fig. 3  Energy band diagram of several Cu-based metal oxides together with a wide range of semiconductors. The dotted lines represent the redox potentials of water splitting.9,12,14,16 
3. Cu-Based binary oxides
Copper oxides (Cu2O and CuO) have been attracting much attention in the fabrication of energy conversion devices, electrochemical sensors, and optoelectronic devices owing to their unique physical and chemical properties. These materials show promising potential in constructing highly efficient photocathodes because of their narrow bandgap, earth-abundant and non-toxic elements, and simple synthesis. However, the chemical instability of these materials limits their PEC performance. This major issue has been addressed by employing surface protection, interfacial engineering, and co-catalyst modification.
3.1. Cu2O
Cu2O (cuprous oxide) is a naturally-occurring p-type semiconductor material and one of the earliest studied materials in semiconductor electronics.56 Cu2O crystallizes in a simple cubic structure, and its unit cell contains four copper atoms and two oxygen atoms. The oxygen atoms are tetrahedrally coordinated by copper atoms as nearest neighbor and copper atoms are linearly coordinated by two neighboring oxygen atoms.57 A high Hall mobility of 100 cm2 V−1 s−1 can be achieved for single crystal and polycrystalline Cu2O prepared at high temperatures.58,59 The minority carrier diffusion length of Cu2O is in the range of 1–10 μm when a Hall mobility value larger than 50 cm2 V−1 s−1 is assumed.38,60,61 Based on a Cu2O film prepared by high-temperature oxidation, the absorption coefficient at ∼500 nm is of the order of 104 cm−1 so that a 5 μm-thick film can absorb 99% of sunlight with wavelengths shorter than 530 nm.58,62 Depending on the deposition techniques, the hole concentrations of Cu2O are ranging from 1013 to 1019 cm−3, resulting in resistivity varying from 1 to 1014 Ω cm.58,63–69 The direct bandgap of 2 eV leads to a theoretical efficiency of 18.1% for single-junction Cu2O solar cells under AM 1.5G solar illumination, thus making Cu2O a promising p-type absorber layer for solar cells and PEC applications.

3.1.1. Cu2O as a promising absorber for solar cells. 
In the 1920s and 1930s, Cu2O Schottky junctions have been investigated as rectifiers.70 During this period, the photoresponse of Cu/Cu2O was reported, although the characterization of these devices was not intended for solar cell applications.58,60 In the 1970s, the investigation of Cu2O solar cells was initiated, and Cu2O based Schottky junctions, metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) junctions, and heterojunction PV cells were studied.58 The PV performance was relatively low for these Cu2O solar cells, with the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) less than 2% for the Cu/Cu2O front-wall Schottky junction solar cells. For the metal/Cu2O Schottky junctions, it is found that most of the metals except Au, Ag, and Tl can reduce Cu2O to form a Cu/Cu2O junction, leading to a barrier height of 0.7–1.0 eV independent of the work function of metals. Tl is a low work function metal that will not reduce Cu2O, and thus a useful junction between Tl and Cu2O is expected. However, the obtained barrier height for Tl/Cu2O is found to be similar to that of Cu/Cu2O. This unexpected result can be explained by the formation of copper-rich region and presence of oxygen vacancies at the interface due to the preferential sputtering of oxygen from Cu2O during the metal evaporation process, as presented in Fig. 4a. The surface states associated with oxygen vacancy possess an energy level approximately 0.7 V above the valence band, resulting in a Fermi level pinning phenomenon that hampers the improvement of the barrier height (Fig. 4b).58,60 To avoid the defective layer induced Fermi level pinning in metal/Cu2O Schottky junctions, Cu2O based homojunctions and heterojunctions are constructed to achieve high-performance solar cells. Although the preparation of Cu2O p–n homojunction solar cells has been investigated, the achieved PCEs in Cu2O homojunction solar cells are still relatively low (<5%).71–75 McShane et al. fabricated p–n Cu2O homojunction solar cells by consecutively depositing an n-Cu2O layer on a p-Cu2O layer using the electrodeposition method and obtained a PCE of 1.06%.73 Minami et al. reported that high-quality Mn-doped Cu2O (Cu2O:Mn) or Cl-doped Cu2O (Cu2O:Cl) thin layers can be epitaxially grown on high temperature thermally oxidized p-type Na-doped Cu2O (Cu2O:Na) and the resulting p-Cu2O:Na/Cu2O:Mn/AZO and p-Cu2O:Na/Cu2O:Cl/AZO structures have a PCE of 4.21% and 4.5%, respectively.74,75 The obtained PV properties suggested the Cu2O:Mn and/or Cu2O:Cl thin films served as n- or i-type semiconductor layers. By inserting an n-type Zn–Ge–O thin film between Cu2O:Na/Cu2O:Mn and AZO, the PCE of the homojunction is increased to 4.74%.75 Further improvements of the Cu2O homojunction solar cells could be achieved by improving the crystallinity of the n-type Cu2O, the interfacial quality, and the energy band alignment between different layers.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of Cu or Tl/Cu2O structure with a copper-rich Cu2O region and a Cu2O layer with a high density of O-vacancies. (b) Proposed band diagram for a Cu or Tl/Cu2O Schottky barrier cell. The barrier height is primarily determined by a high density of donor states approximately 0.7 eV above the valence band. ① and ② represent the flow directions of electrons and holes under dark conditions, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 60, Copyright (1982) Elsevier. 
Considering the difficulty in fabricating high-quality n-type Cu2O due to the dopant self-compensation,76 constructing Cu2O-based heterojunctions should offer possible ways to realize better photovoltaic (PV) properties. Herion et al. reported the first Cu2O/ZnO heterojunction solar cell with a low PCE of 0.14%.77 The low PCE can be attributed to the formation of a Cu rich region at the interface due to the chemical reduction during the ZnO sputtering process. This is similar to the formation of Cu/Cu2O due to unintentionally Cu2O reduction at the interface during the Cu2O/metal junction fabrication. These studies highlight the sensitivity of Cu2O surface to chemical reactions and the importance of low-damage deposition methods to construct useful Cu2O heterojunctions.78 Besides ZnO, other semiconductors such as In2O3, In2O3:Sn (ITO), SnO2, CdO, and ZnSe have also been deposited on Cu2O to form heterojunctions by sputtering, however, only poor performances were reported.79,80 Significant enhancement in PCE of Cu2O heterojunctions was achieved through the systematic work by Minani's group.59,81,82 Based on Cu2O films with large grain sizes (∼1–100 mm2) and high mobility (∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1) prepared by high temperature thermally oxidation, a PCE of ∼2% was achieved for the Cu2O/ZnO and Cu2O/AZO structures using low-damage and low-temperature deposition techniques.68,83 To further improve the PCE, different binary and ternary metal oxides were introduced as the buffer layer between Cu2O and AZO, as shown in Fig. 5a–c. By introducing a thin buffer layer made of ZnO,84 Ga2O3,64,84,85 Zn0.91Mg0.09O,86 ZnGa2O4,82 Al0.025Ga0.975–O,82,87 or Zn0.38Ge0.62–O88 between the AZO and Cu2O, the PCE reached 4.13%, 5.53%, 4.31%, 5.36%, 6.1%, and 8.1%, respectively. The performance of selected Cu2O based solar cells is summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). The enhancement of PV properties can be attributed to the favorable band alignment obtained by the introduction of n-type oxide buffer layers, leading to the suppression of charge recombination.89 For example, Ga2O3 possesses an electron affinity close to that of Cu2O (3.2 eV), leading to a decreased conduction band discontinuity and defect levels at the Ga2O3/Cu2O interface, thus making it possible to achieve a high conversion efficiency. The energy band diagrams of Cu2O/AZO, Cu2O/ZnO/AZO, and Cu2O/Ga2O3/AZO structures are shown in Fig. 5d–f. Although significant achievements have been obtained with Cu2O heterojunction solar cells, the current maximum PCE for Cu2O-based heterojunction solar cells is about 8%, which is still lower than the theoretical value of 18%. To improve the PCE, the interface of the Cu2O/n-type metal oxide should be tuned carefully to decrease the defects at the interface.90–94 Moreover, the Hall mobility of Cu2O, the conduction band position, and the conductivity of the buffer layer should also be optimized to reduce charge recombination.59,81,82
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of a p-Cu2O/n-type oxide semiconductor/AZO solar cell. Current–potential (J–V) characteristics obtained in Cu2O-based heterojunction solar cells with binary metal oxides (b) and ternary metal oxides (c) as buffer layers measured under AM1.5G solar illumination. Energy band diagrams of (d) AZO/Cu2O, (e) AZO/ZnO/Cu2O, and (f) AZO/Ga2O3/Cu2O solar cells. Panels (a, b and d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright (2014) Elsevier; panel c is reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright (2016) IOP Publishing. 


3.1.2. Cu2O as promising photocathode for PEC hydrogen evolution. 
Cu2O is also a promising candidate for PEC water splitting because of its suitable bandgap of 2.0 eV. The conduction band edge of Cu2O is appropriate for the water reduction reaction,66,95 but the high valence band edge makes it ineffective for oxygen evolution.46 The main limitation for the application of Cu2O as a photocathode for water splitting is the instability in aqueous solutions because the redox potentials for the oxidation and reduction of Cu2O lie within the bandgap of Cu2O (Fig. 6b).13 This implies that Cu2O can be easily reduced to Cu under photocathodic conditions in aqueous solution. The stabilization of Cu2O can be achieved by coating n-type semiconductors on the Cu2O surface to generate a built-in electrical field that facilitates the transport of minority carriers to the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and obtain a more stable operation.13,14,38,96–101 Compared to Cu2O-based solar cells, the construction of a PEC water splitting device is subject to more constraints. For example, a co-catalyst is usually needed to promote the catalytic reaction on the photoelectrode. Moreover, considering the instability of the amorphous buffer layer in the electrolyte, the Cu2O heterojunction structure must be protected by an appropriate overlayer with good anti-photocorrosion property and favorable electron transfer at the protective layer/electrolyte interface.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/Pt structure. (b) The energy band positions for the semiconductors of the multilayer photocathode and redox levels of the involved chemical reactions. CB, conduction band; VB, valence band. (c) J–V characteristics in 1 M Na2SO4 solution, under chopped AM1.5 light illumination for the as-deposited Cu2O/5 × (4 nm ZnO/0.17 nm Al2O3)/11 nm TiO2/Pt electrode. Inset of (c) is the stability measurement of the photocathode biased at 0 V vs. RHE. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 13, Copyright (2011) Springer Nature. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx structure. (e) J–V characteristics in pH 5.0 phosphate–sulfate electrolyte of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. The first linear sweep (black trace) exhibits a strong photoreduction current in the first seconds, indicating activation of the photoelectrodeposited catalyst. Subsequent sweeps show an improved onset potential (gray trace). (f) Stability measurement of the photocathode, biased at 0 V vs. RHE under light chopping. Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 97, Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH. (g) Cross-sectional SEM image of a Cu2O/SnO2/RuO2 structure. (h) J–V characteristics of composite Cu2O/SnO2/RuO2 photocathode samples with different steam treatment conditions: without treatment and with 3 h steam treatment at temperatures of 100, 125, and 150 °C. (i) Corresponding stability measurements under continuous illumination while biased at 0 V vs. RHE. All measurements were carried out in pH 5.0 with a phosphate–sulfate electrolyte. Panels (g–i) are reproduced with permission from ref. 108, Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
3.1.2.1. Depositing wide-bandgap overlayer and conformal co-catalyst for enhanced stability. 
The attempt to stabilize Cu2O photoelectrodes dates back to 2002 when TiO2 was proposed as a protective layer.102 However, the proposed Cu2O/TiO2 structure exhibited a low photoactivity, and the stability of this photocathode was not investigated in this work. Paracchino et al. first reported a highly active Cu2O-based photocathode for solar water splitting.13,67 The issue of Cu2O instability in aqueous solution under illumination is addressed by depositing AZO and TiO2 on the electrode surface by atomic layer deposition (ALD). The local electrostatic field formed at the Cu2O/ZnO p–n junction could assist in extracting photogenerated electrons from Cu2O to the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and improve the stability. The as-deposited Cu2O/5 × (4 nm ZnO/0.17 nm Al2O3)/11 nm TiO2/Pt electrode showed photocurrent density up to 7.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0 V vs. RHE and pH of 4.9. The electrode exhibited improved stability (only 20% reduction in photocurrent after 20 min of irradiation) compared to bare Cu2O and remained active after 1 h of testing. The schematic representation, energy band alignment, and PEC performance of this electrode are presented in Fig. 6a–c. The decay of the photocurrent may be explained by the reduction of the TiO2 layer and the irreversible loss of Pt from the electrode surface.13,97 To overcome this drawback, a catalyst thin film of RuOx(40 nm) was deposited on the Cu2O/AZO(20 nm)/TiO2(100 nm) electrode to improve the stability (Fig. 6d). The RuOx-catalyzed photoelectrode exhibited much improved stability versus the Pt nanoparticles decorated photoelectrode, with a 94% stability after an 8 h light-chopping stability test (Fig. 6f).97 A photocurrent close to 5 mA cm−2 was obtained with this electrode at 0 V vs. RHE, as shown in Fig. 6e. Azevedo et al. applied a steam treatment on the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2 structure to enhance the quality of the surface for improved homogeneous co-catalysts (RuOx or Pt) deposition, leading to a photocurrent operated at 0 V vs. RHE with a 90% stability for more than 50 h under light chopping.103 To extend the pH operation range, Hu's group combined MoS2+x, Ni–Mo, and CoP with the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2 structure for PEC hydrogen evolution from acidic to basic electrolytes.104–107 The obtained photocathodes exhibited a high photocurrent (4–6 mA cm−2) both in acidic and basic electrolytes, however, their long-term stability still needs further improvements.104–106 SnO2 is another wide-bandgap transparent alternative that can be used to stabilize the Cu2O photocathode, the obtained Cu2O/SnO2/RuOx photocathode shows a stable photocurrent for 57 h.108 However, the onset potential of the Cu2O/SnO2/RuOx photocathode is relatively low, which can be explained by the unfavorable band alignment between Cu2O and SnO2 (Fig. 6h and i). Since a large photovoltage is a prerequisite of photoelectrodes for constructing tandem devices, it is highly desired to improve the photovoltage of Cu2O photocathodes by introducing new design strategies.
3.1.2.2. Engineering the band alignment to improve the photovoltage. 
Although the stability of the Cu2O photoelectrode has been improved by modifying the protective layer and co-catalyst, the photovoltage extracted from the protected Cu2O photoelectrodes is still low. This is limited by the difference between the Fermi level of Cu2O and the n-type buffer layers. Thus, the photovoltage measured on the Cu2O/ZnO/TiO2 structure was below 0.6 V.13,97,104 Depositing an n-type semiconductor with tunable Fermi level on Cu2O to form a p–n junction should provide a powerful means to improve the photovoltage. For this purpose, the n-type semiconductor deposited on Cu2O must have a negative conduction band position because the maximum achievable photovoltage is defined by the difference between the Fermi levels of the Cu2O and n-type semiconductor.89 Thus, decreasing the conduction band offset between Cu2O and the buffer layer can lead to a higher photovoltage by increasing the difference of the Fermi level between the two materials.89 As shown in Fig. 7, the Cu2O has a low electron affinity so that it is difficult to find an n-type material with a low conduction band offset with respect to Cu2O. The large conduction band offset formed between Cu2O and many n-type materials explained the observed relatively low photovoltages, including ZnO (−1.0 to −1.8 eV), TiO2 (∼−1.2 eV), and CdS (∼−0.7 eV). Based on this principle, Dai et al. reported that the introduction of a ZnS buffer layer between the Cu2O and TiO2 can shift the onset potential cathodically to some extent (0.72 V vs. RHE).109 Therefore, a rational adjustment of the buffer layer is expected to increase the photovoltage further by forming an improved energy band alignment across the multilayers.
 Fig. 7  Band energies (in flat-band condition) of n-type materials with respect to Cu2O and their respective error bars. All energies are referenced to the valence band of Cu2O. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, Copyright (2014) AIP Publishing. 
Inspired by the design of Cu2O solar cells, Li et al.14,110 introduced the Ga2O3 thin layer (20 nm) as a suitable buffer layer between the Cu2O layer and the TiO2 protective layer (15 nm) to achieve a high photovoltage and stable photocurrent. The Ga2O3 layer provides an approximately equal electron affinity to that of Cu2O, thus decreasing the height of the conduction band discontinuity at the Ga2O3/Cu2O interface and likely reducing the interfacial recombination,90 as shown in Fig. 8a. The stabilization of the photocathode is realized by first coating a conformal TiO2 thin film and then depositing a thin Pt layer to promote PEC hydrogen evolution. The Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt structure exhibited a relatively stable photocurrent of −6.3 mA cm−2 and −2.95 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE under the illumination of 500 W Xe lamp (286 mW cm−2) and AM 1.5G simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2), respectively (Fig. 8b and c). Furthermore, an extremely positive onset potential of ∼1 V vs. RHE was achieved. The significant enhancement in the photovoltage compared to that of the Cu2O/ZnO/TiO2/Pt structure can be ascribed to the smaller conduction band offset between Cu2O and Ga2O3, leading to a larger intrinsic difference in the Fermi levels and decreased interface recombination. The enhanced PEC performance observed at low applied biases demonstrates the great potential of this structure for developing superior photoelectrodes for use in tandem cells. Following this work, many subsequent studies also proved that the Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2 photocathode is a very promising configuration for achieving high photovoltage and photocurrent.15,28,111–113 Niu et al. deposited Ga2O3/AZO/TiO2 on electrodeposited Cu2O by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and investigated the effect of the PLD oxygen pressure on the PEC performance.111 It is found that the Fermi level and conduction band edge of the Ga2O3 layer can be tuned by changing the PLD oxygen pressure. Based on the Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2 structure, the authors also found that the thermally oxidized (TO) Cu2O substrates revealed a dramatically improved green/red response and a decreased blue response compared with the electrodeposited (ED) Cu2O substrates (Fig. 8f).112 Thus, the dual Cu2O based photocathode composed of TO-Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx and ED-Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx can be constructed to maximize the absorption over the entire range of above bandgap radiation, leading to a photocurrent of 7 mA cm−2 and an STH conversion efficiency of 1.9% (Fig. 8d and e). To further improve the photovoltage, a p–n Si was introduced underlying the Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx structure to form a tandem device.113 The tandem device exhibited a high photovoltage of ∼1.35 V and STH conversion efficiency of 5.51% with the help of Si p–n junctions, presenting a promising method to construct highly efficient Cu2O-based photocathodes.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic energy levels of the Cu2O/Ga2O3(20 nm)/TiO2(15 nm) structure under open circuit conditions before contacting the electrolyte solution. (b) J–V curves of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt samples with different TiO2 deposition temperature. (c) Stability measurement of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt photocathodes with different TiO2 deposition temperatures, biased at 0 V vs. RHE in a buffered electrolyte (pH 4.3). The deposition temperature for Ga2O3 is kept at 150 °C. Panels (b and c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 14, Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the dual Cu2O photocathode experiment. The transparent ED-Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode is placed in front of the TO-Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. The J–V curve (e) and IPCE (f) of the dual Cu2O photocathode. Inset of (e) is the calculated solar to current efficiency. Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright (2018) Wiley-VCH. 
3.1.2.3. Introducing micro/nanowire arrays for enhanced light absorption and charge transport. 
Nanostructuring is a promising concept to enable efficient light absorption and photogenerated carriers collection.45,114 Cu2O micro/nanowire arrays have been employed to prepare Cu2O-based photocathodes for efficient PEC hydrogen evolution.28,96,113,115–119 However, in some cases, the utilization of nanostructured photoelectrodes cannot produce performance superior to the photocathode based on the compact Cu2O film.13,96,112,115–117 For Cu2O-based photocathodes, a fair comparison of PEC performance should be performed using fully protected Cu2O films due to the strong photocorrosion of the bare Cu2O photoelectrode.66 Luo et al. constructed Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes based on the Cu2O nanowire array and planar Cu2O absorbers and investigated the PEC performance (Fig. 9a and b).118 The nanowire sample exhibited a greatly improved incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) in the wavelength range of 500–600 nm and a 25% enhancement in photocurrent density towards PEC water splitting compared to that of the planar sample was achieved (Fig. 9c). To further improve the PEC performance (e.g., photovoltage) of the Cu2O nanowire-based photocathodes, band alignment engineering through the Ga2O3 buffer layer introduction should be considered. In 2018, the same group combined a Cu2O nanowire array, Cu2O/Ga2O3 buried junction, TiO2 protective layer, and RuOx co-catalysts to realize simultaneous enhancement in light absorption, charge separation, and transport (Fig. 9d).28 The obtained photoelectrodes showed an onset potential of ∼1 V vs. RHE, a photocurrent of ∼10 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, and a stable operation exceeding 100 h (Fig. 9e). A considerable improvement in the red light response of the photocathode was observed, which was attributed to the excitonic effects present in the samples. In Fig. 9f, the enhancement in IPCE was highlighted by the shaded area between the electronic bandgap (2.1 eV, 590 nm) and optical bandgap (1.91 eV, 650 nm) of Cu2O. Vijselaar et al.113 also found that the introduction of electrodeposited Cu2O on radial Si p–n junction microwire array contributes to harvest the red part of the incoming radiation, increasing the IPCE in the range of 450–600 nm (Fig. 9g and i). Combining the Si microwires and Si radial p–n junction, the tandem microwire p–n Si/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode presented a stable photocurrent of 9.5 mA cm−2 (0 V vs. RHE, 200 h operation), an onset potential of 1.34 V vs. RHE, and an STH conversion efficiency of 5.51% (Fig. 9h). The introduction of the nanowire structure for Cu2O-based photocathodes provides an important clue to enhance the utilization of sunlight near the absorption edge, and this strategy can be extended to other emerging light absorbers to improve PEC performance.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM of Cu2O nanowire/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. (b) J–V curves of Cu2O planar film/AZO/TiO2/RuOx and Cu2O nanowire/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes under simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination (c) IPCE spectra under monochromatic illumination of Cu2O planar and nanowire-based devices. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 118, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (d) SEM of Cu2O nanowire/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. (e) J–V curves of Cu2O nanowire/AZO/TiO2/RuOx and Cu2O nanowire/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes under simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination. (f) Corresponding wavelength-dependent IPCE measurements. The shaded area represents the contribution of the excitonic effect to the total quantum yield. Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (g) SEM images of the tandem structure composed of Si microwire array and Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2 photocathode. (h) J–V curves under simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination for planar Si/Cu2O (green), planar Cu2O tandem with an underlying Si p–n junction (red), Cu2O on a microwire substrate (black), and Cu2O tandem on microwires with underlying p–n junction (blue) photocathodes. All the Cu2O here was protected by Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx overlayers. (i) Corresponding wavelength-dependent IPCE measurements for planar Si/Cu2O and a microwire Cu2O top absorber with a buried radial Si p–n junction. Panels (g–i) are reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.4. Inserting a transparent hole transporting layer (HTL) between the Cu2O and conductive substrate. 
Usually, Cu2O film is deposited on a conductive FTO layer to construct Cu2O-based photocathodes. However, as the FTO/Cu2O interface is not an ohmic contact, the transport of photogenerated holes will be hampered at the interface. To avoid this problem, Au was introduced between FTO and Cu2O to form an Au/Cu2O ohmic contact, enabling a low resistivity for hole transport.13,67,97,103,104 Since Au is a noble metal, it absorbs and reflects a large amount of solar light and makes it difficult to prepare transparent Cu2O photoelectrodes. Thus, discovering low cost and wide bandgap HTLs with appropriate band levels is critical to constructing tandem devices based on Cu2O photoelectrodes. Son et al.120 employed copper–nickel mixed oxide (CuO:NiO) to replace Au and reported an improved PEC for the FTO/CuO:NiO/Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathode when compared to the Au-based equivalents (Fig. 10a and c). The favorable band alignment between CuO:NiO and Cu2O permits to block electron–hole recombination and improve hole collection, as shown in Fig. 10b. Wei et al. also found that NiO is a promising HTL for the p-Cu2O/n-Cu2O junction based photocathodes, leading to a two-fold increase in the solar conversion efficiency compared to the sample without HTL.121 Very recently, Pan et al.15 introduced CuSCN as an efficient HTL for the Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode to enhance the hole collection (Fig. 10d). Although the valence band edge of CuSCN is lower than that of Cu2O and thus may lead to a band offset that could hinder hole transport from the Cu2O to CuSCN, the transfer of holes is found to be efficient. This can be explained by the band-tail states existing above the valence band maximum and near the Fermi level of CuSCN, thus facilitating hole transport from the valence band of Cu2O to the band-tail states of CuSCN (Fig. 10e). The photocathodes with CuSCN HTL showed an improved fill factor, leading to a high photocurrent of 5.3 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE (Fig. 10f). The photocathode with a high photocurrent at positive potentials provides an excellent platform to achieve bias-free tandem cells with a photoanode such as BiVO4.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the FTO/CuO/NiO/Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx structure. (b) Proposed mechanism for improved hole extraction in FTO/CuO/NiO/Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx structure due to the suppression of electron–hole recombination in the CuO/NiO layer. (c) J–V characteristics of Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes on 4 nm thick NiO (black), 3 nm thick Au (blue), and 4.4 nm CuO/NiO (red) under chopped illumination in a pH 5 electrolyte. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 120, Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of the FTO/Au/CuSCN/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2 structure. (e) Band energy diagrams showing the band-tail assisted hole transport between Cu2O and CuSCN. (f) J–V curves of FTO/Au/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes with or without CuSCN layer under AM 1.5G simulated illumination in pH 5 buffered electrolyte (scan rate 10 mV s−1). Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 15, Copyright (2020) Springer Nature. 
3.1.2.5. Unassisted overall solar water splitting devices based on Cu2O photocathodes. 
The high photovoltage achieved on Cu2O-based photocathodes makes it possible to construct tandem devices with a photoanode. In a tandem configuration, the solar photons with high energy are absorbed by the top cell and the photons with low energy are transmitted and absorbed by the cell underneath (Fig. 1c). The operating photocurrent of a photocathode–photoanode tandem system is determined by the overlap in photocurrent of each photoelectrode. Thus, the absorption of sunlight can be maximized to achieve high STH conversion efficiency by choosing a photocathode and photoanode with an appropriate bandgap. For example, the ideal pair of bandgaps would be 1.7 eV and 1.1 eV for a tandem system with two components.122 The hydrogen and oxygen evolution occurred on the photocathode and photoanode, respectively, without the need for an external voltage. In 2014, Bornoz et al.123 combined the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathode and BiVO4 photoanode to realize a photocathode–photoanode (PEC–PEC) system for unassisted overall solar water splitting (Fig. 11a). The thickness of the BiVO4 photoanode was tuned to optimize the light absorption on BiVO4 top photoelectrode and Cu2O bottom photoelectrode (Fig. 11b and c). Finally, the unassisted two-electrode system showed an initial photocurrent of 1 mA cm−2, and the photocurrent was found to decay over minutes due to the detachment of the Co–Pi co-catalyst on BiVO4. Dias et al.124 constructed an innovative photoelectrode–photovoltaic (PEC–PV) water splitting tandem device by employing a Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx as the photocathode and a hybrid perovskite solar cell as the rear absorber (Fig. 11d). A very thin Au layer was introduced between Cu2O and FTO to enable efficient light transmittance and high PEC performance. The tandem device is capable of performing unassisted water splitting at up to 2 mA cm−2 (corresponding to an STH conversion efficiency of 2.5%), as shown in Fig. 11e and f. The operation photocurrent of the tandem device is highly limited by the low photovoltage (<0.6 V) of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2 structure, which is attributed to the unfavorable band alignment between Cu2O and AZO.14,97 The significant progress obtained on the Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2 structure extended the photovoltage to ∼1 V vs. RHE and photocurrent to 10 mA cm−2 (0 V vs. RHE),28 providing an ideal low-cost photoelectrode that can be connected in series with a photoanode or a solar cell. By combining a planar Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode and a BiVO4 photoanode, a photocurrent of 2.5 mA cm−2 and record STH conversion efficiency of ∼3% were obtained with this PEC–PEC system (Fig. 11g–i).28 Recently, an FTO/Au/CuSCN/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx was used as a top photoelectrode and a perovskite solar cell was employed as a rear absorber to construct a PEC–PV system (Fig. 11j).15 Benefiting from the high photovoltage and fill factor of the photocathode, the STH conversion efficiency of an unassisted water splitting system was determined to be 4.55% (Fig. 11k and l). The detailed PEC performance of some representative Cu2O based photocathodes is summarized in Table S2 (ESI†).
 Fig. 11  (a) Simplified electron energy diagram of a BiVO4 photoanode–Cu2O photocathode tandem cell for overall water splitting. (b) IPCE of Cu2O at 0 V vs. RHE shown in comparison to the standard AM1.5G photon flux (black, right axis). The expected electron flux produced by the photocathode in tandem with the BiVO4 photoanodes of different thicknesses is shown as the shaded areas. (c) J–V curves for the BiVO4 photoanodes with (solid lines) and without (dashed lines) photo-deposited cobalt catalyst under simulated solar illumination (100 mWcm−2). The |J|–V curves for Cu2O photocathode as measured in the tandem cell position are shown as dotted lines in the corresponding color. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 123, Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx-perovskite solar cell tandem cell during operation (IrO2 is employed as a counter electrode). (e) The plot of the spectral flux of photons in the AM1.5G spectrum, and the expected electron current flux of photocathode and PV obtained from the multiplication of their respective IPCE responses by the photon flux. For the measurement of IPCE, the photocathode was biased at +0.3 V vs. RHE and the PV was measured at a short circuit. Integration yields the expected current densities labeled for each component. (f) J–V curves of the photocathode and anode components with overlaid J–V response of the photovoltaic cell. The photocathode configuration was 3 nm Au + 260 nm Cu2O + ALD overlayers + 20 min electrodeposited RuO2 surface catalyst. Panel (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 124, Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH. (g) Illustration of the all-oxide tandem solar water splitting device, consisting of Cu2O as the photocathode and molybdenum-doped BiVO4 (Mo:BiVO4) as the photoanode without bias. (h) Wavelength-dependent IPCE spectra for Cu2O photocathode, BiVO4 photoanode, and the tandem devices. (i) J–V response under simulated air mass 1.5G chopped illumination for the Cu2O photocathode, BiVO4 photoanode, and Cu2O photocathode behind the BiVO4 photoanode in 0.2 M potassium borate (pH 9.0). The crossing point gives ∼2.4 mA cm−2 and ∼3% STH efficiency. Panel (g–i) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (j) Illustration of PEC–PV tandem configuration based on CuSCN-incorporated Cu2O photocathode, PSC, and IrOx anode. (k) The plot of photon flux based on AM 1.5G spectrum and expected electron fluxes of photocathode and PV calculated from wavelength-dependent IPCE responses of photocathode at 0.5 V vs. RHE and PV at short circuit. (l) Estimated tandem operating current density by overlaying J–V curves of photocathodes, J–V curves of PV cells, and linear-sweep voltammetry of IrOx anode. PEC 25, PEC 50, and PEC 100 indicate the photocathodes with three thicknesses of Cu2O, where the numbers denote the duration of deposition in minutes. Panels (j–l) are reproduced with permission from ref. 15, Copyright (2020) Springer Nature. 
3.1.2.6. Perspectives for Cu2O based photocathodes. 
Despite the realization of high photovoltage and relatively stable photocurrent of Cu2O-based photocathodes by coating appropriate overlayers on Cu2O, much effort remains before achieving STH conversion efficiencies necessary for commercial applications. It is reported that the enhancement of photovoltage of Cu2O is hindered by bulk charge recombination due to bulk defect states.125 Thus, to improve the carrier transport properties in bulk Cu2O, doping can be introduced to tune the carrier density, conductivity, and mobility by varying the dopants and annealing temperature.85,126–128 For example, with a Na doping of Cu2O, the hole concentration can reach 1013–1016 cm−3 while maintaining a high Hall mobility above 100 cm2 V−1 s−1.85 The Cu2O films with high mobility, low resistivity, and large grain size could provide excellent substrates for homo/heterojunction construction towards high STH conversion efficiency. One method to enlarge the photocurrent is to improve the conductivity of overlayers by doping and thus decreasing the energy loss during the chemical reactions. Hence, transparent conducting multi-component oxides such as Zn1−xGaxO, Zn1−xMgxO, Al1−x GaxO, and Zn1−xGex–O can be applied as a promising buffer layer for the development of Cu2O-based photocathodes.82,86–88 The electron affinity of multi-component oxides can be easily tuned to achieve a favorable band alignment with Cu2O for achieving decreased charge recombination. In many cases, the theoretical photovoltage for Cu2O based solar cells and Cu2O photocathodes with a buried junction is considered to be determined by the built-in voltage Vbi (difference between the Fermi level of the p-type and n-type layers before contact). This applies to the homojunction solar cells. However, for the heterojunction solar cells, the photovoltage can exceed Vbi due to the additional driving force for charge separation that can be introduced by the steps in electron affinity or density of states.129,130 Thus, although a low Vbi is suggested for Cu2O/AZO structure, a high photovoltage of >1.2 V can be expected based on drift-diffusion semiconductor modeling.129,131 The obtained low photovoltage for the Cu2O/AZO structure can be explained by the existence of an interface recombination layer.129,131 The results highlight the importance of precise interface control of the heterojunction, which is the key step to boost the conversion efficiency of Cu2O-based solar cells and PEC devices. Another important aspect is the determination of the structural change at the heterojunction interface during long-term stability measurements that has so far only given elusive experimental results. By using a dual working electrode (DWE) technique, the pn+Si and Cu2O/Ga2O3 buried junction with a TiO2 protective layer was investigated, as shown in Fig. 12a and b.132 In this configuration, the surface potential can be tested during operation, and an operando deconvolution of the PV and electrocatalytic performance of the photocathode can be obtained by reconstructing the J–ΔV curves (reminiscent of PV J–V curves) from the three-electrode linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) data. Thus, this technique can help to distinguish between PEC performance degradation originating from the instability of the catalyst on the electrode surface and instability of the PV output of the buried p–n junction. By using this method, it is found that the photovoltage of Cu2O/Ga2O3 decreased over time (Fig. 12c), indicating that degradation has occurred at the buried junction part. The results suggest that further investigations are needed to properly monitor the change at the junction interface during PEC operation.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the dual working electrode (DWE) configuration used during PEC measurements with a pn+Si/TiO2/Pt photocathode. (b) Schematic structure of a Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt photocathode. The thickness of Ga2O3 and TiO2 ALD-layers are 20 and 100 nm, respectively. WE1 controls the back contact potential V1 and WE2 measures the surface potential V2. (c) J–ΔV curves (dashed) of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt before and after 2 h stability test, overlaid with the corresponding J–V1 curves (solid). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2. CuO
CuO (cupric oxide) is intrinsically a p-type semiconductor with a narrow bandgap of 1.2–1.5 eV so that this material could be a good absorber to harvest a significant portion of the solar spectrum.133,134 The crystal structure of CuO is monoclinic with a C2/c symmetry. The copper atom is coordinated by four oxygen atoms in an approximately square planar configuration.135 The conduction band edge of CuO lies at a more negative potential relative to the hydrogen evolution level, making it a suitable semiconductor for water reduction.133,136 The flat band potential of CuO is around 0.9 V vs. RHE, indicating a potential large photovoltage for PEC water splitting. Although the material presents an advantage in its light-harvesting property, the research for CuO based solar cells and photocathodes is not intensive. The PCE of CuO based heterojunction solar cells are still below 3%,137–146 which may be attributed to the high defect density of polycrystalline CuO films and low quality of the heterojunction interface. As a photocathode, the CuO is unstable under water reduction operation conditions because its redox potentials for reduction and oxidation of copper oxide lie within the bandgap (Fig. 13b).13,136,147 In the water reduction process, the CuO will be reduced to Cu2O and further reduction leads to the formation of metallic Cu. Thus, the construction of high-quality p–n junctions on CuO is critically important to provide a high photovoltage for water splitting, and a protective layer is needed to against photocorrosion.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the FTO/Au/CuO/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode. (b) Relative band positions of CuO/CdS/TiO2 heterojunctions. (c) J–V curves of CuO/TiO2 (with Pt) and CuO/CdS/TiO2 with and without Pt-catalyst measured in 1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7) under chopped illumination from simulated 1 sun illumination. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 16, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2 structure. (e) Relative band positions of CuO/ZnO/TiO2 heterojunctions. The approximated band positions and band gaps of the semiconductors were adapted from ref. 16 and 67. (f) J–V curves of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes fabricated with TiO2 sputtering power from 50 to 200 W. Panel f is reproduced with permission from ref. 170, Copyright (2018) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although quite a few reports have been published to improve the photoactivity of CuO photocathodes by introducing nanostructures,148–156 plasmonic metals,157,158 and doping,159–161 the intrinsic instability of CuO cannot be easily addressed by these approaches. By controlling the crystallinity and stoichiometric composition, the stability of CuO photocathode can be improved to some extent, but the self-reduction reaction is still inevitable as evidenced by the presence of large dark currents.162–165 Most importantly, although some reports claimed that a large portion of the photocurrent for the bare CuO photocathodes is contributed by hydrogen production,149,166 Emin and Tilley's group found that the photocurrent was almost entirely caused by photocorrosion.16,136 Thus, to avoid the photocorrosion and enhance the carrier separation at the CuO surface, a protective strategy is necessary, and the determination of faradaic efficiency for CuO based photocathode is of crucial importance to confirm whether the photoelectrode is effectively protected. Although many CuO based heterojunction photocathodes have been developed for water reduction,16,166–175 only the CuO/buffer layer/protective layer/co-catalyst structure showed significant performance enhancement.16,170 By depositing a CdS buffer layer using a solution method and a TiO2 protective layer by ALD on CuO, Tilly's group obtained a CuO/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode with a photocurrent of 1.68 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and an onset potential of 0.45 V vs. RHE (Fig. 13a–c).16 The protected photocathode also showed a stable photocurrent (biased at 0 V vs. RHE) for 30 min. A 100% faradaic efficiency was confirmed by the determination of hydrogen amount by gas chromatography (GC), indicating successful protection for this configuration. The same group also tried ALD-ZnO as a buffer layer, however, the photocurrent was low and a large dark current was observed. This may be ascribed to the occurrence of CuO reduction during the ALD deposition process of ZnO, leading to the degradation of the heterojunction interface. Based on magnetron sputtering, Masudy-Panah et al. constructed a CuO/ZnO/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode and reported a photovoltage of 0.53 V, a photocurrent of 5.3 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, and a photostability of 87% after 5 hours (Fig. 13d–f).170 The results suggest that the fabrication technique and deposition parameters affect the heterojunction quality significantly. The noticeable dark current observed on this photocathode also suggested a low quality of the heterojunction interface for the presented structure (Fig. 13f).
CuO photocathode is expected to show very promising PEC performance due to the narrow bandgap and favorable band position. Future work should focus on the development of high-quality CuO based p–n junction and the use of advanced techniques to characterize the structure–photoactivity relationships of these structures. The protective strategy applied to other unstable p-type semiconductor photocathodes (e.g., Cu2O,14 Si,2 InP,3 and CuInS27) should be adopted to optimize the band alignment and improve the photovoltage and photocurrent, so that new designs for highly efficient CuO based photocathodes can be proposed. For the CuO/CdS/TiO2/Pt structure, the IPCE measurements indicated that the photocurrent originated mainly from charge collection at wavelengths <700 nm, which is shorter than the absorption edge of CuO (∼817 nm).16 Considering that the nanostructured Cu2O photocathode exhibited a greatly improved IPCE in wavelength near the absorption edge (500–600 nm),113,118 the introduction of CuO nanowires should be considered to enhance the IPCE in the wavelength range of 700–800 nm. Moreover, the fabrication method of CuO should also be optimized to improve the crystallinity and grain size, reduce the trap density and enhance the carrier collection.
4. Cu-Based ternary oxides
Although Cu2O-based photocathodes achieve promising PEC performance by carefully constructing buried junctions and introducing protective layers and co-catalysts, their bandgap of 2.0 eV limits the theoretical maximum efficiency to 18%. Furthermore, the bandgap of ∼2.0 eV is not optimal for the top photoelectrode used in tandem devices.122 In recent years, ternary metal oxides have emerged as alternative p-type semiconductors for PEC hydrogen evolution.11 Depending on the selection of the transition metal (M) and the Cu coordination environment, the bandgap of CuMxOy can be controlled from ∼1.2 eV to >3.0 eV.12 This class of metal oxides exhibit large tunability in terms of band gaps, band edges, and electrical properties, making them excellent absorbers for PEC solar energy conversion applications, as summarized in Table S2 (ESI†).
4.1. CuBi2O4
CuBi2O4 has a tetragonal crystal structure and consists stacks of square planar Cu(II)O4 groups linked to distorted trigonal Bi(III)O6 polyhedra, as shown in Fig. 14a.19,176 The valence and conduction band edges of CuBi2O4 arise primarily from the Bi 6s and Cu 3d orbitals, respectively.11 With a bandgap of 1.5–1.8 eV, p-CuBi2O4 is a good light absorber for sunlight utilization and has the potential to serve as a high-performance photocathode for PEC water splitting.18,19,177,178 According to theoretical calculations, an STH conversion efficiency of ∼24% is expected based on CuBi2O4 absorber under AM 1.5G sunlight. The HER and OER potentials are within the CuBi2O4 bandgap, and thus enable water splitting. The flat-band potential is located at ∼1.2 V vs. RHE, suggesting the capability to develop a high photovoltage for the reduction of water to hydrogen, as shown in Fig. 14b.18,178 Thus, it is expected that the combination of the CuBi2O4 photocathode with a well-developed photoanode (e.g., BiVO4, Ta3N5) could achieve a high-performance bias-free tandem structure for overall water splitting. The first investigation of CuBi2O4 as a photocathode was achieved by Arai et al. in 2007.17 The authors used a high-throughput screening system to search for narrow bandgap photo(electro)catalysts and found CuBi2O4 to be a new photocathode with visible-light-response. Although several attempts have been conducted to improve the performance of CuBi2O4 photocathodes, the fabricated photocathodes exhibited a photocurrent smaller than 1 mA cm−2 for water reduction.18,19,178–185 This could be attributed to low carrier mobility, apparent surface recombination, and intrinsic instability of CuBi2O4.18,19,186 Berglund et al.18 performed a comprehensive evaluation of CuBi2O4 and provided important insights into the limitations of this semiconductor. It was revealed that the light absorption of CuBi2O4 films is relatively weak, and a gradual instead of a sharp increase in absorption for photon energies above the bandgap was observed. It was also reported that a direct bandgap property for this semiconductor cannot be conclusively determined. Based on the absorption data obtained on CuBi2O4, a maximum light absorption photocurrent of 10 mA cm−2 was estimated. The mobility and carrier diffusion length of the CuBi2O4 film was measured to be 1.2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 10–50 nm, respectively. As a result, the STH conversion efficiency of CuBi2O4 is largely limited by the poor hole carrier transport. The DFT calculations suggested that a reductive photocorrosion of the material can be induced by the trapping of photoelectrons in the Cu 3d band (Fig. 14c).19 The instability of CuBi2O4 photoelectrode is also observed in other experimental works.178,186 Thus, the light absorption, charge carrier collection, and stability of CuBi2O4 photocathodes need to be enhanced, and various strategies have been developed to address the key limitations of CuBi2O4.
 Fig. 14  (a) The CuBi2O4 crystal structure as viewed at an arbitrary angle. The Bi, Cu, O atoms are represented by blue, orange, and red spheres, respectively. (b) Schematic showing the band positions, quasi-Fermi levels for electrons (EF,n) and holes (EF,p), and obtainable photovoltage (Vph) for a CuBi2O4 photocathode in relation to the H+/H2 and H+,O2/H2O electrochemical potentials under the idealized assumption that the photogenerated electrons can reduce H+. The schematic is based on the cathodic photocurrent onset potential for the two-electrode chopped (dark/light) linear sweep voltammetry scans in phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with H2 bubbling. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 18, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Energy scheme of the CuBi2O4 photocatalytic system at the point of zero charge. Visible light irradiation (1.75–3.0 eV) of the material promotes electrons from the valence band into the Cu 3d band, while UV illumination (>3.1 eV) populates the more reducing Bi 3p states above. The photocorrosion of the material can occur by the trapping photoelectrons in the Cu 3d band. Panel c is reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.1.1. Inserting a transparent HTL between CuBi2O4 and the conductive substrate. 
One limitation of the CuBi2O4 thin film photocathodes is found in the unfavorable hole transport across the CuBi2O4/FTO Schottky barrier. Thus, the introduction of a more favorable back-contact layer between FTO and CuBi2O4 could enhance the PEC performance of the CuBi2O4 based photocathodes. Cao et al.179 employed an Au thin layer between FTO and CuBi2O4 and reported an improved crystal quality of the deposited CuBi2O4 film. Furthermore, an upward band bending should be generated at the CuBi2O4/Au interface, which contributes to the transfer of photo-excited holes to the back contact (Fig. 15a). The FTO/Au/CuBi2O4 photocathode exhibited a photocurrent of −0.3 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE, which is more than two times larger than that of the FTO/CuBi2O4 photoelectrode (Fig. 15b). Besides Au, CuO and NiO183,187–189 have also been used as an HTL for CuBi2O4 photocathodes. Lee et al.189 found that a NiO film deposited between CuBi2O4 and FTO improved the PEC performance of the CuBi2O4 photocathode. The presence of NiO film resulted in a 50% improvement in the photocurrent compared to the samples without NiO. This performance enhancement can be attributed to the type-II band alignment for the NiO/CuBi2O4 heterojunction that is known to improve carrier collection. A similar photocurrent enhancement (∼25%) can also be observed on the CuBi2O4 photocathodes with Cu doped NiO (Cu:NiO) HTL (Fig. 15c and d).183 In this case, a photocurrent of 0.5 and 2.83 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE can be produced on the FTO/Cu:NiO/CuBi2O4 photocathode tested in electrolyte without and with H2O2 electron scavenger, respectively. Thus, the introduction of HTL between FTO and CuBi2O4 provides an effective means to reduce the barrier height at the CuBi2O4/FTO interface as well as contribute to the selective extraction of the photogenerated holes.
 Fig. 15  Schematic of energy-band diagrams for Au/CuBi2O4 (a) and Cu:NiO/CuBi2O4 structures (c). (b) Chopped linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) scans for CuBi2O4 and Au/CuBi2O4 in 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution. (d) Chopped LSV scans for CuBi2O4 and Cu:NiO/CuBi2O4 photocathodes in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with Ar bubbling and with H2O2. Inset in (d) shows the average photocurrent densities (at least 3 samples) at 0.6 V vs. RHE extracted from LSV scans for photocathodes with different thicknesses. All measurements were performed under AM 1.5G illumination. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (c and d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright (2019) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.2. Doping of CuBi2O4 for enhanced stability and photocurrent. 
The incorporation of additional elements or doping is a promising way to improve the PEC performance of semiconductors.190–193 Berglund et al. investigated the incorporation of transition and post-transition metals (M) into CuBi2O4 through combinatorial chemistry to improve the PEC hydrogen production performance (Fig. 16a and b).194 It is found that Ag was the most effective element to improve the photoactivity of CuBi2O4, and the Bi–Ag–Cu oxide with an atomic ratio of 22:3:11 showed four times higher photocurrent than that of CuBi2O4 at 0.6 V vs. RHE (Fig. 16c and d). The authors suggested that Ag segregated primarily as reduced Ag in CuBi2O4 and contributed to improving the conductivity and charge transport through the film. The Bi–Ag–Cu oxide films were relatively stable during operation in neutral aqueous electrolytes, and the addition of Pt co-catalyst did not improve the photocurrent obviously but did enhance the photocurrent during long-term operation. Furthermore, hydrogen evolution was confirmed at a potential of 0.6 V vs. RHE for the photocathode with Pt co-catalyst but not for the film without Pt. Based on a similar combinatorial method, Compton et al.195 found that the introduction of Na-doping increased the absorbance in the 600–800 nm range, offering a way to improve the IPCE near the absorption edge of the CuBi2O4 photocathode. Choi's group178 reported the synthesis of Ag-doped CuBi2O4 by adding a trace amount of Ag+ in the plating medium for co-deposition. For the Ag-doped CuBi2O4, Ag+ substitutionally replaced Bi3+ ions, which likely follows a different mechanism from that of the Ag metal incorporation in Berglund's studies. Compared to CuBi2O4, the Ag-doped CuBi2O4 showed photocurrent and stability enhancement for oxygen reduction (Fig. 16e and f). The enhanced stability observed for Ag-doped CuBi2O4 during the oxygen reduction process suggested that the Ag doping suppressed the anodic photocorrosion due to the increased hole concentration. However, the Ag doping cannot alleviate cathodic photocorrosion, leading to poor stability for the Ag-doped CuBi2O4 photocathode under water reduction conditions. The results revealed that poor interfacial electron injection kinetics cannot be addressed by the increased hole concentration induced by Ag-doping. In this study, the photocurrent obtained under water reduction conditions was very low and unstable, leading to an undetectable hydrogen generation. Besides external element doping, gradient self-doping is also introduced to prepare CuBi2O4 photocathodes with a forward gradient in copper vacancies that can generate an internal electric field within CuBi2O4.181 The Fermi level energy of CuBi2O4 can be tuned by changing the concentration of copper vacancies, and thus the formation of copper vacancies gradient leads to a gradient in the Fermi level and a built-in electric field can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 17a–c. It is found that the CuBi2O4 photocathode with a forward gradient showed an enhanced charge separation efficiency and improved PEC performance. However, the stability of the CuBi2O4 photocathodes is still limited by self-reduction during operation. Thus, other methods, such as the introduction of a protective layer/conformal catalyst layer and the construction of a built-in field, are critically needed for efficient hydrogen production on CuBi2O4 photocathodes.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of array dispenser (a) and scanner (b). (c) Bi–Ag–Cu array scan results. Each spot had a total of 36 drops with a spot spacing of 1000 mm. Scanned at a potential of 0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl (0.45 V vs. RHE) with an optical fiber tip scan rate of 250 μm s−1. (d) Chopped (dark/light) LSV scans for CuBi2O4 and Bi:Ag:Cu = 22:3:11 oxide films synthesized by drop-cast in 0.1 M Na2SO4 and 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8). Measurements were done using backside illumination (100 mW cm−2) and a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. Panels (a–d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 194, Copyright (2013) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) J–V plots (scan rate = 10 mV s−1) and (f) current–time (J–t) plots at 0.6 V vs. RHE of CuBi2O4 (black) and Ag–CuBi2O4 (red) measured in 0.1 M NaOH solution (pH 12.8) saturated with O2 under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. Dotted lines in (e) represent dark currents for O2 reduction. The inset in (f) shows photographs of CuBi2O4 and Ag–CuBi2O4 electrodes after the J–t measurement. Panels (e and f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 178, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 17  (a) Flat-band potential of homogeneous CuBi2O4 films with different stoichiometries, (b) the formation of a CuBi2O4 homojunction when brought into contact, and (c) the formation of CuBi2O4 with forward gradient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 


4.1.3. Forming heterojunction on CuBi2O4 to improve charge separation and stability. 
As mentioned before, the PEC performance of CuBi2O4 is largely limited by poor charge separation at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and charge transport in the bulk material, as well as the self-reduction of materials occurring during the operation. One effective way to address the problem is to develop a heterojunction on CuBi2O4 to create a built-in field for enhanced charge separation. Different heterojunctions such as CuBi2O4/TiO2,196,197 CuBi2O4/Cu,198 CuBi2O4/CuO,199,200 CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2,181 CuBi2O4/ZnSe/TiO2,201 CuBi2O4/AgI,202 and CuBi2O4/BiVO4203 were fabricated to improve the performance of CuBi2O4 photocathodes. However, it should be noted that most of the CuBi2O4-based heterojunction photocathodes did not show obvious enhancement in photocurrent, photovoltage, and stability compared with bare CuBi2O4 samples. Furthermore, the faradaic efficiency and hydrogen production measurements are not reported in most of these studies. In contrast, for the Cu2O heterojunction construction, the photovoltage, photocurrent, and stability are improved significantly, and the hydrogen production on the Cu2O heterojunction photocathode is confirmed. Wang et al.181 provided information about the inhibition of photocorrosion of CuBi2O4 by introducing a CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/Pt structure. The authors fabricated a CuBi2O4 homojunction with a gradient in the Fermi level to create a built-in electric field, without the introduction of an external dopant. Then, a CdS/TiO2 layer was deposited on CuBi2O4 to reduce photocorrosion. The band diagrams of CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2 structure are presented in Fig. 18a and b. The protected photocathode presented a nearly complete suppression of the dark current from 1 to 0 V vs. RHE, and a photocurrent of −1 mA cm−2 (0 V vs. RHE) was obtained, indicating successful protection of the CuBi2O4 from photocorrosion (Fig. 18c). The stability of the protected photocathode can be extended to 3 h and a decrease of 38% in the photocurrent was observed during the operation (Fig. 18d). The hydrogen production occurring at potentials ≤0.3 V vs. RHE was directly confirmed by differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) and a faradaic efficiency of 91% for hydrogen evolution was obtained. Although these results achieved on the protected photocathode are encouraging, the obtained photocurrent onset potential of 0.5–0.6 V vs. RHE is much more negative than that of the bare CuBi2O4 photocathode (∼1 V vs. RHE). The hydrogen production onset potential of ∼0.3 V vs. RHE indicated that the internal built-in field of this CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2 structure is very low and, therefore, bias-free water splitting with a photoanode (e.g., BiVO4) is unrealistic at this stage,20 unless the photovoltage can be improved to a reasonable value (>0.9 V). Moreover, the attained photocurrent is much lower than the theoretical maximum value. This may be ascribed to the imperfect interface quality and/or unfavorable band alignment between CuBi2O4 and CdS.
 Fig. 18  Estimated band diagrams of CuBi2O4, CdS, and TiO2 (a) before contact, and (b) in contact as a CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2 photocathode in relation to electrochemical redox potentials for proton reduction (H+/H2) and water oxidation (H+, O2/H2O). EF is the Fermi level, EC is the conduction band, EV is the valence band, and Vph is the estimated photovoltage. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. (c) Chopped LSV for a forward gradient on CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode, and (d) constant potential measurements for an unprotected CuBi2O4 photocathode at 0.6 V vs. RHE (red line) and a forward gradient on CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode at 0.0 V vs. RHE (blue line). Measurements were done in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with N2 bubbling under front (CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/Pt) and back (CuBi2O4) illumination. Panels (c and d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 


4.1.4. Unassisted overall solar water splitting devices based on CuBi2O4 photocathodes. 
Since the CuBi2O4 photocathodes showed a very positive onset potential (∼1 V vs. RHE) during PEC measurements, these photocathodes are excellent top photoelectrodes that can be combined with a photoanode to realize water splitting without external bias. The CuBi2O4 photocathodes have been combined with BiVO4200,204 and TiO2205 photoanodes to construct bias-free tandem cells. Limited by the low photocurrent of CuBi2O4, the obtained tandem devices are not efficient. Moreover, the photocorrosion of CuBi2O4 severely hindered the stability of the system, and the faradaic efficiency for hydrogen production should be extremely low without appropriate protection.178 To achieve a successful tandem device for overall water splitting, both photoelectrodes should be protected and a rigorous determination of the gas evolution is needed to confirm the feasibility of the proposed devices. Recently, Song et al. investigated the CuBiO4–BiVO4 tandem structure and provided important insights into the significance of the photovoltage in tandem systems for overall water splitting (Fig. 19a and b).20 It is found that the W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode produces oxygen at applied potentials larger than 0.7 V vs. RHE (Fig. 19c). Besides, no hydrogen production can be observed on the CuBi2O4 photocathode with Pt and RuOx used as co-catalysts, indicating that the photocurrent primarily originated from photocorrosion instead of water reduction. After the surface modification/protection, the obtained the CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode was not affected by photocorrosion and generated hydrogen at potentials ≤0.3 V vs. RHE (Fig. 19d). For the tandem devices composed of the CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode and the W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode, the hydrogen evolution can be detected under illumination at an applied bias ≥0.4 V (Fig. 19e). The requirement on the external bias for this tandem structure may be ascribed to the relatively low quasi-Fermi level splitting within CuBi2O4 and BiVO4. This work first demonstrated the hydrogen production from a CuBi2O4–BiVO4 tandem structure with a certain external bias, highlighting the importance of preventing photocorrosion and improving internal photovoltage for these photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 19  (a) Simplified energy diagram of a tandem cell consisting of a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode and CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode submerged in aqueous electrolyte and “wired” for overall photoelectrochemical water splitting. The diagram illustrates that the CdS/TiO2 heterojunction layer protects CuBi2O4 from photocorrosion and that the photovoltage within CuBi2O4 is relatively small so that an applied bias of ≥0.4 V is required to drive overall water splitting. (b) LSV scans for a W:BiVO4 photocathode (green solid line), W:BiVO4 photocathode with CoPi co-catalyst (blue solid line), CuBi2O4 photocathode with Pt as an electrocatalyst behind a W:BiVO4 photocathode (red solid line), and a CuBi2O4 photocathode with CdS/TiO2/RuOx protection and electrocatalyst layers behind a W:BiVO4 photocathode (orange solid line) measured with Ar bubbling. (c) DEMS LSV scans for a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode, and (d) CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode under illumination. (e) Simultaneous current vs. time and H2 gas signal vs. time measurements for a W:BiVO4/CoPi–CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx tandem cell measured in two-electrode configuration with various applied biases as labeled (0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.5 V). (f) Two-electrode LSV scans for a tandem device consisting of a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode and CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode (W:BiVO4/CoPi vs. CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx) under illumination (red solid line) and in the dark (green dashed line) and a single photoelectrode device consisting of a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode vs. Pt wire measured under illumination (blue solid line) and in the dark (black dashed line). Measurements were done in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8) under AM 1.5G simulator (100 mW cm−2) and electrolyte was continuously purged with Ar gas during the measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. 


4.1.5. Perspectives for CuBi2O4 based photocathodes. 
In summary, the development of efficient CuBi2O4 based photocathodes that can produce hydrogen at positive potentials require the detail control of numerous material properties. To employ CuBi2O4 thin films as an absorber layer, the columnar grain structure with large grain size is preferred to minimize carrier recombination at the grain boundaries and thus improve carrier mobility.206 Although different techniques such as electrodeposition, spin coating/dip coating, and spray pyrolysis have been used to prepare CuBi2O4 thin films on FTO substrates, the grain sizes of CuBi2O4 are usually smaller than 300 nm. The crystallization, electrical resistivity, and carrier mobility should be investigated systematically to achieve conformal coating of CuBi2O4 thin films with large size columnar grains on FTO. Recently, a novel method was developed to prepare CuBi2O4 films by sequentially depositing Bi2O3 and CuO layers on FTO and subsequently applying rapid thermal processing.207 This method gives pure-phase and highly crystalline films with better stability for PEC measurements and sheds light on the design of highly efficient CuBi2O4 photocathodes by engineering the crystallinity and stoichiometry of films. Since the intrinsic instability of CuBi2O4 photocathodes is induced by self-reduction during the operation, a careful protection process must be introduced. Although hydrogen production on protected CuBi2O4 has been confirmed, the observed effective photovoltage is very low (≤0.6 V) (Fig. 19f). Thus, further improvements of the photovoltage of the CuBi2O4 photocathodes is crucial. The efficient bias-free water splitting tandem devices composed of a CuBi2O4 photocathode and a BiVO4 photoanode can only be realized when the photovoltage of CuBi2O4 increased to >0.9 V. In this case, the band alignment and interface quality between the absorber layer and the protective layer play key roles to guarantee efficient charge separation. Low damage and low energy deposition techniques are suggested for the preparation of the overlayers on CuBi2O4 to avoid detrimental chemical reactions at the interface. The interface structure should be characterized by TEM, XPS, and other advanced techniques to figure out the performance limiting factors for CuBi2O4 heterojunctions. For example, the possible existence of Cu-rich or O-rich surface layers on CuBi2O4 may lead to a defective interfacial layer, resulting in a large loss in photovoltage and photocurrent. The search for a more suitable electron-selective layer is another important topic to improve the conduction-band alignment with CuBi2O4. The multi-component oxides (e.g., Zn(O,S), and (Mg,Zn)O) with tunable band edges and electrical properties provide a large number of candidates for electron-selective layers with potential to achieve high photovoltages.89

4.2. Copper delafossites: CuFeO2
The copper oxide delafossite structures have the formula of CuMO2 (M = Fe, Rh, Ga, Co, Cr, In), in which Cu and M are a monovalent cation and a trivalent positive ion, respectively.208 Cu+ ions are primarily coordinated to two O2− ions linearly and the O–Cu–O array is parallel to the c-axis of the hexagonal structure. The M3+ ions are coordinated to six O2− ions in a distorted octahedron. The layers of Cu+ ions and [MO2−] perpendicular to the c-axis are stacked alternatively, forming a layered crystal structure.209,210Fig. 20a shows the crystal structure of the rhombohedral 3R-CuFeO2. The Cu 3d is hybridized with O 2p and contributes to the composition of the valence band, and the valence band edge and conduction band edge are constituted by Cu-3d and M 3d states, respectively.211–213 Depending on the M cations, the bandgap of copper delafossites is ranging from ∼1.5 eV (CuFeO2), 1.9 eV (CuRhO2) to >3 eV (CuCoO2, CuCrO2). Considering that narrow bandgap semiconductors with earth-abundant constituents are more attractive for solar water splitting, CuFeO2 is discussed in detail in the following section to clarify the bottlenecks and help to address the main problems of this material.
 Fig. 20  (a) Crystal structure of rhombohedral 3R-CuFeO2. The Cu, Fe, and O atoms are given in brown, cyan, and gray, respectively. (b) Proposed band energy diagram of CuFeO2 under flat-band conditions. The optically forbidden band (OFB) is not accessible from the valence band (VB) by a transition of energy Eg1, whereas a transition induced by a photon of energy Eg2 can excite an electron to the optical conduction band (OCB). Panel b is reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH. (c) UV/Vis spectrum of a CuFeO2 film on FTO corrected for the substrate. Insets: Corresponding direct (right) and indirect (left) Tauc plots. Panels (a and c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 213, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (d) J–V scans for CuFeO2 photocathode measured with chopped light in 1 M NaOH purged with Ar (black) and O2 (blue) (scan rate, 10 mV s−1), and (e) photocurrent measured at 0.6 V vs. RHE in 1 M NaOH purged with Ar (black) and O2 (blue) (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Panels (d and e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
For CuFeO2, the conduction band edge is higher than the hydrogen production level and the valence band edge is lower than the oxygen evolution level, thus a favorable water splitting reaction on CuFeO2 is expected (Fig. 20b).23,24 The flat band potential of CuFeO2 is determined to be more positive than 1 V vs. RHE, suggesting that a high photovoltage can be generated by CuFeO2-based photocathodes.23,24 Moreover, CuFeO2 is a multi-band spectrum absorption material, and the absorption edges cover the UV to the IR region, thus providing a promising absorber for photoelectric conversion (Fig. 20c).209,213,214 However, the reported bandgap of CuFeO2 exhibits large discrepancies between theoretical and experimental works.23,24,209,211–225 Ong et al.212 reported theoretical optical band gaps of 1.3, 2.06 and 3.2 eV for CuFeO2, in agreement with the experimental data (1.15, 2.03 and 3.35 eV) obtained by Benko et al.209 But the calculations conducted by Hiraga et al.211 showed larger band gaps (1.55, 2.8, 3.85 and 4.38 eV) than those reported by Benko et al. and Ong et al. Nevertheless, most experimental results report predominantly absorption edges at ∼1.5 and 2.1 eV for CuFeO2,23,24,213,218,219,221,222,225 which permit efficient utilization of the solar spectrum. It is found that the absorption coefficient of CuFeO2 thin films (∼104 cm−1 at 700 nm) is three orders of magnitude higher than that of Cu2O thin films prepared by electrodeposition.24,220,226 For the polycrystalline CuFeO2, the resistivity of ∼0.5 Ω m and mobility of ∼0.2 cm2 V−1 s−2 were measured, presenting better carrier transport properties than CuBi2O4.22,227–230 The mobility of single-crystalline CuFeO2 can be increased to 34 cm2 V−1 s−2, and the mobility in the plane of the single-crystal is higher than that along the c-axis direction.230 Thus, due to the wide-range light absorption, favorable band position, and unique layered quasi-two-dimensional structure, CuFeO2 has become an emerging candidate for PEC water splitting.
In 1998, Domen et al.231 first reported the photocatalytic hydrogen production by the CuFeO2 particles in distilled water under the irradiation of visible light. However, in the subsequent studies, the same group found that the catalytic decomposition of water proceeded by vigorous stirring these powders in distilled water without light illumination.232,233 Thus, the hydrogen and oxygen evolution are not due to photocatalytic reaction but to a “mechano-catalytic effect”. These results highlight that photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen production based on this type of semiconductor should be investigated with great attention. Subsequently, photocatalytic hydrogen production on CuFeO2 and CuFeO2/SnO2 was reported by Tiari's group with the utilization of a sacrificial reagent and a quantum yield of 0.5% for the CuFeO2/SnO2 system under polychromatic light was obtained.234,235 In 2012, Read et al. fabricated CuFeO2 thin film on FTO by electrodeposition and investigated the PEC performance of CuFeO2 photocathode. The photocurrent onset potential was 0.98 V vs. RHE, which was close to the flatband potential (1.3 V vs. RHE) measured for this CuFeO2. The photocurrent for water reduction was 0.085 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE, which quickly decreased to reach a steady state (ca. 0.016 mA cm−2) (Fig. 20d and e). This suggested that the catalytic activity of the bare CuFeO2 for water reduction is very low and the stability is poor. With O2 as electron acceptors, a stable photocurrent can be increased to 0.16 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. RHE. Furthermore, in an O2-purged NaOH electrolyte, the generation of hydrogen was reported when the electrode was tested under intense illumination without stirring. These results indicated that the low PEC activity may be attributed to the low conductivity of the film, the lack of active catalysts, and the existence of surface states on the nanocrystalline surface.

4.2.1. Doping of CuFeO2 for enhanced PEC performance. 
Doping is an effective way to enhance carrier concentration and improve the conductivity of semiconductor films. Prévot et al.24 claimed that the thermal intercalation of oxygen in CuFeO2 can be achieved by a post-annealing process (300 °C in air, 1 h) and increased majority carrier concentration. Based on the photoelectrode with optimized thickness and oxygen doping, a very stable oxygen reduction photocurrent of 1.51 mA cm−2 at 0.35 V vs. RHE was obtained. However, the water reduction on bare CuFeO2 was limited to a very low photocurrent (25 μA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE) in an Ar-purged electrolyte. Jang et al.236 introduced a hybrid microwave annealing (HMA) to introduce interstitial oxygen into the CuFeO2 lattice uniformly. Compared with the conventional thermal annealing (CTA), HMA is more effective and thus lead to a high photocurrent of −1.3 mA cm−2 at 0.4 vs. RHE. Furthermore, with the introduction of a NiFe-layered double hydroxide/reduced graphene oxide electrocatalyst, the photocurrent of the photocathode increased to −2.4 mA cm−2 at 0.4 vs. RHE. Thus, to boost the PEC performance of CuFeO2, it is recommended to combine the doping strategy with a surface modification process so that the electron transfer efficiency and catalytic activity on the electrode surface can be enhanced.
Besides oxygen intercalation, Mg doping is another common method used for increasing the carrier concentration and conductivity of CuFeO2.209,217,237–239 Mg2+ substituted Fe3+ in the delafossite lattice served as a p-type donor, leading to an increased carrier concentration and photoinduced carrier lifetime.239 Thus, Mg-doped CuFeO2 may serve as an efficient photocathode with enhanced photoactivity.237,239 Wuttig et al.238 studied the effect of Mg doping and Cu deficiency on the PEC performance of CuFeO2 photoelectrode. Although both donors increased the conductivity of CuFeO2, increasing the impurity concentration by either Mg doping or Cu deficiency decreased the majority carrier mobility and photoresponse of the CuFeO2 photoelectrode. The un-doped CuFeO2 with the lowest carrier concentration and highest carrier mobility exhibited the largest photocurrent, indicating that the mobility should be an important parameter to improve the PEC activity of this material and pointing to a need to clarify the complex defect chemistry of delafossites.


4.2.2. Construction of heterojunction for enhanced charge separation and stability. 
Most metal oxides (e.g., Fe2O3) have a narrow space-charge layer at the solid/liquid interface and a short diffusion length of minority carriers, thus, a very thin film is employed to enhance the carrier collection. However, light absorption requires a sufficiently thick layer. The severe trade-off between light absorption and minority carrier transport can be addressed by the deposition of the thin absorber on a scaffold with excellent electron/hole transport, thus enabling the decoupling of light absorption and charge transfer. For CuFeO2, the hole selective layer between FTO and CuFeO2 should be a wide bandgap semiconductor with high hole mobility. Furthermore, the conduction and valence band edges of hole selective layers should be higher than that of CuFeO2 to promote hole transfer from the absorber to the hole selective layer and block the electron–hole recombination. Sivula et al.240 found that CuAlO2 can serve as a low-cost mesoporous scaffold for CuFeO2 deposition due to the wide bandgap (3.5 eV), high carrier mobility, and stability of the synthesized CuFeO2 (Fig. 21a). The FTO/CuAlO2/CuFeO2 structure with an optimized CuAlO2 layer thickness of 2 μm presented a photocurrent of 2.4 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE for oxygen reduction, which is 2.4 times higher than that of the FTO/CuFeO2 photoelectrode (Fig. 21c). This result can be ascribed to the selective extraction of the photoexcited holes towards the substrate due to the slightly higher (∼0.1 eV) potential of the CuAlO2 flat band compared to CuFeO2 (Fig. 21b). Moon's group developed a transparent 2D opal photocathode consisting of a monolayer of ultra-thin CuFeO2 deposited on microspheres arranged as a periodic macroporous structure (shelled-microsphere structure) that enhances light absorption by multiple scattering.241 However, the proposed structure suffered from a low IPCE due to the ultra-thin absorber layer (∼2 nm). To address this issue, an inner CuFeO2/outer CuAlO2 double-shelled heterojunction was constructed on each partially etched (PE) microsphere to prepare a hexagonally assembled 2D opal photoelectrode, as shown in Fig. 21d.242 The CuAlO2/CuFeO2 double-shelled photocathode combined the advantages of excellent light trapping and improved charge separation, resulting in a nine times enhancement in photocurrent compared to that of the single-shelled CuFeO2 photocathode (Fig. 21e).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the CuAlO2/CuFeO2 structure. (b) Scheme of the possible pathways that photogenerated charges can take inside a CuAlO2/CuFeO2 electrode. The brown layer represents CuFeO2. Holes can travel either inside the CuFeO2 layer or through the CuAlO2 scaffold. (c) Comparison of J–V curves obtained for optimized CuAlO2/CuFeO2 (blue trace) and CuFeO2 (red trace) electrodes, under O2 bubbling. Electrolyte: 1 M NaOH, scan rate: 10 mV s−1, illumination: 1 sun. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 240, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the operation principle of PE-SiO2@CuFeO2- and PE-SiO2@CuFeO2@CuAlO2-based 2D opal photocathodes on FTO substrates. (e) LSV scans for 2D opal photocathodes composed of microspheres with a partial etching process in oxygen-saturated 1 M NaOH solution, under chopped illumination. The sweep rate was 5 mV s−1. Panels (d and e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 242, Copyright (2018) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides the introduction of a hole selective layer between FTO and CuFeO2, the deposition of overlayers on CuFeO2 that facilitate photogenerated electron–hole separation and/or enhance the stability is another approach towards the achievement of high-performance CuFeO2 photocathodes. The CuFeO2/CuO heterojunction photocathode has been reported to enhance the PEC water reduction photocurrent, which is attributed to the generation of an electric field at the interface that extends the lifetime of the photogenerated charge carriers and facilitates the charge separation efficiency.243 However, based on the cyclic voltammetry behavior of the CuFeO2/CuO photocathode, Jiang et al.213 suggested that the higher photocurrent obtained with the CuFeO2/CuO composite photocathode was not an indication for an intrinsically improved catalytic activity, but CuO acting as a catalyst on the CuFeO2. Furthermore, based on visible light transient absorption (TA) measurements, Fugate et al.244 revealed that there is no evidence for electron injection from CuFeO2 to CuO, suggesting that the charge separation at the CuFeO2/CuO interface does not play a role in the carrier lifetime or PEC performance of the photocathode. Considering that CuO is a very unstable material under photocathodic conditions, it is also recommended to measure the hydrogen generation by GC under long-time operation and calculate the faradaic efficiency to confirm that the CuFeO2/CuO structure can be used for water reduction.
To achieve a reliable hydrogen production, thin layers of AZO and TiO2, together with Pt catalyst were deposited on the CuFeO2 photo-absorber.24 The results revealed a stable photocurrent of 0.4 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE for 50 min (Fig. 22). The hydrogen production was verified by GC in Ar-purged electrolyte and a faradaic efficiency of ∼100% was obtained. However, the onset potential of the photoelectrode decreased from ∼0.9 to 0.4 V vs. RHE after the surface was modified by the overlayers, indicating an imperfect interface quality and/or unfavorable band alignment at the interface. Oh et al.25 employed an inverse opal (IO) structure as a periodic macrostructure on CuFeO2 to achieve excellent near-band photo harvesting (600–700 nm) (Fig. 23a and d). Intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) analysis suggested that the IO structure is advantageous for utilizing the visible-light-induced electrons to drive the proton reduction due to the shortening of the electron path (Fig. 23c). After surface modification with an electron transfer layer (C60) and double hydroxide electrocatalyst (CoFe LDH), the CuFeO2-based photocathode presented a high photocurrent of 4.86 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE (Fig. 23b). The obtained photocathode with a C60/CoFe LDH layer also showed stable operation over 1 h at 0.25 V vs. RHE under Ar-purged NaOH. The hydrogen generated from the water was also confirmed by GC and the faradaic efficiency was determined to be 85–100%. The high IPCE at 600 nm (17.5%) and stable operation indicated an efficient charge transfer at the interface and high catalytic activity that were achieved by engineering the morphology and surface catalysis. However, similar to the CuFeO2/CdS/TiO2/Pt structure, the onset potential of IO CuFeO2/C60/CoFe LDH is about 0.5–0.6 V vs. RHE. This is much lower than that of the previous bare CuFeO2 photocathode (0.9–1 V vs. RHE). Thus, there is still room for improvement to simultaneously enhance the photovoltage and the photocurrent at positive potentials for the CuFeO2 photocathodes.
 Fig. 22  LSV scans for CuFeO2/AZO/TiO2 and CuFeO2/AZO/TiO2/Pt photocathodes under intermittent one sun illumination, with argon-purged pH 6.1 buffered electrolyte (0.5 M Na2SO4). The sweep rate was 8 mV s−1 and the scan was in the cathodic direction. Inset: Chronoamperometry of the CuFeO2/AZO/TiO2/Pt photocathode at 0 V vs. RHE under intermittent illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 23  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images of the IO CuFeO2 on FTO substrates. (b) LSV scans for the IO and planar CuFeO2 photocathodes after modification by the electrocatalyst in an argon-purged 1 M NaOH solution (pH 13.5) under chopped illumination. The sweep rate was 8 mV s−1, and the scan was performed in the cathodic direction. (c) Schematic diagram of the charge transfer for the different types of structures under different photon energy illumination. (d) IPCE spectra with respect to the wavelength for the planar and IO CuFeO2 photocathodes after modification of the C60/CoFe LDH biased at 0 V vs. RHE in an argon-purged 1 m NaOH solution. Integration of the IPCE value with the solar AM 1.5 spectrum (gray line) yields a photocurrent value (dotted line) similar to the observed current under simulated 1 sun illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. 


4.2.3. Perspectives for CuFeO2 photocathodes. 
Although the achievements for CuFeO2 are encouraging, the photocurrent and photovoltage are still much lower than the predicted values. Hence, the major bottlenecks that limit the PEC performance should be carefully evaluated and addressed. A critical analysis of the film quality, surface/bulk defects, and intrinsic stability is necessary to guide the design of highly active and stable CuFeO2 photocathodes.
4.2.3.1. The importance of fabrication of high quality and phase-pure CuFeO2. 
The fabrication of single-phase CuFeO2 is challenging because the Cu–Fe–O system comprises different phases affected by the synthesis conditions and the Cu/Fe ratio (Fig. 24a).245,246 Particularly, the formation of Fe2O3, CuO, and CuFe2O4 should be avoided during the CuFeO2 crystal growth. CuFeO2 single crystals have been prepared by a flux method with a high operation temperature >1100 °C, and p-type CuFeO2 could be obtained in a Pt crucible.230,247 Based on a single crystal with controlled exposed facets, the PEC measurement realized on well-defined crystal planes of CuFeO2 is made possible.247 The results point to an important design strategy for a highly efficient photocathode making use of the large mobility anisotropy for CuFeO2. However, since the deposition of thin films on transparent and conductive substrates (e.g., FTO and ITO) is more applicable to PEC applications, this high-temperature method is difficult to be employed in the fabrication of cost-effective and large area photoelectrodes. Solid-state reactions were often used to synthesize polycrystalline samples by sintering mixtures of Cu2O and Fe2O3 at a temperature of ∼1000 °C under vacuum.209,230,238 It is also difficult to distribute the prepared CuFeO2 powders on a conductive and transparent substrate to form a uniform film with good conductivity. To decrease the fabrication temperature, a sol–gel method was employed to prepare CuFeO2 thin films on FTO substrates at 700 °C.22,24,25,224,236,240–242,248,249 It is reported that the annealing temperature for the sol–gel method can be further decreased to 550 °C by reducing the oxygen pressure to 5 × 10−5 atm, thus providing a means to fabricate single-phase CuFeO2 on FTO under moderate temperature. Similarly, electrodeposition was also introduced to produce CuFeOx thin films on FTO, and a low post-annealing procedure (650 °C) was needed to enhance the crystallinity.23,225 Compared with the above-mentioned method, the hydrothermal method provides another powerful way to prepare CuFeO2 single crystal particles under low temperature (<200 °C).214,220,239,250,251 This low-temperature method is compatible with FTO but the control of uniformity and phase (3R or 2H) of the film should be modulated carefully by tuning the growth conditions. By using magnetron sputtering, single-phase CuFeO2 films can be prepared with tunable phase purity, morphology and electrical property by varying the sputtering deposition parameters (oxygen partial pressure and deposition temperature).213,229,252 A post-annealing process (450–900 °C) is needed to improve the crystallinity of the sputtered films, resulting in the formation of polycrystalline 3R-CuFeO2. The difficulty in obtaining impurity-free CuFeO2 thin films with high crystallographic quality hampers the determination of the basic properties of these films. Attempt to improve the CuFeO2 film quality by epitaxial growth (pulsed laser deposition) on Al2O3(0001) substrates was reported.221 The high quality and impurity-free epitaxial thin films provide an excellent platform to investigate the fundamental characteristics of the CuFeO2 films, which is of critical importance for PV and PEC applications.221,222,253 For the PEC applications, a CuFeO2 thin film should be deposited on an FTO substrate, and a high-temperature deposition or post-annealing process should decrease the conductivity of the substrate. A low-temperature technique is needed for the fabrication of high crystalline quality CuFeO2 thin films that is compatible with FTO substrates, which is preferable for the investigation of fundamental properties and PEC performance of CuFeO2 thin films.
 Fig. 24  (a) Experimental phase diagram of the Cu–Fe–O system in air, with experimental points with an accuracy of ±2 °C for the transition temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (b) Pourbaix diagrams computed using the experimental formation free energies of solid phases and dissolved ions. The white dashed lines represent the redox potential of water, while the red cross and circle represent the conditions at which the PEC measurements were performed in ref. 23 and 24. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
4.2.3.2. Stability in electrolyte under water reduction conditions. 
Although CuFeO2 photoelectrodes have been reported to be relatively stable at potentials at which photocurrents are generated, the long-term stability evaluation at high photocurrents based on this semiconductor is proving elusive. Based on the Pourbaix diagram constructed by Ferri et al.,254 it is revealed that CuFeO2 is stable in a 0.5 V window in an alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 24b). With a pH ranging from 4 to 6, the region for stable operation becomes narrower. The cross and filled circle indicated in Fig. 24b represent the practical operation conditions of PEC measurements conducted by Read et al.23 and Prevot et al.24 The reported conditions (see points in Fig. 24b) are compatible with this Pourbaix diagram and falling inside the stable region, explaining the relative stable operation reported in the literature. This indicates that the CuFeO2 photoelectrode is only stable in a narrow operation window, and the material can suffer from chemical and photochemical instability under a more negative operation potential. The development of protection strategies is necessary to achieve a stable operation. For example, a highly stable overlayer (e.g., TiO2) can be introduced to suppress the self-reduction of the absorber. The efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons to overlayers will dramatically reduce the degradation of the interface, which can be achieved by carefully choosing an appropriate buffer layer with favorable band edges. Meanwhile, active catalysts should be deposited on the protected photocathode to enhance the kinetics and reduce corrosion.
4.2.3.3. The effect of surface and bulk defects. 
Although the CuFeO2 has a narrow bandgap and favorable band edges for solar water splitting, the obtained photocurrent is still low. Usually, the poor PEC performance is associated with recombination induced by either surface or bulk defect states. Thus, it is necessary to clarify the limiting factors that determine the performance of the CuFeO2 photoelectrode. Prévot et al. investigated photoelectrochemically the properties of the CuFeO2/electrolyte junction by using a series of redox species with electrochemical potentials varying from the valence band edge to the conduction band edge of CuFeO2.22 By using Fe(CN)63−/4− with an electrochemical potential close to the Fermi level of CuFeO2, a linear increase in the open circuit potential (OCP) under illumination with the pH was observed. However, in the case of Ru(NH3)63+/2+ and MV2+/1+ with potential higher than Fe(CN)63−/4−, the OCP showed very little variation (∼0.18–0.28 V), almost independent of pH (Fig. 25a and b). The results indicated that a high density of surface states (1014 cm−2) positioned close to the valence band edge decreased the photovoltage of the photoelectrode. In this case, the Fermi energy in CuFeO2 equilibrates with the energy of the surface states rather than with the electrolyte, resulting in the pinning of the Fermi level. It was found that the surface states were located at 0.35 eV above the flat band potential of CuFeO2 and the photovoltage was lower than 0.35 V (Fig. 25c). XPS analysis suggested that a thin layer of metal hydroxide existed at the surface of CuFeO2, which served as electron traps and promoted charge recombination, thus limiting the photovoltage. To study the Fermi level pinning on CuFeO2 heterojunctions, Hermans et al.255 designed three heterojunctions, namely CuFeO2/Pt, CuFeO2/Ag, and CuFeO2/Nix(OH)y and found that no substantial enhancement in water reduction could be observed on these heterojunctions. In this study, the Fermi level pinning at the Fe3+/Fe2+ electron polaron formation level was given as a possible explanation for the low photovoltage observed with the CuFeO2 photoelectrode.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of the potential regions probed by the different redox couples shown next to the band position of CuFeO2, under flat-band conditions, in water (left side) and in acetonitrile (right side). MV = methyl viologen, DMFc = decamethylferrocene, and EFB = flat-band potential of CuFeO2. (b) ΔOCP = OCP10suns − OCPdark measured as a function of the redox potential of the electrolyte, referenced to the RHE. The expected ΔOCP value, in the absence of FLP, is shown as the broken line that intercepts the x-axis at E = EFB. (c) Proposed energy band diagram for an isolated CuFeO2 electrode in the dark, where ECB = conduction band edge, EVB = valence band edge, EF = Fermi level, NA = acceptor density, τ = carrier lifetime, LD = carrier diffusion length, W = depletion width, and NSS = density of surface states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
Besides surface defects induced Fermi level pinning, the bulk defects may also play an important role in determining the performance of the CuFeO2 photoelectrodes. To this end, the effects of native point defects such as Cu vacancies and O interstitials on the PEC activity of the CuFeO2 photoelectrodes were investigated.244,254,256 Combining TA measurements and DFT simulations, Baker's group suggested that the Cu vacancies can improve PEC activity by promoting ultrafast charge separation.244 This may be ascribed to the charge separation in the CuFeO2 interlayer occurring through hole thermalization from O 2p to hybridized Cu 3d valence band states, resulting in increased carrier lifetime. Also, the O interstitials are predicted to switch the relative positions of O 2p and Cu 3d valence band states, which would hinder the charge separation by inter-band hole thermalization. This is in contrast to the experimental results where O intercalation can improve the PEC performance of the CuFeO2 photocathodes.24,236 Ferri et al.254 predicted that small formation energy for a Cu antisite defect could be detrimental for the PEC performance of CuFeO2 due to these gap states well separated from the top of the valence band and thus facilitating carrier recombination.
These findings suggest that both the surface and bulk defects are relevant to charge separation and the elimination of detrimental effects caused by defects is necessary. Forming buried junction on CuFeO2 with favorable band alignment and high-quality interface should offer a powerful approach to passivate the surface states and improve the photovoltage of the photoelectrodes. Moreover, the built-in field that occurred at the junction interface can help to enhance the charge separation at the interface. It is estimated that if the detrimental effects of the surface states were eliminated, a photovoltage of 0.8 V and photocurrent of ∼9 mA cm−2 could be obtained based on the ideal junction with water.22 Moreover, the intentional elimination of Cu antisite defects and the incorporation of Cu vacancies should be realized by controlling the synthesis conditions of CuFeO2 so that the conductivity and carrier lifetime can be increased.

4.3. Group V copper oxides based photocathodes: copper vanadates, copper niobates, and copper tantalates
Group V copper oxides provide a series of semiconductors with appropriate band edges and band gaps for solar water splitting applications.12,26,257,258 By changing the early transition metals (e.g., V, Nb, and Ta) in the group V copper oxides, bandgap values ranging from 1.2 to 2.7 eV can be obtained. This large variation is caused by the dependence on the energetic level of the conduction band as determined by the early transition metals and the coordination environment of the Cu cation in the structure.12 The bandgap and edges can be tuned further by forming solid solutions, and thus applications can be extended to solar energy conversion. Although these materials are suitable for solar water splitting, the development of group V copper oxides used as photocathodes has not been pursued actively and more work should be done to understand the fundamental properties and address the weaknesses of these materials.
Copper vanadates have been considered as promising materials for solar water splitting, and several ternary metal oxides within the CuO–V2O5 system can be fabricated by controlling the Cu/V ratio, annealing temperature, and atmosphere. Among the photoelectrocatalyst phases, α-CuV2O6 (2 eV), α-Cu2V2O7 (1.9 eV), β-Cu2V2O7 (2 eV), γ-Cu3V2O8 (1.8 eV), and Cu11V6O26 (1.8 eV) have been reported as photoanodes with promising water oxidation activity.259–264 On the other hand, high-purity p-type Cu3VO4 (1.2 eV) was synthesized via solid-state methods and evaluated for PEC water splitting.265 The Cu3VO4 photocathode exhibited a low photocurrent (∼0.02 mA cm−2) and a significant dark current. The photocurrent of the photocathode increased after a post-annealing in ambient air at 300 and 350 °C, an effect that can be attributed to the formation of CuO and Cu3V2O8 on the surface of Cu3VO4. Depositing denser CuO on Cu3VO4 leads to a larger photocurrent than that of the Cu3VO4/CuO structure formed by annealing, indicating the important role of CuO in enhancing the PEC performance of Cu3VO4.
For copper niobates, several p-type CuNb oxide semiconductors such as CuNbO3 (2.0 eV),29,266 CuNb3O8 (1.26 eV),267,268 Cu2Nb8O21 (1.43–1.65 eV),269 and CuNb2O6 (1.9 eV)270 were synthesized and characterized. All the photocathodes mentioned here presented a low photocurrent and large dark current. The photocurrent can be enhanced by annealing the copper niobates in air, resulting in partial oxidation of the surface with the formation of CuO.29,267–269 Although the photoactivity is low, the photocathodes exhibited good stability which can be attributed to the electrons being excited to the lower energy Nb5+(d0) orbitals instead of the Cu-based orbitals. Moreover, a faradaic efficiency of 63% was achieved on the CuNb3O8 photocathode at the applied potential of −0.156 V vs. RHE, indicating that part of the photocurrent originates from water reduction.267
p-Type copper tantalates such as Cu5Ta11O30 (2.55 eV),271,272 Cu3Ta7O19 (2.6 eV),271 and Cu2Ta4O11 (2.65 eV)273,274 can also be employed as photocathodes. Similar to the copper vanadates and copper niobates, the photoactivity is low and an oxidation process in ambient air is introduced to improve the photocurrent. The bandgap of these semiconductors is slightly too large so that efficient photocathodes cannot be fabricated. Alternatively, solid solutions such as CuNb1−xTaxO3(0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25)275 and Cu(Ta1−xNbx)11O30 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4)276 provide more possibilities to tune the optical and electronic structure of the materials for solar water splitting. For CuNb1−xTaxO3, the bandgap changed from ∼1.89 to 1.97 eV when x is varied from 0 to 0.25. Hydrogen evolution cannot be detected for the photocathodes, but the suspended particles of CuNbO3 with Pt co-catalyst produced hydrogen in a solution of water and methanol. For Cu(Ta1−xNbx)11O30 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4), increasing Nb content leads to a significant decrease in the bandgap from ∼2.58 to 2.05 eV. Similarly, the aqueous suspensions of Cu(Ta1−xNbx)11O30 powders were demonstrated to be active for hydrogen evolution in a 20% aqueous methanol solution under visible light.
The results illustrate the advantages of utilizing the group V copper oxides as photocathode materials for solar water splitting, including the tunable bandgap and band edges. However, the low photoactivity achieved with these semiconductors suggests that appropriate surface protection and the introduction of a co-catalyst (e.g., Pt) are essential for achieving highly efficient and stable photocathodes.
5. Summary and remarks
Cu-Based metal oxide photocathodes such as Cu2O (2.0 eV), CuBi2O4 (1.5–1.8 eV), and CuFeO2 (1.55 eV) have attracted extensive interests in the PEC field due to their narrow bandgaps, low costs, and appropriate band edges for water splitting. Especially for Cu2O, remarkable advancements have been achieved after a decade of research, the STH conversion efficiency being increased from ∼0.78% in 2011 to 5.51% in 2019,13,113 as shown in Fig. 26. Bare Cu2O photocathodes are suffering from severe stability issues due to the favorable pathway for self-reduction under illumination in an electrolyte. Moreover, the photovoltage of the Cu2O photoelectrodes is limited by the relatively high valence band, leading to a low barrier height for the Cu2O/electrolyte junction. Due to the successful experience in the field of solar cells, both issues have been largely addressed by forming buried junctions and introducing a protective layer on Cu2O. By engineering the buffer layer between Cu2O and the protective layer, a large photovoltage of ∼1 V can be achieved with a Ga2O3 thin buffer layer that realizes a near-ideal band alignment with Cu2O.14 Benefiting from the high photovoltage, tandem devices composed of Cu2O-based photocathode and underlying buried radial Si p–n junction achieved a high STH conversion efficiency up to 5.51% with a long-time operation (200 h).113 Considering that an open-circuit voltage as large as 1.78 V for Cu2O/Ga2O3 and a PCE Cu2O/Zn0.38Ge0.62O of ∼8% were obtained with these heterojunction solar cells,88,94 it can be said that there is still much room for performance improvement for the Cu2O based photocathodes.
 Fig. 26  Reported photocurrent vs. onset potential for selected Cu2O, CuO, CuBi2O4, and CuFeO2 based photocathodes. The photocurrent for the photocathodes is collected at 0 V vs. RHE. The maximum STH conversion efficiency for each type of the photocathodes and tandem devices is represented by a colored disk. The radius of the disk is proportional to the value of the STH conversion efficiency. Detailed information on the device structures and measurement conditions can be found in Table S2 (ESI†). 
Compared to Cu2O, the ternary Cu-based metal oxides received increasing attention because of their narrow bandgaps and possible stable operation in an electrolyte. However, the PEC performances achieved with ternary Cu-based metal oxides are much lower than the theoretically predicted values (Fig. 26). The improvement of the PEC performance of CuBi2O4 is severely hindered by the low carrier mobility, short diffusion length, and instability. Although bare CuBi2O4 photocathodes showed a positive onset potential (∼1 V vs. RHE) during operation, the CuBi2O4 photocathodes did not generate a detectable amount of hydrogen from water reduction even when Pt or RuOx was introduced as co-catalysts.20 The photo-excited electrons are primarily consumed by photocorrosion of CuBi2O4 rather than water reduction. The protected CuBi2O4 photocathode (CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx) presented an onset potential of 0.3 V vs. RHE for hydrogen production, leading to a requirement of an external bias of >0.4 V for CuBi2O4–BiVO4 tandem devices to realize overall water splitting.20 CuFeO2 is a visible light-responsive material with multi-band absorption and an expected high photovoltage due to the Fermi level position at ∼1.2 V vs. RHE. However, the photocurrent obtained on bare CuFeO2 is very low, and the detection of hydrogen is almost impossible under the water reduction conditions.23 The fabrication of high quality and pure-phase CuFeO2 on FTO is challenging due to the numerous phases of the Cu–Fe–O system. Furthermore, a high density of surface states positioned at 0.35 eV above the flat band potential was confirmed, leading to Fermi level pinning at the semiconductor–liquid junction.22 Thus, the photovoltage of bare CuFeO2 is limited to ∼0.35 V, regardless of the electrolyte utilized to create the junction. The construction of bias-free tandem devices based on CuFeO2 photocathodes and other photoanodes cannot be realized unless the photovoltage of CuFeO2 improved significantly. Group V copper oxides are also emerging as candidates for high-performance photocathodes, however, the photoactivity is very low for these materials. The significant dark current also suggested that photocorrosion occurs under the water reduction conditions. More fundamental properties, including carrier mobility, diffusion length, and surface/bulk defects, should be identified for this class of materials. The introduction of a protective layer and co-catalysts are also important to address the key problems of the group V copper oxides based photocathodes.
Generally, the solar water splitting systems can be classified into three types: photovoltaic–electrochemical (PV–EC) systems, PEC water splitting cells, and particulate photocatalytic (PC) systems. The PV–EC technology with high STH efficiency up to 20–30% is much more mature than that of PEC and PC technologies since it has been adopted for the construction of hydrogen fueling stations.277 The PEC technology holds a low complexity but a lower efficiency compared with that of the PV–EC technology. Based on a techno-economic analysis, the levelized cost of hydrogen for the base-case PEC system could be lower than that of the base-case of the PV–EC system if they share the same solar absorption materials with the same efficiency.278 The main obstacle that hinders the commercialization of the PEC system lies in the solar absorption materials that usually exhibit inferior energy conversion efficiency and a much shorter lifetime in the PEC systems than that in the PV–EC systems. Thus, to realize competitive Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes, a high solar-to-hydrogen efficiency above 10% with a lifetime longer than 10 years are required. Improvements in the efficiency and stability of the photocathodes are prerequisites to achieve this goal. Most importantly, the large-scale demonstration of PEC hydrogen production based on these materials should be assessed to validate the development of PEC water splitting systems at a commercial scale. The following technical challenges should be addressed before Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes can be employed in practical systems for use in solar water splitting.
(1) To realize highly efficient photocathodes with large photovoltages and photocurrents, the formation of high-quality heterojunctions on highly crystalline copper-based metal oxides with large grain sizes is crucial. The selection of an appropriate buffer layer for each absorber and the introduction of a protection layer with co-catalysts on the heterojunction are necessary. The rigorous determination of hydrogen gas generation is essential for the accurate evaluation of the photocathode performance. Furthermore, since the onset potential for the photo-reduction current may be different from the onset potential for hydrogen evolution, the hydrogen gas signal should be measured at different applied potentials to obtain the real onset potential for hydrogen generation. The interface quality of the heterojunction should be monitored by in situ and/or in-operando techniques to optimize the growth of desired p–n junctions without the introduction of Cu- or O-rich interfacial layers. Finding a means to reduce recombination at the heterojunction interfaces is still needed. Particularly, the deep level defect states at interfaces forming a detrimental interface layer and the defects existing in bulk Cu-based metal oxides should be eliminated to further enhance the performance of photocathodes.
(2) The long-term stability of Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes is currently the most serious bottleneck for the commercialization of these materials. Despite the use of wide bandgap semiconductors such as TiO2 to protect the Cu-based metal oxide photocathode and extend the lifetime to hundred hours,28,113 the lifetime of the photocathodes is still much shorter than the required lifetime which is of the order of years. The degradation occurring both at the protective layer/co-catalysts interface and the buried junction interface should account for the decreased photocurrent and fill factor for the J–V curves. The photoelectrode degradation mechanism associated with both the heterojunction interface and protective layer/co-catalyst interface requires a closer examination by monitoring the dynamic process at the solid/liquid and solid/solid interfaces of the photoelectrode during the measurement. The detailed characterization of the photoelectrodes by SEM, TEM, XPS, and XAS at different operating stages is critical to evaluate and improve the long-term stability of these photocathodes.
(3) PEC water splitting based on single light-absorber components usually exhibits relatively low STH efficiency due to the low optical absorption or low photovoltage of the single light absorber in such a system. A tandem device consists of two light absorbers with complementary absorption spectra that can effectively harvest various portions of the solar spectrum and realize overall water splitting without external bias.122 To maximize the efficiency of this configuration, the combination of the band gaps of the two light absorbers should be optimized.279,280 For Cu-based metal oxide systems, Cu2O–BiVO4 is one of the most promising tandem PEC–PEC models having only earth-abundant elements and exhibiting great potential for future applications.28 However, the band gaps of Cu2O (2.0 eV) and BiVO4 (2.4 eV) cannot realize maximum solar absorption due to the large bandgap of BiVO4. If we consider Cu2O as the top photoelectrode, an optimal bandgap value for the bottom photoanode should be <1.3 eV to reach an optimized STH efficiency of 18.5%.122 Great efforts are required to evaluate the candidates for photoanode materials that possess narrow bandgaps and can couple with Cu2O and other Cu-based metal oxides to improve the STH efficiency. Besides the PEC–PEC configuration, the PEC–PV configuration provides a different way to harvest sunlight efficiently and guarantee a large photovoltage for the photoelectrodes. A systematic modeling and experimental assessment of Cu-based metal oxide photocathodes used in combination with low-cost and narrow bandgap (1.0–1.5 eV) PV-cells is crucial to turn this system competitive and marketable.
(4) Although the large-scale demonstration of PEC water splitting is crucial for practical solar water splitting, few studies have been performed to comprehensively investigate the photoelectrode performance, fluid dynamics, and temperature profile under large-scale operation. Based on the experimental results of large-scale fabrication of WO3,281 Fe2O3,282 BiVO4283–288 and Cu2O,289 it was found that the scale-up of the photoelectrodes is limited by the increased sheet resistance of the substrates, nonuniformity of the scaled-up films and non-linear diffusion of reactants and products towards the electrode surface. The exploration of low-cost and large-scale synthesis methods for Cu-based metal oxide films with high uniformity and crystallinity should be pursued to provide reliable large-area photoelectrodes for scale-up purposes. The design, fabrication, and assessment of devices with large area photoelectrodes in PEC–PV and PEC–PEC tandem configurations should be performed. Additionally, efforts to address the issues of the mass-transfer and kinetic limitation of the scaled-up PEC reactors by design engineering are necessary. In view of this, design support tools (e.g, multiscale simulators) for the PEC reactor should be developed to optimize the electrolyte flow path with efficient heat dissipation and minimize the effect of gas bubbles.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
CL and JH are supported by the Hundreds of Talents Program of Sun Yat-sen University. YL and YX acknowledge financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21872019) and Sichuan Science and Technology Foundation (No. 2018JY0137).
References
R. Fan, Z. Mi and M. Shen, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A51–A80 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2158–2181 RSC .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y. Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y. L. Chueh and J. W. Ager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, T. Minegishi, M. Katayama and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4486–4492 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, C. Platzer-Björkman, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 15027–15035 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi, N. Sato, M. Orita, Y. Kuang, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3003–3009 RSC .
J. Zhao, T. Minegishi, L. Zhang, M. Zhong, M. Nakabayashi, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, S. Ikeda and N. Shibata, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11808–11812 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Muzzillo, W. E. Klein, Z. Li, A. D. DeAngelis, K. Horsley, K. Zhu and N. Gaillard, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19573–19579 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moriya, T. Minegishi, H. Kumagai, M. Katayama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3733–3735 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Suzuki, K. Seki, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 894–901 RSC .
K. Sivula and R. Van De Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sullivan, B. Zoellner and P. A. Maggard, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5999–6016 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, T. Hisatomi, O. Watanabe, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, K. Domen and J.-J. Delaunay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1493–1500 RSC .
L. Pan, Y. Liu, L. Yao, D. Ren, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
W. Septina, R. R. Prabhakar, R. Wick, T. Moehl and S. D. Tilley, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1735–1743 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arai, Y. Konishi, Y. Iwasaki, H. Sugihara and K. Sayama, J. Comb. Chem., 2007, 9, 574–581 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Berglund, F. F. Abdi, P. Bogdanoff, A. Chemseddine, D. Friedrich and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4231–4242 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, Z. Zhao, P. Sarker, B. A. Nail, J. Wang, M. N. Huda and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2936–2942 RSC .
A. Song, P. Bogdanoff, A. Esau, I. Y. Ahmet, I. Levine, T. Dittrich, T. Unold, R. van de Krol and S. P. Berglund, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13959–13970 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar, H. Zhao and C. Persson, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2013, 28, 065003 CrossRef .
M. S. Prévot, X. A. Jeanbourquin, W. S. Bourée, F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, R. Van De Krol, N. s. Guijarro, F. Le Formal and K. Sivula, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4952–4962 CrossRef .
C. G. Read, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1359–1367 CrossRef .
Y. Oh, W. Yang, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park and J. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900194 CrossRef .
K. Rajeshwar, M. K. Hossain, R. T. Macaluso, C. Janáky, A. Varga and P. J. Kulesza, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, H3192 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802877 CrossRef .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M.-K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Joshi, A. M. Palasyuk and P. A. Maggard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13534–13539 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, Y. Yu and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 583–588 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, P. Koirala, C. R. Grice, P. J. Roland, Y. Yu, X. Tan, R. J. Ellingson, R. W. Collins and Y. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601803 CrossRef .
F. Jiang, T. Harada, Y. Kuang, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and S. Ikeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13691–13697 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Li, C. Li, R. Zhang, J.-J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Li, Q. Chen, Z. Zhen, X. Jiang, M. Zhong, F. Zhang and H. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12753–12763 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Prabhakar, W. Septina, S. Siol, T. Moehl, R. Wick-Joliat and S. D. Tilley, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23139–23145 RSC .
W. Yang and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20467–20477 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zeng, L. Li, C. Qin, Y. Wang, Z. Lou, F. Liu, Z. Ye and L. Zhu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6188–6194 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wick and S. D. Tilley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26243–26257 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi and S. P. Berglund, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 193002 CrossRef .
W. Yang, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Tan, S. D. Tilley and J. Moon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4979–5015 RSC .
M. A. Lumley, A. Radmilovic, Y. J. Jang, A. E. Lindberg and K.-S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18358–18369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1835–1845 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 82, 133–143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 RSC .
A. J. Bard and M. S. Wrighton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1706 CrossRef CAS .
K. Frese Jr, M. Madou and S. R. Morrison, J. Phys. Chem., 1980, 84, 3172–3178 CrossRef .
K. Frese Jr, M. Madou and S. Morrison, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1527 CrossRef .
F. Cardon, W. P. Gomes, F. V. Kerchove, D. Vanmaekelbergh and F. Van Overmeire, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1980, 70, 153–164 RSC .
P. Allongue and H. Cachet, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2861 CrossRef CAS .
P. Allongue and S. Blonkowski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 316, 57–77 CrossRef CAS .
P. Allongue, S. Blonkowski and D. Lincot, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 300, 261–281 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nandjou and S. Haussener, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1984–1994 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Brattain, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1951, 23, 203 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meyer, A. Polity, D. Reppin, M. Becker, P. Hering, P. Klar, T. Sander, C. Reindl, J. Benz and M. Eickhoff, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2012, 249, 1487–1509 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rakhshani, Solid-State Electron., 1986, 29, 7–17 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, T. Miyata and Y. Nishi, Sol. Energy, 2014, 105, 206–217 CrossRef CAS .
L. Olsen, F. Addis and W. Miller, Sol. Cells, 1982, 7, 247–279 CrossRef CAS .
F. Biccari, C. Malerba and A. Mittiga, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1947–1952 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pastrnyak, Sov. Phys. – Solid State, 1959, 1, 888–891 Search PubMed .
V. Drobny and L. Pulfrey, Thin Solid Films, 1979, 61, 89–98 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi and T. Miyata, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 549, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kardarian, D. Nunes, P. M. Sberna, A. Ginsburg, D. A. Keller, J. V. Pinto, J. Deuermeier, A. Y. Anderson, A. Zaban and R. Martins, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Li and J.-J. Delaunay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 480–486 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 RSC .
A. Mittiga, E. Salza, F. Sarto, M. Tucci and R. Vasanthi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 163502 CrossRef .
Ø. Nordseth, R. Kumar, K. Bergum, I. Chilibon, S. E. Foss and E. Monakhov, Materials, 2019, 12, 3038 CrossRef .
L. O. Grondahl, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1933, 5, 141 CrossRef CAS .
K. Han and M. Tao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 153–157 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, H. Gong, L. Chen, M. Zi and B. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10510–10515 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. McShane and K.-S. Choi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 6112–6118 RSC .
T. Minami, J. Yamazaki and T. Miyata, MRS Commun., 2016, 6, 416–420 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyata, J. Yamazaki, K. Watanabe, H. Tokunaga and T. Minami, ECS Trans., 2017, 80, 693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tsur and I. Riess, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 8138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herion, E. Niekisch and G. Scharl, Sol. Energy Mater., 1980, 4, 101–112 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Wong, S. Zhuk, S. Masudy-Panah and G. K. Dalapati, Materials, 2016, 9, 271 CrossRef .
L. Papadimitriou, N. A. Economou and D. Trivich, Sol. Cells, 1981, 3, 73–80 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tanaka, T. Shimakawa, T. Miyata, H. Sato and T. Minami, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 469, 80–85 CrossRef .
T. Minami, T. Miyata and Y. Nishi, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 559, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi and T. Miyata, J. Semicond., 2016, 37, 014002 CrossRef .
Y. Nishi, T. Miyata, J.-i. Nomoto and T. Minami, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 3819–3822 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi and T. Miyata, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 044101 CrossRef .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi and T. Miyata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 212104 CrossRef .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi, T. Miyata and S. Abe, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 59–68 CrossRef .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi and T. Miyata, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 022301 CrossRef .
T. Minami, Y. Nishi and T. Miyata, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 052301 CrossRef .
R. E. Brandt, M. Young, H. H. Park, A. Dameron, D. Chua, Y. S. Lee, G. Teeter, R. G. Gordon and T. Buonassisi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 263901 CrossRef .
Y. S. Lee, D. Chua, R. E. Brandt, S. C. Siah, J. V. Li, J. P. Mailoa, S. W. Lee, R. G. Gordon and T. Buonassisi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4704–4710 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, Y. S. Lee, J. Heo, S. C. Siah, D. Chua, R. E. Brandt, S. B. Kim, J. P. Mailoa, T. Buonassisi and R. G. Gordon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301916 CrossRef .
S. S. Wilson, J. P. Bosco, Y. Tolstova, D. O. Scanlon, G. W. Watson and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3606–3610 RSC .
R. L. Hoye, R. E. Brandt, Y. Ievskaya, S. Heffernan, K. P. Musselman, T. Buonassisi and J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 020901 CrossRef .
D. Chuan, S. B. Kim and R. Gordon, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 055203 CrossRef .
F. Caballero-Briones, J. M. Artés, I. Díez-Pérez, P. Gorostiza and F. Sanz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1028–1036 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, R. Dua, L. Zhang, H. Zhu, H. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1709–1717 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, Z. Hu, C. Y. Jimmy and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13736–13741 RSC .
C. Das, B. Ananthoju, A. K. Dhara, M. Aslam, S. K. Sarkar and K. R. Balasubramaniam, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700271 CrossRef .
P. Shinde, P. Fontenot, J. Donahue, J. Waters, P. Kung, L. McNamara, N. Hammer, A. Gupta and S. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9569–9582 RSC .
R. Wick-Joliat, T. Musso, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Löckinger, S. Siol, W. Cui, L. Sévery, T. Moehl, J. Suh, J. Hutter, M. Iannuzzi and S. D. Tilley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1901–1909 RSC .
W. Siripala, A. Ivanovskaya, T. F. Jaramillo, S.-H. Baeck and E. W. McFarland, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azevedo, L. Steier, P. Dias, M. Stefik, C. T. Sousa, J. P. Araújo, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and S. D. Tilley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4044–4052 RSC .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. Liardet, M. T. Mayer, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 664–667 CAS .
L.-A. Stern, L. Liardet, M. T. Mayer, C. G. Morales-Guio, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 311–316 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio and X. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2671–2681 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azevedo, S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, M. Stefik, C. Sousa, J. P. Araújo, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dai, W. Li, J. Xie, Y. He, J. Thorne, G. McMahon, J. Zhan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13493–13497 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, T. Hisatomi, O. Watanabe, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, K. Domen and J.-J. Delaunay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 033902 CrossRef .
W. Niu, L. Zhu, Y. Wang, Z. Lou and Z. Ye, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1602–1610 RSC .
W. Niu, T. Moehl, W. Cui, R. Wick-Joliat, L. Zhu and S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702323 CrossRef .
W. Vijselaar, P. P. Kunturu, T. Moehl, S. D. Tilley and J. Huskens, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2287–2294 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2244–2250 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Lai, D. Mersch and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3482–3487 RSC .
A. Kargar, S. S. Partokia, M. T. Niu, P. Allameh, M. Yang, S. May, J. S. Cheung, K. Sun, K. Xu and D. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 205401 CrossRef .
A. Martínez-García, V. K. Vendra, S. Sunkara, P. Haldankar, J. Jasinski and M. K. Sunkara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15235–15241 RSC .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Kunturu, C. Zachariadis, L. Witczak, M. D. Nguyen, G. Rijnders and J. Huskens, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41402–41414 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Son, L. Steier, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 912–918 RSC .
Y. Wei, X. Chang, T. Wang, C. Li and J. Gong, Small, 2017, 13, 1702007 CrossRef .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 RSC .
P. Bornoz, F. F. Abdi, S. D. Tilley, B. Dam, R. Van De Krol, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16959–16966 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dias, M. Schreier, S. D. Tilley, J. Luo, J. Azevedo, L. Andrade, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, A. Mendes and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501537 CrossRef .
M. Borgwardt, S. T. Omelchenko, M. Favaro, P. Plate, C. Höhn, D. Abou-Ras, K. Schwarzburg, R. van de Krol, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
A. Musa, T. Akomolafe and M. Carter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 51, 305–316 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ishizuka, T. Maruyama and K. Akimoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 39, L786 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ishizuka, S. Kato, Y. Okamoto and K. Akimoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 950–952 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cendula, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2633–2641 RSC .
C. Li, Q. Cao, F. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, J.-J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4981–5037 RSC .
Y. Takiguchi and S. Miyajima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 112303 CrossRef .
W. Cui, W. Niu, R. Wick-Joliat, T. Moehl and S. D. Tilley, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6062–6067 RSC .
F. Koffyberg and F. Benko, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 1173–1177 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, K. Zhang, D. Xu, G. Yang, H. Huang, F. Nie, C. Liu and S. Yang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 60, 208–337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Forsyth and S. Hull, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1991, 3, 5257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Emin, F. Abdi, M. Fanetti, W. Peng, W. Smith, K. Sivula, B. Dam and M. Valant, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 717, 243–249 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Lim, J. J. Choi and T. Hanrath, J. Nanomater., 2012, 393160 Search PubMed .
Q. Bao, C. M. Li, L. Liao, H. Yang, W. Wang, C. Ke, Q. Song, H. Bao, T. Yu and K. P. Loh, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065203 CrossRef .
R. Motoyoshi, T. Oku, H. Kidowaki, A. Suzuki, K. Kikuchi, S. Kikuchi and B. Jeyadevan, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 118, 1021–1023 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Zhao and B. Li, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 11271–11279 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dimopoulos, A. Peić, P. Müllner, M. Neuschitzer, R. Resel, S. Abermann, M. Postl, E. List, S. Yakunin and W. Heiss, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2013, 5, 011205 CrossRef .
S. Masudy-Panah, K. Radhakrishnan, H. R. Tan, R. Yi, T. I. Wong and G. K. Dalapati, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 266–274 CrossRef CAS .
J. Morasch, H. F. Wardenga, W. Jaegermann and A. Klein, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2016, 213, 1615–1624 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhardwaj, R. Barman and D. Kaur, Mater. Lett., 2016, 185, 230–234 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhaumik, A. Haque, P. Karnati, M. Taufique, R. Patel and K. Ghosh, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 572, 126–133 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kaphle, E. Echeverria, D. N. Mcllroy and P. Hari, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 7839–7854 RSC .
K. Nakaoka, J. Ueyama and K. Ogura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, C661–C665 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Jin, R. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, X. Liu and H. Jiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang, J.-W. Jang, S. H. Choi, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, D. H. Youn, W. Y. Kim, S. Han and J. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7624–7631 RSC .
W.-M. Jin, J.-H. Kang and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2982–2986 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chiang, K. Aroh, N. Franson, V. R. Satsangi, S. Dass and S. Ehrman, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15519–15526 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2952–2958 RSC .
C.-Y. Chiang, Y. Shin, K. Aroh and S. Ehrman, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8232–8239 CrossRef CAS .
M. Basu, ChemPhotoChem, 2019, 3, 1254–1262 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, N. Zhou, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3012–3018 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Lee, D.-Y. Kim, J.-H. Lee, M.-w. Kim, S. An, H. S. Jo, C. Nervi, S. S. Al-Deyab, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15406–15414 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, P. Wang, Z. Yan and N. Ren, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 609, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masudy-Panah, R. Siavash Moakhar, C. S. Chua, A. Kushwaha and G. K. Dalapati, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27596–27606 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chiang, Y. Shin and S. Ehrman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 159, B227–B231 CrossRef .
J. Oh, H. Ryu, W.-J. Lee and J.-S. Bae, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oh, H. Ryu and W.-J. Lee, Composites, Part B, 2019, 163, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masudy-Panah, R. Siavash Moakhar, C. S. Chua, H. R. Tan, T. I. Wong, D. Chi and G. K. Dalapati, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1206–1213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masudy-Panah, R. S. Moakhar, C. S. Chua, A. Kushwaha, T. I. Wong and G. K. Dalapati, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 29383–29390 RSC .
Z. Hubička, M. Zlámal, M. Čada, Š. Kment and J. Krýsa, Catal. Today, 2019, 328, 29–34 CrossRef .
S. Lee, Y. Hong, H. Ryu and J. Yun, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 697, 137849 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cots, P. Bonete and R. Gómez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26348–26356 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zheng, G. Song, C. W. Kim and Y. S. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 340–344 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kargar, Y. Jing, S. J. Kim, C. T. Riley, X. Pan and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11112–11120 CrossRef CAS .
M.-w. Kim, H. Yoon, T. Y. Ohm, H. S. Jo, S. An, S. K. Choi, H. Park, S. S. Al-Deyab, B. K. Min and M. T. Swihart, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masudy-Panah, Y.-J. K. Eugene, N. D. Khiavi, R. Katal and X. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11951–11965 RSC .
A. Mahmood, F. Tezcan and G. Kardaş, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 12937–12943 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xing, E. Lei, D. Zhao, X. Li, M. Ruan and Z. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 15093–15096 RSC .
Y. Li and K. Luo, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 8350–8354 RSC .
H. Xing, E. Lei, Z. Guo, D. Zhao, X. Li and Z. Liu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 2488–2499 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. Jiang, L. Li, Q. Wang, L. Du, X. Liu and G. Tian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 6174–6183 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Arpe and H. Müller-Buschbaum, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1976, 426, 1–6 CrossRef .
N. T. Hahn, V. C. Holmberg, B. A. Korgel and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6459–6466 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, J. C. Hill, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4331–4340 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, N. Nasori, Z. Wang, Y. Mi, L. Wen, Y. Yang, S. Qu, Z. Wang and Y. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8995–9001 RSC .
F. Wang, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol and S. P. Berglund, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12838–12847 RSC .
F. Wang, W. Septina, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, P. Bogdanoff, R. van de Krol, S. D. Tilley and S. P. Berglund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15094–15103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Jian, F. Li, W. Liu, L. Jia and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21997–22004 RSC .
A. Song, P. Plate, A. Chemseddine, F. Wang, F. F. Abdi, M. Wollgarten, R. van de Krol and S. P. Berglund, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9183–9194 RSC .
N.-W. Kim, B.-U. Choi, H. Yu, S. Ryu and J. Oh, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A171–A183 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin, S.-Y. Lin, M.-C. Tsai and C.-H. Wu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 625–632 RSC .
I. Rodriguez-Gutierrez, R. García-Rodríguez, M. Rodriguez-Perez, A. Vega-Poot, G. Rodríguez Gattorno, B. A. Parkinson and G. Oskam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27169–27179 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Park, C.-Y. Lee and E. Reisner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22462–22465 RSC .
Z. Zhang, S. A. Lindley, R. Dhall, K. Bustillo, W. Han, E. Xie and J. K. Cooper, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4111–4117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Yoon, S. Kim, S. Seo, J. Song, B.-U. Choi, S. Y. Choi, H. Park, S. Ryu and J. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12447–12450 RSC .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
M. Woodhouse and B. Parkinson, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2495–2502 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. Gonzalez Martinez and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. Van De Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. P. Berglund, H. C. Lee, P. D. Núñez, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4554–4565 RSC .
J. S. Compton, C. A. Peterson, D. Dervishogullari and L. R. Sharpe, ACS Comb. Sci., 2019, 21, 489–499 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Z. Guan, P. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 1704–1710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C. Du, Y. Wen, Z. Zhang, K. Cho, R. Chen and B. Shan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 9549–9557 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Oropeza, B. T. Feleki, K. H. Zhang, E. J. Hensen and J. P. Hofmann, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6866–6874 CrossRef CAS .
R. Patil, S. Kelkar, R. Naphade and S. Ogale, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3661–3668 RSC .
S. A. Monny, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, B. Luo, M. Konarova, A. Du and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2498–2504 RSC .
S. Wei, N. Xu, F. Li, X. Long, Y. Hu, L. Gao, C. Wang, S. Li, J. Ma and J. Jin, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3367–3374 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y.-L. Shen, G.-C. Fan, M. Xiong, X.-D. Yu and W.-W. Zhao, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186, 284 CrossRef .
S. Liu, J. Zhou, Y. Lu and J. Su, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 180, 123–129 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Lai, K.-C. Lin, C.-Y. Yen and B.-J. Jiang, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 297–312 RSC .
J. Li, M. Griep, Y. Choi and D. Chu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3331–3334 RSC .
A. Morales-Acevedo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 678–685 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gottesman, A. Song, I. Levine, M. Krause, A. N. Islam, D. Abou-Ras, T. Dittrich, R. van de Krol and A. Chemseddine, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1910832 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon, C. T. Prewitt and D. B. Rogers, Inorg. Chem., 1971, 10, 719–723 CrossRef CAS .
F. Benko and F. Koffyberg, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1987, 48, 431–434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kawazoe, H. Yanagi, K. Ueda and H. Hosono, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hiraga, T. Makino, T. Fukumura, H. Weng and M. Kawasaki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 041411 CrossRef .
K. P. Ong, K. Bai, P. Blaha and P. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 634–640 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Jiang, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, Y. Liang, Y.-S. Liu, G. Liu, F. M. Toma, D. Prendergast, I. D. Sharp and J. K. Cooper, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2524–2534 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-L. Liu, Z.-Y. Zhao, R.-D. Zhao and J.-H. Yi, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 819, 153032 CrossRef .
V. Galakhov, A. Poteryaev, E. Kurmaev, V. Anisimov, M. Neumann, Z. Lu, B. Klein and T.-R. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 4584 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Crespo, Sol. Energy, 2018, 163, 162–166 CrossRef .
Z. Deng, X. Fang, S. Wu, Y. Zhao, W. Dong, J. Shao and S. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 577, 658–662 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yengantiwar, P. S. Shinde, S. Pan and A. Gupta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, H831–H837 CrossRef CAS .
I. Garcia-Torregrosa, Y. G. Geertzema, A. S. Ismail, T. L. Lee, F. M. de Groot and B. M. Weckhuysen, ChemPhotoChem, 2019, 3, 1238–1245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin and G. Chumanov, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 26392–26397 RSC .
S. Luo, A. Fluri, S. Zhang, X. Liu, M. Döbeli, G. F. Harrington, R. Tu, D. Pergolesi, T. Ishihara and T. Lippert, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 127, 065301 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wheatley, S. Rojas, C. Oppolzer, T. Joshi, P. Borisov, D. Lederman and A. Cabrera, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 626, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, X. Fang, S. Wu, W. Dong, J. Shao, S. Wang and M. Lei, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2014, 71, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen and J.-H. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 4844–4847 CrossRef CAS .
G. Riveros, C. Garín, D. Ramírez, E. Dalchiele, R. Marotti, C. Pereyra, E. Spera, H. Gómez, P. Grez and F. Martín, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 164, 297–306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, J. C. Brauer, J.-E. Moser, E. Thimsen and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7341–7350 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon, D. B. Rogers, C. T. Prewitt and J. L. Gillson, Inorg. Chem., 1971, 10, 723–727 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, P. Li, K. Huang, Z. Tang, G. Liu and Y. Li, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 3289–3291 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, X. Fang, S. Wu, S. Wang, W. Dong, J. Shao and R. Tao, Vacuum, 2015, 115, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dordor, J. Chaminade, A. Wichainchai, E. Marquestaut, J. Doumerc, M. Pouchard, P. Hagenmuller and A. Ammar, J. Solid State Chem., 1988, 75, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata, A. Tanaka, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Catal. Today, 1998, 44, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, S. Ikeda, T. Takata, A. Tanaka, M. Hara and J. N. Kondo, Appl. Energy, 2000, 67, 159–179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara, M. Komoda, H. Hasei, M. Yashima, S. Ikeda, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 780–785 CrossRef CAS .
M. Younsi, A. Aider, A. Bouguelia and M. Trari, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 574–580 CrossRef CAS .
A. Derbal, S. Omeiri, A. Bouguelia and M. Trari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4274–4282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang, Y. B. Park, H. E. Kim, Y. H. Choi, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6054–6061 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, A. Wuttig, J. W. Krizan, Y. Hu, Z. M. Detweiler, R. J. Cava and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12415–12422 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wuttig, J. W. Krizan, J. Gu, J. J. Frick, R. J. Cava and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 165–171 RSC .
T. Jiang, Y. Zhao, M. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Xia and H. Xue, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2018, 215, 1800056 CrossRef .
M. S. Prévot, Y. Li, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3018–3026 RSC .
Y. Oh, W. Yang, J. Kim, S. Jeong and J. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14078–14087 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oh, W. Yang, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park and J. Moon, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3720–3729 RSC .
T. Jiang, Y. Zhao and H. Xue, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 11951–11958 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Fugate, S. Biswas, M. C. Clement, M. Kim, D. Kim, A. Asthagiri and L. R. Baker, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2390–2399 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schorne-Pinto, L. Cassayre, L. Presmanes and A. Barnabé, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 6431–6444 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jacob, K. Fitzner and C. Alcock, Metall. Trans. B, 1977, 8, 451–460 CrossRef .
S. Omeiri, B. Bellal, A. Bouguelia, Y. Bessekhouad and M. Trari, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 1395–1401 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen and G.-W. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 288, 258–264 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen and J.-H. Wu, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 5029–5035 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, T. Jiang, Z. Wu, W. Zhou, X. Zhang, T. Guo, L. Wu and H. Xue, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 12407–12412 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ito, C. Izawa and T. Watanabe, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 814–816 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barnabé, E. Mugnier, L. Presmanes and P. Tailhades, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 3468–3470 CrossRef .
S. Li, J. Liu, X. Wang, B. Yan, H. Li and J. M. Liu, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 2412–2415 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferri, J. Elliott, M. Farnesi Camellone, S. Fabris and S. Piccinin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 29589–29598 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hermans, A. Klein, H. P. Sarker, M. N. Huda, H. Junge, T. Toupance and W. Jaegermann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910432 CrossRef CAS .
J. Husek, A. Cirri, S. Biswas, A. Asthagiri and L. R. Baker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 11300–11304 CrossRef CAS .
M. Harb, D. Masih and K. Takanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18198–18204 RSC .
C. T. Crespo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 305–311 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Seabold and N. R. Neale, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1005–1013 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Q. Yan, A. Shinde, D. Guevarra, P. F. Newhouse, N. Becerra-Stasiewicz, S. M. Chatman, J. A. Haber, J. B. Neaton and J. M. Gregoire, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500968 CrossRef .
W. Guo, W. D. Chemelewski, O. Mabayoje, P. Xiao, Y. Zhang and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27220–27227 CrossRef CAS .
P. Newhouse, D. Boyd, A. Shinde, D. Guevarra, L. Zhou, E. Soedarmadji, G. Li, J. B. Neaton and J. M. Gregoire, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7483–7494 RSC .
C.-M. Jiang, M. Farmand, C. H. Wu, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo, W. S. Drisdell, J. K. Cooper and I. D. Sharp, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3334–3345 CrossRef CAS .
A. Song, A. Chemseddine, I. Y. Ahmet, P. Bogdanoff, D. Friedrich, F. F. Abdi, S. P. Berglund and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 2408–2419 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Sahoo, B. Zoellner and P. A. Maggard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4501–4509 RSC .
K. Skorupska, P. A. Maggard, R. Eichberger, K. Schwarzburg, P. Shahbazi, B. Zoellner and B. A. Parkinson, ACS Comb. Sci., 2015, 17, 742–751 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Joshi and P. A. Maggard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1577–1581 CrossRef CAS .
N. King, P. P. Sahoo, L. Fuoco, S. Stuart, D. Dougherty, Y. Liu and P. A. Maggard, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2095–2104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, N. King and P. A. Maggard, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1699–1708 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kormányos, A. Thomas, M. N. Huda, P. Sarker, J. P. Liu, N. Poudyal, C. Janáky and K. Rajeshwar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16024–16034 CrossRef .
L. Fuoco, U. A. Joshi and P. A. Maggard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10490–10497 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sullivan, P. P. Sahoo, L. Fuoco, A. S. Hewitt, S. Stuart, D. Dougherty and P. A. Maggard, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6711–6721 CrossRef CAS .
N. King, R. D. Sommer, P. Watkins-Curry, J. Y. Chan and P. A. Maggard, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 552–558 CrossRef CAS .
N. King, I. Sullivan, P. Watkins-Curry, J. Y. Chan and P. A. Maggard, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 236, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zoellner, S. Stuart, C.-C. Chung, D. B. Dougherty, J. L. Jones and P. A. Maggard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3115–3126 RSC .
B. Zoellner, S. O’Donnell, Z. Wu, D. Itanze, A. Carbone, F. E. Osterloh, S. Geyer and P. A. Maggard, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 6845–6857 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J.-W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
B. Seger, I. E. Castelli, P. C. Vesborg, K. W. Jacobsen, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2397–2413 RSC .
B. Seger, O. Hansen and P. C. Vesborg, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, e201600013 CrossRef .
W. J. Lee, P. S. Shinde, G. H. Go and E. Ramasamy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5262–5270 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vilanova, T. Lopes, C. Spenke, M. Wullenkord and A. Mendes, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 175–188 CrossRef .
K. R. Tolod, S. Hernández and N. Russo, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 13 CrossRef .
X. Yao, D. Wang, X. Zhao, S. Ma, P. S. Bassi, G. Yang, W. Chen, Z. Chen and T. Sritharan, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
V. Andrei, R. L. Hoye, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Bajada, S. Ahmad, M. De Volder, R. Friend and E. Reisner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801403 CrossRef .
H. Lu, V. Andrei, K. J. Jenkinson, A. Regoutz, N. Li, C. E. Creissen, A. E. Wheatley, H. Hao, E. Reisner and D. S. Wright, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804033 CrossRef .
I. Y. Ahmet, Y. Ma, J.-W. Jang, T. Henschel, B. Stannowski, T. Lopes, A. Vilanova, A. Mendes, F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2366–2379 RSC .
M. Huang, W. Lei, M. Wang, S. Zhao, C. Li, M. Wang and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3845–3850 RSC .

          F. F. Abdi, J. Jang, A. Bronneberg, R. V. D. Krol, S. Kirner, B. Stannowski, M. Son, J. Luo, M. Mayer, T. Lopes, P. Dias, A. Vilanova, A. Mendes and F. Oswald, PEC DEMO-Project Deliverable Report, 2016.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee02397cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Changli Li
	Changli Li is an Associate Professor at the School of Materials, Sun Yat-sen University, China. He received his PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from The University of Tokyo, Japan, in 2015. After Post-Doctoral studies at Tsinghua University and The University of British Columbia, he began his independent career as faculty member at Sun Yat-sen University. His research activities focus on the synthesis of nanostructured materials and semiconductor heterojunctions for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical energy conversion.

Jingfu He
	Jingfu He is currently an associate professor in School of Materials, Sun Yat-sen University. He received his PhD in 2012 from University of Science and Technology of China. He joined Berlinguette group at the University of British Columbia as a postdoctoral associate in 2015 and conducted research on film synthesis and CO2 electrocatalysis. His current research interests include photoelectrochemistry and electrochemistry for CO2 reduction, water splitting and in situ synchrotron radiation spectrum.

Yequan Xiao
	Yequan Xiao is a PhD student in the Institute of Fundamental & Frontier Sciences at University of Electronic Science & Technology of China, under the supervision of Prof. Yanbo Li. He obtained his master's degree from China Three Gorges University in 2017. During his master's study, he was a visiting student at Tsinghua University working on graphene and solar cells. His research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of tantalum (oxy)nitride-based photoanode materials for solar-driven water splitting.

Yanbo Li
	Yanbo Li is a Professor at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Science, UESTC. He received his PhD degree in Engineering Synthesis from The University of Tokyo (UT) in 2010. He then conducted Postdoctoral research at UT and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory until 2016. His research interests focus on materials and devices for solar energy conversion, including artificial photosynthesis and solar cells.

Jean-Jacques Delaunay
	Jean-Jacques Delaunay is an Associate Professor at the School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo. He received his PhD degree from the Strasbourg University. He has worked for research institutions in the fields of nanotechnology and solar energy in France, Germany, and Japan. He conducts research on the synthesis of micro/nanomaterials with controlled structures and functionalities for sensing and energy conversion. He has co-authored more than 100 scientific publications.

Broader context
Cu-Based metal oxides possess a wide range of bandgap values and favorable band edges relative to the water splitting redox couples, thus providing promising candidates for PEC solar conversion applications. Among the Cu-based metal oxides, Cu2O is the most successful photocathode with outstanding PEC performance obtained by introducing buried p–n junctions, protective layers, and nanostructures. However, the other important and emerging binary and ternary Cu-based photocathodes still have limited PEC performance mainly due to low carrier mobility, surface states induced Fermi level pinning, and difficulty in forming high-quality p–n junctions. Moreover, chemical instability, which is a common issue to Cu-based photocathodes, leads to a very low faradaic efficiency and electrode surface degradation during measurement of bare Cu-based photocathodes. In this review, we emphasize the importance of faradaic efficiency in the characterization of surface stability, provide a fundamental understanding of the key limitations of these materials, and highlight recent strategies that have proven successful in overcoming these limitations. A perspective regarding the future direction for the design of heterojunctions, interface engineering, and surface/bulk defects passivation is also presented.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Principle of operation of PEC cells based on bias-assisted p-type semiconductor, (b) bias-assisted n-type semiconductor, and (c) bias-free tandem structure consisting of p- and n-type photoelectrodes.	 
H2O(l) + 2h+ → 1/2O2(g) + 2H+(aq),	(1-1)
2H+(aq) + 2e− → H2(g),	(1-2)
H2O(l) → 1/2O2(g) + H2(g).	(1-3)
Cathodic decomposition: MX + ne− → M + Xn−,	(1-4)
Anodic decomposition: MX + nh+ → Mn+ + X,	(1-5)

 	Fig. 2  Typical correlations between energy band positions and decomposition potentials. Controlling thermodynamic stability against photodecomposition: (a) stable, (b) anodic decomposition, (c) cathodic decomposition, and (d) unstable. Adapted with permission from ref. 46, Copyright (1977) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Energy band diagram of several Cu-based metal oxides together with a wide range of semiconductors. The dotted lines represent the redox potentials of water splitting.9,12,14,16	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of Cu or Tl/Cu2O structure with a copper-rich Cu2O region and a Cu2O layer with a high density of O-vacancies. (b) Proposed band diagram for a Cu or Tl/Cu2O Schottky barrier cell. The barrier height is primarily determined by a high density of donor states approximately 0.7 eV above the valence band. ① and ② represent the flow directions of electrons and holes under dark conditions, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 60, Copyright (1982) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of a p-Cu2O/n-type oxide semiconductor/AZO solar cell. Current–potential (J–V) characteristics obtained in Cu2O-based heterojunction solar cells with binary metal oxides (b) and ternary metal oxides (c) as buffer layers measured under AM1.5G solar illumination. Energy band diagrams of (d) AZO/Cu2O, (e) AZO/ZnO/Cu2O, and (f) AZO/Ga2O3/Cu2O solar cells. Panels (a, b and d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright (2014) Elsevier; panel c is reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright (2016) IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/Pt structure. (b) The energy band positions for the semiconductors of the multilayer photocathode and redox levels of the involved chemical reactions. CB, conduction band; VB, valence band. (c) J–V characteristics in 1 M Na2SO4 solution, under chopped AM1.5 light illumination for the as-deposited Cu2O/5 × (4 nm ZnO/0.17 nm Al2O3)/11 nm TiO2/Pt electrode. Inset of (c) is the stability measurement of the photocathode biased at 0 V vs. RHE. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 13, Copyright (2011) Springer Nature. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx structure. (e) J–V characteristics in pH 5.0 phosphate–sulfate electrolyte of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. The first linear sweep (black trace) exhibits a strong photoreduction current in the first seconds, indicating activation of the photoelectrodeposited catalyst. Subsequent sweeps show an improved onset potential (gray trace). (f) Stability measurement of the photocathode, biased at 0 V vs. RHE under light chopping. Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 97, Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH. (g) Cross-sectional SEM image of a Cu2O/SnO2/RuO2 structure. (h) J–V characteristics of composite Cu2O/SnO2/RuO2 photocathode samples with different steam treatment conditions: without treatment and with 3 h steam treatment at temperatures of 100, 125, and 150 °C. (i) Corresponding stability measurements under continuous illumination while biased at 0 V vs. RHE. All measurements were carried out in pH 5.0 with a phosphate–sulfate electrolyte. Panels (g–i) are reproduced with permission from ref. 108, Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Band energies (in flat-band condition) of n-type materials with respect to Cu2O and their respective error bars. All energies are referenced to the valence band of Cu2O. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, Copyright (2014) AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic energy levels of the Cu2O/Ga2O3(20 nm)/TiO2(15 nm) structure under open circuit conditions before contacting the electrolyte solution. (b) J–V curves of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt samples with different TiO2 deposition temperature. (c) Stability measurement of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt photocathodes with different TiO2 deposition temperatures, biased at 0 V vs. RHE in a buffered electrolyte (pH 4.3). The deposition temperature for Ga2O3 is kept at 150 °C. Panels (b and c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 14, Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the dual Cu2O photocathode experiment. The transparent ED-Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode is placed in front of the TO-Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. The J–V curve (e) and IPCE (f) of the dual Cu2O photocathode. Inset of (e) is the calculated solar to current efficiency. Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright (2018) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM of Cu2O nanowire/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. (b) J–V curves of Cu2O planar film/AZO/TiO2/RuOx and Cu2O nanowire/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes under simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination (c) IPCE spectra under monochromatic illumination of Cu2O planar and nanowire-based devices. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 118, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (d) SEM of Cu2O nanowire/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathode. (e) J–V curves of Cu2O nanowire/AZO/TiO2/RuOx and Cu2O nanowire/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes under simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination. (f) Corresponding wavelength-dependent IPCE measurements. The shaded area represents the contribution of the excitonic effect to the total quantum yield. Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (g) SEM images of the tandem structure composed of Si microwire array and Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2 photocathode. (h) J–V curves under simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination for planar Si/Cu2O (green), planar Cu2O tandem with an underlying Si p–n junction (red), Cu2O on a microwire substrate (black), and Cu2O tandem on microwires with underlying p–n junction (blue) photocathodes. All the Cu2O here was protected by Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx overlayers. (i) Corresponding wavelength-dependent IPCE measurements for planar Si/Cu2O and a microwire Cu2O top absorber with a buried radial Si p–n junction. Panels (g–i) are reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the FTO/CuO/NiO/Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx structure. (b) Proposed mechanism for improved hole extraction in FTO/CuO/NiO/Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx structure due to the suppression of electron–hole recombination in the CuO/NiO layer. (c) J–V characteristics of Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes on 4 nm thick NiO (black), 3 nm thick Au (blue), and 4.4 nm CuO/NiO (red) under chopped illumination in a pH 5 electrolyte. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 120, Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of the FTO/Au/CuSCN/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2 structure. (e) Band energy diagrams showing the band-tail assisted hole transport between Cu2O and CuSCN. (f) J–V curves of FTO/Au/Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/RuOx photocathodes with or without CuSCN layer under AM 1.5G simulated illumination in pH 5 buffered electrolyte (scan rate 10 mV s−1). Panels (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 15, Copyright (2020) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Simplified electron energy diagram of a BiVO4 photoanode–Cu2O photocathode tandem cell for overall water splitting. (b) IPCE of Cu2O at 0 V vs. RHE shown in comparison to the standard AM1.5G photon flux (black, right axis). The expected electron flux produced by the photocathode in tandem with the BiVO4 photoanodes of different thicknesses is shown as the shaded areas. (c) J–V curves for the BiVO4 photoanodes with (solid lines) and without (dashed lines) photo-deposited cobalt catalyst under simulated solar illumination (100 mWcm−2). The |J|–V curves for Cu2O photocathode as measured in the tandem cell position are shown as dotted lines in the corresponding color. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 123, Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the Cu2O/AZO/TiO2/RuOx-perovskite solar cell tandem cell during operation (IrO2 is employed as a counter electrode). (e) The plot of the spectral flux of photons in the AM1.5G spectrum, and the expected electron current flux of photocathode and PV obtained from the multiplication of their respective IPCE responses by the photon flux. For the measurement of IPCE, the photocathode was biased at +0.3 V vs. RHE and the PV was measured at a short circuit. Integration yields the expected current densities labeled for each component. (f) J–V curves of the photocathode and anode components with overlaid J–V response of the photovoltaic cell. The photocathode configuration was 3 nm Au + 260 nm Cu2O + ALD overlayers + 20 min electrodeposited RuO2 surface catalyst. Panel (d–f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 124, Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH. (g) Illustration of the all-oxide tandem solar water splitting device, consisting of Cu2O as the photocathode and molybdenum-doped BiVO4 (Mo:BiVO4) as the photoanode without bias. (h) Wavelength-dependent IPCE spectra for Cu2O photocathode, BiVO4 photoanode, and the tandem devices. (i) J–V response under simulated air mass 1.5G chopped illumination for the Cu2O photocathode, BiVO4 photoanode, and Cu2O photocathode behind the BiVO4 photoanode in 0.2 M potassium borate (pH 9.0). The crossing point gives ∼2.4 mA cm−2 and ∼3% STH efficiency. Panel (g–i) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (j) Illustration of PEC–PV tandem configuration based on CuSCN-incorporated Cu2O photocathode, PSC, and IrOx anode. (k) The plot of photon flux based on AM 1.5G spectrum and expected electron fluxes of photocathode and PV calculated from wavelength-dependent IPCE responses of photocathode at 0.5 V vs. RHE and PV at short circuit. (l) Estimated tandem operating current density by overlaying J–V curves of photocathodes, J–V curves of PV cells, and linear-sweep voltammetry of IrOx anode. PEC 25, PEC 50, and PEC 100 indicate the photocathodes with three thicknesses of Cu2O, where the numbers denote the duration of deposition in minutes. Panels (j–l) are reproduced with permission from ref. 15, Copyright (2020) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the dual working electrode (DWE) configuration used during PEC measurements with a pn+Si/TiO2/Pt photocathode. (b) Schematic structure of a Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt photocathode. The thickness of Ga2O3 and TiO2 ALD-layers are 20 and 100 nm, respectively. WE1 controls the back contact potential V1 and WE2 measures the surface potential V2. (c) J–ΔV curves (dashed) of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt before and after 2 h stability test, overlaid with the corresponding J–V1 curves (solid). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the FTO/Au/CuO/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode. (b) Relative band positions of CuO/CdS/TiO2 heterojunctions. (c) J–V curves of CuO/TiO2 (with Pt) and CuO/CdS/TiO2 with and without Pt-catalyst measured in 1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7) under chopped illumination from simulated 1 sun illumination. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 16, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2 structure. (e) Relative band positions of CuO/ZnO/TiO2 heterojunctions. The approximated band positions and band gaps of the semiconductors were adapted from ref. 16 and 67. (f) J–V curves of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes fabricated with TiO2 sputtering power from 50 to 200 W. Panel f is reproduced with permission from ref. 170, Copyright (2018) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The CuBi2O4 crystal structure as viewed at an arbitrary angle. The Bi, Cu, O atoms are represented by blue, orange, and red spheres, respectively. (b) Schematic showing the band positions, quasi-Fermi levels for electrons (EF,n) and holes (EF,p), and obtainable photovoltage (Vph) for a CuBi2O4 photocathode in relation to the H+/H2 and H+,O2/H2O electrochemical potentials under the idealized assumption that the photogenerated electrons can reduce H+. The schematic is based on the cathodic photocurrent onset potential for the two-electrode chopped (dark/light) linear sweep voltammetry scans in phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with H2 bubbling. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 18, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Energy scheme of the CuBi2O4 photocatalytic system at the point of zero charge. Visible light irradiation (1.75–3.0 eV) of the material promotes electrons from the valence band into the Cu 3d band, while UV illumination (>3.1 eV) populates the more reducing Bi 3p states above. The photocorrosion of the material can occur by the trapping photoelectrons in the Cu 3d band. Panel c is reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of energy-band diagrams for Au/CuBi2O4 (a) and Cu:NiO/CuBi2O4 structures (c). (b) Chopped linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) scans for CuBi2O4 and Au/CuBi2O4 in 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution. (d) Chopped LSV scans for CuBi2O4 and Cu:NiO/CuBi2O4 photocathodes in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with Ar bubbling and with H2O2. Inset in (d) shows the average photocurrent densities (at least 3 samples) at 0.6 V vs. RHE extracted from LSV scans for photocathodes with different thicknesses. All measurements were performed under AM 1.5G illumination. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (c and d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright (2019) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of array dispenser (a) and scanner (b). (c) Bi–Ag–Cu array scan results. Each spot had a total of 36 drops with a spot spacing of 1000 mm. Scanned at a potential of 0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl (0.45 V vs. RHE) with an optical fiber tip scan rate of 250 μm s−1. (d) Chopped (dark/light) LSV scans for CuBi2O4 and Bi:Ag:Cu = 22:3:11 oxide films synthesized by drop-cast in 0.1 M Na2SO4 and 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8). Measurements were done using backside illumination (100 mW cm−2) and a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. Panels (a–d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 194, Copyright (2013) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) J–V plots (scan rate = 10 mV s−1) and (f) current–time (J–t) plots at 0.6 V vs. RHE of CuBi2O4 (black) and Ag–CuBi2O4 (red) measured in 0.1 M NaOH solution (pH 12.8) saturated with O2 under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. Dotted lines in (e) represent dark currents for O2 reduction. The inset in (f) shows photographs of CuBi2O4 and Ag–CuBi2O4 electrodes after the J–t measurement. Panels (e and f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 178, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Flat-band potential of homogeneous CuBi2O4 films with different stoichiometries, (b) the formation of a CuBi2O4 homojunction when brought into contact, and (c) the formation of CuBi2O4 with forward gradient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Estimated band diagrams of CuBi2O4, CdS, and TiO2 (a) before contact, and (b) in contact as a CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2 photocathode in relation to electrochemical redox potentials for proton reduction (H+/H2) and water oxidation (H+, O2/H2O). EF is the Fermi level, EC is the conduction band, EV is the valence band, and Vph is the estimated photovoltage. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. (c) Chopped LSV for a forward gradient on CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode, and (d) constant potential measurements for an unprotected CuBi2O4 photocathode at 0.6 V vs. RHE (red line) and a forward gradient on CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode at 0.0 V vs. RHE (blue line). Measurements were done in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with N2 bubbling under front (CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/Pt) and back (CuBi2O4) illumination. Panels (c and d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Simplified energy diagram of a tandem cell consisting of a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode and CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode submerged in aqueous electrolyte and “wired” for overall photoelectrochemical water splitting. The diagram illustrates that the CdS/TiO2 heterojunction layer protects CuBi2O4 from photocorrosion and that the photovoltage within CuBi2O4 is relatively small so that an applied bias of ≥0.4 V is required to drive overall water splitting. (b) LSV scans for a W:BiVO4 photocathode (green solid line), W:BiVO4 photocathode with CoPi co-catalyst (blue solid line), CuBi2O4 photocathode with Pt as an electrocatalyst behind a W:BiVO4 photocathode (red solid line), and a CuBi2O4 photocathode with CdS/TiO2/RuOx protection and electrocatalyst layers behind a W:BiVO4 photocathode (orange solid line) measured with Ar bubbling. (c) DEMS LSV scans for a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode, and (d) CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode under illumination. (e) Simultaneous current vs. time and H2 gas signal vs. time measurements for a W:BiVO4/CoPi–CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx tandem cell measured in two-electrode configuration with various applied biases as labeled (0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.5 V). (f) Two-electrode LSV scans for a tandem device consisting of a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode and CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx photocathode (W:BiVO4/CoPi vs. CuBi2O4/CdS/TiO2/RuOx) under illumination (red solid line) and in the dark (green dashed line) and a single photoelectrode device consisting of a W:BiVO4/CoPi photoanode vs. Pt wire measured under illumination (blue solid line) and in the dark (black dashed line). Measurements were done in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8) under AM 1.5G simulator (100 mW cm−2) and electrolyte was continuously purged with Ar gas during the measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Crystal structure of rhombohedral 3R-CuFeO2. The Cu, Fe, and O atoms are given in brown, cyan, and gray, respectively. (b) Proposed band energy diagram of CuFeO2 under flat-band conditions. The optically forbidden band (OFB) is not accessible from the valence band (VB) by a transition of energy Eg1, whereas a transition induced by a photon of energy Eg2 can excite an electron to the optical conduction band (OCB). Panel b is reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH. (c) UV/Vis spectrum of a CuFeO2 film on FTO corrected for the substrate. Insets: Corresponding direct (right) and indirect (left) Tauc plots. Panels (a and c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 213, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (d) J–V scans for CuFeO2 photocathode measured with chopped light in 1 M NaOH purged with Ar (black) and O2 (blue) (scan rate, 10 mV s−1), and (e) photocurrent measured at 0.6 V vs. RHE in 1 M NaOH purged with Ar (black) and O2 (blue) (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Panels (d and e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the CuAlO2/CuFeO2 structure. (b) Scheme of the possible pathways that photogenerated charges can take inside a CuAlO2/CuFeO2 electrode. The brown layer represents CuFeO2. Holes can travel either inside the CuFeO2 layer or through the CuAlO2 scaffold. (c) Comparison of J–V curves obtained for optimized CuAlO2/CuFeO2 (blue trace) and CuFeO2 (red trace) electrodes, under O2 bubbling. Electrolyte: 1 M NaOH, scan rate: 10 mV s−1, illumination: 1 sun. Panels (a–c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 240, Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the operation principle of PE-SiO2@CuFeO2- and PE-SiO2@CuFeO2@CuAlO2-based 2D opal photocathodes on FTO substrates. (e) LSV scans for 2D opal photocathodes composed of microspheres with a partial etching process in oxygen-saturated 1 M NaOH solution, under chopped illumination. The sweep rate was 5 mV s−1. Panels (d and e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 242, Copyright (2018) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  LSV scans for CuFeO2/AZO/TiO2 and CuFeO2/AZO/TiO2/Pt photocathodes under intermittent one sun illumination, with argon-purged pH 6.1 buffered electrolyte (0.5 M Na2SO4). The sweep rate was 8 mV s−1 and the scan was in the cathodic direction. Inset: Chronoamperometry of the CuFeO2/AZO/TiO2/Pt photocathode at 0 V vs. RHE under intermittent illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images of the IO CuFeO2 on FTO substrates. (b) LSV scans for the IO and planar CuFeO2 photocathodes after modification by the electrocatalyst in an argon-purged 1 M NaOH solution (pH 13.5) under chopped illumination. The sweep rate was 8 mV s−1, and the scan was performed in the cathodic direction. (c) Schematic diagram of the charge transfer for the different types of structures under different photon energy illumination. (d) IPCE spectra with respect to the wavelength for the planar and IO CuFeO2 photocathodes after modification of the C60/CoFe LDH biased at 0 V vs. RHE in an argon-purged 1 m NaOH solution. Integration of the IPCE value with the solar AM 1.5 spectrum (gray line) yields a photocurrent value (dotted line) similar to the observed current under simulated 1 sun illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Experimental phase diagram of the Cu–Fe–O system in air, with experimental points with an accuracy of ±2 °C for the transition temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (b) Pourbaix diagrams computed using the experimental formation free energies of solid phases and dissolved ions. The white dashed lines represent the redox potential of water, while the red cross and circle represent the conditions at which the PEC measurements were performed in ref. 23 and 24. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254, Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of the potential regions probed by the different redox couples shown next to the band position of CuFeO2, under flat-band conditions, in water (left side) and in acetonitrile (right side). MV = methyl viologen, DMFc = decamethylferrocene, and EFB = flat-band potential of CuFeO2. (b) ΔOCP = OCP10suns − OCPdark measured as a function of the redox potential of the electrolyte, referenced to the RHE. The expected ΔOCP value, in the absence of FLP, is shown as the broken line that intercepts the x-axis at E = EFB. (c) Proposed energy band diagram for an isolated CuFeO2 electrode in the dark, where ECB = conduction band edge, EVB = valence band edge, EF = Fermi level, NA = acceptor density, τ = carrier lifetime, LD = carrier diffusion length, W = depletion width, and NSS = density of surface states. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Reported photocurrent vs. onset potential for selected Cu2O, CuO, CuBi2O4, and CuFeO2 based photocathodes. The photocurrent for the photocathodes is collected at 0 V vs. RHE. The maximum STH conversion efficiency for each type of the photocathodes and tandem devices is represented by a colored disk. The radius of the disk is proportional to the value of the STH conversion efficiency. Detailed information on the device structures and measurement conditions can be found in Table S2 (ESI†).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee02397c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
