Recent progress in fabrication and application of polydimethylsiloxane sponges  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA04577H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04577H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16467-16497Recent progress in fabrication and application of polydimethylsiloxane sponges

        
          
            Deyong 
            Zhu†
, 
      
        
          
            Stephan 
            Handschuh-Wang†
 and 

        
          
            Xuechang 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *
      College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: xczhou@szu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-755-26536141;   Tel: +86-755-26536627
Received 
      25th May 2017
    , Accepted 19th June 2017First published on 19th June 2017AbstractOwing to their structural advantages in comparison with bulk polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), porous 3D substrates, which are also known as PDMS sponges, possess immense potential in energy generation, transport and storage, absorption, separation, photocatalysis, wearable electronics and life science applications. Extensive effort has therefore been devoted to the design and synthesis of porous PDMS sponges. The key to excellent performance in high-value applications is a deep knowledge of the beneficial aspects of their porosity, structure and morphology for a specific application. Several new routes for the fabrication of PDMS sponges, as well as novel applications, have been developed recently. Therefore, this review focuses on advances in the field of the fabrication and application of PDMS sponges since 2011. After a concise introduction, which includes remarks on the benefits of PDMS in comparison with other materials, strategies for the synthesis/fabrication of PDMS sponges are presented and their advantages and drawbacks are concisely discussed. A summary of the potential fabrication procedures will be beneficial for those entering the field, as it gives a quick overview of the feasible applications of a PDMS sponge fabricated via a specific method. Afterwards, different high-value applications of PDMS sponges are described in conjunction with specific and detailed examples of all the abovementioned applications. In this regard, suggestions are also made regarding which fabrication method is most beneficial for the application being discussed. Finally, recent advances in the fabrication and application of PDMS sponges are summarized, as well as issues, such as surface functionalization and pore size limitations, which are impeding reasonable future applications. We envision that this review will be helpful to those entering the field, as well as experienced researchers who need rapid access to recent literature, and will give new stimuli for the development of novel porous materials.Deyong ZhuDeyong Zhu received his BS degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2011. Following this, he joined Prof. Bo Zheng's group for the study of microfluidics at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and obtained his PhD in chemistry in 2015. Dr Zhu is currently a postdoctoral fellow of Prof. Xuechang Zhou's group at Shenzhen University. His current research interests lie in soft matter interfaces, novel porous systems, and microfluidics and their applications in the environment, sensors and electronics.Stephan Handschuh-WangStephan Handschuh-Wang obtained his Diploma degree in physical chemistry from the Technical University of Dortmund in 2010. He pursued his PhD with Professor Holger Schönherr at the University of Siegen on the study of soft matter interfaces and obtained his PhD in 2016. Dr Handschuh-Wang is currently a postdoctoral fellow of Prof. Xuechang Zhou's group at Shenzhen University. His previous and current research interests are focused on phenomena at the interface of preferably soft matter, in particular, the characterization and application of novel functional interfaces.Xuechang ZhouProf. Xuechang Zhou is currently an associate professor of the College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering at Shenzhen University. Prof. Zhou received his BS in polymer chemistry (Advisor: Prof. Guangzhao Zhang) at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2005 and MPhil and PhD degrees in the Department of Chemistry (Prof. Bo Zheng's group) at the Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2007 and 2010, respectively. From 2010 to 2014, he worked in Prof. Zijian Zheng's group as a postdoctoral researcher at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University focusing on the development of flexible and wearable electronics and surface patterning techniques. He joined the College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering at Shenzhen University as an associate professor in 2014. His research interests include flexible and stretchable electronics, sensors, and environmental engineering.
1. Introduction
Nature is an instructive school for scientists and engineers, and its products have contributed to the welfare of humankind. Porous structures, which are commonly found in living organisms, represent examples of vital building blocks that have achieved the desired properties and optimal performance over a long period of evolution.1–11 For instance, sponges are aquatic animals of the phylum Porifera and possess bodies full of pores on the surface, through which a flux of water circulates to bring food and oxygen and to remove waste.12 Alveolar tissue in the lungs is another appealing example, with its hollow cavities.13 Alveoli are endowed with huge internal surface areas for sufficient gas exchange and comprise elastic walls that permit expansion and contraction of the alveoli during breathing. An understanding of the relationships between natural porous architectures and their functionalities is essential for developing new approaches for the design and construction of advanced structured porous materials. Historically, the skeleton materials of biomimetic porous structures have evolved from essentially inorganic zeolites,14 active carbon,15 and porous silicates16 to hybrid metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),17 hypercrosslinked porous polymers (HCPs),18 and, recently, porous organic polymers (POPs).1,2 In particular, porous polymers have received an increasing amount of research interest, which is attributed to their potential to combine the properties of both porous structures and polymeric materials. In comparison with non-porous materials, the emerging advantages of porous polymers include their large surface area, well-defined porosity, easy processability, and numerous synthetic routes for their fabrication and functionalization. Recent decades have witnessed the productive use of porous polymeric materials for greenhouse gas adsorption, proton conduction, energy storage and conversion, sensing, separation, catalysis, drug delivery and release, and tissue engineering, together with other essential applications.19–25
Among the large family of porous polymeric materials, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sponges have received growing attention in many research areas over the past few years.26–40 This trend arises from both the outstanding properties of PDMS itself and its elastic porous structures.
From the point of view of materials, PDMS has been the most widely used silicon-based organic elastomer since the first silicones were synthesized by Wacker Chemie in the 1950s and their first introduction into academic laboratories in the 1990s.41–43 In general, PDMS is a viscoelastic, biocompatible, and chemically and mechanically robust material with a low glass transition temperature, high cost-effectiveness and good moldability, which ensure that it is acceptable for practical uses.44–46 The Si–O–Si backbone endows PDMS elastomers with intriguing properties, such as high flexibility, non-toxicity, non-flammability, thermal and electrical resistance, and low bulk density.10 PDMS exhibits high transmittance and low absorption under UV irradiation, which is suitable for desirable optical applications.47,48 Because of its excellent contour accuracy of less than 10 nm, PDMS is widely employed in micro- and nanotechnologies.43,49 Solid PDMS is resistant against most aqueous reagents and alcoholic solvents. However, organic solvents, such as xylene, are able to swell this elastomer.50 In addition, it is permeable to small unreactive vapor and gas molecules such as water and oxygen.51–53 Moreover, the surface of pristine PDMS displays low surface tension and energy and is hydrophobic. Its wettability can be changed to hydrophilic temporarily by the extensive introduction of hydroxyl groups by oxygen plasma treatment; however, it regains its hydrophobic properties owing to chain migration.54 The surface of PDMS can easily be modified via oxygen plasma treatment, the adsorption of proteins, or the conjugation of other functional chemical groups.55,56 Its high electronegativity can also be exploited to deposit oppositely charged electrolytes for hydrophilic modifications and to enable various electrical applications.57
From the viewpoint of structure–function correlation, a “target-motivated” approach for the further adjustment and optimization of the structures and consequently, the properties of pristine PDMS is being carried out to serve specific purposes. A representative example mentioned above is the synergy between the porosity and pristine features of PDMS sponges, which makes it possible to improve existing applications and to introduce new functions.26–40 The porous structures generated in PDMS sponges by template leaching, phase separation, gas foaming, 3D printing, or other techniques provide them with extensive scope for use in flexible conductors, sensors, energy generators and storage devices, adsorbents, oil/water separators, biomedical scaffolds, etc. According to the desired functions, an appropriate fabrication method should be adopted to produce PDMS sponges with the requisite structural characteristics, including pore geometry, pore size, pore distribution, and closed/open porous frameworks. Not every fabrication method can meet the needs of every envisaged application. In addition to the physical structure of the pores, the functionalities of PDMS sponges and their pore surfaces are also important. Furthermore, these sponges benefit from the ability to incorporate functional species into the precursors of PDMS elastomers and to engineer the pore surfaces via post-modification processes with functional monomers.
PDMS sponges, as some of the most important porous polymeric materials, constitute quite a broad subject in relation to their chemical and physical structures, fabrication techniques, optimized properties and desired applications. Several excellent reviews of the development of porous polymeric materials have been published in recent years.1–5,8–10 Readers can consult these comprehensive reviews to gain a general and complete understanding of the aspects of structural design, synthesis strategies, correlated functions and applications. More specifically, this subject has been reviewed on the basis of pore formation mechanisms, different pore sizes of microporous (<2 nm), mesoporous (2–50 nm), and macroporous (>50 nm) polymers, and specific applications.6,10,58 However, PDMS sponges have rarely been mentioned in existing reviews. Considering their outstanding properties and the growth in research interest, we believe that offering a focused review that summarizes newly emerged design strategies and applications is of great importance for the future development of elastic PDMS sponges.
In this review, we aim to provide a detailed and focused overview of what has been achieved in the preparation of various PDMS-based sponges with amorphous pore structures, as well as their promising applications in electronics, sensors, energy storage and conversion, oil/water separation, biomedical engineering and beyond. This review gives a brief introduction to the general properties of PDMS itself and the elastic sponges that have been constructed, followed by a demonstration of typical synthesis strategies and a clarification of the reasons for favoring a designed pore system or fabrication process for a particular purpose. Finally, the review is concluded with some personal insights into existing challenges with, and future directions for, the intriguing porous material of PDMS sponges.
2. Fabrication methods of PDMS sponges
Over recent decades, much research has been devoted to the development of techniques for fabricating porous polymeric materials.1–3 As mentioned in the introduction, although a wide variety of approaches have been employed for the preparation of porous structures (Fig. 1), the emphasis here is centered on the material of elastic PDMS sponges, and the most relevant and suitable fabrication methods for this compound are described in the following subsections, with discussions of both their advantages and limitations.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges from various templates: (a) sugar cubes; (b) PS beads, emulsion, or phase separation; (c) Ni foam; (d) gas forming; (e) 3D printed template. 
2.1. Direct templating technique
A straightforward method that is often utilized for fabricating PDMS sponges involves the use of various solid templates as a porogen, which can be selectively dissolved or removed to leave a PDMS skeleton with interconnected cavities. On the basis of the type of template, this class of direct templating can be categorized into two main approaches by the use of sacrificial templates, including salt crystals, sugar cubes, zinc oxide powder, nickel foam, and easily dissolved polymer particles.26,33,59–62 Among these, the particle leaching of salt or sugar cubes is the most prominent. A reason for its widespread use lies in its facile procedure, because no sophisticated laboratory equipment or hazardous solvent is required. In particular, water is utilized for the leaching process, and the leached salt or sugar particles/cubes can be retrieved afterwards. In addition, sugar leaching techniques are suitable for scaled-up production. For example, Wang et al.39 fabricated a larger PDMS sponge simply by using sugar particles, which tolerated a humidity of 85%. The high humidity resulted in fusion of the sugar particles, which ultimately yielded highly interconnected macroporous PDMS sponges.

Fig. 2a shows a typical sugar cube leaching method for the fabrication of PDMS sponges.30 In brief, sugar cubes used as a sacrificial template are placed in a container ready for molding PDMS elastomers. Subsequently, a mixture of a PDMS prepolymer and a curing agent (10:1 by weight) is poured to form a pool to submerge the sugar cubes, followed by degassing in a vacuum chamber to assist the infiltration of the liquid prepolymer into the voids of the sugar cubes. Afterwards, the PDMS–sugar cubes are cured in an oven. Finally, the cured PDMS–sugar cubes are cut to reveal the sugar template and the sugar portion is leached out by water, which results in a 3D interconnected porous structure of PDMS sponges. Not limited to sugar cubes, Choi et al. reported the fabrication of PDMS sponges with optimized performance via oil absorption using sugar particles with different sizes, as shown in Fig. 2b.26 Zhang et al. reported a modified sugar leaching method involving direct curing of a PDMS prepolymer in a p-xylene solution in the presence of sugar particles, as shown in Fig. 2c. As such, the as-made PDMS sponges contained 3D interconnected pores and a swellable skeleton (Fig. 2g–k).113 Similarly, Zhao et al. reported the fabrication of PDMS sponges by curing a PDMS prepolymer and a curing agent in dimethicone using NaCl microparticles as templates (Fig. 3a–c). In this method, the porous structures are controlled by varying the weight ratio of the prepolymer to dimethicone and the sizes of the NaCl particles.33 More recently, to address the issue of the use of salt or sugar as a sacrificial template and water as a solvent for leaching, Yu et al. reported a modified leaching method that employed citric acid monohydrate as a sacrificial template and ethanol as a solvent (Fig. 3d). In this method, the solvent is capable of wetting PDMS, and the template is easily dissolved in the solvent.59 As such, high-performance sponges were obtained by oil absorption (Fig. 3e and f).
 Fig. 2  PDMS sponges fabricated by the sugar leaching method. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process using a sugar cube as a template. (b) Photographs of sugar particles of different sizes. (c) Vacuum-free method of sugar particle leaching in a p-xylene (PX) solution, in which the sugar and PX were removed after curing. (d–k) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of sugar particles (d–f) and as-made PDMS sponges (g–k). (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (c–k) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  PDMS sponges fabricated by the salt leaching method. (a, b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges using NaCl particles as a template. (c) Digital image of as-made PDMS sponges. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges using citric acid monohydrate (CAM) particles as a template. (e) SEM images of the as-made sponges. (f) Micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) image of the porous PDMS sponges. (d–f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons. 
In particle leaching techniques, the pore size and porosity of PDMS sponges are tunable via the particle size and the mixing ratio of the PDMS prepolymer solution. The typical pore size obtained by sugar leaching techniques is in the range of dozens to hundreds of micrometers, but is reduced to 10 μm for salt leaching methods.32–34,36,40,63 Owing to the intrinsic lack of a narrow pore size distribution in sugar or salt, other sacrificial templates, such as colloidal crystals with designed dimensions, have recently been utilized for generating subtle porous structures. Kang et al.64 utilized polystyrene (PS) microspheres to fabricate PDMS sponges with a well-ordered face-centered cubic structure of separate voids with a narrow size distribution (see Fig. 4). In particular, the pore size was controllable at 2, 4 or 6 μm, depending on the diameter of the PS spheres that were employed. A drawback of the use of these inorganic or polymeric particles as a sacrificial template is the need to use hazardous solvents, such as dimethylformamide for PS spheres and hydrofluoric acid for silica beads, during the leaching process.
 Fig. 4  PDMS sponges fabricated by a PS bead leaching method. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of porous structures of PDMS using PS beads as a template. (b) SEM images of the porous PDMS structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 
With respect to the mixing ratio of the particles and the PDMS prepolymer solution, a high concentration of particles in the prepolymer solution leads to the formation of interconnected pores, which is beneficial for applications that require this kind of pore system. For example, flexible conductors and batteries rely on a 3D interconnected pore system.29,30 On the other hand, if the concentration of particles increases the porosity of PDMS sponges increases, together with a decline in their density. This may result in a reduction in mechanical properties, such as Young's modulus. For instance, Lantada et al.65 showed that the Young's modulus and tensile strength of a PDMS sponge are dependent on its uniformity of pores and density. By varying the concentration of sugar particles, the Young's modulus of PDMS sponges (Neukasil RTV-20 monomer and Neukasil A2 crosslinker) could be regulated in the range between 3.70 MPa (density of 0.82 g cm−3) and 1.47 MPa (density of 0.65 g cm−3), which was explained by stress concentrations at the connection points of larger voids.
Besides inorganic and polymeric particles, nickel foam is another sensitive sacrificial template for producing PDMS sponges with pores of well-defined size, shape, and wall width. In a typical experiment by Chen et al., as illustrated in Fig. 5,61 a 3D porous PDMS sponge was prepared via a four-step process, which was begun by dipping nickel foam into a diluted PDMS prepolymer solution mixed from PDMS monomer, a curing agent and ethyl acetate in a weight ratio of 30:3:100 for 30 min. Subsequently, PDMS located on the nickel scaffold was cured at an elevated temperature (80 °C) and a reduced pressure (1.3 kPa) to infiltrate the pores. The sacrificial nickel foam was removed by a ferric nitrate (Fe(NO3)3) solution (1 M) at 60 °C for 72 h. Finally, the porous PDMS sponge that was obtained was dried in an oven at 40 °C for 24 h. The porous PDMS described here could be used as a flexible conductor after modification with carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/reduced graphene oxide (rGO). In addition, other applications in sensors and energy harvesters are possible. Applications in oil/water separation problems and biological applications, however, are unlikely because of the high cost of the nickel template, the time-consuming fabrication process and the harmful chemicals that are needed.
 Fig. 5  PDMS sponges fabricated using Ni foam. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges from Ni foam. SEM images of the Ni foam (b) and the corresponding PDMS structure (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. 
2.2. Emulsion templating technique
PDMS sponges based on emulsion templates are synthesized via the polymerization of the continuous phase of an emulsion, in which the emulsion droplets act as templates for pore formation.28,66–69 Commonly, these macroporous polymers are produced from water-in-oil emulsion templates. Depending on the volume ratio of the internal phase, high (HIPE, >70%, generally >74%), medium (MIPE, 30–70%), and low internal phase emulsions (LIPE, <30%) can be utilized to construct porous systems with varying pore sizes and porosity. The resulting products are known as polyHIPEs, polyMIPEs, and polyLIPEs, respectively.70,71 To obtain the desired porous structures, it is important to understand and control the stability of the liquid emulsion template with respect to ageing effects such as droplet coalescence. Both interconnected and separate pores can feasibly be produced by this method with a narrow pore size distribution as replicas of the monodisperse emulsion droplets. Furthermore, the product can easily be upscaled. A drawback of this technique is the surfactant that is utilized, which persists in the polymer and influences its performance after synthesis and its properties.72 The removal of the surfactant is often difficult and time-consuming. Nevertheless, the emulsion templating technique is often utilized for the fabrication of 3D porous polymers for tissue engineering, separation, and water retention.
Previously, Grosse et al.69 prepared interconnected porous PDMS sponges via siloxane–polyHIPEs. Open-cell monoliths were prepared by a hydrosilylation reaction between polymethylhydrosiloxane and vinylsiloxane monomers, which constituted the continuous phase of an inverse emulsion, with an aqueous solution of a sodium salt as the dispersed phase. Surfactants with different tail groups were tested. With no salt in the dispersed phase, a stable emulsion was difficult to form, because the salt acted to increase the affinity of the surfactant for the interface.73 Once the stability of the HIPE was assured, a Pt-based catalyst was added to start the polymerization reaction at 50 °C for 24 h. After washing and drying, firm opaque porous monoliths were obtained with regular spherical pores. Furthermore, Drenckhan et al.67 fabricated silicone polyHIPEs with controlled pore sizes using a reactive blending system consisting of two immiscible polymer solutions, namely, closely packed poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) droplets in a continuous phase of a siloxane copolymer with Si–H groups along the chain (Fig. 6). In this approach, when both liquids entered into contact, molecules of the crosslinker/catalyst that were initially dissolved in the PEG droplets diffused to the interface and formed a solid-like skin of silicone around the PEG droplets to stabilize the PEG-in-siloxane emulsion. An investigation of the relationship between the interfacial properties and the emulsion stability was carried out in detail. Thus, the size and organization of the droplets can be adjusted at will before the continuous phase solidifies. This approach, namely, the stabilization of reactive emulsions without using surfactants, could easily be transferred to a wide range of polymeric systems.
 Fig. 6  Solid emulsions of PDMS and PEG-400 with mean drop radii of 335 μm (a, b) and 850 μm (c, d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 
2.3. Gas foaming technique
Gas foaming is a well-known method for fabricating polymer foams, which find applications in joint sealants, mechanical shock absorbers, insulators, etc., with either open or closed pores.74–77 It has been widely commercialized, and medical applications of porous materials fabricated by this technique have recently emerged, as no hazardous solvents have to be utilized. This reduces the toxicity of the scaffold, which makes scaffolds prepared by gas foaming especially useful for in vivo applications. In addition, the method is facile and cost-effective. However, a disadvantage of this method is the difficulty of controlling the size and interconnectivity of the pores.
The bubbles for the formation of pores can either originate from chemical, physical or biological triggers. Silicone foams prepared by heat-activated vulcanization and room-temperature vulcanization have been widely reported.75,77,78 For example, porous PDMS sponges can be obtained by hydrosilylation curing of a silicone compound with a vinyl group and a hydrosilane residue in the presence of active hydrogen compounds, such as water and ROH, for the evolution of hydrogen gas.75 However, adventitious water or other active hydrogen compounds greatly affect both the crosslinking density of the elastomeric sponges and the relative kinetics of curing/bubble generation, which cause changes in the density and pore structure of the sponge. To tackle this problem, Brook et al.79 recently utilized the Piers–Rubinsztajn reaction, which generates alkane by-products by the condensation of alkoxysilanes with hydrosilanes to create small well-defined silicone structures from simple starting materials. The facile formation of gaseous by-products that could act as blowing agents avoids the problems in traditional methods with adventitious water and makes the fabrication process rapid, even at room temperature, with high yields.
As well as modifying the starting materials with functional groups, the addition of compounds such as NaHCO3 that easily decompose and release gases is an alternative and facile approach.80,81 Recently, Zargar et al.80 fabricated a 3D macroporous PDMS sponge by a synergistic combination of the aforementioned particle leaching and gas foaming techniques, in which NaCl crystals served as porogens for the formation of macropores after leaching and NaHCO3 as an effervescent porogen that released carbon dioxide by reacting with HCl solution. As the salt concentration increased the pore size distribution became narrower, from less than 200 μm to less than 100 μm with a predominant pore size of 5 μm, while the pores remained interconnected. Likewise, Tebboth et al. reported that closed-cell elastomeric PDMS sponges were produced from polyMIPEs containing an aqueous solution of NaHCO3.66 The blowing agent NaHCO3 was triggered by thermal decomposition to release carbon dioxide into the structure of the polyMIPEs. Interestingly, these macroporous PDMS elastomers could expand to up to 30 times their original volume when a reduced pressure was applied (Fig. 7). Although prolonged exposure to a vacuum caused a significant loss of gas owing to the gas permeability of PDMS, it demonstrated a potential use of these closed-cell elastomeric PDMS sponges in such applications as self-sealing containers and puncture-resistant materials.
 Fig. 7  PDMS foams fabricated by the gas foaming technique. (a, b) A polyMIPE was prepared by curing an MIPE with a dispersed volume ratio of 50% and 30 g L−1 of an NaHCO3 phase at atmospheric pressure (a) and under reduced pressure (b). (c, d) A polyMIPE was prepared by curing an MIPE with a dispersed volume ratio of 60% and 70 g L−1 of an NaHCO3 phase at atmospheric pressure (c) and under reduced pressure (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
2.4. Phase separation technique
The phase separation technique has been shown to be a promising approach for the fabrication of porous polymer membranes and 3D structures.82–84 Here, a distinction between at least four different approaches is feasible. The production of porous materials via phase separation methods can be achieved by thermally induced phase separation (TIPS),85 nonsolvent-induced phase separation (NIPS),86 vapor-induced phase separation (VIPS)87 and solvent evaporation-induced phase separation (EIPS).88,89 This review focuses on the discussion of EIPS, as it is the most prominent method for the fabrication of porous PDMS. It should be noted that for other polymers NIPS, TIPS or VIPS may be more favorable.
EIPS is the reason for the formation of porous morphologies in electrospun fibers of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA).89 Here, phase-separated structures form during solvent evaporation. At first, the polymer–solvent system forms a stable phase. By solvent evaporation the polymer concentration increases. Thus, the polymer–solvent system undergoes a transition from a single phase via a metastable region, where phase separation is governed by nucleation and growth mechanisms, to an unstable two-phase region. During this process, the polymer solution undergoes a phase separation into solvent-rich and polymer-rich regions, which, for example, depends on the kinetics of solvent evaporation. After exhaustive removal of the solvent, the fabricated fiber appears porous. Kim et al.90 transferred this approach to the fabrication of porous films from a ternary polymer solution of polystyrene (PS), polyethylene glycol (PEG), and toluene. This resulted in highly ordered pores with pore diameters ranging from 5 to 12 μm on the surface of the polymer film. As shown in Fig. 8a, Jung et al.28 systematically investigated the formation of pores during the fabrication process of a PDMS sponge and evaluated the performance of a home-made pressure sensor based on a PDMS sponge. During this work, deionized water was used as the internal phase, whereas the external phase was an immiscible organic solvent, such as hexane, heptane or octane. The addition of an emulsifier and subsequent stirring resulted in the formation of well-dispersed reverse micelles. Afterwards, the solution of reverse micelles was added to a PDMS prepolymer, which was loaded with multi-walled carbon nanotubes to enhance the response of the pressure sensor, stirred and ultrasonicated to yield a homogeneous gel-like solution. Heat treatment solidified the gel-like solution, owing to the polymerization of PDMS, and simultaneously coalescence of micelles occurred, which increased their uniformity. Finally, the formation of pores was achieved by further heat treatment to evaporate water at 70–120 °C for 6 h. The entire process resulted in pore sizes that ranged from tens of micrometers to a few millimeters depending on the organic solvent, the volume of the emulsion added to the PDMS prepolymer and the temperature used to fabricate the porous PDMS. Increasing the volume of the emulsion increased not only the pore size, by means of emulsion coalescence, but also the porosity of the polymer. By increasing the chain length of the organic solvent from hexane (C6) to octane (C8), the pore size was tunable from about 2 mm, with a predominance of emulsion coalescence, to a few hundred micrometers.
 Fig. 8  Porous PDMS structures fabricated by phase separation. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic illustration of the pore formation process at the surface of a silicone rubber membrane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Zhao et al.84 utilized EIPS for the manufacture of porous silicone rubber membranes (see Fig. 8b). For the membranes, a mixture of either liquid silicone rubber/liquid paraffin/hexane or liquid silicone rubber/liquid paraffin/hexane/Span-80 was prepared and cast into a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) mold. Subsequently, the mold was kept in an oven for 60 min to entirely remove the hexane solvent, and thereafter the membrane was cured at 100 °C. Finally, the liquid paraffin was removed by dipping the membrane in hexane, which resulted in the formation of pores. The average pore size (3 to 41 μm) and uniformity were controllable via the weight ratio of liquid paraffin, casting temperature and thickness of the initial casting solution. The advantages of this technique are the ease with which it can be scaled up, the well-ordered pores and the facile adjustment of the pore size. However, organic liquids, such as hexane and paraffin, are needed, which makes this method unsuitable for green chemistry, oil/water separation and so on. However, it is a reasonable approach for several high-value applications, including tissue engineering, drug delivery systems, catalysts, photonic devices, and microsieves.
2.5. 3D printing technique
Advances in the manufacture of additives have drawn much attention so far this century and have resulted in numerous improved approaches for 3D printing using PDMS.91–94 However, the direct 3D printing of PDMS to form complex structures is still challenging, owing to the low elastic modulus of the liquid prepolymer. There are two general routes for coping with this difficulty. One is to endow the starting material with thixotropic flow properties by utilizing low-temperature vulcanizing PDMS sealants, non-flowable component PDMS elastomers, and PDMS prepolymers with increased viscosity due to the incorporation of fillers to preserve geometric fidelity during curing.92–94 However, the construction of more complicated 3D geometries is still restricted, and deformation may occur owing to gravitational forces. Consequently, the second route comprises the introduction of a support during the printing and curing processes.91 As a proof of concept, a hydrophilic Carbopol gel support was used for the 3D printing of solutions of Sylgard 184 PDMS prepolymer by means of freeform reversible embedding. In this method, the Carbopol gel can yield and liquefy while the 3D printer nozzle moves through it. Moreover, it serves as a solid support after the PDMS prepolymer is extruded within it to maintain dimensional stability. After curing, the support can release the printed PDMS using phosphate buffered saline solution. This method should be adaptable to other kinds of PDMS and soft polymeric materials.
To some extent, the second route, as mentioned above, is similar to the templating technique discussed in subsection 2.1, in which the templates are prepared using 3D printing. PDMS sponges that possessed highly ordered pores with sizes of about 200 μm were previously fabricated by Duan et al.95 In their approach, 3D porous PDMS sponges were obtained by the initial 3D printing of polylactic acid (PLA) via melt extrusion with a nozzle size of 200 μm, which resulted in a 3D porous PLA skeleton (Fig. 9). This was followed by the previously described step of the infiltration of PDMS and its subsequent solidification. Finally, the PLA support was removed by etching with dichloromethane. Porous substrates with varying pore sizes, porosities and patterns are available using this technique; even the fabrication of a 3D gradient with a porous appearance is feasible. At present, however, this process is slow and cost-intensive and burdens the environment with toxic organic solvents. Therefore, significant upscaling cannot be considered at this point. This technique is in its infancy and more research is needed to enhance its reliability, economic viability and precision.
 Fig. 9  Porous PDMS networks fabricated from 3D printed porous polylactic acid (PLA). (a, b) Schemes of 3D printed PLA (a) and porous PDMS (b) networks. (c, d) SEM images of aligned porous PLA (c) and PDMS (d) networks. (e, f) SEM images of split-level PLA (e) and PDMS (f) networks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
2.6. Brief summary of fabrication methods
In this section, we have described the commonly used and promising methods for preparing elastic PDMS sponges that have recently been reported, which include direct templating, emulsion templating, gas foaming, phase separation, and 3D printing techniques. The applicability of these fabrication methods is promoted by their advantages, as well as being impeded by their limitations. The characteristics of each method have been indicated in the corresponding subsections and are briefly summarized in Table 1. Apart from the commonly used methods, a few other techniques have also been adopted for the fabrication of PDMS sponges, such as the in situ polymerization of PDMS onto porous templates, pressurized steam-assisted pore formation, and so forth. Hopefully, in combination with the literature and the comments here, the methods presented for the fabrication of PDMS sponges will assist readers in finding a synthesis route that is suitable for the envisaged application.
Table 1 Summary of the advantages and limitations of the main techniques used for the fabrication of PDMS sponges




Fabrication technique
Pore size (μm)
Major advantages
Major limitations




Direct templating


Tunable pore size and porosity
Broad pore size distribution


• Salt/sugar leaching
Dozens to hundreds
Good pore interconnection


• Colloidal crystals (PS, etc.)
Down to several microns
Facile, reliable, cost-effective
Hazardous solvents needed


• Nickel foam
Well-ordered pore structure when assembled using PS particles
Higher consumption of time and cost


Emulsion templating
Down to several microns
Monodisperse pore size available
Removal of surfactants and organic solvents


Tunable pore size and porosity


Both closed and open pore structures obtainable


Gas foaming
Down to several microns
Facile and eco-friendly fabrication procedures
Poor control of pore size and porosity


Both closed and open pore structures obtainable


Phase separation
Down to several microns
Cost-effective and facile in fabrication
Dependence on the thickness of the casting prepolymer solution


Well-ordered pore structure
Organic solvents needed


Tunable pore size and porosity


3D printing
Down to sub-micron scale
Desirable pore size and porosity
Relatively high cost


Low fabrication efficiency




3. Applications of PDMS sponges
In this section, we explain and discuss the applications of materials based on PDMS sponges in diverse fields, including flexible conductors,30,31,35,38,61,95–98 sensors,28,36,64,81,97–101 energy harvesting and storage devices,27,29,37,60,62,82,102–109 absorbents and oil/water separation appliances,26,33,40,59,110–117 biomedical applications,32,34,65,80,118 catalysis,119 microfluidics,120 and so forth. Each of these functions can be attributed to the outstanding characteristics of the PDMS material itself and its porous structure, including its large surface area, high transparency, flexibility, elasticity, inherent hydrophobicity, gas permeability, biocompatibility, chemical inertness, mechanical durability, thermal stability, electronegativity, processability, ease of fabrication, and low cost, together with other properties mentioned in the Introduction section.
3.1. Flexible conductors
Flexible electronics is a novel emerging technology that enables a variety of new applications. Flexible electronic devices have to endure mechanical deformation, such as twisting, bending, stretching, folding and compression.121–124 Flexible electronic devices are envisaged to be beneficial for many applications, including stretchable displays, artificial electronic skins, flexible energy harvesters, wearable electronics and energy storage devices.29,125–128 It is notable that energy harvesters, energy storage devices and sensors only function as long as the material keeps the device conductive. Therefore, flexible conductors are essential for the applications described in the following subsections. Different 3D materials and strategies have been proposed in recent years, which achieve the flexibility required for conductors without impairing their conductivity. For example, conductive materials can be coated on the surfaces of an elastomer or embedded in 3D structures. Alternatively, high electrical conductivity and stability have been achieved by the direct engineering of thin structured metal films on flexible and stretchable elastomers. Here, PDMS sponges displayed great potential owing to their interconnected pores and high stretchability and repeatability. Furthermore, their 3D structure enables the facile incorporation of various conductors and their chemical inertness hinders the degradation of the 3D structure and its mechanical properties.
Flexible conductors can be obtained by coating stretchable materials with a thin metal film by electroless deposition and by the incorporation of conductive carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc. For instance, Liang et al.30 used PDMS sponges fabricated by sugar leaching in conjunction with a coating of a thin metal film on the flexible polymer to fabricate flexible conductors (Fig. 10). Prior to the actual deposition of the metal, the PDMS sponges were modified by treatment with air plasma (oxidation) and silanization with vinyltrimethoxysilane, followed by in situ free-radical polymerization and finally ion exchange and electroless deposition. Via this method, PDMS sponges with thin films of Cu, Au/Cu and Ag/Cu were obtained, whereas in the cases of Au and Ag the PDMS sponge was first activated with a thin film of Cu prior to the deposition of Au or Ag. The resistance was virtually constant during stretching at a tensile strain of 40% even after 5000 cycles of stretching, and a reduction in conductivity of only ∼20% was observed at a tensile strain of 50%. Furthermore, the as-made metal-coated PDMS sponges were readily used as stretchable, compressible, and bendable interconnects to light up LED lamps.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of metal-coated PDMS sponges. (b) Optical image of the original PDMS sponge and the as-prepared Cu–, Ag/Cu–, and Au/Cu–PDMS sponges. (c–f) Electrical performance of Ag/Cu–PDMS sponges during stretching, compression, bending and twisting. (c, d) Fatigue tests of the stretchability of Ag/Cu–PDMS sponges at different tensile (c) and compressive strains (d). (e, f) Flexible LED circuits made from interconnects of Ag/Cu–PDMS sponge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 
By introducing CNTs and graphene into the skeleton, Duan et al.95 fabricated porous PDMS sponges using a modified leaching method, in which a replica of a 3D printed porous polylactic acid (PLA) structure was used as a leachable template. The advantages of this approach are a distinct pore size and interconnectivity, which can be tuned via the template (3D printing program). The 3D porous PDMS was coated with a conductive network of carbon nanotubes and graphene, which resulted in highly stretchable conductors (OPCG). Two types of structured OPCG, namely, split-level (S-OPCG) and aligned (A-OPCG) structures, were tested and exhibited different mechanical and electrical properties. In comparison with the case of A-OPCG, a conductive solution can permeate the entire skeleton of S-OPCG more slowly with sufficient residence time to form a compact conductive layer (Fig. 11a and b), which resulted in a conductivity that was 15 times higher in comparison with that of the aligned structure. As shown in Fig. 11c–e, the superior mechanical and electrical properties of S-OPCG were further analyzed using the finite element method (FEM), which confirmed that the specific split-level structure was responsible for the increased deformation capability and ensured that S-OPCG was a high-performance stretchable conductor.
 Fig. 11  (a, b) Cross-sectional FE-SEM images of (a) S-OPCG and (b) A-OPCG. (c) Normalized conductivity of S-OPCG and A-OPCG as a function of tensile strain, and strain distributions in models of S-OPCG and A-OPCG. (d, e) Normalized electrical conductivity of S-OPCG as a function of (d) stretching–releasing cycles at a strain of 50% and (e) the number of bends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Non-toxic liquid metals, such as eutectic gallium–indium and gallium–indium–tin alloys (GaIn and GaInSn), have emerged more recently as important candidates for flexible and soft electronic materials.129–131 Park et al.38 proposed the use of 3D porous PDMS as a scaffold for incorporating a liquid metal (EGaIn) as a conductive material (Fig. 12). The pores, which were of sub-micron size, were fabricated by employing an interference lithographic template as a facile mold. The nanostructured PDMS network increased the stretchability and fracture strain by ∼62% and ∼225%, respectively, with respect to those of the bulk polymer. By filling porous PDMS with a liquid metal, namely, a eutectic gallium–indium alloy, the composite PDMS–liquid metal sponges were conductive. This composite exhibited extremely high electrical conductivity (∼24100 S cm−1) even at a strain of >200%, with high repeatability and current-carrying capacities that are sufficient for interconnects in light-emitting diode systems.
 Fig. 12  Optical images of (a) a supported 3D PDMS film and (b) a folded 3D PDMS film with line patterns. (c) Top-view SEM image of net-shaped 3D PDMS. (d) Comparison of fracture strain between 3D PDMS (blue filled circles) and solid PDMS (red filled squares) for various thicknesses. (e) Comparison of extended stretchability for different ratios of the thickness of the 3D layer to that of the solid film (R = h3D/hs). (f) Conductivity of embedded stretchable conductors under stretching of up to ∼220%. (g) Example of an LED array using 3D stretchable conductors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright (2012) Nature Publishing Group. 
More recently, Liang et al.35 fabricated liquid metal sponges, which provide a much simpler, low-cost and versatile strategy for fabricating soft electrical conductors with excellent stretchability and remarkable mechanical stability, as illustrated in Fig. 13a–c. In contrast to the abovementioned proposed flexible conductor,38 a 3D conductor made from PDMS was produced by a facile and cheap sugar leaching method, followed by loading a liquid metal (GaInSn) into the interconnected pores of the sponge. High conductivity of the liquid metal sponge, which was comparable to that of the bulk liquid metal, was achieved, with a positive relationship between the conductivity and loading. The elasticity of the PDMS skeleton and the fluid nature of liquid metals led to the formation of all-soft structures for electrical conductors with high electrical conductivity and mechanical flexibility. Majidi et al.132 developed a highly stretchable and conductive PDMS–galinstan composite elastomer with no predefined porous PDMS structure (Fig. 13c and d). The conductive elastomer was prepared directly by mixing galinstan liquid metal with a solution of a PDMS prepolymer (Sylgard 184) in a volume ratio of 1:1 using a mortar and pestle. After curing, droplets of the liquid metal with dimensions ranging from 2 to 30 μm were temporarily encapsulated in a closed-cell foam-like PDMS matrix, which exhibited no conductivity in the virgin state. However, the application of concentrated surface pressure led to the irreversible induction of conductivity in the pristine composite, which was due to the formation of a continuous network of galinstan droplets by tearing or rupture of the foam cell walls. The unique electromechanical coupling enabled selective conductivity, such as forming circuits in the composite by the selective application of force, as illustrated in Fig. 13d.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of liquid metal–PDMS sponges and their use as stretchable LED circuits. (b) Optical image of an as-made GaInSn–PDMS sponge. (c) Optical images of the twisting, bending, and punching of the operating LED circuit. ((d), Top left) Illustration of composite (scale bar = 25 μm). (Top right) Microscopy image of the PDMS–galinstan material; galinstan droplets are densely packed inside a clear PDMS matrix (scale bar = 50 μm). (Bottom left) Monolayer of galinstan droplets, which are well distributed and exhibit a spheroidal shape (scale bar = 50 μm). (Bottom right) Compression is believed to cause droplets to rupture and form electrical connections with neighboring inclusions (arrows), which leads to bulk conductivity (scale bar = 25 μm). (e) Square sheet of stretchable PDMS–galinstan embedded in a thin layer of PDMS (top left). Circuits can be formed in this plain sheet of material by using a thin-tipped tool to selectively apply compression. An LED embedded in the nodes of a formed circuit lights up (top right), but a newly added LED will not (bottom left) until more selective compression is used to form connections to the existing circuit (bottom right). (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons. 
3.2. Sensors
Sensors are very important components in both fundamental research and practical uses. High-performance sensors need to fulfill the requirements of high sensitivity to external stimuli, excellent stability under various testing conditions, and ease of operation. In comparison with the bulk materials, the 3D interconnected macroporous PDMS sponges constitute an ideal substrate for various kinds of sensor owing to the advantages of their flexible skeleton, high compressibility, large surface area-to-volume ratio, and physical/chemical stability. For example, pressure sensors, which respond to deformation triggered by mechanical forces and convert this mechanical stress into an electrical signal, have been widely developed. Kang et al.64 introduced a highly sensitive capacitive pressure sensor that contained a thin sponge-like structured PDMS membrane as a dielectric layer (Fig. 14). Various porous dielectric layers with different pore sizes were prepared by the leaching method using PS beads, because for pressure sensors highly symmetric patterns are favorable. There are two beneficial aspects of the introduction of porous dielectric layers, which enable a significant increase in the sensitivity of the capacitive pressure sensor. One is the fact that owing to the reduced stiffness of the porous dielectric layer in comparison with that of conventional sensors without pores, a larger deformation (Δd) and consequently a greater change in capacitance can be induced by an identical pressure input, which results in higher sensitivity. Moreover, the change in capacitance is further increased together with an increase in the effective dielectric constant owing to the gradual closure of the pores upon loading. Therefore, the resulting pressure sensors displayed a high sensitivity of 0.63 kPa−1 in the low-pressure region, fast response and relaxation times, an extremely low pressure detection threshold of 2.42 Pa and excellent durability and stability properties over 10000 working cycles. Moreover, real-time tactile sensing was visualized with multipixel pressure sensor arrays.
 Fig. 14  (a) Relationship between the experimental indentation depth and the theoretical deformation ratio of the porous structure according to the pore size. (b) Curves of relative capacitance for three different porous structured pressure sensors and an unstructured pressure sensor versus increasing pressure. (c) Response of the pressure sensor to the loading and unloading of an ant (20 mg). (d) Durability and stability of the response of the pressure sensor over 10000 cycles with a load of 0.5 N. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the direct utilization of pristine PDMS sponges, great improvements to sensors have been successfully achieved by adding active additives. One approach comprises the incorporation of conductive materials (e.g., carbon nanotubes (CNT), graphene, liquid metals, and ionic liquids) into the sponge compartment of the pressure sensor. Han et al.31 filled PDMS sponges with single-walled CNTs, which resulted in a strain-sensitive conductive material. The conductivity could be controlled via the density of the CNTs (Fig. 15a–c). To obtain the composite, PDMS sponges were made via the sugar leaching method, followed by dip-coating to change the surface functionalization using single-walled CNTs with carboxy group terminals in a buffered solution of dimethylformamide. The as-prepared CNT–PDMS sponge (CPS) resistor/sensor possessed excellent flexibility, compressibility, hydrophobicity, ice-repelling properties, floatability, and conductivity, which made it suitable for several applications, including variable resistors, pressure sensors, and ice-repelling electrodes. Similarly, Kim et al.28 fabricated PDMS sponges doped with multi-walled CNTs for use as piezoresistive materials using a facile reverse micelle template method (Fig. 15d). Large-area pressure-sensitive fabrics and porous pressure-sensitive rubber (PPSR) patterns were produced by template molding and nozzle jet printing, respectively. A wearable multi-channel human–machine interface device based on the printed PPSR patterns was produced for the wireless control of robots. Furthermore, additives can also be loaded into the interconnected pores beyond the PDMS sponge skeleton. As shown in Fig. 15e and f, Jia et al.100 integrated a highly thermally sensitive conductive fluid, namely, an ionic liquid composed of 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate, into different designed elastomers, including PDMS sponges, for the rapid and precise determination of multiple physical parameters, such as near infrared (NIR) light, epidermal temperature, and pressure force. An outstanding feature of the liquid sensor that was developed is its ability to gather and distinguish temperature and pressure information simultaneously.
 Fig. 15  (a) Stress–strain curve of the CPS. (b) Resistance versus strain characteristics of the CPS. (c) Cyclic voltammogram for 0.1 M KOH with the floating CPS as the working electrode. (d) Schematic diagram of the nozzle jet printing process used for producing the patterned PPSR (left) and images of the PPSR pattern printed on a flexible plastic substrate (PET film) (right). (e) On–off cycles of the NIR response of an ionic liquid (IL) sensor at six NIR luminous intensities ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 W. The inset is an SEM image of PPy NPs. (f) Real mixing responses of the PDMS sponge for sensing different temperatures and pressures simultaneously. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright (2013) AIP Publishing LLC. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. (e, f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons. 
Besides the use of the abovementioned sensors for determining various physical parameters, the sensing of certain chemicals and the monitoring of reaction rates have also drawn much attention among the scientific community. As illustrated in Fig. 16a, Yuen et al.36 fabricated 3D interconnected macroporous PDMS microfluidic devices by the sugar leaching method and utilized the devices to investigate the acidification of water by CO2. The surface wettability of the macroporous PDMS sponges was adjustable via the pore size. Owing to its macroporous structure, the rate of the gas absorption reaction, using water acidified with CO2 gas, achieved in the macroporous PDMS gas sensor was 10 times faster than that in a non-porous PDMS microfluidic device under similar experimental conditions. More recently, Wang et al.99 proposed an ammonia detector based on In(OH)3–PDMS sponges. This porous metal–organic composite was synthesized using sugar particles as sacrificial templates to produce PDMS sponges with subsequent covalent modification by polydopamine (PDA) embedded with In(OH)3 micro- and nanoparticles. Owing to the weak interaction between In(OH)3 and NH3·H2O molecules, the sponges that were reported can switch their surface wettability reversibly, with a change in the water contact angle from 141.5° to 0° after storage in an ammonia atmosphere. The limit of detection of NH3·H2O was determined to be a concentration of 5%, which was observed via a change in the surface wettability of the In(OH)3–PDMS sponge over a time interval of 2 h. This approach suggests new directions for the development of new types of ammonia sensor and the detection of other chemicals with high sensitivity and efficiency, especially when considering its eco-friendliness, cost-effectiveness, and simplicity in design and fabrication.
 Fig. 16  (a) Time-lapse images of an experiment on the acidification of water by CO2 gas using microporous PDMS. The sizes of the sugar particles used were 75–150 mm. The inner chamber was filled with sodium hydroxide solution. (b) Plot of the variation in the water contact angle with different NH3·H2O concentrations. The inset shows the reversible reaction between NH3·H2O and In(OH)3. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3. Energy harvesting and storage
With the rapid development of wireless, portable, and wearable electronic devices, flexible and highly efficient power supply and storage techniques have attracted growing attention. As an emerging renewable energy technology, nanogenerators (NGs) can harvest energy from the environment (e.g., mechanical vibrations, heat, wind, tides, and human activities) and convert these different forms of energy into electricity by using piezoelectric, triboelectric, electromagnetic, and pyroelectric effects.27,37,60,62,102–108 Typically, the flexibility and output power of NGs are two key considerations regarding their potential applications in advanced electronics. Taking piezoelectric NGs as an example, a composite of an inorganic piezoelectric material (also known as an electroceramic, e.g., BaTiO3 (BTO), Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT), and (K,Na)NbO3 (KNN)) and an elastomeric polymer is often employed to fulfill the abovementioned requirements. For instance, McCall et al.27 fabricated highly compliant materials of piezoelectric nanoparticle–polymer composite foams (PNPFs) with excellent piezoelectric properties (Fig. 17a–c). Piezoelectric polymer composites were synthesized by incorporating sugar grains directly into mixtures of PDMS containing BTO nanoparticles and CNTs, followed by the removal of the sugar after the polymer was cured. The electrical performance of the piezoelectric NGs displayed a direct relationship between their porosity and piezoelectric output, with a piezoelectric coefficient of ∼112 pC N−1 and a power density of ∼18 mW cm−3 under a load of 10 N for the sample with the highest porosity (73%). Another design for flexible piezoelectric NGs, which was proposed by Zheng et al.,37 used a porous cellulose nanofibril (CNF)/PDMS aerogel film (Fig. 17d–g). The porous CNF/PDMS aerogel film was prepared by coating a layer of PDMS on the porous surface of a compressed CNF aerogel film produced via an eco-friendly freeze-drying process. The resulting NGs generated stable and high-output piezoelectric signals with an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 60.2 V, a short-circuit current (Isc) of 10.1 μA, and a corresponding power density of 6.3 mW cm−3. The electric power produced by such an NG can readily light up 19 blue LEDs or charge a capacitor up to 3.7 V. The polymeric porous structure enhanced both the electrical and the mechanical properties of the NGs.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the poling process. (b) Effective piezoelectric coefficient (d33) of PNPFs as a function of their porosity. The inset shows the piezoelectric response of the foam as a function of time and the applied force. (c) Power density as a function of the external load (∼10 N) for films of different porosity and a neat film. (d, e) Measurements of the electrical output (open-circuit voltage Voc and short-circuit current Isc) of an as-fabricated NG based on a porous CNF/PDMS film under a compressive stress of 0.05 MPa at a frequency of 10 Hz in (d) forward connection and (e) reverse connection. (f) Nineteen blue LEDs in series were simultaneously turned on by the piezoelectricity generated by the NG based on a porous CNF/PDMS aerogel film. (g) Stability test of the NG on the first, second, and third days of operation (1200 cycles per day). (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (d–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs), which are another class of NGs, have received great interest during recent decades. On the basis of the general operating principle of TENGs, surface charge transfer occurs via the generation by the triboelectric effect of electrostatic charges on the surfaces of two different triboelectric materials, and electron flow takes place in a closed circuit. Consequently, the surface charge densities of the triboelectric materials are essential for achieving high output performance of a TENG within a contact-separation structure. Among the various triboelectric materials, PDMS is the most commonly used, owing to its high electronegativity, flexibility, transparency, low cost, and easy processability (i.e., it is mixed with nanoparticles to produce a composite and patterned on the surface or inner structure). In particular, patterned PDMS surfaces have demonstrated the ability to increase the charge separation efficiency and the frictional area between the polymer materials and the electrodes, which thereby enhanced the performance of the TENG. As shown in Fig. 18a–c, Baik et al.103 developed a TENG based on a porous PDMS film impregnated with Au NPs (AMTENG) with a high output power of 13 mW under a cycled compressive force, which represented a more than fivefold increase in output power in comparison with that of a flat film-based TENG (FTENG) under the same mechanical force. The mechanism was suggested to be the influence on the surface potential energy of the porous film of the presence of aligned dipoles, which were generated by charges created by the contact between Au NPs and PDMS inside the pores. Chen et al.102 systematically investigated factors including the permittivity, thickness, porosity and surface area of the triboelectric material that could influence the output performance of a TENG based on a composite PDMS sponge film (CS-TENG) as an energy storage and conversion device (Fig. 18d). In general, the relative permittivity of a PDMS composite is proportional to the permittivity of the NP filler, whereas the formation of pores in a PDMS film can reduce its effective thickness. However, the results were more complicated, as shown in Fig. 18e and f: the output performance of TENGs did not change linearly with an increase in the volume ratio of high-permittivity NPs or the pores formed in PDMS because of side effects, such as a reduction in the surface area of PDMS caused by dielectric particles or a reduction in the permittivity of PDMS caused by pores. By simultaneously optimizing both the dielectric properties, by using high-permittivity NP fillers, and the porosity of the porous PDMS film, a CS-TENG that was fabricated containing 10 vol% SrTiO3 NPs and 15 vol% pores in the PDMS film performed best, with an output voltage, current density, and power density of 338 V, 9.06 μA cm−2, and 6.47 W m−2, respectively.
 Fig. 18  (a) Charge generation mechanism of an AMTENG under an external force in short-circuit conditions. (b) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of a mesoporous PDMS film with Au NPs (0.28 wt%). (c) Dependence of the output power and power density of an AMTENG and an FTENG with a gap of 1 mm on the resistance of external loads ranging from 10 to 109 Ω. (d) Electricity generation process over a full cycle of a CS-TENG under an external force. (e) Measurements of charge transfer in samples filled with SiO2, TiO2, BaTiO3 or SrTiO3 with various volume ratios of the NP fillers. (f) Charge transfer in PDMS sponge films with various pore ratios. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, fascinating performance features, in addition to achieving high output performance, can be obtained using PDMS sponge-based TENGs. For example, triboelectric nanogenerators (FT-TENGs) were fabricated by using well-ordered nest-like porous PDMS film and transparent electrodes (i.e., ITO and graphene) in order to maintain high transparency and flexibility. Well-ordered porous PDMS can be produced by means of a template leaching method with nanoporous AAO or ZnO spheres made from aggregated NPs.60,105 With a transparency of approximately 70% over a broad wavelength range, the entire TENG devices displayed high transparency. In addition, owing to its hydrophobicity, such patterned PDMS could be utilized as a multifunctional film for triboelectric layers, anti-reflective coatings, and self-cleaning surfaces. The water contact angle on the sponge surface significantly increases, which is ascribed to the upward force generated by the air inside the pores, which lifts the water droplets (see also the Cassie equation). Although in triboelectronics it is a critical prerequisite for stable and even electrical output in a high-moisture atmosphere, the maintenance of electric charge is a challenging task. However, humidity affects the generation of charge. Surface charge generally decreases with an increase in humidity in the atmosphere. As a result, by employing a hydrophobic PDMS sponge in the triboelectric layer, PDMS sponge-based TENGs acquired high resistance to very humid conditions, with stable and highly efficient output performance.106 More interestingly, to fully utilize the 3D structure of PDMS sponges and to avoid aligning the components in an integrated NG, Taghavi et al.108 synthesized a system that consisted of a PDMS sponge matrix, which was embedded in a disordered fashion with conductive materials and air gaps. The wired-sponge TENG that was fabricated could sense pressure applied to each side of the soft composite device and generate power in a cost-effective and facile way (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of a wired-sponge generator. (b) Image showing the fabricated composite generator encapsulated in Ecoflex with a volume of 4 cm3. (c) Mechanism of current generation. (d, e) Open-circuit output voltage signal under compressive and tensile strain. Strain was applied to the composite along two different perpendicular directions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. 
Besides energy-harvesting devices, flexible high-energy storage devices and flexible electrodes are also important issues in practical applications.29,82,109 In particular, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have drawn much attention, which is attributable to their high energy density and broad range of potential applications. Many LIBs have been developed with flexible, bendable, foldable or even stretchable features during recent years. Recently, Liu et al.29 successfully demonstrated stretchable LIB electrodes, which consisted of an Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) anode and an LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode, by utilizing 3D interconnected porous PDMS scaffolds. The 3D interconnected porous structure guaranteed rapid conduction and advanced features of stretchability, stability, and electrochemical performance of a PDMS sponge-based battery. Capacity retention values of 82% and 91% for the anode and cathode, respectively, were achieved after 500 stretch–release cycles, and slight capacity fade of the battery of 6% was observed (Fig. 20). The outcome indicated that the fabricated stretchable electrodes for LIBs have significant potential for future applications in wearable, bendable, and stretchable electronic devices.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the comparison between a conventional electrode using metal foil and a stretchable electrode based on a PDMS sponge. Discharge/charge voltage profiles of a stretchable (b) LTO anode and (c) LFP cathode for various numbers of stretch–release cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 
3.4. Oil/water separation and absorbents
Pollution by oil and other organic liquids is a critical threat to our ecosystem. Typically, spillages of oil are countered by in situ burning, gravity separation, oil skimming, oil absorbents, air flotation, degradation with chemical dispersants and bioremediation. These separation techniques have the drawbacks of secondary pollution, high operating costs and low separation efficiency. Here, stimulus-responsive absorbent materials that can absorb large quantities of contaminants and repeatedly release them upon a trigger, such as squeezing, without losing their absorption capacity, have been proposed. Hydrophobic polymeric sponges were recently developed, which were able to reversibly absorb oil from oil spills on water. In this regard, PDMS sponges possess excellent ability for oil/water separation and storage owing to their superhydrophobicity/superoleophilicity and porous structure. Furthermore, the polymer PDMS is biocompatible, chemically inert and antifouling. Thus, it maintains its properties during multiple absorption–release cycles. For example, Choi et al.26 fabricated PDMS sponges via a sugar leaching method and used these sponges for the selective absorption of oil (Fig. 21a–c). Several organic liquids were absorbed, with high absorption capacities ranging between 400 wt% and 1100 wt%, depending on the organic solvent, whereas the absorption capacity was also found to be dependent on the pore size of the template and the interconnectivity of the pores. The heterogeneous mixing of sugar particles of different sizes, which resulted in a heterogeneous pore size distribution, gave rise to improved absorption capacities, which can be ascribed to the enhanced porosity of the sponge. Si et al.111 controlled the interconnectivity of the pores by fusing the sugar template prior to the preparation of the sponge, which yielded improved absorption capacities ranging from 790 wt% to 4000 wt%. Zhao et al.33 discovered that the oil absorption capacity is also dependent on the concentration of the prepolymer in a mixture of prepolymer/dimethicone. A weight ratio of 3:7 (PDMS to dimethicone) was found to be favorable when using NaCl particles of a size of 150–297 μm (Fig. 21d and e). Similarly, Zhang et al.113 utilized p-xylene as a means of reducing the viscosity of the prepolymer, which renders vacuum operation unnecessary.
 Fig. 21  (a) (1, 2) Compressibility, (3) high hydrophobicity, and (4) high oleophilicity of a PDMS sponge. (b) Absorption capacity of PDMS sponges replicated from various sugar templates for transformer oil. For the combined sugar templates, two types of sugar particles were mixed in a volume ratio of 1:1. (c) Plot of mass-based absorption capacity for different organic solvents and oils. (d, e) Variations in the oil absorbency of the PDMS sponges for dichloromethane with (d) the value of mPDMS/mdimethicone (the size of the NaCl microparticles is 150–297 μm) and (e) the size of the NaCl microparticles (mPDMS/mdimethicone = 4:6). (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (d, e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a follow-up article to their previous work on PDMS sponges, Si et al.110 proposed a PDMS sponge coated with polydopamine/octadecylamine (PDA/ODA) as a robust means of selectively absorbing oil spills, as shown in Fig. 22. The oil absorption capacity was slightly higher than that in their previous work, whereas a feature of the coating was its ability to self-heal. Self-healing was achieved by heat treatment (30 min at 70 °C), in which conditions PDA/ODA nanocapsules were molten and ODA molecules were released from the nanocapsules and migrated to their surface, which finally led to the recovery of the hydrophobicity of the PDA/ODA-coated PDMS sponge.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of chemical structures and the preparation of a coating for a PDMS sponge. (b) Photos of liquid droplets on sponges (top) after treatment with sandpaper and (bottom) after treatment with sandpaper and heat. (c) Contact angles of water, tea and milk on the coated sponge during ten cycles of treatment with sandpaper and heat. (d) Absorbency of the coated PDMS sponge for various organic solvents. (e) Demonstration of the recyclability of the coated PDMS sponge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Other advances in the field of oil-absorbing PDMS sponges focus on the use of nanoparticles, a mixture of two or more polymers (see Si et al.) or block copolymers. Nanoparticles, such as 2D graphene sheets and diamond nanoparticles, are well known to enhance the mechanical properties of PDMS. For example, Tran et al.112 increased the mechanical robustness of PDMS sponges by incorporating 2D graphene sheets into the prepolymer prior to its solidification. The PDMS–graphene sponges exhibited high reusability, and it is possible to use these sponges for continuous oil/water separation. As illustrated in Fig. 23a–d, by coating a PDMS sponge made via a sugar leaching method with TiO2 and hydrocarbon nanoparticles, the wettability of the composite sponge could be controlled via irradiation with UV light.40 Here, the TiO2 nanoparticles acted as a photocatalyst for the decomposition of the hydrocarbon, which caused a transition in wettability. This transition in wettability can be repeatedly utilized for the absorption and desorption of oil. Earlier, a switchable composite material based on a polyurethane (PU) sponge coated with block copolymers was proposed by Zhang et al. (Fig. 23e–g).133 pH-Responsive poly(2-vinylpyridine) and PDMS (i.e., P2VP-b-PDMS) was grafted onto the PU sponge. Here, P2VP changed its wettability and conformation according to the pH of the aqueous medium, which resulted in reversibly switchable surface wettability for purposes of oil/water separation.
 Fig. 23  (a) Fabricated nanosponge/porous PDMS (NS/p-PDMS). (b) Mechanism of bubble growth and oil desorption with UV-responsive TiO2. (c) Sequence of underwater absorption and desorption of crude oil with UV irradiation and air bubbling. The diameter of the sponge is 1.5 cm. (d) Schematic procedure of absorption and desorption of oil with UV-responsive wettability and flow of air bubbles. (e) Schematic diagrams of the switchable oil wettability of a textile grafted with P2VP-b-PDMS. (f) Still images from video measurements of the contact angle of a 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) droplet on the functionalized textile surface in water with a pH of 6.5. (g) Snapshots showing (left and center) the absorption of a DCE droplet of about 2 mL (stained with oil red O dye) by the functionalized sponge in water with a pH of 6.5 and (right) the release of the captured DCE from the same sponge in acidic water with a pH of 2.0 after compression. (a–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group. (e–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2012) Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides their applications in the remediation of water by separating oil–water mixtures, PDMS sponges have also been successfully utilized for the efficient removal of the heavy metal ions Pb2+ and Hg2+ from polluted water. For example, a “green” absorbent was fabricated directly by doping PDMS sponges with spent coffee powder during the preparation process (Fig. 24a and b).114 The working mechanism was revealed to be that carboxylate groups of the coffee filler interacted with Pb2+ ions and displayed a high absorption capacity of 13.5 mg g−1, which was effective even in the presence of other metal ions such as Cu2+, Al3+, Mg2+, Co2+, and Hg2+. In another report, as shown in Fig. 24c and d, Fragouli et al.115 functionalized PDMS sponges to be hydrophilic. Polluted water easily penetrated into their volume. The sponge surface was decorated with colloidal nanocrystals of ZnSe for trapping metal ions. Via a cation exchange reaction, Pb2+ and Hg2+ were removed from polluted water with high removal efficiencies of >98% and almost 100% in the studied concentration region of 20–40 ppm for Pb2+ and Hg2+ ions, respectively. Considering the good elastic properties and resistance to heat of the PDMS sponge-based absorbents, they are suitable for use in different conditions for water remediation.
 Fig. 24  (a) Dependence of the equilibrium absorption capacity (qe) of the sponge on the equilibrium concentration (Ce) of Pb2+ ions in water after interaction for 30 h. The inset is a photograph of the as-made PDMS sponge with spent coffee powder. (b) Absorption of mixed metal ions present in wastewater by the sponge absorbent. (c, d) Kinetics of ion removal: (c) Pb2+ concentration of 37.86 ppm and (d) Hg2+ concentration of 39.90 ppm. The inset in (c) is a photograph of elastomeric foams before (white) and after (yellow) being loaded with ZnSe and after the removal of Pb2+ ions from water (dark brown). (a, b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c, d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
3.5. Biomedical applications
Porous polymers are widely used for biological applications, such as cell attachment, cell proliferation, which is beneficial for guided tissue engineering, and drug delivery. In drug delivery applications, the voids of the porous material can be utilized to incorporate drugs. Drug release can be triggered by an external stimulus, which can be based on physical triggers (e.g., mechanical, ultrasound, magnetic, temperature), chemical triggers (e.g., pH) and biological triggers (e.g., enzymes). Recently, 3D porous PDMS sponges were proposed by Shi et al. to be such a stimulus-responsive drug delivery system, as shown in Fig. 25.34 Their system benefits from the synergistic advantages of PDMS as a material and the 3D porous structure of the sponge, which are biocompatibility, high robustness and the possibility of deforming the pores. For this application, the specific shape of the pores and their size and structure/pattern are of subordinate importance. Hence, the PDMS sponges were fabricated by a cheap and biocompatible leaching method (salt/sugar). Iron microspheres were incorporated into the PDMS prepolymer prior to fabrication of the sponge, which rendered the sponges responsive to external magnetic fields. By the application of a magnetic field the sponge was squeezed and the drug (e.g., methylene blue) was released. The advantage of their approach in comparison with other drug delivery systems is the increase in storage ability, which is ascribed to the large interconnected inner cavities, in conjunction with the ability to refill the drug delivery system by the facile injection of drugs with a syringe. The advantages that have been mentioned may yield cost savings and, above all, avoid frequent surgical procedures for the replacement of the drug delivery system, which reduces pain and the danger of infections for patients.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication of PDMS sponge capsules. (b) Cross-section of sponge capsule observed by SEM. (c) Images of a deformed capsule under magnetic fields from different distances. (d) Schematic illustration of the refilling of the capsule with a drug. (e) Profiles of the cumulative release of BSA from PDMS sponge capsules subjected to 2 min cycled magnetic stimulation (3 on/off cycles) every 15 min or no magnetic stimulation. The inset shows an enlarged part of the release profile under magnetic stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In guided tissue engineering, cell attachment and cell proliferation are aided by an increased supply of nutrients and oxygen to the cells via the interconnected pore system as well as via the PDMS polymer, which is permeable to oxygen.134 Moreover, the 3D porous system may guide the attachment and growth of cells and may enable tissue regeneration in three dimensions. For an application in this field, the pore size has to be in a specific range for a particular cell type and specific purpose. For example, for endothelial cells the pore size required for the successful attachment, proliferation and growth of cells was found to be smaller than 60 μm.135 Pedraza et al.32 investigated the possibility of the transplantation of pancreatic islets to alternative sites by the use of 3D scaffolds, which protect the islets and confine them to a well-defined identifiable space. A 3D interconnected porous polymer scaffold with a porosity of 90% and pore sizes ranging from 250 to 425 μm was fabricated by a salt leaching technique. In vitro and in vivo results demonstrated the potential for the transplantation of islets to a clinically relevant extrahepatic site that enables the spatial distribution of islets, as well as intra-device vascularization. Advantages of this technique are the 3D structure of the scaffold for housing the islets, which leads to the 3D distribution of islets, the mechanical integrity of the matrix, and intra-device vascularization. The hydrophobic nature of PDMS typically hinders the attachment and growth of cells. Hence, its surface has to be modified permanently. In contrast to former work, which coated the surface of the scaffold with fibronectin to achieve cell attachment, Zargar et al.80 utilized (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) to modify the surface and render the PDMS scaffold hydrophilic without changing its structure. Prior to this surface modification, the PDMS scaffold was prepared via a combination of gas foaming and particle leaching. The hydrophilic PDMS scaffolds were used to test cell attachment and cell viability. The results showed that the viability of endothelial cells was enhanced while the cells were well attached inside the pores of the PDMS sponge. Although in previous examples the mechanical properties of the PDMS scaffold were of subordinate significance, for tissue engineering changes in, for example, the stiffness and mechanical properties of the scaffold influence the differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) derived from bone marrow and their final fate. To influence the stiffness of the scaffold, Lantada et al.65 exploited the relationship between the porosity and the mechanical properties (e.g., Young's modulus) of a PDMS sponge to tune the mechanical properties of the final scaffold and achieve the typical density and stiffness of several soft tissues. The 3D porous sponge was fabricated via a sugar leaching method in combination with a microemulsion method, whereas by changing the amount of porogen that was added the porosity/stiffness could be variable. A PDMS sponge modified with APTES was shown to be an excellent 3D platform for the adhesion of hMSCs, which was evidenced by the successful chondrogenesis of hMSCs three weeks after being seeded in the 3D hydrophilic scaffold. Finally, Bosi et al.118 utilized 3D porous PDMS scaffolds prepared by sugar leaching for the 3D growth of living primary neurons (Fig. 26). The 3D geometry was found to improve functional organization and synchronization in small neuronal assemblies in comparison with a 2D scaffold. The incorporation of carbon nanotubes into the PDMS sponge boosted synaptic activity significantly, and it was suggested that the 3D system is potentially suitable for mimicking the behavior of complex in vivo networks in such a simplified in vitro model.
 Fig. 26  Development of primary neurons in 2D or 3D PDMS scaffolds. (a) Confocal micrographs show hippocampal cultures grown (9 DIV) on 2D PDMS (left) and 3D PDMS (right) immunostained by b-tubulin III (red), GFAP (green) and DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 100 μm. (b) The DAPI channel alone is selected, to highlight the nuclei under the two culturing conditions (same visual fields as in (a)). (c) Reconstructions of the z profile for the regions of the dashed red lines in (b) note the increased thickness of the DAPI signal in 3D PDMS. Scale bar: 100 × 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group. 
3.6. Other applications

3.6.1. Catalysis. 
Catalysis is the key to the synthesis of many biomolecules and industrially manufactured compounds. One important branch of catalysis is photocatalysis, which enables the exploitation of the energy of the sun for harvesting energy (i.e., organic solar cells), the photocatalytic decomposition of pollutants, energy storage and chemical reactions.136–138 Photocatalysis can be carried out in either a homogeneous or a heterogeneous fashion, both of which have distinct advantages and disadvantages. The advantages of homogeneous catalysts include, for example, their high accessibility, which often renders homogeneous catalysts more active, whereas heterogeneous catalysts are easily recovered and often exhibit higher thermal stability.139 In sustainable green chemistry heterogeneous catalysis is often favored owing to the aforementioned ease of recovery and reusability of the catalyst (e.g., catalysts fixed on solid supports or nanoparticles). Recently, chemically modified polydimethylsiloxane sponges were successfully employed as a 3D scaffold for heterogeneous photocatalysis by Li et al., as shown in Fig. 27.119 The catalytically active PDMS sponge was fabricated by a five-step synthesis, which began with the fabrication of the PDMS sponge via a sugar leaching technique, followed by the oxidation of the surface of the PDMS sponge by oxygen plasma and subsequent silanization with vinyltrimethoxysilane (VTMS). Afterwards, the surface was modified by free-radical polymerization with (2-methacryloyloxyethyl)trimethylammonium chloride (METAC). Finally, the catalytically active substance Rose Bengal (RB) sodium salt was added and electrostatically captured by the PMETAC–PDMS sponge. The coating of the sponge with rose bengal was found to be highly homogeneous, whereas the sponge photocatalyst composite displayed excellent photocatalytic activity in cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reactions under irradiation with visible light. The yield of the CDC reactions typically exceeded 70% and was often higher than 90% for the reactions of ternary amines with various nucleophiles such as nitroalkanes, acetone and diazoacetate. Their approach exploits the large surface area of 3D interconnected porous PDMS, the chemical inertness of PDMS itself, the transparency of PDMS to visible light and the reusability of the modified PDMS sponge and therefore provides an interesting prototype for future novel photocatalytically active PDMS sponges. This can be confirmed because this study showed that the PDMS sponge coated with rose bengal could be employed in a continuous-flow reactor, which could dramatically increase the output of the photocatalytic sponge and thus further exploit the 3D interconnected pore system of PDMS sponges.
 Fig. 27  (a) Preparation of a PDMS–RB sponge photocatalyst. (b) Schematic illustration of a continuous-flow reactor and a picture of the setup. C represents a glass column filled with the PDMS–RB sponge catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.6.2. Microfluidics. 
Microfluidic devices are extensively used in biomedical diagnostics, drug development, microelectronics and portable lab-on-a-chip devices, as well as being employed in the chemical and food industries.119,140–143 Researchers, in particular those from areas of biomedical research that require high-throughput devices, are interested in microfluidic devices as they are small, cheap, and highly controllable and require low sample volumes. Microfluidic devices typically require an energy source, which drives liquid though the device. Non-mechanical mechanisms that are often utilized rely on utilizing Laplace pressure gradients, surface tension, capillary force, vacuum, wettability, evaporation and paper-based devices.51,52,141,144–147 Here, problems include the high complexity, low transportability and difficulty of handling of the actuation systems. Furthermore, most of these systems cannot be reused or operated for a long period. Pumping systems, in which the driving force for the transport of water originates from evaporation in conjunction with capillary force, have the capability for long-term operation and reuse. For example, Zhou et al.120 employed durable hydrophilic polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)–PDMS sponges for the “non-stop” pumping of water by using capillary force coupled with water evaporation with no external power source, as illustrated in Fig. 28. The hydrophilic sponge was fabricated by a facile sugar leaching technique and subsequent hydrophilization of the sponge surface via a “dip-coat-dry” method. The hydrophilic sponge displayed laminar flow even on extended time scales, high stability, reusability and high mobility. Thus, these sponges provide a viable means for the actuation of liquids for prolonged periods of time and can be utilized for continuous-flow reactions, cell cultures and micromixing devices.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic illustration of the leaf-like pumping mechanism of a hydrophilic PVA–PDMS sponge. (b) Microscopic image of the laminar flow that formed in a dandelion flower-like microchannel. (c) Test of the hydrophilic stability of PDMS sponges modified with PVA. (d) Quasi-stable high flow rates maintained by switching sponge pumps for unloaded pumps at an interval of 1 h. (e) Measurement of water evaporation rate with and without sponge pumps. Reprinted from open access article ref. 120 under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License. 

4. Summary and outlook
The introduction of porosity into bulk materials is a promising approach for improving their properties by increasing the surface area and generating well-developed pores. Such porous materials are extensively used in many applications and therefore this field of research is considered to be extremely fertile. In this review, porous PDMS substrates and PDMS sponges have been discussed. Although porous PDMS sponges have been known for a longer period, this review has focused on the remarkable progress made since 2011, which coincides with the emergence of applications in environmental chemistry and electronics, and on the development of novel strategies for the fabrication of porous PDMS sponges. The versatility of porous PDMS originates from the synergy between its bulk material properties, the increase in its surface area due to the introduction of porosity, its diverse fabrication methods, which make various pore sizes and patterns available, the facile incorporation of nanoparticles into the PDMS substrate, and the range of chemical functionalities that can be introduced at interfaces with the porous PDMS substrate. These functionalities can be introduced by either post-fabrication treatment or direct modification and are able to provide additional features, such as responsiveness to external stimuli, including pH, temperature, small molecules, mechanical triggers and magnetic/electrical fields.
At first, basic methods for the introduction of porosity into PDMS, such as leaching techniques and gas foaming techniques, were used. These techniques are robust and reliable and allow a certain degree of control over the pore structure including the pore size, pore geometry, and porosity. However, these methods are not able to tailor-make a porous substrate to the requirements of a specific application. Here, with the rapid development of organic synthesis, polymer chemistry, materials science and engineering, new methods are available for creating porous materials with an unprecedented degree of control over the pore structure. Particularly important features of advanced methods, such as polystyrene sphere leaching and template methods, are the high degree of control over the pore size, with a narrow size distribution, and the pore pattern. These new fabrication methods were the driving force behind advances in the application of porous PDMS sponges. Until now, only macroporous PDMS has been available, as the fabrication methods could only create pores/features larger than 100 nm. A reduction in the pore size to mesopores or even micropores remains challenging. In fact, mesoporous and microporous polymers have already been produced. However, their fabrication techniques are difficult to transfer to PDMS, for example, owing to its intrinsic viscosity, which excludes techniques that rely on evaporation. Once smaller pore sizes are available, the synthesis of hierarchical porous polymers is conceivable, which are expected to exhibit the advantages of each class of pore size. For example, macropores provide high pore accessibility, whereas meso/micropores display even larger surface areas. Therefore, a combination of sizes is desired for catalytic reactions such as the photochemical reaction discussed previously. Furthermore, hierarchical pore sizes are expected to affect a broad range of research fields, e.g., microfluidics, bioengineering, catalysis and separation problems.
As well as the pore structure, the functionalities of PDMS are of great importance for its future applications. As-made 3D porous PDMS sponges exhibited a chemically inert and hydrophobic surface, which can be used for basic applications, such as separation problems and flexible conductors. For advanced applications, however, functionalities have to be introduced. Fortunately, properties such as the mechanical properties, electrical conductivity and surface wettability of PDMS sponges can be varied by a wide range of surface functionalization techniques and polymer modification processes. These modification techniques, in conjunction with the aforementioned control over the pore structure, will enable the design and construction of many new porous PDMS-based materials.
The investigation of an application is often driven by a known or existing material. A new material is fabricated by an experimental technique and subsequently the interested researcher needs to investigate its suitability for high-value applications. However, by compiling a library of routes for the synthesis of specific pore structures and functionalities that exhibit specific behavior, the process of inventing a device can be inverted in a retro-design approach. In this approach, at first a specific application is identified. By analyzing the properties of a porous material that are desired for the envisaged application, a porous material can be designed to the requirements of the particular application.
An urgent issue is the scalability of the methods used for the fabrication of porous PDMS sponges, because large-scale production, in particular for industrial applications, inevitably requires large production volumes and large material sizes. These fabrication techniques should be low-cost, economically viable and, in addition, eco-friendly. A few methods permit the scalable preparation of porous PDMS, such as sugar or salt leaching techniques. However, methods for the fabrication of well-defined pores, such as soft lithography and 3D printing, lack scalability in both cases.
We anticipate that this review will provide a comprehensive understanding of the techniques used for the fabrication of elastic PDMS sponges and their inherent advantages and limitations. Besides, it will impart knowledge of the basic relationship between structure and applications and thus serve as a viable tool for making decisions regarding the design of application-driven pore architectures and functionalities of PDMS sponges.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21674064 and 21404072) and Shenzhen Science and Technology Foundation (JCYJ20160520173802186) for financial support of this work.
References
X. Y. Yang, L. H. Chen, Y. Li, J. C. Rooke, C. Sanchez and B. L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 481–558 RSC .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. L. Qiu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1515–1563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Wu, F. Xu, B. Sun, R. W. Fu, H. K. He and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3959–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Jiang, Y. F. Zhu, G. X. Zhu, Z. J. Zhang, X. J. Chen and W. Q. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5661–5679 CAS .
A. G. Slater and A. I. Cooper, Science, 2015, 348, aaa8075 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, J. Liu and D. Y. Zhao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16023 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Wan, Y. H. Lin, A. Prakash and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18687–18705 CAS .
M. H. Yu, W. T. Qiu, F. X. Wang, T. Zhai, P. P. Fang, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15792–15823 CAS .
W. Zhang, B. Aguila and S. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8795–8824 CAS .
E. Yilgor and I. Yilgor, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1165–1195 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8328–8344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Zhu, S. Handschuh-Wang, G. Lv, J. Wang, T. Li, C. Chen, C. He, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Yang and X. Zhou, Global Chall., 2017, 1, 1600014 CrossRef .
D. R. Chang, D. M. Alanis, R. K. Miller, H. Ji, H. Akiyama, P. D. McCrea and J. C. Chen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 18042–18051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Li, A. Corma and J. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7112–7127 RSC .
M. M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clark and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250–290 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Y. W. Hsu, C. L. Ren, X. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 315–335 RSC .
X. W. Liu, T. J. Sun, J. L. Hu and S. D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3584–3616 CAS .
L. Tan and B. Tan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3322–3356 RSC .
S. Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
P. Kaur, J. T. Hupp and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 819–835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim and Y. M. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 43, 1–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Sun and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2071–2100 CAS .
L. B. Sun, X. Q. Liu and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5092–5147 RSC .
W. J. Wang, M. Zhou and D. Q. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1334–1347 CAS .
Z. H. Xiang and D. P. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2691–2718 CAS .
S. J. Choi, T. H. Kwon, H. Im, D. I. Moon, D. J. Baek, M. L. Seol, J. P. Duarte and Y. K. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4552–4556 CAS .
W. R. McCall, K. Kim, C. Heath, G. La Pierre and D. J. Sirbuly, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19504–19509 CAS .
S. Jung, J. H. Kim, J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Lee, I. Park, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4825–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Z. Chen, G. M. Zhou, Y. M. Sun, H. R. Lee, C. Liu, H. B. Yao, Z. N. Bao and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3578–3583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liang, Y. Li, J. Yang, J. Zhang, C. He, Y. Liu and X. Zhou, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600117 CrossRef .
J. W. Han, B. Kim, J. Li and M. Meyyappan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 051903 CrossRef .
E. Pedraza, A. C. Brady, C. A. Fraker, R. D. Molano, S. Sukert, D. M. Berman, N. S. Kenyon, A. Pileggi, C. Ricordi and C. L. Stabler, Cell Transplant., 2013, 22, 1123–1135 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, L. X. Li, B. C. Li, J. P. Zhang and A. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18281–18287 CAS .
J. R. Shi, H. B. Zhang, J. Jackson, A. Shademani and M. Chiao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7415–7422 RSC .
S. Q. Liang, Y. Y. Li, Y. Z. Chen, J. B. Yang, T. P. Zhu, D. Y. Zhu, C. X. He, Y. Z. Liu, S. Handschuh-Wang and X. C. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1586–1590 RSC .
P. K. Yuen, H. Su, V. N. Goral and K. A. Fink, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 1541–1544 RSC .
Q. F. Zheng, H. L. Zhang, H. Y. Mi, Z. Y. Cai, Z. Q. Ma and S. Q. Gong, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 504–512 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, S. D. Wang, M. Li, C. Ahn, J. K. Hyun, D. S. Kim, D. K. Kim, J. A. Rogers, Y. G. Huang and S. Jeon, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 916 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Guo, P. Si, W. Cai, Y. Wang and G. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 4329–4334 RSC .
D. H. Kim, M. C. Jung, S. H. Cho, S. H. Kim, H. Y. Kim, H. J. Lee, K. H. Oh and M. W. Moon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schneider, J. Draheirn, R. Kamberger and U. Wallrabe, Sens.
Actuators, A, 2009, 151, 95–99 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 2006, 442, 368–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 550–575 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Belanger and Y. Marois, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2001, 58, 467–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Lotters, W. Olthuis, P. H. Veltink and P. Bergveld, J. Micromech. Microeng., 1997, 7, 145–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mata, A. J. Fleischman and S. Roy, Biomed. Microdevices, 2005, 7, 281–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Dong, L. He, Y. F. Xiao, V. R. Gaddam, S. K. Ozdemir, Z. F. Han, G. C. Guo and L. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 231119 CrossRef .
A. Piruska, I. Nikcevic, S. H. Lee, C. Ahn, W. R. Heineman, P. A. Limbach and C. J. Seliskar, Lab Chip, 2005, 5, 1348–1354 RSC .
S. R. Quake and A. Scherer, Science, 2000, 290, 1536–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Lee, C. Park and G. M. Whitesides, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 6544–6554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. Lau, W. W. L. Lam, S. W. N. Au and B. Zheng, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 4924–4930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Zhou, J. F. Li, C. Wu and B. Zheng, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1363–1367 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pedraza, M. M. Coronel, C. A. Fraker, C. Ricordi and C. L. Stabler, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 4245–4250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. J. Chen and E. Lindner, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3118–3122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hu, X. Q. Ren, M. Bachman, C. E. Sims, G. P. Li and N. L. Allbritton, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5569–5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, A. V. Ellis and N. H. Voelcker, Electrophoresis, 2010, 31, 2–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. C. Bauer, M. Fischlechner, C. Abell and W. T. S. Huck, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 1814–1819 RSC .
B. J. Wang, P. Prinsen, H. Z. Wang, Z. S. Bai, H. L. Wang, R. Luque and J. Xuan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 855–914 RSC .
C. Yu, C. Yu, L. Cui, Z. Song, X. Zhao, Y. Ma and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600862 CrossRef .
X. M. He, X. J. Mu, Q. Wen, Z. Y. Wen, J. Yang, C. G. Hu and H. F. Shi, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3714–3724 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Chen, L. Zhang, S. S. Duan, S. L. Jing, H. Jiang and C. Z. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7548–7556 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lee, J. Chun, J. H. Lee, K. N. Kim, N. R. Kang, J. Y. Kim, M. H. Kim, K. S. Shin, M. K. Gupta, J. M. Baik and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5037–5042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Yuen and M. E. DeRosa, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 3249–3255 RSC .
S. B. Kang, J. Lee, S. Lee, S. Kim, J. K. Kim, H. Algadi, S. Al-Sayari, D. E. Kim, D. Kim and T. Lee, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600356 CrossRef .
A. D. Lantada, H. A. Iniesta, B. P. Sanchez and J. P. García-Ruíz, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2014, 2014, 612976 Search PubMed .
M. Tebboth, Q. Jiang, A. Kogelbauer and A. Bismarck, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19243–19250 CAS .
A. Giustiniani, P. Guegan, M. Marchand, C. Poulard and W. Drenckhan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1527–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kovalenko, K. Zimny, B. Mascaro, T. Brunet and O. Mondain-Monval, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 5154–5163 RSC .
M. T. Grosse, M. Lamotte, M. Birot and H. Deleuze, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 21–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Silverstein, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 199–234 CrossRef CAS .
A. Menner, R. Powell and A. Bismarck, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2034–2035 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pahovnik, J. Majer, E. Zagar and S. Kovacic, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 5132–5138 RSC .
M. P. Aronson and M. F. Petko, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1993, 159, 134–149 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, I. K. Park, J. H. Kim, C. S. Cho and M. S. Kim, Tissue Eng. Regener. Med., 2012, 9, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kobayashi, H. Saitoh, N. Fujii, Y. Hoshino and M. Takanashi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1993, 50, 971–979 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salerno, M. Oliviero, E. Di Maio, S. Iannace and P. A. Netti, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2009, 20, 2043–2051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Chrusciel and E. Lesniak, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 119, 1696–1703 CrossRef CAS .
L. Calabrese, L. Bonaccorsi, A. Freni and E. Proverbio, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2017, 12, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Grande, A. S. Fawcett, A. J. McLaughlin, F. Gonzaga, T. P. Bender and M. A. Brook, Polymer, 2012, 53, 3135–3142 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zargar, J. Nourmohammadi and G. Amoabediny, Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem., 2016, 63, 190–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Chen, B. G. Zhuo and X. J. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20364–20370 CAS .
H. Lee, J. K. Yoo, J. H. Park, J. H. Kim, K. Kang and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 976–982 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishigami, Y. Nii, Y. Ohmukai, S. Rajabzadeh and H. Matsuyama, Membranes, 2014, 4, 113–122 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, G. Luo, J. Wu and H. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2040–2046 CAS .
O. M'barki, A. Hanafia, D. Bouyer, C. Faur, R. Sescousse, U. Delabre, C. Blot, P. Guenoun, A. Deratani, D. Quemener and C. Pochat-Bohatier, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 458, 225–235 CrossRef .
H.-H. Chang, K. Beltsios, D.-J. Lin and L.-P. Cheng, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 14–24 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Tsai, J. H. Lin, D. M. Wang, K. R. Lee and J. Y. Lai, Desalination, 2006, 200, 247–249 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, K. Taki and M. Ohshima, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12397–12405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dayal and T. Kyu, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 043512 CrossRef .
J. K. Kim, K. Taki and M. Ohshima, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12397–12405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Hinton, A. Hudson, K. Pusch, A. Lee and A. W. Feinberg, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 1781–1786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Kolesky, K. A. Homan, M. A. Skylar-Scott and J. A. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 3179–3184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Kolesky, R. L. Truby, A. S. Gladman, T. A. Busbee, K. A. Homan and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3124–3130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qin, B. G. Compton, J. A. Lewis and M. J. Buehler, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7038 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Duan, K. Yang, Z. Wang, M. Chen, L. Zhang, H. Zhang and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2187–2192 CAS .
G. S. Jeong, D. H. Baek, H. C. Jung, J. H. Song, J. H. Moon, S. W. Hong, I. Y. Kim and S. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 977 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cho, J. Park, J. Kim, T. Kim, J. Kim, I. Park and S. Jeon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17369–17378 CAS .
S. Wu, J. Zhang, R. B. Ladani, A. R. Ravindran, A. P. Mouritz, A. J. Kinloch and C. H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14207–14215 CAS .
J. K. Wang, J. H. Guo, P. X. Si, W. P. Cai, Y. M. Wang and G. H. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 4329–4334 RSC .
H. Y. Jia, Y. L. He, X. Y. Zhang, W. B. Du and Y. P. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500029 CrossRef .
A. Rinaldi, A. Tamburrano, M. Fortunato and M. S. Sarto, Sensors, 2016, 16, 2148 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Y. Guo, X. M. He, G. L. Liu, Y. Xi, H. F. Shi and C. G. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 736–744 CAS .
J. Chun, J. W. Kim, W. S. Jung, C. Y. Kang, S. W. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. M. Baik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3006–3012 CAS .
J. S. Chun, B. U. Ye, J. W. Lee, D. Choi, C. Y. Kang, S. W. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. M. Baik, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dudem, Y. H. Ko, J. W. Leem, S. H. Lee and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20520–20529 CAS .
D. Kim, S. J. Park, S. B. Jeon, M. L. Seol and Y. K. Choi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500331 CrossRef .
M. L. Seol, J. W. Han, S. J. Park, S. B. Ron and Y. K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
M. Taghavi, V. Mattoli, A. Sadeghi, B. Mazzolai and L. Beccai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400024 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Ding, H. Ha, Y. Shi, L. Peng, X. Zhang, C. J. Ellison and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700898 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Si, J. Wang, J. Guo, S. Li, W. Cai and H. Xu, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 6823–6829 RSC .
P. Si, J. Wang, C. Zhao, H. Xu, K. Yang and W. Wang, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2015, 26, 1091–1096 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. H. Tran, S. Kabiri, T. R. Sim and D. Losic, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2015, 1, 298–305 CAS .
A. Zhang, M. Chen, C. Du, H. Guo, H. Bai and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10201–10206 CAS .
A. A. Chavan, J. Pinto, I. Liakos, I. S. Bayer, S. Lauciello, A. Athanassiou and D. Fragouli, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 5495–5502 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Chavan, H. B. Li, A. Scarpellini, S. Marras, L. Manna, A. Athanassiou and D. Fragouli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14778–14784 CAS .
S. Qiu, H. C. Bi, X. H. Hu, M. B. Wu, Y. F. Li and L. T. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 10479–10486 RSC .
J. S. Gonzalez, C. E. Hoppe and R. J. J. Williams, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 87, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bosi, R. Rauti, J. Laishram, A. Turco, D. Lonardoni, T. Nieus, M. Prato, D. Scaini and L. Ballerini, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Li, Y. Huang, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Yang, C. He, X. Zhou and J. Zhang, Green Chem., 2017 10.1039/c6gc03558b .
T. Zhou, J. Yang, D. Zhu, J. Zheng, S. Handschuh-Wang, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, C. He and X. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700028 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Choong, M. B. Shim, B. S. Lee, S. Jeon, D. S. Ko, T. H. Kang, J. Bae, S. H. Lee, K. E. Byun, J. Im, Y. J. Jeong, C. E. Park, J. J. Park and U. I. Chung, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3451–3458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, G. I. Koleilat, R. Pfattner, D. S. Kong, P. Lin, R. Nur, T. Lei, H. L. Wang, N. Liu, Y. C. Lai, M. G. Kim, J. W. Chung, S. Lee and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4441–4448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shin, J. H. Song, G. H. Lim, B. Lim, J. J. Park and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3706–3711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. G. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Liu, Y. Yu, C. Yan, K. Li and Z. J. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, J. Liu and Z. A. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 937–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, A. Reuveny, J. Reeder, S. Lee, H. Jin, Q. H. Liu, T. Yokota, T. Sekitani, T. Isoyama, Y. Abe, Z. G. Suo and T. Someya, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 472–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. White, M. Kaltenbrunner, E. D. Glowacki, K. Gutnichenko, G. Kettlgruber, I. Graz, S. Aazou, C. Ulbricht, D. A. M. Egbe, M. C. Miron, Z. Major, M. C. Scharber, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 811–816 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Tang, I. D. Joshipura, Y. L. Lin, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Mitchell, K. Khoshmanesh and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 604–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, R. Guo and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 5349–5357 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Liu, D. Zhu, S. Handschuh-Wang, S. Liang, J. Yang, T. Kong, X. Zhou, Y. Liu and X. Zhou, Mater. Horiz., 2017 10.1039/c7mh00065k .
A. Fassler and C. Majidi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1928–1932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Zhang and P. Wang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e8 CrossRef .
L. S. Kumosa, T. L. Routh, J. T. Lin, J. Y. Lucisano and D. A. Gough, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 8287–8296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Salem, R. Stevens, R. G. Pearson, M. C. Davies, S. J. B. Tendler, C. J. Roberts, P. M. Williams and K. M. Shakesheff, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2002, 61, 212–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362–1387 CAS .
N. Li, Y. Wang, D. Tang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 9403–9406 CrossRef .
D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 343, 1239176 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jose Climent, A. Corma and S. Iborra, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 16–58 RSC .
E. Samiei, M. Tabrizian and M. Hoorfar, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 2376–2396 RSC .
A. K. Yetisen, M. S. Akram and C. R. Lowe, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 2210–2251 RSC .
K. S. Elvira, X. C. I. Solvas, R. C. R. Wootton and A. J. deMello, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 905–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Sackmann, A. L. Fulton and D. J. Beebe, Nature, 2014, 507, 181–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, K. Kim and S. J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Cha and D. S. Kim, Biomed. Microdevices, 2011, 13, 877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Cao, K. Li, Z. C. Dong, C. M. Yu, S. Yang, C. Song, K. S. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4114–4119 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Ma, M. Y. Cao, C. Teng, H. Li, J. S. Xiao, K. S. Liu and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15540–15545 CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Deyong Zhu	Deyong Zhu received his BS degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2011. Following this, he joined Prof. Bo Zheng's group for the study of microfluidics at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and obtained his PhD in chemistry in 2015. Dr Zhu is currently a postdoctoral fellow of Prof. Xuechang Zhou's group at Shenzhen University. His current research interests lie in soft matter interfaces, novel porous systems, and microfluidics and their applications in the environment, sensors and electronics.
Stephan Handschuh-Wang	Stephan Handschuh-Wang obtained his Diploma degree in physical chemistry from the Technical University of Dortmund in 2010. He pursued his PhD with Professor Holger Schönherr at the University of Siegen on the study of soft matter interfaces and obtained his PhD in 2016. Dr Handschuh-Wang is currently a postdoctoral fellow of Prof. Xuechang Zhou's group at Shenzhen University. His previous and current research interests are focused on phenomena at the interface of preferably soft matter, in particular, the characterization and application of novel functional interfaces.
Xuechang Zhou	Prof. Xuechang Zhou is currently an associate professor of the College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering at Shenzhen University. Prof. Zhou received his BS in polymer chemistry (Advisor: Prof. Guangzhao Zhang) at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2005 and MPhil and PhD degrees in the Department of Chemistry (Prof. Bo Zheng's group) at the Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2007 and 2010, respectively. From 2010 to 2014, he worked in Prof. Zijian Zheng's group as a postdoctoral researcher at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University focusing on the development of flexible and wearable electronics and surface patterning techniques. He joined the College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering at Shenzhen University as an associate professor in 2014. His research interests include flexible and stretchable electronics, sensors, and environmental engineering.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges from various templates: (a) sugar cubes; (b) PS beads, emulsion, or phase separation; (c) Ni foam; (d) gas forming; (e) 3D printed template.	 

 	Fig. 2  PDMS sponges fabricated by the sugar leaching method. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process using a sugar cube as a template. (b) Photographs of sugar particles of different sizes. (c) Vacuum-free method of sugar particle leaching in a p-xylene (PX) solution, in which the sugar and PX were removed after curing. (d–k) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of sugar particles (d–f) and as-made PDMS sponges (g–k). (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (c–k) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  PDMS sponges fabricated by the salt leaching method. (a, b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges using NaCl particles as a template. (c) Digital image of as-made PDMS sponges. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges using citric acid monohydrate (CAM) particles as a template. (e) SEM images of the as-made sponges. (f) Micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) image of the porous PDMS sponges. (d–f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  PDMS sponges fabricated by a PS bead leaching method. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of porous structures of PDMS using PS beads as a template. (b) SEM images of the porous PDMS structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  PDMS sponges fabricated using Ni foam. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PDMS sponges from Ni foam. SEM images of the Ni foam (b) and the corresponding PDMS structure (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  Solid emulsions of PDMS and PEG-400 with mean drop radii of 335 μm (a, b) and 850 μm (c, d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  PDMS foams fabricated by the gas foaming technique. (a, b) A polyMIPE was prepared by curing an MIPE with a dispersed volume ratio of 50% and 30 g L−1 of an NaHCO3 phase at atmospheric pressure (a) and under reduced pressure (b). (c, d) A polyMIPE was prepared by curing an MIPE with a dispersed volume ratio of 60% and 70 g L−1 of an NaHCO3 phase at atmospheric pressure (c) and under reduced pressure (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Porous PDMS structures fabricated by phase separation. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic illustration of the pore formation process at the surface of a silicone rubber membrane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Porous PDMS networks fabricated from 3D printed porous polylactic acid (PLA). (a, b) Schemes of 3D printed PLA (a) and porous PDMS (b) networks. (c, d) SEM images of aligned porous PLA (c) and PDMS (d) networks. (e, f) SEM images of split-level PLA (e) and PDMS (f) networks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

Direct templating	
	Tunable pore size and porosity	Broad pore size distribution
• Salt/sugar leaching	Dozens to hundreds	Good pore interconnection
• Colloidal crystals (PS, etc.)	Down to several microns	Facile, reliable, cost-effective	Hazardous solvents needed
• Nickel foam	Well-ordered pore structure when assembled using PS particles	Higher consumption of time and cost
Emulsion templating	Down to several microns	Monodisperse pore size available	Removal of surfactants and organic solvents
Tunable pore size and porosity
Both closed and open pore structures obtainable
Gas foaming	Down to several microns	Facile and eco-friendly fabrication procedures	Poor control of pore size and porosity
Both closed and open pore structures obtainable
Phase separation	Down to several microns	Cost-effective and facile in fabrication	Dependence on the thickness of the casting prepolymer solution
Well-ordered pore structure	Organic solvents needed
Tunable pore size and porosity
3D printing	Down to sub-micron scale	Desirable pore size and porosity	Relatively high cost
Low fabrication efficiency

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of metal-coated PDMS sponges. (b) Optical image of the original PDMS sponge and the as-prepared Cu–, Ag/Cu–, and Au/Cu–PDMS sponges. (c–f) Electrical performance of Ag/Cu–PDMS sponges during stretching, compression, bending and twisting. (c, d) Fatigue tests of the stretchability of Ag/Cu–PDMS sponges at different tensile (c) and compressive strains (d). (e, f) Flexible LED circuits made from interconnects of Ag/Cu–PDMS sponge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a, b) Cross-sectional FE-SEM images of (a) S-OPCG and (b) A-OPCG. (c) Normalized conductivity of S-OPCG and A-OPCG as a function of tensile strain, and strain distributions in models of S-OPCG and A-OPCG. (d, e) Normalized electrical conductivity of S-OPCG as a function of (d) stretching–releasing cycles at a strain of 50% and (e) the number of bends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Optical images of (a) a supported 3D PDMS film and (b) a folded 3D PDMS film with line patterns. (c) Top-view SEM image of net-shaped 3D PDMS. (d) Comparison of fracture strain between 3D PDMS (blue filled circles) and solid PDMS (red filled squares) for various thicknesses. (e) Comparison of extended stretchability for different ratios of the thickness of the 3D layer to that of the solid film (R = h3D/hs). (f) Conductivity of embedded stretchable conductors under stretching of up to ∼220%. (g) Example of an LED array using 3D stretchable conductors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright (2012) Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of liquid metal–PDMS sponges and their use as stretchable LED circuits. (b) Optical image of an as-made GaInSn–PDMS sponge. (c) Optical images of the twisting, bending, and punching of the operating LED circuit. ((d), Top left) Illustration of composite (scale bar = 25 μm). (Top right) Microscopy image of the PDMS–galinstan material; galinstan droplets are densely packed inside a clear PDMS matrix (scale bar = 50 μm). (Bottom left) Monolayer of galinstan droplets, which are well distributed and exhibit a spheroidal shape (scale bar = 50 μm). (Bottom right) Compression is believed to cause droplets to rupture and form electrical connections with neighboring inclusions (arrows), which leads to bulk conductivity (scale bar = 25 μm). (e) Square sheet of stretchable PDMS–galinstan embedded in a thin layer of PDMS (top left). Circuits can be formed in this plain sheet of material by using a thin-tipped tool to selectively apply compression. An LED embedded in the nodes of a formed circuit lights up (top right), but a newly added LED will not (bottom left) until more selective compression is used to form connections to the existing circuit (bottom right). (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Relationship between the experimental indentation depth and the theoretical deformation ratio of the porous structure according to the pore size. (b) Curves of relative capacitance for three different porous structured pressure sensors and an unstructured pressure sensor versus increasing pressure. (c) Response of the pressure sensor to the loading and unloading of an ant (20 mg). (d) Durability and stability of the response of the pressure sensor over 10000 cycles with a load of 0.5 N. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Stress–strain curve of the CPS. (b) Resistance versus strain characteristics of the CPS. (c) Cyclic voltammogram for 0.1 M KOH with the floating CPS as the working electrode. (d) Schematic diagram of the nozzle jet printing process used for producing the patterned PPSR (left) and images of the PPSR pattern printed on a flexible plastic substrate (PET film) (right). (e) On–off cycles of the NIR response of an ionic liquid (IL) sensor at six NIR luminous intensities ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 W. The inset is an SEM image of PPy NPs. (f) Real mixing responses of the PDMS sponge for sensing different temperatures and pressures simultaneously. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright (2013) AIP Publishing LLC. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. (e, f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Time-lapse images of an experiment on the acidification of water by CO2 gas using microporous PDMS. The sizes of the sugar particles used were 75–150 mm. The inner chamber was filled with sodium hydroxide solution. (b) Plot of the variation in the water contact angle with different NH3·H2O concentrations. The inset shows the reversible reaction between NH3·H2O and In(OH)3. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the poling process. (b) Effective piezoelectric coefficient (d33) of PNPFs as a function of their porosity. The inset shows the piezoelectric response of the foam as a function of time and the applied force. (c) Power density as a function of the external load (∼10 N) for films of different porosity and a neat film. (d, e) Measurements of the electrical output (open-circuit voltage Voc and short-circuit current Isc) of an as-fabricated NG based on a porous CNF/PDMS film under a compressive stress of 0.05 MPa at a frequency of 10 Hz in (d) forward connection and (e) reverse connection. (f) Nineteen blue LEDs in series were simultaneously turned on by the piezoelectricity generated by the NG based on a porous CNF/PDMS aerogel film. (g) Stability test of the NG on the first, second, and third days of operation (1200 cycles per day). (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (d–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Charge generation mechanism of an AMTENG under an external force in short-circuit conditions. (b) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of a mesoporous PDMS film with Au NPs (0.28 wt%). (c) Dependence of the output power and power density of an AMTENG and an FTENG with a gap of 1 mm on the resistance of external loads ranging from 10 to 109 Ω. (d) Electricity generation process over a full cycle of a CS-TENG under an external force. (e) Measurements of charge transfer in samples filled with SiO2, TiO2, BaTiO3 or SrTiO3 with various volume ratios of the NP fillers. (f) Charge transfer in PDMS sponge films with various pore ratios. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of a wired-sponge generator. (b) Image showing the fabricated composite generator encapsulated in Ecoflex with a volume of 4 cm3. (c) Mechanism of current generation. (d, e) Open-circuit output voltage signal under compressive and tensile strain. Strain was applied to the composite along two different perpendicular directions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the comparison between a conventional electrode using metal foil and a stretchable electrode based on a PDMS sponge. Discharge/charge voltage profiles of a stretchable (b) LTO anode and (c) LFP cathode for various numbers of stretch–release cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) (1, 2) Compressibility, (3) high hydrophobicity, and (4) high oleophilicity of a PDMS sponge. (b) Absorption capacity of PDMS sponges replicated from various sugar templates for transformer oil. For the combined sugar templates, two types of sugar particles were mixed in a volume ratio of 1:1. (c) Plot of mass-based absorption capacity for different organic solvents and oils. (d, e) Variations in the oil absorbency of the PDMS sponges for dichloromethane with (d) the value of mPDMS/mdimethicone (the size of the NaCl microparticles is 150–297 μm) and (e) the size of the NaCl microparticles (mPDMS/mdimethicone = 4:6). (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (d, e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of chemical structures and the preparation of a coating for a PDMS sponge. (b) Photos of liquid droplets on sponges (top) after treatment with sandpaper and (bottom) after treatment with sandpaper and heat. (c) Contact angles of water, tea and milk on the coated sponge during ten cycles of treatment with sandpaper and heat. (d) Absorbency of the coated PDMS sponge for various organic solvents. (e) Demonstration of the recyclability of the coated PDMS sponge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Fabricated nanosponge/porous PDMS (NS/p-PDMS). (b) Mechanism of bubble growth and oil desorption with UV-responsive TiO2. (c) Sequence of underwater absorption and desorption of crude oil with UV irradiation and air bubbling. The diameter of the sponge is 1.5 cm. (d) Schematic procedure of absorption and desorption of oil with UV-responsive wettability and flow of air bubbles. (e) Schematic diagrams of the switchable oil wettability of a textile grafted with P2VP-b-PDMS. (f) Still images from video measurements of the contact angle of a 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) droplet on the functionalized textile surface in water with a pH of 6.5. (g) Snapshots showing (left and center) the absorption of a DCE droplet of about 2 mL (stained with oil red O dye) by the functionalized sponge in water with a pH of 6.5 and (right) the release of the captured DCE from the same sponge in acidic water with a pH of 2.0 after compression. (a–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group. (e–g) Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2012) Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Dependence of the equilibrium absorption capacity (qe) of the sponge on the equilibrium concentration (Ce) of Pb2+ ions in water after interaction for 30 h. The inset is a photograph of the as-made PDMS sponge with spent coffee powder. (b) Absorption of mixed metal ions present in wastewater by the sponge absorbent. (c, d) Kinetics of ion removal: (c) Pb2+ concentration of 37.86 ppm and (d) Hg2+ concentration of 39.90 ppm. The inset in (c) is a photograph of elastomeric foams before (white) and after (yellow) being loaded with ZnSe and after the removal of Pb2+ ions from water (dark brown). (a, b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c, d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication of PDMS sponge capsules. (b) Cross-section of sponge capsule observed by SEM. (c) Images of a deformed capsule under magnetic fields from different distances. (d) Schematic illustration of the refilling of the capsule with a drug. (e) Profiles of the cumulative release of BSA from PDMS sponge capsules subjected to 2 min cycled magnetic stimulation (3 on/off cycles) every 15 min or no magnetic stimulation. The inset shows an enlarged part of the release profile under magnetic stimulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  Development of primary neurons in 2D or 3D PDMS scaffolds. (a) Confocal micrographs show hippocampal cultures grown (9 DIV) on 2D PDMS (left) and 3D PDMS (right) immunostained by b-tubulin III (red), GFAP (green) and DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 100 μm. (b) The DAPI channel alone is selected, to highlight the nuclei under the two culturing conditions (same visual fields as in (a)). (c) Reconstructions of the z profile for the regions of the dashed red lines in (b) note the increased thickness of the DAPI signal in 3D PDMS. Scale bar: 100 × 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Preparation of a PDMS–RB sponge photocatalyst. (b) Schematic illustration of a continuous-flow reactor and a picture of the setup. C represents a glass column filled with the PDMS–RB sponge catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic illustration of the leaf-like pumping mechanism of a hydrophilic PVA–PDMS sponge. (b) Microscopic image of the laminar flow that formed in a dandelion flower-like microchannel. (c) Test of the hydrophilic stability of PDMS sponges modified with PVA. (d) Quasi-stable high flow rates maintained by switching sponge pumps for unloaded pumps at an interval of 1 h. (e) Measurement of water evaporation rate with and without sponge pumps. Reprinted from open access article ref. 120 under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
