Decarbonization at crossroads: the cessation of the positive historical trend or a temporary detour?  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE22879G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE22879G
(Opinion)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1060-1073Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDecarbonization at crossroads: the cessation of the positive historical trend or a temporary detour?

        
          
            N. 
            Muradov
          
          
        
      
Florida Solar Energy Center, University of Central Florida, Cocoa, Florida 32922, USA. E-mail: muradov@fsec.ucf.edu
Received 
      17th July 2012
    , Accepted 4th January 2013First published on 9th January 2013AbstractAvailable statistical data indicate that during the last two to three decades, the positive historical trends in decarbonization of primary energy has markedly slowed down and practically ceased. In this article, the current status of the decarbonization of the global economy and constraints and challenges of near-to-mid term carbon mitigation options are analyzed using the Kaya Identity modeling tool. Dramatic reductions in both energy and carbon intensities of the world economy would be necessary to stop and reverse the worrisome re-carbonizing trends, however, for the majority of promising low-carbon technologies, the competition with fossil incumbents is currently an uphill battle. The pivotal role of the three-way energy system comprising methane, non-carbon electricity and hydrogen (hence, dubbed Decarbonization Triangle) in catalyzing the decarbonization process is examined in this paper. The analysis of current tendencies shows that despite recent drastic increases in carbon emissions, there are signs of emerging positive decarbonizing trends fueled by a recent surge in supply of natural gas, booming renewables market and significant gains in energy efficiency. If further strengthened, these trends may put decarbonization back on its positive historical path.N. MuradovDr Nazim Z. Muradov is a Principal Research Scientist at the Florida Solar Energy Center, University of Central Florida, Cocoa, Florida. He holds a Doctor of Science degree in Physical Chemistry and Ph.D. in Kinetics and Catalysis. Dr Muradov's main areas of research include thermocatalytic and photocatalytic hydrogen production systems, solar-powered water-splitting cycles, fossil fuel decarbonization, reformers for fuel cell applications, radiant detoxification of hazardous waste and nanostructured carbon materials. He has authored and co-authored two books, close to 200 publications and 44 patents. Dr Muradov is a member of the Board of Directors of the International Association for Hydrogen Energy (IAHE), and an Associate Editor of the International Journal of Hydrogen Energy. In 2010, he was granted the honorary title of the IAHE Fellow.

Broader context
In the face of the ever increasing levels of anthropogenic CO2 emissions and their potentially devastating impact on the Earth's ecosystems, there is a growing consensus that many existing challenges can be solved in conjunction with decarbonization of the carbon-intensive economy. However, statistical data indicate that during the last two to three decades, the historical positive decarbonization trend in substitution of primary energy sources has markedly slowed down and practically ceased. Swinging off the current carbon-intensive path would require overcoming enormous technological challenges and an extensive transformation of the global energy system. The prospective decarbonization options include the use of carbon-free and carbon-neutral energy sources (nuclear and renewables), CO2 capture and storage, increase in energy efficiency of power plants and industrial processes, and switching to low-carbon fuels. Although existing low-carbon technologies currently cannot compete with fossil incumbents, there are emerging positive decarbonizing trends in the energy market fueled by a surge in supply of natural gas, the ever-increasing share of renewables and on-going substantial gains in energy efficiency. The analysis of the current tendencies shows the critical role of the three-way methane–electricity–hydrogen energy system in catalyzing the global decarbonization process.

1 Introduction
The history of our industrial civilization is the history of the progression of primary fuel substitution, with one fuel being gradually replaced by another more versatile and efficient fuel. With the beginning of industrial revolution in the middle of the 18th century, wood yielded its dominance to coal, and the latter successively to oil. As oil was still solidifying its leading role in the mid 20th century, natural gas (NG) emerged as a major competitor, and it is still gaining momentum.
Although during this fuel progression process, the environmental merit of fuels was not among the important considerations (if any), advantageously, every posterior fuel was “cleaner” than its predecessor in terms of the amount of CO2 emissions per unit of energy produced. The “cleanness” of fossil fuels is linked to its H/C atomic ratio: the higher the H/C ratio the cleaner is the fuel since it emits less CO2 during combustion (note: sulfurous and other impurities in fuels are not considered in this analysis). The historical trend of fossil fuel substitution is consistent with the following evolutionary pattern (the average H/C ratio of fuels is shown in brackets): wood (<1) → coal (∼1) → oil (∼2) → gas (∼4). This trend of reducing carbon intensity of primary energy is referred to in the literature as decarbonization, implying that more carbon is removed from the energy equation. Currently, the term “decarbonization” covers a wide range of measures aiming at diminishing the carbon footprint of the economy.
2 Historical trends and the current status of decarbonization
In the 1980s–1990s, Nakićenović, Grübler and Marchetti at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) analyzed the long-term decarbonization trends in the global energy system, in particular, the evolution of carbon intensity of primary energy since the middle of the 19th century (the onset of the Second Industrial Revolution marked by the emergence of steam-powered ships, engines, railways, etc.).1,2 Their analyses showed that since the 1850s, decarbonization has appeared to be a continuous and persistent global trend, albeit occurring at a slow rate of about 0.3% per year (Fig. 1, curve a).
 Fig. 1  Historical decarbonization trends presented as evolution of carbon intensity (a) and H/C ratio (b) of primary energy, toe is ton oil equivalent. The data sources are ref. 2 and 3. 
The authors pointed out, however, that since the early 1970s there seemed to have been a certain slowdown in the pace of decarbonization. More recent studies indicated that starting from mid 1970s the H/C ratio of the global energy mix has leveled up and stayed nearly constant at a value of about 1.8 pointing to the practical cessation of the positive historical decarbonization trend (Fig. 1, curve b).3
Over the last two decades, global CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion have been increasing with the growth rate increasing from 1.2% per year during 1990–2000 to 3.0% per year during 2000–2010 to 3.2% per year during 2010–2011, which is greater than the carbon emission growth rate projected by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its most conservative scenarios.4–6 The emergence of decelerating trends in decarbonization of the global economy and even the reversal of decarbonization (i.e., re-carbonization) have been stressed by a number of energy analysts.6–9 In a recent paper in Nature, Pielke et al. discussed these worrisome trends and their potential consequences for climate policies.9 The authors stressed that the IPCC assumptions for the near-term decarbonization are already inconsistent with the recent evolution of the global economy. Based on the ongoing tendencies, the outlook for the current decade seems not to inspire optimism either: most of carbon emission (even “optimistic”) scenarios project that the world economy will continue moving along the carbon-intensive path. What are the major global and regional drivers that pull the world economy along this path?

Kaya Identity (KI) is a simple yet powerful and versatile tool often used for computing and forecasting CO2 emissions by segregating different drivers responsible for CO2 emissions.7,8,10,11
In a simple mathematical form, the KI expresses the global CO2 emissions as a product of four (or, after simplification, three) driving forces as follows: (1) (2)where F is the global CO2 emission flux from fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes, P is the global population, E is the global primary energy consumption, G is the gross world product (GDP), g = (G/P) is the global average per capita GDP, e = (E/G) is the energy intensity of world GDP, f = (F/E) is the carbon intensity of energy, and h = e × f = (F/G) is the carbon intensity of GDP.
Together, the KI factors can describe the variety of economic and technological impacts contributing to the increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations. In particular, the KI provides a quantitative interpretation of the major drivers behind the recent dramatic growth in CO2 emissions.
Historically (from 1850s to early 1990s), f- and h-factors in the KI equation have been falling globally at the average rate of about 0.3% per yearand 1% per year, respectively.1 However, during the last two decades these trends have been substantially altered. Fig. 2 depicts the evolution of global CO2 emissions and all KI factors from 1971 to 2011 based on the latest International Energy Agency (IEA) statistical data4,5 (some data for 2010 and 2011 are not yet available).
 Fig. 2  Evolution of Kaya Identity factors since 1971. All factors are normalized against the year 1971. The data on g, e, f and h factors for the years 2010 and 2011 are not yet available. Based on IEA statistical data.4,5 
The data indicate that from the beginning of 1970s through the end of 1990s, the KI factors e, f and h were decreasing at the average rate of about 0.8% per year, 0.2% per year and 1.1% per year, respectively, but at the turn of the 21st century they practically flattened. After a 1.5% decline in 2009 due to the worldwide economic downturn, global CO2 emissions increased by an unprecedented 5.5% in 2010 reaching 30.6 billion tons per year, but they relatively slowed down in 2011 increasing by “only” 3.3% reaching 31.6 billion tons per year (coal, oil and NG accounted for 45%, 35% and 20% of the total energy-related emissions in 2011).5 It is evident that the drastic growth in man-made CO2 emissions, especially during the last decade, was driven not only by steady increases in population (P) and per capita GDP (g), but also by a reversal of century-long declining trends in the energy intensity of GDP (e) and the carbon intensity of energy (f). To make the above trends more elucidatory, Fig. 3 shows the evolution of carbon intensities of energy (diagram A) and GDP (diagram B) from 1971 through 2009 for USA and China as two major CO2-producing countries (note that in 2007, China overtook the U.S. as the world's largest CO2 emitter).4
 Fig. 3  Carbon intensity of energy (A) and carbon intensity of GDP (B) for USA and China from 1971 to 2009. Based on IEA statistical data.4 
Carbon intensity of energy in the U.S. (and in many European Union countries) gradually decreased over this period. Carbon intensity of the U.S.'s GDP dropped from 1.11 kg CO2 per US$ (2000 exchange rates) in 1971 to 0.46 kg CO2 per US$ in 2009 (reduction of 1.5% per year). In 2011, CO2 emissions in the U.S. fell by 92 million tons (or 1.7%), and since 2006 they have fallen by 430 million tons (or 7.7%), which is the largest reduction among all countries and regions.5 (To put this number in perspective, under the Kyoto Protocol, 37 industrialized countries and the European Community have committed to reduce their emissions by an average of 5% against 1990 levels over the period of 2008–2012.)12 The recent drastic reduction in CO2 emissions in the U.S. can be attributed to a number of factors, including ongoing switching from coal to NG in the power generation sector, investments in energy efficiency, lower petroleum use in transportation (due to efficiency improvements and higher oil prices), reduced demand for heating oil (due to relatively mild winters) and the economic downturn. In the European Union (EU), CO2 emissions in 2011 dropped by 69 million tons (or 1.9%) mostly due to a sluggish economic growth.5
Since 1971, the carbon intensity of China's GDP has dropped over three decades from 6.09 to 2.25 kg CO2 per US$ (2000 exchange rates), but since 2000 it has practically flattened. In 2009, the carbon intensity of China's GDP (heavily fueled by the abundant and cheap coal resources) was three times higher than the world average. In 2011, China was the largest contributor to the global increase with its CO2 emissions rising by 720 million tons (or 9.3%), mostly due to coal consumption in the power generation sector.5 In the same year, India's emissions rose by 140 million tons (or 8.7%), which put it ahead of Russia as the fourth largest emitter after China, USA, and the European Union.5
As a result, in 2011, a 0.6% reduction in carbon emissions in the OECD countries was overwhelmingly offset by a 6.1% increase in non-OECD countries.5 Thus, the practical cessation of further decarbonization of the global economy can be largely attributed to a reversal of the historical positive fuel substitution trend (wood → coal → oil → gas) and “detour” to coal by populous rapidly developing countries taking advantage of the most reliable and lowest cost fuel; this trend is projected to continue in the near future.
The utility of the Kaya Identity is that, besides being an important tool for developing future CO2 emission scenarios and climate models, it can also be very useful in identifying optimal decarbonization strategies for each region and evaluating carbon mitigation policies and technological options aiming at reducing CO2 emissions to specific CO2 stabilization targets. Since the factors P and g in the KI eqn (1) cannot be influenced (it is one of the indisputable ground rules of climate policies that limiting economic growth as a means of reducing CO2 emissions is simply not an option),8 reducing global CO2 emissions would ultimately hinge upon the extent of reductions in the KI factors e and f.
The recent IEA's Energy Technology Perspectives 2012 (ETP-2012) report identifies the portfolio of the low-carbon (least-cost) technologies required to achieve the reduction in global CO2 emissions to half by 2050 (compared to 2009 level) in order to comply with atmospheric CO2 stabilization goals.13 In the absence of climate mitigation policies (i.e., business-as-usual scenario, BAUS), energy-related CO2 emissions could nearly double from the current 31.6 billion tons per year to 58 billion tons per yearCO2. Achieving the IEA's target of reducing CO2 emissions to 16 billion tons per year by 2050 (i.e., reduction at the scale of 42 billion tons per year CO2 against BAUS) would require the deployment of a broad range of efficient low-carbon technologies with contributions from almost all industrial sectors and across most regions of the world. The key technological areas under the IEA's ETP-2012 scenario include: (1) increase in end-use energy efficiency, (2) increase in power generation efficiency, (3) carbon capture and storage, (4) renewables, (5) nuclear technologies, and (6) switching to low-carbon fuels (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Contribution of different technological options to reducing CO2 emissions by 2050 under the IEA's ETP-2012 scenario.13 
It can be seen that the two first technological areas are linked to the KI factor e, i.e., reducing energy intensity of the economy, whereas, the areas (3) through (6) are linked to the factor f, i.e., reducing carbon intensity of the economy.
3 Reducing energy intensity (e) factor
Decreasing the energy intensity of the economy encompasses a large variety of measures including a decrease in the amount of primary energy consumed per unit of product, decrease in requirements for energy-intensive materials (“dematerialization”), increase in energy conversion efficiency, conservation of energy, energy demand management, etc. According to the IEA's ETP-2012 projections, the increase in end-use energy efficiency would be the largest (42%) contributor to reducing CO2 emissions among all technological options.13
Lovins estimated that stabilizing CO2 emissions would require the reduction of energy intensity of GDP at the rate of 2% per year(or at 3% per year level to meet the current IPCC climate stabilization target).14 The United States has been steadily decreasing the energy intensity of its economy by an average of 1.5% per year since early 1970s,4 and during short periods (1981–1986, 2001, 2006) it reached and even exceeded 3% per year.14 Several European countries (e.g., UK, Germany) achieved comparable reductions in their energy intensity. The European Commission has set the target of 20% energy efficiency increase to be achieved by 2020 (about 2% per year).15 To reduce the carbon-footprint of its coal-intensive economy, China is striving to reduce the energy intensity by closing inefficient coal power plants and capping energy use.16 In 2004, China set a new energy strategy (“leap-frog technologies”) aiming at rapid improvements in the efficiency of new power plants, buildings and factories and banning fuel-inefficient cars.17 Thus, the goal of reducing global energy intensity at the rate of 2–3% per year is not unrealistic especially considering that a significant part of power plants in developing countries are inefficient (30% or lower), and very efficient combined heat/power units started their conquest of the power generation market not long ago. The increase in energy efficiency of coal power plants from the current 30% to the state-of-the-art 50% can potentially reduce CO2 emissions almost by one third (32%).18
ExxonMobil's energy analysts estimate that improvements to efficiency will reduce global energy demand growth by about 65% by 2035 (without these improvements the energy demand would rise by almost 100% due to economic expansion and population growth, but because of the efficiency gains the global demand would increase by only 35%).19 Improved efficiency would offset more than 75% of CO2 emissions that could have been produced without efficiency gains. In the industry sector, efficiency improvements will offset 60% of the demand growth by 2030 in the two largest sub-sectors: heavy industry and chemicals, and in the energy industry sub-sector it will remain flat, even as the demand continues to grow. One of the major energy-saving tools in industry is cogeneration, i.e., production of electricity while simultaneously utilizing high-grade heat or steam for industrial processes. In transportation, the increase in energy efficiency boils down to improvements in fuel efficiency of vehicles, which include improved vehicle design, advanced engines and transmissions, use of composite light-weight materials, advanced powertrains (diesel or gasoline hybrids), and others.
Since the increase in power generation efficiency plays a very important role in reducing the energy intensity factor, it is important from a practical viewpoint to prognosticate the ensuing technological progress in this area. The extrapolation of Ausubel–Marchetti's plot20 that tracks the improvements in the efficiency of power engines over three centuries (1700–1997) may help to forecast the energy efficiency of future power generators and proximate time of their market deployment. In the Ausubel–Marchetti's diagram (Fig. 5), the energy efficiency data for different power engines are presented in the form of a linear Fisher-Pry transform function (often used for technological forecasting).
 Fig. 5  Ausubel–Marchetti's diagram for prognosticating energy conversion efficiencies and time of deployment of prospective power generators. The data on the efficiency of existing engines (solid line and gray circles) are taken from ref. 20. 
The extrapolation of the Fisher-Pry transform line to the years 2025, 2050, 2075 and 2100 yields the energy conversion efficiencies of 60%, 70%, 76% and 82%, respectively. These values (especially, last three) may seem quite high for conventional (Carnot-constrained) heat engines, but they are well within the range of electrochemical energy converters: fuel cells (FC). Actual (practical) efficiency of FC is defined as follows:21 (3)where, η is FC actual efficiency, ΔG, ΔH and ΔS are the free energy, enthalpy and entropy of a fuel oxidation reaction (superscript “o” denotes standard conditions), μ is a fuel utilization coefficient (assumed to be 0.8–0.9), V and Vo are the operating and open circuit voltages of FC, respectively.
Based on eqn (3), practical efficiencies of 60, 65–70 and 80–85% for hydrogen, direct methane and direct carbon FC, respectively, would not be out of reach. Thus, the Ausubel–Marchetti's diagram prognosticates the widespread introduction of high-efficiency FC-based power generators to the marketplace in about two decades.
4 Decreasing carbon intensity (f) factor
The main approaches to reduce the carbon intensity of the economy most frequently discussed in the literature are:
• expansion of the nuclear energy sector,
• drastic increase in the use of renewable energy resources,
• deployment of carbon capture and storage technology, and
• switching to low-carbon and carbon-free fuels and energy carriers.
There are a number of daunting technical, economic and political challenges and pitfalls associated with the introduction of these carbon remediation measures to the marketplace. For the majority of promising low-carbon technologies, competition with fossil incumbents is an uphill battle now, but this may change as many companies realize that reducing their carbon intensity could be actually profitable.17 The carbon mitigation potential of the above options has been analyzed in detail by Jacobson in a 2009 review paper,22 thus, the objective of this section is to highlight the latest developments in these areas and briefly discuss the near-to-mid term outlook for the low-carbon technologies in the light of the current trends.
4.1 Nuclear option
Nuclear energy does not inherently involve any direct production of greenhouse gases, and it is considered an important carbon mitigation option, which could substantially alleviate the potential power shortage problem without disturbing the Earth's fragile carbon balance. (Note that several authors stress that nuclear energy is not a completely “carbon-free” source, since its life-cycle GHG emissions are on the order of 65 g CO2-eq. per kW h.)23 It is widely acknowledged that the nuclear resource alone cannot cover the ever-increasing energy needs of humankind: this would have required the construction of a new 1 GW nuclear plant somewhere in the world every other day for the next 50 years.24 Such growth in nuclear power is not feasible today due to severe constraints in cost, nuclear fuel supply, site availability, safety, waste disposal and public acceptance.25
Since 2005, the growth in nuclear capacity has slowed worldwide with the total number of nuclear power plants decreasing from 444 in 2002 to 437 today6 generating about 16% of the world's electricity (21% of the U.S. electricity). Fukushima-Daiichi nuclear disaster (triple meltdowns) further exacerbated already heated debates about the future of nuclear power. In the wake of the accident, Germany announced plans to abandon nuclear energy by 2022, effectively shutting down all 17 nuclear power plants and planning to replace them with renewable energy sources and high-efficiency gas and coal heat/power plants. Japan announced plans to reduce its reliance on nuclear energy. On the other hand, France where nuclear power now accounts for about 80% of the country's electricity production still decisively remains in favor of nuclear energy source. The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) task force commissioned after the Fukushima accident concluded that the risk of a similar accident in the U.S. is “very, very small”, but any risk would be inherently unacceptable, and nuclear power regulators should learn lessons from Japan's nuclear crisis.26 After almost four decades of complete freeze, in February 2012, the U.S. NRC approved a construction and operating license for two new units at the existing Vogtle nuclear power plant in Georgia, and the agency is expected to soon approve a license for another two-unit project in South Carolina.27
The Fukushima nuclear disaster (despite its appalling consequences) was an important test demonstrating the role of nuclear energy as an essential carbon mitigation policy. Following the accident, Japan took 38 of its 54 nuclear reactors offline.28 This caused a substantial drop in energy supply in the country, which was mostly compensated by the increased usage of fossil fuels in the power generation sector (along with energy efficiency measures). As a result of this measure, in 2011, Japan's CO2 emissions increased by 28 million tons, or 2.4% of total.5 Despite the Fukushima disaster, IEA projects a 70% increase in global nuclear output by 2035 with large capacity additions in China, India, South Korea and Russia.18 At the same time, in its “Low Nuclear Case” scenario, IEA considers possible implications of a substantial shift away from nuclear power due to “a second thought” or unforeseen developments. Overall, IEA estimates the carbon reduction potential of nuclear energy by 2050 at 8% of total.13 Nuclear fusion energy is considered a long-term option: most experts agree that, most likely, it will contribute to the overall energy supply by the end of this century.
4.2 Renewables
Renewable energy (RE) is no longer considered a very expensive, immature technological option for curbing carbon emissions. The portfolio of RE technologies is becoming increasingly cost-competitive in many countries as the RE market expansion has been accompanied by significant cost reductions. Among RE sources, wind power is the most commercially significant resource (after hydropower) experiencing the highest growth rate. In 2010, China overtook USA as the country with the largest installed wind power capacity (42.3 vs. 40.2 GW, respectively).6 The Global Wind Energy Council projects reaching 1000 GW global capacity by 2020.29
Solar PV capacity dramatically increased in 2010/2011 worldwide with the major increase linked to Germany. In May 2012, German solar power plants set a world record by producing 22 GW of electricity, which met one third of electricity needs on a work day and almost half of the demand on a weekend (note that this electric capacity is equivalent of about 20 nuclear power plants).30 Currently, Germany gets about 20% of its overall annual electricity from RE sources (solar, wind and biomass). Due to switching to RE, Germany aims to cut its GHG emissions by the year 2020 by 40% from the 1990 level.
In the 2012 report “Renewable Electricity Futures Study”, a panel of U.S. experts analyze the implications and challenges of renewable electricity generation levels – from 30% to 90% of all U.S. electricity generation from RE technologies by 2050.31 The panel concluded that “Renewable energy resources, accessed with commercially available generation technologies, could adequately supply 80% of total U.S. electricity generation in 2050 while balancing supply and demand on the hourly basis”.31 To achieve this goal it would be necessary to combine an optimal mix of RE technologies with a mix of flexible conventional generation and grid storage, the additions of transmission lines, more responsive loads and changes in power system operations. Although in many analyses the wide-spread deployment of intermittent renewable sources such as solar and wind is linked to the necessity of a fossil fuel backup (e.g., NG power plants), there are some studies pointing to the possibility of providing nearly all (99.8%) of the electricity by combination and efficient management of renewable sources in places like California.32
The role of biomass and biofuels as an effective carbon mitigation option is less certain. A recent U.S. National Research Council report on national biofuels policy concluded that the U.S. will unlikely meet its 2022 target on the amount of cellulosic ethanol and biodiesel that was mandated by the U.S. Congress in the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS).33 The Council also pointed out that the RFS may be an ineffective policy for reducing global greenhouse gas emissions because of uncertainties in the environmental impact of biofuel production and associated land-use. These developments add more heat to conflicting assessments of biofuels as genuine carbon-neutral fuels. Biofuels will continue to play an important role in the portfolio of alternative fuels, because not all transportation can be electrified, and there are areas (e.g., aviation, heavy duty vehicles, etc.) where the next-generation biofuels (so-called “drop-in” fuels similar to petroleum-based fuels) will be most preferable.
IEA estimates the reductions in CO2 emissions due to the expansion in renewable energy sources at 21% of total (or by 8.8 Gt CO2) by 2050.13 Achieving these goals would require large investments in power transmission networks and some technological advances, especially in large-scale storage of intermittent wind/solar electricity, further reductions in the cost of PV electricity, development of intercontinental super-grids, etc.
4.3 Carbon capture and storage (CCS)
CCS is an essential part of the portfolio of carbon mitigation options. The objective of CCS is to prevent CO2 from entering the atmosphere by capturing it from industrial sources and safely storing it in different (mostly, geological) carbon sinks.34 A comprehensive overview of the current status of CCS technologies has recently been reported.35 As of 2011, there were 8 large-scale CCS projects in operation around the world and six projects under construction with the overall CO2 storage capacity of 33 million tons per year.36 Globally, there are close to three hundred active or planned CCS-related activities – an indication of a growing commitment to this technological option. Most of CCS projects are concentrated in North America (U.S. and Canada), followed by Europe (Norway, UK, Netherlands and others), Australia and China. The technology has been proven on a commercial scale since 1996 (the Sleipner project in North Sea, Norway), so no major technological breakthroughs will be necessary for the implementation of this technology. Nevertheless, the CCS technology is not currently used in the power generation market mostly because of considerable energy penalties and associated additional large capital and operational costs for capturing and storing CO2. Today, all commercially operating CCS projects utilize CO2 capture technology as part of an already established industrial process, e.g., they use CO2 to generate revenue through enhanced oil recovery (EOR). It is widely acknowledged that the penetration of CCS technologies into power generation and industrial (e.g., cement manufacturing) markets will face enormous challenges considering the scale of the emissions and highly distributed nature of CO2 point sources versus a prevailing centralized approach for CO2 capturing and handling. In the IEA's ETP-2012 scenario, the CCS share of overall CO2 reductions will reach 14% by 2050.13
The CCS technology, however, is not without a controversy. CCS opponents are concerned about its efficacy and long-term ecological uncertainties, and that CCS would provide only a temporary relief and make humankind even more dependent on fossil fuels, thus, making the necessary changes later even more difficult. Some experts argue that due to the relatively high life-cycle emission rate of the coal-CCS technology (255–440 g CO2-eq. per kW h), it does not have any advantages over other carbon mitigation options.22 There is also a widespread Not-In-My-Backyard (NIMBY) attitude toward CCS. Recently, due to a strong public opposition (concerned with possible leaks and potential health hazards), Germany's Bundesrat has struck down a law for testing CCS technology.37 It should be noted, however, that to a large extent, the NIMBYism stems from the lack of information: a recent Eurobarometer survey of the public awareness of the CCS technology in Europe showed that 67% of public have never heard of the technology, and just 10% know what it is.38 These developments, if further persist, may hinder the dynamics of the market penetration of the CCS technology. IEA emphasizes that if CCS is not widely deployed in the 2020s, this will put an extraordinary burden on other low-carbon technologies with potentially negative implications for carbon reduction policies.13
5 Transition to low-carbon and carbon-free fuels
5.1 The Decarbonization Triangle concept
Switching from high-carbon (coal, peat and oil) to low-carbon and carbon-free fuels is considered a Holy Grail of the decarbonization strategy. The evolutionary model of the substitution of primary energy sources (accompanied by the increase in H/C ratio) projects methane (the major component of NG) and later hydrogen to take over the energy market. Besides methane and hydrogen, non-carbon electricity will be an important part of the progressive primary energy substitution process. All three players: methane, non-carbon electricity and hydrogen are well positioned to catalyze the decarbonization of the global energy system (the author suggests to term this three-way energy system “Decarbonization Triangle”, DT) (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the Decarbonization Triangle concept. e− denotes electricity generated from low- and non-carbon energy sources (solar, wind, geo, nuclear, NG/CCS, etc.). 
The major advantages of the DT system are in its flexibility and functionality: all three “pillars” of the system are interconvertible (with high energy conversion efficiency), complementary to each other, and in many cases they display synergism. Nature's building blocks: water, oxygen and CO2 are regenerable agents in this closed loop energy system. Table 1 outlines the processes and devices that form the basis of the DT concept, along with the data on operational temperatures, energy conversion efficiencies and the current status of development.
Table 1 Reactions and processes forming the basis for the Decarbonization Triangle




No.
Reaction
Process/device
Temperature, °C
Efficiencya, %
Status





a State-of-the-art or projected energy efficiencies.
b E and H2 are the electricity and hydrogen generated from non-carbon and low-carbon sources (solar, wind, geo, nuclear, NG/CCS, etc.).
c An estimate.





1
H2O + Eb → H2 + 1/2O2
Water electrolysis


• Alkaline
50–100
75–8039
Commercial


• PEM
80–100
80–9040
Commercial


• High temperature steam
800–1000
80–9040
Pilot


2
H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O + E
Hydrogen fuel cells


• Alkaline FC
90–100
50–6041
Commercial


• PEM FC
50–100
45–6041
Commercial


• Solid oxide FC
700–1000
50–6041
Pilot


• Molten carbonate FC
600–700
45–5041
Pilot


3
CH4 + 2H2O → 4H2 + CO2
Steam reforming
700–900
80–8942
Commercial


4
4H2 + CO2 → CH4 + 2H2O
Methanation process
350–400
65–7043
Commercial


5
CH4 + 2O2→ CO2 + 2H2O + E
Gas turbine combined cycle
1250–1400
50–6044
Commercial


Solid oxide FC
800–1000
50–6041
Pilot


6
CO2 + 2H2O + E → CH4 + 2O2
Electrochemical reduction
25–80
60–70c
R&D45




The complementary and synergistic aspects of the DT are particularly evident from the analysis of its right arm (H2-electricity). Besides the fact that electricity and H2 are interchangeable with high energy conversion efficiency (via use of FC and electrolyzers), together they can offer solutions that are nonexistent for either one acting alone. For example, unlike hydrogen, electricity cannot be stored in very large quantities; but on the other hand, unlike electricity, H2 cannot transfer information or generate light.46 The complementary nature of electricity and hydrogen manifests itself most vividly in the energy systems where hydrogen is used as an energy storage medium for intermittent renewable (solar, wind) electricity47 or an enabler of peak-load electricity.48 In the Hydrogen Intermediate and Peak Electrical System (HIPES) analyzed by Forsberg, off-peak nuclear electricity will be used to produce hydrogen (and oxygen) that will be stored and then used in H2–O2 steam cycles or FC to produce peak electricity.48 This system has the potential to convert the peak-load electricity demand into base-load demand, thus expanding the markets where nuclear electricity is competitive.
In combination, hydrogen and electricity (via use of FC) have an enhanced capacity to exergize energy systems, because the H2–FC systems provide more electrical and thermal exergy services per unit of primary energy compared to conventional systems (note that electricity is the pure form of exergy). In these systems, thermal energy can be provided to an end-user in a wide range of temperatures varying from 80 °C (for home heating) to 500 °C to 900 °C (industry) depending on the type of FC used (PEMFC, MCFC and SOFC, respectively). Thus, the combination of hydrogen and electricity would drastically increase the amount of useful energy obtained from an energy source via complementing the prevailing thermodynamics of Carnot-limited thermal systems with electrochemical systems such as FC and batteries.46 In transportation, the implementation of DT would boost the use of electric-drive vehicles (see Section 5.3).
Hydrogen and methane (the base of the triangle) are easily inter-convertible via steam methane reforming (SMR) and methanation (or Sabatier) reactions with relatively high efficiencies. Both fuels can be used in efficient gas turbines and internal combustion engines (ICE). In some respect, fuel characteristics of the hydrogen–methane mixtures are superior to those of the components used separately (hence, synergism): the H2–CH4 mix has greater volumetric energy density than pure H2 (which is essential for onboard storage), and it features improved combustion characteristics and reduced GHG emissions (CO2 and NOx) compared to methane used alone (environmental benefits).
Besides being interconvertible, the components of the DT system can supplement and back-up each other. For example, in lieu of large-scale electricity storage systems, high-efficiency NG combined cycle (NGCC) power generators can supplement intermittent solar/wind energy sources to achieve round-the-clock generation of electricity with minimal carbon emissions (for example, the “Archimede” power plant in Sicily, Italy is a combination of a solar thermal plant and NGCC).49 NG can serve as a low-carbon back-up for coal/CCS if the pace of CCS deployment is slower than expected (for technical, environmental or political reasons). NG can fill the gap for these and other technologies well into the mid century and possibly beyond.

Fig. 7 provides a quantitative assessment of the carbon reduction potential of the DT-based energy system.
 Fig. 7  The percentage of CO2 emission reduction from electricity generation if main elements of the DT concept would be implemented. CO2 emissions produced in 2009 by power plants using the world energy mix (500 kg CO2 per MW h)4 are used as a baseline. Note that only direct CO2 emissions are presented in this diagram, without accounting for life-cycle emissions. 1 – All fossil-based electricity is generated by conventional coal power plants.50 2 – All fossil-based electricity is generated by advanced coal-IGCC plants.50 3 – All fossil fuel power plants are converted to NGCC technology. 4 – Solar/wind electricity without energy storage with 40% NGCC backup. 5 – Solar/wind electricity with energy storage and 10% NGCC backup. 6 – NGCC plant equipped with CCS (90% carbon capture). 7 – Solar/wind electricity and nuclear with hydrogen peak load. 8 – Combination of all renewables with solar thermal and/or hydrogen storage. 

Fig. 7 depicts the percentage of reduction in CO2 emissions from the DT-based electricity generation systems against the CO2 emissions from electricity produced by the world energy mix (in 2009, it was 500 kg CO2 per MW h).4 For the comparison, CO2 emissions from conventional coal and advanced coal IGCC power plants are also included in the diagram. It was estimated that if all fossil fuel based power generation (globally, about 67% of total) would be converted to NGCC technology, this would result in 54% reduction in CO2 emissions compared to the current world average (which includes hydro and nuclear). Note that switching power plants from coal to NG would benefit both energy and carbon intensity factors: not only NG burns cleaner (per kW h of electricity generated, NG releases 330–370 g of CO2, compared to 830–940 g of CO2 for coal, a reduction of 60–65%),4 but producing electricity using NGCC (nearly 60% efficient) is significantly more efficient than using state-of-the-art ultra-supercritical (USC) coal-fired plants (47% efficient).50 Despite the relative cleanness of NG as a fuel, its increased usage will eventually necessitate equipping NG-fueled power plants with CCS systems in order to fully realize their carbon mitigation potential (NGCC plants equipped with CCS systems capturing 90% of carbon would reduce CO2 emissions by 95% compared to the current world energy mix). The largest (direct) carbon reductions (close to 100%, under favorable conditions) can be achieved by various combinations of carbon-free electricity sources (e.g., solar, wind, geo, nuclear) with energy storage and H2-based peak-load electricity.
The DT-based energy systems have potential to accelerate the emergence of new technologies that hold the promise of higher productivity, environmental compatibility and lesser quantities of energy-intensive materials (“dematerialization”) (e.g., the use of hydrogen, which has the lowest atomic mass of all elements, would dramatically reduce the total mass flow associated with energy activities). In the event of an imminent danger of reaching a “tipping point” (an uncontrollable increase in atmospheric CO2 due to strong positive carbon cycle feedbacks), the DT may present a viable solution via capture and conversion of atmospheric CO2 to CH4 (and further to other products, if necessary). A recent report by the Royal Society (UK) concluded that atmospheric CO2 removal methods should be regarded as preferable to the Solar Radiation Management method as a potential climate change mitigation action in a long run.51
Although many elements of the DT system already exist and function on a large scale (see Table 1), its take-over of the energy and transportation markets will most likely accelerate after 2020 with the accent gradually shifting from methane to non-carbon electricity and hydrogen. In the following sub-sections, the role of all three components of the DT system as efficient decarbonization tools is analyzed.
5.2 Advent of Methane Economy
Methane (NG) is the cleanest of fossil fuels, and according to many analyses replacing coal with NG is the most cost-effective near-term carbon mitigation option. Besides environmental benefits, the major advantages of methane as the basis of the prospective methane-based energy system (Methane Economy) are as follows:
1. abundant conventional and unconventional resources (larger than previously thought) geographically well-spread across the world,
2. existing infrastructure, ease of transport (gas pipelines, liquid NG tankers),
3. flexibility of use (power generation, industry, transportation and commercial/residential sectors),
4. safety: in many applications, methane is safer than gasoline and diesel since it is lighter than air and quickly disperses (e.g., in the event of spill or leak),
5. no on-site storage of fuels and disposal of solid waste (e.g., ash) is necessary,
6. in general, lower capital cost, easier maintenance, smaller physical footprint of NG-based units (compared to coal, heating oil),
7. energy security (via fuel diversification).
IEA predicts a “Golden Age” for NG in its 2011 World Energy Outlook (WEO) report.50 The following is a brief outline of major prerequisites of establishing the basis of the global Methane Economy.

NG resources. 
IEA in its GAS Scenario estimates the global ultimately recoverable resources of conventional gas at about 404 trillion cubic meters (TCM) at the indicative production cost of US$1.9 per GJ–US$8.6 per GJ (based on the current technology).50 These resources are equal to more than 120 years of global gas consumption at the current rate. The ultimately recoverable resources of unconventional gas (in TCM) and their production costs (in US$ per GJ, in italics) are estimated as follows: shale gas – 204, 2.9–6.7; coal bed methane (CBM) – 118, 2.9–7.6; and tight gas – 84, 2.9–7.6.50 Conventional and unconventional gas resources when combined could sustain gas production for over 250 years at the current rate. The GAS Scenario also projects that global primary NG demand will increase from 3.3 TCM in 2010 to 5.1 TCM in 2035 (an increase of 50%) and will account for 25% of the world's energy mix (overtaking coal between 2025 and 2030). The gas resource base is immense and geographically well-spread over the globe with each region having at least 75 years worth of gas at the current consumption rate, which has very important geopolitical implications. Naturally occurring methane hydrates represent an additional enormous source of unconventional methane fuel. In a recent report, the U.S. National Research Council reiterated an increasing confidence that although a number of technical challenges still remain, none of them is insurmountable, and commercial production of methane fuel from hydrates could be realized in the U.S. by 2025.52


Trends in NG demand. 
Due to flexibility and versatility of NG as an energy source, a broad increase in NG demand is expected across practically all sectors: power generation, buildings, industry, transportation, etc. The NG demand in different sectors by the year 2035 is shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Current and projected world primary NG demand by sector. “Other energy and non-energy use” includes oil and gas production and refining, gas-to-liquid processes, petrochemistry and distribution losses. BCM – billion cubic meters. Based on IEA data.50 
Power generation will remain the largest source of NG demand; it will see the largest gain (about 0.8 TCM) among all sectors between now and 2035 (exceeding 2 TCM by 2035).50 Recent discovery of major shale gas reserves in the U.S., China and other countries could boost the transition from coal-fired to efficient NGCC plants. Currently, in the U.S., at a gas price of $5.6 per GJ, the cost of electricity generation by NGCC is about $65 per MW h, which is close to that of coal-fired generation without CCS.50 In China, USC coal plants produce electricity at the cost of $42 per MW h, which is about two times cheaper than that from NGCC at a NG price of US$(9–11) per GJ.50 Thus, increasing the use of NG-generated power in China is currently largely driven not by economical but government policies concerned with local air pollution and diversification of the energy mix.


Methane in transportation. 
Low prices and a large supply will make NG increasingly competitive with conventional fuels (gasoline, diesel) in the land transportation market. Other incentives for switching to NG in transport have to do with the fuel security (in the U.S., 98% of all NG supply is local or from Canada) and drastically reduced local air pollution. IEA projects the increase in the use of NG in road transport to 0.155 TCM by 2035, mostly at the expense of oil, which will drop by 60 million ton oil equivalent (Mtoe) (or 1.2 million barrels per day).50 The lack of refueling infrastructure may hinder the growth of NG vehicles (NGVs) sales to private consumers, although, this factor plays a lesser role for commercial fleets (e.g., buses, municipal vehicles, public transportation, taxis, delivery trucks) that have an access to central refueling depots.
On-board storage of NG is currently viewed as another major bottleneck to its wide-spread use, especially, in light passenger vehicles. Most of current NGVs use compressed NG stored in cylindrical containers at a pressure of 200–300 atm. In this arrangement, NGVs have much larger fuel tanks than gasoline cars and require more frequent refueling. Recent developments in adsorbed NG (ANG) storage technology (e.g., use of metal–organic frameworks) may lead to significant reductions in the storage tank pressure and volume.53 The reduction of on-board NG storage pressure to 35 atm would allow using an existing NG pipeline system for refueling (in principle, home refueling would also be possible). Additionally, low pressure would make it possible to use lighter materials for the storage tank, and, thus, reduce car weight and improve fuel efficiency.
Currently, there are about 13 million NGVs worldwide with the largest number in Asia (Pakistan, Iran, India) and Latin America (Argentina, Brazil). In the U.S., NGVs remain a niche market, however, their share is expected to significantly grow due to the abundant supplies of shale gas. More stringent standards on GHG emissions and air quality could also boost the deployment of NGVs. IEA projections put about 186 million NGVs on the road by 2035.50 As a result, CO2 emissions from the road-transportation sector will drop by 165 million tons in 2035.


Environmental aspects of Methane Economy. 
Due to relatively high global warming potential (GWP) of methane (25 times higher than that of CO2 over a century and 72 times higher over two decades),54 there are concerns over an adverse environmental impact of the widespread use of NG. At the current stage of technological development, NG leakage rate from valves, pipes, compression stations, venting and purging is estimated to be about 1% per year. In the methane economy, this rate of leakage may not be acceptable, and new technological solutions will have to be implemented to significantly decrease the leakage rate. There are claims from different concerned groups that shale gas production by hydraulic fracturing (HF) technology has an adverse environmental impact (e.g., it contaminates drinking water aquifers, induces earthquakes, etc.). These and other issues with regard to possible adverse ecological and health-related effects of HF technology are still hotly debated.

5.3 Electrification as an efficient decarbonization strategy
Electricity is a versatile energy carrier that is increasingly substituting fossil fuels in many areas, e.g., industrial processes (resistive heating vs. fuel combustion), transportation (battery-electric vehicles), household appliances, and others. Most future energy scenarios predict that this trend will intensify in the near-to-mid term future with an emphasis shifting from high-carbon to low-carbon to non-carbon electricity. It is projected that as a result of electricity-driven decarbonization measures, carbon emissions from electricity generation will drop from the current worldwide average of 500 g CO2 per kW h to about 25 g CO2 per kW h by 2050.4 Currently, nuclear sector is the major producer of non-carbon electricity followed by hydro-electric plants and relatively small share of renewable sources (11.0, 2.1 and 1.2% of total, respectively).55
Switching from the direct uses of fossil fuels to electricity has tremendous potential to reduce the carbon intensity factor. In a recent analysis of the measures aiming at drastically reducing carbon emissions in California (the largest state in the U.S. and the world's sixth largest economy), the authors estimated that the share of electricity as an end-use energy will need to be increased from the current 15% to 55% in 2050 in order (along with other measures) to meet the target of reducing 2050 emissions 80% below the 1990 level (which is consistent with the IPCC trajectory for stabilizing atmospheric GHG concentrations at 450 ppm CO2-eq. by mid-century).56 The largest share of GHG emission reductions will result from electrification of the transportation sector, where 70% of vehicle-miles traveled will be powered by electricity (plug-in hybrid and battery electric vehicles) (the remaining 20% and 10% will be powered by biofuels and conventional fossil fuels, respectively). In other sectors, 65% of non-heating/cooling fuel use in buildings and 50% industrial fuel uses will also be electrified. IEA projects that by 2050, the share of electric-drive vehicles (plug-in hybrid, battery-electric and FC vehicles) in the light-duty transportation market will reach 80%.57 The profound decarbonization effect of the end-use electrification can be attributed to the fact that electric/electrochemical processes are much more efficient than thermal/thermochemical processes (that are constrained by Carnot efficiency). Of particular importance are FC-based systems that can generate simultaneously electricity and heat with very high exergetic efficiency (see Section 5.1). More detailed discussion of the exergization aspects of electricity can be found in publications by Winter.46,58
5.4 Transition to Hydrogen Economy
The gradual transition to hydrogen fuel will mark further increase in the H/C ratio, essentially, with no further limits to the increase in this ratio. In accordance with the historical fuel progression trend, this would signal the gradual and unrelenting penetration of hydrogen into the energy market, cleansing it of carbon and establishing “hydrogen metabolism” (as Ausubel put it).59 Like methane, hydrogen can reduce both energy and carbon intensity factors in the KI equation, but with a potentially greater effect. However, unlike methane, hydrogen does not occur in nature in a free form, thus it has to be produced from water and primary energy sources such as fossil, nuclear and renewable resources (with inevitable energy penalties). From this viewpoint, hydrogen is an energy carrier (or a vector), similar to electricity. The discussion of different aspects of the hydrogen economy is widely reported in the literature.60–62 Global commercial production of hydrogen is estimated to be about 65 million tons per year,63 however, most of it is used in non-energy application areas: ammonia production, oil refineries, food industry, metallurgy, etc. SMR is a main process for the commercial manufacturing of hydrogen (48% of total), with the remaining hydrogen produced from petroleum (30%), coal (18%), and water electrolysis (about 4%).63 However, SMR plants are major sources of CO2 emissions (about 9 kg CO2 is emitted per kg H2 produced),42 which will eventually necessitate coupling them with CCS.
Despite the rapid progress and major advances in the development of hydrogen technologies, significant challenges must be overcome on the path to mature hydrogen economy. Due to the enormous cost of building a new hydrogen infrastructure, hydrogen will most likely be introduced to the marketplace through decentralized hydrogen production units based on SMR and renewables-electrolysis technologies (e.g., wind-electrolysis, solar PV-electrolysis). This will be followed by a transition to large-scale, centralized hydrogen production from low- and non-carbon sources such as NG/CCS, nuclear and renewable sources. The potential introduction of carbon reduction policies and incentives (e.g., carbon tax in the range of US$25–$50 per ton of CO2) would considerably boost hydrogen's competitiveness with conventional fuels.63 According to the IEA projections, under favorable assumptions, a gradual penetration of hydrogen fuel into the world market could start around 2020, with its energy use reaching 12.5–22 EJ (exajoules) per year by 2050. This amount of hydrogen would be enough to power about 700 million FC vehicles (or 30% of the global fleet of passenger cars) and cover other industrial applications.63 The establishment of the matured hydrogen economy will conclude the historical decarbonization process.
6 Concluding remarks
The recent cessation of the positive historical decarbonization trend could pose a serious challenge for the success of the global mitigation efforts to stabilize atmospheric CO2 concentration. The drastic increase in global CO2 emissions during the last two decades can be attributed to the “detour” to coal by populous rapidly developing countries attempting a speedy economic “catch-up” with industrialized countries, and in doing so trying to secure the most reliable energy supply at the lowest possible cost. On the positive side, the industrialized countries that have ratified the Kyoto Protocol plus the non-ratifying USA have emitted approximately 7.5% less CO2 in 2010 than in 1990, and, thus, collectively remain on the target to meet the Protocol's 5.2% carbon reduction objective.6
The Fukushima-Daiichi nuclear disaster further highlighted opposing viewpoints and heated debates over the future of the important carbon mitigation option. A widespread NIMBY attitude toward carbon storage, wind, energy transmission and other low-carbon technologies adds to the confusion of the current decarbonization roadmap. Despite these ongoing worrisome trends, there are signs of positive decarbonizing tendencies in developing countries, e.g., booming renewables market, a shift from coal- to NG-fired plants, an explosive growth of NG vehicles and restriction in sales of fuel inefficient cars in Asia and South America, rapid expansion of nuclear power in Asia, etc. Many of these positive trends are facilitated by government policies encouraging fuel diversification, deployment of clean energy sources and concerns about local air pollution.
Notwithstanding the fact of being number one carbon emitter, China is now the world's leader in wind and solar energy technologies (currently, 9 out of 10 major PV manufacturing plants are located in China), and it has very ambitious goals for the implementation of renewable resources (15% of total energy by 2020) and reduction in carbon and energy intensities of GDP by 40–45% and 40%, respectively, below 2005 level by 2020.64
Practically all future energy scenarios and projections emphasize the decisive role of NG in near-to-mid term decarbonization of the global energy system. A recent surge in supply of NG (including shale gas) provides an ideal opportunity to substantially curb CO2 emissions from burning fossil fuels while supporting economic growth. However, despite the fact that NG is the cleanest fossil fuel available, its use as a dominant energy source would generate enormous amounts of CO2 emissions (surpassing those of other fossil fuels) by mid-century. Thus, a wide deployment of CCS technology and transition to non-carbon energy sources would be necessary. Many projections indicate that NG contribution to the global energy market would reach a peak around 2050–2060 before starting to decline and giving way to alternatives.65,66 The availability of NG would (expectantly) allow for the necessary time to deploy carbon-free energy sources.
Since the reductions in energy intensity of the economy promise the largest near-term dividends, experts agree that the national energy utilization efficiencies worldwide should be raised by about 2% per year – the target that has already been reached in some countries. Low- and non-carbon energy sources can contribute more than one third of targeted carbon reductions by mid-century. However, swinging off the current carbon-intensive path and stabilizing atmospheric CO2 concentration at acceptable levels would require overcoming enormous technological challenges and an extensive transformation of the global energy system. The combination and progressive introduction to the world market of all available low-carbon and carbon-free energy solutions seems to be a realistic strategy to meet ever-growing clean energy demands. In the near term, NG and the lower cost renewables (wind, biofuels) are expected to play an ever-increasing role. In the medium-term future, more expensive options such as solar PV, concentrated solar power (CSP), geothermal, next-generation (high-temperature) nuclear and CCS technologies will enter the marketplace. More proactive community outreach activities have to be pursued to overcome NIMBYism and build public awareness and confidence in CCS, nuclear, wind and other carbon mitigation technologies. Carbon reduction targets set by the IEA in its BLUE Map57 and ETP-201213 scenarios are achievable with existing and emerging technologies as proven by the experience of developed countries consistently reducing their energy and carbon intensities, and reassured by the encouraging signs of positive decarbonization trends in developing countries. If further strengthened, these positive emerging trends may put decarbonization back on its evolutionary path.
Nomenclature

ANGAdsorbed natural gas
BAUSBusiness-as-usual scenario
BCMBillion cubic meters
CO2-eq.CO2 equivalent
CBMCoal bed methane
CCSCarbon capture and storage
CSPConcentrated solar power
DTDecarbonization Triangle

E
Global primary energy consumption

e
Energy intensity of world gross domestic product
e−Electricity (in Decarbonization Triangle)
EJExa (1018) Joule
EOREnhanced oil recovery
ETPEnergy Technology Perspectives report (IEA)
EUEuropean Union

F
Global CO2 emissions flux from fossil fuel combustion

f
Carbon intensity of energy
FCFuel cell

G
Gross world product

g
Global average per capita gross domestic product
GDPGross domestic product
ΔGFree energy change of a fuel oxidation reaction
GHGGreenhouse gas
GWGiga (109) Watt
GWPGlobal warming potential
GtGiga (109) ton
ΔHEnthalpy change of a fuel oxidation reaction

h
Carbon intensity of gross domestic product
HFHydraulic fracturing
H/CHydrogen to carbon atomic ratio in fossil fuels
ICEInternal combustion engine
IIASAInternational Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
IEAInternational Energy Agency
IGCCIntegrated gasification combined cycle
IPCCIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
KIKaya Identity
kW hKilo (103) Watt hour
MCFCMolten carbonate fuel cell
MW hMega (106) Watt hour
NGNatural gas
NGCCNatural gas combined cycle
NGVNatural gas vehicle
NRCU.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
NIMBY“not-in-my-backyard”
OECDOrganization for Economic Cooperation and Development

P
World population
PEMFCPolymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell
PVPhoto-voltaic
RERenewable energy
ΔSEntropy change of a fuel oxidation reaction
SMRSteam methane reforming
SOFCSolid oxide fuel cell

T
Temperature
TCMTrillion (1012) cubic meters
toeTon oil equivalent

V, VoOperating and open circuit voltages of a fuel cell
USCUltra-supercritical
WEOWorld Energy Outlook

Greek symbols


η
Actual efficiency of a fuel cell

μ
Fuel utilization coefficient

Acknowledgements
The author thanks Prof. T. N. Veziroglu and Dr A. T-Raissi for fruitful discussions of topics covered in this article.
References
N. Nakićenović, Daedalus, 1996, 125, 95–112 Search PubMed .
A. Grübler and N. Nakićenović, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change, 1996, 53, 97–110 CrossRef .
R. Aguilera and R. Aguilera, J. Pet. Technol., 2009, 34–39 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency (IEA), CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion, IEA Report, 2011 Edition, Paris, France,  2011 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency (IEA), Global carbon-dioxide emissions increase by 1.0Gt in 2011 to record high, http://iea.org/newsroomandevents/news/2012/may/name, 27216,en.html, accessed June  2012 Search PubMed .

          J. Olivier, G. Janssens-Maenhaut, J. Peters and J. Wilson, Long-term trend in global CO2 emissions, European Commission's Joint Research Center, PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, The Hague, The Netherlands,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Raupach, G. Marland, P. Ciais, C. Le Quere, J. Canadell, G. Klepper and C. Field, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10288–10293 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Pielke, Jr, The Climate Fix, Basic Books, NY,  2010, pp. 61–80 Search PubMed .
R. Pielke, T. Wigley and C. Green, Nature, 2008, 452, 531–532 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Yamaji, R. Matsuhashi, Y. Nagata and Y. Kaya, An integrated system for CO2/Energy/GNP analysis: case studies on economic measures for CO2 reduction in Japan. Workshop on CO2 Reduction and Removal: Measures for the Next Century. Intern. Inst. Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria,  March 19, 1991 Search PubMed .
M. Hoffert, K. Caldeira, A. Jain, E. Haites, D. Harvey, S. Potter, M. Schlesinger, S. Schneider, R. Watts, T. Wigley and D. Wuebbles, Nature, 1998, 395, 881–884 CrossRef CAS .

          United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Fact Sheet: the Kyoto Protocol,  February 2011, http://unfccc.int/files/press/backgrounders/application/pdf/fact_sheet_the_kyoto_protocol.pdf, accessed 8 October 2012 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 2012 – Pathways to a Clean Energy System, IEA, Paris, France,  2012, ISBN 978-92-64-17488-7 Search PubMed .
A. B. Lovins, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 15–18 Search PubMed .

          European Commission, Strong impetus to energy savings and energy efficiency, http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/11/770,  2011, accessed December 2011 Search PubMed .
L. Jiao and R. Stone, Science, 2011, 334, 886–887 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Lovins, Sci. Am., 2005, 74–83 CrossRef .

          International Energy Agency, World Energy Outlook 2011, ISBN 978-92-64-12413-4, Paris, France,  2011 Search PubMed .

          K. Cohen (ExxonMobil), Our most powerful energy solution? Efficiency, http://www.exxonmobilperspectives.com/2010/11/29/our-most-powerful-energy-solution-efficiency, accessed October 2011 Search PubMed .

          J. Ausubel and C. Marchetti, in Technological Trajectories and the Human Environment, ed. J. Ausubel and D. Lanhford, National Academy Press, Washington, DC,  1997, pp. 110–134 Search PubMed .
D. Cao, Y. Sun and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 167, 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jacobson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 148–173 CAS .
M. Lenzen, Energy Convers. Manage., 2008, 49, 2178–2199 CrossRef CAS .

          BES, Basic research needs for solar energy utilization, Report of the U.S. DOE Basic Energy Sciences Workshop on Solar Energy Utilization, Publ, Argonne Nat. Lab.,  2005 Search PubMed .

          BES, Report of US DOE Office of Science BES Workshop. Basic Research Needs for the Hydrogen Economy, Washington DC,  2004 Search PubMed .
G. Hess, Chem. Eng. News, 2011, 89, 14 Search PubMed .
K. Maize, Power, 2012, 44 Search PubMed .
J. Hansen, Oil, 2011, 49 Search PubMed .

          Global Wind Energy Council, Global Wind Report. Annual Market Update 2010, Brussels, Belgium,  2011, http://www.gwec.net/fileadmin/documents/Publications/Global_Wind_2007_report/GWEC%20Global%20Wind%20Report%202010%20low%20res.pdf, accessed October 2011 Search PubMed .

          E. Kirschenbaum, Germany sets new solar power record, institute says. Reuters, http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/05/26/us-climate-germany-solar-idUSBRE84P0FI20120526, accessed June 2012 Search PubMed .

Renewable Electricity Futures Study, ed. M. Hand, et al., National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2012, NREL/TP-6A20-52409, Golden, CO, http://www.nrel.gov/analysis/re_futures/, accessed June 2012 Search PubMed .
E. Hart and M. Jacobson, Renew. Energ., 2011, 36, 2278–2286 CrossRef .

          U.S. National Research Council, Renewable Fuel Standard: Potential Economic and Environmental Effects of US Biofuel Policy, National Academies Press,  2011, ISBN 978-0-309-18751-0, http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13105, accessed December 2011 Search PubMed .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage, ed. B. Metz, O. Davidson, H. de Coninck, M. Loos and A. Meyer, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and NY, USA,  2005, pp. 195–318 Search PubMed .

          N. Muradov, Fossil fuel decarbonization: In the quest for clean and lasting fossil energy, in Carbon-Neutral Fuels and Energy Carriers, ed. N. Muradov and N. Veziroglu, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2012, pp. 667–786 Search PubMed .

          Global CCS Institute, The Global Status of CCS: 2011, Canberra, Australia, ISBN 978-0-9871863-0-0,  2011 Search PubMed .

          I. Quaile and B. Gräßler, Deutsche Welle,  23 September 2011, http://www.dw-world.de/dw/article/0,15402725,00.html, accessed December 2011 Search PubMed .

Carbon Capture Journal, Online Edition,  December 3, 2011, http://www.carboncapturejournal.com/displaynews.php?NewsID=873, accessed January 2012 Search PubMed .

          B. Kruse, S. Grinna and C. Buch, hydrogen, ISBN 82-92318-05-4, The Bellona Foundation Publ., Oslo, Norway,  2002 Search PubMed .

          B. Tamburic, et al., Residential Fueling with Hydrogen, Imperial College London, Design Report,  January 2011 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. Fuel Cells, Fuel Cell Technologies Program,  November 2010, http://www1.eere.energy.gov/hydrogenandfuelcells/pdfs/fct_h2_fuelcell_factsheet.pdf, accessed August 2011 Search PubMed .

          P. Spath and M. Mann, Life cycle assessment of hydrogen production via natural gas steam reforming, national renewable energy Laboratory report, NREL/TP-570–27637, Golden, Colorado,  2000 Search PubMed .

          L. Cheb, R. Nolan and S. Avadhany, Thermodynamic analysis of Coal-to-SNG process, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, Report,  May 2009, http://www.mit.edu/people/leichen/Thermodynamic_analysis_of_Coal_to_SNG_process(final).pdf, accessed April 2012 Search PubMed .

          US Department of Energy, Office of fossil energy. DOE technology successes- “Breakthrough” gas turbines, http://www.fe.doe.gov/programs/powersystems/turbines/turbines_successes.html, accessed January 2012 Search PubMed.
S. Kaneco, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .

          C.-J. Winter, in Carbon-Neutral Fuels and Energy Carriers, ed. N. Muradov and N. Veziroglu, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2012, pp. 115–202 Search PubMed .

          E. Martin and N. Muradov, in Advances in Hydrogen Energy, ed. C. G. Padro and F. Lau, Kluwer Academic, New York,  2000, pp. 175–190 Search PubMed .

          C. Forsberg, Economic implications of peak vs base-load electric costs on nuclear hydrogen systems, AIChE Annual Meeting, San Francisco, CA,  2006 Search PubMed .

          D. Biello, World's first solar power plant that can work at night, Scientific American,  4 August 2010, http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/2010/08/04/worlds-first-solar-power-plant-that-can-work-at-night/, accessed April 2012 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency (IEA), World Energy Outlook 2011. Are We Entering a Golden Age of Gas?IEA, Paris, France,  2011 Search PubMed .

          The Royal Society, Geoengineering the Climate: Science, Governance and Uncertainty, ISBN: 978-0-85403-773-5, London,  2009 Search PubMed .

          The National Academies Press, Realizing the energy potential of methane hydrate for the United States, Committee chair: C. Paull, The National Academies Press, Washington DC,  2010, ISBN-10: 0-309-14889-8 Search PubMed .
S. Ma, D. Sun, J. Simmons, C. Collier, D. Yuan and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1012–1016 CrossRef CAS .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 4th Assessment Report, Climate Change 2007. The Physical Science Basis, ed. S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. Averyt, M. Tignor and H. Miller, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and NY,  2007, pp. 210–216 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency, 2011 Key world energy statistics, Paris, France,  2011, http://www.iea.org/textbase/nppdf/free/2011/key_world_energy_stats.pdf, accessed April 2012 Search PubMed .
J. Williams, A. DeBenedictis, R. Ghanadan, A. Mahone, J. Moore, W. Morrow, S. Price and M. Torn, Science, 2012, 335, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .

          International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 2010 – scenarios and Strategies to 2050, ISBN 978-92-64-08597-8,  2010 Search PubMed .
C.-J. Winter, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 4109–4111 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ausubel, American Scientist Magazine, 1996, 84, 166–178 Search PubMed .

Hydrogen Economy: Opportunities and Challenges, ed. M. Ball and M. Wietschel, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,  2009, pp. 254–636 Search PubMed .

          T. Sigfusson, Planet Hydrogen – The Taming of the Proton, Coxmoor Publ., Oxford, IK,  2008, p. 218 Search PubMed .

Hydrogen Fuel. Production, Transport and Storage. ed. R. Gupta, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2009 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency, Hydrogen production and distribution: IEA energy technology essentials, Paris,  2007, http://www.iea.org/techno/essentials5.pdf, accessed November 2011 Search PubMed .
J. Steckel, M. Jacob, R. Marschinski and G. Luderer, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 3443–3455 CrossRef CAS .
R. Aguilera and R. Aguilera, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change, 2012, 79, 579–586 CrossRef .
J. Oliveira Matias and T. Campos Devezas, Low Carbon Econ., 2011, 2, 49–53 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
N. Muradov	Dr Nazim Z. Muradov is a Principal Research Scientist at the Florida Solar Energy Center, University of Central Florida, Cocoa, Florida. He holds a Doctor of Science degree in Physical Chemistry and Ph.D. in Kinetics and Catalysis. Dr Muradov's main areas of research include thermocatalytic and photocatalytic hydrogen production systems, solar-powered water-splitting cycles, fossil fuel decarbonization, reformers for fuel cell applications, radiant detoxification of hazardous waste and nanostructured carbon materials. He has authored and co-authored two books, close to 200 publications and 44 patents. Dr Muradov is a member of the Board of Directors of the International Association for Hydrogen Energy (IAHE), and an Associate Editor of the International Journal of Hydrogen Energy. In 2010, he was granted the honorary title of the IAHE Fellow.

Broader context
In the face of the ever increasing levels of anthropogenic CO2 emissions and their potentially devastating impact on the Earth's ecosystems, there is a growing consensus that many existing challenges can be solved in conjunction with decarbonization of the carbon-intensive economy. However, statistical data indicate that during the last two to three decades, the historical positive decarbonization trend in substitution of primary energy sources has markedly slowed down and practically ceased. Swinging off the current carbon-intensive path would require overcoming enormous technological challenges and an extensive transformation of the global energy system. The prospective decarbonization options include the use of carbon-free and carbon-neutral energy sources (nuclear and renewables), CO2 capture and storage, increase in energy efficiency of power plants and industrial processes, and switching to low-carbon fuels. Although existing low-carbon technologies currently cannot compete with fossil incumbents, there are emerging positive decarbonizing trends in the energy market fueled by a surge in supply of natural gas, the ever-increasing share of renewables and on-going substantial gains in energy efficiency. The analysis of the current tendencies shows the critical role of the three-way methane–electricity–hydrogen energy system in catalyzing the global decarbonization process.


 	Fig. 1  Historical decarbonization trends presented as evolution of carbon intensity (a) and H/C ratio (b) of primary energy, toe is ton oil equivalent. The data sources are ref. 2 and 3.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Evolution of Kaya Identity factors since 1971. All factors are normalized against the year 1971. The data on g, e, f and h factors for the years 2010 and 2011 are not yet available. Based on IEA statistical data.4,5	 

 	Fig. 3  Carbon intensity of energy (A) and carbon intensity of GDP (B) for USA and China from 1971 to 2009. Based on IEA statistical data.4	 

 	Fig. 4  Contribution of different technological options to reducing CO2 emissions by 2050 under the IEA's ETP-2012 scenario.13	 

 	Fig. 5  Ausubel–Marchetti's diagram for prognosticating energy conversion efficiencies and time of deployment of prospective power generators. The data on the efficiency of existing engines (solid line and gray circles) are taken from ref. 20.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the Decarbonization Triangle concept. e− denotes electricity generated from low- and non-carbon energy sources (solar, wind, geo, nuclear, NG/CCS, etc.).	 


1	H2O + Eb → H2 + 1/2O2	Water electrolysis
• Alkaline	50–100	75–8039	Commercial
• PEM	80–100	80–9040	Commercial
• High temperature steam	800–1000	80–9040	Pilot
2	H2 + 1/2O2 → H2O + E	Hydrogen fuel cells
• Alkaline FC	90–100	50–6041	Commercial
• PEM FC	50–100	45–6041	Commercial
• Solid oxide FC	700–1000	50–6041	Pilot
• Molten carbonate FC	600–700	45–5041	Pilot
3	CH4 + 2H2O → 4H2 + CO2	Steam reforming	700–900	80–8942	Commercial
4	4H2 + CO2 → CH4 + 2H2O	Methanation process	350–400	65–7043	Commercial
5	CH4 + 2O2→ CO2 + 2H2O + E	Gas turbine combined cycle	1250–1400	50–6044	Commercial
Solid oxide FC	800–1000	50–6041	Pilot
6	CO2 + 2H2O + E → CH4 + 2O2	Electrochemical reduction	25–80	60–70c	R&D45

 	Fig. 7  The percentage of CO2 emission reduction from electricity generation if main elements of the DT concept would be implemented. CO2 emissions produced in 2009 by power plants using the world energy mix (500 kg CO2 per MW h)4 are used as a baseline. Note that only direct CO2 emissions are presented in this diagram, without accounting for life-cycle emissions. 1 – All fossil-based electricity is generated by conventional coal power plants.50 2 – All fossil-based electricity is generated by advanced coal-IGCC plants.50 3 – All fossil fuel power plants are converted to NGCC technology. 4 – Solar/wind electricity without energy storage with 40% NGCC backup. 5 – Solar/wind electricity with energy storage and 10% NGCC backup. 6 – NGCC plant equipped with CCS (90% carbon capture). 7 – Solar/wind electricity and nuclear with hydrogen peak load. 8 – Combination of all renewables with solar thermal and/or hydrogen storage.	 

 	Fig. 8  Current and projected world primary NG demand by sector. “Other energy and non-energy use” includes oil and gas production and refining, gas-to-liquid processes, petrochemistry and distribution losses. BCM – billion cubic meters. Based on IEA data.50	 
ANG	Adsorbed natural gas
BAUS	Business-as-usual scenario
BCM	Billion cubic meters
CO2-eq.	CO2 equivalent
CBM	Coal bed methane
CCS	Carbon capture and storage
CSP	Concentrated solar power
DT	Decarbonization Triangle

E
	Global primary energy consumption

e
	Energy intensity of world gross domestic product
e−	Electricity (in Decarbonization Triangle)
EJ	Exa (1018) Joule
EOR	Enhanced oil recovery
ETP	Energy Technology Perspectives report (IEA)
EU	European Union

F
	Global CO2 emissions flux from fossil fuel combustion

f
	Carbon intensity of energy
FC	Fuel cell

G
	Gross world product

g
	Global average per capita gross domestic product
GDP	Gross domestic product
ΔG	Free energy change of a fuel oxidation reaction
GHG	Greenhouse gas
GW	Giga (109) Watt
GWP	Global warming potential
Gt	Giga (109) ton
ΔH	Enthalpy change of a fuel oxidation reaction

h
	Carbon intensity of gross domestic product
HF	Hydraulic fracturing
H/C	Hydrogen to carbon atomic ratio in fossil fuels
ICE	Internal combustion engine
IIASA	International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
IEA	International Energy Agency
IGCC	Integrated gasification combined cycle
IPCC	Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
KI	Kaya Identity
kW h	Kilo (103) Watt hour
MCFC	Molten carbonate fuel cell
MW h	Mega (106) Watt hour
NG	Natural gas
NGCC	Natural gas combined cycle
NGV	Natural gas vehicle
NRC	U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
NIMBY	“not-in-my-backyard”
OECD	Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

P
	World population
PEMFC	Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell
PV	Photo-voltaic
RE	Renewable energy
ΔS	Entropy change of a fuel oxidation reaction
SMR	Steam methane reforming
SOFC	Solid oxide fuel cell

T
	Temperature
TCM	Trillion (1012) cubic meters
toe	Ton oil equivalent

V, Vo	Operating and open circuit voltages of a fuel cell
USC	Ultra-supercritical
WEO	World Energy Outlook

η
	Actual efficiency of a fuel cell

μ
	Fuel utilization coefficient

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
