Materials and design of nanostructured broadband light absorbers for advanced light-to-heat conversion  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR06024J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR06024J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21555-21574Materials and design of nanostructured broadband light absorbers for advanced light-to-heat conversion

        
          
            Jong Uk 
            Kim
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sori 
            Lee
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Seung Ji 
            Kang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tae-il 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 440-746, Korea. E-mail: taeilkim@skku.edu
Received 
      26th July 2018
    , Accepted 31st October 2018First published on 1st November 2018AbstractLight-to-heat conversion systems have been attracting growing research interest in the last few decades, due to their highly intriguing photothermal properties and their wide applications ranging from biomedical applications to solar energy harvesting to mechanical actuators. In general, because the light-to-heat conversion efficiency depends strongly on the absorbing material, significant efforts have been focused on fabricating broadband light absorbers. However, there are several challenges associated with the design and fabrication of light absorbers, such as minimizing heat loss, and optimizing the broadband light absorption and omnidirectional light absorption. Thus, the rational design of enhanced light absorbers is critical to achieve efficient light absorption over a broad wavelength range. In this paper, we introduce the basic theory of light absorption and heat transfer, then summarize fundamental understanding of representative light-to-heat conversion agents including carbon-based, semiconductor-based and plasmonic metal-based materials and structures, and highlight state-of-the-art structural designs towards the development of broadband light absorbers. In addition, the practical applications of these materials and designs are also discussed.Jong Uk KimJong Uk Kim received his BS degree in Chemical Engineering (2015) from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim at SKKU. His research interests lie in developing localized heating and cooling together with emerging engineering methods in material science and heat transfer phenomena, to apply to different areas ranging from neuroscience to energy conversion and semiconductor manufacturing processes.Sori LeeSori Lee received her dual BS degrees in Chemical Engineering and the Department of Architecture (2016) from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea, and her MS degree in Chemical Engineering (2018) under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim from SKKU. She worked on the fabrication of high-aspect ratio nanostructures via semiconductor manufacturing processes for biomedical applications, including a thermo- and chemotherapeutic esophageal stent. She currently works at Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd.Seung Ji KangSeung Ji Kang is currently an undergraduate student researcher, majoring in Chemical engineering under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. Her research interest primarily focuses on the development of light-to-heat conversion materials and structural design via conventional and unconventional lithographic techniques for energy, environmental and biomedical applications.Tae-il KimTae-il Kim is currently working as an associate professor in the School of Chemical Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. He earned his BS and PhD degrees from SKKU (2003) and Seoul National University (2009), respectively. He moved to University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) for postdoctoral research with Prof. John A. Rogers, where he worked on bio-integrated optoelectronic devices and their optogenetic applications, from 2009 to 2012. His research is based on nanoscale patterning using unconventional lithography and bioinspired electronics systems fabricated using this patterning method.
1. Introduction
Renewable and sustainable energy collected from naturally replenished resources, such as sunlight, wind and tides, can continuously provide electricity, heating/cooling, automation and transportation without the depletion of fossils fuels and environmental problems, such as global warming from CO2 emissions. Among the many kinds of renewable energy, solar power is the most powerful, as radiant light and heat are endlessly provided. Although the efficiency of electricity generation by photovoltaic (PV) devices has been rapidly increasing, it is still limited to a maximum of about 21%.1 Interestingly, solar thermal energy (STE), based on direct solar heating, typically has 80% efficiency, which is much higher than other renewable technologies.2 To take advantage of such a remarkable energy system and apply it to diverse applications, studies investigating the design and materials of such technologies are urgently needed.
A blackbody is an ideal light absorber that completely absorbs incident light from all directions and at all wavelengths, while no light is transmitted or reflected.3 Thus, it appears perfectly black at room temperature. Because every physical object at thermal equilibrium emits the same amount of radiation as it absorbs, the blackbody is the most efficient thermal radiative absorber and emitter. The absorbed light energy from the blackbody absorber is converted into thermal energy. This characteristic makes blackbody light absorbers valuable for many applications, such as biomedical applications,4–9 solar energy storage,10–13 solar vapor generation,14–29 photoactuators30–35 and photocatalysts.36 Therefore, to achieve remarkable light-to-heat conversion agents that possess characteristics that are close to those of an ideal blackbody absorber, much attention has been paid to the discovery of new black photothermal materials for broadband light absorption from ultraviolet (UV)-visible to infrared (IR), as shown in Fig. 1a. Although there are several candidates for such wide-range light absorbers, such as carbon-based, semiconductor-based, and plasmonic metal-based materials, carbon-based materials have relatively low light absorbance, because of the moderate reflection at the air–dielectric interface.37 The inherently high thermal conductivity of these pure materials limits their practical applications. On the other hand, although semiconductors (e.g. titanium oxide-based (TiOx) particles) and plasmonic metal-based light absorbers (e.g. gold nanoparticles) have been intensively investigated because they absorb light and then rapidly generate heat that is released into their surroundings, their practical uses are profoundly limited since they have intrinsically narrow and specific absorption bands.27,38–40 Therefore, for broadband light absorption and high light-to-heat conversion efficiencies, the blackbody needs to be improved in the following respects: (1) wide-range wavelength absorption with less transmittance and reflectance; (2) localized heating on a desired spot, while minimizing the dissipated heat to the surrounding environment; and (3) constant light absorption, regardless of incident light direction.
 Fig. 1  Nanostructured broadband light absorber for efficient light-to-heat conversion. (a) Illustrations of broadband light absorber. (b) Various light absorbers depending on materials and their designed nanostructures. Reproduced with permission: “bimorph19”, “vertically align23”, “randomly oriented9”. Copyright, respectively, 2016, 2017, 2018, American Chemical Society. “hierarchical20”, “nanoparticles27”, “nanowires41”, “mesh29”. Copyright, respectively, 2017, 2016, 2013, 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. “aggregated nanowires25”. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Ltd “porous template28”. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Based on the considerations above, current light absorber technology has focused on rational design concepts with the above-referenced materials to enhance photothermal performance, while at the same time finding new light-to-heat conversion agents. Both approaches can provide new prospects, such as simple fabrication at a large scale, low cost, high thermal stability, biocompatibility and eco-friendliness, as shown in Fig. 1b. With rationally designed structures such as dispersed nano-particles/wires,27,41 porous structures,9,23,25,28,29 bimorphs,19,42 and three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical networks,20,43 the practical applications of light-to-heat converting materials and designs are becoming more extensive, and continue to grow. Table 1 highlights the more detailed functions and performances of diverse materials used in photothermal applications and their structural design. In this review, we introduce the basic theory of light-to-heat conversion and then discuss the fundamental understanding and appropriate design concepts of representative light-to-heat conversion systems comprising various materials, such as carbon-based, semiconductor-based and plasmonic metal-based materials. We then summarize the practical applications of recently-developed advanced light absorbers that comprise specific materials and have been designed for each purpose, including photothermal therapy and imaging, controllable drug delivery, solar steam generation and mechanical actuation. Finally, the report concludes with a summary, with a brief discussion of the remaining challenges.
Table 1 Materials and structural designs for various types of broadband light absorber




Materials
 
Structural design
Applications
Ref.




Carbon-based
Amorphous carbon (a-C)
Inverse V-type structured a-C film
Black body absorber

52



Mesoporous carbon nanospheres (meso-CNs)
Controllable drug release

6



Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
Vertically aligned single-walled CNT (SWNTs)
Black body absorber

37



CNT/silica bimorph porous structure
Solar vapor generation

19



Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (pNIPAM, thermal responsive polymer)/CNT bimorph structure
Photoactuator

34



VO2/SWNT film
Photoactuator

30



CNTs/Graphene oxide (GO)
CNT/GO, GO/nanofibrillated cellulose mesh and GO/NFC integrated structure (all-in-one structure)
Solar vapor generation

14



Graphene (G)
N-Doped porous graphene sheet
Solar vapor generation

16



Hierarchical graphene foam
Solar vapor generation

20



3D hydrophilic reduced graphene oxide (rGO) aerogel
Solar vapor generation

22



rGO/mixed cellulose esters (MCE) double layer
Solar vapor generation

21



Vertically aligned graphene sheet membrane
Solar vapor generation

23



GO film on cellulose-wrapped polystyrene foam
Solar desalination

18



Fe3O4@graphene NPs within the phase change material (PCM)
Solar energy storage

11



rGO/GO-PDA bimorph structure
Photoactuator

31



rGO-CNT/PDMS rolled bimorph structure
Photoactuator

33



rGO with PVA network hydrogel
Solar desalination

181



Graphite
Exfoliated graphite/carbon foam double-layer structure
Solar vapor generation

17



Acetamide/expanded graphite composite PCM
Solar energy storage

12



Nano-graphite/paraffin composite PCM
Solar energy storage

10



Carbon black (CB)
CB-added polyurethane (PU, shape memory feature)
Photoactuator

32



CB-coated polystyrene foam
Solar vapor generation

165



Semiconductor-based
Ti2O3 NPs
Narrow bandgap NPs (Oxygen vacancies formation)
Solar vapor generation

27



MoO3−x QDs
Oxygen-deficient MoO3−x
Solar vapor generation

15



CsxWO3 NRs
Cs-Doped WO3 NRs (high carrier concentration)
Photothermal Therapy/imaging

5



Hydrogenated TiO2 (H-TiO2) NPs
Narrow bandgap NPs (oxygen vacancies formation)
Photothermal therapy

7



Cu2−xSe NCs
Transition metal chalcogenide NCs (LSPR effect with high carrier concentration)
Photothermal therapy

8



Oligoaniline
Oligoaniline containing poly(1,3,5-hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine) (PHT) monolithic porous foam
Solar vapor generation

26



Polypyrrole (PPy)
PPy-coated stainless steel mesh
Solar vapor generation

29



PVA/PPy hierarchically nanostructured gel
Solar vapor generation

43



Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene) (PEDOT)
PEDOT doped with tosylate (PP-PEDOT)/PDMS bimorph structure
Photoactuator

35



Polydopamine (PDA)
(PEG)/PDA@BN composite PCM
Solar energy storage

13



Ti3C2 Mxene
Ti3C2 Mxene nanosheets
Solar vapor generation

177



Surface modified Ti3C2 Mxene nanosheets
Photothermal therapy

178



Surface modified Ti3C2 Mxene nanosheets by soybean phospholipid
Photothermal therapy

179



Mixed metal oxide (MMO)
3D cylindrical cup-shaped MMO
Solar vapor generation

175



CuCr2O4/SiO2
CuCr2O4/SiO2 composite with Frisbee and flat disk shape structure
Solar vapor generation

176



Plasmonic metal-based
Au
Au and Si3N4-sputtered nanocone array via Anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template based molding
Bidirectional light absorber

104



Self-assembled Au NPs into porous AAO template
Solar vapor generation

28



Aggregated Au nanowires via AAO pore widening
Solar vapor generation

25



Au-Sputtered nanoturf structure
Controllable drug release

9



Multi-branched Au nanoechinus (Au NEs)
Photothermal/photodynamic therapy

4



Black Au films on PDMS via AAO template removal
Photocatalyst

36



Al
Self-assembled Al NPs into porous AAO template
Solar desalination

24





2. Basic theory of light-to-heat conversion
2.1 Thermal radiation of black and real body
Heat transfer occurs via three methods: conduction, convection and radiation.44 Among them, radiation is the flux of heat by means of electromagnetic waves. Thus, no medium is required between one body and another for heat transfer to take place. Because radiation can propagate even in a vacuum, the energy from the Sun to the Earth travels through the vacuum of space by photons, which travel at the speed of light. Not only hot objects, but also all objects with an absolute temperature of more than 0 K, which have thermal energy, emit radiation; and this radiative energy is proportional to the fourth power of the absolute temperature. Therefore, all objects can emit and absorb radiation in the form of electromagnetic waves at the same time, and the net radiation effect from an object to its surroundings can be expressed by the following equation: P = εσA(T4 − Tc4)(1)where, P is the thermal energy emitted per unit area, ε is the emissivity of the object, A is the total radiating surface area, and T and Tc are the absolute temperature of the object and that of the cooler surroundings, respectively. σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, which is equal to 5.6697 × 10–8 W m−2 K−4. In particular, emissivity (ε), as a surface property, determines how much radiation an object emits at a given temperature. This is the ratio of energy radiated by a real body to the energy radiated by a blackbody at the same temperature and wavelength. The emissivity of a body at a given temperature (T) is defined as: (2)where, Eemitted (λ, T) and Eblackbody (λ, T) are the emissive power of a body and a blackbody per unit wavelength (λ).
A blackbody, which is used as a standard with real objects, is a theoretically ideal object that absorbs all incident wavelengths. In addition, under thermal equilibrium, it emits electromagnetic radiation, called blackbody radiation. In accordance with Planck's law, the radiation spectrum of a blackbody is determined by its absolute temperature only, not by the material properties or shape. Thus, Fig. 2a shows that the blackbody radiation spectrum governed by Planck's law shifts towards shorter wavelengths as the temperature of the body increases. However, real bodies do not exhibit ideal blackbody properties. Some of the energy incident upon real bodies could be reflected or transmitted. Thus, the total energy balance for a surface is divided into the reflected, absorbed, transmitted and emitted energy, as follows: α(λ, T) + ρ(λ, T) + τ(λ, T) = 1(3-1) α(λ) = ε(λ)(3-2)where, α is the absorptivity, ρ is the reflectivity, τ is the transmissivity, and ε is the emissivity at a given wavelength. In thermal equilibrium (that is, at a constant temperature), eqn (3-2), known as Kirchhoff's Law, states that the absorptivity of a body is equal to its emissivity at every wavelength.
 Fig. 2  (a) Blackbody radiation at four different temperatures (−50, 0, 50 and 100 °C), (b) solar radiation spectrum without atmospheric absorption. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 1981, Optical Society of America. 
2.2 Toward advanced light-to-heat conversion

Fig. 2b shows the solar spectrum for radiation outside of the Earth's atmosphere. The curve agrees well with the blackbody spectrum defined by the sun's surface temperature (approximately 6000 °C). In order to design a light absorber that efficiently converts solar radiation into useful heat, it should absorb as much of the electromagnetic radiation as possible within the solar spectrum; whereas, for thermal re-radiation, its emittance should be near zero.45,46 As shown in Fig. 2, α should be high in the wavelength range of 0.3–3 μm, and ε should be low in the wavelength range of 3–50 μm. Recent progress in solar thermal systems shows that the radiative heat loss is successfully suppressed using commercial spectrally-selective coating.45 Thus, the thermal energy converted from solar energy is retained, and can be delivered to the desired spot.
To further improve the light-to-heat efficiency, the absorber must minimize the loss of generated heat. In such a solar vapor generation system, input solar light energy is typically divided into four output energies, including: (1) optical loss stemming from reflectance and transmittance; (2) radiation loss from light-to-heat conversion materials; (3) convection and conduction heat losses into the underlying water and overlying air through nonradiative energy dissipation; and (4) the energy of water evaporation. This means that by reducing optical and thermal losses, solar steam can be produced more efficiently.161 In particular, suppressing thermal conduction to the surrounding medium is a key process that confines the generated heat directly to the target area. To concentrate thermal energy and minimize heat conduction loss, several types of nanostructures have been rationally designed to meet their intended applications, such as porous foam for low thermal conductivity materials,16,47,48 and bimorph structures for thermal insulation.17,19,21 Moreover, using organic photothermal materials and doped impurities to decrease the thermal conductivity helps to deliver and confine the generated heat at the desired spot.
As mentioned above, a blackbody completely absorbs incident light from all directions and at all wavelengths. Although considerable efforts have been devoted to achieving superior optical properties like a blackbody, the optical properties of most proposed light absorbers have been assessed using normal incident light. Nevertheless, the angular-dependent optical properties must also be considered for practical and industrial uses, to maximize the light-to-heat conversion efficiency. For example, the amount of solar radiation received on an absorber depends on the latitude, day of the year, time of day, and angle of incident radiation.49 Omnidirectional optical properties are inevitably required to maintain and maximize the amount of radiation flux received by the absorber. Therefore, using nanostructured absorbers and/or predicting optical properties through simulation modeling would be able to help realize angular-independent light absorption.50,162–164
3. Materials and design for efficient light-to-heat conversion
For heat generation from a light absorber, enhanced light-to-heat conversion is closely related to the materials and structural design of light absorbers. Therefore, here we classify the materials and structures used for the absorption layer in light-to-heat conversion systems into several subgroups, to show which types of materials and structures are utilized on purpose, and how they function as the absorption layer. In this section, we introduce light-to-heat platforms in terms of light absorbable materials and rational designs with different conversion principles in detail: (1) carbon-based, (2) semiconductor-based, and (3) plasmonic metal-based materials.
3.1 Carbon-based materials
Among the black materials used as light absorbers, carbon-based materials, such as amorphous carbon, carbon black and graphite, have a good ability to absorb broadband light, due to the optical transitions of their π-bands.51,165 For example, amorphous carbon, composed of mixed sp2 and sp3 bonds, has broadband light absorption capabilities, due to the closely-spaced energy levels of loosely-held π electrons.52 Likewise, carbon black and graphite have outstanding light absorption capabilities, because of the optical transitions of their π-bands as well. However, they have a limited emissivity (absorptivity) of approximately 0.85, because of the moderate reflection at the air–dielectric interface.53,54 Therefore, to achieve low reflectance and high emissivity, different geometries of nanostructures, including aligned,23,37,54 porous55–57 and hierarchical structures,20,43 have been proposed. Using these designs, the light–matter interaction length is often longer, resulting in high light absorption.58 While macro/mesoscale structures normally absorb light as well as reflecting and scattering it, the nanostructured interface induces light rays to bend progressively. When the wavelength of exposed light is higher than the dimension of the nanostructure, light interacts differently, as if the surface has a refractive index gradient.59 Hence, light can be trapped in micro-/nano-sized gaps, and the light is absorbed by multiple internal reflection.20 Therefore, carbon-based light absorbers could be designed with regard to geometries for efficiently converting light into useful heat for various practical purposes, such as solar-driven steam generation devices.167
Since their first discovery,60 carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have received considerable research attention as light-absorbing photothermal materials, due to their outstanding physical properties, such as low specific heat capacity, and high physical, chemical and thermal stability.61 Among their excellent properties, their relatively low specific heat capacity of 0.50–0.75 g−1 K−1 allows a CNT-based light absorber to reach thermal saturation time quickly.62 In addition, CNTs can be facilely fabricated into thin and porous membranes with controlled thicknesses and pore sizes by simple filtration, spray-coating and spin-coating.63–65 Although their emissivity is limited to 0.8–0.85 because of the moderate reflection at the air–dielectric interface, vertically-aligned single-walled CNT arrays overcome the above limit and exhibit a nearly constant emissivity of 0.98–0.99 across a wide spectral range of 0.2–200 μm.37 Therefore, they could be a highly efficient photothermal agent, making them a promising candidate for various energy harvesting and conversion applications. Fig. 3a1 shows a CNT membrane on top of a macroporous silica substrate via vacuum filtration.19 In the CNT-silica bilayered structure, hydrophilic macroporous silica with low thermal conductivity serves as a heat transfer barrier and water transport channel for efficient water transport from the bulk material to the evaporative CNT surface. In addition, the top CNT membrane leads to a diffuse reflection of less than 2% with thicknesses in the range of 1.2–2.4 μm (Fig. 3a2), indicating broadband light harvesting. Because the silica substrate prevents heat loss to the underlying bulk water and maintains the converted thermal energy, the temperature of the CNT–silica bilayered material reaches around 72 °C, whereas the self-supporting CNT material has a lower equilibrium temperature of 68 °C (Fig. 3a3).
 Fig. 3  Nanostructured light absorbers based on carbon nanomaterials. (a1–a3) CNT–silica bilayered light absorber. (a1) SEM images of the light absorber. (a2) Diffuse reflectance spectra of the light absorber with increasing CNT layer thickness. (a3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the light absorber under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b1–b3) N-doped porous graphene sheet. (b1) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the N-doped graphene-based light absorber. (b2) Total reflection and transmittance curves (inset) of the light absorber. (b3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the light absorber under the solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (c1–c3) Hierarchical graphene (h-G) foam. (c1) SEM image and photograph (inset, top) of the h-G light absorber. SEM image (inset, bottom) of the frame edge of the hierarchical light absorber. (c2) Diffuse reflectance spectra of the light absorber. (c3) IR images of the h-G and the ordinary graphene-based light absorbers at three incident angles (70°, 50°, and 30°) under the solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Due to their broadband absorption, low specific heat, light weight and excellent chemical stability, carbon-based materials, such as CNTs and graphene, stand out as excellent photothermal materials in extensive studies, for applications such as photoactuators and solar steam generation for water purification/desalination. Nevertheless, the high thermal conductivity of these materials leads to heat loss to the surrounding environment, and prevents the heat from being confined at the interface.66–68 In order to decrease the intrinsic thermal conductivity, graphene sheets were doped with nitrogen (N) atoms to maximize the photothermal conversion efficiency via heat localization.16 The N-doped porous graphene sheet (Fig. 3b1) shows the lowest thermal conductivity among carbon-based materials of 9.0 ± 1.2 W m−1 K−1. In addition, porous N-doped graphene samples grown at 800 °C (N800) and 950 °C (N950) show relatively lower total reflectance of 2–10% and transparency (ca. 0.01%) in a wide wavelength range from 250 to 2000 nm (Fig. 3b2). As a result, the temperature of the N950 sample rose to more than 100 °C within 300 s under solar irradiation, while the temperature increase of ordinary porous graphene (G950) could not reach 100 °C, because of thermal loss due to the higher thermal conductivity and lower light absorptivity of pure graphene (Fig. 3b3).
To enhance their light-to-heat conversion efficiency, the omnidirectional light absorption of carbon-based materials needs to be improved in broadband spectrum ranges. Light absorbers with a flat surface are mainly sensitive to the incident angle of light.161 In order to reduce incident angle dependency, porous structures,16 three-dimensional (3D) structures20,48,158 and/or hierarchical structures159,160 have been suggested, because the interaction between light and matter is enhanced and retained when matter is oriented along the direction of incident light. Fig. 3c1 shows hierarchical graphene (h-G) foam, which consists of a vertical graphene nanoplate array on self-standing graphene foam.20 Compared to ordinary graphene foam (G foam), the reflectance of h-G foam is remarkably decreased in the whole range of the solar spectrum (Fig. 3c2). Moreover, graphene nanoplates are randomly orientated, having 45–90° angles with the porous graphene skeleton surface. Thus, the incident light gets trapped in the gaps, leading to light–matter interactions, until it is completely absorbed. Fig. 3c3 also shows direct evidence of the decreased angle dependence of h-G foam, due to its randomly porous and oriented hierarchical structure.
3.2 Semiconductor-based materials

3.2.1 Inorganic materials. 
Recently, inorganic semiconducting materials have been extensively developed as new types of photothermal agents, because of their good biocompatibility and low cytotoxicity.5,7,8 Photons that have higher energy than the bandgap of an inorganic semiconducting material lead to the generation of above-bandgap electron–hole pairs. Then, the electrons and holes relax to the conduction and valence band edges, respectively, and convert the energy in excess of the bandgap into heat through the thermalization process (Fig. 4a).69 However, semiconducting materials generally have poor light absorption ability in the IR region, due to their wide bandgap. In the case of sunlight, the IR region (700–2500 nm) of the total electromagnetic radiation power accounts for approximately 50%.70 This characteristic can be regarded as a serious drawback to increasing the photothermal efficiency. Thus, these materials should shift the absorption profile to the near-infrared (NIR) regions to enhance their light-to-heat conversion efficiency. In this respect, much attention has been paid to improving the limited optical absorption via manipulation of the energy bandgap by impurity doping and self-doping.7,71,72 Titanium dioxides (TiO2) have been widely used as solar energy-harvesting and biomedical materials, due to their low cost, biocompatibility, high thermal stability and photoresponsive capability. However, the intrinsic bandgap of TiO2 is approximately 3 eV, which only responds to the short wavelength region (<400 nm, UV light region).73,74 Thus, for more efficient solar energy utilization, it is desirable to narrow the bandgap further, to less than 0.5 eV. Based on the considerations above, self-doping by Ti3+ and/or oxygen vacancies in TiO2 phase (TiO2−x) has been reported as an effective way to extend the photoresponse of TiO2-based materials from the UV region to the IR region.75,76 Because oxygen vacancy states are formed between the filled O 2p orbitals and the empty Ti 3d orbitals of TiO2 (3d0), the bandgap of TiO2 is narrowed by the oxygen vacancies, and is able to enhance visible light absorption. In particular, titanium sesquioxide, Ti2O3 (3d1), transformed from TiO2 with the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+, can be used as a promising titanium-based light absorber. Due to the strong Coulomb repulsion effect among 3d1 electrons, the bandgap of Ti2O3 is narrowly formed between the two Ti 3d bands (lower Ti 3d band filled by 3d1 electrons, and upper empty Ti 3d band).77 Due to the ultra-small bandgap (approximately 0.09 eV) of the Ti2O3 nanoparticles (NPs), external light with an ultra-broadband spectrum ranging from 500 to 2500 nm was absorbed by the material, as shown in Fig. 4b1.27 Furthermore, the nanoscale features (approximately 400 nm width) of the material further enhance the absorption efficiency. With these advantages, an excellent absorption capacity (92.5%) was presented over a wide range, with an average reflectance of less than 10% (Fig. 4b2). Fig. 4b3 shows that the semiconducting materials successfully generated heat by absorbing solar light with a power density of 1 kW m−2.
 Fig. 4  Nanostructured light absorbers based on inorganic semiconductors (b–c) and conjugated organic materials (d–e). (a) Illustrations of light-to-heat conversion during electron–hole generation and relaxation in a typical semiconductor (left) and in an engineered narrow-bandgap material (right). (b1–b3) Narrow-bandgap titanium sesquioxide nanoparticles (Ti2O3 NPs). (b1) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the narrow-bandgap Ti2O3 NPs. (b2) Reflectance spectra of commercial TiO2, graphite, commercial Ti2O3 powder and the Ti2O3 NPs. (b3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the Ti2O3 NPs under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (c1–c3) Oleylamine-capped copper selenide nanocrystals (Cu2−xSe NCs). (c1) TEM image and photograph (inset) of the polymer-coated Cu2−xSe NCs. (c2) Absorption spectra and (c3) time-dependent temperature changes (800 nm diode laser irradiation 2 W cm−2) of polymer-coated Cu2−xSe NCs (red solid squares) dispersed in deionized water. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d1–d3) PHT (poly(1,3,5-hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine)) foam. (d1) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the conjugated polymer-based light absorber. (d2) Optical properties of the light absorber. (d3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the light absorber under solar illumination (0.5, 1 and 2 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e1–e3) Polypyrrole (PPy)-coated stainless steel (SS) mesh (e1) SEM image and schematic (inset) of the PPy-coated SS mesh. (e2) Extinction spectra of PPy-coated ITO glass by electropolymerization. (e3) Time-dependent temperature changes and infrared images (inset) of the original SS mesh (black line) and the PPy-coated SS mesh (red line) under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Moreover, to overcome the poor IR range absorption of general semiconducting materials, creating plasmonic effects in semiconducting NPs is emerging as a subject of active research to achieve metallic behavior and plasmonic response in the near-infrared (NIR) range. In particular, transition metal chalcogenides, such as CuS, and Cu2−xSe NPs, have received attention, since they can adopt a variety of stoichiometric ratios with variable optical bandgaps.78,79 For example, copper-deficient Cu2−xSe allows a high density of holes to be made in the valence band. Thus, copper selenide (Cu2−xSe) nanocrystals can exhibit NIR absorption bands, due to the excitation of hole-carrier oscillation via a localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effects in the IR wavelength range. In addition, the LSPR response, which depends on the IR wavelength, can be tuned by the degree of copper deficiency (x). When x in Cu2−xSe is greater than zero, more vacancies are created, and the IR absorption band becomes gradually blue-shifted and increases in intensity.80Fig. 4c1 and c2 show that the absorption spectra of polymer-coated Cu2−xSe nanocrystals (NCs) exhibit a broad absorbance peak centered at 970 nm with monotonically rising absorbance at wavelengths below 500 nm,8 while gold-based nanoparticles show narrow NIR absorbance peaks at around 800 nm. The photothermal effect was investigated by monitoring the temperature elevation of the Cu2−xSe NCs under 800 nm diode laser irradiation with a power density of 2 W cm−2. After being exposed to NIR light for 5 min, the temperature change (ΔT) of the aqueous solution was raised by 22 °C (Fig. 4c3). Additionally, research on discovering novel inorganic materials has been progressing to achieve broadband absorption. Advancements in inorganic photothermal agents such as mixed metal oxides,175,176 MXene (Ti3C2)177–179 and titanium nitride (TiN)180 would offer great advantages for light-driven thermal applications.


3.2.2 Organic materials. 
Although non-organic semiconductor materials for light-to-heat conversion are relatively efficient, these materials normally comprise NP-shaped powders dispersed in solution. Since the practical applications of such materials require a uniform thin-film format, the fabrication of large-scale samples is challenging, and there are further issues in terms of environmental instability. However, organic materials have many advantages, as they are inexpensive, suitable for monolithic large-area fabrication and intrinsic thermal insulators.26 Therefore, much effort has been devoted to developing new organic materials for efficient light-energy harvesting. Conjugated polymers are organic macromolecules that are characterized by π-conjugated backbones of contiguous sp2-hybridized carbon atoms.81,82 Their overlapping pz-orbitals, which are orthogonal to the other three sigma-bonds, create delocalized electronic structures, leading to useful optical and electrical properties. However, solar energy utilization is impeded by the narrow absorption bandwidth and low charge-carrier mobility of conjugated polymers.83 Therefore, to broaden the absorption spectra, several strategies have suggested the copolymerization of electronic donor–acceptors,84–88 protonic acid doping89,90 and oxidative doping.91,92 These methods can offer high mobility, lower bandgaps and red-shifted absorption of the conjugated polymers. Therefore, with appropriate doping processes and molecular structure design, NIR-absorbing conjugated polymers with low fluorescence emission ability would allow for highly efficient light-to-heat conversion. It has been reported that the light absorption of polyaniline,26,168 polypyrrole,43,169 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS),35,170,171 polydopamine13,172,173 and other conjugated polymers174 exhibited broadband light absorption spectra.
For polyaniline, which is well known as an organic photothermal agent, protonic dopants (i.e., strong acids, Lewis acids, transition metals, alkali ions) form an inter-bandgap state between the valence and conduction bands that enhances the electron mobility and decreases the excitation-energy level. Thus, the absorption peak of polyaniline is red-shifted toward the NIR region. Meanwhile, a recent study reported that oligoaniline could convert light into heat as well.93 Compared with polyaniline, oligoaniline has well-defined molecular structures, good solubility in common solvents, and flexibility for chemical modification. With better photothermal conversion, chemically-modified oligoaniline foam (poly(1,3,5-hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine), PHT foam) was applied for solar steam generation (Fig. 4d1).26Fig. 4d2 shows that the PHT foam presents low total reflectance and broad light absorption within the whole solar spectrum range. In addition, with the intrinsic thermal insulating properties of organic materials, the temperature profiles in Fig. 4d3 show that the temperature of the PHT foam floating at the air–water interface rises to 46 °C within 15 min under a solar intensity of 1 kW m−2.
Among organic materials, polypyrroles (PPys) are outstanding photothermal agents, owing to their broadband absorption spectrum, excellent biocompatibility, photothermal stability and low cost.91,94,95 The wide range adsorption is characteristic of the bipolaronic metallic state of doped PPy. Metal cations, such as Fe3+, act as the oxidizing agent for chemical oxidation polymerization of the pyrrole monomer.96,97 In addition, PPys can be facilely coated or deposited on various substrates, including conductive and non-conductive and curved structures, while manipulating the PPy coating thickness. Recently, PPy-coated stainless steel (SS) mesh with hydrophobic treatment was reported by L. Zhang et al. for solar steam generation (Fig. 4e1).29 PPy was uniformly deposited onto the meshes by electropolymerization, and due to hydrophobic treatment, the PPy-coated SS mesh floated well at the air–water interface. PPy-coated ITO glass exhibited a broad absorption band, and the absorbance increased with the thickness of the PPy (Fig. 4e2). Fig. 4e3 shows that the temperature of the PPy-coated mesh increased to 53 ± 2 °C under solar intensity of 1 kW m−2.

3.3 Plasmonic metal-based materials
Noble plasmonic metals with negative permittivity (ε), such as gold (Au), silver (Ag) and platinum (Pt), on dielectrics (ε > 0) also enable the generation of heat under light illumination due to their unique optical characteristics, stemming from resonance oscillations of free electrons as a response to incident waves known as surface plasmons (SPs) (Fig. 5a, left image).98 Concretely, when the oscillation frequency of delocalized electrons of the plasmonic metal matches that of the incident wave, collective excitation of electrons is triggered above the Fermi level to higher energy levels, creating hot electrons.38 These hot electrons cool very fast by electron–phonon scattering within the noble metal lattice, occurring in picoseconds.99 Then, through phonon–phonon relaxation, heat is dissipated into the surrounding environment.100 Thus, among photothermal materials, metal NPs show strong heat generation via localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) because they have many mobile electrons for heat conversion. Extensive and frequent use of these materials has been made for biomedical and optical engineering applications.101,102 Despite their strong advantages, metal NPs have a fundamental limit because of their inherently narrow absorption bandwidth,39 which makes their application to broadband wavelength light absorption difficult.
 Fig. 5  Anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template-assisted light absorbers using plasmonic-metals. (a) Illustrations of plasmonic metal-deposited on the different AAO templates including (b1–b3) widening, (c1–c3) reservoir, (d1–d3) removing, and (e1–e3) molding purposes. (b1) Illustrations of the fabrication processes for the black gold membrane thin film via AAO pore widening. (b2) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the black gold light absorber. (b3) Optical properties of the stacked light absorber as increasing layers. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. (c1) Illustrations of the self-assembly of gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) on disordered nanoporous AAO templates (Au/D-NPT) to form the light absorbers. (c2) SEM and photograph (inset) images of the Au/D-NPT light absorbers. (c3) Absorption spectra of the Au/D-NPT light absorbers. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d1) Illustrations of the fabrication processes for the black gold film supported on the PDMS substrate via AAO template removal. (d2) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the black gold light absorber on the PDMS substrate. (d3) Absorbance spectra comparison between the bulk gold and black gold light absorbers. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (e1) Illustrations of the fabrication processes for the bidirectional visible light absorber (BLA, Au/Si3N4 deposited UV-nanocone array) via UV-assisted nanoimprint lithography with the AAO template. (e2) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the light absorber. (e3) The angle-dependent absorption spectra of the absorber from 15° to 75° illuminating the rear surface. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To attain broadband light absorption using plasmonic metals, one of the most effective approaches is the template-assisted technique (Fig. 5a) to introduce nano-(and/or micro-) structures to plasmonic metals, due to the optical advantages of the structure for broadband light absorption, such as light focusing, omnidirectional absorbance, minimized dissipative loss and efficient reflection reduction. Meanwhile, the advantages of plasmonic metal are maintained. Fig. 5b–e show that we can categorize template-assisted techniques for broadband light absorption according to how the template was used. This section includes the method that has no data of temperature rise, but which has the potential to be used for photothermal conversion using broadband absorption. First, we introduce effective temperature rise using ultrabroadband light absorption by directly depositing plasmonic metals on the template (Fig. 5b and c). Fig. 5b demonstrates a template widening method for a self-aggregated metallic nanowire bundle array, and representative results.25Fig. 5b1 shows an overview of the fabrication procedure for a black gold thin-film membrane: (1) fabrication of AAO template by a conventional two-step anodization process;103 (2) employing a pore-widening process by wet etching with phosphoric acid; (3) formation of self-aggregated nanowire bundles via a drying process (bending force > yield strength); and (4) sputtering-coating a film with 40 nm of gold and peeling off the gold-coated film with micropore tape. Fig. 5b2 shows that the metallic nanowire bundles have a wide range of gaps from zero to hundreds of nanometers over a depth of a few micrometers. Due to the various sizes of the nanogaps between the aggregated metallic nanowires, an average absorption of 91% at 500–2500 nm was achieved (Fig. 5b3). This black gold membrane was used directly for solar vapor generation with a few micrometer-thick light absorption layer and continuous water supply through micropore tape.
For effective absorption of light over a wide wavelength range, random distributions of plasmonic NPs with different sizes and shapes can give rise to hybridized LSPR effects due to overlapping plasmonic modes. In this respect, randomly-sized Au NPs deposited on a disordered nanoporous template (Au/D-NPT) for efficient light-to-heat conversion has been reported. Fig. 5c1 shows the Au/D-NPT that was fabricated via self-assembly deposition on a disordered nanoporous AAO template.28 As shown in Fig. 5c2, the Au NPs are closely packed in random distributions along the pores, leading to multiple overlapping plasmonic modes for broadband light absorption. Furthermore, the assembly of randomly-sized and distributed Au NPs on the more disordered template enables a high density of hybridized LSPRs to effectively absorb incident light, compared with those on a less disordered template (Au/NPT). Since the porosity of Au/D-NPT (∼59%) is much higher than that of Au/NPT (∼38%), reduced reflection, a stronger light–matter interaction and a higher density of LSPR modes can be induced. Thus, compared with the pristine nanoporous template and Au/NPT, the Au/D-NPT absorber shows an average measured light absorption of ∼99% over a wide wavelength range of 400–2500 nm (Fig. 5c3). The self-assembled plasmonic absorber was used for efficient solar steam generation, because of the highly efficient light absorption throughout the solar spectrum due to resonant characteristics of surface plasmon excitations.
Next, we will discuss plasmonic light absorbers fabricated via indirect template-assisted methods. For example, single-component, nanostructured plasmonic films can be fabricated by removing the template.36Fig. 5d1 shows a schematic of the processes of the template-removal method: (1) sputtering Au film (400 nm thick) on an AAO membrane; (2) adhering the patterned Au onto the desired substrate; (3) dissolving the sample in NaOH solution to remove the AAO membrane completely; and (4) achieving pure black Au. The sputtering system is essential for deeply penetrating and depositing Au atoms into the AAO template, because of its higher deposition rate, as compared to thermal and electron beam evaporation. Fig. 5d2 shows that the single-component black Au has randomly-sized nanotube structures (average pore diameter: 85 nm, average wall thickness: 15 nm, average pore-to-pore distance: 137 nm, depth: 400 nm). As a plasmonic broadband absorber, the black Au film had an absorbance of more than 92% from 300 to 600 nm, and more than 70% up to 800 nm (Fig. 5d3). The observed absorbing performance of the black Au film can be attributed to light trapping capacity as a result of the high-aspect ratio of the nanostructures. Therefore, all these characteristics of the black Au film could be attractive for a wide range of photo-related applications, such as light-to-heat conversion.
Furthermore, the AAO template could serve as a master mold (and/or a stamp) for UV-assisted nanoimprint lithography to create light-trapping structures. Fig. 5e1 shows that to fabricate the light absorber, a UV-curable resin was drop-casted onto a pre-fabricated AAO master template.104 The UV-curable layer was then cured on the PET substrate under UV illumination. A quasi-periodic nanocone array on a PET substrate was peeled off from the AAO template. The Au (20 nm)/Si3N4 layers (18 nm) were subsequently deposited onto the nanocone array (Fig. 5e2) via a radiofrequency magnetron sputtering process. The SEM image in Fig. 5e2 shows the high-fidelity replication from the AAO template. The dielectric/metal composite nanostructured interfaces induce improved omnidirectional absorption properties. Due to the unique interaction between optical modes, including the localized cavity resonant mode (CRM), localized surface plasmonic mode (SPM) and guided-mode resonance (GMR), the quasi-periodic nanocone array coated with Au/Si3N4 was capable of bidirectionally absorbing light from both the front and rear surfaces.105,106 The bidirectional structure was also designed to make the broadband light absorption of the absorber independent of the incident angle from 0 to 60° (Fig. 5e3). In addition, the proposed approach via this inexpensive unconventional lithographic technique holds the potential to improve the scalability and throughput of the absorber material for widespread applications.
4. Applications of broadband light absorbers via light-to-heat conversion

Table 1 shows various studies that have reported wide-range absorbers that can be used for biomedical applications, energy harvesting, and actuator or soft robotic applications, because of their advanced properties (Fig. 6). In the following, we highlight examples of applications of broadband light absorbers, and discuss the characteristics of each type.
 Fig. 6  Practical applications of broadband light absorbers including (a) biomedical, (b) energy-harvesting, and (c) mechanical applications. 
4.1 Light-mediated treatment
In recent decades, accurate therapeutic and imaging methods towards targeted cancer treatment have been widely studied in living systems. Among various methods, NIR light-mediated treatment (photothermal and photodynamic therapy, and photoacoustic imaging) is a promising and powerful strategy,107–110 due to its controllable operation of therapeutic moieties (e.g. heat, reactive oxygen and drugs), non-invasive signal detection, high spatiotemporal resolution and low photodamage. Although NIR light-responsive therapeutic systems have been extensively established with the advances of nanoabsorbers (nanomaterials), such as plasmonic NPs and semiconducting NPs, they typically have narrow absorption peaks within the wavelength range of the first biological windows (700–950 nm, NIR-I). As a result, most presented photothermal nanoabsorbers for light-mediated treatment are performed using an 808 nm laser. However, when considering the absorption and scattering effects in blood and tissue, the second biological window (1000–1350 nm, NIR-II) is well known to offer more efficient tissue penetration relative to the first biological window.111–113 Thus, photothermal nanoabsorbers responsive in the NIR-II region have been demonstrated for biomedical applications.114,115 In this regard, strong photothermal nanoabsorbers excitable in a wide NIR range, covering both NIR-I and II, play a significant role in enabling more effective treatment of deeply located cancer, with synergy achieved through drug release control, photothermal imaging and photothermal therapy.
Recently, a tungsten bronze-based nanoabsorber, comprising CsxWO3 nanorods (NRs) coated with polyelectrolyte multilayers (CsxWO3 NR@PEM) was demonstrated, which has strong light absorption in the whole NIR region, as shown in Fig. 7a.5 The wide range NIR absorption characteristic of CsxWO3 NR@PEM originates from its strong LSPR effect, since tungsten bronze (WO3) is an n-type semiconductor with a relatively high concentration of free electrons due to Cs-doping.116,117 With remarkable light-heat conversion ability and excellent biocompatibility, CsxWO3 NR@PEM would be an outstanding agent for in vitro and in vivo photoacoustic imaging tomography (PAT) and photothermal and photodynamic therapy (Fig. 7b). Based on PAT imaging guidance, highly effective in vivo NIR light-mediated therapy of tumors was achieved with CsxWO3 NR@PEM upon 880 nm (NIR-I) and 1064 nm (NIR-II) laser irradiation (Fig. 7c).
 Fig. 7  Light-mediated cancer treatments using nanostructured broadband light absorbers: (a–c) photothermal therapy and (d–h) controllable drug release system. (a) Absorption spectra and TEM image (inset) of polyelectrolyte-multilayer-coated cesium-doped tungsten bronze nanorods (CsxWO3 NRs@PEMs). (b) Fluorescence images of in vitro photothermal/photodynamic therapeutic effect of the semiconductor-based nanoabsorber against HeLa cells (live cells, green fluorescence; dead cells, red fluorescence) (c) IR images of HeLa-tumor-bearing mice after injection with the nanoabsorber under 880 or 1064 nm NIR laser radiation (2 W cm−2). Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (d) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of pristine nanoturf structures. (e) Absorption spectra of Au nanoturf, pristine nanoturf, flat polysiloxane acrylate (PSA), and PET (control). (f) Illustration of NIR-mediated drug release control from DOX-loaded nanoturf passivated by a thin gold film (DOX/Au nanoturf). (g) In vitro drug release profiles from DOX/Au nanoturf with or without 808 nm NIR laser irradiation (0.3 W cm−2 for 10 min). (h) Photograph of an esophageal stent incorporated with pristine nanoturf structures (Au nanoturf ES) and IR image of Au nanoturf ES-implanted nude mice under 808 nm NIR laser irradiation (1 W cm−2 for 5 min). (i) Representative images of DOX fluorescence by the cellular uptake of DOX/pristine nanoturf ES, DOX(+)/Au nanoturf ES, and DOX(++)/Au nanoturf ES groups, with or without NIR irradiation (DOX(+) = 1.18 ± 0.14 μg, and DOX(++) = 12.07 ± 0.87 μg). Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
More recently, a controllable and light-responsive drug reservoir, which is based on randomly formed nanoturf structures on an esophageal stent, was demonstrated.9 The nanoturf structures were fabricated using partially cured polysiloxane acrylate (PSA) with ultraviolet (UV) flood exposure. Partially cross-linked spots with relatively lower molecular weight were selectively removed by argon-based reactive ion etching;118 as a result, only the fully cross-linked spots remained as randomly-oriented nanoturf structures, as shown in Fig. 7d. Due to the high aspect-ratio nanostructure with different periodicities or porosities, gold-coated nanoturf exhibits strong absorbance in a broad wavelength range of 400–1100 nm, which corresponds to free electron vibrational behavior (Fig. 7e). In addition, the high aspect-ratio hole structures can be loaded with any drug, such as doxorubicin (DOX, anti-cancer drug). Fig. 7f shows DOX-loaded nanoturf passivated by a thin gold film (DOX/Au nanoturf), which provides controllable drug release, as LSPR-induced heating changes the drug diffusion rate from the structure at any time point under NIR irradiation (Fig. 7g). Moreover, the Au nanoturf structure was applied on an esophageal stent (ES) (Fig. 7h). Chemo- and thermo-therapeutic effects from the light-to-heat conversion of DOX/Au nanoturf ES induce cancer apoptosis via this highly synergetic treatment. In the DOX(+)/Au nanoturf ES groups, without NIR irradiation, cellular uptake of DOX was detected only in the vicinity of the stent region, whereas under NIR irradiation, DOX was observed in a larger region (Fig. 7i). Consequently, this result directly provides the evidence to achieve simultaneous chemotherapy and photothermal therapy using a multifunctional plasmonic metal-based light absorber.
4.2 Solar energy harvesting

4.2.1 Solar vapor generation. 
With increasing demands for clean, renewable and sustainable energy, harvesting and converting solar energy for solar steam generation is an important technology for green energy innovation, towards applications in power generation, sterilization and water desalination and purification.119–123,166 A recent study shows that the calculated overall energy efficiency of the steam generation process in this unoptimized experimental setup is approximately 24%,124 whereas the efficiency of the average commercial silicon-based photovoltaic solar cell is about 17%.125,126 Nevertheless, to further enhance the solar energy-to-heat conversion efficiency, a solar steam generator generally requires three key components: (1) a blackbody material, which absorbs solar irradiation over a wide wavelength range and converts the light into heat energy; (2) a thermal insulator that can reduce heat loss through underlying bulk water, as well as apply localized heating to only the absorber region for steam generation; and (3) porous and/or channel networks with hydrophilicity, which are necessary for continuous water supply through capillary effects to the evaporation area.
There are many candidates for the absorber layers, as referred to above, e.g. carbon-based materials, plasmonic metals and semiconducting materials. Different structure designs depending on the type of photothermal agents used have been proposed, including single-layer, dual-layer, and all-in-one structures.122 Because it is difficult to integrate the above properties into a single-layer structure, significant efforts have been focused on fabricating dual- or multi-layered structures. For example, a double-layer structure (DLS) consisting of a thermally-insulating layer supporting a broadband-absorbing layer was developed, as shown in Fig. 8a.127 Under solar illumination, the top exfoliated graphite layer (>99% absorption in the wavelength range of 250–2250 nm) generates a localized heating area where water evaporation occurs, while the bottom carbon foam (thermal conductivity (k) in filled water; 0.426 W m−1 K−1) enhances the thermal insulation of the system, and thus maintains heat localization. In addition, the hydrophilic and interconnected porous structures of the double layer transport the water to heated regions due to the capillary effect. As a result, the evaporation rate of water with the DLS is higher than that of the exfoliated graphite layer alone, due to the reduction of heat loss to the underlying bulk water (Fig. 8b). With the DLS, steam at more than 100 °C was generated at a solar illumination of 10 kW m−2 (Fig. 8c). More recently, progress in such solar steam generation has demonstrated the improved energy efficiency of solar vapor generation by using nanostructured hydrogel. Due to the reduced water evaporation enthalpy in the molecular meshes of hydrogels, integrated hydrogel networks with photothermal agents such as reduced graphene oxide (rGO)181 and PPy43,182 enable steam generation at a high evaporation rate (more than 2.5 kg m−2 h−1).
 Fig. 8  Solar energy harvesting and photo-responsive actuator using a nanostructured broadband light absorber: (a–c) solar steam generation; (d–f) solar thermal energy storage; (g–i) mechanical actuator. (a) Illustration and photograph of double-layer structure (DLS) consisting of carbon foam (insulating layer) supporting an exfoliated graphite (light absorber) under solar illumination (10 kW m−2). (b) The evaporation mass loss of water using the DLS under solar illumination (10 kW m−2). (c) The generated vapor temperature from the light absorber at varied optical concentrations. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. (d) Illustration of solar light-to-heat conversion and storage using PEG/PDA@BN composite PCMs. (e) Absorption spectra of the 30BN and the 30PDA@BN composite PCMs. Different BN mass contents were labeled as 30BN and 30PDA@BN. (f) Time-dependent temperature changes of pure PEG, PEG/BN, and PEG/PDA@BN composite PCMs under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photographs (top) of HiPCO, metallic and (6,5)-enriched nanotube bilayer structures and their absorption spectra (bottom). (h) Light response of the three different bilayers for wavelength bands of 600–800 nm, 850–1050 nm and 1050–1250 nm (0.35 mW cm−2). (i) Hexagonal array (smart curtain) of 19 bilayer actuators (13 Type A; it is flat without light irradiation and is curled when exposed to light and 6 Type B; it is reversed actuation) when simulated sunlight is off and on, respectively. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 


4.2.2 Solar energy storage. 
Although solar thermal energy is a promising cost-free renewable energy resource, its extensive utilization in practical applications is impeded by its intermittent nature.128 Therefore, an efficient and reliable solar energy storage system must be developed to overcome this time-dependent limitation. Phase change materials (PCMs) can absorb or emit a lot of heat by changing their phase mainly from solid to liquid or vice versa, without changing the temperature at a specific temperature. Latent heat storage using PCMs is an effective way to store the surrounding thermal energy itself, as well as release it when it is needed. Hence, various PCMs (e.g., paraffins,10 fatty acids129 and polyethylene glycol130) can be used to store thermal energy at a fixed temperature, by taking advantage of their latent heat (heat of fusion) during phase transition. For solar energy storage, the materials must have a high volumetric latent thermal storage capacity at low cost, and good thermal and chemical stability when used repeatedly for many hundreds of melting/freezing cycles. In addition, they must have high thermal conductivity to increase the energy charging and discharging rates. In the case of organic PCMs, highly thermally-conductive materials that form a composite with the PCM and thermal conductivity promoters (e.g., graphene,11,131 graphite132 and boron nitride (BN)13) are often introduced, to overcome these intrinsic limitations. Moreover, the solar-thermal harvesting performance of PCM composites can be improved by utilizing light absorbers with high solar-thermal energy conversion efficiency.
Polydopamine (PDA), as the major pigment of eumelanin, typically exhibits strong absorbance across the ultraviolet (UV) and visible spectrum.133–135 In addition, PDA has strong adhesion to different kinds of materials such as stainless steel,136 graphene137,138 and boron nitride (BN),139,140 due to strong π–π interactions and van der Waals interactions. Therefore, PDA and its compounds could be attractive candidates for solar energy harvesting applications. Recently polyethylene glycol (PEG)/PDA@BN composites for solar-thermal energy conversion and storage have been demonstrated, as shown in Fig. 8d.13 Among organic PCMs, PEG is a versatile PCM with a high latent enthalpy, wide transition temperature range, thermal and chemical stability and facile chemical modification. With the high thermal conductivity of BNs similar to several metals, PDA@BN PCM composites show strong absorption over a wide range of wavelengths (Fig. 8e), and rapid increases under solar irradiation, compared to pure PEG and PEG/BN composites, due to the function of PDA as an effective light absorber (Fig. 8f).

4.3 Mechanical actuators
Soft robots with non-tethered actuation have been developed using advanced manufacturing systems for prosthetic uses.141–144 Although several electrical thermally-driven actuation systems have been presented, large volumes and weights cannot easily be achieved. Light-driven actuators (photoactuators) can change their shape and induce mechanical movement in response to optical radiation, and provide considerable advantages of remote control, contactless and wireless actuation, as well as tissue-permeable operation.145–147 With different photosensitive materials, including polymers, nanoparticles and carbon-based materials, most of such devices have been fabricated with the incorporation of shape-reconfigurable structures, based on shape memory features,32,148 bimorphs,33,35,149 and hydrogels.34,150
For the direct and rapidly-reversible transformation of light energy into mechanical energy, several energy-conversion mechanisms have been proposed so far, especially photochemical and photothermal approaches.151 For example, azobenzene-functionalized materials, which can drive photochemical reactions in chromophores under light irradiation, exhibit a reversible response under alternate irradiation with UV and visible light.152–154 However, photochemical actuators have typically suffered from slow response times (approximately 10 s) upon light irradiation, and require two UV and visible light sources for reversible actuation. On the other hand, by using photothermal actuation with light-to-heat conversion materials, large deformation is achieved with an exposure time of within 1 s. Due to the highly intriguing photothermal properties of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), SWCNT-based photoactuators have been reported. A commonly used CNT actuator configuration is the CNT/polymer bimorph structure, which enables asymmetric deformation and different thermal shrinkages, because of the thermal stress between the two layers.155,156 X. Zhang et al. designed a bilayer structure that combined a thin polycarbonate (PC) substrate and three types of nanotubes with selective chirality distributions: (1) HiPCO; (2) metal-enriched; and (3) (6,5)-chirality-enriched SWCNTs, as shown in Fig. 8g.157 The absorption spectra show that the HiPCO SWCNTs absorb light in a wide wavelength range, while metallic and (6,5)-single-chirality SWCNTs have specific absorption wavelength ranges. Under light illumination at different wavelength ranges of 600–800 nm, 850–1050 nm, and 1050–1250 nm, the actuators were readily programmed, depending on the type of nanotubes used (Fig. 8h). Because of the fast and reversible light-responsive properties and programmable features with wavelength-selectivity to light, this approach could be useful for selective modulation in practical applications such as smart curtains (Fig. 8i).
Conclusions
In this review, we described the fundamental principles and mechanisms of light-to-heat conversion, and the effects of structural features in the development of broadband light absorbing nanomaterials. From carbon-based and semiconductor-based materials, to plasmonic metal-based materials, significant engineering designs for efficient light-to-heat conversion highlight straightforward directions to many biomedical and engineering applications, including photothermal therapy and imaging, controllable drug delivery systems, solar steam generators and mechanical actuators. However, to meet these practical goals, several hurdles associated with broadband light absorbers for light-to-heat conversion should be overcome: (1) simple synthesis process and/or fabrication of highly efficient light-to-heat conversion materials is required for mass production; (2) the biocompatibility and eco-friendliness of diverse photothermal agents should be clearly demonstrated; (3) innovative and optimized structures should be designed for inducing high optical concentration from a light source with low intensity as well as preventing heat dissipation; and (4) in the case of solar thermal conversion, a rapid response time to reach the saturation temperature of the light absorber is required due to the intermittent nature of solar irradiation. Nevertheless, we believe that the advances of nanotechnology and nanomaterials will undoubtedly provide an engineering opportunity to address the above problems. Therefore, achieving light-to-heat conversion using broadband light absorbers will lead to their practical applications in various fields, such as wastewater treatment.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Nano-Convergence Foundation (http://www.nanotech2020.org) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP, Korea) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE, Korea) [Project Number: R201700610].
Notes and references
R. G. Wilks and M. Bär, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef .

          S. Lozanova, 4 Things to Consider Before Going Solar Thermal, https://www.triplepundit.com/2011/04/4-things-to-consider-before-going-solar-thermal/(accessed: September, 2018).

          R. A. Serway and J. W. Jewett, Physics for Scientists and Engineers with Modern Physics, Cengage Learning, 9th edn,  2013 Search PubMed .
P. Vijayaraghavan, C.-H. Liu, R. Vankayala, C.-S. Chiang and K. C. Hwang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6689–6695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Guo, N. Zheng, T. Sun and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604157 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Jing, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, D. Gao, H. Chen, W. Song, T. Wang, X. Fang, W. Qin, Z. Yuan, S. Dai, Z. A. Qiao and C. Wu, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 663–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, Y. Yan, L. Zeng, Z. Shi, A. Gong, P. Schaaf, D. Wang, J. Zhao, B. Zou, H. Yu, G. Chen, E. M. B. Brown and A. Wu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1526–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hessel, V. P. Pattani, M. Rasch, M. G. Panthani, B. Koo, J. W. Tunnell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, G. Hwang, T. H. Kim, S. J. Kwon, J. U. Kim, K. Koh, B. Park, H. Hong, K. J. Yu, H. Chae, Y. Jung, J. Lee and T. Kim, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6756–6766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Appl. Energy, 2013, 106, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Tong, Q. Ye, H. Hu, X. Nie, C. Yan, W. Shang, C. Song, J. Wu, J. Wang, H. Bao, P. Tao and T. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1478 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xia and P. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2246–2254 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, G.-Q. Qi, L.-S. Tang, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, W. Yang, B.-H. Xie and M.-B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9625–9634 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ding, W. Huang, C. Song, M. Yan, C. Guo and S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6744–6747 RSC .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1223–1230 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wang, Y. Fu, X. Ma, W. Pi, D. Liu and X. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 114, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, G. Wang, X. Ming, X. Liu, B. Hou, T. Mei, J. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Carbon, 2018, 130, 250–256 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, Z. Pei, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 623–628 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, D. Torres, F. E. Fernández, C. Wang and N. Sepúlveda, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602697 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mu, C. Hou, H. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and M. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500533 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, W. R. Leow, T. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yu, K. He, D. Qi, C. Wan and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701627 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, G. Wu, T. Lan, J. Zhao, Y. Liu and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7867–7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamamoto, K. Kanao, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11002–11006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lim, T. Park, J. Na, C. Park, B. Kim and E. Kim, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e399 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ng, L. W. Yap, A. Roberts, W. Cheng and D. E. Gómez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 27, 1604080 CrossRef .
K. Mizuno, J. Ishii, H. Kishida, Y. Hayamizu, S. Yasuda, D. N. Futaba, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6044–6047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Boriskina, H. Ghasemi and G. Chen, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 375–386 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Liu, H. Lu, P. Zhan, W. Du, M. Wan and Z. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43803 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 323–343 RSC .
Z. Chen, Q. Wang, H. Wang, L. Zhang, G. Song, L. Song, J. Hu, H. Wang, J. Liu, M. Zhu and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2095–2100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Song, D. Ji, C. Li, A. Cheney, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, B. Chen, J. Gao, Y. Li, X. Liu, D. Aga, S. Jiang, Z. Yu and Q. Gan, Global Challenges, 2017, 1, 1600003 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Welty, C. E. Wicks, G. Rorrer and R. E. Wilson, Fundamentals of momentum, heat, and mass transfer, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, Appl. Opt., 1981, 20, 2606–2615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xue, K. Liu, Q. Chen, P. Yang, J. Li, T. Ding, J. Duan, B. Qi and J. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15052–15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Skeiker, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 2439–2448 CrossRef .
W. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Fang, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, M. Bai and D. Zhang, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 4208–4211 CrossRef PubMed .
E. A. Taft and H. R. Philipp, Phys. Rev., 1965, 138, A197–A202 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, T. Fan, J. Ding, D. Zhang, Q. Guo and M. Kamada, Carbon, 2011, 49, 877–883 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Xu and K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 269–284 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Yang, L. Ci, J. A. Bur, S.-Y. Lin and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 446–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, G. Wang, T. Mei, J. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4665–4671 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kashyap, A. Al-Bayati, S. M. Sajadi, P. Irajizad, S. H. Wang and H. Ghasemi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15227–15234 RSC .
M. Liu, X. Yin, E. Ulin-Avila, B. Geng, T. Zentgraf, L. Ju, F. Wang and X. Zhang, Nature, 2011, 474, 64–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Raut, V. A. Ganesh, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3779–3804 RSC .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Thostenson, Z. Ren and T.-W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2001, 61, 1899–1912 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Pradhan, H. Duan, J. Liang and G. S. Iannacchione, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 245705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Holubowitch, J. Landon, C. A. Lippert, J. D. Craddock, M. C. Weisenberger and K. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22159–22167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jo, J. W. Jung, J. U. Lee and W. H. Jo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5382–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Q. Wu, C. Mishra, J. Kang, H. Zhang, K. Cho, W. Cai, A. A. Balandin and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 203–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pop, D. Mann, Q. Wang, K. Goodson and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 96–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Umlauff, J. Hoffmann, H. Kalt, W. Langbein, J. M. Hvam, M. Scholl, J. Söllner, M. Heuken, B. Jobst and D. Hommel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1390–1393 CrossRef CAS .

          L. V. Wake and R. F. Brady, Formulating Infrared Coatings for Defence Applications,  1993, p. 10, MTL-RR-1–93 Search PubMed .
W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13669–13679 CrossRef .
N. Yu, Y. Hu, X. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Q. Tian, M. Zhu, X. Shi and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9148–9159 RSC .
C. Dette, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, C. S. Kley, P. Punke, C. E. Patrick, P. Jacobson, F. Giustino, S. J. Jung and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6533–6538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tao, T. Luttrell and M. Batzill, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 296–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, Y. Peng, L. Lin, C.-M. Fan, G.-Q. Gao, R.-X. Wang and A.-W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4429–4437 RSC .
B. Qiu, Y. Zhou, Y. Ma, X. Yang, W. Sheng, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Yang, X. Shu, D. Wan, N. Wei, X. Yu, M. B. H. Breese, T. Venkatesan, J. M. Xue, Y. Liu, S. Li, T. Wu and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4383–4392 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Pan, Y. Lou, X. Qiu, J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5564–5576 RSC .
D. Dorfs, T. Härtling, K. Miszta, N. C. Bigall, M. R. Kim, A. Genovese, A. Falqui, M. Povia and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11175–11180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cui, H. Liu, L. Gan, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2918–2925 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, L. Cheng, C. Wang, R. Peng and Z. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 1573–1580 RSC .
Y. Li and Y. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2952–2958 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. MacNeill, E. G. Graham and N. H. Levi-Polyachenko, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 1622–1632 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. MacNeill, R. C. Coffin, D. L. Carroll and N. H. Levi-Polyachenko, Macromol. Biosci., 2013, 13, 28–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Geng, L.-D. Liao, N. Thakor, X. Gao and B. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2854–2862 RSC .
G. L. Gibson, T. M. McCormick and D. S. Seferos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 539–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. Feng, M. Seifrid, M. Wang, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16063–16066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kulkarni, A. K. Viswanath, R. Marimuthu and T. Seth, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 2043–2049 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Yslas, L. E. Ibarra, M. A. Molina, C. Rivarola, C. A. Barbero, M. L. Bertuzzi and V. A. Rivarola, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 389 CrossRef .
M. Chen, X. Fang, S. Tang and N. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8934–8936 RSC .
R. B. Bjorklund and B. Liedberg, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 16, 1293–1295 RSC .
Q. Chen, X. Yu, Z. Pei, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 724–733 RSC .
X. Huang, Y.-H. Yu, O. L. de Llergo, S. M. Marquez and Z. Cheng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 9495–9499 RSC .
Z. Zha, Z. Deng, Y. Li, C. Li, J. Wang, S. Wang, E. Qu and Z. Dai, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4462–4467 RSC .
K. Yang, H. Xu, L. Cheng, C. Sun, J. Wang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5586–5592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zha, X. Yue, Q. Ren and Z. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 777–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Roper, W. Ahn and M. Hoepfner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(9), 3636–3641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Alexandria J. Med., 2011, 47, 1–9 CrossRef .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Webb and R. Bardhan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2502–2530 RSC .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Zhou, Y.-F. Zhu, X.-X. Dong, B.-L. Gao, Y.-Z. Wang and S. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 391–397 RSC .
W. E. I. Sha, W. C. H. Choy and W. C. Chew, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 478–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pardo, P. Bouchon, R. Haïdar and J.-L. Pelouard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 093902 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-F. Tsai, S.-H. G. Chang, F.-Y. Cheng, V. Shanmugam, Y.-S. Cheng, C.-H. Su and C.-S. Yeh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5330–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Wang and C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3869–3880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bao, X. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Liu and K. Zhao, Asian J. Pharm. Sci., 2016, 11, 349–364 CrossRef .
X. Ai, J. Mu and B. Xing, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 2439–2457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Smith, M. C. Mancini and S. Nie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, A. L. Antaris and H. Dai, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 1–9 CrossRef .
K. Homan, S. Kim, Y.-S. Chen, B. Wang, S. Mallidi and S. Emelianov, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 2663–2665 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, P. K. Upputuri, C. Xie, Y. Lyu, L. Zhang, Q. Xiong, M. Pramanik and K. Pu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4964–4969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, L. Feng, G. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Shen, D. Li and X. Yang, Biomaterials, 2018, 155, 103–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wang, G. Wu, W. Dai, N. Guan, L. Li and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1580–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tahk, T.-I. Kim, H. Yoon, M. Choi, K. Shin and K. Y. Suh, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2240–2243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Palanisami, K. He and I. S. Moon, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2014, 31, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Abid, M. Ebrahim, O. Nafi, L. Hussain, N. Maneual and A. Sameer, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2014, 31, 1194–1203 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Mariñas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, C. Feronti, A. D. Neumann, A. Dong, K. Schell, B. Lu, E. Kim, M. Quinn, S. Thompson, N. Grady, P. Nordlander, M. Oden and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 11677–11681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gerbinet, S. Belboom and A. Léonard, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 38, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Tyagi, N. A. A. Rahim, N. A. Rahim and J. A. L. Selvaraj, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 20, 443–461 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
G. Notton, M.-L. Nivet, C. Voyant, C. Paoli, C. Darras, F. Motte and A. Fouilloy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 87, 96–105 CrossRef .
A. A. Aydin and A. Aydin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sundararajan, A. B. Samui and P. S. Kulkarni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18379–18396 RSC .
L.-W. Fan, X. Fang, X. Wang, Y. Zeng, Y.-Q. Xiao, Z.-T. Yu, X. Xu, Y.-C. Hu and K.-F. Cen, Appl. Energy, 2013, 110, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Shi, M.-D. Ger, Y.-M. Liu, Y.-C. Fan, N.-T. Wen, C.-K. Lin and N.-W. Pu, Carbon, 2013, 51, 365–372 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, P. Yang, G. Chen, S. Gai, J. Xu and P. N. Prasad, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 13562 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lei, K. Ren, T. Chen, X. Chen, B. Li, H. Chang and J. Ji, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600767 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu and M. Su, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 160 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, M. Sakuragi, A. Shibata, H. Abe, T. Kitajima, S. Tada, M. Mizutani, H. Ohmori, H. Ayame, T. I. Son, T. Aigaki and Y. Ito, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2012, 32, 2552–2561 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Kong, W. A. Yee, W. Liu, S. L. Phua, C. L. Toh, S. Huang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4968–4971 RSC .
S. M. Kang, S. Park, D. Kim, S. Y. Park, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 108–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fernandez-Yague, A. Larrañaga, O. Gladkovskaya, A. Stanley, G. Tadayyon, Y. Guo, J.-R. Sarasua, S. A. M. Tofail, D. I. Zeugolis, A. Pandit and M. J. Biggs, Bioconjugugate Chem., 2015, 26, 2025–2037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Thakur, J. Yan, M.-F. Lin, C. Zhi, D. Golberg, Y. Bando, R. Sim and P. S. Lee, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 962–969 RSC .
J. Z. Gul, M. Sajid, M. M. Rehman, G. U. Siddiqui, I. Shah, K.-H. Kim, J.-W. Lee and K. H. Choi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19, 243–262 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Tolley, R. F. Shepherd, B. Mosadegh, K. C. Galloway, M. Wehner, M. Karpelson, R. J. Wood and G. M. Whitesides, Soft Robot., 2014, 1, 213–223 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, J. Amend, T. Farrell, D. Latour, C. Martinez, J. Johansson, A. McNicoll, M. Wartenberg, S. Naseef, W. Hanson and W. Culley, Soft Robot., 2016, 3, 205–212 CrossRef PubMed .
S. I. Rich, R. J. Wood and C. Majidi, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 102–112 CrossRef .
C. Wu, J. Feng, L. Peng, Y. Ni, H. Liang, L. He and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18584–18591 RSC .
C. Wu, J. Feng, L. Peng, Y. Ni, H. Liang, L. He and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18584–18591 RSC .
J. Deng, J. Li, P. Chen, X. Fang, X. Sun, Y. Jiang, W. Weng, B. Wang and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 225–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, F. Li, T. Guo and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9921–9927 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lan, Y. Hu, G. Wu, X. Tao and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1888–1892 RSC .
Y. Yang, Y. Tan, X. Wang, W. An, S. Xu, W. Liao and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7688–7692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-D. Han, Y.-L. Zhang, J.-N. Ma, Y.-Q. Liu, B. Han and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8328–8343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Terao, M. Morimoto and M. Irie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 901–904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takashima, S. Hatanaka, M. Otsubo, M. Nakahata, T. Kakuta, A. Hashidzume, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1270 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kobatake, S. Takami, H. Muto, T. Ishikawa and M. Irie, Nature, 2007, 446, 778–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2548–2554 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, J. Hou, X. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Yuan, L. Xiao, Y. Wei, S. Fan, K. Jiang and K. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 421–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Yu, C. Wang, D. Zarrouk, J.-W. T. Seo, J. C. Cheng, A. D. Buchan, K. Takei, Y. Zhao, J. W. Ager, J. Zhang, M. Hettick, M. C. Hersam, A. P. Pisano, R. S. Fearing and A. Javey, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 2983 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, R. Lin, G. Ni, N. Xu, X. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Lv, J. Li, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 70–77 CrossRef .
F. D. Nicola, P. Hines, M. D. Crescenzi and N. Motta, Carbon, 2016, 108, 262–267 CrossRef .
F. D. Nicola, P. Hines, M. D. Crescenzi and N. Motta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2017, 96, 045409 CrossRef .
P. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1078–1089 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Huang, C.-E. Hsiung, Y. Tian, J. Wang, Y. Han and A. Fratalocchi, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1600013 CrossRef .
P. Fan, H. Wu, M. Zhong, H. Zhang, B. Bai and G. Jin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14617–14624 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, J. Zhou, L. Miao, C. Liu, Y. Peng, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7691–7709 RSC .
V.-D. Dao and H.-S. Choi, Global Challenges, 2018, 2, 1700094 CrossRef .
J. Yang, J. Choi, D. Band, E. Kim, E.-K. Lim, H. Park, J.-S. Suh, K. Lee, K.-H. Yoo, E.-K. Kim, Y.-M. Huh and S. Haam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Xu, C. Liang, Y. Liu, Z. Li, G. Yang, L. Cheng, Y. Li and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6782–6795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gong, L. Cheng, J. Xiang, H. Xu, L. Feng, X. Shi and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 6059–6067 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, K. Yang, Q. Chen and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5605–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, H. G. Derami, D. Ghim, S. Cao, Y.-S. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18397–18402 RSC .
X. Wu, G. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Liu and H. Xu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700046 CrossRef .
X.-Q. Xu, Z. Wang, R. Li, Y. He and Y. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 9769–9772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, R. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhuo, L. Shi, J. Chang, S. Hong, K.-C. Ng and P. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1171–1186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, R. Li, L. Shi, E. Ahmed, Y. Jin and P. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700145 CrossRef .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Zou, Q. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, P. Chen, J. Shao and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40077–40086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, J. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, P. Li and Y. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701394 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ishii, R. P. Sugavaneshwar and T. Nagao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2343–2348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
F. Zhao, Y. Shi, L. Pan and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1734–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Jong Uk Kim	Jong Uk Kim received his BS degree in Chemical Engineering (2015) from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim at SKKU. His research interests lie in developing localized heating and cooling together with emerging engineering methods in material science and heat transfer phenomena, to apply to different areas ranging from neuroscience to energy conversion and semiconductor manufacturing processes.
Sori Lee	Sori Lee received her dual BS degrees in Chemical Engineering and the Department of Architecture (2016) from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea, and her MS degree in Chemical Engineering (2018) under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim from SKKU. She worked on the fabrication of high-aspect ratio nanostructures via semiconductor manufacturing processes for biomedical applications, including a thermo- and chemotherapeutic esophageal stent. She currently works at Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd.
Seung Ji Kang	Seung Ji Kang is currently an undergraduate student researcher, majoring in Chemical engineering under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. Her research interest primarily focuses on the development of light-to-heat conversion materials and structural design via conventional and unconventional lithographic techniques for energy, environmental and biomedical applications.
Tae-il Kim	Tae-il Kim is currently working as an associate professor in the School of Chemical Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. He earned his BS and PhD degrees from SKKU (2003) and Seoul National University (2009), respectively. He moved to University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) for postdoctoral research with Prof. John A. Rogers, where he worked on bio-integrated optoelectronic devices and their optogenetic applications, from 2009 to 2012. His research is based on nanoscale patterning using unconventional lithography and bioinspired electronics systems fabricated using this patterning method.

 	Fig. 1  Nanostructured broadband light absorber for efficient light-to-heat conversion. (a) Illustrations of broadband light absorber. (b) Various light absorbers depending on materials and their designed nanostructures. Reproduced with permission: “bimorph19”, “vertically align23”, “randomly oriented9”. Copyright, respectively, 2016, 2017, 2018, American Chemical Society. “hierarchical20”, “nanoparticles27”, “nanowires41”, “mesh29”. Copyright, respectively, 2017, 2016, 2013, 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. “aggregated nanowires25”. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Ltd “porous template28”. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

Carbon-based	Amorphous carbon (a-C)	Inverse V-type structured a-C film	Black body absorber	
52

Mesoporous carbon nanospheres (meso-CNs)	Controllable drug release	
6

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)	Vertically aligned single-walled CNT (SWNTs)	Black body absorber	
37

CNT/silica bimorph porous structure	Solar vapor generation	
19

Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (pNIPAM, thermal responsive polymer)/CNT bimorph structure	Photoactuator	
34

VO2/SWNT film	Photoactuator	
30

CNTs/Graphene oxide (GO)	CNT/GO, GO/nanofibrillated cellulose mesh and GO/NFC integrated structure (all-in-one structure)	Solar vapor generation	
14

Graphene (G)	N-Doped porous graphene sheet	Solar vapor generation	
16

Hierarchical graphene foam	Solar vapor generation	
20

3D hydrophilic reduced graphene oxide (rGO) aerogel	Solar vapor generation	
22

rGO/mixed cellulose esters (MCE) double layer	Solar vapor generation	
21

Vertically aligned graphene sheet membrane	Solar vapor generation	
23

GO film on cellulose-wrapped polystyrene foam	Solar desalination	
18

Fe3O4@graphene NPs within the phase change material (PCM)	Solar energy storage	
11

rGO/GO-PDA bimorph structure	Photoactuator	
31

rGO-CNT/PDMS rolled bimorph structure	Photoactuator	
33

rGO with PVA network hydrogel	Solar desalination	
181

Graphite	Exfoliated graphite/carbon foam double-layer structure	Solar vapor generation	
17

Acetamide/expanded graphite composite PCM	Solar energy storage	
12

Nano-graphite/paraffin composite PCM	Solar energy storage	
10

Carbon black (CB)	CB-added polyurethane (PU, shape memory feature)	Photoactuator	
32

CB-coated polystyrene foam	Solar vapor generation	
165

Semiconductor-based	Ti2O3 NPs	Narrow bandgap NPs (Oxygen vacancies formation)	Solar vapor generation	
27

MoO3−x QDs	Oxygen-deficient MoO3−x	Solar vapor generation	
15

CsxWO3 NRs	Cs-Doped WO3 NRs (high carrier concentration)	Photothermal Therapy/imaging	
5

Hydrogenated TiO2 (H-TiO2) NPs	Narrow bandgap NPs (oxygen vacancies formation)	Photothermal therapy	
7

Cu2−xSe NCs	Transition metal chalcogenide NCs (LSPR effect with high carrier concentration)	Photothermal therapy	
8

Oligoaniline	Oligoaniline containing poly(1,3,5-hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine) (PHT) monolithic porous foam	Solar vapor generation	
26

Polypyrrole (PPy)	PPy-coated stainless steel mesh	Solar vapor generation	
29

PVA/PPy hierarchically nanostructured gel	Solar vapor generation	
43

Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene) (PEDOT)	PEDOT doped with tosylate (PP-PEDOT)/PDMS bimorph structure	Photoactuator	
35

Polydopamine (PDA)	(PEG)/PDA@BN composite PCM	Solar energy storage	
13

Ti3C2 Mxene	Ti3C2 Mxene nanosheets	Solar vapor generation	
177

Surface modified Ti3C2 Mxene nanosheets	Photothermal therapy	
178

Surface modified Ti3C2 Mxene nanosheets by soybean phospholipid	Photothermal therapy	
179

Mixed metal oxide (MMO)	3D cylindrical cup-shaped MMO	Solar vapor generation	
175

CuCr2O4/SiO2	CuCr2O4/SiO2 composite with Frisbee and flat disk shape structure	Solar vapor generation	
176

Plasmonic metal-based	Au	Au and Si3N4-sputtered nanocone array via Anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template based molding	Bidirectional light absorber	
104

Self-assembled Au NPs into porous AAO template	Solar vapor generation	
28

Aggregated Au nanowires via AAO pore widening	Solar vapor generation	
25

Au-Sputtered nanoturf structure	Controllable drug release	
9

Multi-branched Au nanoechinus (Au NEs)	Photothermal/photodynamic therapy	
4

Black Au films on PDMS via AAO template removal	Photocatalyst	
36

Al	Self-assembled Al NPs into porous AAO template	Solar desalination	
24

P = εσA(T4 − Tc4)	(1)
	(2)
α(λ, T) + ρ(λ, T) + τ(λ, T) = 1	(3-1)
α(λ) = ε(λ)	(3-2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Blackbody radiation at four different temperatures (−50, 0, 50 and 100 °C), (b) solar radiation spectrum without atmospheric absorption. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 1981, Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nanostructured light absorbers based on carbon nanomaterials. (a1–a3) CNT–silica bilayered light absorber. (a1) SEM images of the light absorber. (a2) Diffuse reflectance spectra of the light absorber with increasing CNT layer thickness. (a3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the light absorber under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b1–b3) N-doped porous graphene sheet. (b1) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the N-doped graphene-based light absorber. (b2) Total reflection and transmittance curves (inset) of the light absorber. (b3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the light absorber under the solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (c1–c3) Hierarchical graphene (h-G) foam. (c1) SEM image and photograph (inset, top) of the h-G light absorber. SEM image (inset, bottom) of the frame edge of the hierarchical light absorber. (c2) Diffuse reflectance spectra of the light absorber. (c3) IR images of the h-G and the ordinary graphene-based light absorbers at three incident angles (70°, 50°, and 30°) under the solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 4  Nanostructured light absorbers based on inorganic semiconductors (b–c) and conjugated organic materials (d–e). (a) Illustrations of light-to-heat conversion during electron–hole generation and relaxation in a typical semiconductor (left) and in an engineered narrow-bandgap material (right). (b1–b3) Narrow-bandgap titanium sesquioxide nanoparticles (Ti2O3 NPs). (b1) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the narrow-bandgap Ti2O3 NPs. (b2) Reflectance spectra of commercial TiO2, graphite, commercial Ti2O3 powder and the Ti2O3 NPs. (b3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the Ti2O3 NPs under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (c1–c3) Oleylamine-capped copper selenide nanocrystals (Cu2−xSe NCs). (c1) TEM image and photograph (inset) of the polymer-coated Cu2−xSe NCs. (c2) Absorption spectra and (c3) time-dependent temperature changes (800 nm diode laser irradiation 2 W cm−2) of polymer-coated Cu2−xSe NCs (red solid squares) dispersed in deionized water. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d1–d3) PHT (poly(1,3,5-hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine)) foam. (d1) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the conjugated polymer-based light absorber. (d2) Optical properties of the light absorber. (d3) Time-dependent temperature changes of the light absorber under solar illumination (0.5, 1 and 2 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e1–e3) Polypyrrole (PPy)-coated stainless steel (SS) mesh (e1) SEM image and schematic (inset) of the PPy-coated SS mesh. (e2) Extinction spectra of PPy-coated ITO glass by electropolymerization. (e3) Time-dependent temperature changes and infrared images (inset) of the original SS mesh (black line) and the PPy-coated SS mesh (red line) under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 5  Anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template-assisted light absorbers using plasmonic-metals. (a) Illustrations of plasmonic metal-deposited on the different AAO templates including (b1–b3) widening, (c1–c3) reservoir, (d1–d3) removing, and (e1–e3) molding purposes. (b1) Illustrations of the fabrication processes for the black gold membrane thin film via AAO pore widening. (b2) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the black gold light absorber. (b3) Optical properties of the stacked light absorber as increasing layers. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. (c1) Illustrations of the self-assembly of gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) on disordered nanoporous AAO templates (Au/D-NPT) to form the light absorbers. (c2) SEM and photograph (inset) images of the Au/D-NPT light absorbers. (c3) Absorption spectra of the Au/D-NPT light absorbers. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d1) Illustrations of the fabrication processes for the black gold film supported on the PDMS substrate via AAO template removal. (d2) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the black gold light absorber on the PDMS substrate. (d3) Absorbance spectra comparison between the bulk gold and black gold light absorbers. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (e1) Illustrations of the fabrication processes for the bidirectional visible light absorber (BLA, Au/Si3N4 deposited UV-nanocone array) via UV-assisted nanoimprint lithography with the AAO template. (e2) SEM image and photograph (inset) of the light absorber. (e3) The angle-dependent absorption spectra of the absorber from 15° to 75° illuminating the rear surface. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Practical applications of broadband light absorbers including (a) biomedical, (b) energy-harvesting, and (c) mechanical applications.	 

 	Fig. 7  Light-mediated cancer treatments using nanostructured broadband light absorbers: (a–c) photothermal therapy and (d–h) controllable drug release system. (a) Absorption spectra and TEM image (inset) of polyelectrolyte-multilayer-coated cesium-doped tungsten bronze nanorods (CsxWO3 NRs@PEMs). (b) Fluorescence images of in vitro photothermal/photodynamic therapeutic effect of the semiconductor-based nanoabsorber against HeLa cells (live cells, green fluorescence; dead cells, red fluorescence) (c) IR images of HeLa-tumor-bearing mice after injection with the nanoabsorber under 880 or 1064 nm NIR laser radiation (2 W cm−2). Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (d) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of pristine nanoturf structures. (e) Absorption spectra of Au nanoturf, pristine nanoturf, flat polysiloxane acrylate (PSA), and PET (control). (f) Illustration of NIR-mediated drug release control from DOX-loaded nanoturf passivated by a thin gold film (DOX/Au nanoturf). (g) In vitro drug release profiles from DOX/Au nanoturf with or without 808 nm NIR laser irradiation (0.3 W cm−2 for 10 min). (h) Photograph of an esophageal stent incorporated with pristine nanoturf structures (Au nanoturf ES) and IR image of Au nanoturf ES-implanted nude mice under 808 nm NIR laser irradiation (1 W cm−2 for 5 min). (i) Representative images of DOX fluorescence by the cellular uptake of DOX/pristine nanoturf ES, DOX(+)/Au nanoturf ES, and DOX(++)/Au nanoturf ES groups, with or without NIR irradiation (DOX(+) = 1.18 ± 0.14 μg, and DOX(++) = 12.07 ± 0.87 μg). Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Solar energy harvesting and photo-responsive actuator using a nanostructured broadband light absorber: (a–c) solar steam generation; (d–f) solar thermal energy storage; (g–i) mechanical actuator. (a) Illustration and photograph of double-layer structure (DLS) consisting of carbon foam (insulating layer) supporting an exfoliated graphite (light absorber) under solar illumination (10 kW m−2). (b) The evaporation mass loss of water using the DLS under solar illumination (10 kW m−2). (c) The generated vapor temperature from the light absorber at varied optical concentrations. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. (d) Illustration of solar light-to-heat conversion and storage using PEG/PDA@BN composite PCMs. (e) Absorption spectra of the 30BN and the 30PDA@BN composite PCMs. Different BN mass contents were labeled as 30BN and 30PDA@BN. (f) Time-dependent temperature changes of pure PEG, PEG/BN, and PEG/PDA@BN composite PCMs under solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photographs (top) of HiPCO, metallic and (6,5)-enriched nanotube bilayer structures and their absorption spectra (bottom). (h) Light response of the three different bilayers for wavelength bands of 600–800 nm, 850–1050 nm and 1050–1250 nm (0.35 mW cm−2). (i) Hexagonal array (smart curtain) of 19 bilayer actuators (13 Type A; it is flat without light irradiation and is curled when exposed to light and 6 Type B; it is reversed actuation) when simulated sunlight is off and on, respectively. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Ltd.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
