Synthesis and potential applications of trimetallic nanostructures  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NJ06074K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NJ06074K
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 5438-5459Synthesis and potential applications of trimetallic nanostructures

        
          
            Shushay Hagos 
            Gebre
          
          
        
      
College of Natural and Computational Science, Department of Chemistry, Jigjiga University, P.O. Box, 1020, Jigjiga, Ethiopia. E-mail: shushayhagos@gmail.com
Received 
      21st December 2021
    , Accepted 20th February 2022First published on 9th March 2022AbstractThe continuous growth and advancement of nanotechnology have introduced new and novel state-of-the-art multi-metallic nanostructures with well-defined morphologies and small particle size, together with high surface area, enhancing the transfer of electrons between the metal atoms. Nowadays, the combination of three metal elements in a core–shell, alloy, intermetallic, or other forms of nanostructures is under investigation. The synergistic combination of three metals in trimetallic nanostructures (TMNs) leads to extraordinary physicochemical properties, better performance, and better durability in various applications as compared to mono- and bimetallic nanostructures. The trimetallic nano-catalysts synthesized using chemical, physical, and biological methods in alloy and core–shell structures have shown promising performance in organic synthesis, environmental treatment and remediation, and health applications. Ternary systems have shown up to 100% yield, conversion, and selectivity in the catalysis of organic reactions. Similarly, 100% organic dye degradation has been recorded in a very short time. Furthermore, trimetallic nanostructures have shown excellent results in different diagnostic biomarker detections. In the present review, the synthesis strategies of TMNs are discussed using recent literature. The potential applications of TMNs in organic reactions, environmental remediation, and health-related applications are also reviewed. Finally, the conclusion and future prospects are highlighted.
Shushay Hagos Gebre
Shushay Hagos Gebre earned his MSc in organic chemistry from Hawassa University in 2012. He is currently a lecturer and researcher at Jigjiga University at the chemistry department under the College of Natural and Computational science, Ethiopia. His research interests are in renewable energy, functional materials, and nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
Engineered nanomaterials are manipulated into various forms to improve their performance through doping, adding supporting materials, alloying, and other state-of-the-art methods.1,2 Thus, the evolution of monometallic nanostructures to bimetallic3,4 and trimetallic nanostructures (TMNs),1 and even quadrometallic nanostructures (QMNs),5 is currently under investigation for various applications such as catalysis,6 medicine,7 electronics,8 water treatment,9 environmental remediation,10 energy storage and conversion11,12 because of their auspicious and effective activities.13 The occurrence of such materials at the nano-level induces a precise size and morphology with a high surface area leading to them being more reactive than their conventional bulk counterparts.2,14,15 The nanostructures are easily manipulated into the desired size, structures, and architectures depending on the need for a wide range of applications. TMNs, as compared to mono and bimetallic nanostructures (BMNs), have shown superior performance in sensors, imaging, catalysis, and environmental applications due to the synergistic effects of each metal.16 The synthesis of new kinds of nanomaterial catalysts that have high catalytic activity, stability, and selectivity, low cost, and easily available fabrication using non-noble metals is of paramount importance.17 The combination of three metals in TMNs affords unique properties such as plasmonic,18 magnetic,19 catalytic, and optical properties that are significantly different from their monometallic counterparts.20 The addition of the third metal into BMNs introduces additional combination effects to the properties of TMNs, such as electronic structure changes, modification of the d-band center, reduction of the lattice distance, and overall improvements in the electronic charge shift, resulting in increased catalytic activity and selectivity of TMNs in comparison to their monometallic and bimetallic counterparts.21
State-of-the-art TMNs may have core–shell, alloy, intermetallic, mixed, or hybrid structures. In most reports, the core–shell structures show superior catalytic activities as compared to the alloy or monometallic counterparts because of the interplay of the electronic or lattice effects of the neighboring metals.22 In the triple core–shell structure, the first metal becomes a core, the second metal covers the core and forms an interlayer, and the third metal covers the interlayer and forms a shell and a successive electronic effect is observed in such structures.23 This successive electronic effect of the triple core–shell structure is more effective than the electronic effect in a bilayered system due to the concept of a sequential potential field that results from the ionization potential difference of the three metal atoms.24,25 Lui et al.26 designed a porous core–shell nanowire trimetallic Au@PdPt using a facile strategy (micelle method). The Au nanowire was designed as the core and the remaining porous PdPt surface as the shell architecture to yield the trimetallic Au@PdPt nanowire structure. Wang et al.27 fabricated an ordered PtCoFe alloy using a thermal interfacial diffusion strategy. The addition of Fe to the bimetallic PtCo helped to improve the charge transfer from Fe/Co to Pt, which resulted in changing the electronic nature of Pt (Fig. 1c). Similarly, Au/Pt/Rh TMNs showed better catalytic activity than the monometallic and Au/Pt nanostructures for the hydrogenation of methyl acrylate. The electronic (ligand) effect between the core and shell atoms and sequential electronic charge transfer can be from Rh to Pt and from Pt to Au (Fig. 1a and b).28
 Fig. 1  (a) Design for the fabrication of three-layered Pd–core/Ag-interlayer/Rh–shell trimetallic nanoparticles (TNPs). Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Springer, copyright 2009. (b) Sequential electronic charge transfer in the Au–core/Pt-interlayer/Rh–shell TNPs. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2007 (c) Electron transfer illustration of the synthesis of the bimetallic ordered alloys and trimetallic PtCoFe. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. 
Shang et al.13 reported the oxidation of methanol using PdRuPt nanowires where bromide ions were added to enhance the formation of the nanowire network structure. The trimetallic nanocomposite (TNC) in the Pd0.97Ru0.44Pt ratio exhibited the highest catalytic activity and durability, more than 3.5 times higher than the commercial Pt/C and Pt/Ru/C catalysts in an acidic medium. The addition of Ru to the PtPd nanocrystals increased the catalytic activity of the nanowires.
TMNs and oxides are synthesized using different supporting materials such as carbon, silica, Al2O3, and others to improve the performances since the active metals are directly bound to the supporting materials.29 Carbon-based supporting materials such as carbon nanotubes, reduced graphene oxide (rGO), activated carbon, and carbon nanofibers are widely employed due to their magnetic, electrical, stability, and thermal conductivity properties, etc. The durability and cost of the supporting materials are other important factors.30,31 For example, Elsheikh et al.32 used Vulcan carbon to synthesize the PdAgNi TMNs electrocatalyst. Similarly, Yurderi et al.33 used activated carbon-supported trimetallic PdNiAg TMNs for formic acid decomposition. The catalyst was highly active, reusable, and 100% selective for formic acid conversion. Mazzieri et al.34 synthesized the Al2O3-supported Pt–Re–Sn TMNs catalyst for naphtha reforming. The TMNs exhibited improved activity, selectivity, and stability without presulfiding steps for the reforming of n-heptane and cyclopentane hydrogenolysis. A very recent study by Zheng et al.35 showed that the carbon-supported Pt–Pd–Ni trimetallic nanocatalyst exhibited excellent catalytic activity for the hydrogenation of benzaldehyde and styrene as compared to the Ni/C, Pt/Ni/C, and Pd/Ni/C nanocatalysts. The ternary system showed 100% yield, whereas the Ni/c, Pt/Ni/C, and Pd/Ni/C exhibited 0.1%, 64.0%, and 58.2% yields, respectively.
The design of trimetallic and trimetallic oxide nanoparticles is applied not only to improve the catalytic activity, stability, and durability but also to replace noble and expensive metals such as Pt and Pd for various catalytic applications. The TMNs can also tolerate the poisoning of their surfaces by CO in various catalytic activities such as organic synthesis, the degradation of organic pollutants, CO2 reduction, and the electrocatalytic oxidation of small organic molecules like alcohols to energy fuels. This is a big challenge when monometallic catalysts such as Pt are used. The new properties introduced by the second and third metals, such as the reduction of lattice distance, change in the d-band center, and electronic charge shifts, have played crucial roles in the selectivity and overall performance of the ternary system.21,36 The morphology and composition of the TMNs are important factors for their catalytic activity and stability. Mesoporous and nonporous architectures are very important for a broad range of practical applications due to their large surface area and pore volume.37,38 The open nonporous structure enables the interaction of the reagents to facilitate diffusion or mass transport and resistance against aggregation. Multi-metallic mesoporous structures are currently used as nanoelectrocatalysts and photocatalysts,39–42 though the synthesis of TMNs is an emerging strategy for maximizing performance. There is, however, difficulty in synthesizing the TMMs in well-defined shapes, which has hampered the structure-performance relationship.43
TMNs demonstrate ever-greater catalytic performances as compared to the corresponding traditional catalysts or monometallic and bimetallic nanoparticles. TMNs have also shown their robust stability, enhancement of mass transport in organic synthesis, environmental, and health applications. However, until recently, there have been very few reviews that discuss the synthesis strategies and applications of TMNs for the above activities; for example, Nasrollahzadeh et al.44 published the greener synthesis of TMNs and their potential applications in general. Ali et al.45 also reviewed the bimetallic and TMNs for biological applications, with more detail given to the BMNs. Ahmed and Eman46 reviewed some synthesis strategies of BMPs and TMNs, basically the simultaneous reduction methods and seed growth method. They also gave an overview of the application of the BMNs and TMNs in the medical, environmental, and electrocatalysis fields. In our latest review,47 concerning the electrocatalytic application of TMNs, we have discussed the synthesis methods in detail, including their merit and demerits. Therefore, the present review covers both the physical and chemical synthesis strategies, which have not been discussed before, and the potential applications of the TMNs in comparison to the traditional, monometallic, and BMNs nanostructures towards organic synthesis, environmental remediation, and health-related applications.
2. The synthesis strategies of TMNs
2.1 Physical methods
Until recently, the synthesis of multicomponent nanoparticles with three different components has not been well studied and explored. Most of the studies showed that thermal heating methods are used for the synthesis of TMNs.48 The synthesis methods are categorized as top-down and bottom-up approaches. The top-down approaches (physical methods) are used to synthesize nanomaterials including TMNs.49 This method involves the destruction of bulk materials to give smaller molecules, then nanoparticles (NPs), carried out by physical forces.50 High-quality and pure nanomaterials are obtained using these methods; however, the consumption of high energy (temperature, pressure), and the use of complex apparatus result in the formation of low-yield products. To date, various physical methods such as sputtering, thermal evaporation, flame, and laser pyrolysis, laser ablation, spark discharge, etc., are used for the synthesis of nanomaterials.51 However, very few studies are communicated for the synthesis of TMNs using the aforementioned methods.

2.1.1 Laser ablation. 
The laser ablation method is considered an environmentally benign method. The method is carried out in different solvents without adding surfactants or additional chemicals.44 Thus, the obtained nanomaterials are free of counterions or reaction by-products, which allow them to be used in biological or biomedical applications.52 The NPs obtained via ultrahigh vacuum are extraordinarily pure and reactive, however, expensive vacuum instruments are required, which is economically difficult. Atmospheric air may be used for laser ablation since it is cheap and easily available. However, suspended nanomaterials in the air may be very toxic for human beings. The purity of the nanomaterials is highly dependent on the air quality; polluted air may incorporate impurities into the products, and the synthesis is uncontrollable.53
Pulse laser ablation (PLA) was used to prepare bimetallic Rh/Pt and trimetallic Rh/Pt/Au catalysts. The nanocatalyst was synthesized from tablets prepared by blending and pressing 325 mesh 99.9% pure metal powders using 50:50 and 40:40 weight ratios for the bimetallic and trimetallic nanocatalysts, respectively. The sample was sintered at 700 °C for 20 min using Ar gas. The nanocatalyst obtained from the powders of pure metals was crystalline, uniform in size with 1–3 nm diameter.54 Fast and one-step PLA was used to transform the Al–Cu–Fe quasicrystal into Cu/CuO/Fe3O4 and Al2O3 nanocomposites in ethanol and deionized water solvents. The pulsed laser dealloying was carried out in two laser fluences of 40 J cm−2 and 80 J cm−2 in both solvents for 15 min. The scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM and TEM) characterizations showed that the core–void–shell of the crystalline Cu–Fe phase in the core and the amorphous Al2O3 phase in the shell was formed in ethanol. However, hollow structures of Cu, Fe, and Al oxides were formed in deionized water.55 Similarly, bimetallic (Al2O3@Ag) and trimetallic (Al2O3@AgAu) NPs were synthesized using nanosecond PLA in deionized water. The Al2O3@AgAu showed improved catalytic activity in the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) as compared to the Al2O3@Ag.56 Sarker et al.57 prepared a composition-controlled ternary alloy of Rh–Pd–Pt using femtosecond laser irradiation without any addition of reducing agents. Pure salts of RhCl3·3H2O, PdCl2, and H2PtCl6·6H2O were dissolved in ultra-pure water and laser irradiation was carried out for 30 min. The obtained TMNs were free from any pre-added reducing agents and can be used for practical applications.


2.1.2 Mechanical milling. 
Physical methods such as mechanical milling, mechanical alloying, and mechanochemical techniques are used for the fabrication of nanomaterials including multi-metallic materials. Milled powder products are formed due to the deformation and fracture of the particles accompanied by repeated ball-powder collision procedures.58 Intermetallic compounds with small grain sizes and different thermodynamic natures are produced using mechanical alloying.59
The latest work by Musza and coworkers60 showed that NiSn, the bimetallic CuSn, and the NiCuSn nanocomposite were prepared using mechanical milling. The mechanochemical synthesis was carried out using different inorganic and organic additives. The milled Cu–Sn and Ni–Sn systems were examined with several grinding additives such as poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), and ethylene glycol. The quality and quantity of the milling end-products were highly dependent on the quantity of the applied additives and increasing amounts led to the formation of intermetallic compounds. Nanometric RuSeM and RuSnMo were fabricated using the mechanical alloying method for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). The characterization of RuSeMo showed the presence of a homogeneous bimetallic phase of RuSe2 and irregular morphology of free Ru and Sn with 14–32 nm particle size. Similarly, RuSnMo showed intermetallic bimetallic compounds of Ru3Sn7 and Mo5Ru3 and the irregular morphology of each, with sizes of 6–15 nm.61 Mondal et al.62 used mechanical alloying to synthesize nanocrystalline Cu–Ni–Co alloys. After 30 h of ball milling, an inhomogeneous Cu–Ni powder with 8 nm size was obtained, then the isothermal annealing of the ball-milled powder gave nonmagnetic homogeneous Cu–Ni phases with increased particle size to 30 nm. Further addition of 10 wt% Co resulted in the formation of Cu–Ni–Co alloys with magnetic behavior.


2.1.3 Sputtering. 
Various forms of nanomaterials, like alloys, core–shells, and nanocomposites, can be fabricated using a vacuum, in the magnetron sputtering route. To this end, the bombardment of a target with energetic gas ions is carried out using Ar, O2, N2, or H2, etc. The ejected atoms or groups of atoms by the bombardment are deposited on the substrate and inserted into the vacuum sputtering chamber. The energetic gas ions are generated via the collision of electrons and carrier gas in a vacuum using direct current (DC), radio frequency (RF), or magnetron sputtering.63 Less volatile and green solvents such as vegetable oil, silicone oil, ionic liquids, polymers are used. Ionic liquids such as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) are suitable for stabilizing nanostructured materials.64 Factors such as sputtering time, sputtering current, the rotation speed of the stirrer, temperature, etc. play a crucial role in determining the size and shape of the materials when the NPs are deposited on a suitable solvent.65 The synthesis of bimetallic NPs is reported using the sputtering approach using a direct gas-phase without affecting the morphology and size of the NPs by increasing the sputtering power.66
Cai et al.67 used a room-temperature ionic liquid (RTILs)-assisted sputtering method to fabricate multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT)-supported TMNs, (CNTs)–PdAu/Pt TMNs (Fig. 2). The TMNs was designed with a small size of 3 nm with a ratio of 3:1:2 of Pd:Au:Pt. The TMNs exhibited excellent catalytic activity as compared to the bimetallic and commercial Pt/C catalyst towards the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR). Similarly, Mattei et al.68 used a gas-phase route to synthesize Au–Pt–Pd nanoalloys using magnetron-sputtering inert-gas condensation. A DC magnetron-sputtering inert-gas was applied and the Au, Pt, and Pd NPs were co-sputtered concurrently. Pd showed a faster nucleation rate as compared to Au and Pt sputtered atoms.
 Fig. 2  Synthesis of (CNTs)–PdAu/Pt TMNs. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Springer, copyright 2017. 

2.2 Chemical methods
The bottom-up approach is preferable and effective for the synthesis of the TMNs, due to its simplicity, scalability, and being very cheap, which allows the building up of atoms or molecules to the nanostructures using solvothermal,69 hydrothermal,70 photo-deposition,71 microemulsion,72 galvanic replacement,73 ultrasonic irradiation,74 coprecipitation,75 co-decomposition,76 microwave,77 seed growth,78 co-reduction,79,80 and biological methods.81 The growth of nanomaterials is carried out by means of chemical synthesis through the reduction of metal ions using reducing agents. The chemical methods used reducing, stabilizing, or capping agents, most of which are toxic and are not acceptable from the green chemistry point of view.82 Furthermore, the purification of the synthesized nanomaterials from the reaction mixture of the reagents and organic solvents is a major challenge in the chemical synthesis approach.83,84

2.2.1 Microwave (MW) irradiation. 
The microwave (MW) dielectric heating method is a fast and widely accepted rapid technology for the synthesis of TMNs. The size and morphology of the TMNs can be easily controlled using the MW heating process.85 The MW irradiation technique is advantageous in terms of its homogeneous heating of the precursor materials up to the reaction solution and results in the formation of uniform nucleation, very fast crystal growth, and nanomaterials with a narrow size distribution.86 The MW technique is important in the production of quality nanomaterials by reducing side reactions, toxic organic solvents, and chemicals with controlled reaction parameters.87 The MW irradiation method was reported for the synthesis of Au/Pd/Pt colloidal nanocomposites. The BMN Au/Ag was arranged in the core and Pt was the shell with L-cysteine attached to the metals via its thiol group (Fig. 3).88 Ag/Ti/Zn TMNs were fabricated using ant (Pachycondyla sensnaarensi) venom via the microwave heating method. The aqueous solution of the ant venom is an excellent antioxidant that is expected to act as a reducing and stabilizing agent for the reduction of the metal ions to the Ag/Ti/Zn TMNs.89 MW irradiation-mediated Au/Pt/Ag TNC has been reported using trisodium citrate as the reducing agent. The nanocomposite was formed in a spherical shape and 20–51.3 nm size. Thus, the formation of Au nanowire and spherical NPs (Ag/Pt) was confirmed.90
 Fig. 3  The MW irradiation method for the preparation of trimetallic Au/Pd/Pt colloidal nanocomposites and the ionization energy of the corresponding bulk metals. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013. 


2.2.2 Galvanic replacement reaction (GRR). 
The GRR approach is carried out via the differences of the reduction potential between the replacing and replaced metals at moderate temperature, minimizing the homonucleation of independent NPs.91 In the GRR route, one metal NP is used as a template and the other metals that have higher reduction potentials are reduced and deposited on the template to provide core–shell, hybrid, or hollow multi-metallic structures. Wang et al.92 developed a GRR route to prepare Au–Cu–X (X = Pt, Pd, and Ag) using Au–Cu nanorods as the templates and further extended it to Au–Cu–Pt, Au–Cu–Pd, and Au–Cu–Ag by the diffusion of the metal precursors.
Nahar et al.93 used the GRR method for the synthesis of Au/Ag/Pd alloy TMNs in an ultrasmall size of 3–5 nm, being mesoporous (2–50 nm) with high surface area and an aerogel structure. The stepwise galvanic replacement of thiol-coated Ag NPs was carried out and the metal ions were reduced according to their reductional potential difference (Fig. 4a). The aerogels with higher Pd content and the wire-like morphology of the TMNs generated grain boundaries for enhanced catalytic performance. Similarly, Ag/Au/Pt trimetallic nanocages (TMNC) were prepared using GRR in a porous nanocage structure after Ag was added. The intermetallic synergistic effect between Ag, Au, and Pt can detect Rhodamine 3B in a concentration range of 10−8 to 10−15 M, with the lower limit of detection (10−15 M). The stability of the TMNC in air and solution with the relatively low cost can be tailored for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) detection.94 Ahm et al.95 prepared Ag@Ag–Au core–frame nanocubes via the GRR in an aqueous solution using CTAB. The transformation of Ag@Ag–Au core–frame nanocubes into Ag@Ag–Au–Pt concave nanocubes and then Ag–Au–Pt cage cubes occurred through the GRR as shown in Fig. 4b. The oxidation of Ag was carried out first and Pt atoms were deposited on the edges and corners to generate Ag@Ag–Au–Pt concave nanocubes. As the GRR continued, holes were drilled in all corners and allowed to alloy the Ag and Au atoms.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ag/Pd and Au/Ag/Pd alloy NPs via the stepwise GRR of L-glutathione (GSH-functionalized) Ag NPs, followed by oxidative self-assembly into monolithic Au/Ag/Pd alloy aerogels. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the structural evolution of a Ag@Ag–Au core–frame nanocube into a Ag@Ag–Au–Pt concave cube and a Ag–Au–Pt cage cube through a galvanic replacement reaction. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Hollow octahedral and cuboctahedral PtNiAu ternary nanocrystals were reported by Shviro et al.96 using a two-step reaction followed by the GRR method. In the first step, the nucleation of Au and Ni etching was carried out. Au nucleation was followed by its diffusion in the Ni/Pt framework to yield a ternary alloy. The formation of the hollow structure was dependent on the third metal. Fu et al.97 designed a ternary system of PdCuPt nanodendrites with low Pt content using GRR for electrocatalytic activity. The synthesis was assisted using bromide ions between a Pt precursor and a PdCu template in an aqueous solution. KBr was used to control the overall reaction kinetics since PtBr62− was first formed than the PtCl62− due to its stability. A combination of GRR and co-reduction methods was employed for the synthesis of the highly pure, uniform-sized PdAgCu TMNs, with nearly 90% adopting the branched tip morphology with hollow interiors and well-alloyed nature. The combined system was important for controlling the size and morphology of the TMNs in an aqueous medium at room temperature using a surfactant-less route.98


2.2.3 Co-reduction method. 
The co-reduction method is a straightforward process since the reduction of three metal salts is carried out simultaneously.99 Shi et al.100 fabricated Pt53Ru39Ni8 trimetallic nanosponges using the co-reduction wet chemical method, using hydrogen bubbles from the hydrolysis of sodium borohydride as a dynamic template for the synthesis of the sponge-like structure. The trimetallic nanosponges were prepared without support on a clean surface or additional organic solvent or seed (Fig. 5a). 3D trimetallic PdAgCu hollow mesoporous nanospheres (HMSs) were synthesized via the in situ co-reduction of the Pd, Ag, and Cu precursors on a “dual”-template structure using the surfactant dioctadecyldimethylammonium chloride (DODAC) in an aqueous solution. The TEM and high angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) characterizations of the HMSs showed uniform nanostructures with a well-defined interior hollow cavity and cylindrically opened mesoporous shell (Fig. 5c–e). The hydrophobic tails and hydrophilic quaternary head of the surfactant of DODAC self-assembled into rod and vesicle “dual” micelle structures (Fig. 5b).101
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Pt53Ru39Ni8 nanosponges. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic illustrating the formation of trimetallic PdAgCu HMSs based on a “dual”-template route. (c) TEM images, (d) HAADF-STEM images of trimetallic PdAgCu HMSs, and (e) high-magnification TEM image of PdAgCu HMSs. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
The ultrasound-assisted co-reduction of ternary PtIrNi nanocrystals was carried out to yield crystals with an average size of 20 ± 1 nm, an electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of 73 m2 g−1, using ascorbic acid (AA) as a reducing agent and pluronic F127 as a structure-directing agent. The formation of a porous nanodendritic morphology was confirmed by the TEM characterization. All the reactions were carried out in a one-step reaction at room temperature. The TMNs were stable and durable with enhanced poisoning tolerance in the electrochemical oxidation reaction.102 A two-step co-reduction method was reported for the synthesis of PtPdCr TMNs with uniform morphology and 4.5 nm size, which w supported by Vulcan carbon. The low content platinum (∼5 wt%) PtPdCr/C showed remarkable electrocatalytic application towards MOR.103
The co-reduction of HAuCl4, CuSO4, and K2PtCl4 precursors resulted in the production of Cu/Au/Pt TMNs using NaBH4 as a reducing agent. The obtained TMNs were used for biological applications such as biosensing and theranostics. The presence of Au in the TMNs introduced surface plasmon resonance (SPR) properties.104 The one-pot synthesis of the trimetallic Au@PdPt core–shell was reported using the simultaneous reduction of the three metals in a dual reducing agent (AA and hydrazine). TMNs with a well-defined octahedral Au core and crystalline dendritic Pd–Pt alloy shell (Auoct@PdPt) were formed in one pot without any workup procedure.1


2.2.4 Seed growth. 
The seed growth of NPs was carried out in two steps: seed preparation (nucleation) and subsequent growth. The TMNs prepared via the seed growth method are narrow in size with a high yield. Core–shell forms of nanostructures were obtained by this method. During the synthesis of the TMNs using the seeded growth method, the core (seed metal) reduction potential was higher than the layer and shell metals to prevent a galvanic reaction from occurring between them.105 The formation of well-defined TMNs depends on the quality of the seeds. Well-defined multi-metallic nanostructures of 1D and 2D were produced using the seed growth method.106 Aranishi et al.107 used a one-step seeding-growth method to synthesize Au/Co/Fe TMNs. A core–shell structure with a triple-layer of the Au core, Co-rich inter-layer, and Fe-rich shell was obtained. The roughly spherical and ∼10 nm in size Au/Co/Fe TMNs was used for the catalytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane. It was used several times due to its magnetically recyclable nature.
Ag–Au–Pd ternary core–shell nanostructures with 58.8 nm size have been reported via the seed growth method using AA/sodium alginate reducing agents for water treatment application. The TMNs were applied in the catalytic degradation of methyl blue (MB). The ternary structure (Ag–Au–Pd) showed the highest rate constant of MB degradation of 852.4 × 10−3 m−1, however, the binary Ag–Pd nanostructure and monometallic Ag exhibited 403.3 × 10−3 m−1, and 62.1 × 10−3 m−1, respectively.108


2.2.5 Biological method. 
Plant and microorganism extracts are used as reducing, capping, and stabilizing agents. The bioinspired method is advantageous in terms of the non-toxicity, ease of scale-up, low cost, and formation of structures with well-defined dimensions.109,110 Thus, the biological method solves some problems related to the environmental concerns and biocompatibility of the NPs for medical applications as compared to the chemically synthesized nanostructures. However, the biological method also has problems related to undetermined reaction mechanisms, since the phytochemicals or other biomolecules are used synergistically as reducing/stabilizing agents. Various plants and microorganisms are used for the biosynthesis of metallic and metal oxide NPs, however, few studies are reported for the green synthesis of TMNs.111 The production of low yield and difficulty in controlling the size and shape of the TMNs is also a challenge. Dlugaszewska and Dobrucka112 use a green and bioinspired method to synthesize Au/Pt/Ag trimetallic nanoparticles (TNPs) using Lamii albi flos extracts. The TNPs (35–40 nm) were applied due to their antibacterial activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and showed promising results.
Alshehri et al.113 used Origanum vulgare leaf extract for the synthesis of Cu–Co–Ni NPs. The hydroxy groups of the water-soluble biomolecules of the plant extracts synergistically reduced the metal ions as shown in Fig. 6. The Cu–Co–Ni NPs were used for the photocatalytic removal of methyl blue to exhibit 92.67% degradation efficiency inside 100 min using UV-Light. Similarly, Kamli et al.114 synthesized Ag–Cu–Co TMNs using the leaf extracts of Salvia officinalis and an equal amount of Ag, Cu, and Co precursor solutions (20 mL, 0.01 mol dm−3). The rosmarinic acid and luteolin-7-glucoside gallic acid of the plant extracts played a major role in the bio-reduction of the metal ions to NPs. Water extracted Meliloti officinalis-mediated Au/ZnO/Ag TMNs was synthesized successfully with the size of 20 nm. The hydroxy groups of the flavonoids such as melilotoside, dicoumarol, scopoletin, umbelliferone, cinnamic acid, caffeic acid, ferulic acid, and chlorogenic acid were responsible for the bio-reduction of the metal ions to NPs. Spherical, triangular, and hexagonal shapes were observed.115 Khan et al.116 used a biodegradable, biocompatible, and nontoxic biopolymer chitosan for the synthesis of Au@Pd@Ag TMNs for the adsorption removal of acid orange 7 dye. The lone pairs of the functional groups of chitosan such as amino, primary, and secondary hydroxyl groups make an electrostatic interaction with the positive surface of NPs. The TMNs exhibited an adsorption efficiency of 71.42 mg g−1.
 Fig. 6  A systematic illustration of the synthesis of the tri-metallic Co–Cu–Ni nanoparticle composite reduced by rosmarinic acid and water-soluble glycosides. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from MDPI, copyright 2020. 


2.2.6 Other methods. 
Tsuji et al.117 used a three-step reduction method to fabricate Au@Ag@Cu trimetallic nanocrystals using oil-bath heating at different heating time intervals. In the first step, a decahedral Au core seed was prepared from HAuCl4·4H2O solution in diethylene surfactant in the presence of the surfactant PVP with oil-bath heating. In the second step, Ag shells were allowed to overgrowth on Au core seeds of dimethylformamide (DMF) and Au@Ag nanocrystals were obtained. In the third step, Cu shells were allowed to be overgrown further on Au@Ag bimetallic nanocrystals to form the Au@Ag@Cu TMNs. All steps were carried out under PVP and oil-bath heating. The characterization of the Au@Ag@Cu TMNs using TEM and TEM-energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) showed that slight shape changes have occurred when the oil-bath heating was carried out in the range of 5–20 min, and 15 ± 2:44 ± 4:41 ± 4 atomic ratios of Au:Ag:Cu in Au@Ag@Cu nanocrystals were formed (Fig. 7a–c).
 Fig. 7  Au@Ag@Cu nanocrystals prepared by the three-step reduction method. Heating times in the third step were (a) 5 min, (b) 10 min, and (c) 20 min. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 
A simple solvothermal process was used to prepare PtNiCo ternary array nanoflowers. The obtained nanoflowers were annealed at a higher temperature. DMF was used as both a solvent and a mild reducing agent, iodine was used to control the specific facets (111), and PVP acted as a surfactant to control the size of the nanostructures. The nanoflower morphology of the PtNiCo was responsible for its stability and excellent electrocatalyst activity.118 Similarly, Bhunia et al.69 used the solvothermal method to prepare (Pt66Au11Ni23) alloy TMNs with narrow size distribution (3–6 nm). The PVP protects the TMNs from agglomeration during the synthesis. In another study, monodispersed PtPdNi alloy TMNs supported in graphene oxide (rGO) were synthesized without any surfactant materials. The solvothermal-assisted TMNs were highly uniform, in the size range of 2–4 nm, and uniformly dispersed on the rGO sheets.119 Carbon-supported PdCo@Pt core–shell NPs in elemental compositions were reported using one-pot sonication-assisted polyol reactions of Pt(acac)2, Pd(acac)2, and Co(acac)2 in ethylene glycol. The Pd–Co core and Pt shell NP showed excellent electrocatalyst activity in the ORR.120 Similarly, a MWCNT supported Co@Pt–Ru core–shell was synthesized using a surface displacement reaction. Sodium borohydride and hydrazine hydrate reagents were used to reduce the metal ions step by step.121
To summarize, synthetic methods have their merits and demerits (Table 1). Physical methods are used to fabricate highly pure and quality TMNs that may be used for medical applications without fear but the tedious instrumentation and consumption of high energy results in the formation of low-yield products. The TMNs can be effectively synthesized using chemical methods, however, toxic reducing agents are required to reduce the metals simultaneously or successively. Thus, the presence of toxic chemicals on the surface of the TMNs and toxic byproducts are big concerns for the application of the materials in the fields of health and the environment. Due to the dissimilar redox potentials of the metals, they can nucleate separately and mostly lead to the formation of core–shell structures. The selection of the reducing agent and the reaction conditions is important for reducing the metals simultaneously. Chemically synthesized nanomaterials are restricted from clinical field applications. The cost, complexity, environmental concern, and consumption of energy are solved by applying green routes. Plant and microbe extracts are used to fabricate the TMNs in a one-pot system. However, the problem of low yield, reproducibility, difficulty in the size and shape control of the TMNs are still challenges. On the other hand, the reaction mechanisms of the formation of the nanomaterials using plant extracts have not been deduced due to the huge number of phytochemicals that are collectively or synergistically used to reduce the metal ions. The synthesis, characterization, and application of selected TMNs are summarized in Table 2 below.
Table 1 Summary of the advantages and disadvantages of the chemical synthesis methods




Chemical methods
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Microwave
Fast and short reaction rate, high selectivity and yield
The presence of microwave effect maybe causes damaging

122–124



Provides uniform internal heating
Challenges in the construction of materials (reactors) like corrosion leaks, scratches


Low-cost and environment-friendly




Sol-gel
High yield, low operation temperatures, and low production costs
Long reaction time

122 and 125





Acquiring the use of toxic chemical




Introduction of impurities from byproducts of the reaction


Sonochemical
Formation of small size NPs at a rapid reaction rate
Carried out at high temperature or high pressure

49



Interface-mediated
Various interfaces such as gas–liquid, liquid–solid, and organic–inorganic interfaces are used to tune the reactions
—

122



GRR
GRR is used to prepare inactive metal nanocrystals using an active metal as the template
Increases production cost due to addition of templates

47 and 126



Controllable size and morphology
The procedures are complex and time-consuming


Seed growth
Tunable size, shape, and composition
Time- and cost-consuming

126



Facile and wide applicability
Complex procedures


Biological method
Simple, cost-effective, and environmentally benign, products are free from toxic chemicals
Unknown reaction mechanism, low yield, reproducibility problems

127





The biological method is not fast enough to compete with the chemical methods


Co-reduction method
A Simple strategy
Impurities among the core and mixed shell metals occur, special reducing agents required to reduce the precursor simultaneous maybe using dual reducing agents (overuse of reducing agent) results in more toxic byproducts

47 and 126



Easily control composition
Random alloy NPs are formed if the metals have a similar reduction potential


High yield and low cost




The simultaneous reduction provides smaller particles than the successive reduction




Solvothermal/hydrothermal
Simple and facile, environmentally benign
Performed at a higher temperature, higher than the boiling point of the solvent and atmospheric pressures

47 and 126



Metastable phases that cannot be obtained at normal pressure and temperature can be prepared
Corrosive resistance and high-cost materials are required such as Teflon-lined autoclave and closed vessels


At high vapor pressures and minimal loss of nanomaterials, the procedure is well controlled through liquid-phase or multiphase chemical reactions






Table 2 Summary of the synthesis and characterization of trimetallic nanoparticles




TNPs
Reducing agents
Method
Shape
Size (nm)
Studied applications
Ref.




acac = Acetylacetonate, L-AA = ascorbic acid.




Au–Pd–Pt/MoS2

L-AA
Wet-chemical
Nanoflower
14–26
Detection of H2O2

128



Au–Pt–Pd
—
Photo-deposition
Spherical
6.8 ± 1.7
Volatile organic compound oxidation

71



FeAl–Ce
—
Spray coating
Spherical
2–3
Fluoride removal from drinking water

129



Ce–Al–Fe
—
—
—
—
Removal of arsenite from water

130



Au/Ag/Cu

L-AA, NaBH4
Simultaneous reduction
Spherical
65
Degradation of MB

131



PdCu@Pt/C
sodium citrate
GRR
Core@shell
—
MOR

132



Au/PtPd
AA, CTAB
GRR
Core/shell
—
Alcohol electrooxidation and Suzuki coupling reaction

133



AgAuPt
AA
Sequential chemical reduction
Spherical
18 ± 4
MOR

134



PtCoRhd
oleylamine, CTAC
Solvothermal
—
33.3
Alcohol oxidation

135



Au@Ag–Pt@ICPs
sodium citrate
GRR
Core–shell
—
Biosensing

136



Au–Ag–Cu

Brassica juncea

Biological
Alloy
5–50
—

137



Au–Ag–Sr

Coriandrum sativum

Biological
Core–shell
70
Sensing

138



PtPdAu
—
Electrochemical deposition
Alloy
—
MOR

139



PtRuTe
Hydrazine
Self-sacrificial template
Nanotube
—
MOR

140



PtSnZn
NaBH4
Oil–water interface
Nanosheet
—
MOR and 4-NP reduction

141



PdAuNi/C
NaBH4
Sequential chemical reduction
Core–shell
—
Borohydride oxidation reaction

142






3. Applications of trimetallic nanostructures
The synthesis of multi-metallic NPs is currently of interest to the research community because they provide novel functions and performances not found in monometallic/metal oxide and bimetallic NPs. The multicomponent nanostructures can possess unique physical and chemical properties due to complementary or synergistic effects induced by interactions between the metal components.143 The combinations of wide ranges of metals in different compositions show excellent catalytic activity as compared to the single metals due to the formation of unique or modified properties. The addition of the third metal, such as iron, copper, nickel, and cobalt, enhances the magnetic, optical, plasmonic, and electronic properties of the multi-metallic nanostructures.144 For example, Fe–Ni–Zn, Fe–Co–Zn, and Co–Ni–Zn TMNs showed superparamagnetic, soft ferromagnetic, and hard ferromagnetic behavior, respectively, after calcination at 600 °C. However, the bulk samples showed paramagnetic behavior.75
3.1 Organic synthesis
The search for a more efficient, non-toxic, and economical catalyst that combines both homogeneous and heterogeneous behaviors is a great challenge in organic synthesis.145 There are very few reports on TMNs and BMNs for the catalysis of organic reactions. The heterogenic multicomponent nanocatalysts showed superior catalytic activity to the monometallic catalysts. For example, the bimetallic Ag–Au nanostructure exhibited an 84.8–94.3% reduction rate for p-nitroaniline (p-NA) inside 15 min whereas, the Ag NPs showed a 71.9% reduction rate after 40 min.146 A trimetallic nanoparticle (Au–Ag–Pd TNPs) synthesized via laser irradiation of a mixture containing gold, silver, and palladium colloids were studied by Tsai et al.147 for nabumetone drug (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug) synthesis via the Heck reaction from the coupling of 2-bromo-6-methoxynaphthalene with 3-buten-2-ol. The authors discovered that only 0.45 mol% of Au–Ag–Pd TNPs was adequate for catalyzing the coupling reaction to yield >90% of the product. However, the synthesis of this product using a traditional metal salt catalyst ((PPh3)2PdCl2) consumed 1.8 mol% and resulted in a yield of only 64% for nabumetone formation under the same reaction conditions. Similarly, Venkatesan and Santhanalakshmi148 synthesized Au–Ag–Pd TNPs for a Heck coupling reaction between methyl acrylate (1.05 mmol) and bromobenzene (1.0 mmol). The Au–Ag–Pd NPs (13 ± 0.5 nm) in the composition ratio of 1:1:1 was applied under K2CO3 and DMF–water solvent mixture at 120 °C. Only 0.5 mol% of the Au–Ag–Pd TNPs catalyst was enough for the coupling reaction to yield ≥95% of methyl cinnamate whereas, only 70% yield of methyl cinnamate was obtained using the traditional Pd(PPh3)4 catalyst under the same reaction conditions.149
Basavegowda et al.81 used Platycodon grandiflorum root extracts to fabricate the FeAgPt trimetallic nano-catalyst and the TNPs were tested for the reduction of 4-nitroaniline (4-NA) to p-phenylenediamine via an ultra-sonication reaction. A 94% yield of phenylenediamine was obtained using the nano-catalyst in the presence of NaBH4. Furthermore, the activity of the trimetallic nano-catalysts was checked for the decolorization of RhB and 89% degradation efficiency was obtained in 15 min. Concomitantly, Suwannarat et al.150 studied the reduction of 4-NP to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) using hollow Ag–Au–Pd TNPs. The reaction took place using an aqueous solution of NaBH4 with the substrate and the reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP was monitored by recording the absorbance at 400 using Uv-vis spectroscopy. The catalytic activity of the AgxAu1Pd2 (where x = 1, 2, 3) was superior to that of the bimetallic AgxAu1. Aromatic amines are important compounds for pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, polymers, and other widespread applications. The reduction of aromatic nitro compounds to their corresponding amines is crucial. A study by Haldar et al.151 also supported the catalytic performance of Cu–Au–Ag TNPs for the reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP with excellent catalytic conversion of 98.6% but the use of pure Ag, Cu, and Au NPs gave yields of only 6.7%, 13.4%, and 22.7% conversion efficiencies, respectively. Ahmed et al.152 used a simultaneous co-reduction approach to prepare Ag, Au, Pd, Ag–Au, Au–Pd, and Ag–Au–Pd TMNs. The Ag, Ag–Au, and Ag–Au–Pd nanostructures were prepared with quite small sizes of 8.7, 15.7, and 3.8 nm, respectively. The obtained NPs were used for catalyzing the reduction reaction of p-nitroaniline and the trimetallic nanocatalyst accelerated the reduction reaction by 151 times that of the mono- and bimetallic NPs.
A monodisperse graphene oxide-supported PdRuNi TNCs in the size range of 3.78 ± 0.43 nm was prepared using a microwave method by Sen et al.77 for the dehydro-coupling of dimethylamine-borane (DMAB). The prepared graphene oxide-decorated PdRuNi TMNs showed an outstanding turnover frequency of 737.05 1 h−1 and Ea of 55.47 kJ mol−1 during the dehydrogenation of dimethylamine-borane performed at low temperature. The heterogeneous catalyst PdRuNi was recovered for further use and performed at 77% after six cycles. Venkatesan and Santhanalakshmi153 synthesized Au/Ag/Pd TMN-based catalysts using a wet chemical method with CTAB as a capping agent. The prepared TMNs (4.2 ± 0.5 nm) were used as a catalyst for the Sonogashira C–C coupling reaction and only 0.5 mol% of Au–Ag–Pd (1:1:1) was satisfactory to complete the coupling reaction with ≥95% conversion and product yield. The TMNs catalyst performed better than the Pd and Au–Pd NPs catalysts under the same reaction conditions (0.5 mol% dose, K2CO3 base, 120 °C, and DMF–H2O solvent). Furthermore, the TMN catalyst was easily recovered and recycled for reuse;, it can be reused three times without losing its initial catalytic activity. The above authors in their other paper154 synthesized Au–Ag–Pd TMNs using a chemical method and CTAB as a capping agent. The TMNs were formed with the Au core/Ag-interlayer/Pd-shell and the as-synthesized TMNs were tested for the Suzuki C–C coupling reaction. The coupling reaction was carried out between iodobenzene and phenylboronic acid to yield the biphenyl. The Au–Ag–Pd catalyst showed good catalytic activity in the C–C coupling reaction, better than the Pd complex and bimetallic catalysts. Only 0.5–0.6 mol% of the catalyst was enough to provide 99% yield using DMF–H2O solvent, CH3COONa base, and 100–250 °C reaction temperature, whereas, 86% yield of product was obtained using Pd NPs under the same reaction conditions.
Fatahi et al.155 synthesized PdNiZn and PdNiZn-rGO nanosheets and ultrathin nanospheres, respectively, using the oil–water interfacial method. The trimetallic materials were used for catalyzing the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction. In the coupling reaction, both the electron-withdrawing and donating groups of the aryl halides were coupled to give good yields of 70–97% products under mild conditions and short reaction times due to the synergistic effect of the individual metals (Fig. 8a). High yields of the products were obtained using water as a solvent and low catalyst loading. Further, the nanocatalyst was reused seven times without significant loss of its performance. The rGO-supported catalyst showed better catalytic activity than the unsupported trimetallic nanoalloy due to its ultrathin nanosphere morphology, small size, and the presence of rGO. The proposed reaction is presented in Fig. 8b–d.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the synergistic effect between three metals (Pd, Ni, and Zn). (b) Important steps in the catalytic cycle of the Suzuki–Miyaura C–C coupling reaction. (c) PdNiZn nanosheets and PdNiZn/rGO spherical NPs thin films catalyzed the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction of an aryl halide with phenylboronic acid in water. (d) Isolated yields for the recycling of PdNiZn nanosheets and PdNiZn/rGO ultrathin spherical NPs as catalysts in the coupling reaction of phenylboronic acid with bromobenzene at 80 °C in water. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. 
Mishra et al.156 used Astragalus membranaceus root extract to fabricate AuFeAg TMNs. The as-biosynthesized NPs catalyst was used to synthesize α,β and β,β-dichloroenones from the cyclic diazodicarbonyl compounds. The catalytic performance of the TMNs was compared with the mono and bimetallic NPs in the presence of fluorobenzene (PhF) solvent. Their results confirmed that only 50%, 12%, 42%, 68%, and 60% of conversions and 27%, 5%, 3%, 48%, and 42% yields were obtained using Au, Fe, Ag, Fe–Au, and Fe–Ag nano-catalysts in 6, 9, 8, 5, and 8 h reaction times, respectively. However, on using the AuFeAg trimetallic catalyst, 99% conversion and >92% yield of α,β and β,β-dichloroenones was obtained in 3 h reaction time. Pt/Pd/Fe TMN was synthesized using the reverse micelle technique for the hydro-dehalogenation (HDH) of halogenated organic compounds (HOCs). The performance of the TMN was compared with the Pt/Pd, Pt/Fe, and Pd/Fe BMNs prepared by the same method. The TMN with twice as much Fe as the ratio of Pt and Pd (1:1:2 ratio) exhibited the conversion of 97% (TON = 8848; TOF = 253 min−1) in 35 min at 22 °C, however the Pd/Fe, Pt/Fe, Pt/Pd showed a conversion of 53% (TON = 3220; TOF = 92 min−1), 16% (TON = 971; TOF = 28 min−1), 40% (TON = 2431; TOF = 69 min−1), respectively, at 65 °C for the HDH reaction of chlorobenzene. It was proposed that the C–Cl bond breaking as a rate-determining step, which was weakened by Pd first and hydrogen ions from the solvent, was able to adsorb on the surface of the Pt (Fig. 9a). The TMNs performed for up to five cycles without any loss of their catalytic activity, but it decreased by 22% in the sixth run as compared with the first run. However, Pd/Fe performed only 7% conversion in the six runs. The main reason for the TMN exhibiting higher catalytic activity was due to the charge transfer effect among the metals.157 Well-designed Pt3(Fe0.75M0.25) trimetallic alloys supported on SiO2, where M = Fe, Co, Cu, Zn, Ga, In, Sn, Pb were prepared for catalyzing the dehydrogenation of methylcyclohexane (MCH) to toluene. The partial substitution of Fe with Zn formed Pt3(Fe0.75Zn0.25), an excellent catalyst with 99% toluene selectivity (99% methane concentration), 99% MCH conversion for at least 50 h, and higher TOF and higher hydrogen evolution rate than Pt/SO2 (Fig. 9b). The Pt3(Fe0.75Zn0.25)/SiO2 catalyst showed little deactivation under harsh conditions, showing its remarkably high durability as compared to the Pt3Sn and Pt3In catalysts as shown in Fig. 9c and d. The long-term stability of the catalyst was tested for two days with 0.25 wt% Pt loading and 99% MCH conversion, and >99.8% toluene selectivity was retained (Fig. 9e).158 Sharma et al.159 synthesized Fe/La/Zn TNC using the microemulsion method for the photocatalytic degradation of amoxicillin and for catalyzing the esterification reaction. The nanocomposite achieved 78% of degradation efficiency against amoxicillin. Further, the reaction of butanol, ethanol, and isopropyl alcohol with acetic acid was catalyzed using the Fe/La/Zn TNC to give 80%, 88%, and 92% yield products of butyl acetate, ethyl acetate, and isopropyl acetate, respectively. Majeed et al.160 synthesized nitrogen-doped graphene-supported (CuNiRu/N-rGO) alloy TMNs for the dehydrogenation of cyclohexanol to cyclohexanone. The selectivity, conversion and yield of the cyclohexanone using the catalyst CuNiRu/N-rGO were better than the monometallic nitrogen-doped graphene supported (Cu/N-rGO). The TMNs were better than the Cu/N-rGO, with 3.7% conversion, 8.1% yield, and 8.8% selectivity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Proposed mechanism for the catalytic cycle of the hydrodehalogenation reaction on the Pt/Pd/Fe (1:1:2) T-NP surface. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (b) Alkane dehydrogenation by Pt3(Fe0.76Zn0.25), (c) changes in MCH conversion in durability testing at 400 °C, (d) TOF at 300 °C, and (e) long-term durability testing at 320 °C using Pt3(Fe0.75Zn0.25)/SiO2 with 0.25 wt% Pt loading. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
3.2 Environmental application
The rapid growth of industrialization, population, and urbanization causes climate change, and water, air and soil contamination, and is a source of great concern in the 21st century. The contamination of water by dyes, fluoride, heavy metal ions, and waste pharmaceuticals needs an urgent solution.161,162 Therefore, the continuous advancement of nanotechnology has attracted substantial interest for environmental remediation and treatment due to the improved efficiency of the nanomaterials at a reasonable cost, stability, and recyclability. The small size of the nanomaterials is responsible for eliminating and purifying contaminated water, air, and soil via a chemical reduction process.82 In recent decades various eco-friendly, cost-effective, and efficient nanomaterials with unique properties and functions have been created for possible environmental decontamination.163 The TMNs are used for environmental remediations such as hydrotreating,164,165 fluoride removal,166 organic dye removal,167 desulfurization of diesel,168 photodegradation of pharmaceuticals, etc. The activity of Pd–Au–Sn TMNs, supported on alumina or silica, was tested for the denitration of drinking water. They showed the highest activity in the Pd5Sn1.5Au3/SiO2 ratio, with 97.5% selectivity under nitrogen, whereas the bimetallic Pd5Sn1.5/SiO2 had a selectivity of 93.2% under the same conditions.169 Al2O3-supported Pt–Re–Ge and Pt–Ir–Ge are used for naphtha reforming, both the TMNs showed the same activity when a small ratio of Ge was applied, however, increasing the content of Ge decreases the toluene yield due to the formation of isolated Ge and metal phase poisoning.170
A Mn–Ce–Ti sorbent prepared using co-deposition–precipitation, co-impregnation, sequential impregnation, and deposition–impregnation in different structural patterns was used for elemental mercury capture. The Mn–Ce–Ti exhibited sulfur-resistance activity and better adsorption of mercury, which is difficult with other materials. Hence, the TMNs solve the challenge of mercury capture due to the capturing difficulty on the solid surface materials to form particle-bound mercury and its insoluble nature in water.171 An electrocatalyst-modified electrode of NiFeCo prepared using a hydrothermal method was used for hydrazine (HY) detection. The TMNs were synthesized in a cost-effective and stable form for the detection of HY at a very low detection limit of 6.4 nM.172 Sharma et al.173 introduced algal biochar-mediated TNC (AlBc TNC), AlBc@La/Cu/Zr TNC, using a microwave procedure. The as-synthesized TNC was applied in the degradation of malachite green from an aqueous solution. The TNC achieved 94% removal efficiency for malachite green under solar light irradiation while the algal biochar achieved 76% removal efficiency as confirmed via the LC-MS technique. The TNC was recycled for further use and 71% removal efficiency was achieved after five cycles. The Si3N4-assisted Zr2Ni1Cu7 nanocomposite was synthesized by Sharma et al.174 for the degradation of organic dye (MB). The degradation of the MB in the presence of H2O2 revealed 81% for TNA (trimetallic nano-alloy composite) without Si3N4 and 92% for TNA-Si3N4. However, the degradation efficiency without H2O2 was only 67% and 79% for TNA and TNA-Si3N4, respectively. This is because TNA-Si3N4 has a lower bandgap (2.47 eV) than TNA (2.54 eV) and the presence of Si3N4 on the surface increases the adsorption of the MB. The La/Cu/Zr/C dots trimetallic nanocomposite (La/Cu/Zr/CQDs TNCs) was applied for the removal of malachite green and ampicillin antibiotic under visible light irradiation. The bandgaps of the CQDs and La/Cu/Zr/CQDs TNCs were 2.55 and 1.56 eV, which lie in the semiconductor region. The removal of the pollutants was carried out under different conditions, namely, adsorption followed by photocatalysis and coupled adsorption/photocatalysis. The TNCs achieved a removal efficiency of 75% and 86% malachite green, 96% and 91% ampicillin antibiotic by adsorption followed by photocatalysis, and coupled adsorptional/photocatalysis, respectively.175 The same TNPs (La/Cu/Zr) were synthesized by the same author for the photodegradation of ampicillin antibiotic. TNP was recovered for further use and the degradation capacity was decreased from 86% to 59% after six cycles of antibiotic degradation. A total of ten degradation products were analyzed by GC; ampicilloic acid (m/z 368), and diketopiperazines of ampicillin (m/z 355) as parent ions were formed initially as major products before being degraded to the nontoxic product as shown in Fig. 10.176
 Fig. 10  Photodegradation mechanism of ampicillin antibiotic using La/Cu/Zr TNPs. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Recent studies by Dobrucka177 revealed that Au–CuO–ZnO TMNs, 5–25 nm in size with spherical shape were synthesized using Vitex agnus-castus extract for the degradation of organic dyes, particularly methylene blue and crystal violet under sunlight. Maximum absorbances of 590 nm and 650 nm were recorded for crystal violet and methylene blue, respectively after 360 minutes of exposure. Wu et al.178 used a coprecipitation method to synthesize a porous trimetallic oxide (Fe–Al–Ce) from Fe(III), Al(III), and Ce(IV) salt solutions under alkaline conditions. The TNPs were tested for fluoride ion removal at different pH values. The highest defluoridation activity was achieved at pH 5.5–7.0, with a high fluoride adsorption capacity of 178 mg g−1 under 84.5 mg L−1 F− concentration and 150 mg L−1 of the adsorbent dose. The treatment was carried out under NaOH solution at pH, where 97% desorption efficiency was achieved. Similarly, Adak et al.179 prepared a trimetallic oxide (Al–Fe–La) nano-adsorbent for fluoride removal from drinking water after calcination at 400 °C, leading to a high surface area of 22.12 m2 g−1, suitable for fluoride adsorption. The maximum adsorption capacity was recorded up to ∼99% using a 0.3 g/100 mL dose of the NP and F− concentration of 3 ppm, ∼99.2% at the 0.3 g/100 mL dose and 5 ppm, and ∼99.6% using the 0.3 g/100 mL dose, and 10 ppm was obtained in the first 15 min. Again, a maximum adsorption of up to 99.1% was recorded having a dose of 0.2 g/100 mL and fluoride concentration of 3–5 ppm, and ∼98 for 0.2 g/100 mL trimetallic oxide dose and 10 ppm fluoride concentration in 45 min was recorded. Therefore, maximum adsorption was achieved in 60 min and it was considered as an equilibrium condition. Mukherjee et al.180 formed the trimetallic Fe–Al–Ti (1:1:1) oxide nanocomposite on calcining at 900 °C for 4 hours for the defluoridation and photodegradation of MB. Their findings showed that increasing the concentration of F− increased the removal efficiency. An adsorbent dose of 0.2 g/100 mL was applied to obtain the most satisfactory results for all of the sets of fluoride solutions. A maximum of 99.00% F− removal capacity was observed after 30 min. Only 1 mmol of the Fe–Al–Ti was enough for the photocatalyst to detoxify the organic MB to leuco-methylene blue with greater than 90% degradation efficiencies under different concentrations of MB solutions. A graphene oxide-supported La–Co–Ni trimetallic nanocomposite (La–Co–Ni@GO TNC) was prepared by Sharma et al.181 for the photocatalytic remediation of 2-chlorophenol from water. A comparison of the catalytic activity of the graphene-supported La–Co–Ni@GO TNC and La–Co–Ni TNPs was done. The optical bandgaps of the La/Co/Ni TNPs and La/Co/Ni@GO were 2.55 and 2.42 eV, respectively which lie in the semiconductor region for the photocatalyst. The photocatalytic removal of 2-chlorophenol on applying the supported TNC under sunlight irradiation was found to be 71% as compared to the unsupported La/Co/Ni TNPs that accomplished only 57% in 300 min. Further, the TNC nanocatalyst was stable and can be reused, and 54% and 68% degradation efficiencies were obtained in the five cycles for La/Co/Ni TNPs and La–Co–Ni@GO TNC, respectively.
Amorphous silica, amine-modified silica (AFS), and mercapto-modified silica (MFS) decorated Ag–Bi–Cu TMN were tested for the photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) under sunlight in comparison to the Ag–Au, and Au–Cu BMNs. The MFS-supported TMNs showed the highest degradation efficiency of 90.9% while the TMNs assisted by AFS showed only 82.0% efficiency (Fig. 11a). The presence of multi-metals on the surface of the silica-functionalized TMNs influenced the reduction of the recombination of the electrons on the metal NPs, which allowed the transfer from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) in the same metal (Fig. 11b and c).182
 Fig. 11  (a) Proposed mechanism for the photodegradation of RhB using di- and trimetallic NPs. (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the main photocatalytic reaction. (c) The efficiency of the catalysts in RhB degradation. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
Gong et al.183 synthesized blackberry-like Ni@Cu@Pd TMNs via seed-mediated growth for the catalytic reduction of RhB, MB, and 4-NP (Fig. 12a). The catalytic reduction was monitored by observing the visible color change of the organic pollutants to colorless (Fig. 12b). The TMNs showed excellent catalytic reduction of organic pollutants as compared to the Ni NPs and blackberry-like Ni@Cu NPs, due to their blackberry structure and large surface area. Besides, the TMNs did not show significant structural and performance changes after five cycles, and the catalytic efficiency of the TMNs for RhB after five cycles was better than 80% as characterized by Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and SEM techniques; however, 20% aggregated NPs were observed in the SEM images (Fig. 12d and e). Finally, the rate constants were 7.20, 3.29, and 1.10 min−1 for the reduction of RhB, MB, and 4-NP, respectively. Porous trimetallic Au@Pd@Ru TMNs showed better catalytic activity than the porous Au@Pd NPs and porous Au NPs for p-nitrophenol and azo dye removal, which indicated the effect of the third metal for its excellent performance.184 Similarly, the core–shell structure of Fe/Cu/Ag (5:1:0.2) TMNs was used to degrade methyl orange (MO). The TMNs exhibited 100% degradation efficiency inside 1 min, whereas, Fe/Cu and Fe/Ag showed 100% and 69% in 10 and 15 min, respectively.185 In another study, Emam and Ahmed186 synthesized homo-metallic (Ag) and hetero-metallic (Ag–Au) and Ag–Au–Pd nanostructures with sizes of 9.1, 23.7, and 13.6 nm, respectively, using sequential reduction. The nanostructures were used for the degradation of MB and MO in the presence of sodium borohydride. The degradation of MB and MO without any of the catalysts was recorded as 68% and 73% after 80 and 90 min, respectively. However, using the homo-metallic Ag and bimetallic (Ag–Au), 85–92% of degradation was obtained inside 20 min for MB and 40 min for MO; thus, the homo-metallic nanostructure showed better performance than the bimetallic nanostructure due to its small particle size. Finally, the Ag–Au–Pd trimetallic nanostructures showed full degradation (96.5–98.6%) inside 4 min.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of Ni, Ni@Cu, and Ni@Cu@ Pd NPs. (b) The color change and molecular structure of RhB after catalytic reduction by Ni@Cu@Pd NPs. The UV-vis spectra of RhB during reduction in the presence of NaBH4 solution. (c) XRD patterns before and after use. (d and e) SEM images before and after the fifth cycle. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Zarei et al.187 synthesized stabilized Ni/Fe/Zn TMNs for the degradation of perchlorate. The TMN were prepared with an average size of 20–50 nm and spherical shape. Under the optimum temperature, time, pH, and amount of catalyst, the TMN exhibited 98.10% degradation efficiency with nearly 90% of the perchlorate conversion to chlorine ions. A recent study by Emam et al.188 reported chitin-mediated recyclable catalysts of homo-metallic (Ag@chitin, Au@chitin, and Pd@chitin) and hetero-metallic Au@Ag@chitin, Pd@Ag@chitin, and Pd@Au@Ag@chitin composites using the melt intercalation technique for the hydrolysis of prothiofos pesticides. Cubic Au, rock-like Pd, and uniformly clustered bimetallic and trimetallic@chitin composite structures were obtained. The Ag@chitin, Au@chitin, and Pd@chitin showed 32.0% (115 mg g−1), 49% (170 mg g−1), and 58% (208 mg g−1) degradation of the prothiofos through hydrolysis, respectively after 150 min., whereas the Pd@Au@Ag@chitin, Pd@Ag@chitin, and Au@Ag@chitin showed 99% (348 mg g−1), 92% (324 mg g−1), and 78% (271 mg g−1) hydrolysis, respectively due to the synergistic effect. The trimetallic composite was used up to five times during the prothiofos hydrolysis and a 22% reduction was observed in the fifth cycle. Aqueous leaf extract of Eryngium campestre-mediated Cu/Cr/Ni TMNs were reported for the separation of Cu, Cr, and Ni ions from aqueous solution. The ternary catalyst exhibited maximum removal efficiencies of 98.92%, 98.16%, and 93.39% corresponding to Cu, Cr, and Ni at a pH of 7.189
3.3 Health applications
The advancement of nanotechnology in the medical field is due to the unique physicochemical properties of the nanomaterials. The unique physical, chemical, and tuneable properties of the multi-metallic nanostructures result in their application as excellent temperature sensors and fluorescence detectors for H2O2, glucose, cancer theranostics, antibacterial, antioxidant, anticancer, drug delivery, as compared to the monometallic and bimetallic counterparts in lower metal concentrations.144,190,191 The detection of the molecules is very important in food analysis and health for toxin identification and cancer detection.192 For example, the design of a reliable, fast, and cost-effective glucose sensor to determine and control diabetes.193 To date, many efforts have been made to develop electrochemical immunosensors for biological detection, food safety, environmental pollution monitoring, etc. AgPtCo nanodendrites (NDs) have been used as an electrochemical biosensor for human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) assays with a minimum detectable concentration of 0.487 pg mL−1. Therefore, the NDs can be used as a diagnostic biomarker in ovarian cancer patients.194 Wu et al.195 synthesized Cu/Au/Pt TMNs as a novel enzyme mimic for biosensing applications in H2O2 catalytic reduction. The Cu/Au/Pt TMNs was synthesized in an earthworm-like structure with particle size of 20 nm. In comparison to horseradish peroxidase (HRP), TMNs were highly stable up to 55 °C, whereas the activity of HRP decreased at 30 °C; TMNs can perform for seven days without losing their performance but the HRP activity decreased in a day. Thus, the Cu/Au/Pt TMNs showed several merits, and they can be used in biological applications on Au-S surface interactions. Similarly, the Au@PdPt trimetallic dendritic structure was used in electrochemical sensing to monitor K-562 cells and exhibited robust, selective signal amplifying nanoprobes for the ultrasensitive electrochemical cytosensing of K-562 cancer cells with a wide linear range of 1.0 × 102 to 2.0 × 107 cells mL−1 and detection limit of 31 cells mL−1.196
Au/Pt/Ag TMNs were prepared by Zhang and Toshima197via the reduction of the corresponding ions with the rapid injection of NaBH4. The TMNs (1.5 nm) with the Au70/Pt20/Ag10 ratio showed excellent catalytic activity and durability for aerobic glucose oxidation. The activity of the TMNs catalyst did not decrease much in several runs; 70% of the initial activity was obtained even after four cycles and its high catalytic activity can remain for 8 hours. CuAuPd TMNs were synthesized by Yuan et al.198 for the qualitative electrochemical detection of semaphorin 3E (Sema3E), a potential biomarker for several diseases such as atherosclerosis and systemic sclerosis. The CuAuPd nanowire network with high surface area showed fast electron transport activity, excellent catalytic performance, and biocompatible novel biosensors. The repeatability, specificity, and stability of the CuAuPd biosensor were checked and the results revealed a 1.2% decline in current response when it was stored for a week; further, 91% of its initial intensity was retained after four weeks of storage. The successive cyclic voltammetry scan measurement for 50 cycles confirmed the retention and stability of the TMNs as a biosensor. The AuPtPd nanocomposite supported on rGO of a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was synthesized by Dong and coworkers199 for breast cancer diagnosis. MDA-MB-231 and T47D types of breast cancer cells were used for the detection of H2O2 release and the results indicated that the living cells remained healthy even on incubation with 2 μg mL−1 of AuPtPd/rGO for 24 h. Further, the GCE-modified AuPtPd/rGO nanocomposite was investigated for the reduction of H2O2 in a wide range of 0.005 μM to 6.5 nM with a low detection limit of 2 nM, good selectivity, stability, biocompatibility, and acceptable repeatability. Similarly, Tian et al.200 used PtPdCu nanocage electrodes for the electrochemical reduction of H2O2. The PtPdCu electrode showed excellent sensitivity and electrochemical activity as compared to the mono and bimetallic nanotrusses due to its hollow porous structure, large surface area, and synergistic electrocatalysis effect among the metals, which allow the diffusion of the analyte and desorption of intermediate products. The electrochemical sensor also shows long-term stability for 30 days to attain 97% of its initial current response using 0.2 mM H2O2.
Wu et al.201 studied the calorimetric detection of hazardous microcystin-LR (MC-LR) using Cu/Au/Pt TNPs-encapsulated DNA hydrogel. The 3D DNA hydrogels were used as a target response and increased the peroxidase-like activity. The two complementary DNA strands were combined via their linear polyacrylamide chains and they form polymer strands A and B (P-SA and P-SB) (Fig. 13). The DNA hydrogel-based coated Cu/Au/Pt TNPs exhibited the qualitative determination of MC-LR. The colorimetric biosensor was able to detect MC-LR with a linear range of 0.004–10 μg L−1 and a detection limit of 3.0 ng L−1.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the colorimetric biosensor for the detection of MC-LR based on the Cu/Au/Pt TNs-encapsulated DNA hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Rao and Paria202 used a bioinspired method to synthesize Ag–Au–Pd TMNs using the plant-mediated extract of Aegle marmelos leaf (LE) and Syzygium aromaticum bud extract (AE). The as-synthesized TMNs were tested for glucose oxidation to gluconic acid, which is widely used as a water-soluble cleansing agent or additive for food and beverages. Their result showed that 77% and 80% gluconic acid conversion was accomplished using the LE and LE + AE extract-mediated NPs respectively. Further, the TMNs showed antimicrobial inhibition of the E. coli bacteria using 0.1 mM TMNs to possess 0.99 and 0.96 zones of inhibition using the agar plate. Correspondingly, Vaseghi et al.203 used a green and bioinspired method to synthesize Cu/Cr/Ni trimetallic oxide using aqueous extracts of Eryngium campestre and Froriepia subpinnata. Eryngium campestre (EC-TMNs), Froriepia subpinnata (FS-TNPs), and EC + FS-mediated TMNs were prepared for antimicrobial activity against E. coli and S. aureus. The FS extract-mediated TMNs showed the MIC of 12.5 and 25 μg mL−1 for S. aureusa and E. coli, respectively, however, the EC-mediated NPs showed a MIC of 25 μg mL−1 for the bacterial strains. The TMNs obtained from the mixed extracts (FS + EC) possessed MIC of 25 and 12.5 μg mL−1 against S. aureus and E. coli, respectively. The trimetallic Au–Pt–Ag-based nanofluid was prepared by Yadav et al.204 for antimicrobial activity purposes. The Au–Pt–Ag nanofluid showed better antimicrobial activity at a very low concentration (15.625 μg mL−1) than its monometallic or bimetallic counterparts. The inhibition zones for the Au–Pt–Ag, Au–Pt and Au nanofluids were 21–24, 13–17 and 9–13 mm, respectively, in all of the bacteria. Sharma et al.205 synthesized graphene oxide-supported multifunctional Fe/La/Zn@GO-TNC using the microemulsion method. The nanocomposites were checked for their antimicrobial activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative strains of bacteria. The results confirmed that a maximum inhibition zone of 19 mm at 150 μg mL−1 occurred against E. coli. Similarly, 18 and 17 mm zones of inhibition were exhibited against S. aureus at 200 μg mL−1. Graphene-supported NiAuPt nanosheets (NSs) have been used for the qualitative detection of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). The NiAuPt NSs showed excellent catalytic activity for the reduction of H2O2 as compared to Pt-NSs, NiPt-NSs, and AuPt-NSs. The NiAuPt-GNs can detect the CEA at the detection limit of 0.27 pg mL−1. The current response of the immunosensor showed a small change in 7 days and further, 89.4% current response was retained in 28 days. Therefore, the immunosensor is stable, reproducible, and selective to detect CEA in real human samples.206 Similarly, the Pd@Au@Pt nanocomposite platform on COOH-terminated rGO (PdAuPt/COOH-rGO) was tested as a biosensor for the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) biomarkers. The TNC immunosensor was found to have the sensitivity of 0.099 ± 0.007 μA ng−1 mL, a wide linear range (LR) of 12 pg mL−1–85 ng mL−1, 8 pg mL−1 LOD, and 4.38% RSD; however, the PSA exhibited a sensitivity of 0.267 ± 0.02 μA ng−1 mL, 3 pg mL−1–60 ng mL−1 LR, 2 pg mL−1 LOD, and 2.84% RSD.207 A summary of selected TMNs and composites for the detection of different targets is presented in Table 3.
Table 3 Application of selected TMNs for biosensors




TMNs
Target
Wide linear range
Lower detection limit
Ref.




β-Lactoglobulin (BLG), poly (diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA).




BLG–PtAuPd–rGO
glucose
0.005–9 mM
0.13 μM (S/N = 3)

208



PdCuAu
H2O2
0.1–300 μM
5 nM

209



PdCuAu
glucose
0.5–500 μM
25 nM

209



COOH–AgPtPd/NH2–rGO
H2O2
—
0.2 nM

210



COOH–AgPtPd/NH2–rGO
PSA
4 fg mL−1 to 300 ng mL−1
4 fg mL−1

210



PDDA–AuPtAg/rGO
H2O2
0.05 μM–5.5 mM
1.2 nM

211



PdPtCu
PSA
10 fg mL−1–100 ng mL−1
3.3 fg mL−1

212



PtCoIr
septicemia
0.001–100.0 ng mL−1
0.46 pg mL−1 (S/N = 3).

213





4. Conclusion and prospects
Multi-metallic nanostructures are attractive advanced materials with improved catalytic activities as compared to their corresponding mono and bimetallic counterparts. New properties were obtained in the ternary system such as magnetic, electronic, and synergistic effects enhancing the stability, recyclability, and durability of the TMNs in organic synthesis, water treatment, and biological applications. Physical, chemical, and biological methods were employed to synthesize the TMNs. There are very few reports on the synthesis of multi-metallic nanostructures using physical and biological methods. The chemical methods such as seed growth, solvothermal, GRR, co-reduction, etc., are widely used for the synthesis of the three metal-containing nanostructures. However, strong reducing agents such as sodium borohydride, hydrazine, and others are used to reduce the metal ions, which are toxic and environmentally unfriendly. The applications of the TMNs depend on their structure/morphology, the composition of each metal, and supporting materials, which must be controlled during the synthesis. The superior catalytic activity, selectivity, stability or durability, and recyclability of the TMNs arise from their synergistic effects.
To this end, a deep study is required to understand the better catalytic activity. The toxicity of the TMNs was not studied and, therefore, the effects of the TMNs after discharge should be investigated. Alternative methods should be applied for the synthesis of the TMNs using nontoxic reducing agents capping, and surfactants. The biological method of fabricating TMNs should be deeply examined as an alternative. To synthesize size- and shape-controlled TMNs, more combined methods should also be examined; for example, if an independent metal-containing bimetallic nanoparticle is formed via the co-reduction method, it is possible to add the third metal to their surface by the seed growth route. Similarly, the combination of GRR and seed-mediated co-reduction is versatile for the synthesis of TMNs.
Despite the promising performance of the TMNs, the studies on the synthesis and application of the TMNs are very limited. The role of the third metal on the performance of the TMNs is still not well deduced, and a combination of experimental and theoretical studies is required. The core–shell structure showed excellent activity in electrocatalysts, in energy, environmental and organic synthesis; however, the lack of the nanoporosity of the shell region hinders access of the inner cores is a serious problem in their applications. The synthesis and application of the TMNs in the environmental, health, and organic synthesis fields are still at the laboratory level. Therefore, more studies are required to scale up the synthesis and applications.
The sequential or successive reduction of metals such as GRR and seed growth are used for the synthesis of core/shell or core/interlayer/outer shell structures in a favorable and controlled manner; however, the simultaneous reduction methods like co-reduction have limitations for controlling such structures. On the other hand, the simultaneous reduction is advantageous in the fabrication of TMNs of small size as compared to the successive reduction, since the smaller the size the higher the catalytic activity. Thus, synthesis of the TMNs using the combined methods is crucial.
Compliance with ethical standards.
Conflicts of interest
The corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.
References
J. Kang, T. Chen, D. Zhang and L. Guo, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Gebre and M. G. Sendeku, SN Appl. Sci., 2019, 1, 928 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, T. Akita, T. Ishida, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1304–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gopiraman and S. Saravanamoorthy, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 17090–17103 RSC .
M. Rethinasabapathy, S. Kang, Y. Haldorai, N. Jonna, M. Jankiraman, G.-W. Lee, S.-C. Jang, B. Natesan, C. Roh and Y. S. Huh, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 69, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, P. Srivastava and G. Singh, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 562, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Chaturvedi, S. Nand, N. Tabassum, N. Yadav, V. Singh, R. A. Bohara and M. P. Singh, Biochem. Biophys. Rep., 2020, 24, 100812 Search PubMed .
N. Toshima, Macromol. Symp., 2008, 270, 27–39 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Ndlwana, K. Sikhwivhilu and R. M. Moutloali, Membranes,  2020, 10, 232 Search PubMed .
A. Colombo, C. Dragonetti, M. Magni and D. Roberto, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2015, 431, 48–60 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eid, V. Malgras, P. He, K. Wang, A. Aldalbahi, S. M. Alshehri and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31147–31152 RSC .
C. Wang, D. Van Der Vliet, K. L. More, N. J. Zaluzec, S. Peng, S. Sun, H. Daimon, G. Wang, J. Pearson, A. P. Paulikas, G. Karapetrov, D. Strmcnik, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 919–926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shang, Y. Guo and E. Wang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 4348–4355 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Gebre, Synth. Commun., 2021, 51, 1669–1699 CAS .
S. H. Gebre, Appl. Nanosci., 2021, 11, 1–49 CrossRef .
M. Sui, S. Kunwar, P. Pandey, S. Pandit and J. Lee, New J. Phys., 2019, 21, 113049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, J. Wang, G. Zhang, X. Fan, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, G. Liu, Y. Zhou, K. A. Brown, N. Chernyak, J. L. Hedrick, S. He, Z. Xie, Q. Lin, V. P. Dravid, S. A. O’Neill-Slawecki and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9167–9173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Yan, Z. Wang and Q. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10229–10235 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, G. Reggiano, S. Thota and J. Zhao, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2017, 34, 1600384 CrossRef .
S. Khanal, N. Bhattarai, D. McMaster, D. Bahena, J. J. V. Salazar and M. Jose-Yacaman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 16, 16278–16283 RSC .
L. Yang, J. Su, W. Luo and G. Cheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 39, 3360–3370 CrossRef .
T. Matsushita, Y. Shiraishi, S. Horiuchi and N. Toshima, J. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80, 1217–1225 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Toshima, in Nanohybridization of Organic-Inorganic Materials, ed. A. Muramatsu and T. Miyashita, Springer, Heidelberg,  2009, pp. 55–80 Search PubMed .
D. Liu, Q. Zeng, H. Liu, C. Hu, D. Chen, D. Liu, Q. Zeng, H. Liu, C. Hu, D. Chen, L. Xu and J. Yang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100357 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, S. Yin, H. Zhang, S. Jiao, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131070 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. Tang, M. Wang, L. Guo, S. Chen and Z. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4047–4050 RSC .
N. Toshima, R. Ito, T. Matsushita and Y. Shiraishi, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, J. Wang, F. Meng, L. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10028–10030 RSC .

          A. M. F. R. Pinto, V. S. Oliveira and D. S. C. Falcao in Direct Alcohol Fuel Cells for Portable Applications, ed. A. M. F. R. Pinto, V. S. Oliveira and D. S. C. Falcao, Elsevier, 1st edn,  2018, pp. 209–244 Search PubMed .
B. Jiang, Y. Guo, J. Kim, A. E. Whitten, K. Wood, K. Kani, A. E. Rowan, J. Henzie and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12434–12441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Elsheikh and J. Mcgregor, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yurderi, A. Bulut, M. Zahmakiran and M. Kaya, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160–161, 514–524 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Mazzieri, J. M. Grau, C. R. Vera, J. C. Yori, J. M. Parera and C. L. Pieck, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296, 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, F. Wu, H. Fu, L. Zeng, C. Shang, L. Zhu and Z. Guo, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 2298–2306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and N. Toshima, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 268–278 RSC .
C. Li, M. Iqbal, J. Lin, X. Luo, B. Jiang, V. Malgras, K. C. Wu, J. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1764–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, M. Iqbal, B. Jiang, Z. Wang, J. Kim, A. K. Nanjundan, A. E. Whitten, K. Wood and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4054–4061 RSC .
J. Lan, C. Li, T. Liu and Q. Yuan, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2019, 23, 43–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Li, H. Xue, Z. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 2939–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, H. Yu, S. Liu, Y. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 3397–3403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, H. Wang, Y. Li, H. Yu, S. Yin, H. Xue, X. Li, Y. Xu and L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 255404 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. M. da Silva, T. S. Rodrigues, S. J. Haigh and P. H. C. Camargo, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7135–7148 RSC .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, M. Sajjadi, S. Iravani and R. S. Varma, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ali, A. S. Sharma, W. Ahmad, M. Zareef, M. M. Hassan, A. Viswadevarayalu, T. Jiao, H. Li and Q. Chen, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2020, 50, 1–28 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Ahmed and H. E. Emam, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 321, 114669 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Gebre and M. G. Sendeku, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 65, 329–352 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, M. Okumura and N. Toshima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14883–14891 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Huynh, X.-H. Pham, J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, H. Chang, W.-Y. Rho and B.-H. Jun, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 1–29 Search PubMed .
I. Ijaz, E. Gilani, A. Nazir and A. Bukhari, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2020, 13, 59–81 Search PubMed .
H. B. Ahmed, M. A. Attia, F. M. S. E. El-dars and H. E. Emam, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 128, 214–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Semaltianos, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 35, 37–41 Search PubMed .
D. Zhang, Z. Li and K. Sugioka, J. Phys. Photon., 2021, 3, 042002 CrossRef CAS .
S. Senkan, M. Kahn, S. Duan, A. Ly and C. Leidholm, Catal. Today, 2006, 117, 291–296 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rawat, A. Tiwari, N. Arun, S. V. S. N. Rao, A. P. Pathak, Y. Shadangi, N. K. Mukhopadhyay, S. V. Rao and A. Tripathi, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 859, 157871 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh and R. K. Soni, J. Nanosci. Nanotechlol., 2014, 14, 6872–6879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Sarker, T. Nakamura and S. Sato, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 856–864 CrossRef .
T. Tsuzuki and P. G. M. C. Cormick, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 5143–5146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pithakratanayothin, R. Tongsri, T. Chaisuwan and S. Wongkasemjit, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 5413–5421 RSC .
K. Musza, M. Szabados, A. A. Adam, P. Belteky, Z. Konya, A. Kukovecz, P. Sipos and I. Palinkp, J. Solid State Chem., 2021, 293, 121756 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ezeta-Mejía, J. M. Mora-Hernández, J. M. Hallen-López and E. M. Arce-Estrada, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 2044–2055 Search PubMed .
B. N. Mondal, A. Basumallick and P. P. Chattopadhyay, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 457, 10–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Nguyen and T. Yonezawa, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19, 883–898 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng, M. T. Nguyen, J. Shi, Y. R. Chau, T. Tokunaga, M. Kudo, S. Matsumura, N. Hashimoto and T. Yonezawa, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 3004–3015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Deng, M. T. Nguyen, S. Mei, T. Tokunaga, M. Kudo, S. Matsumura and T. Yonezawa, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 8418–8427 CAS .
N. Abbas, Y. Li, J. Ding, J. P. Liu, H. Luo, J. Du, W. Xia, A. Yan, F. Wang and J. Zhang, Mater. Des., 2019, 181, 108052 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Cai, C.-H. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Lu, Y.-N. Zhong, K.-Q. Nie, J.-L. Xu, X. Gao, X.-H. Sun and S.-D. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 48 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mattei, P. Grammatikopoulos, J. Zhao, V. Singh, J. Vernieres, S. Steinhauer, A. Porkovich, E. Danielson, K. Nordlund, F. Djurabekova and M. Sowwan, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2151–2163 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bhunia, S. Khilari and D. Pradhan, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 15558–15566 RSC .
K. Ding, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y. Chen and Q. Wang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2015, 10, 8844–8857 CAS .
P. Qiao, S. Xu, D. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zou, J. Liu, W. Yi, J. Li and J. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11713–11716 RSC .
X. Zhang, F. Zhang and K. Chan, Catal. Commun., 2004, 5, 749–753 CrossRef CAS .
S. Paulo, S. Pedro, H. C. Camargo, A. G. M. Silva and P. H. C. Camargo, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7135 RSC .
K. Eid, Y. H. Ahmad, H. Yu, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Y. AlQaradawi, H. Wang and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18881–18889 RSC .
Z. Razmara and F. Razmara, Inorg. Nano-Metal Chem., 2019, 49, 163–168 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, D. Yoon, H. Baik and K. Lee, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 6852–6856 RSC .
B. Sen, B. Demirkan, A. Savk, S. K. Gulbay and F. Sen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 17984–17992 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Weiner and S. E. Skrabalak, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4139–4142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, F. Zhu, Y. He, M. Wang, Z. Zhang, Z. Ma and R. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 468, 200–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Elsheikh, H. M. Mousa and J. McGregor, Micromachines, 2021, 12, 1327 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Basavegowda, K. Mishra and Y. R. Lee, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 701, 456–464 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kozma, A. Rónavári, Z. Kónya and A. Kukovecz, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 4, 291–297 CrossRef .
G. Habibullah, J. Viktorova and T. Ruml, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2021, 16, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Ahmed, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 140, 265–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Karthikeyan and B. Loganathan, J. Nanoparticles, 2013, 2013, 1–9 CrossRef .
D. C. Onwudiwe, Heliyon, 2019, 5, e01413 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Womiloju, C. Höppener, U. S. Schubert and S. Hoeppener, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2020, 37, 2000019 CrossRef CAS .
B. Loganathan and B. Karthikeyan, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 436, 944–952 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Moradiya, P. K. Khiriya, G. K. Tripathi, P. Bundela and P. S. Khare, Lett. Appl. NanoBioSci., 2022, 11, 3102–3110 Search PubMed .
B. Karthikeyan and B. Loganathan, Mater. Lett., 2012, 85, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nafria, Z. Luo, M. Ibáñez, S. Martí-sànchez, X. Yu, M. De Mata, J. Arbiol, M. V. Kovalenko, A. Grabulosa, G. Muller and A. Cabot, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 10634–10643 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Chen, G. Reggiano, S. Thota, Y. Wang, P. Kerns, L. Suib and J. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1249–1252 RSC .
L. Nahar, A. A. Farghaly, R. J. A. Esteves and I. U. Arachchige, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7704–7715 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. T. Quyen, W. Su, C. Chen, J. Rick, J. Liu and B. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2014, 2, 5550–5557 RSC .
J. Ahn and D. Qin, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9179–9187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shviro, S. Polani and D. Zitoun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13521–13529 RSC .
S. Fu, C. Zhu, J. Song, P. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, H. Xia, D. Du and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1279–1284 RSC .
N. T. Tran, H. Liao, X. Feng, Z. Z. Xu and B. Liedberg, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 185601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, E. Jung, Y. Jang, S. H. Bhang, J. Kim, W.-S. Kim and T. Yu, Materials, 2020, 13, 254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, T. Yuan, J. Feng, J. Yuan and A. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 505, 14–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, A. Lopes, D. Xu and B. Liu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 1412–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ahmad, A. T. Mohamed, K. M. Youssef and S. Kundu, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 101, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
K. Peng, N. Bhuvanendran, S. Ravichandran, W. Zhang, Q. Ma, L. Xing, Q. Xu, L. Khotseng and H. Su, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 22752–22760 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, X. He, Y. Lei, J. Tang, Y. Yu, H. Shi and K. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2321–2324 RSC .
M. A. Z. G. Sial, M. A. U. Din and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6175–6200 RSC .
H. Xu, H. Shang, C. Wang and Y. Du, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2006317 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aranishi, H. Jiang, T. Akita, M. Haruta and Q. Xu, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1233–1241 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Ahmed and H. E. Emam, Polym. Test., 2020, 89, 106720 CrossRef CAS .
N. Basavegowda, T. K. Mandal and K. Baek, Food Bioprocess Technol., 2019, 13, 30–44 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Yang, H. Sun, X. Wang, H. Wang, M. Wang, H. Su, D. Li, X. Li and Y. Qin, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6402–6410 CrossRef CAS .
N. Patra, A. C. Taviti, A. Sahoo, A. Pal, T. K. Beuria, A. Behera and S. Patra, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 35111–35118 RSC .
J. Dlugaszewska and R. Dobrucka, J. Cluster Sci., 2019, 30, 1091–1101 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Alshehri and M. A. Malik, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 1138 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Kamli, V. Srivastava, N. H. Hajrah, J. S. M. Sabir, K. R. Hakeem, A. Ahmad and M. A. Malik, J. Fungi, 2021, 7, 62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dobrucka, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2019, 100, 981–991 CrossRef .
Z. Khan, F. Science, P. O. Box and S. Arabia, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 153, 545–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tsuji, M. Matsunaga, H. Kumagai, M. Ogino, S. Hikino, Y. Yoshida and T. Ishizaki, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1345–1351 RSC .
M. Lokanathan, I. M. Patil and B. Kakade, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 8983–8990 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bhunia, S. Khilari and D. Pradhan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7769–7778 CrossRef CAS .
A. Matin, J. Jang and Y. Kwon, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 3710–3718 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, L. Li, J. Yang and Y. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1527–1529 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Wu, Controlled Synthesis of Pt–Ni Bimetallic Catalysts and Study of Their Catalytic Properties, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Beijing,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. C. Motshekga, S. K. Pillai, S. S. Ray, K. Jalama and R. W. M. Krause, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 1–15 CrossRef .
C. Leonelli, J. Wojnarowicz and W. Lojkowski, J. Mach. Constr. Maint, 2018, 3, 41–47 Search PubMed .

          S. Rahim, F. Jan Iftikhar and M. I. Malik, in Metal Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery and Diagnostic Applications, ed. M. R. Shah, M. Imran and S. Ullah, Elsevier Inc., 1st edn,  2019, pp. 301–328 Search PubMed .
G. Li, W. Zhang, N. Luo, Z. Xue, Q. Hu, W. Zeng and J. Xu, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pani, J. H. Lee and S.-I. I. Yun, Chem. Cent. J., 2016, 10, 15 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Dou, J. Yang, R. Yuan and Y. Xiang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 5945–5950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, H. Wu, T. Wang, Y. Jin, Y. Zhang and X. Dou, Powder Technol., 2009, 193, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, J. Qiu, Z. Zhang, T. F. Marhaba and Y. Zhang, J. Chem., 2016, 2016, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Kushwah, S. Bhadauria, K. Arora and M. S. Gaur, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 095013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, R. Wang, H. Li, Q. Wang, J. Kang and Z. Lei, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 36, 839–848 CrossRef .
W. Kuang, Z. Jiang, H. Li, J. Zhang, L.-N. Zhou and Y.-J. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3901–3905 CrossRef CAS .
K. Thongthai, P. Pakawanit, N. Chanlek, J. Kim, S. Ananta and L. Srisombat, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 375602 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Han, A. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, K. Fang, Z. Yin and J. Feng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 554, 512–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zeng, A. Shen, Y. Fu, L. Zeng and J. Hu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 86025–86033 RSC .
R. G. Haverkamp, A. T. Marshall and D. Van Agterveld, J. Nanoparticle Res., 2007, 1, 697–700 CrossRef .
A. Binod, S. V. Ganachari, J. S. Yaradoddi, R. P. Tapaskar, N. R. Banapurmath and A. S. Shettar, Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 376, 012054 Search PubMed .
A. S. Nugraha, G. Lambard, J. Na, M. S. A. Hossain, T. Asahi, W. Chaikittisilp and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13532–13540 RSC .
A. S. Yin, H. Wang, K. Deng, Z. Dai, Y. Xu, X. Li, H. Xue and L. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 25, 5316–5321 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Sarmoor, S. J. Hoseini, R. H. Fath, M. Roushani and M. Bahrami, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 32, e3979 CrossRef .
A. M. A. Elsheikh, G. Backovi, R. C. P. Oliveira, C. A. C. Sequeira, J. McGregor, B. Šljuki and D. M. F. Santos, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kim, J. Kim, A. Azad and Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1457–1462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Basavegowda and K.-H. Baek, Molecules, 2021, 26, 912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. Son, Y. Jang, J. Park, H. Bin Na, H. M. Park, H. J. Yun, J. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Emam, M. A. Attia, F. M. S. E. El-Dars and H. B. Ahmed, J. Polym. Environ., 2019, 8, 553–565 Search PubMed .
S. Tsai, Y. Liu, P. Wu and C. Yeh, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 978–980 RSC .
P. Venkatesan and J. Santhanalakshmi, Phys. Chem., 2012, 2, 12–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Jadhav and C. V. Rode, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5958–5970 RSC .
K. Suwannarat, K. Thongthai, S. Ananta and L. Srisombat, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 540, 73–80 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Haldar, S. Tanwar, R. Biswas, T. Sen and J. Lahtinen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 140–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Ahmed and H. E. Emam, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 287, 110975 CrossRef CAS .
P. Venkatesan and J. Santhanalakshmi, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12225–12229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Venkatesan and J. Santhanalakshmi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 326, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fatahi and S. J. Hoseini, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 32, e4187 CrossRef .
K. Mishra, N. Basavegowda and Y. R. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 506, 180–187 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abazari, F. Heshmatpour and S. Balalaie, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 139–149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakaya, M. Miyazaki, S. Yamazoe, K. I. Shimizu and S. Furukawa, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5163–5172 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, A. Garc, M. Naushad, A. Kumar, M. Sillanp and F. J. Stadler, J. Chem., 2021, 2021, 1–14 CrossRef .
A. K. Mageed, A. B. D. Radiah, A. Salmiaton, S. Izhar and M. A. Raza, J. King Saud Univ. Sci., 2019, 31, 878–885 CrossRef .
A. Gupta, N. Khosla, V. G. Amit and S. K. Annapurna, Appl. Nanosci., 2020, 10, 4191–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, H. Tan, J. Lin, X. Luo, S. Wang, J. You, Y. Kang, Y. Bando, Y. Yamauchi and J. Kim, Nano Today, 2018, 21, 91–105 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Yang, L. Yang, L. Ding, F. Deng, X. Luo and S. Luo, in Nanomaterials for the Removal of Pollutants and Resource Reutilization, ed. X. Luo and F. Deng, Elsevier Inc.,  2019, pp. 1–23 Search PubMed .
S. Sigurdson, V. Sundaramurthy, A. K. Dalai and J. Adjaye, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 291, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shan, H. Liu, Y. Yue, G. Shi and X. Bao, J. Catal., 2016, 344, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Kang, X. Yu, M. Ge and Y. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 264, 506–513 CrossRef CAS .
G. Allaedini, S. M. Tasirin and P. Aminayi, Chem. Pap., 2015, 70, 231–242 Search PubMed .
W. Nur, A. Wan, W. Azelee, W. Abu, R. Ali, A. Aziz and A. Kadir, Arab. J. Chem., 2018, 11, 1201–1208 CrossRef .
A. Garron, K. Lázár and F. Epron, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 65, 240–248 CrossRef CAS .
V. Benitez, M. Boutzeloit, V. A. Mazzieri, C. Especel, F. Epron, C. R. Vera, P. Marécot and C. L. Pieck, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 319, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Reddy, J. He, S. W. Thiel, N. G. Pinto and P. G. Smirniotis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8634–8644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Annalakshmi, P. Balasubramanian, S. Chen and T. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 296, 126620 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, S. Bhogal, V. Kumar, S. Agarwal, A. Kumar, D. Pathania, G. Tessema and F. J. Stadler, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 275, 499–509 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, A. Kumar, S. Sharma, M. Naushad, T. Ahamad, S. I. Al-saeedi, G. M. Al-senani, N. S. Al-kadhi and F. J. Stadler, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 272, 170–179 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, S. Bhogal, M. Naushad, A. Kumar and F. J. Stadler, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 347, 235–243 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, V. Kumar, S. Agarwal, S. Bhogal, M. Naushad, A. Kumar and F. J. Stadler, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 260, 342–350 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dobrucka, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2019, 99, 1–12 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Dou and M. Yang, Chemosphere, 2007, 69, 1758–1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Adak, A. Sen, S. Sen and D. Dhak, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 719, 460–469 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukherjee, M. K. Adak, S. Upadhyay, J. Khatun, P. Dhak, S. Khawas, U. K. Ghorai and D. Dhak, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 9686–9696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sharma, A. Kumar, M. Naushad, S. Sharma, A. A. Ghfar, T. Ahamad, C. Si and F. J. Stadler, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 294, 111605 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Khdary, W. S. Alkhuraiji, M. A. Ghanem and F. A. Alqureshah, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 11556–11567 RSC .
Z. Gong, T. Ma and F. Liang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 873, 159802 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sahoo, S. K. Tripathy, N. Dehury and S. Patra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19376–19383 RSC .
M. Kgatle, K. Sikhwivhilu, G. Ndlovu and N. Moloto, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 428 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Emam and H. B. Ahmed, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 138, 450–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Zarei, A. Moloudi and S. G. Hosseini, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2017, 14, 2067–2076 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Emam, H. B. Ahmed and R. M. Abdelhameed, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 266, 118163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Vaseghi, A. Nematollahzadeh and O. Tavakoli, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 96, 148–159 CrossRef CAS .
A. Binod, S. V. Ganachari, J. S. Yaradoddi, R. P. Tapaskar, N. R. Banapurmath and A. S. Shettar, IOP Conf. Ser Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 376, 1–6 Search PubMed .
G. Deloid, J. M. Cohen, T. Darrah, R. Derk, L. Wang, G. Pyrgiotakis, W. Wohlleben and P. Demokritou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3514 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Wasfi, F. Awwad, N. Qamhieh, R. Iratni and A. I. Ayesh, New J. Phys., 2021, 23, 103041 CrossRef CAS .
M. Caldara, J. W. Lowdon, R. Rogosic, R. Arreguin-campos, K. L. Jimenez-monroy, B. Heidt, K. Tschulik, T. J. Cleij, H. Dili, K. Eersels and B. Van Grinsven, ACS Sens., 2021, 6, 4515–4525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, Y. Yan, B. Guo, M. Zhao, J. Li, X. Bian, H. Wu, W. Cheng and S. Ding, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 296, 126697 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, P. Ding, X. Ye, L. Li, X. He and K. Wang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 14982–14989 RSC .
S. Ge, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Liang, H. Liu, M. Yan, J. Huang and J. Yu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 665–672 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and N. Toshima, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 400, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, J. Chen, Y. Wen, C. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yang and C. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 145, 111677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Dong, Y. Ren, Z. Bai, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, C. Zhang and Q. Chen, Talanta, 2018, 189, 79–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, Y. Chen, S. Wu, Y. Cai, H. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Yang, G. He, W. Xiao, L. Li and Y. Cheng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 34071–34076 RSC .
P. Wu, S. Li, X. Ye, B. Ning, J. Bai, Y. Peng, L. Li, T. Han, H. Zhou, Z. Gao and P. Ding, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1134, 96–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Rao and S. Paria, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14018–14025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Vaseghi, O. Tavakoli and A. Nematollahzadeh, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1898–1911 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yadav, A. K. Jaiswal, K. K. Dey, V. B. Yadav, G. Nath, A. K. Srivastava and R. R. Yadav, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 218, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, A. García-peñas, A. Kumar, M. Naushad, G. Tessema, S. M. Alshehri, J. Ahmed, N. Alhokbany and F.
J. Stadler, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 285, 362–374 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, L. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Wei and W. Cao, Nat. Publ. Gr., 2016, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. C. Barman, M. F. Hossain, H. Yoon and J. Y. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 100, 16–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, M. Pan, J. Zhou, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Jiao, C. Zhang and Q. Chen, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 724 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Nie, L. Ga, J. Ai and Y. Wang, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Sharifuzzaman, S. C. Barman, M. T. Rahman, A. Zahed, X. Xuan and J. Y. Park, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, B983–B993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiao, M. Pan, X. Liu, B. Li, J. Liu and Q. Chen, Sensors, 2019, 20, 71 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, P. Wang, F. Pei, H. Yu, Y. Dong, Y. Li, Q. Liu and P. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 261, 22–30 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Feng, A. Wang, L. Mei, X. Luo, Y. Xue and J. Feng, Bioelectrochemistry, 2021, 140, 107802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

Shushay Hagos Gebre
	Shushay Hagos Gebre earned his MSc in organic chemistry from Hawassa University in 2012. He is currently a lecturer and researcher at Jigjiga University at the chemistry department under the College of Natural and Computational science, Ethiopia. His research interests are in renewable energy, functional materials, and nanotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Design for the fabrication of three-layered Pd–core/Ag-interlayer/Rh–shell trimetallic nanoparticles (TNPs). Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Springer, copyright 2009. (b) Sequential electronic charge transfer in the Au–core/Pt-interlayer/Rh–shell TNPs. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2007 (c) Electron transfer illustration of the synthesis of the bimetallic ordered alloys and trimetallic PtCoFe. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis of (CNTs)–PdAu/Pt TMNs. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Springer, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 3  The MW irradiation method for the preparation of trimetallic Au/Pd/Pt colloidal nanocomposites and the ionization energy of the corresponding bulk metals. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ag/Pd and Au/Ag/Pd alloy NPs via the stepwise GRR of L-glutathione (GSH-functionalized) Ag NPs, followed by oxidative self-assembly into monolithic Au/Ag/Pd alloy aerogels. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the structural evolution of a Ag@Ag–Au core–frame nanocube into a Ag@Ag–Au–Pt concave cube and a Ag–Au–Pt cage cube through a galvanic replacement reaction. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Pt53Ru39Ni8 nanosponges. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic illustrating the formation of trimetallic PdAgCu HMSs based on a “dual”-template route. (c) TEM images, (d) HAADF-STEM images of trimetallic PdAgCu HMSs, and (e) high-magnification TEM image of PdAgCu HMSs. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 6  A systematic illustration of the synthesis of the tri-metallic Co–Cu–Ni nanoparticle composite reduced by rosmarinic acid and water-soluble glycosides. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from MDPI, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  Au@Ag@Cu nanocrystals prepared by the three-step reduction method. Heating times in the third step were (a) 5 min, (b) 10 min, and (c) 20 min. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 

Microwave	Fast and short reaction rate, high selectivity and yield	The presence of microwave effect maybe causes damaging	
122–124

Provides uniform internal heating	Challenges in the construction of materials (reactors) like corrosion leaks, scratches
Low-cost and environment-friendly	

Sol-gel	High yield, low operation temperatures, and low production costs	Long reaction time	
122 and 125


	Acquiring the use of toxic chemical

	Introduction of impurities from byproducts of the reaction
Sonochemical	Formation of small size NPs at a rapid reaction rate	Carried out at high temperature or high pressure	
49

Interface-mediated	Various interfaces such as gas–liquid, liquid–solid, and organic–inorganic interfaces are used to tune the reactions	—	
122

GRR	GRR is used to prepare inactive metal nanocrystals using an active metal as the template	Increases production cost due to addition of templates	
47 and 126

Controllable size and morphology	The procedures are complex and time-consuming
Seed growth	Tunable size, shape, and composition	Time- and cost-consuming	
126

Facile and wide applicability	Complex procedures
Biological method	Simple, cost-effective, and environmentally benign, products are free from toxic chemicals	Unknown reaction mechanism, low yield, reproducibility problems	
127


	The biological method is not fast enough to compete with the chemical methods
Co-reduction method	A Simple strategy	Impurities among the core and mixed shell metals occur, special reducing agents required to reduce the precursor simultaneous maybe using dual reducing agents (overuse of reducing agent) results in more toxic byproducts	
47 and 126

Easily control composition	Random alloy NPs are formed if the metals have a similar reduction potential
High yield and low cost	

The simultaneous reduction provides smaller particles than the successive reduction	

Solvothermal/hydrothermal	Simple and facile, environmentally benign	Performed at a higher temperature, higher than the boiling point of the solvent and atmospheric pressures	
47 and 126

Metastable phases that cannot be obtained at normal pressure and temperature can be prepared	Corrosive resistance and high-cost materials are required such as Teflon-lined autoclave and closed vessels
At high vapor pressures and minimal loss of nanomaterials, the procedure is well controlled through liquid-phase or multiphase chemical reactions	



Au–Pd–Pt/MoS2	
L-AA	Wet-chemical	Nanoflower	14–26	Detection of H2O2	
128

Au–Pt–Pd	—	Photo-deposition	Spherical	6.8 ± 1.7	Volatile organic compound oxidation	
71

FeAl–Ce	—	Spray coating	Spherical	2–3	Fluoride removal from drinking water	
129

Ce–Al–Fe	—	—	—	—	Removal of arsenite from water	
130

Au/Ag/Cu	
L-AA, NaBH4	Simultaneous reduction	Spherical	65	Degradation of MB	
131

PdCu@Pt/C	sodium citrate	GRR	Core@shell	—	MOR	
132

Au/PtPd	AA, CTAB	GRR	Core/shell	—	Alcohol electrooxidation and Suzuki coupling reaction	
133

AgAuPt	AA	Sequential chemical reduction	Spherical	18 ± 4	MOR	
134

PtCoRhd	oleylamine, CTAC	Solvothermal	—	33.3	Alcohol oxidation	
135

Au@Ag–Pt@ICPs	sodium citrate	GRR	Core–shell	—	Biosensing	
136

Au–Ag–Cu	
Brassica juncea
	Biological	Alloy	5–50	—	
137

Au–Ag–Sr	
Coriandrum sativum
	Biological	Core–shell	70	Sensing	
138

PtPdAu	—	Electrochemical deposition	Alloy	—	MOR	
139

PtRuTe	Hydrazine	Self-sacrificial template	Nanotube	—	MOR	
140

PtSnZn	NaBH4	Oil–water interface	Nanosheet	—	MOR and 4-NP reduction	
141

PdAuNi/C	NaBH4	Sequential chemical reduction	Core–shell	—	Borohydride oxidation reaction	
142


 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the synergistic effect between three metals (Pd, Ni, and Zn). (b) Important steps in the catalytic cycle of the Suzuki–Miyaura C–C coupling reaction. (c) PdNiZn nanosheets and PdNiZn/rGO spherical NPs thin films catalyzed the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction of an aryl halide with phenylboronic acid in water. (d) Isolated yields for the recycling of PdNiZn nanosheets and PdNiZn/rGO ultrathin spherical NPs as catalysts in the coupling reaction of phenylboronic acid with bromobenzene at 80 °C in water. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Proposed mechanism for the catalytic cycle of the hydrodehalogenation reaction on the Pt/Pd/Fe (1:1:2) T-NP surface. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (b) Alkane dehydrogenation by Pt3(Fe0.76Zn0.25), (c) changes in MCH conversion in durability testing at 400 °C, (d) TOF at 300 °C, and (e) long-term durability testing at 320 °C using Pt3(Fe0.75Zn0.25)/SiO2 with 0.25 wt% Pt loading. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  Photodegradation mechanism of ampicillin antibiotic using La/Cu/Zr TNPs. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Proposed mechanism for the photodegradation of RhB using di- and trimetallic NPs. (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the main photocatalytic reaction. (c) The efficiency of the catalysts in RhB degradation. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of Ni, Ni@Cu, and Ni@Cu@ Pd NPs. (b) The color change and molecular structure of RhB after catalytic reduction by Ni@Cu@Pd NPs. The UV-vis spectra of RhB during reduction in the presence of NaBH4 solution. (c) XRD patterns before and after use. (d and e) SEM images before and after the fifth cycle. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the colorimetric biosensor for the detection of MC-LR based on the Cu/Au/Pt TNs-encapsulated DNA hydrogel. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 


BLG–PtAuPd–rGO	glucose	0.005–9 mM	0.13 μM (S/N = 3)	
208

PdCuAu	H2O2	0.1–300 μM	5 nM	
209

PdCuAu	glucose	0.5–500 μM	25 nM	
209

COOH–AgPtPd/NH2–rGO	H2O2	—	0.2 nM	
210

COOH–AgPtPd/NH2–rGO	PSA	4 fg mL−1 to 300 ng mL−1	4 fg mL−1	
210

PDDA–AuPtAg/rGO	H2O2	0.05 μM–5.5 mM	1.2 nM	
211

PdPtCu	PSA	10 fg mL−1–100 ng mL−1	3.3 fg mL−1	
212

PtCoIr	septicemia	0.001–100.0 ng mL−1	0.46 pg mL−1 (S/N = 3).	
213


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
