Perovskite nanocrystal superlattices: self-assembly, collective behavior, and applications  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC06534G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC06534G
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 5365-5374Perovskite nanocrystal superlattices: self-assembly, collective behavior, and applications

        
          
            Danni 
            Yan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qingsong 
            Shan
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yuhui 
            Dong
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Lu 
            Han
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xinli 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Peng
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Haibo 
            Zeng
          
          
        
      *
      MIIT Key Laboratory of Advanced Display Materials and Devices, Institute of Optoelectronics & Nanomaterials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China. E-mail: zeng.haibo@njust.edu.cn
Received 
      1st December 2022
    , Accepted 4th April 2023First published on 4th April 2023AbstractMetal halide perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) have been widely studied for application in photonics and optoelectronics due to their excellent photoelectric properties. Perovskite NCs with narrow luminescence linewidth and high photoluminescence quantum yield are excellent assembly modules for building large-scale NC superlattices. The coupling of optics and electricity in such excellent aggregates gives them exceptional collective photoelectric performance, such as superfluorescence, red-shifted emission, coupling-enhanced electron transport, etc. Perovskite NC superlattices are expected to become another hot research topic in optoelectronics. Here, we focus on the collective behavior of superlattices and review the recent progress of the self-assembly, collective photoelectric properties, and applications of perovskite NC superlattices. Finally, a few challenges and prospects are indicated.
Danni Yan
Danni Yan received her bachelor degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China. She is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Zeng's group at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology. Her current research interests include quantum dots and their optoelectronic applications.
Qingsong Shan
Qingsong Shan received his PhD degree in Materials Science from the Nanjing University of Science and Technology in 2020. He is currently a Postdoc at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology. His current research interests include quantum dots and their optoelectronic applications.
Yuhui Dong
Yuhui Dong received her PhD from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China. She is currently an Associate Professor at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology. She recently focused on the research of nano-photoelectronic devices constructed using solution processes, lead-less perovskite materials and optoelectronic devices.
Haibo Zeng
Haibo Zeng received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. He later worked with Prof. Claus Klingshirn in 2007 at the University of Karlsruhe, Germany. In 2008, he joined Prof. Yoshio Bando's group at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. Since 2013, he has been working as a distinguished professor and Director of the Institute of Optoelectronics and Nanomaterials in Nanjing University of Science and Technology. His research interests are focused on the exploratory design of semiconducting nanocrystals and 2D crystals, with an emphasis on optoelectronics applications.
1. Introduction
In the last decade, halide perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) have been widely studied for application in photonics and optoelectronics due to their excellent photoelectric properties.1–9 The highly controllable physical and chemical properties such as the luminescence spectrum, structure, morphology, and component of perovskite NCs endow their assemblies with versatile properties.10 More importantly, their excellent photoelectric performance can be further enhanced by orderly arranging individual NCs to form a collective array of self-assembly structure, resulting in better collective performance.11–14 This self-assembled periodic matrix arrangement from high-quality monodisperse NCs is known as a NC superlattice, which was reported in conventional semiconductors, such as CdSe,15 PbSe,16 PbS,17etc.
In NC superlattices, zero-dimensional perovskite NCs behave as grids and can be self-assembled into periodic lattice arrays with the assistance of solvents and surface ligands. The self-assembly mode of NCs can be one-dimensional (1D) chain self-assembly, two-dimensional (2D) layered self-assembly, and three-dimensional (3D) cubic self-assembly.14 Through different driving methods, self-assembled superlattice models with specific structures can be realized as required. Kovalenko and coworkers18 assembled halide perovskite NCs into highly ordered cubic superlattice structures for the first time using a drying-mediated self-assembly method. At the same time, the superfluorescence phenomenon in NC superlattices was revealed. After that, collective photoelectric effects in NC superlattices different from the original monodisperse NCs gradually began to attract attention, such as red-shifted emission in superlattices,18 microcavity effects,19 enhanced exciton diffusion behavior,20 and strong coupling effects under electron transport.21,22 Taking advantage of these unique and excellent properties will further expand the application of perovskite NCs in optoelectronics.
However, the research on perovskite NC superlattices is still in the initial stage. There are few articles summarizing the current research progress. Here, we focus on the collective behavior of perovskite NC superlattices and summarize the research status of NC self-assembly, optoelectronic properties, charge behavior under coupling, and applications of perovskite NC superlattices. We hope this feature article can provide valuable insights into perovskite NC superlattices and promote research on their potential applications.
2. Structures and synthesis
Structures
The ultra-high luminescence efficiency, large oscillator strength, fine-regulated spectrum and excellent charge transport performance of perovskite NCs make them outstanding in optical and electronic applications such as lasers, displays, and lighting. When NCs with brilliant performance self-assemble into superlattices, a structure with many bosons in ordered aggregation and coupling, their original photoelectric performance will improve further. Based on the above, perovskite NCs are ideal candidates for constructing superlattice structures. High-quality monodisperse perovskite NCs can self-assemble to form highly ordered NC superlattices, driven by van der Waals forces, coulomb interactions, and ligand interactions between units.12,23 Current research on perovskite NC superlattices mainly focuses on cubic-shaped self-assembly, so we will mainly discuss the cubic-shaped NC superlattice structure. The typical superlattices include 1D superlattice chains (Fig. 1(c)),24 2D layered superlattices (Fig. 1(d)),25 and 3D cubic superlattices (Fig. 1(e)).26
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the self-assembly of monodisperse perovskite NCs into superlattices. TEM or STEM micrographs of the CsPbBr3 monodispersed NCs (b), reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH (2021), 1D superlattices (c), reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2019). 2D superlattices (d), reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020) and 3D superlattices (e), reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH (2021). 
Synthesis
At present, the methods for realizing the construction of perovskite NC superlattices are mainly divided into two categories (Fig. 2): solvent-assisted method (top area) and ligand-assisted method (bottom area).
 Fig. 2  Self-assembly method. Solution-assisted method. (a) Drying mediated. Left: schematic illustration of the drying-mediated self-assembly. Right: (i) TEM image of the CsPbBr3 NC superlattice. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). (ii) TEM image of the binary NaCl-type superlattice, composed of CsPbBr3 NCs and NaGdF4 NCs. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from American Chemical Society (2022). (b) Liquid–air interface self-assembly. Left: schematic illustration of the liquid–air interface self-assembly. Right: large and continuous NC superlattice films observed by TEM in different scales. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2022). Ligand-assisted method. (c) Left: schematic illustration of the ligand-assisted NC self-assembly mechanism. Right: self-assembly of CsPbBr3 NCs driven by the small ligand AuBr3. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society (2018). 
Solvent-assisted method
One of the solvent-assisted methods is drying-mediated (Fig. 2(a)), which is the most common way to achieve the self-assembly of NCs. NCs dispersed in non-polar or low-polar solvents such as hexane or toluene are drop-cast directly onto a solid substrate (glass or silicon substrate) following by a solution spontaneous dry process.18,29–32 Through drying-mediated effects, NCs gradually self-assemble into superlattice structures through various forces such as van der Waals forces, Coulomb interactions, and hydrophilic–hydrophobic interaction as the solvent evaporates.12,13,33 This method is often used to construct 3D cubic-typed superlattice structures18 (Fig. 2(a)-i) and realize the superlattices with multi-component NCs27 (Fig. 2(a)-ii). In the process of drying-mediated method, the adjustment of solvent polarity can control the balance of interaction forces between the solution–ligands and ligand–ligand, so as to realize the construction of different superlattice structures.34 It is demonstrated that CsPbBr3 NCs self-assemble into 1D superlattice chains when dispersed in the non-polar solvent. At the same time, they exhibit short-range 2D self-assembled structures in the polar solvent. The different direct van der Waals and hydrophobic interactions between the alkyl ligands on the NC surface and the solvent drive the different self-assemblies.35 On the other hand, when a polar solvent is used to destroy the dispersion of NCs in a non-polar solvent, the NCs will crystallize with the slow evaporation of the non-polar solvent. The cubic superlattices are gradually formed under the coordination of the van der Waals force and the change of crystallization-free energy between NCs.31 Additionally, the evaporation rate of the solvent also plays a role in the process of superlattice self-assembly. Homogeneous and slow solvent evaporation preferred the formation of superlattice self-assembled structures with high coverage on the substrate, and the inhomogeneous evaporation of solvent results in low self-assembly coverage of NCs on the substrate. The uniformity of solvent evaporation is affected by the vapor pressure of the solvent, the temperature of the evaporation environment,36 and the interaction between the solvent and NCs.37 What's more, it has been demonstrated in binary systems38 (PbSe NC, PbS NC, etc.) that the design of the symmetry of the NC superlattice structure can be achieved by controlling the evaporation rate. To determine whether this is also applicable to perovskite systems, more studies are needed to provide guidelines.
Although the drying-mediated method can achieve high-coverage superlattices on the substrate at appropriate evaporation rates, the superlattices are more discrete rather than continuous. Another method of liquid–air interface assembly can overcome this problem and achieve the growth of continuous superlattice films at the centimeter scale. The self-assembly process occurs on incompatible liquid surfaces. Driven by surface tension and evaporation, the deposition of NCs on the surface of a specific liquid can realize particle capture and liquid–air interface assembly to form a large-scale 2D superlattice film (Fig. 2(b)).39,40 The choice of liquid support should consider that it is neither immiscible with nonpolar solvents, nor disperse or destroy perovskite NCs, such as Glycerol triacetate.27 This method of growing superlattice films on liquid surfaces facilitates film transfer, allowing integration of superlattice films on any substrate for device fabrication, and this self-assembly process is not affected by the affinity of the solvent for the substrate like the drying-mediated method.39
Ligand-assisted method
Unlike the solvent-assisted method, the ligand-assisted method does not involve the self-assembly of superlattices on a solid substrate, but in solution with the main aid of ligands. Appropriate capping ligands for NCs play a good role in the assembly process of NC superlattices. Under the combined effect of van der Waals forces between carbon chain ligands and electrostatic interaction between ligands and complexes, perovskite NCs can be transformed from monodisperse to self-assembled superlattices28 (Fig. 2(d)). More interestingly, the assembly of NCs can be transformed from 2D arrays to 3D cubic arrays by changing the number of ligands and additives, enabling controllable adjustment of the size and number of perovskite NC superlattices.28 In addition, the length of the ligands can controllably change the NC spacing to achieve highly ordered superlattices.37 Introducing small-sized ligands into CsPbBr3 NCs through ligand exchange26 or excess ligand mechanism41 can re-adjust the interaction force between NCs and reduce the equilibrium spacing between NCs, thereby inducing the self-assembly of NCs, forming a long-range ordered and regular shaped cubic superlattice. The superlattice self-assembly of NC can be completed in solution by the ligand-assisted self-assembly method, which reduces the later assembly time on the substrate, but the quality of the superlattice film obtained by this method is lower than that of the solvent-assisted method.
Ordered NC superlattice formation by two or more kinds of NCs are also possible.32,42 Bodnarchuk et al.27 have shown that perovskite NCs can be assembled with other kinds of NCs to obtain multi-component NC superlattice structures. Apart from the drying-mediated method, they also successfully assembled NCs such as NaGdF4, Fe3O4, and PbS with CsPbBr3 NCs utilizing liquid–air interface self-assembly. They obtained binary NaCl-type superlattices, ternary ABO3-type superlattices, and ternary ABO3-type superlattice and other multivariate superlattice structures. Currently, most of the research on perovskite NC superlattices focuses on single-component superlattices. The construction of multi-component superlattices will help further to broaden the performance and application of perovskite NC superlattices.
In addition to the commonly used methods mentioned above, ultrasonication,22 light-induced,43,44 and template assembly methods45–47 have also been developed to realize superlattice self-assembly. Among them, the template method is worthy of further development of the superlattice self-assembly method. On the one hand, the template method can achieve more flexible construction of superlattice structures. Not only cubic superlattices, but also spherical and hexagonal perovskite NC superlattices can be constructed.47 On the other hand, using template self-assembly to block the surface of perovskite nanocrystals provides a novel way to protect perovskites from their decomposition. The cladding in the template method can inhibit the ion exchange process between different NCs, also reduce the direct contact of NCs with external environment water and oxygen to improve the stability.46
Although these self-assembly methods can achieve large-scale NC superlattice construction, on the one hand, these self-assembly processes require long time (hours or even days) to complete, and on the other hand, the process operation is demanding, such as the transfer process of superlattice films and the precise control of solvent evaporation rate. Therefore, further research is needed to develop and improve the assembly scheme to achieve high efficiency and high-quality growth of superlattice films. Moreover, the order parameters of the superlattice films also have a significant impact on superlattice quality.48 A higher degree of translational order in a superlattice can hinder sliding between NCs, resulting in a more compact arrangement. On the other hand, sliding between nanocrystals in a superlattice with more orientational order will not cause significant energy loss, but may lead to the appearance of distorted regions in the superlattice and affect the compactness of the superlattice. It has been found that the coupling effects between NCs, such as superfluorescence, are enhanced with tightly ordered superlattice structures,19 which will be further discussed in Section 3.1. Further research on the superlattice order parameters is essential to ensure the quality of perovskite NC superlattice films.
3. Collective photoelectric effect in perovskite NC superlattices
Obviously, the coupling of NC superlattices endows them not only with excellent photoelectric properties of perovskite NCs, but also with new collective behavior different from mono-dispersed NCs. In this part, we will introduce the collective photoelectric behavior of perovskite NC superlattices in terms of optical emission and charge transport, respectively.
3.1 Collective optical performance in NC superlattices

Superfluorescence. 
Superfluorescence was first proposed in 1975.49 The self-assembly of NCs into a superlattice will lead to phase synchronization of the internal dipoles, and the resulting synergistic fluorescence phenomenon is called superfluorescence. If the two-level systems are initially fully uncorrelated, the superradiant emission is termed superfluorescence. Initially, the atomic system is in particle number inversion, and the dipoles are not correlated. A few dipoles will emit ordinary spontaneous emission fluorescence. The weak spontaneous emission light field interacts with the adjacent dipoles, leading to the phase correlation of local dipoles in the material and polarization to form a weakly polarized electric field. Furthermore, this weak polarization field causes the particles in the medium to generate new polarization, forming a larger polarization field and finally making the other unirradiated dipoles in the system phase correlated. Superfluorescence starts from spontaneous radiation and gradually upgrades to a cooperative emission phenomenon (Fig. 3(a)).
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the build-up process of superfluorescence. (b) PL spectrum of a single CsPbBr3 superlattice (solid black line) and NC film (solid green line). (c) Time-resolved PL decay of the CsPbBr3 superlattice film (solid red line) and NC film (solid blue line). Inset, power-dependence of the 1/e-decay times of both components. (d) First-order coherence properties of uncoupled NCs (top) and NC superlattices (bottom). Inset, the real-space interferogram of the superlattice. (e) Second-order coherence properties of uncoupled NCs (top) and NC superlattice (bottom). Inset, a super-bunching from a single superlattice. (f) Time-resolved emission intensity curve under different excitation powers of NC superlattices. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). 
Gabriele Rainò et al. discovered the existence of superfluorescence in highly ordered 3D superlattice CsPbX3 perovskite NCs.18 Contrasted with uncoupled CsPbX3 NCs, in the optically coupled CsPbX3 NC superlattices, the photons established coherence within superfast time (picosecond scale), followed by superfluorescence by the associated exciton dipole moments. The single superlattice exhibits a narrow red-shift emission peak (full-width at half-maximum, FWHM = 11 meV) compared to the uncoupled NCs (Fig. 3(b)). At high excitation densities, an accelerated radiative decay was observed in the superlattice, and the superfluorescence decay time is dependent on the excitation power (Fig. 3(c)). As the excitation power density increases, the number of coherently coupled particles increases, and the coupling strength between particles increases, which leads to an increase in the proportion of the superfluorescence process, and its corresponding fast decay lifetime becomes shorter and shorter. The unique decay time makes fluorescence decay monitoring a common method to determine the existence of superfluorescence phenomena in superlattices.18,32,50 Furthermore, more than 4-fold first-order coherence time shows that the superfluorescence exhibited a stronger coherence, compared with the uncoupled state (Fig. 3(d)). Different from ordinary coherent light such as laser, the second-order coherence of superfluorescence emission shows obvious photon bunching (Fig. 3(e)), and Burnham–Chiao ringing behavior51 can be clearly observed in the time domain (Fig. 3(f)). The results indicate that these coherent states have the potential to improve the performance of optoelectronic devices and realize multi-quantum entangled light sources.
In simple terms, superfluorescence is a high-density set of coupled bosons emitting intense fluorescence in an extremely short time. Optical microcavity is one of the important methods to realize ultrafast quantum emission in a semiconductor system.52,53 When superfluorescence is introduced into an optical microcavity, ultra-fast radiation of the perovskite NC superlattice can be achieved. The optical microcavity can compress the light field and increase the density of the light field and the spontaneous emission rate. The macro quantum coupling effect, collective emission effect and synergistic effect of the 3D superlattice formed by self-assembly of perovskite NCs also accelerate the emissivity.18,49,50 The optical microcavity formed by the NC superlattice is called NC superlattice microcavity (NCSM). Superlattice microcavity not only has the characteristics of excited resonance emission but also has the collective effect of superfluorescence. Under the interaction of superfluorescence and cavity, ultra-fast and intense laser is generated, and the radiation lifetime can be reduced to picosecond order. Zhou et al.19 successfully observed microcavity superfluorescence in a superlattice microcavity structure composed of CsPbBr3 NCs. They proved that highly symmetrical, long-range ordered NC superlattice microcavity can be used as a carrier of superfluorescence and stimulated radiation at the same time to realize the cavity-enhanced superfluorescence (CESF) phenomenon (Fig. 4(a)) and the radiation time is reduced from 29 ps to 4 ps (Fig. 4(b)), and also, the radiation time of superfluorescence and CESF decays rapidly with the increase in pumping intensity. At the same time, in both of them, the PL peak intensity increases nonlinearly (Fig. 4(c)). The difference is that the peak increase of CESF has a significant threshold. Above the threshold, CESF exhibits a much faster radiation lifetime than superfluorescence (Fig. 4(d)). Similarly, Zhang et al.54 constructed CsPbBr3 NC superlattice microcavity at low temperatures. The study found that when the pump density increased beyond the excitation threshold, the radiation life was reduced to 4.2 ps, which proved the potential of the perovskite NC superlattice in high-bandwidth communication.
 Fig. 4  (a) Phase transitions of exciton ensemble in the superlattice (left) and NCSM (right), respectively. The “+” and “−” orientations indicate the phase of dipole moments. (b) Radiative time of superlattice (left) and NCSM (right), respectively. (c) Power dependences of PL peak intensity in the superlattice and NCSM, respectively. (d) Power dependences of radiative time in SL and NCSM, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020). 


PL red-shift in cooperative emission. 
It has been known that monodisperse perovskite NCs can be spectrally controlled by doping, anion exchange or other component control methods.55–60 Compared with monodisperse perovskite NCs, the PL emission of superlattices is usually red-shifted due to the co-emission of perovskite-coupled NCs.14,29,31,61,62 The common phenomenon of red-shift of fluorescence spectra in superlattice structures provides a new idea for the spectral modulation of perovskite NCs.
Tong et al.22 achieved a self-assembled highly ordered 3D perovskite NC superlattice in solution by ultrasonic treatment. The superlattice demonstrated a red-shift emission from 516 nm to 535 nm (Fig. 5(a)). This red-shifted behavior has been demonstrated in CsPbX3 NCs with different compositions (Fig. 5(b)) Huang et al.63 observed PL red-shift of CsPbBr3 NCs during the cooling process via in situ PL spectroscopy tracking. The superlattice formed during the cooling process. This observation provides a valuable reference for further qualitative description of the growth process of perovskite NCs or the accurate spectral regulation. Besides, Zhang et al.64 found in their study on the mechano-optical properties of perovskite NC superlattices that the superlattices would be dissociated after being subjected to transverse mechanical forces. The PL spectra of the superlattices would be blue-shifted after dissociation. Meanwhile, the corresponding radiative recombination rate would be reduced (Fig. 5(c)). This reversible redshift–blueshift phenomenon provides a new idea for the spectral regulation of perovskite NCs. At present, there are different conclusions about the causes of the red shift phenomenon in the NC superlattice of the perovskite. Vanmaekelbergh et al.31 summarized three possible mechanisms that may lead to the red shift of the superlattice based on previous studies: (i) the delocalization of electrons and holes in the superlattice leads to the increase of the dielectric constant, and resulted in the red-shift; (ii) strong coupling between NCs in the superlattice results in the red-shift; (iii) the spatial diffusion of excitons on superlattices caused by exciton energy transfer is accompanied by the trend of exciton transfer towards lower energy. The emission of low energy causes the red-shift. On the other hand, combined with their time-resolved PL experiments, Vanmaekelbergh et al. observed that PL shifts faster than time-resolved, which may be faster than exciton energy transfer. For this reason, they believe that the energy transfer is not the cause of the redshift. Therefore, the specific cause of the redshift emission remains to be further discussed.
 Fig. 5  (a) PL spectra of perovskite films of individual NCs (left side) and SCs (right side). Insets show the photographs of the films under UV-light illumination. (b) The PL spectra of CsPbX3 perovskite superlattices and monodispersed NCs (the dotted line) with different halide compositions. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley-VCH (2018). (c) Mechano-optical properties of self-assembled FAPbBr3 NCs. Top: the microscopic PL images of an NC film showing the emission color (green) before and (blue) after applying a lateral mechanical force. Bottom: the possible recombination mechanism of FAPbBr3 NCs before and after applying a lateral mechanical force. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from American Chemical Society (2022). 
The phenomenon of transient coherent optical effect superfluorescence caused by the phase synchronization of dipoles inside the NC superlattice has been widely recognized. The realization of superfluorescence provides a new way for the development of ultrafast radiation of perovskite NCs. The combination of superfluorescence with microstructures to control the coherent states is expected to be applied in ultrafast quantum simulators and micro-coherent light sources. However, the realization of superfluorescence in the perovskite NC system requires maintaining an ultra-low temperature environment.50,65,66 How to realize superfluorescence at room temperature is the key to its further application in LEDs and other optoelectronic devices. Recently, researchers have realized room temperature superfluorescence on 2D perovskite films, but the realization on NCs needs further exploration.67 Besides, the general phenomenon of red-shifted emission in perovskite NC superlattices and the specific reasons for its occurrence remains to be clarified.

3.2 Collective charge behavior in NC superlattices
The collective optical behavior of perovskite NC superlattices has been recognized, but the understanding of charge behavior, such as charge transport and electron–hole recombination, is still unclear.
Elucidating the charge transport modes in NC superlattices is crucial for developing corresponding optoelectronic devices. As early as the traditional NC system, the charge transport behavior between NCs in the superlattice has been studied. Wang et al. proposed four possible mechanisms of charge transfer in CdSe NC superlattices: (i) miniband transport, (ii) tunneling, (iii) over the barrier activation mechanism, and (iv) the phonon-assisted hopping. The calculated results suggest that phonon-assisted hopping is the most likely mechanism for charge transport in their NC superlattices. Electrons hop from one point to a neighboring point by absorbing one or more phonons.68 However, there is no further experimental research support for this speculation. Meanwhile, previous studies have proposed that in the structure of strongly coupled NCs, the charge transfer between NCs is mainly tunneling when the coupling energy between NCs (related to NC spacing) is equal to or greater than the exciton binding energy. When the coupling energy is less than the exciton binding energy, the charge transfer is dominated by Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) (Fig. 6(a) and (b)), and the charge transport rate between NCs decreases with the increase of the spacing (Fig. 6(d)).69 Penzo et al.20 showed that in the highly ordered and tightly packed CsPbBr3 NC superlattice, FRET is the primary mechanism of charge transfer between NCs, and FRET can enhance the exciton diffusion between neighboring NCs, so that the exciton diffusion length reaches 200 nm. For monodisperse disordered NCs, the longer dot spacing (≥20 nm) between NCs hinders Förster resonant energy transfer.
 Fig. 6  (a) and (b) Charge transport mechanisms at different coupling degrees: strong coupling, tunneling is the main pathway (a); weak coupling, Förster resonant energy transfer is the main pathway (b). Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2010). (c) Schematic diagram of the carrier wavefunction distribution of uncoupled NCs (top) and NC Superlattices (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Wiley-VCH (2021). (d) The charge transfer rates dependent on d-spacing. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2010). (e) PL decay of uncoupled NCs (black symbols) and NC superlattices (blue symbols). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Wiley-VCH (2021). 
Collective electronic phenomena have been observed in ordered NC superlattices. When the spacing between NCs reduces to 2–3 nm, the electronic wave function coupling occurs between adjacent NCs.70,71 The synergy forms coupled electronic states (minibands) in the valence and conduction bands. Huang et al.63 found that superlattices’ electron–hole recombination rate is low. For monodisperse NCs, electrons and holes are confined in a single NC. The low dielectric constant of the surroundings results in weak shielding of Coulomb interactions between electrons and holes, resulting in high exciton binding energies and, in turn, high radiative recombination rates. In superlattices, NCs can be effectively coupled to form minibands, which allow carriers to delocalize in the superlattice. In addition, due to the close arrangement between NCs, the dielectric constant between them will increase, resulting in more substantial shielding of Coulomb interactions between electron holes. Therefore, the exciton binding energy decreases, and the electron–hole recombination process becomes slower than monodisperse NCs. In another research, Sargent et al. found that nonradiative recombination is suppressed in CsPbBr3 NC superlattices.26 Compared with isolated NCs, the reduction in the spacing of NCs in the superlattice will result in a spatial distribution of electrons and holes, which leads to a lower Auger recombination rate. Furthermore, the increase in the transient PL lifetime of the superlattice at high excitation flux also demonstrates that the nonradiative recombination process is inhibited (Fig. 6(c) and (e)).
To sum up, there are still various speculations about the carrier transport mode in the perovskite superlattice, so further research is needed to make a final decision. Irrespective of the system, the research on charge transport is always a critical step for further application developments. A better understanding of the charging behavior will allow for more effective material selection and device structure design. Due to the enhanced charge transport capability in perovskite NC superlattices, it is foreseeable that perovskite NC superlattices will shine in devices such as LEDs, lasers, transistors and solar cells, the performance of which is closely related to the carrier transport capability.
4. Optoelectronic devices based on halide perovskite superlattice
Perovskite NC superlattices have great potential in the fabrication of high-performance optoelectronic devices due to their enhanced photoelectric properties such as collective emissions (superfluorescence), red-shift emission, long exciton diffusion length, and electron coupling. At present, preliminary attempts are being made to employ NC superlattices in LEDs,22,72,73 photodetectors,74 and lasers.26
Based on the red-shift emission properties in perovskite NC superlattices, Tong et al.22 self-assembled the monodisperse NC emitting cyan light (≈521 nm) into 3D superlattices. LEDs with pure green emission (≈530 nm) corresponding to Rec2020 are achieved (Fig. 7(a)). Recently, Kumar et al.73 reported a directional self-assembly method for fabricating anisotropic perovskite NC superlattices. It is found that emission polarization in the FA0.5MA0.5PbBr3 superlattice adjusts the radiation of the horizontal and vertical transition dipole, and the enhancement rate of the horizontal dipole is up to 0.75, effectively leading to the preference of the horizontal transition-dipole-moment orientation. Compared with isotropic perovskite NCs (θH = 0.67), the anisotropic NC superlattice with this optimal structure (θH = 0.72) has lower horizontal dipole emission near the critical angle (41°) of the substrate–air interface (Fig. 7(b)), and the vertical dipole coupled more strongly to the substrate, so the emission is enhanced. Furthermore, the higher radiant power at higher θH also proves that this structure enhances luminescence (Fig. 7(c)). The theoretical optical coupling efficiency of the LED based on the superlattice is increased by more than 30%. The optimized NC LED has a maximum external quantum efficiency of 24.96%, comparable to the most advanced organic LEDs. In addition, perovskite NC superlattices are ordered arrays with collective emissions. Integrating NC superlattices in electrically pumped diode structures to act as quantum light sources can facilitate the development of time-correlated multiphoton beams and entangled photons in photonic quantum technologies.75
 Fig. 7  (a) CIE coordinates of the superlattice LED device (inset: magnified view of the color coordinates of CsPbBr3 superlattices (SC), isolated NCs of CsPbBr3 (NC), and FAPbBr3 (ref) in comparison with the recommended pure green (Rec2020) color). Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the Wiley-VCH (2018). (b) Experimentally characterized (Exp.) and optical theory-calculated thin-film p-pol PL intensity as a function of viewing angle ϕ, using the thin-film horizontal dipole ratio θH as the control parameter. (c) Calculated far-field emission patterns (FEPs) generated by EMLs in the optimized LED stack for different θH values. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group (2022). (d) Photodetector based on the 1D perovskite NC superlattice assembled using a liquid bridge induced assembly strategy. (e) The time-dependent photoresponse of a single 1D NC photodetector. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the the Royal Society of Chemistry (2019). 
Not only LEDs, but the applications of photodetectors and lasers based on perovskite NC superlattices are also explored by researchers. Bao et al.74 constructed a photodetector based on 1D CsPbX3 NC superlattices (Fig. 7(d)), which exhibited a responsivity of 60 mA W−1, an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 16%, and a photoelectric response time on the order of milliseconds (rise time ≈4.4 ms and fall time ≈6.7 ms) (Fig. 7(e)). These results indicate that 1D perovskite NC superlattices have great potential for constructing high-response and high-sensitivity detectors. Zhou et al.19 realized the CESF by combining the microcavity with the superlattice. They used an excitation threshold in this structure to achieve the conversion between superfluorescence and CESF. Based on this, a THz quantum container with switching characteristics was designed, and an experimental demonstration of a quantum container with ultrafast conversion was conducted using two different radiation states of perovskites as the switching state. The realization of this device demonstrates the potential application of perovskite NC superlattices in quantum devices. On the other hand, Sargent et al.26 further demonstrated the feasibility of perovskite NC superlattices for laser applications. In previous studies, the maintenance of low-threshold lasers required excitation by femtosecond pulses. In this work, sodium ligand-capped NCs are assembled into superlattices with collective emission and optical cavity effects, realizing a low-threshold (≈25 μJ cm−2) nanosecond persistent laser, which trails a new path to achieve the goal of continuous-wave lasers.
Conclusions
This review mainly covers reports on perovskite NC superlattices over the past five years. The successful construction of perovskite NC superlattices demonstrates the new vitality of perovskite NCs in optoelectronic devices. In this review, the self-assembly strategy of perovskite NC superlattices is described in detail, and the collective photoelectric effect after self-assembly and photoelectric application based on this are discussed.
At present, the research on perovskite NC superlattices is still in its early stage, and how to efficiently achieve the construction of high-quality superlattice films is still the focus of research in this field. Liquid–air interface self-assembly can be used to fabricate centimeter-scale superlattice films, but this self-assembly process still requires a lot of time. Appropriate solvent selection and reasonable control of the evaporation environment will be the key to improve this problem. In the future, when the superlattice self-assembly strategy becomes more mature, how to integrate thin films into device application and achieving perfect compatibility of a device will be the focus of the next research.
Benefiting from the strong coupling between the NCs, perovskite NC superlattices exhibit excellent collective photoelectric properties. The realization of superfluorescence provides a new way for the development of ultrafast radiation of perovskite NCs. At present, superfluorescence in perovskite NC superlattices still needs to be investigated successfully in ultra-low temperature environments. Further studies on the superfluorescence kinetics are needed to realize the superfluorescence properties of perovskite NC superlattices at room temperature. On the other hand, the enhanced charge transport due to the coupling in a superlattice endows it with great potential for optoelectronic device applications. The degree of coupling depends on the spacing of each NC in the superlattice. Establishing a mathematical relationship between the distance of each NC and the charge transport performance will help studying the charge transport ability of superlattices, so as to promote the material structure design of a superlattice photoelectric device. Halide perovskites have excellent nonlinear optical properties, such as nonlinear absorption, optical Kerr effect, and two-photon and multi-photon fluorescence. They have attracted extensive attention in the fields of laser saturation absorbents, frequency up-conversion photonic devices, and super-resolution imaging.76,77 Similarly, we believe that perovskite superlattices with perovskite NCs as the assembly unit also have potential for application in nonlinear optics. Researchers have found that the change of PL intensity has a nonlinear dependence on the excitation power in the study of perovskite superlattices. Moreover, when a superlattice is further assembled into an optical microcavity, the PL spectrum shows an apparent time-dependence under high-power excitation. The wavelength of the excited center will show a significant red shift with time, resulting in a larger FWHM. This nonlinear feature in the superlattice optical microcavity will lay the foundation for developing new multifunctional ultra-fast time-controlled optoelectronic microdevices.
In addition to the problems mentioned above, the photoelectric property regulation and stability of perovskite NC superlattices are also issues that need attention. At present, there are few research studies and discussions on these two points. For these two aspects, we make the following assumptions:
Ion doping plays an important role in improving the photoelectric properties of perovskite NCs and improving the structural stability of the material. This technology has been widely used in perovskite monodisperse systems.60,78,79 Previous studies have shown that doped perovskite quantum dot superlattices have better stability than monodisperse systems.80 Similarly, ion doping should regulate the NC self-assembled superlattice system. Researchers should consider whether the effect of this additional regulation under strong coupling is consistent with a monodisperse system. If the material properties can be successfully regulated in perovskite NC superlattices, the research on the application of perovskite superlattice optoelectronic devices will open a new chapter.
From the perspective of material properties of perovskite NCs, the components of the superlattice, light, water, oxygen, and electric field have significant effects on the fluorescence stability and structural stability of the perovskite. In a superlattice system, studies have shown that superlattices formed by the self-assembly of perovskite NCs have better photostability and water and oxygen resistance than the monodisperse state.80 However, how the superlattice changes under an electric field have not been described in detail. In addition, the perovskite superlattice will be decoupled under mechanical pressure64 and multiple dilutions,63 which will lead to the destruction of the superlattice structure and loss of the collective photoelectric effect. The differences in the stability of the superlattice structures obtained using different self-assembly methods should also be further discussed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62204120, 61904081, 52131304, and 62261160392), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20190449), the Postdoctoral Research Funding Program of Jiangsu Province (2020Z144).
Notes and references
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. G. de Arquer, A. Armin, P. Meredith and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16100 CrossRef .
Q. Shan, J. Song, Y. Zou, J. Li, L. Xu, J. Xue, Y. Dong, B. Han, J. Chen and H. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1701770 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. Hodes, Z. Jin and S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15596–15618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-K. Liu, W. Xu, S. Bai, Y. Jin, J. Wang, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 10–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Schmidt, A. Pertegás, S. González-Carrero, O. Malinkiewicz, S. Agouram, G. Minguez Espallargas, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and J. Pérez-Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos and D. Credgington, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Cao, D. Yu, J. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. Shen, Y. Zhu, L. Wang, Y. Wei, Y. Wu and H. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1603996 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Abecassis, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 618–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Boles, M. Engel and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11220–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Chimia, 2017, 71, 461–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Zheng, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 262–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 1995, 270, 1335–1338 CrossRef CAS .
G. Springholz, V. Holy, M. Pinczolits and G. Bauer, Science, 1998, 282, 734–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Weidman, K. G. Yager and W. A. Tisdale, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 474–482 CrossRef CAS .
G. Raino, M. A. Becker, M. I. Bodnarchuk, R. F. Mahrt, M. V. Kovalenko and T. Stoferle, Nature, 2018, 563, 671–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhong, H. Dong, W. Zheng, J. Tan, Q. Jie, A. Pan, L. Zhang and W. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Penzo, A. Loiudice, E. S. Barnard, N. J. Borys, M. J. Jurow, M. Lorenzon, I. Rajzbaum, E. K. Wong, Y. Liu, A. M. Schwartzberg, S. Cabrini, S. Whitelam, R. Buonsanti and A. Weber-Bargioni, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6999–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1013–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, E.-P. Yao, A. Manzi, E. Bladt, K. Wang, M. Döblinger, S. Bals, P. Müller-Buschbaum, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801117 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Marino, T. E. Kodger, G. H. Wegdam and P. Schall, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803433 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ji, M. Wang, Z. Yang, S. Ji and H. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8471–8476 RSC .
J. Jagielski, S. F. Solari, L. Jordan, D. Scullion, B. Bluelle, Y.-T. Li, F. Krumeich, Y.-C. Chiu, B. Ruhstaller, E. J. G. Santos and C.-J. Shih, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, J. M. Pina, T. Zhu, D. H. Parmar, H. Chang, J. Yu, F. Yuan, G. Bappi, Y. Hou, X. Zheng, J. Abed, H. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Gao, B. Chen, Y.-K. Wang, H. Chen, T. Zhang, S. Hoogland, M. I. Saidaminov, L. Sun, O. M. Bakr, H. Dong, L. Zhang and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Sci., 2021, 2101125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Cherniukh, T. V. Sekh, G. Rainò, O. J. Ashton, M. Burian, A. Travesset, M. Athanasiou, A. Manoli, R. A. John, M. Svyrydenko, V. Morad, Y. Shynkarenko, F. Montanarella, D. Naumenko, H. Amenitsch, G. Itskos, R. F. Mahrt, T. Stöferle, R. Erni, M. V. Kovalenko and M. I. Bodnarchuk, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 7210–7232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Wang, J.-N. Yang, Q.-K. Ni, H.-B. Yao and S.-H. Yu, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 595–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nagaoka, K. Hills-Kimball, R. Tan, R. Li, Z. Wang and O. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606666 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Huang, J. Liu, B. Bai, L. Huang, M. Xu, J. Liu, H. Rong and J. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 125606 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. van der Burgt, J. J. Geuchies, B. van der Meer, H. Vanrompay, D. Zanaga, Y. Zhang, W. Albrecht, A. V. Petukhov, L. Filion, S. Bals, I. Swart and D. Vanmaekelbergh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15706–15712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Cherniukh, G. Rainò, T. Stöferle, M. Burian, A. Travesset, D. Naumenko, H. Amenitsch, R. Erni, R. F. Mahrt, M. I. Bodnarchuk and M. V. Kovalenko, Nature, 2021, 593, 535–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yun and T. Paik, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Kaushik and P. Clancy, J. Comput. Chem., 2013, 34, 523–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Soetan, W. R. Erwin, A. M. Tonigan, D. G. Walker and R. Bardhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 18186–18194 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rabani, D. R. Reichman, P. L. Geissler and L. E. Brus, Nature, 2003, 426, 271–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Weidman, Q. Nguyen, D.-M. Smilgies and W. A. Tisdale, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 807–816 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bian, J. J. Choi, A. Kaushik, P. Clancy, D.-M. Smilgies and T. Hanrath, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2815–2823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dong, J. Chen, P. M. Vora, J. M. Kikkawa and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2010, 466, 474–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dong, Y. Jiao and D. J. Milliron, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10978–10984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Chan, D. Zhou, Z. Yu and T. T. Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14699–14708 RSC .
I. Cherniukh, G. Raino, T. V. Sekh, C. Zhu, Y. Shynkarenko, R. A. John, E. Kobiyama, R. F. Mahrt, T. Stoeferle, R. Erni, M. V. Kovalenko and M. I. Bodnarchuk, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16488–16500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, K. Song, Y. Shin, X. Liu, J. Chen, K. X. Yao, J. Pan, C. Yang, J. Yin, L.-J. Xu, H. Yang, A. M. El-Zohry, B. Xin, S. Mitra, M. N. Hedhili, I. S. Roqan, O. F. Mohammed, Y. Han and O. M. Bakr, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6642–6649 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Liu, Q. Ying, C. Wang, W. Jia, X. Xing, L. Yin, Z. Lu, K. Zhang, Y. Pan, Z. Shi, L. Huang and D. Jia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17207–17213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pan, M. Jurow, Y. Zhao, F. Qiu, Y. Liu, J. Yang, J. J. Urban, L. He and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17688–17693 RSC .
V. K. Ravi, R. A. Scheidt, A. Nag, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1049–1055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, L. Gomez, A. Lesage, E. Marino, T. E. Kodger, J.-M. Meijer, P. Kolpakov, J. Meng, K. Zheng, T. Gregorkiewicz and P. Schall, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5997–6004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Ondry, L. B. Frechette, P. L. Geissler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 389–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bonifacio and L. A. Lugiato, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1975, 11, 1507–1521 CrossRef .
F. Krieg, P. C. Sercel, M. Burian, H. Andrusiv, M. I. Bodnarchuk, T. Stöferle, R. F. Mahrt, D. Naumenko, H. Amenitsch, G. Rainò and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 135–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Burnham and R. Y. Chiao, Phys. Rev., 1969, 188, 667–675 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tatebayashi, S. Kako, J. F. Ho, Y. Ota, S. Iwamoto and Y. Arakawa, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 501–505 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, R. M. Liu, R. L. Su, Y. Yu, H. F. Xu, Y. M. Wei, Z. K. Zhou and X. H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13565–13571 RSC .
Y. Zhong, C. Zhou, L. Hou, J. Li, W. Xie, H. Dong and L. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2022, 10, 2102290 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Cao, W. Wang, B. Xu, S. Liu, H. Dai, S. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Wan and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20671–20678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Amgar, T. Binyamin, V. Uvarov and L. Etgar, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6060–6068 RSC .
Y. Zhou, T. Fang, G. Liu, H. Xiang, L. Yang, Y. Li, R. Wang, D. Yan, Y. Dong, B. Cai and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2106871 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Mir, T. Sheikh, H. Arfin, Z. Xia and A. Nag, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 9 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Brennan, S. Toso, I. M. Pavlovetc, M. Zhukovskyi, S. Marras, M. Kuno, L. Manna and D. Baranov, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1465–1473 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, M. W. Feil, S. Fuchs, T. Debnath, A. F. Richter, Y. Tong, L. Wu, Y. Wang, M. Döblinger and B. Nickel, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 8877–8884 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Ghimire, T. Okamoto, B. M. Sachith, J. Sobhanan, C. Subrahmanyam and V. Biju, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 160–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Baranov, A. Fieramosca, R. X. Yang, L. Polimeno, G. Lerario, S. Toso, C. Giansante, M. D. Giorgi, L. Z. Tan, D. Sanvitto and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 650–664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Findik, M. Biliroglu, D. Seyitliyev, J. Mendes, A. Barrette, H. Ardekani, L. Lei, Q. Dong, F. So and K. Gundogdu, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 676–680 CrossRef CAS .
M. Biliroglu, G. Findik, J. Mendes, D. Seyitliyev, L. Lei, Q. Dong, Y. Mehta, V. V. Temnov, F. So and K. Gundogdu, Nat. Photonics, 2022, 16, 324–329 CrossRef CAS .
I.-H. Chu, M. Radulaski, N. Vukmirovic, H.-P. Cheng and L.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21409–21415 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Choi, J. Luria, B.-R. Hyun, A. C. Bartnik, L. Sun, Y.-F. Lim, J. A. Marohn, F. W. Wise and T. Hanrath, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1805–1811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sugaya, T. Amano, M. Mori and S. Niki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 043112 CrossRef .
T. Hanrath, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 030802 CrossRef .
E. Cao, J. Qiu, D. Zhou, Y. Yang, Q. Wang and Y. Wen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4460–4463 RSC .
S. Kumar, T. Marcato, F. Krumeich, Y.-T. Li, Y.-C. Chiu and C.-J. Shih, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dai, Q. Ou, C. Wang, G. Si, B. Shabbir, C. Zheng, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Dong, J. J. Jasieniak, B. Su and Q. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5954–5961 RSC .
J. Shamsi, G. Rainò, M. V. Kovalenko and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1164–1168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Li, J. Xiong, C. Yuan, S. Semin, T. Rasing and X. H. Bu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1806736 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shen, J. Chen, J. Wu, X. Li and H. Zeng, ACS Photonics, 2020, 8, 113–124 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, J. Chen, O. M. Bakr and H.-T. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6589–6613 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dey, J. Ye, A. De, E. Debroye, S. K. Ha, E. Bladt, A. S. Kshirsagar, Z. Wang, J. Yin, Y. Wang, L. N. Quan, F. Yan, M. Gao, X. Li, J. Shamsi, T. Debnath, M. Cao, M. A. Scheel, S. Kumar, J. A. Steele, M. Gerhard, L. Chouhan, K. Xu, X.-G. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Dutta, C. Han, I. Vincon, A. L. Rogach, A. Nag, A. Samanta, B. A. Korgel, C.-J. Shih, D.
R. Gamelin, D. H. Son, H. Zeng, H. Zhong, H. Sun, H. V. Demir, I. G. Scheblykin, I. Mora-Seró, J. K. Stolarczyk, J. Z. Zhang, J. Feldmann, J. Hofkens, J. M. Luther, J. Pérez-Prieto, L. Li, L. Manna, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, M. B. J. Roeffaers, N. Pradhan, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr, P. Yang, P. Müller-Buschbaum, P. V. Kamat, Q. Bao, Q. Zhang, R. Krahne, R. E. Galian, S. D. Stranks, S. Bals, V. Biju, W. A. Tisdale, Y. Yan, R. L. Z. Hoye and L. Polavarapu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 10775–10981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, M. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Wang, M. A. Padhiar, H. Qiu, J. Dang, Y. Miao, Y. Zhou and A. S. Bhatti, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 2359–2366 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Danni Yan
	Danni Yan received her bachelor degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China. She is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Zeng's group at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology. Her current research interests include quantum dots and their optoelectronic applications.

Qingsong Shan
	Qingsong Shan received his PhD degree in Materials Science from the Nanjing University of Science and Technology in 2020. He is currently a Postdoc at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology. His current research interests include quantum dots and their optoelectronic applications.

Yuhui Dong
	Yuhui Dong received her PhD from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China. She is currently an Associate Professor at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology. She recently focused on the research of nano-photoelectronic devices constructed using solution processes, lead-less perovskite materials and optoelectronic devices.

Haibo Zeng
	Haibo Zeng received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. He later worked with Prof. Claus Klingshirn in 2007 at the University of Karlsruhe, Germany. In 2008, he joined Prof. Yoshio Bando's group at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. Since 2013, he has been working as a distinguished professor and Director of the Institute of Optoelectronics and Nanomaterials in Nanjing University of Science and Technology. His research interests are focused on the exploratory design of semiconducting nanocrystals and 2D crystals, with an emphasis on optoelectronics applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the self-assembly of monodisperse perovskite NCs into superlattices. TEM or STEM micrographs of the CsPbBr3 monodispersed NCs (b), reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH (2021), 1D superlattices (c), reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2019). 2D superlattices (d), reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020) and 3D superlattices (e), reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH (2021).	 

 	Fig. 2  Self-assembly method. Solution-assisted method. (a) Drying mediated. Left: schematic illustration of the drying-mediated self-assembly. Right: (i) TEM image of the CsPbBr3 NC superlattice. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018). (ii) TEM image of the binary NaCl-type superlattice, composed of CsPbBr3 NCs and NaGdF4 NCs. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from American Chemical Society (2022). (b) Liquid–air interface self-assembly. Left: schematic illustration of the liquid–air interface self-assembly. Right: large and continuous NC superlattice films observed by TEM in different scales. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2022). Ligand-assisted method. (c) Left: schematic illustration of the ligand-assisted NC self-assembly mechanism. Right: self-assembly of CsPbBr3 NCs driven by the small ligand AuBr3. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society (2018).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the build-up process of superfluorescence. (b) PL spectrum of a single CsPbBr3 superlattice (solid black line) and NC film (solid green line). (c) Time-resolved PL decay of the CsPbBr3 superlattice film (solid red line) and NC film (solid blue line). Inset, power-dependence of the 1/e-decay times of both components. (d) First-order coherence properties of uncoupled NCs (top) and NC superlattices (bottom). Inset, the real-space interferogram of the superlattice. (e) Second-order coherence properties of uncoupled NCs (top) and NC superlattice (bottom). Inset, a super-bunching from a single superlattice. (f) Time-resolved emission intensity curve under different excitation powers of NC superlattices. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2018).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Phase transitions of exciton ensemble in the superlattice (left) and NCSM (right), respectively. The “+” and “−” orientations indicate the phase of dipole moments. (b) Radiative time of superlattice (left) and NCSM (right), respectively. (c) Power dependences of PL peak intensity in the superlattice and NCSM, respectively. (d) Power dependences of radiative time in SL and NCSM, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Nature Publishing Group (2020).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) PL spectra of perovskite films of individual NCs (left side) and SCs (right side). Insets show the photographs of the films under UV-light illumination. (b) The PL spectra of CsPbX3 perovskite superlattices and monodispersed NCs (the dotted line) with different halide compositions. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley-VCH (2018). (c) Mechano-optical properties of self-assembled FAPbBr3 NCs. Top: the microscopic PL images of an NC film showing the emission color (green) before and (blue) after applying a lateral mechanical force. Bottom: the possible recombination mechanism of FAPbBr3 NCs before and after applying a lateral mechanical force. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from American Chemical Society (2022).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) and (b) Charge transport mechanisms at different coupling degrees: strong coupling, tunneling is the main pathway (a); weak coupling, Förster resonant energy transfer is the main pathway (b). Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2010). (c) Schematic diagram of the carrier wavefunction distribution of uncoupled NCs (top) and NC Superlattices (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Wiley-VCH (2021). (d) The charge transfer rates dependent on d-spacing. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2010). (e) PL decay of uncoupled NCs (black symbols) and NC superlattices (blue symbols). Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Wiley-VCH (2021).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) CIE coordinates of the superlattice LED device (inset: magnified view of the color coordinates of CsPbBr3 superlattices (SC), isolated NCs of CsPbBr3 (NC), and FAPbBr3 (ref) in comparison with the recommended pure green (Rec2020) color). Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the Wiley-VCH (2018). (b) Experimentally characterized (Exp.) and optical theory-calculated thin-film p-pol PL intensity as a function of viewing angle ϕ, using the thin-film horizontal dipole ratio θH as the control parameter. (c) Calculated far-field emission patterns (FEPs) generated by EMLs in the optimized LED stack for different θH values. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group (2022). (d) Photodetector based on the 1D perovskite NC superlattice assembled using a liquid bridge induced assembly strategy. (e) The time-dependent photoresponse of a single 1D NC photodetector. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the the Royal Society of Chemistry (2019).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
