Recent advances in the potential applications of bioinspired superhydrophobic materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA02071E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA02071E
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16319-16359Recent advances in the potential applications of bioinspired superhydrophobic materials

        
          
            Thierry 
            Darmanin
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Frederic 
            Guittard
          
          
        
      *
      Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis, LPMC, UMR 7336, CNRS, Parc Valrose, 06100 Nice, France. E-mail: Frederic.GUITTARD@unice.fr;  Fax: +33 4-92-07-61-56;   Tel: +33 4-92-07-61-59
Received 
      25th April 2014
    , Accepted 4th June 2014First published on 9th June 2014AbstractThis review gives an overview of recent advances in the potential applications of superhydrophobic materials. Such properties are characterized by extremely high water contact angles and various adhesion properties. The conception of superhydrophobic materials has been possible by studying and mimicking natural surfaces. Now, various applications have emerged such as anti-icing, anti-corrosion and anti-bacterial coatings, microfluidic devices, textiles, oil–water separation, water desalination/purification, optical devices, sensors, batteries and catalysts. At least two parameters were found to be very important for many applications: the presence of air on superhydrophobic materials with self-cleaning properties (Cassie–Baxter state) and the robustness of the superhydrophobic properties (stability of the Cassie–Baxter state). This review will allow researchers to envisage new ideas and industrialists to advance in the commercialization of these materials.Thierry DarmaninDr Thierry Darmanin obtained his PhD degree in 2008 from the Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis (France) under the supervision of Prof. Frederic Guittard. He was then a postdoctoral fellow with Dr François Rossi at the Joint Research Centre (European Commission, Ispra, Italy). His work involved the elaboration and characterization of nanoparticles. In 2009, he rejoined Prof. Frederic Guittard as an Associate Professor. His research interests focus on superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces, the electrochemical processes of deposition and bio-inspired and biomimetic materials and systems. He has co-authored more than 50 journal papers.Frédéric GuittardDr Frédéric Guittard is a Full Professor at the Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis (France) in the Laboratory Physics of Condensed Matter (LPMC) with more than 20 years of experience in organic and fluorine chemistry, surfaces & interfaces, bioinspired and advanced materials, and surface wettability. His present research interests include bioinspired and biobased chemistry & materials. He has co-authored more than 100 journal papers and attended 50 international conferences as an invited speaker.
1. Introduction
Superhydrophobicity is characterized by the repellency of water on a surface with apparent contact angles of water (θw) above 150° and various adhesive properties characterized by dynamic contact angle measurements. The potential applications of superhydrophobic materials are extremely wide and include anti-icing coatings, anti-corrosion coatings, anti-bacterial coatings, textiles, oil–water separation, water purification and desalinization, microfluidic devices, optical devices, batteries, sensors, drug delivery and heterogeneous catalysis. Recent advances in the potential applications of superhydrophobic materials will be carefully described in this review.
Biomimetic and bioinspired approaches have been necessary to well understand and reproduce non-adhesion phenomena.1–3 Indeed, nature has produced for millennia several plants, insects and animals with superhydrophobic surface properties. The possession of superhydrophobic properties is a major trump for these species to survive in very aggressive environments. The most famous example is the lotus leaf associated with self-cleaning properties and robustness due to the presence of micro- and nanostructures of hydrophobic waxes (Fig. 1a and b).1–5 Very recently, it has been reported that soil-dwelling wingless arthropods such as pringtails (Orthonychiurus stachianus and Tetrodontophora bilanensis) are resistant to the wetting of low surface tension liquids (Fig. 1f), such as oils, due to the presence of surface structures with positive re-entrant structures (serif T structures).6–8 We can also cite the antireflective9 and anti-fogging10 properties of moth and mosquito eyes to have a large and clear view of the surroundings, the structural color of butterfly wings to warn the predators (Fig. 1d),11,12 and the bactericidal properties of cicada wings.13 Other species are also capable of collecting water in very dry and hot media (Fig. 1c),14,15 collecting air underwater (Fig. 1b),16 while others are capable of slipping on water (Fig. 1e)17,18 or walking on vertical surfaces (Fig. 1g). These various abilities are especially due to differences of surface adhesion.19
 Fig. 1  (a) Picture of superhydrophobic peanut leaves; (b) superhydrophobic Salvinia leaves with hydrophilic pins for air retention; (c) picture of a superhydrophobic lupin with superhydrophilic channels to guide water droplets; (d) picture of a blue Morpho aega with directional adhesion; (e) picture of a water strider capable of walking on water; (f) picture of superoleophobic Folsomia candida; (g) picture of a gecko capable of walking on vertical surfaces;19 (h) picture of cicada with superhydrophobic and self-cleaning wings. Panel a reprinted with permission from ref. 4, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; Panel b reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH; Panel c reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society; Panel d reprinted with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; Panel e reprinted with permission from ref. 17, copyright 2010, Elsevier B.V.; Panel f reprinted with permission from ref. 6, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; Panel h reprinted with permission from ref. 5, copyright 2013, PNAS. 
The superhydrophobicity is governed by two main parameters as described by the Wenzel20 and Cassie–Baxter21 equations: the intrinsic hydrophobicity of the materials present at the extreme surface and a roughness parameter, which combines surface roughness and topography, as described by Marmur.22,23 Various strategies could be used to reproduce these properties such as lithographic processes, templating, electrospinning, electrodeposition, sol–gel processes and layer-by-layer deposition.24–27
Because the scientific community has worked very intensively for about 10 years, it is now appropriate to give a very exhaustive overview of the importance of the superhydrophobicity for various potential applications. After the description of the wetting theories as well as self-cleaning properties and robustness, which are extremely important for applying superhydrophobic materials, we will summarize each application as a “mini-review”.
2. Wetting theories, self-cleaning properties and robustness
When a droplet is deposited on a substrate, it wets the substrate to a certain extent. The apparent contact angle θw is taken at the triple point solid–liquid–vapor. For a smooth, homogeneous, rigid, insoluble and non-reactive solid surface,28θw depends on the solid–vapor tension γSV (surface free energy), the solid–liquid surface tension γSL and the liquid–vapor surface tension γLV, as given by the Young–Dupre equation (Fig. 2a): cosθY = (γSV − γSL)/γLV.29 Hence, for a “smooth” surface, θY increases when γSV decreases or γLV increases. However, for a smooth surface, θw does not exceed 125–130 °C, which is the maximum value obtained for some fluorinated materials.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of a water droplet on a (a) smooth surface, following the Young–Dupre equation, and on a rough surface, following (b) the Wenzel equation and (c) the Cassie–Baxter equation. 
Indeed, it is necessary to increase the surface roughness by creating surface structures, as described by the Wenzel20 and Cassie–Baxter21 equations. A liquid droplet in the Wenzel state20 fully wets the surface by entering into all surface anfractuosities (Fig. 2b). The solid–liquid interface is increased by a roughness parameter r corresponding to the specific/projected area. The Wenzel equation is: cosθ = rcosθY. As a consequence, both superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic properties can be predicted. The surface roughness increases the hydrophobicity of intrinsically hydrophobic materials (θY > 90°) and decreases the hydrophobicity of intrinsically hydrophilic materials (θY < 90°). In the Cassie–Baxter state,21 the liquid droplet is suspended on top of rugosities and on air trapped inside surface anfractuosities (Fig. 2c). The Cassie–Baxter equation is: cosθ = φs(cosθY + 1) − 1, where φs is the solid fraction in contact with the droplet and (1 − φs) is the air fraction.
To determine the superhydrophobic properties of materials, it is necessary to determine not only the water apparent contact angle θw but also the dynamic contact angles: the advanced contact angle θadv,w, the receding contact angle θrec,w, and as a consequence the hysteresis Hw = θadv,w − θrec,w. H gives an indication of the necessary force to remove a droplet from a substrate. Usually, for superhydrophobic surfaces, the most employed method to determine H is the tilted-drop method. This method consists of the deposition of a water droplet on a substrate. After inclination until a maximum angle, called the sliding angle or the tilting angle (α), the water droplet rolls off the substrate. H has to be determined just before the droplet rolls off the substrate. Indeed, the gravity inducing a deformation of the droplet allows the determination of θadv,w and θrec,w. When a liquid droplet follows the Wenzel equation, H and α are very high because of the increase in the solid–liquid interface. By contrast, when a liquid droplet follows the Wenzel equation, H and α are very low (usually <10°) due to the increase in the liquid–vapor interface. The low H and α are also responsible for the self-cleaning properties observed in natural species such as the lotus leaves.1–5 Indeed, if dust or particles are present on a superhydrophobic surface, there are more attracted by water droplets than by the surface (Fig. 3).30,31 As a consequence, during rainfall, a simple surface inclination allows the removal of dust and particles from superhydrophobic surfaces (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of (a) a smooth surface without self-cleaning properties and (b) a superhydrophobic surface with self-cleaning properties (Cassie–Baxter state).30 
 Fig. 4  Relationship of cosθ with cosθY: the black and blue lines correspond to the Wenzel state and the Cassie–Baxter state while the red dotted and red dashed lines correspond to the metastable Cassie–Baxter state when θY > 90° and the metastable Cassie–Baxter state when θY < 90°. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter states are two extreme states but many other states between these two states can also exist (with a composite interface).32–34 Indeed, the Cassie–Baxter state is a metastable state and the application of an external pressure can induce a Cassie–Baxter-to-Wenzel transition (Fig. 5). A surface supporting a very high pressure is called the “robust” surface. The term “robust” is different from the term “mechanically durable”, which is also important for many applications.35
 Fig. 5  Superoleophobic bronchosomes observed at the surface of leafhoppers (Insecta, Hemiptera, Cicadellidae). Scale bars: 50 nm (a and b), 100 nm (c and e) and 1 μm (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, The Royal Society. 
The robustness is highly dependent on the surface topography. For example, the presence of both micro- and nanostructures was found to be an important parameter to obtain robust superhydrophobic properties.36 The possibility of stabilizing the Cassie–Baxter state using intrinsically hydrophilic materials (θYw < 90°) as well as superoleophobic properties by using intrinsically oleophilic materials (θYoils < 90°) was even demonstrated.37 The main parameter was found to be the presence of re-entrant surface structures, as observed in springtails (Fig. 1f) and in leafhoppers (Fig. 5), such as overhangs, T-like structures or mushroom-like structures. Indeed, their presence often affects the interface meniscus and induces a negative capillary effect helping to support the liquid.35,39
3. Potential applications of superhydrophobic surfaces
3.1 Anti-icing coatings
The development of anti-icing coatings can increase the energy efficiency as well as the safety of materials and systems such as aircrafts or turbines.40 The surface topography/roughness necessary to obtain superhydrophobic surfaces can lead also, under certain conditions, to anti-icing properties. However, if water and ice are composed of the same molecules, their adhesion on a substrate is clearly different. First of all, it was demonstrated that superhydrophobic properties can delay the formation of ice.41–47 Indeed, the presence of air trapped on superhydrophobic surfaces favoring the Cassie–Baxter state can induce the formation of a thermal barrier between the solid and the liquid. This characteristic was demonstrated by depositing water on cold solids.41 Hence, if the substrate is tilted, water droplets can be removed without freezing. The group of Song showed, using superhydrophobic surfaces made of ZnO nanorods, that condensed micro-droplets below the freezing points were always spherical indicating that the surfaces were superhydrophobic to these droplets.42 Moreover, they observed a dependence of the delay of the ice formation on the dimensions of the ZnO nanorods. Other groups worked on the ice nucleation on superhydrophobic surfaces using supercooled water droplets.43–46 They observed a delay for superhydrophobic surfaces but also a nucleation mechanism highly dependent on the temperature. As a consequence, it is extremely difficult to obtain anti-icing properties for all temperature ranges. Gao et al. also studied anti-icing properties of superhydrophobic surfaces made of nanoparticle/polymer composites using supercooled water droplets.47 They observed that their anti-icing capacity was highly dependent on the size of the particles.
Second, the adhesion of ice can be higher or lower on superhydrophobic surfaces than on smooth surfaces. It was demonstrated that there is a relationship between the water wettability and the ice adhesion with the quantity [1 + cosθrec].48,49 More precisely a surface should exhibit a θrec > 118.2° to induce a significant decrease of the ice adhesion. As a consequence, superhydrophobic textured surfaces favoring the Cassie–Baxter state are preferable to reduce the ice adhesion and more precisely a water droplet should freeze in the Cassie–Baxter state.48–53 Such surfaces should also be resistant to freezing rain and condensation of moisture within the surface structures. Indeed, it was shown that the anti-icing efficiency is lower in a humid atmosphere because the water molecules can enter inside the surface roughness leading to higher values of ice adhesion strength.52 The surfaces should be also mechanically resistant to the icing and deicing phenomena.54
Moreover, the mechanisms of water and ice adhesion are clearly different,55–58 as shown by the group of Nosonovsky. When a piece of ice is present on a surface, it can be removed by dewetting or can be fractured (Fig. 6).55 When a superhydrophobic surface in the Cassie–Baxter state is used, the freezing of water changes the air pockets into air voids, which can act as stress concentrators (microcracks). It was shown that the forces necessary to remove a piece of ice are dependent on the receding contact angle and the initial size of the interfacial cracks. Hence, a superhydrophobic surface can lead to high ice adhesion if there are not sufficiently large voids at the interface. The hardness of the materials is also important for the process. For example, flexible and rigid materials were tested against icing and deicing cycles.59a The results showed that the rigid materials were more efficient against icing and deicing cycles. Indeed, the icing and deicing can deteriorate the surface structures and also the chemical compounds present on the surface. However, Zheng et al. also reported that flexible materials containing PDVF microspheres and coated by ZnO nanocones have excellent anti-icing and deicing properties.59b
 Fig. 6  Normal and shear forces during the loading of (a) a water droplet and (b) an ice frozen droplet on a flat and (c) textured (Cassie–Baxter state) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Hence, many strategies were used to reduce the ice adhesion using superhydrophobic surfaces. The group of Aizenberg also reported the elaboration of a predictive model for the formation of ice on superhydrophobic surfaces with the possibility of varying the surface morphology and the surface chemistry.60
In the last section, we will report examples of ice-phobic materials reported in the literature.
Robust anti-icing coatings were reported on stainless steel. To obtain such properties, the substrates were etched, modified with silica nanoparticles and treated with a fluorinated silane.61 Anti-icing coating was reported in freezing rain at −6 °C and humidity 97% with robustness even after 100 icing–deicing cycles. Superhydrophobic aluminum alloy substrates obtained by chemical etching or anodization (θw = 159.1° and H = 4° for the etched substrates) were tested at room temperature (16°).62 In comparison to smooth aluminum, the authors observed a delay in the ice formation at −2.2° of 270 s while the icing temperature could be decreased from −2.2° to −6.1°. Moreover, the tilting of the surface could highly reduce the utilization temperature of these materials. The resistance of superhydrophobic anodized aluminum substrates to ice was also confirmed by other studies.63
Copper foils were treated by immersion in KOH and K2S2O8 to form superhydrophobic (θw = 156.2°) flower-like structures after surface modification with a fluorinated silane.64 The authors showed that the water droplet was smaller and more dispersive on these surfaces, in comparison with smooth copper foils, reducing both the icing and deicing time. Glass substrates were also modified in the literature to obtain anti-icing properties.65,66 The strategies involved the use of silica nanoparticles and calcium carbonate/polymer composites.
Another strategy to form robust ice-repellent coatings was to infuse a water-immiscible liquid inside the structures of a porous superhydrophobic material.67 The group of Aizenberg worked on aluminum substrates coated by a porous layer of polypyrrole and reported that when these materials are infused in a perfluorinated lubricant (perfluoroalkylether), the resulting materials can reduce the ice adhesion by 1–2 orders of magnitude in comparison to conventional materials (Fig. 7).67a
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of a slippery, liquid-infused porous surface (SLIPS) for anti-icing coatings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67b, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Anti-corrosion coatings
The corrosion of metals is one of the major concerns of the world and the annual cost of corrosion is about 3% of the world GDP. Today, most of the anti-corrosive coatings used contain chromium(VI) ions due to their anti-corrosion properties and alternative strategies have to be tested to replace them due to their toxicity. It has been shown in the literature that superhydrophobic materials can also act as anti-corrosion barriers without adding chemicals.68,69 Superhydrophobic surfaces with different adhesions but with the same surface chemistry have been reported in the literature and especially superhydrophobic surfaces with self-cleaning properties (Cassie–Baxter state) and with high adhesion (Wenzel state).68 The authors observed that the surfaces with self-cleaning properties have more promising anti-corrosion properties with a very high impedance value of 1010 Ω cm2 (at 10−2 Hz). They proposed that the air layer between the surface and water, when a superhydrophobic surface possesses self-cleaning properties, may inhibit ion transport from the electrolyte to the metal substrate (Fig. 8). As a consequence robust superhydrophobic surfaces which maintain their properties in seawater have to be used for use as anti-corrosion barriers.
 Fig. 8  Mechanism of corrosion of (a) superhydrophobic and (b) hydrophobic metals; (c) experiments on inclined superhydrophobic films with self-cleaning properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. 
Superhydrophobic metals have been used in the literature to obtain anti-corrosive materials. A metal (M) can be oxidized to form Mn+ ions. In acidic media, the substrate can be etched while in neutral or basic media, the Mn+ ions can react to form metal oxide, hydroxide, or complex nanostructures. The group of Wang etched Mg, Al, and Ti alloys in HNO3, HCl, HF as well as oxidized Mg and Al alloys in hot water and Ti alloys in H2O2 or H2O2/HF.70 The surfaces were superhydrophobic after modification with a perfluorinated silane. The authors showed that the surfaces treated in hot water or H2O2 are much more efficient against corrosion than the surfaces etched in acidic media. This is probably due to the presence of the oxide layer which adds a barrier effect and also strengthens the interfacial binding between the surfaces and the perfluorinated silane. Similar results were also reported by other research groups.71–74 To induce a more controlled oxide layer, aluminum and titanium surfaces with excellent ant-corrosion properties were also obtained by anodization.75,76 Zhang et al. elaborated Cu[CH3(CH2)12COO]2 flower-like structures by electrochemical oxidation of Cu plates in the presence of tetradecanoic acid (Fig. 9).77 The films presented excellent anti-corrosion properties and a decrease of more than four orders of magnitude of the anodic and cathodic polarization current densities was observed. The films were stable after more than 20 days immersion in 3.5 wt% NaCl even if a decrease of θw to around 140° was observed. The authors could also play on the surface morphology replacing tetradecanoic acid by laurylamine or 3-undecyl-4-amino-5-mercapto-1,2,4-triazole as well as the copper substrate by a zinc one.78–80 Carambola-like CuO structures were also reported by immersing Cu plates in hot water containing copper acetate and hexamethylenetetramine.81 It was also possible to deposit metal nanostructures on a substrate composed of another metal by galvanostatic deposition. When the potential difference between the metal and the metal ion is sufficiently high, the growth is spontaneous at room temperature.
 Fig. 9  Cu[CH3(CH2)11N]2C nanostructures by electrochemical oxidation of Cu in the presence of laurylamine at a voltage of (a) 5 V and (b) 50 V. (c) Picture of a superhydrophobic film immersed into 3.5% NaCl solution. Scale bars: 100 μm (a) and 20 μm (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V. 
For example, Fe and Ni nanostructures were deposited at the surface of Mg alloy substrates as well as Pt nanostructures at the surface of Zn substrates.82,83 Otherwise, the deposition can be performed by electrodeposition.
To increase the surface roughness and to improve the anti-corrosion properties, SiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles were used in the literature.84–88 For example, the group of Rao reported the elaboration of large SiO2 particles at the surface of Cu substrates with superhydrophobic properties (θw = 158°) and low sliding angles (α = 7°).84 The coating was resistant to an immersion for 100 h in 50% HCl solution even if a decrease of θw from 158° to 146° was observed after 120 h. To increase the surface properties, a fluorinated silane could also be grafted onto the nanoparticles.86–88 Fibrous szaibelyite structures and leaf-like boehmite structures were also applied on Mg alloy and Al substrates, respectively.89,90 After surface modification, the substrates displayed anti-corrosion properties with a decrease in the corrosion current density by three orders of magnitudes in comparison to smooth substrates.
Polymer materials were also found to be suitable for use as anti-corrosion barriers. Rough polysiloxane materials deposited on Mg alloys by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition highly improved their corrosion resistance.91 However, the films were stable in acidic and neutral media but not in alkaline media. To improve the adhesion between a polymer layer and a metal substrate, the polymer should be grafted onto the surface. An electrospun diblock copolymer was used to improve the corrosion of Al and also the adhesion to Al.92 The first block (poly(heptadecafluorodecyl acrylate-co-acrylic acid)) was used to increase the surface hydrophobicity and to graft onto Al thanks to carboxylic acids while the second block (polyacrylonitrile) was used to ensure the stability during annealing. The best adhesion and corrosion resistances were obtained for 20 μm thickness. The group of Yuan also reported the graft polymerization of a fluorinated polymer after introduction of vinyl groups on copper substrates.93
Superhydrophobic polymer surfaces with regular patterns were also obtained by a lithographic process. Yeh et al. used a soft lithographic process using natural Xanthosoma sagittifolium leaves as molds and used polyaniline, electroactive polyimide, or an electroactive epoxy for the replication (Fig. 10).94–96 Here, the electroactivity of the polymer enhanced the protection of the polymer against the corrosion. The same group also used an UV-curable epoxy-acrylate to induce very fast curing and without any solvent.97 Here, the corrosion potential and the corrosion current were found to shift from −730 mV and 5.44 μA cm−2 for the smooth surfaces to −394 mV and 2.30 μA cm−2 for the structured superhydrophobic ones. Colloidal lithography was also used in the literature. To induce microstructures, the group of Advincula formed ordered PS nanoparticles on steel substrates before electrodeposition of a polythiophene-derived polymer.98 They observed an increase of the anti-corrosive efficiency of 96.2% and 81.3% for the superhydrophobic films and the corresponding smooth surface, in comparison with the steel substrate. Wang et al. also used the deposition of PS nanoparticles by colloidal lithography but as a removable template.99 After deposition of SiO2 nanoparticles, the PS template was removed by heating at 550 °C. The as-prepared materials possessed good anti-corrosive properties.
 Fig. 10  Superhydrophobic surfaces with anticorrosive properties obtained by soft lithography and using natural Xanthosoma sagittifolium leaves as molds. The inset represents Tafel plots for different materials measured in 3.5 wt% NaCl aqueous solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Hence, several kinds of materials (metal, inorganic, polymer…) were used in the literature to enhance the anti-corrosion properties of metals by formation of superhydrophobic films. Composites films were also reported in the literature for this application.100,101
3.3 Anti-bacterial surfaces
The biocontamination of materials and devices is a major problem in various industrial sectors including in medicine and environmental fields. In these fields the growth of biofilms can be problematic as observed by nosocomial infections in hospitals. The formation of biofilms is a natural and spontaneous process taking place in four steps: transport, adhesion, strengthening and colonization. Two strategies are often employed: to kill them or to reduce their adhesion.

3.3.1 Bactericidal surfaces. 
The first strategy to reduce the presence of bacteria on surfaces is to kill them. It was shown that the superhydrophobic and nanopatterned wings of cicada Psaltoda claripennis possess this ability.13,102 The wings are capable of consistently killing Gram-negative bacteria (Branhamella catarrhalis, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas fluorescens) but do not kill Gram-positive bacteria (Bacillus subtilis, Planococcus maritimus, Staphylococcus aureus), independent of the shape of the bacteria (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  (a) Picture of cicada Psaltoda claripennis with nanopatterned superhydrophobic wings; (b–d) SEM images of the wings with dead bacteria. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
Otherwise, biocides can be used such as Ag+, or highly reactive species such as hydroxyl radicals, hydrogen peroxide and superoxide produced by the photocatalysis of TiO2. Ag nanoparticles immobilized in polyelectrolytes were used to prevent bacterial adhesion.103–105 The authors reported that the presence of superhydrophobic properties can reduce the release of Ag+ ions due to the presence of air between the substrate and seawater, which reduces the contact between the substrate and seawater (Fig. 12). Hence, superhydrophobic properties enhanced the stability of the Ag-based coating and prolonged the duration of release of antibacterial Ag+ ions. To control the release of Ag+ ions, superhydrophobic mesoporous silica microcapsule-supported Ag nanoparticles were also elaborated.106 In this strategy, the release of Ag+ was controlled by mesopore channels.
 Fig. 12  Mechanism of Ag+ ions released on a polyelectrolyte superhydrophobic film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Other research groups elaborated superhydrophobic surfaces using Ag nanoparticles for antibacterial properties. For example, fibrous Ag–perfluorodecanethiolate complexes were elaborated by reaction between AgNO3 and perfluoroodecanethiol.107 After UV irradiation to form Ag nanoparticles, the film showed antibacterial properties. To use the antibacterial photocatalytic effect of TiO2 but under-visible light, N-doped TiO2 nanoparticles were used as well as Cu/WO3 ones.108,109 Composites obtained with these materials and PTFE showed a bacterial activity against Escherichia coli. Cotton textiles with antibacterial properties were also reported by incorporation of Ag nanoparticles, Cu nanoparticles or ammonium moieties.110–115


3.3.2 Anti-bioadhesion surfaces. 
Hence, if the use of bactericidal materials allows killing of bacteria with high efficiency, the increase in bacterial resistance allowed us to envisage another way without killing the bacteria. This strategy is based on the reduction of the bacterial adhesion on surfaces.
3.3.2.1 Protein and cell adhesion. 
The control of the cell and protein adhesion has potential applications in bio-sensors and the implantation of biomaterials. This control is also important to control and reduce the adhesion of pathogenic bacteria, germs and cancer cells.
It is admitted in the literature that the adhesion of proteins and cells is dependent on the surface chemistry. The question is how the presence of a surface topography in superhydrophobic surfaces can affect the interactions between the surface and proteins or cells.116,117
The group of Salmeron-Sanchez studied the influence of the superhydrophobicity on the fibronectin adsorption and MC3T3-E1 cell adhesion.118 They used superhydrophobic PS substrates and compared their results to smooth PS ones. They observed that the superhydrophobic surfaces reduce the density of adsorbed fibronectin and alter their conformation, leading to cell adhesion without formation of mature focal adhesion plaque and scarce phosphorylation of FAKs. However, cells were able to proliferate on superhydrophobic surfaces and maintain a stable population up to 21 days even if their density was lower than on smooth surfaces. On the one hand, Ishizaki et al. studied the impact of the surface chemistry and physics by investigating the cell adhesion on superhydrophobic, superhydrophilic (with a similar roughness) and micropatterned superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic surfaces (Fig. 13).119 On micropatterned surfaces, the cells attached to the superhydrophilic regions in a highly selective manner. When the distances between superhydrophilic regions were lower than 400 μm, the cells partially extended to the neighboring cells. Moreover, the cells adhered and proliferated much easier on superhydrophilic surfaces than on superhydrophobic ones. The authors also observed that the amount of adsorbed proteins was greater on smooth hydrophilic surfaces than on smooth hydrophobic ones.
 Fig. 13  Cell adhesion on micropatterned superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, the group of Moon studied the impact of the topography on the adhesion of mouse liver cancer cells on nanostructured superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic surfaces.120 They observed that the growth of the cancer cells is suppressed on superhydrophilic surfaces with high aspect ratio nanostructures (hair shaped) due to the limited sites for focal adhesion. The adhesion and the growth were further restricted on superhydrophobic surfaces with high aspect ratio nanostructures. More precisely, they observed that their cell activity was extremely low and that their spherical shape was maintained.
Other groups were interested in the evaluation of the role of air trapped on superhydrophobic surfaces in protein and cell adhesion. Indeed, it is thought that the air trapped can act as a resistance to protein and cells.121,122 The group of Lin investigated the influence of air trapped within the interstices of TiO2 nanotubes by the elaboration of micropatterned superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic surfaces.122 The effect of air was investigated by displacing the air by sonication. The authors observed that the proteins bind much more on superhydrophobic surfaces when the air is displaced. However, they also showed that the air trapped in superhydrophobic surfaces does not block short or long-term cell attachment.
Finally, the adhesion of proteins and cells was also investigated on switchable superhydrophobic surfaces. To study this effect, superhydrophobic GaN nanowires were deposited by CVD while their wettability could be switched to superhydrophilic by UV irradiation with an increase in the protein adsorption and cell adhesion (Fig. 14).123 Chen et al. also fabricated nanostructured Teflon AF with superhydrophobic properties and resistance to protein adsorption.124 After electrowetting, the surfaces changed into superhydrophilic with promotion of the protein adhesion. The group of Advincula was also interested in such materials.125 They developed superhydrophobic surfaces combining colloidal lithography with electrodeposited polythiophene derivatives. In its undoped state, the film was superhydrophobic and inhibited the adhesion of fibrinogen protein and Escherichia coli. By changing the voltage, the doped polythiophene film became hydrophilic and increased the adhesion of protein and Escherichia coli.
 Fig. 14  Effect of irradiation on protein adsorption and cell adhesion of GaN nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
3.3.2.2. Bacterial adhesion. 
In this last sub-section, we will discuss on the surface able to limit the adhesion of bacteria also called anti-bioadhesive surfaces. If protein and cell adhesions can give information and strategies to reduce the bacterial adhesion, it should be noticed that bacteria are extremely complex microorganisms having various surface chemistry, hydrophobicity, cell membranes, surface charges, shapes, and hardness and can also have pili and flagella to modify their adhesion.126–130 Hence, the elaboration of surfaces repelling all kinds of bacteria is to date not possible.
The group of Dowling studied the adsorption of proteins on siloxane and fluorinated materials with surfaces ranging from superhydrophilic to superhydrophobic.131 A reduction of protein adsorption was observed on superhydrophilic surfaces in comparison to hydrophobic ones, but the highest reduction was measured on superhydrophobic surfaces. The authors also observed a reduction of Staphylococcus aureus on their surfaces. Superhydrophobic xerogels made of fluorinated silica nanoparticles have been reported in the literature.132 Such surfaces were able to reduce the bacterial adhesion (tests realized using a parallel plate flow cell) of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa by 2.08 ± 0.25 log and 1.76 ± 0.12 log in comparison with a “smooth” similar surface. Superhydrophobic surfaces containing nanoparticles of an elastomer silicone (Sylgard 184) obtained by aerosol assisted CVD were also studied. The surfaces were able to reduce the bacterial adhesion of Escherichia coli and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.133
Khine et al. reported the antibacterial properties of superhydrophobic plastics (PS, PC and PE) with wrinkles as surface structures.134 They reported that these surfaces were able to prevent the growth of Escherichia coli. Moreover, the authors suggested that the self-cleaning of superhydrophobic surfaces with low hysteresis and sliding angles is the key factor to control the anti-bioadhesion properties.
On the other hand, the group of Ivanova observed that the bacterial adhesion is highly dependent on the nature of the bacteria.135 They created superhydrophobic (θw = 166°) titanium surfaces by femtolaser ablation with low hysteresis (H = 10°) and with a possibility of water droplets to bounce on these surfaces. The authors revealed that Staphylococcus aureus was able to colonize these superhydrophobic surfaces with an increase in the number of attached cells in comparison with smooth substrates. However, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was not able to colonize these superhydrophobic surfaces. They suggest that one of the main factors may be the shape of the bacteria. Indeed, the spherical shape of Staphylococcus aureus may need less contact with thse surface to be attached than Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which have a rod-like shape.
The surface topography is another parameter studied in the literature. The group of Lin revealed that natural plants of the genus Nelumbo nucifera and Colocasia esculenta possess both self-cleaning and biofouling properties under submerged conditions.136 They showed that this resistance is due to the presence of dense nanostructures, which reduce the adhesion force of the plant. Other studies on superhydrophobic PP and PS obtained by plasma treatments also showed the importance to have surface structures with bacterial dimensions in order to avoid their trapping.137,138

3.4 Textiles
The development of fabrics which repel water but also all kinds of organic contaminants is highly in demand. However, for this application, the coating should be mechanically resistant to stresses, such as scratching, abrasion or tensile, as well as support many cycles of laundry. Hence, it is absolutely necessary that the superhydrophobic textiles are robust. The robustness of such materials can be controlled by several parameters.139–141 For example, the Cassie–Baxter state can be highly stabilized by playing with the spacing ratio (D*), defined as the ratio of the distance between the fibers and the region covered by the fibers, the pressure difference across the liquid–vapor interface or the surface chemistry (Fig. 15). Theoretically, nanometric fibers can lead to extremely stable superhydrophobic properties and can even resist the impact of rainfall. The formation of nanostructures around the textile fibers often also increases its robustness.
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the sagging of the liquid–air composite interface on the fiber surface in an electrospun nonwoven mat. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
To obtain durable and robust superhydrophobic textiles, it is extremely important to have a resistant interface between the textile and the coating. To form robust superhydrophobic polyester fabrics, the group of Im reported the possibility of stacking polymer films composed of poly(1,3,5,7-tetravinyl-1,3,5,7-tetramethylcyclotetrasiloxane) and poly(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecylacrylate) by initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD), a solventless process allowing the formation of nanostructures.142 Here, the two polymer layers most likely formed a covalent bond at their interface. These fabrics were chemically and mechanically stable and also stable after 75 cycles of laundry test. Lin et al. reported the fabrication of robust and durable superhydrophobic fabrics by dip-coating with a solution of perfluorinated SiO2 nanoparticles and a PDMS elastomer (Sylgard186) to form a composite layer.143a
The best strategy to highly enhance the binding of the interface is to graft the coating on the surface of the textile. In the case of cotton textile, hydroxyl groups are already present on the surface. One of the most employed strategies is to use silanes to graft hydrophobic materials. Highly durable and robust cotton textiles were reported by grafting diblock copolymers of poly(glycidyl methacrylate) and poly(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl methacrylate).143b While the fluorinated segment was necessary to reach superhydrophobic properties, the epoxy groups allowed the grafting of the polymer on the cotton textile. Moreover, the polymer grafting allowed the formation of nanostructures on the textile surface, which is an important parameter to obtain robust textiles. Here, these textiles withstood mechanical abrasion, laundering with strong conditions, UV-light irradiation, ultrasonication in THF and trifluorotoluene and immersions in organic solvents, acid and basic solutions. Nanostructures could also be obtained using nanoparticles. SiO2 nanoparticles were grafted onto cotton fabrics by functionalizing them with azido groups (Fig. 16).144a Then, covalent cross-linking was performed under UV-light irradiation.
 Fig. 16  Grafting of SiO2 nanoparticles onto cotton fabrics by functionalizing them with azido groups. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144a, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
A fluorinated polyacrylate polymer was also grafted onto the cotton fabric under γ-ray irradiation.144b The fabrics were stable against acid and basic solutions and durable for more than 250 launderings. Wool and polyester fabrics were modified with hydrophobic SiO2 nanoparticles (containing alkyl groups) with the help of triethylamine and ultrasonication to form highly durable and robust textiles.145a,145b Robust, self-healing and superoleophobic polyester fabrics were also obtained using SiO2 nanoparticles functionalized with fluorinated chains followed by the reaction with poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) and a fluorinated silane.149 The as-prepared fabrics were extremely chemically and mechanically resistant and withstood more than 600 cycles of laundry.
Other properties are often required for applications in the textile industry. First of all, for anti-soil textiles, it is necessary to induce the repellency of other liquids such as oils. However, due to the much lower surface tension of oils (<35 mN m−1 following the oil used), it is much more difficult to impede their spreading on surfaces.37,146–149 Indeed, if it was demonstrated that, for example, the formation of micro and nanostructures can allow the fabrication of robust superhydrophobic surfaces, other surface structures are necessary for robust superoleophobicity. Because all materials are intrinsically oleophilic, the surface structures should induce a change from oleophilic to superoleophobic. Surface structures with re-entrant curvatures such as overhang structures, mushroom-like structures or T-like structures were found to be ideal to induce such an effect.37 Indeed, an extremely high pinning effect of the liquid interface on these structures can induce the stabilization of the Cassie–Baxter state even using low surface tension liquids. Fortunately, fibrous structures such as fabric textures can induce such an effect but the presence of nanostructures on the fabrics and the surface modification with fluorinated materials is one of the best ways to produce stable superoleophobic properties. The stability of the superoleophobic properties is also extremely dependent on the geometric parameters on the fabrics such as the fiber diameter the distance between the fibers or the fiber weaving. As shown by the group of McKinley, the maximum pressure that the fabrics can support is highly dependent on the surface tension of the liquid and these geometric parameters.150 They obtained superoleophobic fabrics even against octane and methanol by coating polyester fabrics with fluorodecyl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (F-POSS) forming a nanostructured coating. Similar results were also reported by the group of Lin.151 They reported the possibility of obtaining superoleophobic fabrics with UV, acid, mechanical and laundry resistance, in the presence of F-POSS and a fluorinated silane.
Superoleophobic cotton textiles were reported by the group of Ming via a multi-step grafting process.152 First, they induced the formation of relatively large SiO2 nanoparticles (≈800 nm) directly grafting on the cotton textile with the Stöber method. Then, the SiO2 layer was modified to introduce amino groups, which were then protonated into ammonium. In the last step, negatively charged SiO2 nanoparticles were introduced by layer-by-layer assembly and the surface was modified with a perfluorinated silane resulting in superoleophobic properties. The group of Seeger developed a technique allowing the growth of silicone nanofilaments on the surface of polyester fabrics.153 A subsequent plasma fluorination led to robust superoleophobic surfaces with resistance to impacts of alkane drops. Another strategy to obtain superoleophobic properties was to infuse the nanostructures with a lubricant (a perfluoropolyether, for example).154,155 Here, Aizenberg et al. reported the possibility of achieving robust superoleophobic properties for polar and non-polar liquids.
Mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles were also used in the literature. The group of Freire showed the possibility of using mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles modified with a perfluorinated silane (Fig. 17).156 Their synthesis by co-condensation in the presence of the textile, hexadecyltrimethylammonium (CTAC) and triethanolamine led to their formation on the surface of the textile. Various morphologies were obtained with different surface area, pore volume with the possibility of obtaining superoleophobic surfaces. Finally, Lovingood et al. also reported the possibility of repelling chemicals in the vapor phase such as chemical weapons (sarin, for example) using SiO2 nanoparticles and perfluorinated silanes. Such properties are highly important for military applications.157
 Fig. 17  Superoleophobic textiles modified by mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles and a perfluorinated silane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
The use of metal oxide white pigments such as TiO2, ZnO, CeO2 can be introduced for UV blocking. However, the absorption of UV by these materials often also changes their wettability due to the formation of hydroxyl groups on their surface. As a consequence, these pigments should be inserted in nanocomposites or core–shell structures to avoid this effect. ZnO nanorods were used in the literature to coat textiles and obtain superhydrophobic properties.158,159 Then, a SiO2 shell was formed around ZnO nanorods. The textiles displayed UV-shielding properties and also UV-durability of the superhydrophobic properties. CeO2 nanoparticles were also used for UV protection.160 The surfaces were functionalized with a fluorinated silane to achieve also superhydrophobic properties. Benzophenone-type UV organic absorbers were also reported in the literature. The group of Lin intercalated 4-methoxybenzophenone-5-sulfonic acid inside the structure of a layered double hydroxide and structured the surface of cotton textiles with nanoplatelets.161 The textiles exhibited both superhydrophobicity and a high increase of UV protection.
Another property reported in the literature is the improvement of the flame retardancy properties. Commercially, especially two kinds of treatments are known to enhance the flame retardancy of cotton: the use of tetrakis(hydroxymethyl)-phosphonium chloride and the use of N-methylol functional phosphorous esters. Another way to impart such properties without using toxic chemicals is to form a nanocoating. Mohamed et al. reported the grafting of the coating to introduce epoxy groups, which were then used to graft amino-modified ZnO nanoparticles.162 The as-prepared cotton displayed both superhydrophobicity and flame retardancy. The group of Wang also reported the modification of cotton textiles with epoxy groups and the grafting of amino-functionalized SiO2 nanoparticles to achieve superhydrophobicity and flame retardancy.163
3.5 Oil–water separation
The water decontamination of organic compounds such as petroleum and other oils has become a serious threat to biological and human safety. As present, the methods used to separate oils from water often present low separation efficiency and involve complex separation instruments. Here, using meshes, membranes, textiles, foams or sorbents, the possibility of rendering all these materials superhydrophobic has opened up a very interesting way to separate oils from water with high efficiency. Three different properties are used in the literature: both superhydrophobic and superoleophilic properties, both superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic properties, or both superhydrophilic and superoleophobic properties.

3.5.1 Superhydrophobic/superoleophilic materials. 
To obtain superhydrophobic and superoleophilic membranes, the best strategy is to use meshes as substrates and to form nanostructures around the mesh wires. Indeed, to obtain superhydrophobic and superoleophilic membranes it is necessary that the meshes stabilize the Cassie–Baxter with water but not with oils. Here, hydrocarbon derivatives were very often used to achieve superhydrophobic and superoleophilic properties.
The group of Jiang showed that the formation of the meniscus of the liquid between the mesh wires is very important to predict the superhydrophobic and superoleophilic properties (Fig. 18).164,165 Indeed, the liquid will not penetrate the mesh if its hydrostatic pressure ΔP = 2γLV/R = −lγLVcos(θA)/A with γLV being the liquid surface tension, R being the radius of the meniscus, A being the cross-sectional area of the pore and θA being the advancing contact angle of the liquid. When θ > 90°, the liquid will not penetrate due to a negative capillary effect (ΔP > 0) and reversely. Hence, the permeation is highly dependent on the liquid surface tension but also the mesh opening.
 Fig. 18  Liquid wetting model of nanostructured meshes as a function of the hydrostatic pressure (ΔP).164 
3.5.1.1 Meshes. 
Meshes could be etched to induce the formation of structures around the meshes. Copper meshes (opening: 44–490 μm) were etched in nitric acid to increase the roughness of the wires.166 After modification with 1-hexadecanethiol, the meshes became superhydrophobic and superoleophilic whatever the mesh opening. Copper meshes were also etched in alkaline media (NaOH + K2S2O8 or anodization) to form Cu(OH)2 nanoneedles around the mesh wires and modified with 1-dodecanethiol to achieve superhydrophobic and superoleophilic properties.167,168 The authors reported a higher separation efficiency for the mesh with a short opening (<600 μm).167 By surface modification with 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid and 1-dodecanethiol mixture, it was possible to obtain pH-responsive materials (Fig. 19).169 Indeed, in acid or neutral media, the mesh was superhydrophobic due to the presence of carboxylic acid groups and dodecane chains but in alkaline media, the change of the carboxylic groups into more polar carboxylate ones induced a switching from superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic. Cu2O cauliflower-like structures were also electrodeposited on stainless steel (opening: 75 μm) meshes at constant potential (3 V) in aqueous solution containing CuSO4, lactic acid and NaOH.170,171 Superhydrophobic surfaces were obtained by 20 min of deposition. These substrates could separate different kinds of oils from water with separation efficiency above 90%. Cu nanoparticles were also electrodeposited in CuSO4, containing H2SO4 and at constant current (0.1 A). Superhydrophobic and superoleophilic meshes were obtained by deposition for 240 s after surface modification with 1-octadecylthiol. These meshes could separate the chloroform–water mixture with high efficiency.
 Fig. 19  (a) SEM images of Cu(OH)2 nanoneedles on meshes. (b) Schematic representation of a water droplet and (c) a liquid wetting model after modification with a 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid and 1-dodecanethiol mixture in acidic/neutral and basic media. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Other metal oxide and inorganic nanostructures were also used in the literature. Vertically aligned ZnO nanorods were coated on stainless steel meshes by CVD or in a two-step process including dip-coating of ZnO sol and immersion in Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and methenamine (Fig. 20).164 The best superhydrophobic surfaces were obtained for an opening of 50–75 μm following the experimental conditions reported in the literature. Another interest to use ZnO is the possibility of having UV-switchable materials (Fig. 21).172–176 It was shown that meshes with aligned ZnO nanorods could be water-permeable after UV light irradiation due to the formation of hydroxyl groups and become impermeable to water after dark storage. Other strategies were used in the literature to control the growth of other nanostructures. ZnO flower-like structures were formed by spraying ZnO seeds using a zinc acetate solution and growth in Zn acetate solution at pH 10.177 Using this strategy, oil–water separation meshes were obtained after coating by PTFE and for an opening of 25–250 μm. ZnO nanoflakes were also formed by depositing an aluminum layer on stainless steel (opening: 75 μm) and immersion in Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and hexamethylenetetramine.178 After modification with stearic acid, oil–water separation meshes were obtaining with an efficiency of 95%.
 Fig. 20  Aligned ZnO nanorod array-coated stainless steel mesh film obtained by dip-coating of ZnO sol and immersion in Zn(NO3)2·6H2O.164 
 Fig. 21  Experimental process of separation of oil and water.172 
TiO2 nanoparticles were also coated on a copper mesh by immersion in TiCl3/NaCl and heating.179 Surface modification with octadecylphosphonic acid led to oil–water separation meshes with UV-light switchable wettability from superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic. Moreover, the photocatalytic effect of TiO2 could lead to promising effects on water purification. SiO2 particles were also deposited using the sol–gel process to form superhydrophobic and superoleophilic meshes.180,181 These properties were dependent on the size of the particles, concentration of the chemicals and surface modification. Finally, vertically aligned carbon nanotubes as well as nanocrystalline diamond were also produced on meshes by thermal CVD to separate the oil–water mixture.182–184 In the case of the nanocrystalline diamond, the mesh wettability was also switchable from superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic by hydrogen and oxygen plasma.184
Polymers and polymer composites could also be used to form nanostructures on meshes using different strategies. Copper meshes were coated (opening: 152–297 μm) with a rough silicone elastomer (Sylgard 184).185 The highest separation efficiency (>99%) with toluene, petroleum ether and hexane were obtained with an opening of 297 μm. PS nanofibers were also electrospun on stainless steel meshes to deposit horizontal nanofibers of about 317 nm average diameter.186 These meshes easily separate diesel oil from water with excellent efficiency. Conducting polymers were also reported in the literature to modify meshes. For example, polypyrrole micropapilla and polyaniline nanofibers were deposited by electropolymerization and chemical polymerization.187
3.5.1.2 Textiles. 
Textiles were also employed for oil–water separation. The principle is exactly the same as with meshes. Cotton textiles were used by several groups. The group of Guo showed the possibility of inducing the growth of metal or metal oxide nanostructures of Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Ag on textiles.188 Further modification with perfluorodecanethiol led to superhydrophobic and superoleophilic properties with the possibility of separating oil and water. Wang et al. pre-treated cotton textiles to form hydroxyl groups at the surface of the fibers and the textiles were then coated with SiO2 nanoparticles and finally modified with octadecyltrichlorosilane.189 The as-prepared cotton could absorb various oils and organic solvents up to fifty times of its own weight while repelling water completely.
To produce superhydrophobic and superoleophilic cotton in one step, SiO2/polystyrene as well as ZnO/polystyrene nanocomposites were also used.190 TiO2–SiO2/PDMS were also deposited in the literature.191 These materials combined an extreme thermal stability (up to 400 °C), chemical resistance, photocatalytic properties of TiO2 with the possibility of cleaning water, wettability switching from superhydrophobicity to superhydrophilicity by calcination, and oil–water separation. Cotton textiles were also coated with polyaniline and a perfluorinated silane by vapor phase polymerization in the presence of FeCl3 as an oxidizing agent.192 Using this process, nanogranules were deposited on the surface of the textile. These materials displayed oil–water separation with an efficiency of 97.8%. Plastic textiles were also used in the literature. PET textiles were hydrolyzed on their surface with NaOH to produce hydroxyl and carboxylic groups to graft SiO2 nanoparticles.193 The rough PET textiles were able to separate oil–water mixtures.
3.5.1.3 Foams. 
Some examples of foams were also reported in the literature for oil–water separation applications. Ni foams were modified with candle soot nanocoating followed by with a silicone elastomer (Sylgard 184) to enhance the binding degree of the candle soot.194 The as-prepared materials were efficient for oil–water separation. Ultralight Fe2O3/C, Co/C and Ni/C foams were also prepared by grafting polyurethane foams with poly(acrylic acid) through cerium(IV)–ammonium nitrate (CAN)-catalyzed polymerization, ion exchange with Fe3+, Ni2+ or Co2+ followed by calcination.195 After coating with PDMS, the foams could be used for oil–water separation with the ability to absorb oil 100 times of its own weight.
3.5.1.4 Synthetic membranes. 
Finally, several research groups also fabricated membranes for oil–water separation. PVDF membranes composed of spherical particles were prepared by a phase-inversion process.196 The membranes could separate with an efficiency higher than 99.95% water-in-oil emulsions such as surfactant-free and surfactant-stabilized emulsions (droplet sizes in the micrometer to nanometer range) with high flux. Otherwise, the electrospinning technique was also used to elaborate porous membranes made of nanofibers.197–199 Silica nanofibrous membranes were fabricated first by calcination of electrospun tetraethylorthosilicate/poly(vinyl alcohol) composite nanofibers (Fig. 22).197 Further modification with Al2O3 nanoparticles and a fluorinated monomer derived from benzoxazine and in situ polymerization at 200 °C led to the membrane. The membrane could separate water-in-oil microemulsions with high efficiency and with an extremely high flux. Similar results were also reported for electrospun poly(m-phenyleneisophthalamide) and SiO2 nanoparticles.198
 Fig. 22  (a and b) Silica nanofibrous membranes obtained by modification with Al2O3 nanoparticles and a fluorinated monomer derived from benzoxazine and in situ polymerization at 200 °C; (c) schematic representation of the oil–water separation experiment.197 
3.5.1.5 Sorbents. 
Sorbents can also be used to clean-up water from oils. Common absorbents include activated carbon, zeolites, natural fibers but suffer from low separation selectivity and low absorption capacity.200 Hence, the strategy was to elaborate superhydrophobic and superoleophilic sorbents such as sponges or aerogels. Wang et al. elaborated oil-absorbent by incorporation of SiO2 nanoparticles onto natural kapok fibers and surface modification with an alkylsilane.201 For example, the as-prepared materials displayed an improvement of the oil sorption capacity of 46.6% and 20.2% for diesel oil and soybean oil. Leung et al. also used natural cotton fibers to form hollow carbon fibers after carbonization.202 The enhancement of the oil sorption capacity was 27–126%. Carbon aerogels as well as sponges were also used in the literature. Yu et al. developed carbon nanofiber aerogels from a template-directed hydrothermal carbonization using glucose as a precursor.203 The carbon aerogels displayed high sorption capacity, high selectivity but especially can maintain their properties over a wide temperature range (≈−200 °C to 400 °C).
The group of Qiu reported the properties of multiwall carbon nanotube–graphene hybrid aerogels by functionalization of the graphene aerogel with ferrocene and its decomposition into iron particles and cyclopentadienyl, which acted as a catalyst and a carbon source for the growth of carbon nanotubes.204 The as-prepared materials displayed rapid oil sorption, large sorption capacity, good recyclability and high compressibility. It was also interesting to develop sponges due to their high elasticity and desorption easiness.205–210 Pan et al. developed robust and easily reusable (>300 cycles) polyurethane sponges with high oil absorption capacity by surface modification with methyltrichlorosilane. The group of Lu also reported the fabrication of superhydrophobic sponges with excellent absorbency and flame retardancy by modifying a melamine-formaldehyde sponge with a polydopamine layer and a perfluorinated thiol (Fig. 23).210 The flame retardancy properties of these materials are due to their high nitrogen content, which releases N2 after burning and decreases the surrounding O2.
 Fig. 23  Superhydrophobic sponge with absorbency and flame retardancy obtained by modifying melamine–formaldehyde sponges with a polydopamine layer and a perfluorinated thiol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 


3.5.2 Superhydrophilic/underwater superoleophobic materials. 
Because oils droplets are often stabilized in aqueous media, another strategy to obtain oil–water separation membranes is to use superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic properties. Underwater superoleophobicity is the resistance of a surface to the wetting of oils when the surface is immersed in water: solid–liquid (water)–liquid (oil) interface.211
Here, hydrophilic derivatives are very often used to achieve superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic properties. Cu meshes were modified by electrodeposited Cu nanoparticles as well as by the formation of Cu(OH)2 nanoneedles.212 After surface modification with 11-mercaptoundecanoic, the meshes displayed pH-switchable underwater superoleophobicity: underwater superoleophilicity in acidic and neutral media and underwater superoleophobicity in alkaline media. Aligned ZnO nanorods were also found to be suitable for underwater superoleophobicity and oil–water separation (opening: 75 μm).213 The surface wettability of these materials could be switched by UV-light irradiation. To form materials with controllable porosity, zeolite silicate-1 crystals were used to cover meshes.214,215 These superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic materials showed excellent efficiency for oil–water separation. Moreover, it was possible to tune the flux and intrusion pressure by changing the growth time.
Hydrophilic polymers such as polyacrylic acid, polyacrylamide and polyacrylamide-co-poly(acrylic acid) hydrogels were reported in the literature to achieve superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic materials.216–222 Polydopamine was also used to immobilize nanoparticles, as observed in marine mussels, with tuning of the adhesion by changing the pH or adding 1-dodecanethiol (Fig. 24).219,220 One of the advantages of using polymers is the possibility of functionalization by various groups. Hence, sensitive groups could be introduced to obtain “smart” materials with switchable wettability. Thermo and pH dual-responsive meshes were elaborated by coating with poly(dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) hydrogels.221 While the amino groups allowed the switching of the wettability by varying the pH, the change in the tacticity of the polymer was possible by changing the temperature (T). Here, water could pass through the mesh when T < 55 °C and pH < 13.
 Fig. 24  Immobilization of Fe3O4 nanoparticles onto polyurethane foams and application for oil–water separation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Other research groups also used nanoparticles to achieve superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic meshes.222 pH-switchable textiles and polyurethane sponges were also reported by depositing SiO2 nanoparticles, silanization to introduce bromide groups and grafting poly(2-vinylpyridine)-b-PDMS. In acidic media, the pyridine moiety was protonated and the material became superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic while att pH ≥ 6.5 the pyridine moiety was deprotonated and the material became superhydrophobic and underwater superoleophilic. Moreover, the flexibility of the PDMS block facilitated the reversible switching of the oil wettability.


3.5.3 Superhydrophilic and superoleophobic materials. 
Because the surface tension of oils is lower than that of water, almost all the superoleophobic surfaces reported in the literature are also superhydrophobic.37,223–227 As a consequence the elaboration of materials with higher oleophobicity than hydrophobicity, when the medium is air, is extremely rare. In all these examples, the importance of using a material with both a hydrophilic moiety and an oleophobic one to induce this property is shown.228–231 Zhou et al. reported, to our knowledge, the unique example of superhydrophilic and superoleophobic coatings (Fig. 25).232 They produced superhydrophilic and superoleophobic meshes by coating with poly(diallyldimethylammonium perfluorooctanoate). The resulting rough meshes were capable of separating oil–water mixtures (tests done with hexadecane, vegetable oil, gasoline and diesel).
 Fig. 25  Superhydrophilic and superoleophobic materials for oil–water separation by coating of poly(diallyldimethylammonium perfluorooctanoate).232 

3.6 Membrane distillation and water desalination
The desalination of seawater is a worldwide concern especially in countries where drinkable water is little available. Different strategies are used in industry for water desalination, such as reverse osmosis, multi-stage flash distillation or the use of membrane distillation. In the last case, a hot feed steam containing non-volatile species has to pass across a hydrophobic membrane. On the other side of the membrane, a cooling stream creates a vapor difference. Then, the feed liquid evaporates and passes through the pores of the membrane. This method is often limited by low mass-flux across the membrane and fouling issues, which are both dependent on the microstructures and materials of the membranes including the ratio of the pore diameter, porosity and vapor pressure difference. If microporous membranes are made superhydrophobic, the allowable pore sizes can be larger, which can increase the mass flux. Hence, it is necessary to have both superhydrophobic properties but with vapor permeability. This dual functionality was reported in several publications. Glass membranes with ordered arrays of nanospiked microchannels were fabricated by glass fiber drawing, template dissolving and chemical etching (Fig. 26).233 These membranes had higher antifouling capacity and higher flux than existing polymer membranes especially at high salt concentration.
 Fig. 26  Superhydrophobic membranes with arrays of nanospiked microchannels for water desalination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic polyurethane membranes with gas permeability were reported. Nanofibrous membranes were elaborated by electrospinning of polyurethane containing fluorinated segments (Fig. 27).234 The membranes showed high water resistance (39.3 kPa), good air permeability (8.46 L m−2 s−1) and water vapor transmittance (0.384 kg m−2 h−1). SiO2 nanoparticles could also be incorporated inside the membranes to enhance the roughness of the fibers.235 Stretchable polyurethane membranes with gas permeability were also obtained by electrospinning of an elastomer polyurethane followed by surface modification with polyaniline nanofibers and PTFE.236 Superhydrophobic PS nanofibrous membranes with micro- and nanoscale hierarchical structures were also obtained by electrospinning.237 The membranes maintained a high and stable permeable water vapor flux.
 Fig. 27  (a) Fluorinated polyurethane segments to produce (b and b) superoleophobic nanofibrous membranes with (d and e) high air permeability.234 
Superhydrophobic aligned multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) were reported by thermal CVD followed by the deposition of a PDMS layer.238 Here, the interstitial space of nanotubes allowed high gas permeability with even a selectivity as high as 2 × 105 for H2/H2O. The use of carbon nanotubes for water desalination was also reported in other studies.239
PDVF membranes were highly used in the literature for water desalination due to their high chemical stability.240–246 PVDF membranes were modified by CF4 plasma.241 The authors observed an increase in the water flux of about 30%. Li et al. also studied the effect of the modification of PVDF membranes by spraying a solution containing SiO2 nanoparticles and PDMS.242 These membranes showed NaCl rejection of above 99.99% with excellent anti-fouling properties. PVDF membranes were also modified with TiO2 nanoparticles and a fluorinated silane.243,244 The authors showed that the use of a templating agent such as polyethylene glycol results in porous, multi-level microstructures with improved salt rejection and desalination performance. PVDF membranes were also modified with poly(vinyl acetate) or PDMS functionalized carbon nanotubes for water desalination.245,246
3.7 Water purification
When superhydrophobic materials are made from semiconductors or TiO2 they can also have intrinsic photocatalytic properties due to the formation of superoxides under light-irradiation. Such properties can reduce the bacterial adhesion, induce anti-misting properties, improve the self-cleaning properties or purify soiled water.247–253 Superhydrophobic materials composed of Ag2Se complex nanostructures were reported.249 The authors observed excellent degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) dye (89.8% after 15 h) under UV-light irradiation. The group of Cao also reported the photocatalytic activity of In(OH)3 nanocubes synthesized by an amino-assisted hydrothermal process (Fig. 28).250 The surfaces displayed superhydrophobic properties with extremely low α and photocatalytic effects on the degradation of RhB (93.25% after 16 h). Superhydrophobic surfaces with photocatalytic properties were also obtained with Ag-NPs@ZnO-nanorods.251 After exposure to visible or UV-light, the surfaces changed from superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic due to the formation of hydroxyl groups. To overcome the problem of the change of the wettability after light exposure, the photocatalytic materials could be incorporated as nanoparticles in a polymer matrix.252–254 The group of Parkin elaborated superhydrophobic surfaces by incorporating TiO2 nanoparticles into PDMS via an aerosol-assisted CVD.252 The polymer remained superhydrophobic even after UV-exposure. The materials displayed a photocatalytic effect with a discoloration of resazurin dye after 90 min under UV-light irradiation. Yamashita et al. also reported the photocatalytic properties of a composite made of TiO2 nanoparticles and PTFE by radio frequency-magnetron sputtering deposition.253 The surfaces were superhydrophobic and composed of nanofibers. The photocatalytic effect was confirmed by the discoloration of methylene blue under UV-light irradiation. The surfaces also displayed photocatalytic self-cleaning properties (test realized with oleic acid).
 Fig. 28  (a) TEM images of In(OH)3 nanocubes with a photocatalytic effect on the (b) degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) dye. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
3.8 Microfluidic devices
Controlling the transport and manipulation of liquid is very important for microfluidic devices. Many research studies were reported on the enhancement of transport properties, which are very important for the manipulation of liquids in microfluidic devices.
Many studies were dedicated to the reduction of the drag of a flux on a surface, a pipeline or a channel, which impacts the necessary energy and the flux rate. This drag is due to the shear stress induced by the flux on the surface. In nature, the shark skin was found to have low drag properties while rice leaves (Oryza sativa) and butterfly wings (Blue Morpho didius) combine both low drag properties (anisotropic flow) and self-cleaning properties (Fig. 29).255–257 The surface of the rice leaves is composed of micropapillae superimposed by epicuticular waxy nanobumps and that of butterfly wings of hierarchical scales with microgrooves. Replicas of these natural surfaces were realized in order to evaluate the effect of superhydrophilicity/phobicity and superoleophilicity/phobicity on the drag reduction with various fluids (water, oil, air) in laminar and turbulent flows. In the case of oil flux, superoleophilic and superoleophobic surfaces could reduce the drag. The air drag could be reduced by increasing the smoothness of the surface structures. The highest drag reduction was observed in turbulent water flow with the rice leaf and shark skin replicas. Hence, these natural surfaces could provide new ideas to reduce the drag and the surface topography seems to be essential to control these properties.
 Fig. 29  Rice leaves (Oryza sativa) and butterfly wings (Blue Morpho didius) with low drag (anisotropic flow) and self-cleaning properties due to the presence of grooves and scales, respectively.255 
First of all, it was found that the air trapped inside superhydrophobic surfaces with self-cleaning (Cassie–Baxter state) is responsible for the reduction of the drag.258–262 Indeed, studies on the immersion of superhydrophobic materials in water demonstrated that the main parameter to reduce the drag is that the superhydrophobic materials should able to keep an air layer, also called plastron, when immersed into water.259 This ability is obviously dependent on the surface topography. Lu et al. also experimented on determining the speed of superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic hollow glass balls on water.260 They found that the movement of a superhydrophobic ball is faster than that of a superhydrophilic one because the presence of air in superhydrophobic surfaces provides an extra supporting force.
In the case of a water flux, the change of the surface hydrophobicity from hydrophilic to hydrophobic can induce the slipping of the liquid flowing, which can be highly amplified by the air trapped on rough superhydrophobic surfaces.263–267 The group of Rothstein fabricated micropatterned superhydrophobic surfaces consisting of regular parallel grooves in the flow direction and studied the effect of the topography.268 They observed the possibility of reducing the drag by about 50% with structures 60 μm wide and spaced 60 μm apart, if the Reynolds (Re) number is important (Re > 2500).
The reduction is due to the presence of a shear-free air–water interface.268–272 Moreover, the presence of these parallel structures induced the formation of an anisotropic flux.273–275
Teo et al. also studied the influence of the pattern (longitudinal grooves, transverse grooves, square holes and square posts) as a function of Re and on the drag reduction.276 They showed that when Re is low, square posts are the most effective structures while longitudinal grooves are the best at high Re. The group of Gad-el-Hak also demonstrated that high drag reduction can also be obtained on superhydrophobic surfaces with randomly distributed roughness, if the air fraction is high and that the air–water interface is stable (the stability is dependent on the average spacing between the roughness).277 The group of Yoon elaborated a superhydrophobic surface with micro and nanostructures by anodization of an aluminum plate followed by the treatment with a fluorinated silane.278 They revealed a considerable drag reduction for Re < 200000, with an increase of the drag reduction as the Re decreases.
Ming et al. studied the fluid drag reduction of superhydrophobic surfaces composed of carbon nanotube forests obtained by CVD.279 They determined the effect of superhydrophobic properties by measurements of apparent viscosity to calculate the slip length. They observed that this slip length can reach 10 μm. Hence, by coating a microchannel of 90 μm with these carbon nanotubes, it was possible to reduce the drag by about 10%. To obtain mechanically durable structures with low drag, carbon nanotube/epoxy composites were also sprayed on micro-patterned surfaces.280 Superhydrophobic PMMA micro-channels were also fabricated by O2 plasma etching and using photosensitive PDMS as a resist.281 The authors measured the electroosmotic flow induced by voltage between the anode and the cathode. In comparison with hydrophilic and non-treated PMMA channels, the superhydrophobic treatment induced an increase in the electroosmotic velocity.
In droplet-based, also called digital, microfluidic devices, reactant solutions are confined in discrete droplets, which can be moved, mixed and analyzed on the surface of a chip. In most of the techniques, the movement of droplets is possible through closed channels or using an actuation method such as electrowetting on dielectric (EWOD), dielectrophoresis using electrode arrays, among others.282–299 Based on these considerations, microfluidic systems were elaborated using superhydrophobic micro-channels. First of all, when a micro-droplet enters into a superhydrophobic microchannel, a high capillary force can be induced on the droplet due to the Laplace pressure difference. Tolonen et al. studied the EWOD technique with superhydrophobic surfaces obtained by crystallization of the alkylketene dimer (AKD).300 In this system based on electrowetting, two electrodes are necessary to move droplets: a working electrode covered by dielectric materials and a superhydrophobic coating, and a counter-electrode also coated by a superhydrophobic coating. Application of a voltage induces a decrease in the contact angle of the droplet in contact with the working electrode but not in that in contact with the counter-electrode. As a consequence, a difference pressure is induced on the droplet, which leads to its movement. Here, the authors succeeded in the stepwise movement of water droplets by switching the electrode voltage. The advantages of using superhydrophobic coatings in EWOD are many such as lower applied voltage, higher average speed, greater motion and deformation of the droplet or more importantly, contact angle variation.293–299 Indeed, the electrowetting of superhydrophobic surfaces can induce a Cassie–Baxter-to-Wenzel transition.
As an example of application, Di Fabrizo et al. reported the possibility of studying the biomineralization of CaCO3 by in situ SAXS/WAXS by coalescence of a droplet containing CaCl2 with another droplet containing Na2CO3 in an EWOD device.301 The group of Boukherroub also succeeded in the realization of reversible electrowetting on superhydrophobic surfaces by deposition of silicon nanowires and coating with a fluorinated polymer.302–306 They could use these superhydrophobic materials in EWOD for matrix-free mass-spectrometry analyses (DIOS analysis). By applying voltage with very narrow frequencies, it was also possible to induce the jumping of the droplet in EWOD.307,308 Carbon nanofiber superhydrophobic surfaces were also reported in the literature to obtain reversible electrowetting.309
Manipulation of water droplets could be realized in the literature by introducing paramagnetic carbonyl-iron microparticles inside the droplets.310 Here, the movement of droplets was possible by applying a magnetic field. Kaler et al. also used liquid dielectrophoresis actuation to move droplets.311 This method uses passivized metallic electrodes in order to induce a spatially non-uniform electric field. The group of Sikorski proposed a digital microfluidic chip based with inlets, outlets, sample storage and mixing areas using wire guidance to move the droplets.312 This technique is based on the realization of arrays of superhydrophobic dimples. Here, the modification with superhydrophobic CuO nanowire only in the dimples was performed with a mask and by electrodeposition and subsequent modification with a perfluorinated thiol. In this technique, the guidance is based on direct contact between the droplet and the rod: if the adhesion between the droplet and the rod is larger than that between the droplet and the surface, the droplet follows the rod, and reversely.
EWOD is a technique also used in biotechnology to displace biological liquids. The advantages are for example the reduction of consumption of expensive reagents and the high surface-to-volume ratio.313–317 However, due to the desorption of proteins and other analytes, the droplet motion is often reduced. Freire et al. showed the possibility of moving biological liquids using superoleophobic materials made by coating of candle soot and subsequent surface modification.316 The authors were able to move bovin serum albumin droplets even at concentration 2000 times higher. To control the protein adsorption on microfluidic channels, Gogolides et al. used a lithographic process on PMMA followed by anisotropic O2 plasma etching and fluorinated plasma deposition to obtain superhydrophobic channels.317 Using the biotin–streptavidin system, they showed that the superhydrophobic properties can enhance the sensitivity of the protein detection by two orders of magnitude in comparison to flat microchannels.
Another method to confine the flow is to use superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic contrasts. Shirtcliffe et al. showed that some superhydrophobic plants have the ability to collect water from their environment without the possibility of moving (Fig. 30).14 Similar behavior was also reported on the surface of beetles in the Namib Desert.15 This ability is due to a combination of topography and more precisely both superhydrophobic and highly “sticky” states designed in order to induce effective water collection. Here, the water droplets are collected by the sticky regions and when their size becomes critical they can roll off them. However, on some plants such as Echeveria and Euphorbia, the leaves acted like channels steering the water to the stem by gravity where it is trapped. They also showed the possibility of artificially collecting water by creating superhydrophilic artificial grooves surrounded by superhydrophobic walls to channel the water. It was also reported that the cactus Opuntia microdasys is able to collect water thanks to structured spines having a wettability gradient318 whereas the endemic Namib Desert grass Stipagrostis sabulicola uses microgrooves parallel to the axis of the plant to guide water.319 By contrast, Cotula fallax uses a 3D arrangement formed by its leaves and the fine hairs covering them to collect a high amount of water.320a We can also cite the spider Uloborus walckenaerius, which uses silk constituted of periodic spindle-knots made of nanofibrils to collect water.320b
 Fig. 30  (a) Alchemilla (Lady's Mantle) with highly “sticky” superhydrophobic leaves (Wenzel state) to collect water and superhydrophilic channels to guide the water to the stem; (b) artificial superhydrophilic channels surrounded by superhydrophobic walls. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Hence, other authors worked on the biomimetism and the reproduction of this ability to collect water. Cohen et al. elaborated hydrophilic patterns of the superhydrophobic surface using a water–2-propanol solution of the poly(fluorescein isothiocyanate allylamine hydrochloride) polyelectrolyte.321 Gogolides showed the interest in producing superhydrophilic microchannels in microfluidic devices while superhydrophobic patches could be used as passive valves.322a Boukherroub et al. used also superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic contrasts to induce the movement of small biomolecules in a EWOD system coupled to a surface-assisted laser desorption-ionization (SALDI) for mass spectrometry.322b They showed that analyses of low molecular weight compounds can be achieved with very high sensitivity.
Finally, another important interest to use these properties was the possibility of creating open microfluidic devices and more precisely on paper substrates.323,324 Indeed, paper could made superhydrophobic for example by immersion in poly(hydroxybutyrate) solution. Then, it was possible to render regions superhydrophilic just by writing or printing.
3.9 Floating properties
The principle of the possibility of walking on water is based on that of water striders (Fig. 1e).18 These insects have this ability thanks to densely packed nano-hairs on their legs, which allow the trapping of a high amount of air between the legs and the water surface. To construct microrobots capable of walking on the water surface, nanostructured legs were fabricated (Fig. 31).325 These legs are able to support the weight of the microrobot. Here, the legs consisted of copper wires covered with Cu(OH)2 nanoribbons which were treated with n-dodecanoic acid to induce superhydrophobic properties. Microrobots capable of jumping on the water surface were also created with superhydrophobic nickel foam legs.326 Pan et al. used copper meshes and induced the galvanic deposition of Ag nanodendrites by a simple immersion process in AgNO3.327 After surface modification with n-dodecanoic acid, loading capacities (>11 g for a boat of 8 cm3, for the best results) as a function of the pore size of the copper meshes were reported. Aerogels were also used in the literature to support a considerable weight.328
 Fig. 31  Picture of a microrobot with superhydrophobic legs capable of moving on water like a water strider. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The use of smart materials can also lead to the motion of a microrobot. To induce the on-off motion of a superhydrophobic boat by changing the pH based on the Marangoni effect, the group of Shi used three functional materials: a material to reduce the drag, a gold substrate with platinum nanostructures to give a hydrogen peroxide-responsive surface and a nickel mesh coated with a mixture of 1-dodecanethiol and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid to induce a pH-response.329,330 The microrobot could move on water by changing the pH from 1 to 13.
3.10 Printing technologies
The superhydrophobic properties were also utilized in printing technologies. Indeed, in these technologies it is important to have a high contrast of wettability between the image areas and non-image areas.331 Nishimoto et al. were interested in the improvement of offset printing.332,333 In a classical process, a wettability-patterned surface is formed by coating an anodized Al plate with a photosensitive polymer, light illumination through a mask and development treatment. During the printing, the hydrophilic areas are filled with water. Then, the ink injected adheres only in the areas without water and the pattern is transferred to the paper. While conventional printing plates cannot be reused, the authors reported the possibility of using TiO2-based superhydrophobic–superhydrophilic patterns and also having a very high contrast of wettability. Indeed, the remaining patterned hydrophobic organic molecules could be photocatalytically decomposed by TiO2 under light irradiation.
Law et al. worked on the improvement of the impression to paper from a fuser surface (Fig. 32).334–336 In this process, a toner is usually fused at a temperature ranging from 130 to 180 °C under pressure (300–700 kPa) in 10–20 ms. In this technology, the molten toner has to adhere onto the paper rather than to the fuser surface. Otherwise, the quality of the images decreases after each use. Usually, the fuser surface is made of Teflon but this material is oleophilic with a contact angle of hexadecane of ≈48°. As a consequence, the molten toner, which is close to a wax, can be attracted by the fuser surface. Here, the authors proposed to develop a robust superoleophobic fuser surface to reduce this possibility. They developed textured pillars using the Bosch etching process and modified them with a perfluorinated silane. Superoleophobic properties, with a contact angle of ink or toner up to 168°, were reported.
 Fig. 32  (a) Improvement of the impression to paper from a superoleophobic fuser surface composed of (b) textured pillars; (c) water and hexadecane droplets on the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 334, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
3.11 Optical devices

3.11.1 Transparency. 
To obtain superhydrophobic properties, it is necessary to structure the surface of a material. The surface structures can decrease the transparency of the material due to the scattering of the light by the surface roughness. However, the transparency is absolutely fundamental for various applications such as windows, glasses, lenses or optical instruments. The light scattering on superhydrophobic surfaces can be predicted by the Rayleigh scattering and Mie scattering if we suppose that the roughness acts such as spherical, non-absorbing particles (dielectric) to redirect the incident light.337
For roughness dimensions below that of the light wavelength, the intensity of scattered light I is given by the equation:  where λ is the wavelength light, n is the refraction index of the particle, d is the particle diameter and S is the distance between the particle and the detector. Hence, using visible light the Rayleigh scattering is negligible for roughness size lower than 100 nm. Moreover, for antireflection, the refractive index of the material should be low.
Hence, most of the techniques used to produce transparent superhydrophobic particles are based on the use of nanoparticles (SiO2, TiO2, ZnO, C, polymers,…), for example with the sol–gel process, electrospinning, vapor deposition or by colloidal lithography, and also based on plasma treatments.337–339
A very interesting potential application was given by the group of Xiao (Fig. 33).340 They showed that nanoporous polymer chalk such as polydivinylbenzene can be used to obtain transparent superhydrophobic paintings. These materials could be used to coat, paper, PDMS and even the skin.
 Fig. 33  Fingers coated with a transparent superhydrophobic paint. Reprinted with permission from ref. 340, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 


3.11.2 Anti-reflection coatings. 
Anti-reflection properties are useful to increase the light transmittance rate and to reduce the glare, and are widely used in various optical devices such as cameras or cell phones. Usually, anti-reflection properties can be introduced by fabricating a multiple layer thin film with various refractive indices and thicknesses, or by structuring the surface of a material. In order to produce superhydrophobic properties and anti-reflection properties it is necessary to have ordered surface structures with controlled dimensions. In nature, moths and flies are known to have eyes with anti-reflective properties.9,341–344 Moth eyes are composed of hexagonal arrays of nonclose-packed nano-nipples (Fig. 34) to reduce the reflectivity. The sub-wavelength size of the nipples induces a grade transition of the refractive index. As a consequence, the reflection is minimized over a broad range of wavelengths and incidence angles.
 Fig. 34  SEM image of a fly's eye with antireflection properties.344a 
Different research groups tried to reproduce these properties.345–350 The group of Jiang produced anti-reflection coatings composed of nano-pillars with self-cleaning properties.345 They reported the reactive ion etching process using silica nanoparticles to induce the formation of nano-pillars with various aspect ratios on silicon and glass. They observed that a high aspect ratio (≈10) is necessary to achieve also self-cleaning properties. For example, in the case of Si wafer, the nano-pillars allowed the reduction of the reflectivity from >30% for smooth silicon wafers to <2.5% for the structured ones. In a similar way, Yang et al. produced silica arrays of different shapes using colloidal crystals of PS as a mask and reactive ion etching.346 The surfaces were finally modified with a perfluorinated silane to achieve superhydrophobic properties. The best surfaces displayed anti-reflective properties <2.5% over the range of 800–2500 nm.
Moreover, the transmittance was >99% in the range of 1600–2130 nm.
In a similar approach, Huang et al. reported the formation of Si nanopillar arrays with properties depending on the height of the pillars.347 Reflectance <10% was observed with longer pillars. The substrates also displayed superhydrophobicity, photoluminescence and surface-enhanced Raman scattering by metal deposition onto the pillars.
Superhydrophobic substrates with self-cleaning and anti-reflective properties composed of needle-shaped microcrystals (∅ = 0.2–0.3 μm, length = 2.2–2.5 μm) were reported by Uchida et al. by photoinduced self-epitaxy of a fluorinated diarylethene derivative (Fig. 35).349 The reflectance of the substrates was <0.5%. The group of Sung also reported the elaboration of antireflective and superhydrophobic properties on large-area flexible substrates (PET) by a UV-nanoimprint lithography roll-to-roll process, plasma etching and surface modification with a perfluorinated silane.350 The best results were obtained with nanostructures of 82 nm height, 300 nm pitch and 283 nm diameter.
 Fig. 35  (a) Molecule used for (b and d) photoinduced self-epitaxial crystal growth with (c) anti-reflection properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


3.11.3 Anti-fogging coatings. 
The formation of fog appears by condensation of vapor into water droplets.351–355 The condensation nuclei diameter is larger than 190 nm, which is approximately half of the shortest wavelength of the visible light. As a consequence, the visibility of transparent materials can be reduced by light scattering and reflection. Indeed, the formation of water droplets on superhydrophobic surfaces is a very complex phenomenon and superhydrophobic properties can sometimes increase and sometimes decrease the water condensation. Jiang et al. reported that the eyes of mosquitoes and flies are able to repel micrometer-sized water droplets (Fig. 36).10 They showed that this ability is due to specific ordered structures in both at the microscale and the nanoscale: hexagonally close-packed ommatidia (∅ ≈ 26 μm) at the microscale and hexagonally non-close-packed nipples (∅ ≈ 101 μm and interparticle spacing ≈48 nm) at the nanoscale. Moreover, they could reproduce the structures by a complex process including photolithography, heating, transfer by soft lithography and incorporation of SiO2 nanoparticles.
 Fig. 36  Corneal nipple arrays with anti-fogging properties of mosquitoes, at different magnification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10a, copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH. 
Other research groups also reported the anti-fogging properties of superhydrophobic materials.356–358 The group of McKinley reported robust superhydrophobic surfaces with ordered arrays of nanoplots of conical shape by a complex lithographic process using reactive ion etching followed by a modification with a perfluorinated silane.356 The as-prepared materials displayed optical transmission (>98% over a broad range of wavelengths and incident angles) and anti-fogging properties. Krupenkin et al. fabricated transparent Ta2O5 containing nanoplots using anodized Al as a mold to transfer the pattern.357 After plasma deposition of a fluorinated polymer the thin film became transparent with self-cleaning and anti-fogging properties.


3.11.4 Photoluminescence. 
The elaboration of one-dimensional nanostructures of semiconductors such as nanorods, nanoneedles, nanowires, nanotubes or nanobelts can yield unique properties including photoluminescence. Hence, the deposition of these nanostructures on surfaces can yield both photoluminescence and superhydrophobicity. In the literature, ZnO is probably one of the most studied semiconductors for photoluminescence properties due to the possibility of forming extremely various nanostructures with controllable dimensions such as nanorods.359–364 Indeed, the exceptional properties of ZnO are in part due to its wide band gap (≈3.37 eV) with a large excitation binding energy of 60 meV at room temperature and its hexagonal wurtzite-type crystalline structure.
The photoluminescence is an important phenomenon to characterize the purity and crystalline quality of semiconductors. For example, Patil et al. elaborated superhydrophobic ZnO nanoplatelets by spray pyrolysis.359 They observed a strong UV emission at ≈398 nm with three shoulders at 373 nm, 382 nm and 410 nm, with a weak blue emission at 471 nm and a green emission at 520 nm. The UV emission at 398 nm, corresponding to the near band edge emission of ZnO and responsible for the excitonic recombination, can be taken as an indicator of good crystallinity. In the opposite, the green emission peak is due to crystal defects such as vacancies or interstitial sites. A study of crystalline defects was also performed by Ozer et al. comparing ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanoneedles obtained by a hydrothermal process with different seed-to-growth solution concentration ratios (Fig. 37).360 Indeed, they concluded that the ZnO nanoneedles had a higher degree of crystallinity. The position of the peaks can also give information about the dimensions of the crystalline structures. For example, Huang et al. studied the growth of ZnO nanorods on CuO nanowires (Fig. 38).364 They observed that the UV emission peaks shift from 377.7 nm to 384.0 nm due to the increase in the diameter and length of the ZnO nanorods. Moreover, the substrates also displayed self-cleaning properties. Superhydrophobic and photoluminescent ZnS nanostructures have also been reported in the literature using thiourea as a sulfur source.365 The authors observed a difference in the photoluminescence spectra of ZnS nanowires and ZnS nanorods arrays with a strong yellow UV emission centered at 574.9 nm and 587.7 nm respectively.
 Fig. 37  ZnO nanostructures with different shapes and photoluminescence properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 360, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 38  Growth of ZnO nanorods on CuO nanowires in Zn(NO3)2 aqueous solution at a concentration of (a) 0.05 M and (b) 0.1 M; (c) photoluminescence spectra at different concentrations of Zn(NO3)2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 364, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Other nanomaterials with superhydrophobicity and photoluminescence have also been explored in the literature. Jaouad et al. reported the properties of vertically aligned Ge nanoneedles.366 In comparison with bulk Ge, the Ge nanoneedles showed a broad emission peak centered at 650 nm. The other materials include Si flower-like structures,367 BN nanosheets,368 PbSe nanodendrites,369 Bi2S3 urchin-like structures,370 In(OH)3 nanocubes,371 InxGa(1−x)N nanotips372 and different C nanostructures.373,374
Another strategy to obtain superhydrophobic materials with photoluminescence was to introduce quantum dots (QDs) such as CdS, CdSe or CdTe. Zhai et al. induced the growth of CdS QDs directly on TiO2 nanotube arrays using a chemical bath deposition method. Superhydrophobic properties were obtained after modification with a perfluorinated silane.375 In order to obtain superhydrophobic properties in one step and to induce good compatibility with the organic monomer and polymer matrix, other research groups preferred to synthesize CdS QDs in solution followed by an exchange with a hydrophobic ligand.376–380 The group of Chen modified CdS QDs with dodecanethiol.376 The authors could introduce these QDs in a PMMA matrix. The same author also reported the incorporation of CdTe QDs after modification with dodecaneamine.377 Then, they elaborated superhydrophobic fibrous structures by electrospinning. Photoluminescence analyses confirmed that the QDs were well dispersed in the matrix: as expected, just a shift was observed as a function of the size of the CdTe QDs. To enhance the resistance of nanocrystals against photooxidation, various dithiocarbamates were tested (Fig. 39). Various crystalline structures were obtained as a function of the dithiocarbamate while superhydrophobic properties were obtained using dithiocarbamates with long alkyl chains.379
 Fig. 39  Schematic representation of the superhydrophobic surfaces with photoluminescence using CdS quantum dots and dithiocarbamates.379 
Finally, the last strategy discussed in this review was the use of Eu complexes due to their high photoluminescence properties.380–382 Hou et al. reported the photoluminescence properties of the methylsilicone polymer just by dissolving the polymer in ethanol and mixing with Eu(benzoic acid)3(1,10-phenanthroline).381 YBO3/Eu3+ with various crystalline structures and hydrophobicity were hydrothermally synthesized by adjusting the ratio of surfaces PEG-6000 to octadecylamine. For example, the rose-like structures displayed photoluminescence with three strong emission peaks at 591, 610 and 615 nm. The group of Jin reported the formation of structured silica of various crystalline structures in the presence of poly(ethylenimine) and additives.382 Then, the surfaces could be modified with perfluorinated chains to achieve superhydrophobic properties and with Eu3+ complexes for photoluminescence.


3.11.5 Photonic crystals. 
The butterflies of the genus Morpho, which display brilliant blue color, intrigued the scientific community.383–386 The brilliant colors of their wings are useful against predators while their self-cleaning properties are an advantage when they fly. It was shown that their colors were not due to the presence of pigments or dyes but due to to the presence of ordered structures on their wings diffracting light and inducing interference effects. Hence, the replacement of pigments and dyes by introduction of structured materials is very interesting to increase the lifetime of colored materials. An example of a complex skeleton of a butterfly is given in Fig. 40b. Moreover, butterflies of the genus Morpho also display superhydrophobic properties.11,387 For example, the blue butterfly Morpho aega possesses anisotropic superhydrophobic properties due to the presence of directional arrangement of micro-scales. The group of Goodwyn studied superhydrophobic white translucent butterfly's wings of the genus Parantica sita (Nymphalidae) and transparent butterfly's wings of the genus Parnassius glacialis (Papilionidae) (Fig. 40).388 They observed that the white zones of Parantica sita's wings are due to the presence of highly porous and ordered scales (ridge-lamella connected by cross ribs) as observed in Morpho species. Similar effects were also found to be responsible for the iridescence of insects and animals such as damselfish,389 the neon tetra Purucheirodon innesi,390Pentapodus paradiseus whiptail,391Loligo pealeii squid,392Beroë cucumis comb-jellyfish,393Pachyrhynchus argus,394Hoplia coerulea395 and Charidotella egregia396 beetles, Ancyluris meliboeus Fabricius397 and Papilio palinurus butterflies.398 It was demonstrated that these color changes are due to changes in the refractive index, periodic nanostructures and incident light angle.
 Fig. 40  Superhydrophobic white translucent butterfly's wings of the genus Parantica sita (Nymphalidae) (a–c) at different magnifications and transparent butterfly's wings of the genus Parnassius glacialis (Papilionidae) (d–f) at different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 388, copyright 2009, Springer. 
The group of Gu tried to reproduce the properties of Morpho species using colloidal crystals, also called colloidal lithography, using poly(methyl methacrylate-co-divinylbenzene-co-methacrylic acid) spherical particles.399 Indeed, this method based on the deposition of highly ordered particles (inorganic or polymer) allowed the tuning of the surface wettability and the material color with the surface topography.399–402 These properties were confirmed by the group of Zhu using PS spheres.403 Moreover, the introduction of dyes as dopants could improve the brightness of the materials by the suppression of light scattering. The use of colloidal crystals is extremely interesting to tune the optical properties, for example with the diameter of the particles, their refractive index, the incidence angle of the light, but also by swelling or by stretching as well as using sensitive polymers and by post-functionalization.404,405
Indeed, in nature the iridescence of opal (a hydrated amorphous form of silica) is due to the presence of closely packed silica spheres (150 to 300 nm in diameter).406,407 Moreover, other strategies can be used to deposit these materials such as spray coating, ink-jet printing or deposition on low-adhesive superhydrophobic substrates,408–416 which increases the interest of these properties for various applications.
To tune the surface hydrophobicity of colloidal crystals without changing the photonic bandgap, the group of Jiang used PS-block-PMMA-block-poly(acrylic acid) particles.417 The surface wettability could be changed from superhydrophilic to superhydrophobic by controlling the assembly temperature. The authors explained this possibility by changing the chemical groups present at the extreme surfaces of the spheres as a function of the assembly temperature.
In order to obtain both structural color and self-cleaning properties, inverse opal films were fabricated using a suspension of PS spheres (∅ = several 100 nm) and SiO2 nanoparticles (∅ ≈ 6 nm) (Fig. 41).418 Then, the materials were calcined at 450 °C to remove the PS spheres and to solidify the SiO2 nanoparticles, and modified with a perfluorinated silane to achieve superhydrophobic properties. Moreover, different colors were obtained depending on the center-to-center distance between two neighboring holes (275 nm for blue, 310 nm for green and 400 nm for red). Moreover, the assembly of colloidal particles is possible only if the surface is hydrophilic.419 Hence, surfaces with hydrophobic/hydrophilic contrasts were also elaborated combining colloidal lithography and photolithography. To enhance the mechanical and thermal properties of the materials, Song et al. also reported the properties of superhydrophobic inverse opal films using polyimide and with close-cell structures.420 These structures were produced with poly(styrene-methyl methacrylate-acrylic acid) core–shell: a rigid PS core and an elastomer poly(methyl methacrylate-acrylic acid) shell. Here, the elastomeric properties of the shell are responsible for the formation of core–shell structures. The materials maintained their superhydrophobic properties and photonic band gap after heating at 400 °C for 2 h. To obtain tough materials, these core–shell polymers were also used for the formation of SiC inverse opals.421 The authors showed the possibility of obtaining photonic crystals covering the entire UV-vis-NIR range. To elaborate materials with switchable wettability and conductivity, inverse opals of polypyrrole were fabricated from poly(styrene-methyl methacrylate-acrylic acid) core–shell.422 While the surface wettability could be reversely changed from highly hydrophobic to hydrophilic by dedoping/doping processes with a change in conductivity but also in color, due to the change in the polypyrrole refractive index and volume.
 Fig. 41  (a) Opal structures obtained by colloidal lithography with PS spheres and SiO2 nanoparticles, and (b) inverse opal structures obtained after calcination to remove the PS spheres; (c) color and transmission spectra of the inverse opal structures with different center-to-center distances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 418, copyright 2003, Wiley-VCH. 
Finally, other strategies were employed to obtain photonic crystals with similar or different ordered structures. Yang et al. obtained structures close to that obtained with inverse opals using holographic lithography.423 In order to increase the superhydrophobic properties (θw = 161.4°), they could control the formation of nano-roughness on the microstructures using epoxy-functionalized POSS. The nano-roughness was generated due to microphase separation during the rinsing step of holographic lithography. Here, nano-roughness did not significantly affect the bang gap of the photonic crystal. Moreover, these materials had very high ability of dye adsorption (6 times higher) in comparison with smooth surfaces.
The group of Sun used a multibeam holographic lithography, sensitization with SnCl2 and Ag electroplating to produce photonic crystals with regular nano-nipples arrays.424 The as-prepared material displayed superhydrophobic properties and iridescence (Fig. 42).
 Fig. 42  (a) Schematic representation of regular nano-nipples arrays with superhydrophobic and iridescence properties;424 (b) man-made polymer opals with different colors and iridescence properties.406 


3.11.6 Solar cells. 
The low conversion efficiency is a major problem for solar cells. The energy efficiency can be enhanced by reducing the light reflection, increasing the transparency and/or increasing the light absorption. As shown in the previous sections a surface can be made superhydrophobic while being transparent and anti-reflective, by controlling the surface topography. Another important interest to use superhydrophobic coatings is the possibility of reducing the dust on the solar cells, which is to date an important problem (the dust reducing the energy performance).
It was possible to induce transparent and anti-reflective properties by producing nanostructures close to the moth eyes.9,341–344 Wong et al. elaborated superhydrophobic and self-cleaning solar cells containing Si micropyramids modified with ZnO nanowires (Fig. 43).425 Here, the micropyramids were obtained by etching Si wafer in KOH water–isopropyl alcohol solution. ZnO nanowires were produced by magnetron sputtering to form a ZnO seed layer before immersion in zinc nitrate and hexamethylenetetramine solution.
 Fig. 43  Superhydrophobic and self-cleaning (a) solar cells containing (b) Si micropyramids modified with (c) ZnO nanowires with excellent anti-reflection properties and (d) conversion efficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 425, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
The solar cells displayed an increase in anti-reflection by 3.2% over the 300–1200 nm range and a high conversion efficiency of 16%. The performance of solar cells based on ZnO nanostructures has also been reported in others studies. To improve the UV-resistance of the materials, Beaujuge et al. also proposed to add an ultra-thin layer of SiO2 around the ZnO nanostructures, while Nuraje et al. electrospun PS and PVC fibers incorporating TiO2 nanoparticles and graphene nanoflakes.426,427 Other research groups also reported the possibility of reducing the dust accumulation on flexible and transparent PDMS or PET substrates by creating microshells and nanofibers, respectively.428,429 They developed their substrates by replication from a patterned mold.
This process as well as the UV-nanoimprint process were also used on PET substrates by Lee et al. to replicate the moth eye structures and consequently increase the anti-reflective properties.430 The authors also reported an increase in the accumulated electric energy of the solar cell of up to 3.9%. Finally, the use of superhydrophobic properties in dye-sensitized solar cells was also reported.431 Kim et al. incorporated an anti-reflective layer with moth eye-like structures in this device.432 The layer could increase the transmittance up to 82% at 540 nm. The dye-sensitized solar cells displayed an enhancement of the efficiency to 7.3% at 100 mW cm−2.
To combine self-cleaning properties with anti-reflectivity and high absorption properties, nanodomes of an active absorber (hydrogenated amorphous silicon) were created by pattern transfer from a mold.433 The as-prepared materials could absorb 94% of the light in the range of 400–800 nm, higher than the corresponding smooth substrate (65%). They also reported a high power efficiency of 5.9% (25% more than the corresponding smooth substrate). Patsalas et al. used nanocomposites of metal nanoparticles (Ni, Fe, Mo, Sn) including diamond-like carbon matrices to form various nanostructures depending on the experimental conditions.434 The interlinked star-shaped Ni structures displayed superhydrophobic properties, extreme optical absorbance over the visible range, low optical reflection (<10−4) and high thermal conductivity.
Finally, the elaboration of superhydrophobic photo-sensors was also reported.435 The authors fabricated arrays of epoxy photoresist square micropillars on n-doped crystalline Si substrates. Then, a poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-yl) layer with nano-roughness was deposited to form a p–n junction. The authors observed an increase in the superhydrophobic properties and the photosensitivity with the interpillar distance. Indeed, only the regions in between the pillars are responsible for the photoconductivity while the relationship with the superhydrophobic properties follows the Cassie–Baxter equation.

3.12 Batteries
The technology of batteries has become a major field of research in electronic devices because their capacity and shelf life are not able to follow the advances made in semiconductor technologies. A battery has to provide power when required and to endure prolonged periods of storage. For this last point, a mechanical separator is present in a normal battery to separate the electrolyte from the electrodes, increasing the necessary volume of the battery. To overcome these problems, the group of Simon proposed the use of superhydrophobic nanostructured electrodes instead of using a mechanical separator in order to miniaturize the system (Fig. 44).436–438 Here, the system is based on the electrowetting phenomena.
 Fig. 44  Superhydrophobic nanostructured batteries based on the electrowetting phenomena. Reprinted with permission from ref. 436, copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. 
When no power is applied, the electrolyte cannot penetrate into the electrode space because of its self-cleaning properties. But, when a power is activated, a Cassie–Baxter-to-Wenzel transition is induced which highly increases the contact between the electrode and the electrolyte. Moreover, this phenomenon is extremely fast (≈1 ms). They also demonstrated the use of microporous honeycomb membranes deposited on the nanostructured electrodes to obtain batteries with electrically controllable permeability.439 Indeed, the penetration of the electrolyte inside the membrane is electrically controllable.
Other research groups also showed the potential of superhydrophobic coating of batteries, fuel cells and photoelectrochemical cells.440–442 For example, Pan et al. successfully improved the lithium storage properties of Fe2O3@C nanoparticles in lithium ion batteries by adding a superoleophilic and superhydrophobic polysiloxane coating.440 Indeed, a superoleophilic and superhydrophobic coating can repel water while allowing the penetration of the electrolyte.
3.13 Sensors

3.13.1 Enhancement of the SERS effect. 
In the case of metal nanostructures, coherent oscillations of conduction band electrons can lead to plasmon resonance in an extremely high local electromagnetic field. This effect is called surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and is known for metal nanoparticles in solution but also on surfaces.443–452 This effect can be used for the detection of trace molecules. Gold nanoparticles forming Candock leaf structures have also been reported in the literature through an aggregation process controlled with a polyelectrolyte film.443 The superhydrophobic film (θw = 155°) also displayed excellent SERS enhancement with a factor of more than 5 compared to a sputtered gold film (tests done with Rh6G). The group of Li studied the enhancement of the SERS effect on superhydrophobic surfaces made of ZnO nanorods coated by Ag nanoparticles.444 They observed a signal amplification by a 3-fold. The SERS effect of superhydrophobic surfaces obtained by assembling Ag nanocubes (size distribution: 102 ± 9 nm) using the Langmuir–Blodgett technique, coating a 25 nm Ag layer to weld the Ag nanocubes and functionalization with perfluorodecanethiol was also studied (Fig. 45).445 The surfaces were able to detect trace molecules such as rhodamine 6G (Rh6G) down to 10−16 M while only 1 μL of diluted analytes were necessary. Superhydrophobic surfaces containing PS–Ag Janus particle arrays were also elaborated by site-specific electrodeposition.446 These surfaces were able to detect highly diluted solution (femtomolar range). The group of Di Fabrizio fabricated a superhydrophobic periodic array of micropillars and modified them by incorporating Ag nanoparticles on the head of the pillars.450–452 They observed an enhancement of the SERS effect with the possibility of detecting Rh6G in the fairly low attomolar range. The authors envisaged to use these surfaces to detect tumors or other important pathologies.
 Fig. 45  Enhancing surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) using superhydrophobic Ag nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 445, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


3.13.2 Classical sensors. 
Following its chemical composition, a superhydrophobic material can also have interactions with various molecules in solution or gases. Here, the surface roughness can increase the sensitivity of sensors. Saito et al. used a superhydrophobic quartz crystal microbalance to detect volatile organic compounds.453 Using nanostructured superhydrophobic surfaces by plasma-enhanced CVD of trimethylmethoxysilane, the materials could adsorb organic compounds such as toluene and formaldehyde by van der Waals interactions leading to an increase in the weight of the materials. Other research groups modified superhydrophobic materials by incorporating amine groups to interact with CO2.454,455 In order to detect explosives, Lei reported superhydrophobic sand by modification with PS/pyrene/tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate composites.456 The resulting materials were able to detect nitroaromatic explosive vapor such as 2,4-dinitrotoluene. One of the interests to use superhydrophobic materials was found to be to develop sensors able to detect gases or explosives dissolved in water.457–459


3.13.3 Sensors based on photonic crystals. 
As described above, photonic crystals are unique materials with color or stopbands depending on structural parameters (Fig. 46).460–462 Hence, when a product is in contact with the structure, a shift in the stopband or the color can be observed. Song et al. developed superhydrophobic and superoleophilic inverse opals for oil sensors.460,461 They observed that, for a given pore size, the stopband of the photonic crystal shifts linearly with the refractive indices of the oils.
 Fig. 46  (a) Superhydrophobic and superoleophilic inverse opals for oil sensors; (b and c) the stopband of the photonic crystal shifts linearly with the refractive indices of the oils.481 Panel a reprinted with permission from ref. 460, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 


3.13.4 Biosensors. 
Many natural systems are based on complex interactions like hydrogen bonding and specific recognition. For example, protein–carbohydrate interactions concern many important biological processes such as signaling, recognition and catalysis.463,464 Hence, the elaboration of sensors based on the sensing of carbohydrates is highly important for medical applications, diagnostics and therapeutics. The group of Sun reported the possibility of elaborating a superhydrophobic surface with switchable wettability in the presence of saccharides.465 The used copolymer contained N-isopropylacrylamide and a derivative containing phenylboronic acid. Its polymerization on micro and nanostructured patterned substrates led to superhydrophobic properties. Their immersion in glucose solution changed the surface wettability into superhydrophilic due to interactions between the polymer and the glucose. The same group also showed that their polymers can also interact with nucleotides such as adenosine phosphate with similar switchable wettability (Fig. 47).466 The group of Li also reported the elaboration of superhydrophobic surfaces made of calix[4]azacrown.467 The sensors could selectively interact with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium ions but only with Cl− counterions (the tests were also realized with Br− and PF6−) due to specific insertion of Cl− ions into azacrown and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium with the calix moiety. The interactions induced also a change in the surface hydrophobicity from superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic. Yao et al. also reported the elaboration of superhydrophobic electrocatalytic sensors made of C60 hollow spheres by bubble-templates.468 These sensors displayed high sensitivity and selective detection of dopamine in the presence of ascorbic acid, and uric acid in the presence of L-cysteine.
 Fig. 47  Schematic representation of biosensors with nucleotide recognition and switchable superhydrophobic properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 466, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Superhydrophobic surfaces can also find applications in immunoassays.469–471 Shen et al. reported the advantages of using superhydrophobic polycarbonate surfaces in Schistosoma japonicum antibodies (SjAb) immunoassays, which consist of sensitive stripping voltammetry analysis coupled with Cu enhanced Au nanoparticle tag amplification.470 First of all, small total volumes were required and short assay times. Moreover, the technique was quantitatively sensitive to SjAb concentrations ranging from 2 ng mL−1 to 15 μg mL−1 with a detection limit of 1.3 ng mL−1.
Superhydrophobic properties can also be used to improve bioanalytical readout. For this purpose, protein microarrays are very often used.472–474 The group of Ressine elaborated porous Si with various porosities and hydrophobicities by electrochemical etching in the presence of HF (Fig. 48a).473,474 After ink-injection of antibodies (antirabbit IgG), the authors observed that the antibody spots are well confined to a diameter of 50 μm, allowing a higher microarray density of over 15000 spots per square centimeter. The higher homogeneity of antibodies all in all the spot is due to the presence of a rotational flow during the evaporation when the surface is hydrophobic (Marangoni effect) (Fig. 48b). Such substrates were also used for MALDI-TOF MS detection. Indeed, such techniques were developed because it is not possible to obtain antibodies with no reactivity to any other proteins. Here, superhydrophobic MALDI-TOF MS target anchor chips were developed to increase the sensitivity of MALDI-TOF MS by creating hydrophilic anchor points (500 μm) by proton beam irradiation surrounded by superhydrophobic porous areas (Fig. 48c). Then, 5 μL of sample with a matrix were deposited on a hydrophilic anchor point. After desorption and ionization, the authors observed an increase in detection peaks of proteins by five to sevenfold in comparison with a standard MALDI target.
 Fig. 48  Superhydrophobic surfaces to improve bioanalytical readout based on (a) porous Si and (b) evaporation of droplets containing proteins; (c) target anchor chips developed to increase the sensitivity of MALD-TOF MS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 473, copyright 2007, Elsevier B.V. 
The group of Alam also used the properties of superhydrophobic surfaces to concentrate ultra-diluted DNA solutions onto an electrode for non-faradaic impedance spectroscopy measurements.475 They observed an enhancement of the detection limit by five orders of magnitude. This strategy was also used by other authors to deposit various bioactive agents or cells as well as multilayers.476–478
Other groups also used superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic contrast to immobilize proteins or cells in the superhydrophilic areas (Fig. 49).479−482 Chi et al. elaborated substrates with superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic contrasts by formation of TiO2 nanotubes by Ti anodization and photocatalytic lithography.479 With this method, the authors could selectively immobilize cells, proteins with reversibility, as well as various chemicals and materials such as calcium phosphate, Ag nanoparticles, drugs and biomolecules. For example, they demonstrated the SERS enhancement using Ag nanoparticles. A similar strategy was also used in the literature to immobilize and real-time monitor cells on superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic Au–TiO2 micropatterns modified with L-cysteine and functional proteins.480
 Fig. 49  Superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic contrast to immobilize proteins in the superhydrophilic areas, based on Namib desert Beetles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 482, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 

3.14 Drug delivery
The elaboration of drug delivery systems is very interesting to target specifically, for example, cancerous tissues with a drug released over a period of time in a controlled manner. To obtain materials with tunable drug delivery release, electrospun poly(ε-caprolactone) fibers doped with hydrophobic poly(glycerol monostearate-co-ε-caprolactone) (PGC-C18) were used as superhydrophobic scaffold materials.483,484 The authors showed that when a bioactive agent (SN-38 or CPT-11) is added to the materials, this one can be released in a controlled manner. Indeed, the displacement of the air trapped in the materials determines the rate of the drug delivery (Fig. 50). The hydrophobicity of the materials slows down the drug release process by increasing the stability of the entrapped air layer. These materials showed efficiency against cancer cells in vitro. The same authors also showed that the air trapped can be released using high-intensity focused ultrasound.485 Lynn et al. also reported the use of superhydrophobic polyelectrolyte multilayers, which are intrinsically hydrophilic, to promote long-term release of water-soluble agents.486 In their system, the release rate is controlled by the slow penetration of water inside the material.
 Fig. 50  Schematic representation of drug delivery systems based on the displacement of the air trapped on superhydrophobic materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 483, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The drug delivery process can also be performed by encapsulation and delivery using responsive materials. Usually, drug delivery systems suffer from efficiency and poor control of the drug release. Here, superhydrophobic surfaces were used to form a microgel just by deposition of droplets of the material to form spherical particles and crosslinking.487–489 Here, pH-sensitive chitosan microgels were prepared and loaded with the antitumoral drug 5-fluorouracil (Fig. 51).487,488 The surface was coated with pectin to prevent premature leakage of the drug and improve the controlled release. An encapsulation efficiency of 100% was obtained for microgels in the range of 200–600 μm. The release rate depended on the pH. Such materials enhanced the cytotoxic effect of 5-fluorouracil and can be used to treat colon cancer. Using this strategy, temperature-sensitive microgels of dextran-methacrylated and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) were also prepared and loaded with insulin and bovine serum albumin (BSA).489 The rate of the release was dependent on the bead's composition and the temperature.
 Fig. 51  Elaboration of drug delivery systems by deposition of droplets and cross-linking on superhydrophobic surfaces.488 
3.15 Heterogeneous catalysis
Catalysts are extremely used in chemistry to increase the rate of reactions. In the case of catalysis, the surface wettability of the supported catalysts seems to be important for their activity. As a consequence the study of superhydrophobic catalysis seems to be an interesting way. Heterogeneous catalysts can under certain conditions show higher activities than homogenous catalysts. The group of Xiao reported this effect using superhydrophobic mesoporous polymers made of divinylbenzene and an imidazolium moiety containing trifluoromethanesulfonate counterions (Fig. 52).490,491 They observed an increase in transesterification to form biodiesel. Similar results were also reported using superhydrophobic mesoporous polymers made of divinylbenzene and p-styrene sulfonic acid.492,493 Moreover, with p-styrene sulfonyl chloride, they functionalized the polymer with 1,2-diphenylethylenediamine and used it for the coordination of a ruthenium catalyst ([RuCl2(p-cymene)2]).494 Due to their good wettability to ketones and their high ability to transfer the product from the catalyst into the water phase, these heterogeneous catalysts showed higher activities in asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of ketones than their corresponding homogeneous catalysts.
 Fig. 52  Superhydrophobic mesoporous polymers made of divinylbenzene and an imidazolium moiety containing trifluoromethanesulfonate counterions, as heterogeneous catalysts for transesterification to form biodiesel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 490, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Superhydrophobic catalysts were also reported by incorporating cobalt in silica nanoparticles and their functionalization with 3,3,3-trifluoro-propyl groups.495 Due to their higher wettability to organic molecules and their higher repellency to water (product of reaction), these catalysts showed higher catalytic activity for selective oxidation of hydrocarbons than a hydrophilic one. Gold nanoparticles were also encapsulated in silica core–shell spheres containing isobutyl groups to achieve superhydrophobic surfaces with yolk–shell nanostructures after HF etching.496 These surfaces enhanced the catalytic performance in the reduction of nitroaromatic compounds. Nanostructured surfaces containing Co, Ni and CoNi alloys have also been studied in the literature.497 Superhydrophobic films with various nanostructures such as nanosheets or urchin-like structures were obtained by a magnetic-field-induced deposition process. The authors reported an excellent catalytic effect for the reduction of p-nitrophenol with sodium borohydride with high durability of the catalysts. The group of Song also reported the catalytic effect of hybrid materials.498 Combining calixarene with EuW10, highly hydrophobic films (θw > 139°) were obtained with high efficiency in extractive oxidative desulfurization. Superhydrophobic organo-titanosilicates with covalently linked phenyl groups were also reported by Fan et al. They showed promising catalytic activity in the epoxidation of olefins using H2O2 aqueous solutions.499
4. Conclusions
In this review, we gave a very recent overview of potential applications of superhydrophobic materials, which are characterized by extremely high water contact angles and various adhesion properties. Such materials have been elaborated by studying and mimicking natural surfaces. Here, we have extremely detailed each application including anti-icing, anti-corrosion and anti-bacterial coatings, microfluidic devices, textiles, oil–water separation, water desalination/purification, optical devices, sensors, batteries and catalysts. Now, we found that at least two parameters seem to be essential for many applications: the presence of air on superhydrophobic materials with self-cleaning properties (Cassie–Baxter state) and the robustness of the superhydrophobic properties (stability of the Cassie–Baxter state). This review opens up new ways to researchers to envisage new strategies and to industrialists to advance in the commercialization of these materials.
Notes and references

  (a) K. Koch and W. Barthlott, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. J. Ensikat, P. Ditsche-Kuru, C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Ann. Bot., 1997, 79, 667 CrossRef .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Ju, Y. Qiu, Y. He, X. Wang, S. Dou, K. Liu and L. Jiang, Small, 2014, 10, 294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Wisdom, J. A. Watson, X. Qu, F. Liu, G. S. Watson and C.-H. Chen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 7992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hensel, A. Finn, R. Helbig, H.-G. Braun, C. Neinhuis, W.-J. Fischer and C. Werner, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hensel, R. Helbig, S. Aland, H.-G. Braun, A. Voigt, C. Neinhuis and C. Werner, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Helbig, J. Nickerl, C. Neinhuis and C. Werner, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e25105 CAS .
D. G. Stavenga, S. Foletti, G. Palasantzas and K. Arikawa, Proc. R. Soc. B, 2006, 273, 661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Sun, T. Liao, K. Liu, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Small DOI:10.1002/smll.201400516 .
Y. Zheng, X. Gao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 178 RSC .
E. Miyako, T. Sugino, T. Okazaki, A. Bianco, M. Yudasaka and S. Iijima, ACS Nano, 2013, 10, 8736 CrossRef PubMed .
E. P. Ivanova, J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, V. K. Truong, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, V. A. Baulin, S. Pogodin, J. Y. Wang, M. J. Tobin, C. Loebbe and R. J. Crawford, Small, 2012, 8, 2489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale and M. I. Newton, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 14121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Parker and C. R. Lawrence, Nature, 2001, 414, 33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Barthlott, T. Schimmel, S. Wiersch, K. Koch, M. Brede, M. Barczewski, S. Walheim, A. Weis, A. Kaltenmaier, A. Leder and H. F. Bohn, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Watson, B. W. Cribb and J. A. Watson, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 4060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Hu, B. Chan and J. W. M. Bush, Nature, 2003, 423, 663 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, D. H. Lee, S. G. Lee and K. Cho, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4905 RSC .
R. N. Wenzel, Indian Chem. Eng., 1936, 28, 988 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Baxter and A. B. D. Cassie, J. Text. Inst., Trans., 1945, 36, T67 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marmur, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marmur, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 7900 RSC .
T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy, S. Amigoni and F. Guittard, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 656 CrossRef CAS .
E. Celia, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy, S. Amigoni and F. Guittard, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 402, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wolfs, T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Polym. Rev., 2013, 53, 460 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marmur, Contact Angle, Wettability Adhes., 2009, 6, 3 CAS .
T. Young, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1805, 95, 65 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Zhang, H. Xia, E. Kim and H.-B. Sun, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 11217 RSC .
X. Zhang, F. Shi, J. Niu, Y. Jiang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 621 RSC .
L. Cao, H.-H. Hu and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. Bormashenko, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 365, 4695 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Bormashenko, T. Stein, G. Whyman, Y. Bormashenko and R. Pogreb, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Liu, X.-Q. Feng, G. Wang and S.-W. Yu, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 356002/1 CAS .
F. J. Wang, S. Lei, J. F. Ou, M. S. Xue and W. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 276, 397 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koch, B. Bhushan and W. Barthlott, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 1943–1963 RSC .
H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy and F. Guittard, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rakitov and S. N. Gorb, Proc. R. Soc. B, 2013, 280, 20122391 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) J. Bico, U. Thiele and D. Quere, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 206, 41 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Kurogi, H. Yan and K. Tsujii, Colloids Surf., A, 2008, 317, 592 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. M. Fillion, A. R. Riahi and A. Edrisy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 32, 797 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Yingdi, L. Nengzhen, X. Xiangao, X. Yiming, Z. Qinghua and Z. Xiaoli, Progr. Chem., 2014, 26, 214 Search PubMed .

  (a) P. Tourkine, M. Le Merrer and D. Quéré, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7214 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. He, J. Wang, H. Li, X. Jin, J. Wang, B. Liu and Y. Song, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2396 RSC .
M. He, J. Wang, H. Lia and Y. Song, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 3993 RSC .
A. Alizadeh, M. Yamada, R. Li, W. Shang, S. Otta, S. Zhong, L. Ge, A. Dhinojwala, K. R. Conway, V. Bahadur, A. J. Vinciquerra, B. Stephens and M. L. Blohm, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Boinovich, A. M. Emelyanenko, V. V. Korolev and A. S. Pashinin, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 1659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jung, M. Dorrestijn, D. Raps, A. Das, C. M. Megaridis and D. Poulikakos, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Kulinich and M. Farzaneh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 8153 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, A. K. Jones, V. K. Sikka, J. Wu and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Meuler, J. D. Smith, K. K. Varanasi, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3100 CAS .
A. J. Meuler, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Kulinich and M. Farzaneh, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Sarshar, C. Swarctz, S. Hunter, J. Simpson and C.-H. Choi, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 291, 427 CAS .
J. B. Boreyko, B. R. Srijanto, T. D. Nguyen, C. Vega, M. Fuentes-Cabrera and C. P. Collier, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mishchenko, B. Hatton, V. Bahadur, J. A. Taylor, T. Krupenkin and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. A. Kulinich, S. Farhadi, K. Nose and X. W. Du, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. B. Boinovich, A. M. Emelyanenko, V. K. Ivanov and A. S. Pashinin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2549 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. A. Kulinich and M. Farzaneh, Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 2011, 65, 60 CrossRef ; 
  (d) S. Farhadi, M. Farzaneh and S. A. Kulinich, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 6264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Liu, M. He, K. Li, D. Cui, Q. Zhang, X. Zeng, Y. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 111603/1 CAS .
K. K. Varanasi, T. Deng, J. D. Smith, M. Hsu and N. Bhate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 234102/1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nosonovsky and V. Hejazi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Hejazi, K. Sobolev and M. Nosonovsky, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2194 Search PubMed .

  (a) T. Jing, Y. Kim, S. Lee, D. Kim, J. Kim and W. Hwang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 276, 37 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Wang, M. Wen, M. Zhang, L. Jiang and Y. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3312 RSC .
V. Bahadur, L. Mishchenko, B. Hatton, J. A. Taylor, J. Aizenberg and T. Krupenkin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ruan, W. Li, B. Wang, B. Deng, F. Ma and Z. Yu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Song, Y. Liu, S. Cui, L. Liu and M. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Xue, Q. Wang, Q. Chen and J. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3370 CAS .
L. Huang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Gou, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2011, 50, 432 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, B. Yang, Y. Zhang, G. Gu, M. Li and L. Mao, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2014, 69, 441 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Tang, X. Wu, W. Dai and Y. Qiu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 8818 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. Kim, T.-S. Wong, J. Alvarenga, M. J. Kreder, W. E. Adorno-Martinez and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6569 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. A. Stone, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ejenstam, L. Ovaskainen, I. Rodriguez-Meizoso, L. Wagberg, J. Pan, A. Swerin and P. M. Claesson, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 412, 56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu and J. Tian, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 445, 75 CAS .
J. Ou, W. Hu, M. Xue, F. Wang and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3101 CAS .
J. Ou, M. Liu, W. Li, F. Wang, M. Xue and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 258, 4724 CAS .
T. Ishizaki and M. Sakamoto, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, S. Szunerits, W. Xu and R. Boukherroub, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1150 CAS .
L. Feng, Y. Che, Y. Liu, X. Qiang and Y. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 367 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Dong, Y. Lei, T. Liu and Y. Yin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2587 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Iv, T. Xu and T. Liu, Corros. Sci., 2009, 51, 1757 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, R. Qiu, D. Zhang, Z. Lin and B. Hou, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 517 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, D. Zhang, R. Qiu and J. Wu, Corros. Sci., 2014, 83, 317 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, D. Zhang and R. Qiu, Corros. Sci., 2012, 54, 77 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, D. Zhang, R. Qiu and B. Hou, Corros. Sci., 2011, 53, 2080 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, Z. Chen, J. Liang, Y. Wang and H. Chen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 244, 1 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Zhao, Q. Liu, R. Gao, J. Wang, W. Yang and L. Liu, Corros. Sci., 2014, 80, 177 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Ning, W. Xu and S. Lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 1359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Yin, J. Zhang, S. Yu, Z. Han and L. Ren, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 395 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Rao, S. S. Latthe, S. A. Mahadik and C. Kappenstein, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 5772 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, C. Li, Z. Chen and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 6531 CrossRef CAS .
N. Valipour Motlagh, F. Ch. Birjandi, J. Sargolzaei and N. Shahtahmassebi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, S. Huang, S. Liu and W. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 7460 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Isimjan, T. Wang and S. Rohani, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 210, 182 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, Q. Liu, J. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Yang, J. Liu and L. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 241, 352 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, F. Xu, Z. Yu and P. Dong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 8928 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishizaki, J. Hieda, N. Saito, N. Saito and O. Takai, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7094 CrossRef CAS .
B. Grignard, A. Vaillant, J. de Coninck, M. Piens, A. M. Jonas, C. Detrembleur and C. Jerome, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuan, S. O. Pehkonen, B. Liang, Y. P. Ting, K. G. Neoh and E. T. Kang, Corros. Sci., 2011, 53, 2738 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Weng, C.-H. Chang, C.-W. Peng, S.-W. Chen, J.-M. Yeh, C.-L. Hsu and Y. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2075 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Peng, K.-C. Chang, C.-J. Weng, M.-C. Lai, C.-H. Hsu, S.-C. Hsu, Y.-Y. Hsu, W.-I. Hung, Y. Wei and J.-M. Yeh, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 95, 192 CrossRef CAS ; K.-C. Chang, H.-I. Lu, C.-W. Peng, M.-C. Lai, S.-C. Hsu, M.-H. Hsu, Y.-K. Tsai, C.-H. Chang, W.-I. Hung, Y. Wei and J.-M. Yeh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1460 Search PubMed .
D. Zhu, X. Lu and Q. Lu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 4671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Peng, K.-C. Chang, C.-J. Weng, M.-C. Lai, C.-H. Hsu, S.-C. Hsu, S.-Y. Li, Y. Wei and J.-M. Yeh, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 926 RSC .
A. C. C. de Leon, R. B. Pernites and R. C. Advincula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3169–3176 CAS .
Q. F. Xu and J. N. Wang, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 734 RSC .
C.-J. Weng, C.-H. Chang, I.-L. Lin, J.-M. Yeh, Y. Wei, C.-L. Hsu and P. H. Chen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 207, 42 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xu, Z. Z. Zhang, F. Guo, J. Yang and X. T. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 7054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, V. K. Truong, S. Pogodin, V. A. Baulin, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, R. J. Crawford and E. P. Ivanova, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2013, 97, 9257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yin, T. Liu and Y. Yin, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 17019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, B. Yin, T. He, N. Guo, L. Dong and Y. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4683 CAS .
L. Shen, B. Wang, J. Wang, J. Fu, C. Picart and J. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4476 CAS .
H. Yang, W. You, Q. Shen, X. Wang, J. Sheng, D. Cheng, X. Cao and C. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 2793 RSC .
J.-S. Chung, B. G. Kim, S. Shim, S.-E. Kim, E.-H. Sohn, J. Yoon and J.-C. Lee, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 366, 64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamauchi, Y. Yao, T. Ochiai, M. Sakai, Y. Kubota and G. Yamauchi, J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2011, 380979/1 Search PubMed .
Y. Yao, K. Yamauchi, G. Yamauchi, T. Ochiai, T. Murakami and Y. Kubota, J. Biomater. Nanobiotechnol., 2012, 3, 421 CrossRef .
M. S. Khalil-Abad and M. E. Yazdanshenas, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 351, 293 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Xue, J. Chen, W. Yin, S.-T. Jia and J.-Z. Ma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 2468 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Bayer, D. Fragouli, A. Attanasio, B. Sorce, G. Bertoni, R. Brescia, R. Di Corato, T. Pellegrino, M. Kalyva, S. Sabella, P. P. Pompa, R. Cingolani and A. Athanassiou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4024 CAS .
B. Simoncic, B. Tomsic, L. Cerne, B. Orel, I. Jerman, J. Kovac, M. Zerjav and A. Simoncic, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 340 CrossRef CAS .
A. Berendjchi, R. Khajavi and M. E. Yazdanshenas, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 594 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Simoncic, B. Tomsic, L. Cerne, B. Orel, I. Jerman, J. Kovac, M. Zerjav and A. Simoncic, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 340 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, H. Tan, D. Han, Q. Fu and L. Jiang, Small, 2005, 1, 959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Song, J. Yin and W. Ming, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9191 RSC .
J. Ballester-Beltrán, P. Rico, D. Moratal, W. Song, J. F. Mano and M. Salmerón-Sánchez, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 10803 RSC .
T. Ishizaki, N. Saito and O. Takai, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-J. Ko, E. Kim, S. Nagashima, K. H. Oh, K.-R. Lee, S. Kim and M.-W. Moon, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 8705 RSC .
E. S. Leibner, N. Barnthip, W. Chen, C. R. Baumrucker, J. V. Badding, M. Pishko and E. A. Vogler, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 1389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, L. Lin, Y. Yang, R. Hu, E. A. Vogler and C. Lin, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 8213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Han, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. Dong, F. Besenbacher, R. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9816 CAS .
J.-Y. Shiu and P. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2680 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Pernites, C. M. Santos, M. Maldonado, R. R. Ponnapati, D. F. Rodrigues and R. C. Advincula, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 870 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yoon, N. Rungraeng, W. Song and S. Jun, J. Food Eng., 2014, 131, 135 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, S. Liu, B. Li, H. Yang, C. Fan and W. Cui, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Wang and E. Levaenen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12003 RSC .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale and M. I. Newton, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e36983 CAS .
C. Jin, Y. Jiang, T. Niu and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12562 RSC .
C. P. Stallard, K. A. McDonell, O. D. Onayemi, J. P. O'Gara and D. P. Dowling, Biointerphases, 2012, 7, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Privett, J. Youn, S. A. Hong, J. Lee, J. Han, J. H. Shin and M. H. Schoenfisch, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Crick, S. Ismail, J. Pratten and I. P. Parkin, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 3722 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Freschauf, J. McLane, H. Sharma and M. Khine, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e40987 CAS .
E. Fadeeva, V. K. Truong, M. Stiesch, B. N. Chichkov, R. J. Crawford, J. Wang and E. P. Ivanova, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Y. Sun, K. Gleichauf, J. Lou and Q. Lin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Poncin-Epaillard, J. M. Herry, P. Marmey, G. Legeay, D. Debarnot and M. N. Bellon-Fontaine, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33, 1152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tarrade, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy, F. Guittard, D. Debarnot and F. Poncin-Epaillard, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 292, 782 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rawal, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Whyman and E. Bormashenko, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 8171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bormashenko, Colloids Surf., A, 2008, 324, 47 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoo, J. B. You, W. Choi and S. G. Im, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1664 RSC .

  (a) H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, A. Gestos, X. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Zou, S. Lin, Y. Tu, G. Liu, J. Hu, F. Li, L. Miao, G. Zhang, H. Luo, F. Liu, C. Hou and M. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11246 RSC .

  (a) Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, X. Wang and T. Lin, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6328 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. Deng, R. Cai, Y. Yu, H. Jiang, C. Wang, J. Li, L. Li, M. Yu, J. Li, L. Xie, Q. Huang and C. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Zhang, B. Li, L. Wu and A. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11509 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Wu, J. Zhang, B. Li and A. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4756 RSC ; 
  (c) H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, A. Gestos and T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1664 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7928 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 2036 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Tarrade, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy and F. Guittard, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 10848 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy and F. Guittard, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 433, 47 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy and F. Guittard, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5556 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy and F. Guittard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2896 RSC .

  (a) P. Conte, T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, React. Funct. Polym., 2014, 74, 46 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, A. Tuteja, S. Chhatre, J. M. Mabry, R. E. Cohen and G. H. McKinley, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2190 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Xue, J. Ding, L. Feng, X. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Leng, Z. Shao, G. de With and W. Ming, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. J. Artus, J. Zimmermann, F. A. Reifler, S. A. Brewer and S. Seeger, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 3835 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shillingford, N. MacCallum, T.-S. Wong, P. Kim and J. Aizenberg, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 014019/1 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Men and X. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 276, 571 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pereira, C. Alves, A. Monteiro, C. Magén, A. M. Pereira, A. Ibarra, M. R. Ibarra, P. B. Tavares, J. P. Araújo, G. Blanco, J. M. Pintado, A. P. Carvalho, J. Pires, M. F. R. Pereira and C. Freire, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2289 CAS .
D. D. Lovingood, W. B. Salter, K. R. Griffith, K. M. Simpson, J. D. Hearn and J. R. Owens, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 15043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Zhang, B. Li, P. Sun, J. Yang, H. Xu and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1277 CAS .
L. Wang, X. Zhang, B. Li, P. Sun, J. Yang, H. Xu and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1277 CAS .
W. Duan, A. Xie, Y. Shen, X. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 4441 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, X. Wang and T. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 286, 364 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Mohamed, M. A. El-Sheikh and A. I. Waly, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 102, 727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang and C. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 96, 396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tian, X. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14606 RSC .
Z. X. Jiang, L. Geng and Y. D. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 14, 9370 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, T. Yao, J. Wu, C. Ma, Z. Fan, Z. Wang, Y. Cheng, Q. Lin and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2613 CAS .
Q. Pan, M. Wang and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 6002 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. La, T. A. Nguyen, S. Lee, J. W. Kim and Y. S. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 5705 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, M. Du, K. Fu, N. Zhang and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5826 CAS .
F. Wang, S. Lei, M. Xue, J. Ou and W. Li, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 1281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang and Z. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 063704/1 CAS .
H. Li, Y. Li and Q. Liu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 183 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Tian, X. Zhang, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tian, Z. Guo, Y. Wang, W. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv.
Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 536 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Zheng, S. Liu, L. Ma, C. Zhu and Z. Xiong, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 224, 88 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Wang, F.-S. Tzeng, H.-G. Chen and C.-J. Chang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Chen, K. Qasim, J. Xia, W. Lei and B.-p. Wang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2012, 87, 427 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Zheng, L. Ma, C. Zhu and S. Lu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 25 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, Z. Sun, K. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Cao, S. Zhang and L. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1147 CAS .
H. Yang, X. Zhang, Z.-Q. Cai, P. Pi, D. Zheng, X. Wen, J. Cheng and Z.-r. Yang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2011, 205, 5387 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, P. Pi, Z.-Q. Cai, X. Wen, X. Wang, J. Cheng and Z.-r. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 4095 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee and S. Baik, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2192 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, N. Johnson, J. Drelich and Y. K. Yap, Carbon, 2011, 49, 669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Li, S. Cheng, G. Zou, C. Wang and Q. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2900 RSC .
C. R. Crick, J. A. Gibbins and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5943 CAS .
M. W. Lee, S. An, S. S. Latthe, C. Lee, S. Hong and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10597 CAS .
T. An, S. J. Cho, W. Choi, J. H. Kim, S. T. Lim and G. Lim, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9867 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Li, G. Wang, W. Liang, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, Z. Guo and W. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1827 CAS .
F. Liu, M. Ma, D. Zang, Z. Gao and C. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 103, 480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Geng, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and P. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 231, 414 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Deng, W. Wang, L.-H. Mao, C.-F. Wang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4178 CAS .
M. Zhang, C. Wang, S. Wang and J. Li, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 97, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Xue, P.-T. Ji, P. Zhang, Y.-R. Li and S.-T. Jia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 464 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, L. Liu, F. Ma and L. Liu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7132 RSC .
N. Chen and Q. Pan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Shi, F. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Jin and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, Y. Si, X. Tang, Z. Zhu, B. Ding, L. Liu, G. Zheng, W. Luo and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14071 CAS .
X. Tang, Y. Si, J. Ge, B. Ding, L. Liu, G. Zheng, W. Luo and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11657 RSC .
S. U. Patel and G. G. Chase, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 126, 62 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, D. Portehault, D. Liu, S. Qin and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1777 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zheng and A. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 213, 1 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, R. Karthikeyan, X.-Y. Lu, J. Xuan and M. K. H. Leung, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 18251 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Wu, C. Li, H.-W. Liang, Y.-N. Zhang, X. Wang, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4079 Search PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2014, 1, 214 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, Y. Chu, Z. Wang, N. Chen, L. Lin, F. Liu and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5386 CAS .
H. Sun, A. Li, Z. Zhu, W. Liang, X. Zhao, P. La and W. Deng, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guix, J. Orozco, M. Garcia, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. Merkoci, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li, H.-X. Sun, D.-Z. Tan, W.-J. Fan, S.-H. Wen, X.-J. Qing, G.-X. Li, S.-Y. Li and W.-Q. Deng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2062 CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Wu, B. Su, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ruan, K. Ai, X. Li and L. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Wei, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 665 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Liu, J. Zhou, Z. Xue, J. Gao, J. Meng, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Cheng, H. Lai, Y. Du, K. Fu, R. Hou, C. Li, N. Zhang and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. Wang and Z. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9416 RSC .
D. Tian, X. Zhang, Y. Tian, Y. Wu, X. Wang, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19652 RSC .
Q. Wen, J. Di, L. Jiang, J. Yu and R. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 591 RSC .
J. Zeng and Z. Guo, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 444, 283 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, D. Wang, J. Li, L. Jiang and J. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xue, S. Wang, L. Lin, L. Chen, M. Liu, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jing, H. Wang, K.-Y. Lin, P. J. McGinn, C. Na and Y. Zhu, Polymer, 2013, 54, 5771 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu and Q. Pan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, H. Xu and A. Takahara, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300092/1 Search PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Liu, C. Fu, K. Li, L. Tao, L. Feng and Y. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2026 CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Zhang and P. Wang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 44, e8 CrossRef .
T. Darmanin, J. Tarrade, E. Celia and F. Guittard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2052 CAS .
T. Darmanin, J. Tarrade, E. Celia, H. Bellanger and F. Guittard, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 382 CrossRef CAS .
T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 5982 RSC .
A. K. Kota, Y. Li, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, A. K. Kota, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 408, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Taleb, T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7953 CAS .
J. A. Howarter and J. P. Youngblood, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3838 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Howarter and J. P. Youngblood, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Zhu, X. Men and X. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2834 RSC .
Z. Ma, Y. Hong, L. Ma and M. Su, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, Y. Si, F. Fu, J. Wang, J. Yang, L. Cui, B. Ding, J. Yu and G. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2248 RSC .
J. Yang, A. Raza, Y. Si, L. Cui, J. Ge, B. Ding and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 4, 7549 Search PubMed .
S. J. Cho, H. Nam, H. Ryu and G. Lim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5577 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Wang, M. Zhu and B. S. Hsiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2423 CAS .
D. Yoon, C. Lee, J. Yun, W. Jeon, B. J. Cha and S. Baik, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Xie, F. Shen, H. Yan, H. Wu, Y. Wan, M. Yu, H. Ma, L. Li and J. Li, RSC Adv., 214, 4, 16561 Search PubMed.
Y. Liao, R. Wang and A. G. Fane, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 440, 77 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X.-M. Lia, J. Gilron, D.-f. Kong, Y. Yin, Y. Oren, C. Linder and T. He, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 456, 155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Song, B. Li, Q. Wang and S. Wang, Desalination, 2013, 324, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. Razmjou, E. Arifin, G. Dong, J. Mansouri and V. Chen, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 415–416, 850 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meng, J. Mansouri, Y. Ye and V. Chen, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 450, 48 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Xie, F. Shen, H. Yan, H. Wu, Y. Wan, M. Yu, H. Ma, L. Li and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16561 RSC .
S. S. Madaeni, S. Zinadini and V. Vatanpour, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 111, 98 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimoto, M. Becchaku, Y. Kameshima, Y. Shirosaki, S. Hayakawa, A. Osaka and M. Miyake, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 558, 221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Jin, Y. Li, H.-W. Huang, C. Wang, M. Wu, L.-H. Chen and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5051 CAS .
H. Cao, Y. Xiao, Y. Lu, J. Yin, B. Li, S. Wu and X. Wu, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 863 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, H. Zheng, K. Liu and R. Fu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 597 CAS .
M. Macias-Montero, A. Borras, Z. Saghi, P. Romero-Gomez, J. R. Sanchez-Valencia, J. C. Gonzalez, A. Barranco, P. Midgley, J. Cotrino and A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1341 RSC .
C. R. Crick, J. C. Bear, A. Kafizas and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamegawa, Y. Shimizu and H. Yamashita, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Shen, A. Xie, L. Qiu, S. Li and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9641 RSC .
G. D. Bixler and B. Bhushan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 76 RSC .
G. D. Bixler and B. Bhushan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7685 RSC .
B. Bhushan, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. I. Vinogradova and A. L. Dubov, Mendeleev Commun., 2012, 22, 229 CrossRef CAS .
G. McHale, M. R. Flynn and M. I. Newton, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 10100 RSC .
B. Su, M. Li and Q. Lu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee and C.-J. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 014502/1 CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Li, B. Su and Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3301 RSC .
G. McHale, M. I. Newton and N. J. Shirtcliffe, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 714 RSC .
O. I. Vinogradova, N. F. Bunkin, N. V. Churaev, O. A. Kiseleva, A. V. Lobeyev and B. W. Ninham, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1995, 173, 443 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cottin-Bizonne, J.-L. Barrat, L. Bocquet and E. Charlaix, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Belyaev and O. I. Vinogradova, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 4563 RSC .
R. J. Daniello, N. E. Waterhouse and J. P. Rothstein, Phys. Fluids, 2009, 21, 085103/1 CAS .
M. B. Martell, J. B. Perot and J. P. Rothstein, J. Fluid Mech., 2009, 620, 31 CrossRef .
B. R. Elbing, E. S. Winkel, K. A. Lay, S. L. Ceccio, D. R. Dowling and M. Perlin, J. Fluid Mech., 2008, 612, 201 Search PubMed .
J. Ou and J. P. Rothstein, Phys. Fluids, 2005, 17, 103606/1 CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Xue, X. Pei, M. Cai, H. Duan, W. T. S. Huck, F. Zhou and Q. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 218, 2564 Search PubMed .
M. Wilson, Phys. Today, 2009, 62, 16 CAS .
J. Zhou, A. V. Belyaev, F. Schmid and O. I. Vinogradova, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 194706/1 CAS .
A. V. Belyaev and O. I. Vinogradova, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 098301/1 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Nizkaya, E. S. Asmolov and O. I. Vinogradova, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 11671 RSC .
Y. P. Cheng, C. J. Teo and B. C. Khoo, Phys. Fluids, 2009, 21, 122004/1 CAS .
M. A. Samaha, H. V. Tafreshi and M. Gal-el-Hak, Phys. Fluids, 2011, 23, 012001/1 CAS .
S. Lyu, D. C. Nguyen, D. Kim, W. Hwang and B. Yoon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 286, 206 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ming, L. Jian, W. Chunxia, Z. Xiaokang and C. Lan, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4391 RSC .
Y. C. Jung and B. Bhushan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vourdas, A. Tserepi, A. G. Boudouvic and E. Gogolides, Microelectron. Eng., 2008, 85, 1124 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mumm, A. T. J. van Helvoort and P. Sikorski, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schatz, J. V. Vykoukal and P. R. C. Gascoyne, Lab Chip, 2004, 4, 11 RSC .
J. Zhou, S. Yang, X. Y. Zeng, J. H. Wu, G. P. Chen and Y. P. Huang, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2012, 26, 2087 CAS .
Y. Zhao and S. K. Cho, Lab Chip, 2006, 6, 137 RSC .
S. Xing, R. S. Harake and T. Pan, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 3642 RSC .
G. Londe, A. Chunder, A. Wesser, L. Zhai and H. J. Cho, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 132, 431 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Draper, C. R. Crick, V. Orlickaite, V. A. Turek, I. P. Parkin and J. B. Edel, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 5405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong and T. Pan, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2011, 10, 991 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Zhao, H.-M. Fan, J. Luo, J. Ding, X.-Y. Liu, B.-S. Zou and Y.-P. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 184 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Willmott, C. Neto and S. C. Hency, Faraday Discuss., 2010, 146, 233 RSC .
Y.-H. Chang, Y.-T. Huang, M. K. Lo, C.-F. Lin, C.-M. Chen and S.-P. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1985 CAS .
F. Lapierre, M. Jonsson-Niedziolka, Y. Coffinier, R. Boukherroub and V. Thomy, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2013, 15, 327 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Krupenkin, J. A. Taylor, T. M. Schneider and S. Yang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barberoglou, V. Zorba, A. Pagozidis, C. Fotakis and E. Stratakis, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Campbell, M. Breedon, K. Latham and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, B. Tay, C. Tan, M. Shakerzadeh and K. Ostrikov, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, T. Stein, G. Whyman and M. Hakham-Itzhaq, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 264102/1 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kumari and S. V. Garimella, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Torkkeli, J. Saarilahti, A. Haara, H. Harla, T. Soukka and P. Tolonen, Proc. IEEE MEMS 2001,  2001, p. 475 Search PubMed .
A. Accardo, F. Mecarini, M. Leoncini, F. Brandi, E. Di Cola, M. Burghammer, C. Riekel and E. Di Fabrizio, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 332 RSC .
N. Verplanck, E. Galopin, J.-C. Camart, V. Thomy, Y. Coffinier and R. Boukherroub, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lapierre, V. Thomy, Y. Coffinier, R. Blossey and R. Boukherroub, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Verplanck, Y. Coffinier, V. Thomy and R. Boukherroub, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2007, 2, 577 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brunet, F. Lapierre, Y. Coffinier, V. Thomy and R. Boukherroub, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lapierre, Y. Coffinier, V. Thomy and R. Boukherroub, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lee, S. Lee and K. H. Kang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 081604/1 Search PubMed .
W. Y. L. Ling, A. Neild and T. W. Ng, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 17656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Dhindsa, N. R. Smith, J. Heikenfeld, P. D. Rack, J. D. Fowlkes, M. J. Doktycz, A. V. Melechko and M. L. Simpson, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Egatz-Gomez, J. Schneider, P. Aella, D. Yang, P. Dominguez-Garcia, S. Lindsay, S. T. Picraux, M. A. Rubio, S. Melle, M. Marquez and A. A. Garcia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 254, 330 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prakash, D. P. Papageorgiou, A. G. Papathanasiou and K. V. I. S. Kaler, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 182, 351 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Mumm, A. T. J. van Helvoort and P. Sikorski, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2647 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Koc, A. J. de Mello, G. McHale, M. I. Newton, P. Roach and N. J. Shirtcliffe, Lab Chip, 2008, 8, 582 RSC .
S. M. Oliveira, W. Song, N. M. Alves and J. F. Mano, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 8932 RSC .
C. Lu, Y. Xie, Y. Yang, M. M.-C. Cheng, C.-G. Koh, Y. Bai and L. J. Lee, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. S. Freire and B. Tanner, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tsougeni, P. S. Petrou, D. P. Papageorgiou, S. E. Kakabakos, A. Tserepi and E. Gogolides, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 216 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Cao, J. Ju, K. Li, S. Dou, K. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3235 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Heng, M. Xiang, Z. Lu and C. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8032 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Ju, H. Bai, Y. Zheng, T. Zhao, R. Fang and L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1247 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Roth-Nebelsick, M. Ebner, T. Miranda, V. Gottschalk, D. Voigt, S. Gorb, T. Stegmaier, J. Sarsour, M. Linke and W. Konrad, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2012, 9, 1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. G. Andrews, E. A. Eccles, W. C. E. Schofield and J. P. S. Badyal, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Zheng, H. Bai, Z. Huang, X. Tian, F.-Q. Nie, Y. Zhao, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Nature, 2010, 463, 640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhai, M. C. Berg, F. C. Cebeci, Y. Kim, J. M. Milwid, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Tsougeni, D. Papageorgiou, A. Tserepi and E. Gogolides, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 462–469 RSC ; 
  (b) F. Lapierre, G. Piret, H. Drobecq, O. Melnyk, Y. Coffinier, V. Thomy and R. Boukherroub, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 1620 RSC .

  (a) M. P. Sousa and J. F. Mano, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3731 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. P. Sousa and J. F. Mano, Cellulose, 2013, 20, 2185 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Elsharkawy, T. M. Schutzius and C. M. Megaridis, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 1168 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Xing, J. Jiang and T. Pan, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 1937 RSC .
J. Zhao, X. Zhang, N. Chen and Q. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3706 CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Zhao, Q. Zhu, N. Chen, M. Zhang and Q. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2630 CAS .
Q. Pan and M. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 420 CAS .
H. Jin, M. Kettunen, A. Laiho, H. Pynnoenen, J. Paltakari, A. Marmur, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, X. Guo, M. Cheng, G. Ju, Y. Zhang and F. Shi, Small, 2014, 10, 859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, M. Cheng, Y. Zhang and F. Shi, Small, 2013, 9, 2509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tian, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 44, 5184 RSC .
K. Nakata, S. Nishimoto, A. Kubo, D. Tryk, T. Ochiai, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nishimoto, A. Kubo, K. Nohara, X. Zhang, N. Taneichi, T. Okui, Z. Liu, K. Nakata, H. Sakai, T. Murakami, M. Abe, T. Komine and A. Fujishima, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 6221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao and K.-L. Law, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4288 CAS .
H. Zhao, K.-L. Law and V. Sambhy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao and K.-L. Law, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rahmawan, L. Xu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2955 CAS .
J. Bravo, L. Zhai, Z. Wu, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Z. Zhang, G. Ren, X. Men, B. Ge and X. Zhou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 421, 141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Zhang, J.-N. Wang, Y. He, Y. He, B.-B. Xu, S. Wei and F.-S. Xiao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vukusic and J. R. Sambles, Nature, 2003, 424, 852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-y. Takemura, D. G. Stavenga and K. Arikawa, J. Exp. Biol., 2007, 210, 3075 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Parker, Z. Hegedus and R. A. Watts, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 1998, 265, 811 CrossRef .

  (a) P. Qu, F. Chen, H. Liu, Q. Yang, J. Lu, J. Si, Y. Wang and X. Hou, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 5775 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Huang, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 025602/1 CAS .
W.-L. Min, B. Jiang and P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3914 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zhu, H. Dong, F. Jia, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, L. Zhang, S. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kiraly, S. Yang and T. J. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 245704/1 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cao, X. Song, J. Zhai, J. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15858 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Nishikawa, S. Sakiyama, S. Yamazoe, Y. Kojima, E.-i. Nishihara, T. Tsujioka, H. Mayama, S. Yokojima, S. Nakamura and K. Uchida, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Liu, P.-L. Niu and C.-K. Sung, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 015401/1 CAS .

          X. Gao, Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology,  2012, p. 117 Search PubMed .
K. Rykaczewski, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rykaczewski, W. A. Osborn, J. Chinn, M. L. Walker, J. H. J. Scott, W. Jones, C. Hao, S. Yao and Z. Wang, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 8786 RSC .
R. D. Narhe and D. A. Beysens, Europhys. Lett., 2006, 75, 98 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chen, Q. Cai, C. Tsai, C.-L. Chen, G. Xiong, Y. Yu and Z. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 173108/1 CAS .
K.-C. Park, H. J. Choi, C.-H. Chang, R. E. Cohen, G. H. McKinley and G. Barbastathis, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manakasettarn, T.-H. Hsu, G. Myhre, S. Pau, J. A. Taylor and T. Krupenkin, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 214 CrossRef .
Y. Lai, Y. Tang, J. Gong, D. Gong, L. Chi, C. Lin and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7420 RSC .
N. L. Tarwal, A. V. Rajgure, A. I. Inamdar, R. S. Devan, I. Y. Kim, S. S. Suryavanshi, Y. R. Ma, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Sens. Actuators, A, 2013, 199, 67 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Athauda, P. Hari and R. R. Ozer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6237 CAS .
S. He, M. Zheng, L. Yao, X. Yuan, M. Li, L. Ma and W. Shen, Appl. Surf.
Sci., 2010, 256, 2557 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Ji, W. C. Lu and H. P. Ma, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2012, 47, 1121 CrossRef CAS .

          M. G. Gong, Y. Z. Long, X. L. Xu, H. D. Zhang and B. Sun, in Nanowires: Recent Advances, ed. X. Peng, InTech,  2012, ch. 5, p. 77 Search PubMed .
Z. Guo, X. Chen, J. Li, J.-H. Liu and X.-J. Huang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jia, B. Jia, X. Wu and F. Qu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7759 RSC .
S. Schicho, A. Jaouad, C. Sellmer, D. Morris, V. Aimez and R. Ares, Mater. Lett., 2013, 94, 86 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shen, N. Uesawa, S. Inasawa and Y. Yamaguchi, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pakdel, Y. Bando, D. Shtansky and D. Goldberg, Surf. Innovations, 2013, 1, 32 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, Y. Xiao and R. Liang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5688 RSC .
Y. Xiao, H. Cao, K. Liu, S. Zhang and V. Chernow, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 145601/1 CAS .
Y. W. Hu, H. R. He and Y. M. Ma, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 412, 163 CrossRef .
R. Su, H. Liu, T. Kong, Q. Song, N. Li, G. Jin and G. Cheng, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 13220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shen, C. Hou, S. Liu and Z. Guan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 40400 Search PubMed .
B. N. Sahoo and B. Kandasubramanian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11331 RSC .
X. Fan, X. Li, D. Tian, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 366, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Yang, C.-F. Wang, Q.-L. Chen and S. Chen, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 291, 717 CAS .
L. Zhu, S. Yang, J. Yang, C.-F. Wang, L. Chen and S. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2013, 99, 54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, C.-F. Wang and S. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 11590 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hou, C. Wang, L. Chen and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3863 RSC .
M. Yoon, Y. Kim and J. Cho, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, W. Hou and Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 664 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsukizono and R.-H. Jin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sato, S. Kubo and Z.-Z. Gu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Mason, J. Phys. Chem., 1926, 30, 383 CrossRef CAS .
M. Srinivasarao, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yong, Q. Yang, F. Chen, D. Zhang, G. Du, H. Bian, J. Si and X. Hou, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8138 RSC .
P. P. Goodwyn, Y. Maezono, N. Hosoda and K. Fujisaki, Naturwissenschaften, 2009, 96, 781 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kasukawa, N. Oshima and R. Fujii, Zool. Sci., 1987, 4, 243 Search PubMed .
J. N. Lythgoe and J. Shand, J. Physiol., 1982, 325, 23 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Maethger, M. F. Land, U. E. Siebeck and N. J. Marshall, J. Exp. Biol., 2003, 206, 3607 CrossRef .
A. R. Tao, D. G. DeMartini, M. Izumi, A. M. Sweeney, A. L. Holt and D. E. Morse, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Welch, J. P. Vigneron, V. Lousse and A. Parker, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2006, 73, 041916/1 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Parker, V. L. Welch, D. Driver and N. Martini, Nature, 2003, 426, 786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rassart, P. Simonis, A. Bay, O. Deparis and J. P. Vigneron, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2009, 80, 031910/1 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Vigneron, J. M. Pasteels, D. M. Windsor, Z. Vértesy, M. Rassart, T. Seldrum, J. Dumont, O. Deparis, V. Lousse, L. P. Biró, D. Ertz and V. Welch, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2007, 76, 031907/1 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles, C. R. Lawrence and R. J. Wootton, Nature, 2001, 410, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles and C. R. Lawrence, Nature, 2000, 404, 457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Shiu, C.-W. Kuo, P. Chen and C.-Y. Mou, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 561 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, D. Wang, Z.-Z. Gu and H. Moehwald, Langmuir, 2005, 16, 9143 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Xue and Y. Han, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Han, X. Xu and K. Cho, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 6662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, X.-W. Zhao, H. Xu, R. Zhu and Z.-Z. Gu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 316, 168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, B. Gates, Y. Yin and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 693 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fudouzi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 064704/1 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cong, B. Yu, S. Wang, L. Qi, J. Wang and Y. Ma, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 17831 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-N. Wang, R.-Q. Shao, Y.-L. Zhang, L. Guo, H.-B. Jiang, D.-X. Lu and H.-B. Sun, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ge, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 1539 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Shinohara, T. Seki, T. Sakai, R. Yoshida and Y. Takeoka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tian, J. Wang, Y. Zheng, Y. Song, L. Song and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1116 RSC .
A. M. Brozell, M. A. Muha, A. Abed-Amoli, D. Bricarello and A. N. Parikh, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tian, Y. Ma, L. Cui, J. Wang, Y. Song, L. Song and D. Zhu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Men, H. Ge, Z. Sun, Y. Zheng, Y. Song and D. Zhu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2006, 207, 596 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Ren, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cui, Y. Li, J. Wang, E. Tian, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5499 CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Zhou, B. Su, L. Shi, J. Wang, S. Chen, L. Wang, J. Zi, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Wen, X. Feng, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 188 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Z. Gu, H. Uetsuka, K. Takahashi, R. Nakajima, H. Onishi, A. Fujishima and O. Sato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Z. Gu, A. Fujishima and O. Sato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 114, 2171 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Wen, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2262 RSC .
J. Zhou, H. Li, L. Ye, J. Liu, J. Wang, T. Zhao, L. Jiang and Y. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22303 CAS .
L. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3554 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lie, G. Liang, X. Zhu and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2980 CrossRef .
D. Wu, Q.-D. Chen, H. Xia, J. Jiao, B.-B. Xu, X.-F. Lin, Y. Xu and H.-B. Sun, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 263 RSC .
Y. Liu, A. Das, S. Xu, Z. Lin, C. Xu, Z. L. Wang, A. Rohatgi and C. P. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 47 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, I. Gereige, A. El Labban, D. Cha, T. T. Isimjan and P. M. Beaujuge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2219 CAS .
R. Asmatulu, M. Ceylan and N. Nuraje, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.
C. Barshilia, S. John and V. Mahajan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 219 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-B. Park, H. Im, M. Im and Y.-K. Choi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 633 RSC .
J.-H. Kong, T.-H. Kim, J. H. Kim, J.-K. Park, D.-W. Lee, S.-H. Kim and J.-M. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1453 RSC .
S.-H. Lee, K.-S. Han, J.-H. Shin, S.-Y. Hwang and H. Lee, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1056 CAS .
S. Y. Heo, J. K. Koh, G. Kang, S. H. Ahn, W. S. Chi, K. Kim and J. H. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300632/1 CAS .
J. Zhu, C.-M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Panagiotopoulos, E. K. Diamanti, L. E. Koutsokeras, M. Baikousi, E. Kordatos, T. E. Matikas, D. Gournis and P. Patsalas, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10475 CAS .
A. Milionis, R. Giannuzzi, I. S. Bayer, E. L. Papadopoulou, R. Ruffilli, M. Manca and A. Athanassiou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7139 CAS .
V. A. Lifton, S. Simon and R. E. Frahm, Bell Lab. Tech. J., 2005, 10, 81 CrossRef .

          V. A. Lifton and S. Simon, NSTI Nanotech 2005, NSTI Nanotechnology Conference and Trade Show, Anaheim, CA, United States,  2005, vol. 2, p. 726 Search PubMed .

          V. Lifton and S. Simon, Proc. Power Sources Conf.,  2006, 42nd, p. 123 Search PubMed .
V. A. Lifton, J. A. Taylor, B. Vyas, P. Kolodner, R. Cirelli, N. Basavanhally, A. Papazian, R. Frahm, S. Simon and T. Krupenkin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 043112/1 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, N. Chen, F. Tao and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15894 RSC .
W. Li, X. Wang, Z. Chen, M. Waje and Y. Yan, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Tan, F. Yan, L. I. Crouch, J. Robertson, M. R. Jones and M. E. Welland, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5556 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Wang, M.-L. Zheng, W.-Q. Chen, F. Jin, Y.-Y. Cao, Z.-S. Zhao and X.-M. Duan, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Shi, Z. Wen and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9977 CAS .
H. K. Lee, Y. H. Lee, Q. Zhang, I. Y. Phang, J. M. R. Tan, Y. Cui and X. Y. Ling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11409 CAS .
S. Yang, P. J. Hricko, P.-H. Huang, S. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Xie, F. Guo, L. Wang and T. J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 542 RSC .
Y. Hu, S. Liu, S. Huang and W. Pan, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 1314 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-X. Zhang, Y.-X. Chen, Z. Guo, H.-L. Liu, D.-P. Wang and X.-J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10633 CAS .
B.-B. Xu, Y.-L. Zhang, W.-Y. Zhang, X.-Q. Liu, J.-N. Wang, X.-L. Zhang, D.-D. Zhang, H.-B. Jiang, R. Zhang and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 56 CrossRef .
F. Gentile, M. L. Coluccio, N. Coppede, F. Mecarini, G. Das, C. Liberale, L. Tirinato, M. Leoncini, G. Perozziello, P. Candeloro, F. De Angelis and E. Di Fabrizio, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3213 CAS .
F. Gentile, M. L. Coluccio, A. Accardo, G. Marinaro, E. Rondanina, S. Santoriello, S. Marras, G. Das, L. Tirinato, G. Perozziello, F. De Angelis, C. Dorigoni, P. Candeloro and E. Di Fabrizio, Microelectron. Eng., 2012, 97, 349 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gentile, G. Das, M. L. Coluccio, F. Mecarini, A. Accardo, L. Tirinato, R. Tallerico, G. Cojoc, C. Liberale, P. Candeloro, P. Decuzzi, F. De Angelis and E. Di Fabrizio, Microelectron. Eng., 2010, 87, 798 CrossRef CAS .
N. Andreeva, T. Ishizaki, P. Baroch and N. Saito, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 164, 15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, X. Yu, J. Jia, S.-T. Tu, J. Yan and E. Dahlquist, Appl. Energy, 2012, 90, 167 CrossRef CAS .
R. Begag, H. Krutka, W. Dong, D. Mihalcik, W. Rhine, G. Gould, J. Baldic and P. Nahass, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 30 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Liu, S. Mopidevi, Y. Meng, F. Huang, J. Parisi, M.-P. Nieh, C. Cornelius, S. L. Suib and Y. Lei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 52 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Cho, S. E. Kim, E. Seo, M. C. Lee, J. M. Lee and J. S. Ko, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 188, 347 CrossRef CAS .
K. Malzahn, J. R. Windmiller, G. Valdes-Ramirez, M. J. Schoening and J. Wang, Analyst, 2011, 136, 2912 RSC .
Y. Zhao, M. Qin, A. Wang and D. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wang, L. Yang and Y. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3258 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Chang, J. Wang, L. Yang and Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5098 RSC .
F. Song, H. Su, J. Han, D. Zhang and Z. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 495502/1 CAS .
S. J. Williams and G. J. Davie, Trends Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. James, K. R. A. S. Sandanayake and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1996, 35, 1910 CrossRef .
G. Qing, X. Wang, L. Jiang, H. Fuchs and T. Sun, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 2759 RSC .
G. Qing, X. Wang, H. Fuchs and T. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Feng, H. Zhao, J. Zhan, D. Tian and H. Li, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, Y. Lei, H. Fu and J. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1594 CAS .
H. He, Y. Yuan, W. Wang, N.-R. Chiou, A. J. Epstein and L. J. Lee, Biomicrofluidics, 2009, 3, 022401/1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nie, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, S. Wang and G. Shen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 33, 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Li, J. Nie, Y. Zhang, G. Shen and R. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Neto, C. A. Custodio, W. Song and J. F. Mano, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4147 RSC .
A. Ressine, G. Marko-Varga and T. Laurell, Biotechnol. Annu. Rev., 2007, 13, 149 CAS .
A. Ressine, D. Finnskog, G. Marko-Varga and T. Laurell, Nanobiotechnology, 2008, 4, 18 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ebrahimi, P. Dak, E. Salm, S. Dash, S. V. Garimella, R. Bashir and M. A. Alam, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 4248 RSC .
A. C. Lima, C. A. Custodio, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and J. F. Mano, Small, 2013, 9, 2487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Accardo, L. Tirinato, D. Altamura, T. Sibillano, C. Giannini, C. Riekel and E. Di Fabrizio, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2295 RSC .
A. Accardo, F. Gentile, F. Mecarini, F. De Angelis, M. Burghammer, E. Di Fabrizio and C. Riekel, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lai, L. Lin, F. Pan, J. Huang, R. Song, Y. Huang, C. Lin, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, Small, 2013, 9, 2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Liu, A. Zhu, Y. Luo, Z. Deng and Y. Tian, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gentile, M. L. Coluccio, E. Rondanina, S. Santoriello, D. Di Mascolo, A. Accardo, M. Francardi, F. De Angelis, P. Candeloro and E. Di Fabrizio, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 111, 272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H. Zhang, Q. Yang, M. Li, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Yohe, Y. L. Colson and M. W. Grinstaff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Yohe, V. L. M. Herrera, Y. L. Colson and M. W. Grinstaff, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 162, 92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Yohe, J. A. Kopechek, T. M. Porter, Y. L. Colson and M. W. Grinstaff, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 1204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Manna, M. J. Kratochvil and D. M. Lynn, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Puga, A. C. Lima, J. F. Mano, A. Concheiro and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 98, 331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song, A. C. Lima and J. F. Mano, Chem. Commun., 2010, 6, 5868 CAS .
A. C. Lima, W. Song, B. Blanco-Fernandez, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and J. F. Mano, Pharm. Res., 2011, 28, 1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Sun, L. Zhu, X. Meng and F.-S. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, W. Li, Q. Sun, L. Zhu, X. Meng, Y.-H. Guo and F.-S. Xiao, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Noshadi, R. K. Kumar, B. Kanjilal, R. Parnas, H. Liu, J. Li and F. Liu, Catal. Lett., 2013, 143, 792 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xia, F. Liu, C. Wang, S. Zuo and C. Qi, Catal. Commun., 2012, 26, 140 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Y. Jin, L. Zhu, L. Wang, X. Meng and F.-S. Xiao, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 342 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. Xu, Q. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Zhou and M. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1336 RSC .
S. Shi, M. Wang, C. Chen, J. Gao, H. Ma, J. Ma and J. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9591 RSC .
H. Li, J. Liao, Y. Du, T. You, W. Liao and L. Wen, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1768 RSC .
X.-M. Zhou, W. Chen and Y.-F. Song, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 2014, 812 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, L. Xiao, X. Liu, S. Li, H. Kobayashi, X. Zheng and J. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6954 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Thierry Darmanin	Dr Thierry Darmanin obtained his PhD degree in 2008 from the Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis (France) under the supervision of Prof. Frederic Guittard. He was then a postdoctoral fellow with Dr François Rossi at the Joint Research Centre (European Commission, Ispra, Italy). His work involved the elaboration and characterization of nanoparticles. In 2009, he rejoined Prof. Frederic Guittard as an Associate Professor. His research interests focus on superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces, the electrochemical processes of deposition and bio-inspired and biomimetic materials and systems. He has co-authored more than 50 journal papers.
Frédéric Guittard	Dr Frédéric Guittard is a Full Professor at the Univ. Nice Sophia Antipolis (France) in the Laboratory Physics of Condensed Matter (LPMC) with more than 20 years of experience in organic and fluorine chemistry, surfaces & interfaces, bioinspired and advanced materials, and surface wettability. His present research interests include bioinspired and biobased chemistry & materials. He has co-authored more than 100 journal papers and attended 50 international conferences as an invited speaker.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Picture of superhydrophobic peanut leaves; (b) superhydrophobic Salvinia leaves with hydrophilic pins for air retention; (c) picture of a superhydrophobic lupin with superhydrophilic channels to guide water droplets; (d) picture of a blue Morpho aega with directional adhesion; (e) picture of a water strider capable of walking on water; (f) picture of superoleophobic Folsomia candida; (g) picture of a gecko capable of walking on vertical surfaces;19 (h) picture of cicada with superhydrophobic and self-cleaning wings. Panel a reprinted with permission from ref. 4, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; Panel b reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH; Panel c reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society; Panel d reprinted with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; Panel e reprinted with permission from ref. 17, copyright 2010, Elsevier B.V.; Panel f reprinted with permission from ref. 6, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; Panel h reprinted with permission from ref. 5, copyright 2013, PNAS.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of a water droplet on a (a) smooth surface, following the Young–Dupre equation, and on a rough surface, following (b) the Wenzel equation and (c) the Cassie–Baxter equation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of (a) a smooth surface without self-cleaning properties and (b) a superhydrophobic surface with self-cleaning properties (Cassie–Baxter state).30	 

 	Fig. 4  Relationship of cosθ with cosθY: the black and blue lines correspond to the Wenzel state and the Cassie–Baxter state while the red dotted and red dashed lines correspond to the metastable Cassie–Baxter state when θY > 90° and the metastable Cassie–Baxter state when θY < 90°. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Superoleophobic bronchosomes observed at the surface of leafhoppers (Insecta, Hemiptera, Cicadellidae). Scale bars: 50 nm (a and b), 100 nm (c and e) and 1 μm (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, The Royal Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Normal and shear forces during the loading of (a) a water droplet and (b) an ice frozen droplet on a flat and (c) textured (Cassie–Baxter state) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of a slippery, liquid-infused porous surface (SLIPS) for anti-icing coatings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67b, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Mechanism of corrosion of (a) superhydrophobic and (b) hydrophobic metals; (c) experiments on inclined superhydrophobic films with self-cleaning properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cu[CH3(CH2)11N]2C nanostructures by electrochemical oxidation of Cu in the presence of laurylamine at a voltage of (a) 5 V and (b) 50 V. (c) Picture of a superhydrophobic film immersed into 3.5% NaCl solution. Scale bars: 100 μm (a) and 20 μm (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  Superhydrophobic surfaces with anticorrosive properties obtained by soft lithography and using natural Xanthosoma sagittifolium leaves as molds. The inset represents Tafel plots for different materials measured in 3.5 wt% NaCl aqueous solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Picture of cicada Psaltoda claripennis with nanopatterned superhydrophobic wings; (b–d) SEM images of the wings with dead bacteria. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Mechanism of Ag+ ions released on a polyelectrolyte superhydrophobic film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Cell adhesion on micropatterned superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Effect of irradiation on protein adsorption and cell adhesion of GaN nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the sagging of the liquid–air composite interface on the fiber surface in an electrospun nonwoven mat. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Grafting of SiO2 nanoparticles onto cotton fabrics by functionalizing them with azido groups. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144a, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Superoleophobic textiles modified by mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles and a perfluorinated silane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Liquid wetting model of nanostructured meshes as a function of the hydrostatic pressure (ΔP).164	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) SEM images of Cu(OH)2 nanoneedles on meshes. (b) Schematic representation of a water droplet and (c) a liquid wetting model after modification with a 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid and 1-dodecanethiol mixture in acidic/neutral and basic media. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Aligned ZnO nanorod array-coated stainless steel mesh film obtained by dip-coating of ZnO sol and immersion in Zn(NO3)2·6H2O.164	 

 	Fig. 21  Experimental process of separation of oil and water.172	 

 	Fig. 22  (a and b) Silica nanofibrous membranes obtained by modification with Al2O3 nanoparticles and a fluorinated monomer derived from benzoxazine and in situ polymerization at 200 °C; (c) schematic representation of the oil–water separation experiment.197	 

 	Fig. 23  Superhydrophobic sponge with absorbency and flame retardancy obtained by modifying melamine–formaldehyde sponges with a polydopamine layer and a perfluorinated thiol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  Immobilization of Fe3O4 nanoparticles onto polyurethane foams and application for oil–water separation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Superhydrophilic and superoleophobic materials for oil–water separation by coating of poly(diallyldimethylammonium perfluorooctanoate).232	 

 	Fig. 26  Superhydrophobic membranes with arrays of nanospiked microchannels for water desalination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Fluorinated polyurethane segments to produce (b and b) superoleophobic nanofibrous membranes with (d and e) high air permeability.234	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) TEM images of In(OH)3 nanocubes with a photocatalytic effect on the (b) degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) dye. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Rice leaves (Oryza sativa) and butterfly wings (Blue Morpho didius) with low drag (anisotropic flow) and self-cleaning properties due to the presence of grooves and scales, respectively.255	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Alchemilla (Lady's Mantle) with highly “sticky” superhydrophobic leaves (Wenzel state) to collect water and superhydrophilic channels to guide the water to the stem; (b) artificial superhydrophilic channels surrounded by superhydrophobic walls. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  Picture of a microrobot with superhydrophobic legs capable of moving on water like a water strider. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Improvement of the impression to paper from a superoleophobic fuser surface composed of (b) textured pillars; (c) water and hexadecane droplets on the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 334, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 33  Fingers coated with a transparent superhydrophobic paint. Reprinted with permission from ref. 340, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  SEM image of a fly's eye with antireflection properties.344a	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Molecule used for (b and d) photoinduced self-epitaxial crystal growth with (c) anti-reflection properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Corneal nipple arrays with anti-fogging properties of mosquitoes, at different magnification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10a, copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 37  ZnO nanostructures with different shapes and photoluminescence properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 360, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  Growth of ZnO nanorods on CuO nanowires in Zn(NO3)2 aqueous solution at a concentration of (a) 0.05 M and (b) 0.1 M; (c) photoluminescence spectra at different concentrations of Zn(NO3)2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 364, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 39  Schematic representation of the superhydrophobic surfaces with photoluminescence using CdS quantum dots and dithiocarbamates.379	 

 	Fig. 40  Superhydrophobic white translucent butterfly's wings of the genus Parantica sita (Nymphalidae) (a–c) at different magnifications and transparent butterfly's wings of the genus Parnassius glacialis (Papilionidae) (d–f) at different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 388, copyright 2009, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) Opal structures obtained by colloidal lithography with PS spheres and SiO2 nanoparticles, and (b) inverse opal structures obtained after calcination to remove the PS spheres; (c) color and transmission spectra of the inverse opal structures with different center-to-center distances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 418, copyright 2003, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Schematic representation of regular nano-nipples arrays with superhydrophobic and iridescence properties;424 (b) man-made polymer opals with different colors and iridescence properties.406	 

 	Fig. 43  Superhydrophobic and self-cleaning (a) solar cells containing (b) Si micropyramids modified with (c) ZnO nanowires with excellent anti-reflection properties and (d) conversion efficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 425, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 44  Superhydrophobic nanostructured batteries based on the electrowetting phenomena. Reprinted with permission from ref. 436, copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 45  Enhancing surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) using superhydrophobic Ag nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 445, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 46  (a) Superhydrophobic and superoleophilic inverse opals for oil sensors; (b and c) the stopband of the photonic crystal shifts linearly with the refractive indices of the oils.481 Panel a reprinted with permission from ref. 460, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 47  Schematic representation of biosensors with nucleotide recognition and switchable superhydrophobic properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 466, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 48  Superhydrophobic surfaces to improve bioanalytical readout based on (a) porous Si and (b) evaporation of droplets containing proteins; (c) target anchor chips developed to increase the sensitivity of MALD-TOF MS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 473, copyright 2007, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 49  Superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic contrast to immobilize proteins in the superhydrophilic areas, based on Namib desert Beetles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 482, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 50  Schematic representation of drug delivery systems based on the displacement of the air trapped on superhydrophobic materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 483, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 51  Elaboration of drug delivery systems by deposition of droplets and cross-linking on superhydrophobic surfaces.488	 

 	Fig. 52  Superhydrophobic mesoporous polymers made of divinylbenzene and an imidazolium moiety containing trifluoromethanesulfonate counterions, as heterogeneous catalysts for transesterification to form biodiesel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 490, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
