Assessing the environmental effects related to quantum dot structure, function, synthesis and exposure    - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EN00712B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EN00712B
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2022, 9, 867-910Assessing the environmental effects related to quantum dot structure, function, synthesis and exposure†‡

        
          
            Marissa S. 
            Giroux
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zahra 
            Zahra
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Omobayo A. 
            Salawu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Robert M. 
            Burgess
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kay T. 
            Ho
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Adeyemi S. 
            Adeleye
          
        
      *b
aU.S. Environmental Protection Agency, ORD/CEMM Atlantic Coastal Environmental Sciences Division, Narragansett, Rhode Island, USA
bDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-2175, USA. E-mail: adeyemi.adeleye@uci.edu;   Tel: +(949) 824 5819
Received 
      3rd August 2021
    , Accepted 24th November 2021First published on 24th November 2021AbstractQuantum dots (QDs) are engineered semiconductor nanocrystals with unique fluorescent, quantum confinement, and quantum yield properties, making them valuable in a range of commercial and consumer imaging, display, and lighting technologies. Production and usage of QDs are increasing, which increases the probability of these nanoparticles entering the environment at various phases of their life cycle. This review discusses the major types and applications of QDs, their potential environmental exposures, fates, and adverse effects on organisms. For most applications, release to the environment is mainly expected to occur during QD synthesis and end-product manufacturing since encapsulation of QDs in devices prevents release during normal use or landfilling. In natural waters, the fate of QDs is controlled by water chemistry, light intensity, and the physicochemical properties of QDs. Research on the adverse effects of QDs primarily focuses on sublethal endpoints rather than acute toxicity, and the differences in toxicity between pristine and weathered nanoparticles are highlighted. A proposed oxidative stress adverse outcome pathway framework demonstrates the similarities among metallic and carbon-based QDs that induce reactive oxygen species formation leading to DNA damage, reduced growth, and impaired reproduction in several organisms. To accurately evaluate environmental risk, this review identifies critical data gaps in QD exposure and ecological effects, and provides recommendations for future research. Future QD regulation should emphasize exposure and sublethal effects of metal ions released as the nanoparticles weather under environmental conditions. To date, human exposure to QDs from the environment and resulting adverse effects has not been reported.

Environmental significance
Because of their ubiquitous use in electronic imaging, lighting and displays, global production of quantum dots (QDs) is predicted to increase 200% yearly in the next several decades with QDs entering the environment through manufacturing and improper disposal. The majority of QDs are metal-based but new varieties (e.g., carbon-based) are increasingly common, with environmental exposures and effects largely unknown. Critical data gaps for understanding the environmental fate, exposures, and effects of QDs are barriers for performing risk assessments and implementing regulations. This review addresses the exposure and effects literature on terrestrial and aquatic environments, identifies critical data gaps, defines key terms, and recommends future research to inform environmental decision-making for years to come as QD use in consumer products increases.

1. Introduction
1.1 What is a quantum dot?
Quantum dots (QDs) are engineered semiconductor nanocrystals with unique fluorescent properties, making them valuable in a range of applications. The term, “quantum dots”, was initially used to describe zero-dimensional, metallic semiconductor nanoparticles with quantum confinement, which is the change in optical properties directly related to nanoparticle diameter.1,2 Currently, QDs refer to small-sized (typically 2–20 nm) fluorescent metallic and non-metallic nanoparticles (e.g., carbon-based) that possess quantum confinement effects3,4 (Fig. 1). A key characteristic of QDs is their ‘quantum yield’. This characteristic defines a QD's ability to efficiently emit light (i.e., quantums) following light absorption and is measured as the ratio of the number of photons emitted to the number absorbed. The greater the quantum yield, the more useful the QD in manufactured products. They have distinctive physical, chemical, and optical properties; as a result they have been incorporated as active parts of a wide range of commercial and consumer products, such as computer and television display, imaging, and lighting technologies.5,6 QDs may be made up of one element (such as silicon or carbon) or compounds (such as cadmium selenide (CdSe)).7Table 1 provides information about the most common types of QDs.
 Fig. 1  Examples of common quantum dots (QDs) including (a) a metal-based QD (i.e., CdSe core with a ZnS shell) and (b) a simple graphene sheet carbon-based QD discussed in this review. In this figure, colored spheres represent clustered layers of atoms including cadmium (blue), selenium (red), zinc (yellow), sulfur (green), and carbon (orange). 
Table 1 Examples of quantum dot types, and for metallic quantum dots, groupings, core composition, shell materials and capping agents




Quantum dot types
Grouping
Core composition
Abbreviation




Metallic
I–III–VI
Copper indium disulfide
CuInS2


II–VI
Cadmium selenide
CdSe


Cadmium sulfide
CdS


Cadmium telluride
CdTe


Zinc selenium
ZnSe


Zinc sulfide
ZnS


III–V
Indium phosphide
InP


Indium arsenic
InAs


IV–VI
Lead selenium
PbSe


Lead sulfide
PbS





Shell materials



Zinc sulfide
ZnS


Cadmium sulfide
CdS


Indium arsenic
InAs





Capping agents



Bovine serum albumin
BSA


Carboxylic acid
COOH


Di-n-octylphosphine oxide
DOPO


Dihydrolipoic acid
DPA


Fatty amines
—


Mercaptopropionic acid
MPA


Mercaptoundecanoic acid
MUA


Polydiallydimethyl ammonium chloride
PDDA


Polyacrylate acid
PAA


Polyethylenimine ethylenediamine
PEI


Polyethylene glycol
PEG


Polymaleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene
PMAO


Primary amines
—


Butylamine
BA


Decylamine
DA


Hexylamine
HA


Hexadecylamine
HDA


Thioglycolic acid
TGA


Tetraethyl orthosilicate
TEOS


Trioctyl phosphine
TOP


Trioctyl phosphine oxide
TOPO


Carbon-based


Carbon
CQD


Graphene
GQD


Nanodots
NQD


Perovskite


Cesium lead tri-iodine
CsPbI3


Cesium lead tri-bromide
CsPbBr3




The objectives of this review include describing (1) the important physicochemical properties and applications of QDs, (2) the volume and exposure of QDs in the environment, (3) QD environmental fate, (4) adverse effects, and (5) data gaps in the performance of QD risk assessment. While providing suggestions for next steps in the successful performance of QD risk assessments, the data gaps also highlight where exposure and effects data for QDs are very limited and need to be enhanced. Because this review of QDs covers a wide range of topics, at the end of this report, we include a list of Key terms with brief definitions. The focus of this review is on QDs representing an exposure in the environment, QDs associated with non-environmental exposures (e.g., medical applications and devices) are beyond the scope of this investigation. While all QDs that may enter the environment are of interest to this review, we focus primarily on QDs most likely to be present in consumer products including metallic (Cd-based and Cd-free), carbon, and newer QDs including perovskite. The scientific literature available for these types of QDs is also abundant.
1.2 Physicochemical properties of QDs
Metallic, carbon, and newer types of QDs have a range of unique properties resulting in the diversity of applications described in detail below. In the next section, some of these properties will be discussed along with the characteristics which distinguish QDs from other nanoparticles.

1.2.1 Composition. 
Based on elemental composition, metallic QDs can be classified as (1) group II–VI, which includes cadmium selenide (CdSe),8–11 cadmium sulfide (CdS),12,13 cadmium telluride (CdTe),14,15 (2) group III–V, which includes indium phosphide (InP)16,17 and indium arsenide (InAs),18 (3) group I–III–VI including copper indium sulfide (CuInS2),19 and (4) pervoskites (e.g., ABX3)20–22 (Table 1) (Fig. S1‡).
The most popular QDs in consumer products are CdSe and CdTe because they have the highest quantum yield and are monodispersed.23 The surfaces of Cd-based QDs are often capped (as discussed in section 1.2.5) to modify their behavior and increase performance, resulting in decreased dissolution and release of the metal ion.24 Due to concerns with the release of cadmium, Cd-based QDs are also being replaced in some applications by Cd-free alternatives such as InP, zinc sulfide (ZnS), and carbon-based QDs.25–28 Depending on their compositions, Cd-free QDs have physical and chemical properties that are different from Cd-based QDs. For instance, InP QD has a higher photostability compared to CdSe due to the covalent bond between indium and phosphide, compared to the ionic bond occurring in CdSe.23,29
Carbon-based QDs are a promising alternative to Cd-based QDs (Fig. 1). They are mainly composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and the proportion of each element varies between synthesis processes.30 Most carbon-based QDs are made up of amorphous or nanocrystalline cores,31 and can also occur as graphene QDs32 (Table 1; Fig. S1‡). Graphene QD (GQD) consist of higher sp2 hybridized carbon structures compared to other carbon-based QDs.33–35 In addition, other non-metallic elements (e.g., nitrogen, phosphorous, and sulfur) can be incorporated into the lattice of carbon-based QDs to enhance properties such as luminescence, electrical conductivity, dispersibility, photostability, and fluorescence to increase the scope of their applications.36–43 While carbon QDs have showed promising optical properties as alternatives to Cd-based QDs, their synthesis often requires rigorous post-treatment processes to correct for drawbacks such as non-uniformity in size and agglomeration.44
Perovskite QDs are a new class of QD materials and are fast gaining commercial relevance due to their favorable optical and electronic properties, low cost, and ease of synthesis.45,46 Perovskite QDs have physical characteristics, including defect tolerant structure, high absorption efficiency, and photoluminescence quantum yield, that often surpass other QD varieties47,48 although they are often limited by poor chemical, thermal and photostability.49 Synthesis of pervoskites QDs also often involve high temperature and the use of toxic solvents such as toluene. Perovskite QDs may be organic–inorganic hybrids or fully inorganic; and are represented by the chemical formula ABX3 (e.g., CsPbI3 or CsPbBr3)50,51 in which A is an inorganic monovalent cation (such as caesium, Cs+) or an organic cation (such as methylammonium, CH3NH3+, or formamidinium, (NH2)2CH+),52 B is an inorganic-metal cation such as lead (Pb) or tin (Sn); and X is an anion, such as oxygen, halogens, or alkali metals.49,53–56


1.2.2 Structure. 
Structurally, metallic QDs occur in three basic forms: the core, core/shell or alloyed types (Fig. 1 and 2). QDs may also be conjugated with capping agents; which is discussed in section 1.2.5. Core type QDs, such as cadmium telluride (CdTe), lead sulfide (PbS) and cadmium selenide (CdSe), are made up of one material, and can be metallic chalcogenides. Metallic chalcogenides are compounds that consist of at least one chalcogen and at least one more electropositive element, such as cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb) or zinc (Zn).57 Core/shell QDs are made up of inorganic cores encapsulated within a semiconductor material that has a higher band gap (Fig. 2). Examples of core/shell QDs include CdSe/CdS, ZnS/CdSe and CdSe/InAs.22,58,59 Core/shell QDs were developed to improve on the quantum yield of core-type QDs and they exhibit combined properties of both the core and the shell materials.60
 Fig. 2  Selected physicochemical properties of QDs: (A) structural classification of QDs; effect of QD size on (B) energy band gap and (C) emission spectra. 
Alloying QDs is an alternative approach to tuning the physical and opto-electronic properties of QDs without changing their crystallite size (Fig. 2).61 For instance, ZnxCd1−xSe is formed from alloying ZnSe and CdSe, while CdS and CdSe may be combined to form CdSxSe1−x (where x is a stoichiometric value).62 Varying the composition of alloyed QDs leads to simultaneous alterations in their physical and opto-electronic properties.61 Based on composition, alloyed QDs can be either homogeneous (similar composition throughout the QD) or gradient (composition varies in different parts of the QD).63–67


1.2.3 Size and shape. 
Metallic QDs are very small with diameters typically between 2 and 10 nm; however, sizes up to 20 nm have been reported.68,69 Size plays an important role in the chemical, electronic, and optical properties of QDs because the band gap energy level of QDs is inversely related to particle size (Fig. 2).70,71 The color (wavelength) of light emitted by QDs varies with their size: as the size of a QD decreases, the wavelength of emitted light decreases with a corresponding increase in frequency and energy (Fig. 2) which contributes to their favorable optical properties (see section 1.2.4).
Shapes of common QDs include spheres, cubes, disks, rods, pyramidal, needles, cones, and cylinders.72–74 Carbon-based QDs often consist of mono-atomic thick sheets of graphene or graphene oxide (Fig. 1). QD properties are strongly affected by their shape, for example, computational methods show that cubic CdSe QDs have smaller bandgaps and lower emission energy than spherical CdSe QDs because cubic QDs possess a degree of asymmetry that weakens their quantum confinement effect while spherical CdSe have higher surface-to-volume ratios.75


1.2.4 Optical properties. 
One of the novel properties of QD is their size-dependent emission wavelength. QDs absorb light when the excitation energy is higher than their bandgap, which results in the promotion of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band.76 Smaller QDs (∼2 nm) emit lower wavelengths corresponding with violet and blue colors, whereas larger QDs (∼8–10 nm) emit higher wavelengths corresponding with the color red, on the opposite end of the visible light spectrum (Fig. 2). As such, the frequency and color of light emitted by a QD can be altered (i.e., tuned) by changing the size to appropriately fluoresce for their intended purpose. For example, the emission wavelength of CdSe/ZnS QDs can be tuned from blue to red by increasing its particle size.77,78 Size-dependent tuning is also performed in non-metallic QDs, such as graphene QDs, which fluoresce from green to near infrared upon varying their size from 0.46 to 2.31 nm.79–81 The smaller the size of QDs, the higher the energy difference between the conduction and valence band and the shorter the emission wavelength. As a result, QDs can emit electromagnetic radiation at different wavelengths from ultraviolet (UV) to visible to near-infrared (NIR) regions. For instance, CdSe and other group II–VI QDs exhibit a tunable emission within the visible spectrum (480–650 nm) while group IV–VI QDs (PbSe, PbS, SnSe) show tunable NIR emission from 600–2200 nm.82 Carbon-based QDs, on the other hand, have tunable emission wavelength within 320–580 nm.83 The wide range of tunable emission wavelengths contributes to QD use in a variety of electronic display applications.


1.2.5 Capping agents. 
Capping agents are necessary to ensure photostability during application by minimizing the impact of surface defects on luminescent efficiency.84,85 The surface of QDs can be modified using organic (such as tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO)85,86) or inorganic (such as tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS)87,88) capping agents (Table 1). Along with minimizing the impacts of surface defect, organic capping agents are particularly advantageous because they also ensure colloidal stability (i.e., ability of the QD to remain suspended in aqueous solution) and allow conjugation of QDs to biologically functional molecules. TOPO is widely used because it has a high boiling point, which allows for high quality QD synthesis through high temperature nanoparticle formation.86 However, phosphorus-containing impurities in TOPO can introduce variability in the structure of the synthesized QDs and also affect morphology, quality and growth kinetics of QDs.89 In addition, greener and less energy intensive TOPO-substitute capping agents could increase the sustainability of QD synthesis. Other common organic capping agents include mercaptans, primary amines (such as hexadecylamine, decylamine, hexylamine, and butylamine), polyethylene glycol (PEG), and fatty amines.86
In addition to photostability and colloidal stability, capping agents prevent uncontrolled crystal growth and reduce agglomeration.86,90,91 Capping agents also affect electron transfer reactions, shape, size, and core durability of QDs to maximize favorable properties for specific applications.92–94 In addition, capping agents dictate the thermal stability, degree of oxidative degradation, and optical properties of QDs.88,95 As noted above, surface modification with capping agents functionalizes QDs for specific interactions with target analytes and facilitate conjugation with biofunctional molecules for sensing applications such as fluorescent dye analogues.96–100


1.2.6 Quantum confinement. 
The unique properties of QDs are largely due to the quantum confinement effect. Quantum confinement is the spatial confinement of electron–hole pairs (excitons) formed when an electron excites from a valence band to a conduction band, in one or more dimensions within a material.101,102 Quantum confinement originates from an increase in band gap as the size of a bulk material decreases and electrons in the resulting compact particles become confined in a small space.101,103,104 Quantum confinement occurs in QDs as the radius of a semiconducting material becomes smaller than the Bohr's radius because QDs have sizes comparable to their Bohr radii (1–5 nm).105–107 Apart from changing QD size, the quantum confinement behavior of QDs can be modified by controlling QD surface chemistry and composition.108,109
Throughout this review, we will be using the core/shell-capping agent/surface coating annotation to describe specific QD varieties; for example, CdS/ZnS-PEG represents QDs with a cadmium sulfide core, zinc sulfide shell, and conjugated with a polyethylene glycol capping agent.

1.3 Synthesis
The synthesis routes for QDs can be broadly grouped into (1) top-down and (2) bottom-up approaches (Table S1†).110 The top-down approach involves decreasing the size of a larger material to the desired QD size, while in the bottom-up approach, QD particles are synthesized from precursor molecules.

1.3.1 Top-down synthesis approach. 
The top-down synthesis route involves the breakdown of bulk semiconductor materials or large precursors to nanosized QDs. Breakdown or thinning of bulk materials to QDs is achieved by several techniques, including arc discharge,111–113 acidic oxidation,114,115 hydrothermal/solvothermal treatment,116–118 electrochemical oxidation,119 and chemical oxidation.120 Specifics of each synthesis technique are discussed in Table S1.‡ These techniques are particularly applied in the synthesis of carbon-based QDs, although carbon-based QDs can also be synthesized by bottom-up approaches.121–123 Techniques such as electron beam lithography, reactive-ion etching, laser beams, and focused beams have also been used to synthesize metallic QDs with sizes smaller than 30 nm.84,124
The top-down approach is often limited by poor yield, long reaction time, harsh conditions necessary to form QDs, and high cost.125 Contamination of QDs and structural imperfections are also common when using top-down approaches. Hence, top-down synthesis approaches are not commonly used for large-scale manufacture of QDs.115 However, with the advent of renewable feedstocks for carbon-based QD such as chitin, chitosan, graphite, and starch, the cost of producing carbon-based QDs via top-down approaches may be much lower compared to non-carbon QDs.69,126 Also, the use of carbon-rich and relatively inexpensive feedstock (such as coal) to synthesize carbon QD is becoming popular.127,128


1.3.2 Bottom-up synthesis approach. 
Bottom-up approaches involve chemical reduction of molecular precursors to form atoms that nucleate, grow into monodispersed colloids, and self-assemble.129 Bottom-up approaches are the most common synthesis route for monodispersed QDs (e.g., PbS).130 Conventional bottom-up synthesis of QDs is carried out in organic media in the presence of hydrophobic surface ligands—such as TOPO, trioctyl phosphine (TOP), di-n-octylphosphine oxide (DOPO), or hexadecylamine (HDA)—as capping agents.131,132 Bottom-up synthesis can be broadly classified into vapor phase methods and liquid phase (wet-chemical) methods (described in detail in the ESI‡ sections S1.1 and S1.2).

1.4 Applications
QDs have been increasingly produced and used in the past two decades for a wide array of applications, ranging from biological imaging to display technology, and incorporation in solar panels and nanofillers.107,133–136 In 2012, QD global production was projected to be around 0.6 to 55 tons per year.137 Major (known) QD manufacturers include Nanoco (UK), QD Vision (Massachusett, USA), Quantum Materials (Texas, USA), and Nanosys (California, USA). According to a 2019 Future Market report, the production of the top three QD manufacturers (Nanoco, Nanosys, and Quantum Materials) was about 57 tons,138 which implies that the global production of QDs is possibly in the hundreds of tons today. Reliable data on regional and global QD production is needed, especially by the small and midsized companies in the industry. In 2016, the QD industry generated a total revenue of $610.0 million in the global market, and the revenue was estimated to reach $10.4 billion by 2021 with an expected >200% yearly increase over the next decade.138
The entirety of consumer and commercial products enabled with QDs is unknown. More so, there is only limited data on the amount of QDs present in products known to contain them. Thus, there are important data gaps in the subject of QD applications.

1.4.1 Current applications. 
Valued for their light-emitting (i.e., fluorescent) properties, QDs are increasingly used in consumer and industrial products with displays such as televisions, computer monitors, tablets, and cell-phones. QDs are also widely used in medical imaging, solar cells and windows, security tags and inks, sensors, lasers, and biomarkers.138 As shown in Fig. 3, the largest application of QDs (as at 2018) was display technologies (90%), LED lighting (4%), and biotechnology and medicine (2%).138 Other applications include packaging and paper, anti-counterfeiting ink, and biosensors.
 Fig. 3  Quantum dot applications trend data in 2018 and 2030. Data source.138 
QDs are mostly used in liquid crystal displays (LCDs), resulting in displays that are approximately 10–50% more efficient than standard LCDs.138 The main QDs used in LCDs are Cd-based, (that is, CdTe and CdSe QDs) due to their high photoluminescence (PL) quantum yield, and photostability.138 Similarly, QD light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have narrow emission spectra, and high photostability, which allows for a considerable cost reduction compared to organic LEDs (OLED – a LED that uses organic molecules as the optically active element).138 In Europe, the amount of Cd-based QDs in consumer products is restricted to ensure the Cd concentration is less than 100 ppm, as required by the European Union's Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS).139 This restriction of Cd content is shifting the market trend of QDs towards Cd-free alternatives, such as InP and perovskite QDs.140,141
Many Cd-based QDs have enhanced fluorescent potential compared to the Cd-free QD alternatives that often have more stable core materials. There are often tradeoffs between brightness and stability with Cd-free alternatives. For example, the energy band gap of bulk InP (1.35 eV) is similar to that of bulk CdSe (1.74 eV), and by controlling its size, InP QDs can fluoresce at most visible wavelengths.142 InP QD LEDs have low external quantum efficiency (about 12% due to defects in the deep in-gap states of InP QDs);143 but Samsung researchers recently prepared InP with ZnSe and ZnS shells, which increased the external quantum efficiency of the resulting LED to the theoretical maximum for QD LEDs (21.4%).144 The InP-based QD-LEDs are expected to be used in next-generation commercial displays. Similarly, display manufacturers are exploring metal halide perovskite QDs, which offer high quantum efficiency, and provide the best peak brightness in LCD displays.138
CdSe and graphene QDs are also applied in white light-emitting diodes (WLEDs).28,145 A commercial QD-enabled acrylate polymer is used as a faceplate in LED lamps to look like incandescent lamps but with more efficient luminescence (113 Lm W−1) than incandescent lamps (17 Lm W−1),146 and significant energy savings.147 QDs used for spectral correction can further save 25–40% of energy compared to LEDs that use broadband down-conversion (process by which a high definition signal is converted to standard resolution for display on lower resolution systems) materials like rare-earth phosphors.148
QDs are also suitable for smart diagnostics, which has led to applications in biotechnology and medicine.149 QDs are widely used as sensors to detect various chemical and biological species due to their unique optical properties obtained by modifying the surfaces of QDs.150–152 For instance, dopamine, an essential neurotransmitter, can be detected in vitro using the near-IR electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL) of Ag2Se QDs.152 CdS QDs are also used as photoelectrochemical sensors for the detection of biochemical molecules, such as tyrosinase, an indicative marker for melanoma cancer cells.153 Photoelectrochemical sensors typically consist of QDs with surface modifications that act as a linking molecule (linker) to bind to an electrode. Examples of linkers include alkanedithiols154 and 1,6-hexanedithiol.155 In brief, the QDs fluoresce when they are conjugated to the target biomolecules. Upon illumination, a photocurrent is generated, depending on the type and concentration of the analyte in the immediate environment of the electrode.156


1.4.2 Future applications. 
The high demand for QD technology is primarily driven by the growing needs for low-cost high definition displays, improved diagnostic sensors, easier medical imaging, and the low-power/renewable energy market.138 More so, QD displays have longer lifetimes compared to non-QD LED displays, which translates to low cost in the long run;138 thus supporting the market predictions of increasing QD production for consumer products and industrial applications over the next decade.
LEDs with QD luminophores and InP-based QD-LEDs are promising in the development of next-generation displays.144,157 Thus, display will continue to hold a major share of the QD market (Fig. 3). Device-grade thick shell CdZnSe/ZnSe/ZnS QDs are expected to be used in WLED to obtain bright white light with high color index.158 QD alloys with enhanced luminescence and superior monochromaticity for LED lamps will also continue to gain ground.157,159 QDs (such as ZnS and perovskite) will continue to be incorporated into solar cells to improve efficiency and energy storage.160–162 In addition to solar cells, future applications of perovskite QDs will likely include light-emitting devices and displays.47,161,163 Other upcoming QD-based product launches include flash-memory, solar roofing tiles (having OLED flexible displays), and flexible electronics.138 QDs will also play a growing role in biosensors, such as in antiviral agents, for detecting the attenuation of COVID-19 infection.164,165

2. Volume and exposure
2.1 Estimates of QDs in the environment
Given the rate at which QDs are being manufactured for a range of consumer products and applications, it is highly probable they will continue to enter the environment. While experimentally-derived environmental concentrations of nanomaterials are rare, partly due to limitations in analytical capabilities,166,288 models-based estimates/predictions have been reported. Using modeling approach to predict the amount of nanoparticles accumulating in Danish aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems between 2000 and 2014, Gottschalk et al.167 estimated that the concentration of QDs was 0.2–45 μg kg−1 in freshwater sediment and 0.04–2 μg kg−1 in seawater sediment. The modeled concentrations of QDs in surface waters were extremely low, reportedly in the femtogram per liter (fg L−1) range (1 fg L−1 = 10−15 g L−1). Additionally, sludge-treated soils were predicted to contain 0.0001–0.013 ng kg−1 QDs. These predicted environmental concentrations of QDs were orders of magnitude lower than the corresponding concentrations predicted for most other commonly used nanoparticles (including carbon nanotubes, TiO2, ZnO, and Ag).167 The lower environmental concentrations of QDs were attributed to low production volumes relative to other engineered nanoparticles, dissolution of QDs in the natural environment, and application in products with limited environmental exposure during use.167–169 Despite our knowledge of the magnitude of current and future QD production, the actual amount of QDs in commercial products are not well known and will likely vary greatly. The amount of QDs detected and/or estimated in a few displays was below 0.005% and are described in detail in ESI‡ section S2 and Table S2.
Concentrations of QDs in the environment will likely vary between geographic regions. In regions of Europe, Wang and Nowack170 predicted a surface water QD concentration range of 9.6–530 fg L−1 for waters in seven European regions (i.e., the European Union and six sub-regions, which are Central Europe, Northern Europe, Southern Europe, Eastern Europe, South-Eastern Europe, and Switzerland) based on accumulations from 1990 to 2014. Predicted sediment concentrations of QDs in the regions, 0.17–9.4 ng g−1, were substantially higher than the values predicted by Gottschalk et al. (2015)167 for Denmark, which was attributed to the inclusion of direct environmental release of QDs in the estimate by Wang and Nowack.170 In addition, the predicted amount of QDs in sewage-treated soil (0–17 ng kg−1) was higher than in natural and urban soil (0.003–0.027 ng kg−1), demonstrating that QDs can potentially enter terrestrial ecosystems through the application of treated sewage and sludge.
2.2 Environmental release of QDs during product lifecycle
Environmental releases can occur at various phases of QD's or QD-enabled product's lifecycle, including synthesis, manufacturing, application, and end-of-life105,171 (Fig. 4). Environmental concentrations of QDs are expected to increase, due to projected increases in QD applications and the relatively long half-lives of some varieties of QDs (i.e., those QDs that do not readily undergo dissolution) and QD-enabled devices (months to decades).105 Mechanisms of release and factors affecting release of QDs from products are fully discussed in the Environmental fate section. QDs may be released into the environment in the form used in products, but they may also be transformed in products, or during/after environmental release. As an example, while Cd-based QDs may be released from a product matrix as particles during incineration, Cd will likely be released as dissolved ions in landfills due to interaction with natural waters (i.e., rainwater, groundwater) and acidic landfill leachates172 resulting from the presence of waste-related organic matter.
 Fig. 4  Typical lifecycle of QDs/QD-enabled products and their possible environmental exposure pathways. Note, occupational and consumer exposure are beyond the scope of this review. 

2.2.1 Environmental release during QD synthesis and product manufacturing. 
Release of QDs may occur during synthesis in research laboratories and manufacturing facilities. Release may happen due to processes associated with synthesis, post-synthesis, and waste generation. For instance, most QD applications require a well-defined particles size, and size-enrichment (for instance, via centrifugation or filtration) to obtain the desired QD size is an important part of most synthesis methods. Particles with sizes outside the desired range and those within the desired range lost during enrichment may end-up in the waste stream (waste streams are regulated by the Clean Water Act via wastewater effluent testing, but nanoparticles are not specifically included in testing), and finally in the environment, depending on the amount removed or degraded during any wastewater treatment. The yield of different synthesis approaches, 9–90%, (Table S3‡) shows there are opportunities for material loss during synthesis. It should be noted that not all the mass lost during production (based on yield) is actual QDs as some of it may be precursors and other byproducts.
As noted above, the amount of QDs incorporated into products is not widely known. However, experimental analysis of popular consumer displays revealed the amount of commonly used QDs ranged from 0.00011 to 0.0049% (Table S2‡).173,174 This suggests that only small masses of QDs are used during product manufacturing, which may lead to only small release compared to products that use substantial amounts of nanoparticles (such as nano-enabled paints175).
Using typical estimates of nanoparticles released during synthesis and product manufacturing (0.1–2% of the total production176,177), we estimated that 0.057–1.14 metric tons of QDs are released into the environment each year via synthesis and major manufacturing activities (see details of estimation and results in ESI‡ section S4 and Table S4). The largest fraction of the environmental release is into wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and the atmosphere, where the high estimate was 0.456 ton per year.


2.2.2 Environmental release during transport and storage. 
Release of QDs during transport and storage of products will mainly occur due to breakage while in transit or if mishandled. Release of QDs at this life cycle stage is expected to be minimal due to advances in product packaging and encapsulation of QDs in devices. Release will likely be similar to releases during the use phase (discussed below), if it occurs at all.


2.2.3 Environmental release during use. 
The small amount of QDs used in devices are typically strongly embedded in the products (e.g., QD are integrated into the physical matrix of the product). Thus, only a small amount of QDs are expected to be released into the environment during the use phase.170 The amount of QDs estimated to be released during use is shown in Table S5.‡ Release of QDs from products during use is mainly dependent on the product matrix, and how the product is used. If the physical matrix is weathered or abraided, QD particles and polymer fragments with attached QDs may be released into the environment.171 For products that are constantly in contact with an aqueous phase, such as QDs embedded in low density polyethylene (LDPE) or acrylate polymers used in dental fillings, release is expected to occur via dissolution and/or desorption of QDs at the physical matrix surface (Fig. S2‡). Release of fully embedded QDs from nanocomposite materials may occur if the matrix is permeable (for instance, acrylate and LDPE136,148). Acrylic glass or other low permeability transparent polymers used to incorporate QDs in commercial display technologies attenuate dissolution of embedded QDs.136 More so, most display technologies are only expected to contact liquids infrequently or by accident.
In addition, QDs used in displays are firmly embedded in the screens, usually enclosed in multiple layers of glass and plastic, which are very difficult to separate without aggressive activities.173,174,178 As a result, there is extremely low probability that the QDs will be exposed to the environment during normal use.178 Similarly, QDs used in photovoltaic (PV) cells will likely not be released into the environment during use due to their encapsulation in thick layers of glass or plastic matrices.174 Metal leaching from PV panels exposed to corrosive media was minimal due to the protective nature of the matrix; hence, precipitation is not expected to cause leaching of QDs from rooftop solar panels.174,179,180
According to our use-phase estimates, higher amounts of QDs may be released into the environment in applications such as biomedical and packaging compared to uses in sensors and electronics. No release into the atmosphere was estimated as a result of QD use in packaging, sensors and paper. Soil was the largest environmental sink of QDs generated by releases originating from electronics applications. With the increased use of QDs for medical applications170,181 the WWTPs are predicted as the largest intermediate “sink” for releases from this source. The results obtained from our estimation are similar to those reported by Wang and Nowack.170


2.2.4 Environmental release during end-of-life. 
At the end-of-life phase, most devices enabled with QDs will be landfilled, incinerated, or recycled.170 Landfilling may expose the devices to low pH conditions, which typically promote dissolution of metals.178 Most studies that have investigated release of QDs from commercial products under conditions simulating landfills reported low release of dissolved metals due to strong encapsulation of QDs in products (as described above; Table S6‡). In a study investigating release of QD metals from two products with QD-enabled displays (i.e., a 2011 Kindle Fire tablet with CdSe/ZnS QD-enabled display and a 2016 Samsung TV with InP/ZnS QD-enabled display) simulating release during landfill disposal (i.e., Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) extraction fluid), researchers reported a maximum Cd release of 0.021% (relative to the original amount of QD in the products, which is a very low overall release (Table S2‡ represents the amount of QDs embedded in several kinds of display devices173,174)). Similarly, Brown et al.174 reported minimal release (<0.2 μg L−1) of Cd and In from the same devices (i.e., Kindle Fire tablet and Samsung TV) when the TCLP test and California waste extraction test (WET) were performed; but the amount of zinc liberated was in the mg L−1 range.174 Neither Cd or In was released at levels that were detectable when five PV cells were subjected to TCLP and WET tests.174 Cd and other metals (except Pb) released from the PV cells and displays were below the RCRA hazardous waste limits, but increases in disposals as product manufacture and usage increase will very likely, eventually lead to elevated concentrations in landfills.
During incineration of CdSe/ZnS QD-enabled products, the QDs partitioned into particulate matter in the exhaust and into bottom ash.182 In products with higher loads of QDs, the fraction in the bottom ash increased significantly.182 Unlike landfilling, incineration of QD-enabled devices would concentrate hazardous metals (including Cd) in waste ashes182 at concentrations that may exceed the RCRA and California hazardous waste limits.174 QDs in the bottom ash may retain their original size and morphology, but agglomeration and transformation (to different sizes and chemical composition) may also occur during the severe conditions of incineration.182 The presence of QDs in the particulate matter implies that the nanoparticles may be emitted to the atmosphere when QD-wastes are incinerated. Thus, incineration increases the possibility of QD release into the environment via atmospheric transport.
Recycling of QD-based products, such as PV panels and thin-film displays, at their end of life minimizes or eliminates environmental release of Cd and other metals.174,180 Occupational human exposure risk is typically high when devices containing toxic materials are recycled. However, Cd emissions to the workplace (and the environment) are regulated in the United States by agencies including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA), as well as state and local agencies. It is important to note that similar human and environmental safety regulations may not exist or be enforced in some communities in low- and middle-income countries, where informal recycling and illegal flow of electronic waste (e-waste) is often rampant.183,184 Overall, the environmental release of QDs is more likely to occur during their synthesis and incorporation into final products than during use and disposal (if properly disposed and handled). There are no estimates for illegal or improper disposal of QD-containing products and e-waste, but this does not eliminate the possibility that QDs are entering and will continue to enter the environment through improper disposal.
As shown in Table S6‡ we estimated that the highest release at end of life of QDs/QD-enabled devices is from the filters of waste incineration plants (55.86 ton per year) followed by wastewater sludges (55.29 ton per year) (Table S6‡). Depending on the use of sludges, they may be introduced into the greater environment including agricultural soils and landfills. A summary of current studies on release of QDs from products disposal is in Table S7.‡

3. Environmental fate
Although QD release to the environment is relatively low compared to other engineered nanoparticles, as production and use increases, there is a higher probability that greater amounts of QD-s will enter the environment, particularly during increased manufacturing and synthesis processes. The fate of QDs in the environment, which is controlled by processes such as dissolution, agglomeration, and chemical transformation, determine the ecological receptors that will be exposed to them and potentially be adversely effected.185,186 These processes are impacted by the physicochemical properties of QDs (such as chemical composition and surface coatings), and environmental factors (such as pH, light, natural organic matter (NOM), and ionic strength (salinity)). Unlike the abiotic factors discussed here, the impact of microbes on QD fate is not well understood or studied.
3.1 Dissolution
QD may enter aqueous environments via WWTPs outflows. Dissolution in the aqueous phase is important for the fate of QDs, particularly those with metallic cores (e.g., CdSe, CdTe, ZnSe, or PbSe) and/or shells (e.g., ZnS or CdS) as it transforms them from dispersed or agglomerated nanoparticles to dissolved ions. Unlike particulate QDs, which may remain in the aqueous phase (if sufficiently stable) or settle out (if unstable), dissolved ions disperse into all environmental phases, and are potentially more bioavailable than the nanoparticles.168,187 Like other nanoparticles, dissolution of QDs is controlled by environmental factors (such as pH, ionic strength/salinity, dissolved oxygen concentration, and NOM content) as well as the physicochemical properties of the QDs (such as size, surface coating with inorganic shells or capping agent, and properties of the capping agents).169,186,188
The presence of ions in water (e.g., seawater) promotes dissolution of nanoparticles by advancing complexation, or decreases dissolution through common ion effects or nanoparticle agglomeration (i.e., “salting-out effect”). Dissolution of Cd-based QDs (including CdS, CdTe, and CdSe) has been reported in different types of water, including deionized (DI) water and waters with different levels of ions, including natural seawater.169,186,188–190 The dissolution of the ZnS shell of CdSe/ZnS QD was slowed when elevated concentrations of Zn2+ and Cd2+ were present in water, but little to no impact on the dissolution of the CdSe core was observed.190 However, the release of Cd2+ from CdSe was slower in seawater compared to DI water or freshwater, possibly due to nanoparticle agglomeration that led to decreases in surface area or the presence of more ions in seawater led to decreased dissolution.169,189
Cd-Based QDs dissolve via an oxidative process, and the dissolution is driven by chemical, photochemical, and biological processes.169,186 Interestingly, dissolution of Cd-based QDs (to release ions such as Cd2+, SeO42−, and Zn2+) increases with ultraviolet (UV) light intensity,169,185,186,190 oxygen and other oxidizing agents (such as hydrogen peroxide),185,186,189,190 and temperature.186 When excited by UV light, Cd-based QDs generate superoxide radicals (O2˙−) from surrounding oxygen, which induces photooxidation of the nanoparticles.186 Thus, Cd-based QDs are more persistent in the absence of light and oxygen.186,189,190 For example, complete dissolution of the core CdSe in mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) capped CdSe/ZnS QDs took more than 80 days in the absence of light despite complete dissolution of the ZnS shell within a week.190 In the absence of light, dissolution of Cd-based QDs is driven by oxidation from species such as oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, and oxygen radicals, which are present in natural waters due to photochemical reactions driven by sunlight.186,190,191 Oxygen (and other oxidizing agents) can oxidize selenium in CdSe QDs to produce selenium oxyanions, which can detach from the QD surface and leave behind Cd2+ cations.185,186,192 Increases in temperature decreases the dissolution activation energy and enhances the mass transfer rates of dissolved oxygen to the surfaces of QDs, thereby enhancing dissolution.186
The influence of NOM on the release of Cd from QDs is concentration-, light-, and time-dependent. More Cd2+ was released from polydiallydimethylammonium chloride (PDDA)-coated CdSe/ZnS QDs as humic acid (a type of NOM) concentrations increased up to 20 mg L−1.186 NOM improves dissolution due to its sensitization effect and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which enhance the photooxidative dissolution of QDs.186 More so, NOM may promote dissolution of Cd-based QDs by forming complexes with dissolved ions.193 The concentration of Cd2+ detected in the presence of 50 mg L−1 humic acid was however lower than that observed in the presence of 5 mg L−1 humic acid.186 The decrease of dissolution at high humic acid concentration is likely related to the surface coating of QDs, and chelation of Cd2+ by the NOM.186,194 Synthetic complexing agents, such as citrate and ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA), similarly promote the dissolution of Cd-based QDs by complexing dissolved ions and weakening nanoparticles structural bonds.188,190,194,195 Similar to humic acid, extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), which are produced by microorganisms and are abundant in natural waters,191,196,197 promoted the dissolution of uncapped and ligand-capped CdSe QDs in both DI water and artificial seawater.169 The promotion of dissolution of CdSe/ZnS QDs by Suwannee River humic acid (up to 50 mg L−1) in the dark was only observed for up to 20 days, after which there was no significant dissolution. In contrast, humic acid did not enhance the dissolution of CdSe/ZnS QDs under low light conditions in seawater; whereas, dissolution was strongly enhanced by humic acid under high light intensity.189 An ecological effect of NOM, humic acids and other agents (e.g., EDTA), is that when chelated, the bioavailability and toxicity of metals has been shown to decrease significantly.198
Capping the surface of Cd-based QDs with ligands and other organic or inorganic substances (such as ZnS, bovine serum albumin, dihydrolipoic acid, and polyacrylate),199,200 which is typically done to increase the quantum yield and stability of nanoparticles, also moderates dissolution by limiting the transport or diffusion of oxygen onto the nanoparticle's surface.185,189 Thus, ligands with longer chain lengths, higher molecular weights, and structural complexities decrease the dissolution of Cd-based QDs more effectively than smaller and simpler capping agents. More so, short chain capping agents tend to be unstable on the QD's surface and can readily detach.190,201 PDDA-coated CdSe/ZnS QDs released lower concentrations of Cd and Se ions compared to poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-coated QDs under similar experimental conditions due to the higher complexity and molecular weight of PDDA.186 In artificial seawater, capping agents with amine groups protected CdSe QDs from dissolution, much more so than QDs capped with carboxylic ligand or QDs with no capping.169 The hinderance of dissolution from capping agents may also be time-dependent as the ZnS shell of MPA-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs completely dissolved within a week, exposing the core to the external environment.190 Thus, capping agents and surface modifications of QDs are important factors in whether organisms are exposed to intact QD nanoparticles or dissolved ions from core materials.
Along with light, NOM, and ionic strength, pH has substantial effects on QD environmental fate; for example, complete dissolution of the (CdS) shell of a poly(acrylic) acid (PAA)-capped CdTe/CdS QD was observed within 48 hours at pH 4.5. Although the dissolution rate of the QD was lower at pH greater than 4.5, dissolution was not linearly correlated with pH (partly due to the capping ligand). The trend reported was that dissolution was greater at pH 4.5 than at pH 8.5, which was greater than at pH 6.188 The high dissolution at pH 8.5 (compared to pH 6) was attributed to the higher binding capacity of the capping ligand, PAA, for Cd ions at that pH, which supported increased dissolution of the QD. Overall, non-neutral pH media increases the dissolution of QDs, in particular Cd-based QDs.168
As QDs dissolve their size decreases, further promoting dissolution in aqueous media. For instance, the solubility product (Ksp) of CdS increased from 7.9 × 10−27 to 1 × 10−15 when the diameter decreased from 25 nm to 2.5 nm.195 Slow dissolution of QDs in high ionic strength media (like seawater) implies that pelagic organisms will be initially exposed in marine systems mainly based on the nanoparticles' colloidal stability. Gradual dissolution and sedimentation will lead to eventual exposure of benthic organisms. In contrast, in freshwater systems, relatively rapid dissolution will lead to exposure of both pelagic and benthic organisms to dissolved ions.
And as discussed in this section, the role of important QD properties (such as coating, composition, and size) and environmental factors (such as light, ionic strength, and pH) on the dissolution of prepared metallic QDs in aquatic systems has received some attention. However, only a few studies have probed leaching of metals from final products enabled with metallic QDs (such as Kindle Fire tablet and Samsung TV), with the few studies reporting minimal leaching of the metals. QDs may also be attached to polymer fragments when released into the environment;171 yet, the influence of the attached polymer matrice on QD dissolution has not been studied.
3.2 Agglomeration
Agglomeration, the clustering of two or more nanoparticles, is important to the colloidal stability of metallic and nonmetallic QDs.203 The agglomeration rate of QDs increases as the nanoparticle concentration increases in aqueous solutions.202 Like other nanoparticles,203–205 increase in ionic strength of aqueous media also favors homo-agglomeration of QDs.169,202,206,207 Using increase in optical density at 650 nm as an indicator of agglomeration, Morelli et al. observed a faster agglomeration of uncapped CdSe and CdSe/ZnS QDs in raw seawater (salinity = 38.3‰) compared to a water sample with a lower salinity (salinity = 7.7‰).202 Similar observations have been made by other researchers that compared the agglomeration kinetics of QDs in DI water or low salinity water and seawater.189,207
Agglomeration of QDs in high ionic strength media is due to the compression of the electrical double layer around the nanoparticles, leading to decreases in electrostatic repulsive forces as predicted by the classical Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory.207–211 Thus, higher agglomeration rates are observed in aqueous media with elevated ion contents and high fractions of multivalent ions, such as seawater.207–211 The colloidal stability of QDs in aqueous systems is improved with the use of charged or neutral capping agents, which impart electrostatic or steric repulsion, respectively.188,206,209 Plain carbon QDs agglomerated to over 500 nm when suspended in 100 mM NaCl but remained monodispersed at a diameter of only 2 nm when capped with polyethylenimine ethylenediamine (PEI). However, surface coatings may be unable to prevent agglomeration of Cd-based QDs in high ionic strength waters (such as seawater). The average hydrodynamic diameter of amine- and carboxyl-capped CdSe QD was similar to that of the unfunctionalized QDs when introduced to seawater, showing that surface modification did not improve colloidal stability in seawater.169,207 Similarly, in another study, carboxylic acid- and PDDA-stabilized CdSe/ZnS QDs rapidly agglomerated in seawater to sizes greater than 1 μm within one hour.189 The sizes of both nanoparticles (carboxylic acid- and PDDA-stabilized CdSe/ZnS QDs) were only about 20 nm and 500 nm in 0‰ and 1‰ media, respectively, after the same time.189
Humic acid caused further agglomeration of CdSe/ZnS in seawater (compared to when it was absent), although the increase in agglomeration rate was more pronounced for PDDA-coated CdSe/ZnS than for the carboxylic acid-coated ones.189 The impact of humic acid on QD agglomeration in seawater was related to bridging effects (i.e., linking of the humic acid, divalent cation in seawater, and capping agents of the QDs).189 Similarly, the hydrodynamic diameter of uncapped and amine-functionalized carbon QDs increased substantially in the presence of humic acid. More so, interactions between EPS derived from marine algae and CdSe QDs resulted in the formation of very large agglomerates in seawater.169
In addition, pH affects the surface charge (zeta potential) of QDs, thereby influencing their colloidal stability in aqueous media.207,208,211 Often times, pH, ionic strength, and capping agents, all of which have strong influences on the surface charge of nanoparticles, combine to determine the agglomeration of QDs in aquatic systems.207,208 As an example, the isoelectric point of carboxylic acid-coated CdTe QDs was ∼pH 1.7 in DI water, but increased to ∼pH 10.5 in seawater, probably due to the adsorption of cations in seawater.207 As a result, although the carboxylic acid-capped CdTe QDs agglomerated at all pHs tested, the largest agglomerates were observed around pH 10. Conversely, and expectedly, the largest agglomerates in DI water were observed around pH 2, with minimal agglomeration above pH 2 in DI water.
Rapid homo-agglomeration of QDs in high ionic strength conditions implies that sedimentation of the nanoparticles will be a dominant process in marine systems. Despite slower agglomeration in low ionic strength media, almost 68% of carboxylic acid-capped CdTe QDs sedimented after 24 hours in DI water (sedimentation was about 92% in seawater after 24 hours).207 In simulated laboratory studies of marine systems, the estimated settling rate of Cd QD was 4–10 mm per day.189 These settling rates do not take into account environmental processes such as advection, upwelling, and resuspension. Unlike Cd-based QDs, agglomeration of carbon-based QDs in DI water is slow and did not result in observable sedimentation over time.211–213 Thus, relatively fast sedimentation of Cd-based QDs in water, regardless of ionic strength, may be due to the higher density of the metallic QDs in addition to their increased particle size. Hetero-agglomeration between QDs and suspended geogenic and biogenic materials will likely be important due to the abundance of colloids (such as suspended particles, bacteria, etc.) in natural water.203,210 Hetero-agglomeration will increase the settling rates of QDs in natural waters.203,210 There are currently no studies on the hetero-agglomeration of QDs and other geogenic and biogenic materials in natural waters.
3.3 Transformation
The main transformation of Cd-based QDs in the environment is their dissolution (and accompanying structural degradation), which occurs by combined effects of light, water, and oxygen. In addition, the oxidation of both the core and shell of CdSe/ZnS QDs occurred when illuminated in humid oxygenated environments.214,215 The oxidation of CdSe/ZnS in the low moisture conditions led to formation of CdO and ZnO by the core and shell materials, respectively; and the loss of Se, which was likely photo-oxidized to gaseous selenium dioxide.215 While the ZnS shell of Cd-based QDs is not degraded by oxygen, it is not impermeable to oxygen.214,216 Oxidation of ZnS in a humid oxygenated system may have occurred due to reaction with peroxides formed by oxygen radical anion, which demonstrates that ZnS shells are also affected by oxygenation processes.215,217
Carbon QDs absorb solar irradiation within the range of that reaching the earth's surface.212 Rapid photo-bleaching of carbon QDs (i.e., loss of the unique fluorescence signature) will occur when irradiated by sunlight reaching the surface of natural waters. Depending on the precursor and synthesis method of the carbon QD, exposure to natural sunlight may lead to extensive218 or minor structural decomposition in the short term.212 Carbon QDs that are structurally stable after photo-bleaching will persist in the aqueous phase of natural waters and be difficult to detect due to the loss of their fluorescent signature.212 Eventual decomposition of structurally stable carbon QDs will occur (in the order of decades) from reactions with hydroxyl radicals produced by solar irradiation of natural water constituents such as NOM and nitrate.212 Some of the byproducts of the reactions between hydroxyl radical and carbon QDs could persist for several decades, and their toxicity is not well understood.
3.4 Relating QD environmental fate to exposure and adverse effects
Dissolution, agglomeration and transformations are the primary processes affecting QD environmental fate. In turn, these processes also affect what organisms will experience when confronted by QDs in the environment. The majority of available data for these processes addresses Cd-based QDs. For Cd-based and other metallic QDs, dissolution will drive the bioavailability of and exposure to toxic metals, like Cd2+, to organisms. Next, agglomeration of QDs in high ionic strength media decreases the overall surface area of the particles exposed to light and water, which likely plays a role in the decreased dissolution of QDs in seawater.169 Agglomeration also decreases the bioavailability of QDs in seawater since fewer particles will be sufficiently small to passively move through the cell membranes or pass the digestive walls into tissues of organisms. Consequently, the long-term fate of Cd-based QDs in marine systems is the benthic zone, and benthic organisms will likely be exposed to particulate QDs, which will slowly leach Cd ions over time.189 The presence of inorganic shell and surface capping agents improves the colloidal and structural stability of QDs in freshwater systems (Fig. 5), but the impact of these surface modifications is minimal in seawater. In contrast, QDs will dissolve faster in freshwater systems (than seawater) as they slowly settle out to the benthic zone. Therefore, considerable exposure of pelagic and benthic organisms to both Cd QDs and their ions is expected in freshwater systems. Unlike metal-based QDs, carbon-based QDs have a higher colloidal stability in aquatic systems due to their strong surface charge and low density. Depending on their structure, carbon QDs may be rapidly decomposed by sunlight or persist in water for decades. In turbid natural waters where sunlight penetrates inefficiently, carbon QDs might be expected to linger for decades. There are currently no studies on the agglomeration and sedimentation of carbon and graphene QDs in natural waters, but a study of graphene oxide (GO) predicts that it will take almost two years for them to settle out of the euphotic zone of natural seawater.219 On the other hand, fullerene initially (1–3 weeks) rapidly sedimented in lake waters due to the formation of fullerene-dissolved NOM hetero-agglomerates, after which settling was slow for several months.220 Thus, depending on the behavior of carbon-based QDs in natural waters, pelagic organisms may be exposed to more persistent carbon-based QDs for a long time.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of typical QD characteristics including (a) agglomeration and colloidal stability, (b) structure, and (c) effects of environmental conditions (i.e., pristine and weathered) on the dissolution of the QD core releasing cadmium ions. The depicted QDs are composed of cadmium-selenide (CdSe) nanocrystal cores and zinc-sulfide (ZnS) shells. 
4. Environmental effects
4.1 Availability of adverse effects data for QDs
As the emerging concern for engineered nanoparticles grows, the ecotoxicological and environmental risk assessment data for QDs is limited compared to other nanoparticles.221 The majority of ecological and environmental toxicity studies have focused on Cd and other metal based QDs with far fewer studies investigating the adverse effects of newer carbon, graphene, and silicon QDs. The discrepancy between metal and carbon-based QD studies is likely due to the more recent trend to manufacture and utilize carbon-based QDs that are presumably less toxic than metal QDs. We include the available information regarding the toxicity of both carbon-based and heavy metal-based QDs. Additionally, most ecological studies evaluate the effects of QDs using sublethal endpoints (effect concentration 50% (EC50)) which are more sensitive for assessing risk particularly for chronic and subchronic exposures, rather than acute (typically 24–96 hour exposures) or lethal endpoints (lethal dose 50% (LD50) or lethal concentration 50% (LC50)). The majority of these studies are laboratory-based and use QD concentrations that are unrealistically high for likely environmental exposures (see previous discussion in section 2). Studies using higher QD concentrations are useful for predicting the adverse effects of highly contaminated areas, and these are likely extreme scenarios. In addition, dose response studies should be balanced with chronic studies, both of which are lacking in the current literature. Despite the differences in likely environmental exposure and toxicity assessments, overall, there is a range of information on the mode of toxicity and non-target, sublethal effects of many types of QDs on both simple (prokaryotic) and advanced (eukaryotic) organisms (Tables 2 and 3).
Table 2 Median lethal concentration values (LC50) of QDs and equivalent core material concentrations in aquatic species from published studies




Type of quantum dot
Organism
Life stage
Exposure time
Exposure conditions
QD LC50 (mg L−1)
Equivalent core material concentration (mg L−1)
Ref.





GSH = glutathione, GA = gum arabic, TOPO = tri-n-octylphosphine oxide, PMAO = polyanionic polymaleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene, MUA = mercaptoundecanoic acid, PEG = polyethylene glycol, PEO = polyethylene oxide, PLL = poly-L-lysine, COOH = carboxylic acid, MPA = 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane, MPA = mercaptopropionic acid.
a Carbon quantum dot.





CdS-GSH
Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)
Hemocytes
24 h

In vitro exposure
—
9.761
Katsumiti et al., 2014 (ref. 277)


CdS-GSH
Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)
Gill cells
24 h

In vitro exposure
—
9.213
Katsumiti et al., 2014 (ref. 277)


CdSe
Algae (Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata)
—
96 h
25 °C; continuous light
0.0371
9.638
Bouldin et al., 2008 (ref. 222)


CdSe/ZnS

Daphnia pulex

Juvenile (5–7 days)
48 h
20 °C; 16:8 h L:D
1.13 nM
0.168617
Tang et al., 2015 (ref. 289)


CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
48 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light
—
51.1
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
48 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight
—
11.2
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
96 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light
—
7.7
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
96 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight
—
1.4
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnSe-MPA

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
48 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light
—
391.7
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnSe-MPA

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
48 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight
—
384.5
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnSe-MPA

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
96 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light
—
55.8
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnSe-MPA

Daphnia magna

Neonates (<24 h)
96 h
21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight
—
28.1
Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)


CdSe/ZnS-PMAO

Daphnia magna

Neonates
24 h
22 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D
3.1 nM
0.244
Lewinski et al., 2010 (ref. 239)


CdSe/ZnS-MUA

Daphnia magna

Neonates
48 h
20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 5 nm diameter red QDs
0.11
0.09
Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)


CdSe/ZnS-MUA

Daphnia magna

Neonates
48 h
20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 2 nm diameter green QDs
0.35
0.27
Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)


CdSe/ZnS-PEG-COO-
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Embryo 4–6 h
120 h
28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h
22.44
3.147508
King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)


CdSe/ZnS-PEG-NH2
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Embryo 4–6 h
120 h
28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h
15.71
2.360631
King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)


CdSe/ZnS-PEG-OCH3
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Embryo 4–6 hpf
120 h
28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h
33.66
4.721262
King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)


CdSe/ZnS-PEO

Daphnia magna

Neonates
48 h
20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 2 nm diameter green QDs
0.77
0.12
Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)


CdSe/ZnS-PEO

Daphnia magna

Neonates
48 h
20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 5 nm diameter red QDs
3.84
1.46
Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)


CdSe/ZnS-PLL
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Embryo 4–6 h
120 h
28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h
3.3079
0.786877
King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)


CdSe–COOH

Amerimysis bahia

48 h old
48 h
20 °C; 16:8 h light dark; 7 day aged QDs
0.74
0.057
Xiao et al., 2017 (ref. 189)


CdSe–COOH

Amerimysis bahia

48 h old
96 h
20 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 7 day aged QDs
0.29
0.023
Xiao et al., 2017 (ref. 189)


CdSe–COOH

Amerimysis bahia

48 h old
7 day
20 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 7 day aged QDs
0.29
0.023
Xiao et al., 2017 (ref. 189)


CdSe-MPA
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Embryos 6 hpf
120 h
28 ± 0.5 °C; 14:10 h L:D
1.98
—
Zhang et al., 2012 (ref. 265)


CdTe

Daphnia pulex

Juvenile (5–7 days)
48 h
20 °C; 16:8 h L:D
3.29 nM
0.112411
Tang et al., 2015 (ref. 289)


CdTe

Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)
3 weeks old with 1–2 buds
24 h
18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7
—
1.4
Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)


CdTe

Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)
3 weeks old with 1–2 buds
48 h
18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7
—
1.1
Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)


CdTe
Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)
3 weeks old with 1–2 buds
72 h
18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7
—
0.72
Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)


CQDa

Daphnia magna

Neonates
48 h
25 ± 2 °C
160.3
—
Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)


CQDa
Phytoplankton (Scenedesmus obliquus)
—
96 h
25 ± 2 °C; 12:12 h L:D
74.8
—
Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)


CQDa
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Adults
96 h
25 ± 2 °C
97.5
—
Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)


Silicon QD
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Embryos (26 hpf)
120 h
28 °C
40
—
Srivastava et al., 2019 (ref. 291)




Table 3 Summary of sublethal adverse effects of metal and non-metal QDs on prokaryotic and eukaryotic terrestrial and aquatic organisms including lowest observed effect concentrations (LOECs) from published studies




Type of quantum dot
Capping agent or surface modification
Organism
Life stage or tissue
Exposure conditions
Effect
Effect concentration
Concentration range
Cause of effect
Citation





MPEG-SH = thiol-terminated methyl polyethylene glycol, GSH = glutathione, COOH = carboxylic acid, PMAO = polyanionic polymaleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene, PEI = polycationic polyethylenimine, MPA = 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane, PSMA = poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride), MPA = mercaptopropionic acid, MSA = mercaptosuccinic acid, PEG = polyethylene glycol, NH2 = aminated, PAA = polyacrylic acid, EG = ethylene glycol, GA = gum arabic, TGA = thioglycolic acid, Ala = alanine, Gly = glycine, PEN = D-penicillamine.
a Carbon quantum dot.
b Graphene oxide quantum dot.
c Graphene quantum dot.





Cadmium-based QDs


CdS
—
Bakers' yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
Strain BY4742
28 °C
Oxidative stress; increased ROS; decreased GSH; decreased respiratory cytochromes; mitochondrial dysfunction and disrupted morphology
75 mg L−1 QD
75–150 mg L−1 QD
Cadmium ion
Pasquali et al., 2017 (ref. 292)


CdS
MPEG-SH
Blue mussel (Mytilus edulis)
Hemocytes
15 °C; 4 h exposure
Increased genotoxicity and double strand breaks
10 mg L−1 QD
0.1–10 mg L−1 QD
Ions and particles
Munari et al., 2014 (ref. 254)


CdS
GSH
Clam (Scrobicularia plana)
Adults (2.7 ± 0.5 g wet wt)
15 °C; 24 h dark; 14 day static exposure and daily renewal
Impaired foot movement (behavior); accumulation of Cd in clam tissue; increased CAT, SOD, and GST activity; increased CSP-3-like (caspase) activity
10 μg Cd per L
—
Ions and particles
Buffet et al., 2015 (ref. 275)


CdS
—
Daphnid (Daphnia magna)
Neonates (<24 h old)
20 ± 2 °C and 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure
Increased immobilization post UV exposure
0.376 mg L−1
0.38–1 mg L−1
Cadmium ion
Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)


CdS
GSH
Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)
Hemocytes and gill cell
24 h in vitro exposure: 18 °C
Reduced cell viability; oxidative stress through increased ROS, increased DNA damage; increased lysosomal acid phosphatase and multixenobiotic resistance activity; increased internalization of QD into hemocytes; gill cells more sensitive than hemocytes
1 mg Cd per L, hemocytes; 5 mg Cd per L gill cells
0.001–100 mg Cd per L
Cadmium ion
Katsumiti et al., 2014 (ref. 277)


CdS
TOPO
Soybeans (Glycine max)
11 d seedlings
24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure
Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways
200 μg mL−1 vermiculite
—
Particles
Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)


CdS
PVP
Soybeans (Glycine max)
11 d seedlings
24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure
Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways
200 μg mL−1 vermiculite
—
Particles
Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)


CdS
MAA
Soybeans (Glycine max)
11 d seedlings
24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure
Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways
200 μg mL−1 vermiculite
—
Particles
Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)


CdS
GLY
Soybeans (Glycine max)
11 d seedlings
24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure
Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways
200 μg mL−1 vermiculite
—
Particles
Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)


CdS/CdTe
COOH
Mussel (Elliptio complanata)
Adult mussel hemolymph
15 °C; 21 h exposure; QD allowed to aggregate and size fractionated
Increased cytotoxicity; increased phagocytosis in large particles; stimulated immunoactivity
0.42 μg mL−1
0.18–2.7 μg ml−1 Cd
Cadmium ions and aggregates
Bruneau et al., 2013 (ref. 243)


CdS/CdTe
COOH
Mussel (Mytilus edulis)
Adult mussel hemolymph
15 °C; 21 h exposure; QD allowed to aggregate and size fractionated
Increased cytotoxicity; reduced phagocytosis in small particles and increased phagocytosis in large particles; stimulated immunoactivity
0.86 μg mL−1
0.18–2.7 μg ml−1 Cd
Cadmium ions and nanoparticles
Bruneau et al., 2013 (ref. 243)


CdS/CdTe
COOH
Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
Fish leukocytes
Harvested from head kidney tissues; 21 h exposure; QD allowed to aggregate and size fractionated
Decreased cell viability; increased phagocytosis in multiple particle sizes; increased immunoactivity and phagocytic efficiency
0.43μg mL−1 Cd
0.18–2.7 μg ml−1 Cd
Cadmium ions and aggregates
Bruneau et al., 2013 (ref. 243)


CdSe
PMAO or PEI

Bacillus subtilis

—
37 °C; 48 h exposure
Increased mortality
40 nM QD
10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd
Metal ions
Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)


CdSe
PMAO or PEI

Escherichia coli

—
37 °C; 48 h exposure
Reduced growth
>40 nM QD
10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd
Metal ions
Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)


CdSe
MPS

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

—
30 °C; pH 7.4; 24 h dark; 24 h exposure
Reduced growth; increased mortality; ROS formation; QD internalization
10 mg L−1 Cd
10–125 mg L−1 Cd
Metal ions and particles
Priester et al., 2009 (ref. 194)


CdSe
PSMA
Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)
—
21 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; seawater; 5 h and 3 day exposures
Increased Cd release and internalization with increased salinity; increased phytochelatins
0.5 nM QD (240 nM Cd equivalent)
0.4–1 nM QD (20–480 nM Cd equivalent)
Cadmium ion
Morelli et al., 2012 (ref. 202)


CdSe
—
Protozoa (Tetrahymena thermophila)
—
30 °C; QD-exposed bacteria prey; 24 h exposure
Impaired growth and movement; oxidative damage; reduced digestion; low QD degradation after trophic transfer; cadmium biomagnification
3.311 ± 152 mg L−1 Cd in prey bacteria


Cadmium ions
Werlin et al., 2011 (ref. 237)


CdSe/ZnS
—

Bacillus subtilis



37 °C; 48 h exposure with weathered QDs
Reduced growth and increased mortality from weathered QDs
10 nM QD
10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd
Metal ions
Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)


CdSe/ZnS
—

Escherichia coli

—
37 °C; 48 h exposure with weathered QDs
Reduced growth and increased mortality from weathered QDs
10 nM QD
10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd
Metal ions
Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)


CdSe/ZnS
PSMA
Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)
—
21 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; seawater; 5 h and 3 day exposures
Decreased growth rates; increased phytochelatins and ROS; increased SOD and CAT activity; increased Cd release with increased salinity
0.5 nM QD (240 nM Cd equivalent)
0.4–1 nM QD (20–480 nM Cd equivalent)
Cadmium ion and nanoparticle
Morelli et al., 2012 (ref. 202)


CdSe/ZnS
PSMA
Marine diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)
—
21 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; seawater: 7–8 days exposure
Decreased growth rate; growth inhibition; significant protein profile using SELDI-TOF-MS biomarker detection
2.5 nM QD
—
Ions and particles
Scebba et al., 2016 (ref. 293)


CdSe/ZnS
MSA

Caenorhabditis elegans

Adults
15 °C; 6 day exposure
Impaired reproduction and fecundity; higher embryo mortality; prematurely laid embryos; higher frequency of phenotypic deformity; reduced life span
0.10 μM
0.01–1 μM QD
Nanoparticles
Hsu et al., 2012 (ref. 249)


CdSe/ZnS
PEG, NH2, or COOH

Ceriodaphnia dubia

Adult (>72 h)
24 ± 1 °C; 24 h dark; 24 h static exposure; 24 h depuration
Higher levels of QD-COOH retained after depuration; QDs crossed interstitial barrier
8 nM QD
—
Nanoparticles
Feswick et al., 2013 (ref. 241)


CdSe/ZnS
MUA

Daphnia magna



36 h exposure; 3 nm green QDs
QDs localized to gut and intestines; QDs did not dissolve; QDs may have aggregated in exposure media prior to ingestion
15 nmol L−1 QD


Particles
Jackson et al., 2009 (ref. 278)


CdSe/ZnS
MUA

Daphnia magna

—
36 h exposure; 6 nm red QDs
QDs localized to gut and intestines; QDs did not dissolute; QDs may have aggregated in exposure media prior to ingestion
15 nmol L−1 QD


Particles
Jackson et al., 2009 (ref. 278)


CdSe/ZnS
PEG, NH2, or COOH

Daphnia magna

Adult (>72 h)
24 ± 1 °C; 24 h dark; 24 h static exposure followed by 24 h depuration
Internalization of QDs (QD body burdens order COOH > NH2 > PEG); QDs crossed interstitial barrier
8 nM QD
—
Nanoparticles
Feswick et al., 2013 (ref. 241)


CdSe/ZnS
PAA, PMAO, PEG

Daphnia magna

Neonate
22 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; pH 7.2–7.6; 24 h exposure; 48 h depuration
Increased mortality; incomplete gut clearance during depuration; increased QD retention with feeding; cadmium and nanoparticle accumulation
7.7 nM QD (0.6 ppm Cd)
—
Nanoparticles
Lewinski et al., 2010 (ref. 239)


CdSe/ZnS
GA

Daphnia magna

Juvenile (4–6 d)
20 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 48 h static exposure; UV-B irradiation
Decreased survival; increased ROS production; increased Cd2+ release with UV-B irradiation
30 μg L−1 QD
0, 0.95, 3, 9.5, 30, and 94.9 μg L−1 QDs
Cadmium ion
Kim et al., 2010 (ref. 294)


CdSe/ZnS
MPA

Daphnia magna

Juvenile (4–6 d)
20 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 48 h static exposure; UV-B irradiation
Decreased vitellogenin expression with UV-B; increased Cd2+ release with UV-B irradiation
3 μg L−1 QD
0, 0.95, 3, 9.5, 30, and 94.9 μg L−1 QDs
Cadmium ion
Kim et al., 2010 (ref. 294)


CdSe/ZnS
MPA

Alfalfa (Medicago sativa)
Cells
24 °C; 24 h dark
Increased SOD, catalase, and glutathione reductase activity; increased single and double strand breaks; upregulation of DNA repair enzymes and antioxidant defense genes
10 nM QD
10, 50 and 100 nM QD
Particles
Santos et al., 2013 (ref. 255)


CdSe/ZnS
COOH
Plant (Arabidopsis thaliana)
Rosette production stage (3–4 weeks)
Hoaglands solution; 27 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; pH 6.0; 1–7 day exposures; humic acid co-exposure
Intact QDs absorbed into root cell wall (no internalized QDs); cadmium ion internalized into cells; increased oxidative stress through decreased GSH in treatment with humic acids
5.8 nM QD (5 μg mL−1 Cd)
—
Cadmium ions
Navarro et al., 2012 (ref. 224)


CdSe/ZnS
PEG-COO–
Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
Embryos (eyed egg stage)
10 ± 0.5 °C; pH 8.0; 24 h dark; 14 day static exposure
Increased mortality; increased gill ventilation frequency; increased heart rate; decreased behavioral responses; increased developmental malformations; QD localized in the gills/head
4 × 10–9 mol L−1 QD
—
Ions and particles
Jurgelėnė et al., 2018 (ref. 229)


CdSe/ZnS
—
Atlantic killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus)
Adults
20 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 20 ± 2 ppt salinity; static; fed 2× daily QD discs; 85 day exposure
Maternal transfer of Cd into eggs; increased male expression of vitellogenin; impaired fecundity; cadmium accumulation in liver
10 μg QD per day
1–10 μg QD per day
Ions
Blickley et al., 2014 (ref. 263)


CdSeS/ZnS
COOH
Bacteria (Vibrio fischeri)
—
QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 30 min exposure
EC20 of bioluminescence inhibition for 30 min exposure pre and post UV exposure
0.293 mg L−1 (pre), 0.012 mg L−1 (post)
QDs 0.209–0.75 mg L−1
Cadmium ion
Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)


CdSeS/ZnS
COOH
Green algae (Chlorella vulgaris)
—
20 ± 3 °C; 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure
Reduced growth rate
0.251 μg L−1
QDs 0.209–0.75 mg L−1
Cadmium ion
Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)


CdSeS/ZnS
COOH
Microalgae (Raphidocelis subcapitata)
—
20 ± 3 °C; 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure
Reduced growth rate
0.625 mg L−1
0.209–0.75 mg L−1
Cadmium ion
Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)


CdSeS/ZnS
COOH
Crustacean (Daphnia magna)
Neonates (<24 h old)
20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure
Increased immobilization post UV exposure
0.263 mg L−1 EC20 (pre), 0.526 mg L−1 EC20 (post),
0.282 to 0.75 mg L−1
Cadmium ion
Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)


CdSe/CdZnS
PAA-EG

Arabidopsis thaliana

—
23 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 75% humidity
Leaf chlorosis; QD translocation to leaves
10 μg mL−1
—
Ions and particles
Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)


CdSe/CdZnS
PEI

Arabidopsis thaliana

—
23 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 75% humidity
Leaf chlorosis; decreased leaf size; QD translocation to leaves
10 μg mL−1
—
Ions and particles
Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)


CdSe/CdZnS
PAA-EG
Caterpillar (Trichoplusia ni)
Newly hatched
23 °C; 24 h continuous light; 50% humidity; 7 day exposure
Reduced weight gain; trophic transfer of QDs
10 μg mL−1
—
Ions and particles
Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)


CdSe/CdZnS
PEI
Caterpillar (Trichoplusia ni)
Newly hatched
23 °C; 24 h continuous light; 50% humidity; 7 day exposure
Reduced weight gain; trophic transfer of QDs
10 μg mL−1
—
Ions and particles
Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)


CdTe
TGA
Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)
Inoculated fresh stock
21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure
Decreased growth rate; internalization of QDs; increased Cd internal concentration
200 ng mL−1 Cd
100–300 ng mL−1 Cd
Cadmium ion
Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)


CdTe
COOH
Protozoan (Paramecium caudatum)
—
22 °C; 24 h D; 24–72 h exposure
Bioaccumulation of QDs; biomagnification of QDs through trophic transfer (BMF = 1.1–1.4); decreased bacterial grazing ability with increasing exposure; decreased reproductive potential; decreased growth rate
25 mg L−1
25–75 mg L−1
Particles
Gupta et al., 2017 (ref. 236)


CdTe
TGA
Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)
3 weeks old with 1–2 buds
18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7; 24, 48, and 72 h exposures
Impaired reproduction (budding rate); impaired regenerative capability; decreased reproduction; decreased cell proliferation; increased apoptosis
0.4 mg L−1 Cd
1–100 nM QD (0.04–4.0 mg L−1 Cd)
Particles
Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)


CdTe
TGA
Freshwater mussel (Elliptio complanate)
Adults
15 °C; 24 h static exposure
Altered metallothionein concentrations in gill, digestive gland, and gonads; accumulation of Cd in gills and digestive tissues
1.6 mg L−1 Cd
0–8 mg Cd per L
Cadmium ion
Peyrot et al., 2009 (ref. 295)


CdTe
TGA
Freshwater mussel (Elliption complanate)
Mature, 5–7 cm shell length
15 °C; 8:16 h L:D; freshwater; static 24 h exposure
Oxidative stress through increased LPO in gills; reduced phagocytic activity and hemocyte viability; genotoxicity through increased DNA strand breaks; increasing aggregation of QDs in FW
1.6 mg L−1
1.6–8 mg L−1
Cadmium ions and nanoparticles
Gagne et al., 2008 (ref. 262)


CdTe
COOH
Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)
Adults
16.6 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 36‰ salinity; 14 day; static-renewal
Cd accumulation in gonads; decreased superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione-S-transferase activity; increased glutathione peroxidase activity; metallothionein induction in females; increased lipid peroxidation
10 μg L−1 QD
—
Cadmium ion and nanoparticle
Gonçalves et al. 2020 (ref. 296)


CdTe
Ala and gly
Domestic silk moth (Bombyx mori)
48 h-old 5th instar
25 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 70–90% humidity; single 10 μL QD injection; 6–120 h sampling time
Cytotoxicity, oxidative stress, and reproductive impairment; increased ROS in gonads; increased apoptosis and autophagy; decreased sperm production and quality; reduced fertilization rate; sex-specific toxicity differences
0.32 nmol QD
0.32–0.64 nmol QD
Ions and particles
Yan et al., 2016 (ref. 267)


CdTe
GSH
Freshwater macrophyte (Lemna minor)
—
OECD test 221; 24 ± 2 °C; pH 6.8 ± 0.1; 7 day exposure
Inhibited growth rate and biomass
0.03 mg L−1 Cd
0.01–15 mg L−1
Cadmium ions
Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 226)


CdTe
MPA
Freshwater macrophyte (Lemna minor)
—
OECD test 221; 24 ± 2 °C; pH 6.8 ± 0.1; 7 day exposure
Inhibited growth rate and biomass: cadmium bioaccumulation
0.02 mg L−1 Cd
0.01–15 mg L−1
Cadmium ions
Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 226)


CdTe
—
Onion (Allium cepa)
1–2 g bulbs
22 ± 1 °C; 15:9 h L:D; 24 and 72 h exposures
Lower root growth; cadmium dissolution and uptake in roots
30 μm
30–100 μm Cd
Cadmium ions
Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 227)


CdTe/ZnS
—
Onion (Allium cepa)
1–2 g bulbs
22 ± 1 °C; 15:9 h L:D; 24 and 72 h exposures
Low particle dissolution and cadmium uptake; particles adsorbed on roots
>100 μm
30–100 μm Cd
—
Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 227)


CdTe/CdS/ZnS
—
Onion (Allium cepa)
1–2 g bulbs
22 ± 1 °C; 15:9 h L:D; 24 and 72 h exposures
Lower root growth; cadmium dissolution and uptake in roots
30 μm
30–100 μm Cd
Cadmium ions
Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 227)


CdTe
MPA
Wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum)
5 day old
25 °C; 8:16 h L:D; 5 day exposure
Decreased root and shoot growth; increased lipid oxidation; increased MDA
25 mg L−1 QD
25–400 mg L−1 QD
Ions and particles
Chen et al., 2014 (ref. 270)


CdTe
MPA
Wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum)
5 day old
25 °C; 8:16 h L:D; UV-B radiation (10 kJ m−2 d−1); 5 day exposure
Increased apoptosis and DNA damage; decreased chlorophyll a and b; increased ROS; increased SOD and dehydroascorbate activity; decreased CAT, ascorbate peroxidase, and glutathione peroxidase activity; increased Cd accumulation in roots; reduced plant height and root length; increased release of Cd
200 mg L−1 QD
—
Ions and particles
Chen et al., 2014 (ref. 270)


CdTe/CdS
COOH
Freshwater algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii)
—
25 ± 1 °C; 14:10 h L:D; freshwater; 96 h exposure
Reduced growth; synergistic effects with Cd ion co-exposure which increased cytotoxicity
3.571 mg L−1 QD
0.5–6 mg L−1 QD
Ions and particles
Yu et al., 2018 (ref. 297)


CdTe/CdS
TGA
Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)
—
21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure
Decreased growth rate; increased Cd internal concentration
300 ng mL−1 Cd
100–300 ng mL−1 Cd
Cadmium ion
Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)


CdTe/SiO2
TGA
Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)
—
21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure
Decreased growth rate; increased Cd internal concentration
300 ng mL−1 Cd
100–300 ng mL−1 Cd
Cadmium ion
Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)


CdTe/ZnS
TGA
Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)
—
21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure
Increased Cd internal concentration
>300 ng mL−1 Cd
100–300 ng mL−1 Cd
Cadmium ion
Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)


Non-metal QDs


InZnP
GSH
Human
Skin cells
37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs
Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation
>200 nM pristine QD
6.25–200 nM Qd
Ions and secondary degradation products
Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)


InZnP/ZnS
PEN
Human
Skin cells
37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs
Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation;
6.25 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD
6.25–200 nM QD
Ions and secondary degradation products
Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)


InZnP/ZnS
GSH
Human
Skin cells
37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs
Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation
6.25 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD
6.25–200 nm QD
Ions and secondary degradation products
Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)


InZnPS
PEN
Human
Skin cells
37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs
Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation; reduced metabolic activity
12.5 nM weathered QD; 50 nM pristine QD
6.25–200 nm QD
Ions and secondary degradation products
Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)


InZnPS
GSH
Human
Skin cells
37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs
Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation;
12.5 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD
6.25–200 nm QD
Ions and secondary degradation products
Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)


InZnPS/ZnS
PEN
Human
Skin cells
37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs
Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation;
12.5 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD
6.25–200 nm QD
Ions and secondary degradation products
Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)


InZnPS/ZnS
GSH
Human
Skin cells
37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs
Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation
12.5 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD
6.25–200 nM QD
Ions and secondary degradation products
Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)


Silicon QD
Sulfonate

Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Embryos (26 hpf)
28 °C; 120 h exposure; co-exposure with 450 nm blue LED light for 6 h
Blue light increased silicon QD toxicity; increased malformation and mortality rate
40 mg L−1
10–50 mg L−1 QD


Srivastava et al., 2019 (ref. 291)


Carbon-based QDs


CQDa
—

Phytoplankton (Scenedesmus obliquus)
—
25 ± 2 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 24–96 h exposure
Oxidative stress and ROS formation; increased LPO and SOD activity; growth inhibition; reduced chlorophyll a
50 mg L−1 QD
5–500 mg L−1 QD


Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)


GOQDb
—

Green algae (Chlorella vulgaris)
—
24 ± 0.5 °C; 24–96 h exposure
Oxidative stress and ROS formation; increased SOD activity; increased cell permeability; reduced mitochondrial membrane potential; altered cell morphology; inhibited cell division
0.01 mg L−1
0.01–10 mg L−1
Nanoparticles
Ouyang et al., 2015 (ref. 281)


GQDc
—
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
4 hpf
28 °C; 14:10 h L:D; 7 day exposure
Upregulation of inflammatory and detoxifying genes; induction of AP-1 transcription factor for downstream regulation; activated acute inflammatory responses and redox signaling pathway; increased apoptosis
25 μg mL−1
0–100 μg mL−1
GQD particles
Deng et al., 2018 (ref. 257)


GQDc
Reduced
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Adult
26 ± 0.5 °C; 12:12 h L:D; static exposure renewed daily; 7 day exposure; 14 day recovery
Increased DNA methylation in gill, liver, and intestines; increased DNA methylation in liver and intestine after recovery period
2 mg L−1 QD
2–50 mg L−1 QD
Particles
Hu et al., 2019 (ref. 273)


GQDc
Hydroxylated (OH)

Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Adult
26 ± 0.5 °C; 12:12 h L:D; static exposure renewed daily; 7 day exposure; 14 day recovery
Increased DNA methylation in gill, liver, and intestines
2 mg L−1 QD
2–50 mg L−1 QD
Particles
Hu et al., 2019 (ref. 273)


GQDc
Aminated (NH2)
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Adult
26 ± 0.5 °C; 12:12 h L:D; static exposure renewed daily; 7 day exposure; 14 day recovery
Increased DNA methylation in gill, liver, and intestines; increased DNA methylation in liver and intestine after recovery period
2 mg L−1 QD
2–50 mg L−1 QD
Particles
Hu et al., 2019 (ref. 273)




4.2 Routes of exposure
Once QDs enter the environment, the predicted primary routes of exposure are through oral and dermal pathways for animals and cell membrane for bacteria, cell walls for algae, and through root uptake in plants. As noted above, a unique quality of QDs compared to other contaminants is their fluorescence which is easily measured and is useful for detecting intact QDs in various media, including exposed organisms and their cells. Consequently, fluorescence detection is often used to quantify QD exposure and distribution in tissues in plants and aquatic organisms used in laboratory-based studies.105,222 For example, via fluorescent imaging, Cd QDs were demonstrated to interact with the root system of plants with limited evidence of QD translocation into root tissue or transport into vascular tissues to shoots/leaves, particularly with varieties of QDs with shells.223–226 Both terrestrial and aquatic plants can easily uptake and accumulate cadmium ions released from QD dissolution into plant tissues to be transferred throughout food webs. As fluorescent imaging only detects intact QDs, the routes of exposure for the core and shell materials of degraded QDs (i.e., ionic metals) are more challenging to measure and, consequently, difficult to assess.
4.3 Bioavailability
As our understanding of QD environmental exposure and fate has increased, appreciation of the environmental variables affecting QD bioavailability has improved. First, like some other nanoparticles (e.g., silver nanoparticles), the bioavailability of QDs can be characterized in two modes: (1) the entire QD nanoparticle itself and potential for the nanoparticle to interact with biological receptors, and (2) the degraded QDs and released core and shell materials such as metal ions (Fig. 5). The bioavailability of both of these modes of QDs need to be considered when assessing the potential for the nanoparticle to interact with biological receptors. Both of these modes can be combined as the nanoparticle enters the organism allowing a more targeted and higher exposure of dissolved metal ions to occur closer to the receiving tissues.228,229 The majority of ecotoxicological studies on QDs are performed under controlled laboratory conditions presumably due to the methodological difficulties associated with the recovery and quantification of QDs in the environment (see discussions in sections 2 and 3). This is a characteristic that QDs share with other nanoparticles (e.g., single-walled carbon nanotubes, titanium dioxide).230,231 However, the conditions affecting bioavailability in actual ecological systems vary drastically from controlled laboratory settings. For example, Mahendra et al.168 found degradation of QDs occurred at lower rates under neutral pH laboratory conditions compared to acidic (pH 4) or alkaline (pH 10) conditions.
In addition, any phenomena limiting the interaction of the QDs with an organism affects bioavailability. Therefore, the environmental variables discussed in the environmental fate section including nanoparticle agglomeration and sorption to NOM reduce the bioavailability of QDs through increased particle size, slowing degradation, and the resulting lower rates of metal ion dissolution.189,232 Agglomeration can slow QD degradation processes, but can also increase the potential for QDs to be ingested by filter-feeding organisms. For example, many commercially important bivalves (e.g., oysters) filter particles in the 10–30 μm size range, and would not retain nanoscale QDs unless they were agglomerated into larger sizes.233 Overall, the shells of metallic QDs reduce and slow the release of cadmium and other metal ions from the core (Fig. 5), but they do not perfectly encapsulate the core. Shells also limit the bioavailability of metal ions to organisms when the QDs are pristine, but after prolonged weathering in the environment the QDs degrade and eventually the core materials may become more bioavailable.189,228
4.4 Pristine and weathered QDs
Another approach for assessing the potential adverse effects of QDs is whether the nanoparticles are new (pristine) or weathered (transformed). Once QDs enter aquatic systems, the nanoparticles begin weathering which is driven by the processes discussed in Section 3 resulting in the release of core materials as well as development of a biofilm of naturally-occurring organic molecules and bacteria. Weathered QD solutions tend to be more acutely and sublethally toxic due to the release and increased bioavailability of ionized toxic metals. Despite the importance of weathering on QD behavior, few studies specifically assess the toxicity of weathered versus pristine QDs, and those that do often use bacteria as a model to compare acute toxicity thresholds. Bacteria are a model organism due to their ubiquitous nature and their importance in ecosystems including their interaction with environmental contaminants. A study using CdSe QDs with multiple organic surface coatings found that QDs weathered in acidic (pH < 4) or alkaline (pH 10) conditions resulted in higher bacterial mortality in Bacillus subtilis and E. coli.168 This effect was attributed to increased release of cadmium ions compared to exposure in normal laboratory solutions at a neutral pH.168 Low and high naturally occurring pH conditions are often found in reduced sediment environments and freshwater lakes, respectively. Irradiation and photolysis of QDs also significantly degrades nanoparticles and resulted in higher bacterial mortality.171 Even indium-based QDs, a non-cadmium variety, weathered under UV light caused significant bacterial cell mortality compared to pristine InP QDs which had almost no effect on cell survival.23
4.5 Bioaccumulation/biomagnification
While bioaccumulation and biomagnification are not adverse effects, these processes often need to occur before adverse effects take place in an organism. Although toxic metal-based QDs are not highly bioaccumulative, QDs can be transferred to higher trophic levels via prey consumption with internalized QDs leading to oral exposure through food chain (trophic) transfer and possible biomagnification a higher tropic levels largely dependent on environmental conditions and QD uptake in food sources.234,235 Single-celled prokaryotes and eukaryotes, including bacteria, algae, and protozoans, are particularly susceptible to QD cell internalization and accumulation.236 A study detected ingested CdSe QDs present in the digestive tract of Ceriodaphnia dubia that were fed microalgae exposed to CdSe QDs.222 Other studies found intact QDs nanoparticles were detected in the intestines and within some body tissues of fish (Danio rerio) with limited cadmium ion release after two trophic transfers.235 Bacteria-to-protozoa transfer of QDs resulted in CdSe quantum dot biomagnification due to the presence of protozoan food vacuoles which accumulate intact QDs,237 and therefore could be passed to higher trophic organisms. CdTe QDs both accumulate in bacteria and are transferred to predatory protozoans at a biomagnification factor of 1.4 as evidenced by both fluorescent imaging and internal Cd concentrations,236 thus demonstrating diet may be an important route of exposure for QDs. In plants, cadmium ions released from CdTe-MPA QDs in freshwater accumulated within the tissues of the macrophyte Lemna minor at a bioaccumulation factor of 5211.227 The potential transfer from primary producers to consumers must also be considered as a possible source of QDs entering food webs. Arabidopsis thaliana treated with CdSe/CdZnS QDs, which were found to translocate into the plant tissues, were fed to caterpillars (Trichopulsia ni) resulting in reduced weight gain of up to 80% compared to the controls.238 Therefore, the environmental conditions and the physiology of the organisms at each trophic level, as well as the structure and surface modifications of the QDs, contribute substantially to the ability of toxic metal-based QDs or dissolved metal ions to be passed up the food chain and possibly biomagnify (although this phenomena has not been reported).
4.6 Toxicokinetics
Toxicokinetics is the movement of toxicants into an organism and how the compound moves throughout the body. There is evidence that QDs are retained in the gut of macroorganisms and the retention period is largely due to varying surface modifications. daphnids (Daphnia magna) exposed to CdSe/ZnS QDs with surface coatings of PEG, PAA–PEG, PMAO, or PMAO–PEG for 24 hours demonstrated various levels of retention in the following 48 hours of depuration.239 The longer QDs persist in the digestive tract, the higher the potential for QDs to degrade and increase the bioavailability of toxic cadmium ion, particularly in acidic environments such as the stomachs of many organisms or acidic food vacuoles of protozoans.240 For example, D. magna fed during the depuration period actually retained more QDs because sorption to organic carbon facilitated higher uptake of QDs and subsequently resulted in higher levels of internalized cadmium than individuals that were not fed. However, there is the possibility of reduced cadmium toxicity in some circumstances due to lower cadmium ion bioavailability when sorbed to organic carbon. QDs with charged functionalized surfaces (both positively and negatively charged groups) resulted in higher nanoparticle uptake and cellular internalization in the freshwater daphnids D. magna and Ceriodaphnia magna than uncharged QDs.241 As discussed above, different types of surface coatings significantly contribute to the ability of QDs to agglomerate, degrade, and interact with tissues in the digestive tract.239 In mollusks, the digestive tissues and hepatopancreas are targets for QD accumulation and toxicity.233,242 The high retention of Cd-based QDs in the digestive tract suggests that continuous exposure to QDs can lead to increased accumulation of QDs within the body of aquatic organisms. Different filter feeding organisms preferentially retain differing size classes of agglomerates or particulates, thus leading to potential differences in dissolution/degradation rates of QDs within the body.241,243 Once inside the body, there are multiple ways that QDs can enter a cell. Due to their small size, QDs can be engulfed via phagocytosis or cross cellular membranes when functionalized with a bioactive molecule.244 QDs can interact intracellularly with organelles (i.e., mitochondria), lipid membranes, and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
4.7 Effects of surface modification on toxicity
As discussed, it is well-established that QD toxicity varies due to their composition and physiochemical properties as well as the environmental conditions affecting bioavailability.105 However, some generalizations can be made about the similarities between the most common core components of metallic QDs such as Cd-based QDs. Functionalized QDs with surface modifications may pose higher targeted toxicity than unmodified QDs because some surface modifications are designed to effectively interact with biological moieties.244,245 For example, functionalized QDs are more common in biomedical and bioimaging applications, whereas unmodified QDs are typically used in manufactured commercial and consumer products. Therefore, QD design and behavior under exposure conditions can play an important role in the non-targeted toxicity of QDs to organisms, especially if the QD's surface is modified. As noted, the focus of this review is on environmental exposure to QDs not exposures resulting from biomedical use of QDs. However, as their use increases, biomedical QDs may enter the environment at some point in their life cycles. This analysis suggests these modified QDs may represent a greater risk of adverse effects than QDs in manufactured commercial and consumer products.
4.8 Forms of toxicity
The following section discusses the various forms of acute and sublethal toxicity reported in the scientific literature.

4.8.1 Acute toxicity. 
The primary mode of acute toxicity from metal-based QDs is through the release of metal ions from the core (Fig. 5). However, few studies have determined LC50 values because the concentration of QDs resulting in median mortality are higher than current potential environmentally-relevant concentrations (see section 2). Additionally, nearly all acute toxicity studies using aquatic species have been limited to evaluations of Cd-based QDs. There are few studies reporting lethality values using other varieties of QDs (Table 2). This is largely due to the lower acute toxicity associated with carbon-based and silicon QDs and nanoparticles. For example, studies of other carbon-based nanoparticles (e.g., single-wall carbon nanotubes) have also found very limited acute toxicity to aquatic organisms.246,247 Because the acute toxicity associated with Cd-based QDs is understood to be associated with weathering of the core, most ecotoxicology studies on these QDs use a cadmium salt (e.g., CdCl2) as a positive ion control to confirm acute toxicity is associated with cadmium ion release. This approach is standard practice for metal nanoparticles research.
LC50s of many cadmium and selenium-based QDs are often lower (i.e., more toxic) for QDs without shells or surface modifications based on the overall QD structure and the environmental conditions of the exposure (Table 2). The capping agents and shell material of QDs may also lead to distinct differences in acute toxicity observed between cadmium ions and intact QD nanoparticles.248 For example, the round worm C. elegans exposed to QD with a CdSe core and a ZnS shell modified with mercaptosuccinic acid resulted in no significant mortality after a 24 hour exposure compared to a Cd2+ LC50 of 1487.3 ± 1.9 μM, which was comparable to the total cadmium concentration of the intact QDs in the same treatments.249 Surface modifications that increase QD stability, such as polyethylene oxide, are shown to reduce short-term acute toxicity250 as the toxic metals are bound in the crystalline core structure and are not immediately bioavailable especially in capped QDs with shells. In addition, different sizes of QDs display significant differences in acute toxicity.250 However, sublethal effects, ranging from transcriptomic alteration and DNA damage to impaired growth and reproduction must be considered in a comprehensive analysis of the environmental toxicity of QDs.229,249 Like many nanoparticles that are not acutely toxic (e.g., carbon nanotubes or TiO2), LC50 values are not the most important endpoints for evaluating relevant QDs risk to ecological systems. Sublethal endpoints sensitive to nanoparticles are far more relevant for chronic and sub-chronic exposures and understanding transgenerational and transcriptomic impacts related to population health because they are associated with realistic concentrations of QDs occurring in the environment compared to high concentrations used in short-term acute exposure scenarios.


4.8.2 Sublethal toxicity. 
At sublethal concentrations, many varieties of QDs share similar mechanisms of toxicity (Table 3). Several types of sublethal endpoints are discussed below, including (i) cytotoxicity, (ii) transcriptomic alteration, (iii) immunotoxicity, (iv) reproductive effects, (v) growth and development, (vi) transgenerational toxicity, and (vii) behavioral effects.
(i) Cytotoxicity. 
One of the main concerns with Cd-based QDs is that released cadmium ions are highly cytotoxic.244,251 The extent of QD cytotoxicity is attributed to the physiochemical properties of the QD variety (e.g., size, shell material, surface modifications, capping agents) and the exposure conditions (i.e., agglomeration, weathering, oxidation, pH) which all contribute to QD stability and release of metal ions.105 In addition to the known cytotoxicity associated with ionic cadmium, QD nanoparticles have been shown to cause additional cytotoxicity via similar pathways as cadmium ions due to the unique effects of nanosized particles,249,252 which is discussed in detail below. Even carbon-based QDs induce cytotoxicity through oxidative stress pathways due to nanoparticle effects.253 Cadmium reduces antioxidants in cells, which leads to ROS formation, increased activity of super oxide dismutase (SOD), and oxidative stress of cells and tissues. Further, increased ROS contributes to DNA damage such as double strand breaks, retardation of DNA repair mechanisms, and can lead to apoptosis and genotoxicity.251,254 ROS formation ultimately leads to a cascade of other cellular, tissue, and organismal-level effects, such as immune and reproductive system impairment (see adverse outcome pathway (AOP) (Fig. 6) discussed below) in a range of organisms.
 Fig. 6  Example adverse outcome pathway (AOP) for the molecular initiating events (MIE) of oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species formation associated with QD exposure resulting in a cascade of negative effects to aquatic organisms. Blue arrows indicate induction pathways and red arrows indicate inhibitory pathways. Dashed arrows indicate indirect and proposed effects. 
Animals are not the only organisms affected by QD-induced cytotoxicity. Cytotoxicity and formation of ROS has occurred in plants and, due to their small size, single-celled organisms, such as yeast, bacteria, microalgae, and protozoans, which have extensive interaction with QDs at the molecular level leading to high rates of cytotoxicity. For example, when exposed to 10 nM CdSe/ZnS-MPA QDs, alfalfa (Medicago sativa) cells produced higher levels of SOD, glutathione (GSH), and catalase (CAT) in response to oxidative stress.255 In addition, Xu et al.256 found that low levels of CdTe QDs (0.5–10 nM), well below the concentrations needed to inhibit bacterial growth, activated prophages, or silent viruses, inside bacteria related to increased production of ROS. In green algae (Scenedesmus obliquus), exposure to 200 mg L−1 carbon QDs induced ROS formation and significantly increased the activity of SODs and lipid peroxidation (LPO) levels.253
(ii) Transcriptomic alteration. 
Cytotoxicity can lead to transcriptomic alterations, resulting in dysregulated biochemical pathways. Transcriptomic alterations can be measured using targeted quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis or comprehensive microarray and RNAseq technologies to detect a suite of differentially expressed genes. The majority of transcriptomic changes measured in plants, animals and microorganisms are related to disrupted oxidative stress, mitochondrial function, metabolic and detoxification pathways.257–259 Plant transcriptomes also undergo significant alterations associated with oxidative stress when exposed to Cd-based QDs. Soybean seedlings (Glycine max) exposed to CdS modified with TOP, MAA, PVP, and GLY all resulted in transcriptomic alteration of transmembrane proteins involved in the uptake of metal ions, which was primarily attributed to QD particle toxicity rather than cadmium ion toxicity.259 This led to downstream alterations in biosynthesis and metabolic pathways where many metabolites play important roles in oxidative stress response and detoxification.259 An Arabidopsis thaliana (thale cress plant) mutant showed considerably different transcriptomic profiles in response to CdS QDs compared to wild-type plants, suggesting that some plants may exhibit a range of sensitivities to Cd-based QDs due to genetic mutations.260 Additionally, the transcriptomic alterations associated with oxidative stress due to QD nanoparticle exposure are significantly different than pathways associated with the ionic cadmium control derived from the standard CdSO4 salt in both plants and baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae).258,260,261 Similarly, in one of the rare environmental toxicity studies on graphene QDs (GQDs), they were found to alter gene expression in inflammation, detoxification, and ROS-responsive pathways largely due to the activation of the transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1) mediated by ROS production.257 The obvious similarities in transcriptomic pathway alterations associated with QD exposures pinpoints the production of ROS by the nanoparticles itself as the key cause of these effects.
(iii) Immunotoxicity. 
Proper immune response, such a phagocytotic activity, is necessary for organisms to remove harmful exogenous stressors. In freshwater mussels (Elliptio complanata), Gagne et al.262 reported reduced phagocytic activity and hemocyte viability in response to CdTe QD exposure, both of which are immune responses directly involved in removing exogenous toxicicants. In the phagocytotic response in mussels (Mytilus edulis and Elliptio complanata), hemolymph was reduced during exposure to larger agglomerates and higher concentrations of CdS/CdTe QDs, with differences in species sensitivities attributed to the interactive effects of saltwater versus freshwater (i.e., higher ionic strength of saltwater).243 A reduction in phagocytotic activity can be correlated to a decrease in overall organismal health.
(iv) Reproductive effects. 
QDs adversely affect the reproduction and fecundity of several organisms, and the severity of impaired reproduction differs between organisms and the composition of the QDs. The disruption of vitellogenin (an egg-yolk precursor protein) production has been associated with QD exposure.263 Vitellogenin is vital for the successful production of eggs in females, and disruption of the production of the vitellogenin gene (vtg) or protein can cause adverse reproductive effects. QD-indolicidin exposure led to multi-generational reduction in vtg production in the daphnid D. magna, subsequently leading to reduced fecundity across all generations.264 Cadmium QD exposure causes lower hatch rates and embryo survival and is associated with disrupted egg production in both vertebrate and invertebrate models.249,265,266 Male reproduction is also adversely affected by reduced sperm production and quality leading to reduced fertilization rates in male domestic silk moths (Bombyx mori),267 and there is some evidence of endocrine disruption by increased vtg expression in male estuarine fish (Fundulus heteroclitus).263 Therefore, the effects of QDs on reproduction are not only limited to egg production in females, but reduced hatching and embryo survival may be due to adverse impacts on both male and female reproduction.
(v) Growth and development. 
QD exposure during critical windows of development leads to reduced growth in several organisms. Embryonic and larval organisms are particularly susceptible to long-term developmental effects, especially with chronic exposures throughout early developmental periods. Certain QD varieties, particularly Cd-based QDs, are even teratogenic and cause severe malformations of offspring.249,265,266,268 Embryonic rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) experienced about a 5-fold higher incidence of malformations when exposed to 4 × 10−9 mol L−1 CdSe/ZnS QDs for 14 days compared to one day, demonstrating how sub-chronic QD exposure during sensitive periods can have long-term effects.229 Similarly, zebrafish embryos experienced significant developmental malformations and severely altered vascular patterning when exposed to 12.15 mg L−1 CdSe-MPA.265 Offspring growth is also heavily affected by maternal exposure to QDs, which caused reduced growth rates of offspring in the daphnid D. magna.264 Adult organisms exposed to QDs also experience reduced lifespan associated with dysregulation of reproduction in mature round worm C. elegans.249 Even diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum) growth rates decreased in response to QDs both with and without a shell (CdSe and CdSe/ZnS), likely due to the negative impacts of ROS and SOD formation.269 Terrestrial plants, such as wheat, experienced reduced shoot and root growth when exposed concurrently to CdTe QDs and UV-B radiation.270 Exposure during critical developmental timepoints can have long-term impacts, and exposure in advanced stages reduces growth and lifespan of a variety of organisms.271
(vi) Transgenerational toxicity. 
Toxic metal ions are known to cause transgenerational effects in both vertebrate and invertebrate species through (1) maternal transfer of metals to offspring263 and (2) epigenetic and prolonged transcriptomic alterations.267,272,273 Cadmium QDs also display transgenerational effects from cadmium ions manifesting in reduced fecundity, offspring reproduction, and offspring growth, which can be linked to prolonged adverse population-level impacts.272 Contreras et al.274 determined that Cd-based QDs (CdSe) without a shell prevented normal offspring growth and caused reproductive impairments in subsequent generations compared to exposure to CdSe QDs with a ZnS shell; therefore, the toxic effects of the core-type QD are likely due to higher release of metal ions unhindered by the shell. In the estuarine fish, F. heteroclitus, internalized QDs accumulated in the liver and cadmium was detected in the eggs of parents fed CdSe/ZnS QDs daily.263 This observation raised concern for the transfer of QDs from the liver to eggs via egg yolk production pathways. In zebrafish, graphene QD exposure caused increased DNA methylation, which is a major mechanism for controlling the expression of certain genes through epigenetics.273 The evidence for both cadmium- and carbon-based QDs causing transgenerational effects raises concerns for possibility of population-level impacts.
(vii) Behavioral effects. 
Normal behaviors are fundamental for the survival of species. This is accomplished by successful foraging, prey capture, predator avoidance, reproduction, and reducing unnecessary movements that can compromise an organism's chance of survival. The foot movement and filter feeding activity of the bivalve Scrobicularia plana was significantly reduced in response to subchronic exposure to CdS QDs, and these behavioral changes were more pronounced in QD exposures compared to ionic Cd at the same concentrations.275 Nest-making behavior was reduced in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) larvae after short 4 day and sub-chronic 14 day exposures to 4 × 10−9 mol L−1 CdSe/ZnS–COOH QD (2659 μg L−1 equivalent Cd).229 Larval zebrafish swimming speeds were altered after exposure to CdTe-TGA QDs using behavioral tests designed to assess locomotion responses to stress.276 Disruption of normal locomotion and feeding activities suggest that QDs may be neurotoxic and prolonged exposure may have adverse impacts at the organism-level.

4.9 Unique aspects of QD nanoparticle toxicity
Like some other engineered nanoparticles, QDs have the ability to enter individual cells because of two factors: (1) the incredibly small size of QDs (∼2–20 nm) allows passage through cell membranes for easier endocytosis277 and (2) surface modifications with organic molecules can facilitate more rapid passage through cell membranes.245 Additionally, different capping agents and surface modifications alter the toxicity of the nanoparticle itself.268 Whole QDs have been imaged in the digestive tracts of aquatic organisms, on the exterior and interior vacuoles of single-celled organisms, and agglomerated on the outside of plant roots.224,239,278,279 Fluorescent imaging is often utilized to confirm the presence and concentration of intact QDs in organisms due to the useful optical properties of this class of nanoparticles. When fluorescence from pristine (intact) QDs is detected inside an organism, Hsu et al.249 and Feswick et al.241 argue this demonstrates that the adverse effects associated with QD exposure are due to the nanoparticle itself and not necessarily ionic metal. Although QDs may be imaged within the digestive system of an organism, this does not confirm that intact QDs are internalized into cells or have crossed the intestinal wall. QD nanoparticles internalized by plants can also reduce growth, affect ROS formation, and be detoxified through separate metabolic pathways unrelated to minimal Cd2+ ion release.252 Although the capping agents and surface modifications can reduce the release of core materials in short-term exposures, the retention of agglomerated or single QDs internally may add to long-term exposure risk because of particle degradation over time. For example, CdSe/ZnS QDs functionalized with carboxylic acid (–COOH) were internalized and retained in significantly higher concentrations in the tissues of the daphnid C. dubia compared to non-functionalized QDs even after a 24 hour depuration period.241 This demonstrates how surface modifications designed for biomedical and bioimaging applications that enter the environment may lead to higher internalization of QDs in aquatic organisms.
4.10 Comparing metal versus carbon-based QDs
Although the vast majority of QD studies related to environmental adverse effects are focused on metal-based QDs (especially Cd-based QDs), the numbers of original research studies investigating the effects of carbon-based QDs are increasing in response to the increasing usage280 and possible banning or limiting of use of cadmium QDs.138 Initial toxicity testing with carbon-based QDs suggests they are less acutely toxic and cytotoxic than cadmium and other metal-based QDs which would support their eventual replacement of cadmium QDs in manufacturing and consumer products. However, carbon-based QDs elicit similar sublethal responses in oxidative stress and detoxification pathways as metal-based QDs.257 For instance, a study on green microalgae, Chlorella vulgaris, demonstrated that small graphene oxide QDs resulted in a significant increases of oxidative stress and disrupted metabolomic processes such as chlorophyll biosynthesis.281 Similarly, carbon QDs induced oxidative stress pathways and reduced chlorophyll a production in freshwater phytoplankton (Scenedesmus obliquus) at 200 mg L−1 and 50 mg L−1 concentrations, respectively, for each endpoint.282 The highly similar pathways involved for both metal-based and carbon-based QD exposures reinforces the specific sublethal adverse effects caused by the nanoparticles compared to the acute effects associated with released metal ions. Therefore, to capture the full range of the adverse effects of all types of QDs, sublethal effects must be considered when evaluating potential ecological impacts.
4.11 Relevant adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) for QDs
In recent years, the AOP has been proposed as a hierarchical construct for relating the toxicological effects of a chemical or substance along a continuum starting with a molecular initiating event (MIE) leading-up to negative effects at the population level.283 The AOP has many advantages for understanding toxicity including relating sublethal insults, such as oxidative stress, to organismal effects that can be applied for regulatory purposes. A particular advantage of the AOP is that they are agnostic of the specific stressor under investigation and can be applied to contaminants with common adverse impacts. For QDs, overlaps and similarities between oxidative stress and apoptosis pathways leading to negative impacts at the organism level can be visualized through a proposed AOP. As discussed above, pristine QDs promote ROS formation, which leads to a variety of cellular, tissue, and organ-level responses culminating in similar negative impacts. This results in a range of sublethal effects including cytoxicity, impaired reproduction, impaired growth, and delayed development (Fig. 6). In a traditional regulatory paradigm, responses at the organism level (e.g., reduced growth and reproduction) would be used for regulating QDs. However, cellular, tissue and organ responses predict such effects and could be considered as regulatory indicators or sentinels for QDs based on the proposed AOP framework.
5. Data gaps in the performance of quantum dot risk assessment
Despite the scientific information currently available on the exposure and effects associated with QDs in the environment, there are several large data gaps that need to be addressed before it will be possible to accurately and successfully assess environmental risk and effectively develop regulations. Several of the most relevant data gaps are listed below:
(1) There are unacceptable discrepancies—at times up to one or two orders of magnitude—in the projected global production of QDs. The error and variability in the production volumes contributes additional uncertainty to existing predictions of QD concentrations in the environment. More reliable data is needed about QD production on a global scale and on the amount of QDs currently in commerce.
(2) Research on the synthesis of QDs (i.e., pristine, unweathered form) is readily available. However, very little is known about the amount of QDs embedded in different products. More high quality work is needed to account for Cd-based and/or Cd-free QDs used in applications such as thermoelectrics, LEDs, and solar cells. Similarly, experimental studies on release into different environmental phases during the entire life cycle of QD-containing products are not available. While theoretical studies have been carried out, these predictions are largely not validated by experimental or field work.
(3) High quality agglomeration and dissolution rates of all classes of QDs under different environmental conditions (i.e., freshwater vs. seawater, soils/sediments with various levels of organic matter, pH, salinity, UV intensity) is very limited, needs to be determined, and disseminated in the peer-reviewed scientific literature.
(4) Understanding the factors that govern how different QDs degrade under various environmental conditions is vital for understanding their fate in different ecosystems and is a first step to estimating bioavailability and potential human health and ecological effects. Currently, this type of data is lacking. In addition, when the data is available, the physicochemical conditions in controlled experiments are often different from actual environmental settings. Consequently, creating a realistic environmental dataset for predicting the bioavailability and adverse effects of QDs or ionic metal core materials while challenging is critical. Harmonization of environmental testing conditions and reporting could be accomplished following the suggested guidelines of Geitner et al.284
(5) As reflected in the discussion above, the vast majority of toxicological studies have focused nearly exclusively on Cd-based QDs. To achieve a comprehensive risk assessment of QDs, scientific investigations need to measure the adverse effects of other QDs, including Cd-free, carbon-based, silicon, and perovskite forms. In addition, most of the toxicological data available in the literature involved aquatic organisms. More research needs to be performed examining the adverse effects of QDs to terrestrial wildlife including birds.
(6) So far, too many ecotoxicological studies have focused on acute effects. To be truly useful, these studies need to report the sublethal effects of QDs (e.g., EC50s and LOECs). Reports also need to include the concentrations of QDs investigated and the associated relative levels of core and shell components, such as cadmium or selenium, in order to make comparisons in toxicity between organisms, conditions, and types of QDs more viable. Another challenge in comparing studies is the use of different units for expressing amounts and concentrations, the use of consistent and standardized units relative to QDs would be beneficial. In addition, studies should be performed with environmentally realistic concentrations of QDs based on predicted/modeled concentrations, and, eventually, actual measured field concentrations. Given the continuing uncertainties associated with the adverse effects of QDs, as discussed here, assessing risk continues to be a challenge. In a meta-analysis, Notter et al.285 evaluated the toxicity associated with three types of metallic nanoparticles (i.e., copper, zinc, silver) by assuming as a ‘worst case’ scenario all metals in a given nanoparticle dissolved. A similar approach should be considered for assessing risk associated with QDs. However, to use this approach, it is critical to understand how metal ion toxicity compares to the toxicity associated with the remaining QD.
(7) Although not an issue unique to QDs, currently, regulation of chemicals is based primarily on lethal and/or sublethal effects at the organismal level (see the earlier discussion of the AOP). However, linking these effects, especially the sublethal effects, to population-level responses is critical because probable environmental exposures of QDs will likely lead to sublethal, rather than lethal, effects. Sublethal effects of QDs described in the scientific literature often lead to reduced reproduction and growth, which can have adverse effects on populations and communities. There are no studies measuring, predicting or modeling these linkages for QDs and this connection must be made for effective risk assessments and regulations.
(8) Oxidative stress is clearly an important adverse effect caused by QDs. Standardizing sublethal endpoints related to oxidative stress AOPs will better inform realistic toxicity thresholds for QDs to endangered species, economically-important organisms, and sensitive ecosystems. Measuring ROS and SOD formation at the cellular level and quantifying cellular regeneration and apoptosis at the tissue level is a practical method of determining LOECs for each QD variety and for different species. The U.S. EPA and other regulatory agencies are interested in the most appropriate methods for regulating engineered nanomaterials, including QDs, that are entering the market, which may be different than past regulatory requirements as our knowledge base advances.
(9) Organisms will likely be exposed to multiple types of QDs made from different toxic metals, carbon-based materials, and other newer QDs (as they become more common). Again, this is not an issue unique to QDs, but currently, there is extremely limited information on the adverse effects of mixtures of QD to organisms. There are some documented interactions of co-exposures with other types of environmental stressors such as UV radiation, salinity, and non-QD toxic metals.266,286 Realistically, exposed organisms will also be subjected to exposures to various environmental stressors and QDs simultaneously, so it is imperative to understand the interaction of QD mixtures and multiple stressors.
(10) Possibly conspicuous by their absence are any documented adverse effects to humans caused by environmental exposures to QDs. Of course, this does not necessarily mean such effects have not occurred, but they may not have been detected or reported. As discussed here, over the last twenty years or so, a growing body of scientific literature has reported the environmental exposure and adverse effects of QDs for a range of conditions and for a diversity of organisms. Most of these investigations have been performed under controlled laboratory conditions as measurement of QD under field conditions is very difficult. As QDs enter the environment in increasing numbers as by-products of manufacturing practices, use during their life cycle, and improper disposal, field studies will become increasingly important to understand actual QD ecological risk and for gauging the potential for exposure and adverse effects to humans. Of particular concern are those QDs specifically designed to interact with biological moieties via surface modification (e.g., those QDs used in the biomedical field).
6. Summary
Measuring the concentrations of QDs once they enter the environment is difficult due to the challenge of distinguishing them from other natural and anthropogenic materials. Further, environmental processes including dissolution, degradation, agglomeration, and sedimentation complicate QD measurement. The majority of adverse effects data addresses Cd-based QDs even though many other types of QDs are on the market and are potentially released (or will be released) into the environment as QD usage increases over the next several decades. Despite that lack of coverage, the amounts of QDs currently entering the environment is relatively small, suggesting organismal exposure to QDs will likely occur at low concentrations leading to sublethal effects. The slow weathering, dissolution, and degradation of QDs releasing core constituents like ionic cadmium may contribute to prolonged chronic exposure. This will likely be especially true for benthic and lower trophic level organisms interacting with both pristine and weathered QDs present in sediments. However, it is important to recognize that because the study of QDs has been so focused on ionic metals released during degradation our understanding is very limited on the adverse effects of the QD nanoparticles and future research needs to further investigate intact QDs. Sediments are a sink for a range of environmental contaminants including QDs. Consequently, the highest concentration of and exposure to QDs will likely be in benthic environments, which will then lead to an increased risk of adverse effects to benthic organisms. In addition to the data gaps discussed above, we suggest future research evaluating the environmental impacts of QDs should be focused on determining sublethal effects for both individual QDs and mixtures of QDs to benthic organisms, especially keystone organisms, forming the foundation of food webs. Finally, adverse effects to humans caused by environmental exposure to QDs have not yet been documented.
Key terms287

Acute toxicityAdverse effect causing mortality to exposed organisms
Adverse outcome pathway (AOP)Conceptual framework describing a pathway for assessing hazards to organisms and population (including humans) health. Also see molecular initiating event (MIE)
AgglomerationClustering of more than two nanoparticles, including quantum dots, resulting in increasing size of the growing particle. In this report, equivalent to aggregation
AggregationSee Agglomeration
Alloying quantum dotSemiconducting quantum dots formed by combining two semiconductors with different band gap energies resulting in properties distinct not only from the properties of their bulk counterparts but also from those of their parent semiconductors
Band gapDifference in energy between the valence band and the conduction band of a solid material (such as an insulator or semiconductor) consisting of the range of energy values forbidden to electrons in the material
BenthicAquatic organisms, structures and functions associated with the sediments
BioaccumulationAccumulation of chemicals, materials or substances within the tissues of an organism
BioavailabilityExpression of chemical, material or substance present in a form that results in an exposure to an organism causing bioaccumulation and/or adverse effects
BiomagnificationAs a result of trophic transfer, an increase in bioaccumulation of chemicals, materials or substances moving up the food chain
Bohr radiusRadius of the smallest or ground-state electron orbit in the hydrogen atom, equal to about 5.29 × 10−9 centimeter
Capping agentsIn this report, equivalent to capping ligands and surface coatings
ChemiluminescenceLuminescence (such as bioluminescence) due to chemical reaction
Colloidal stabilityAbility of particles to remain suspended in solution
Conduction bandRange of permissible energy values which an electron in a solid material allows the electron to dissociate from a particular atom and become a free charge carrier in the material
Crystalline sizeDimensions of a crystal
CytotoxicityAdverse effects of a compound (toxicity) to cells
DispersibilityQuality or state of being distributed in a system or environment
DissolutionIn this report, the act or process of dissolving
Electrical conductivityMagnitude of the capability to conduct electricity
Electrical double layerRegion existing at the boundary of two phases and assumed to consist of two oppositely charged layers (such as a layer of negative ions adsorbed on colloidal particles that attracts a layer of positive ions in the surrounding electrolytic solution)
Electromagnetic radiationForm of energy in waves including ultraviolet (UV), visible, and infrared (IR) regions
Electron–hole pairsTwo electrons belonging to one atom or shared by two atoms as a chemical bond. Same as excitons
Electrostatic forcesElectrostatic interactions existing in attractive and repulsive forms between particles caused by their electric charges
Emission spectraElectromagnetic spectrum deriving its characteristics from the material of which the emitting source is made and from the way in which the material is excited
EpigeneticHeritable changes leading to different phenotypes due to changes in gene expression without alteration of DNA sequences
EukaryoteDomain (Eukarya) or a higher taxonomic group (Eukaryota) above the kingdom including organisms composed of one or more cells containing visibly evident nuclei and organelles
Euphotic zoneUpper depths of a water body where light penetrates and supports plant growth
Excitation energyMinimum amount of energy required to convert a normal stable molecule into a reactive molecule
ExcitonsSee electron–hole pair
FluorescenceLuminescence caused by the absorption of radiation at one wavelength followed by nearly immediate re-radiation (or emission) usually at a different wavelength that ceases almost at once when the incident radiation stops.
GrapheneExtremely electrically conductive form of elemental carbon composed of a single flat sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a repeating hexagonal lattice.
Graphene oxideOxidized form of graphene in which oxygen and hydrogen moieties are components of the carbon structure.
Hetero-agglomerationAgglomeration involving different particles, including nanoparticles. In contrast, homo-agglomeration involves agglomeration of particles of the same type
Humic acidNatural dissolved and particulate organic matter formed by the degradation of terrestrial and aquatic biomass.
Hydrodynamic diameterDiameter of a particle in liquid solution
ImmunotoxicityChemical, material or substance which causes toxicity to the immune system
IncandescentOf, relating to, or being light produced by incandescence (i.e., white, glowing, or luminous with intense heat)
IonicCharacterized by metals in the form of ions. Often more bioavailable than other forms of metals enhancing the probability of causing adverse effects
Ionic strengthExpression of presence of dissolved ions in aqueous solution (e.g., seawater)
Isoelectric pointPoint or narrow range on a pH scale at which a reactive molecule or surface carries no electrical charge, or in which the negative and positive charges are equal resulting in a net zero charge
Liquid crystal display (LCD)Image based on an organic liquid whose physical properties resemble a crystalline formation of loosely ordered molecular arrays similar to a regular crystalline lattice and an anisotropic refraction of light (i.e., refraction light in multiple directions rather than one direction (isotropic))
LuminescenceLow-temperature emission of light (as by a chemical or physiological process)
Median effect concentrationConcentration of a chemical, material or substance causing a 50% sublethal effect (e.g., reduced growth, reproduction). Also, known as the EC50
Median lethal effect concentrationConcentration of a chemical, material or substance causing 50% mortality. Also known as the LC50
Molecular initiating event (MOI)Initial interaction between a chemical, material or substance and a biomolecule causally linked to a negative outcome via a pathway. Also see adverse outcome pathway (AOP)
MonochromaticityConsisting of one color
Monodispersed colloidsColloidal particles of uniform size in a dispersed phase
No observable effect concentrationHighest concentration tested of a chemical, material or substance without a statistically-significant adverse effect. Also known as the NOEC
Nanocomposite materialsNanomaterials put together molecule by molecule
NanocrystalCrystal with nanoscale dimensions
NanomaterialsSubstances consisting of nanoparticles with nanoscale dimensions
NanoparticlesParticle whose size is measured in nanometers
Oxidative stressPhysiological stress on the body caused by the cumulative damage of reactive oxygen species and/or free radicals inadequately neutralized by antioxidants
OxyanionsAnion containing one or more oxygen atoms bonded to another element (as in the sulfate and carbonate ions)
PelagicAquatic organisms living primarily in the water column
PerovskiteMineral consisting of an oxide of calcium and titanium sometimes containing rare earth elements. Because of unique properties, increasingly used in the quantum dot industry
Photo-bleachingRemoval of color by light energy
PhotoluminescenceLuminescence in which the excitation is produced by ultraviolet (UV), visible, and infrared (IR) electromagnetic radiation
PhotolysisChemical decomposition caused by radiant energy (such as light)
PhotooxidationOxidation under the influence of radiant energy (such as light)
PhotostabilityResistant to degradation under the influence of radiant energy and especially of light
PhotovoltaicGeneration of voltage when radiant energy falls on the boundary between dissimilar substances (such as two different semiconductors)
Physicochemical propertiesCharacteristics of a chemical, material or substance describing physical and chemicals traits (e.g., water solubility, vapor pressure)
PrecipitateDescent of a chemical, material or substance from solution into a solid phase
ProkaryoteUnicellular microorganisms lacking a distinct nucleus and membrane-bound organelles classified as a kingdom (Prokaryotae synonym Monera) or into two domains (Bacteria and Archaea)
Product lifecycleSeries of stages through which an industrial or consumer item (i.e., the product) passes during its lifetime from manufacturer to disposal
Quantum confinementRestriction of the electronic wave function to smaller and smaller regions of space
Quantum dotEngineered semiconductor nanocrystal with unique fluorescent, quantum confinement and quantum yield properties
Quantum efficiencyRatio of the number of photoelectrons released in a photoelectric process to the number of radiation quanta absorbed
Quantum yieldSee quantum efficiency
Salting-out effectPhenomena in which high ionic strength solutions cause dissolved substances and colloidal particles to precipitate from solution. Common when freshwater meets saltwater in estuaries
SedimentationProcess of forming or depositing sediment including natural and anthropogenic particles
Semiconducting nanocrystalNanoscale crystal with the characteristics of a semiconductor
Spectral puritySpectrum in which the dispersion is highly discriminative such that the light is practically monochromatic
Sublethal toxicityAdverse effect causing non-lethal impacts potentially including cytotoxicity, transcriptomic alteration, immunotoxicity, reproductive, growth and developmental effects, transgenerational toxicity, and behavior effects
TeratogenicAdverse effects causing physical malformations in the developing embryo
Thermal stabilityAbility to resist degradation resulting from heat
ToxicokineticsStudy of the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination of hazardous chemicals, materials and substances by an organism
Transgenerational toxicityAdverse effect to an organism caused by transfer from an ancestor
Transcriptomic alterationModification of an organism's messenger RNA, or mRNA, molecules
TransformationProcess of altering a chemical, material or substance includes alterations caused by chemical reactions or interactions
Trophic transferExchange of a chemical, material or substance from one biological level of organization to another biological level (e.g., from a plant consumer to a predator)
Tunable wavelengthAbility to control a wavelength
Valence bandRange of permissible energy values of the highest energies an electron can have and still be associated with a particular atom of a solid material
Zero-dimensionalWithout dimensions in any direction

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate the insightful comments on the draft manuscript by the internal technical reviewers Joseph LiVolsi, Todd Luxton, Rick McKinney, and Bianca Ross. In addition, the authors thank Dr. Todd Luxton for his input on the preliminary structure of this review. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute endorsement or recommendation for use. Funding for the research discussed in this manuscript was entirely by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views or policies of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
References
M. Reed, J. Randall, R. Aggarwal, R. Matyi, T. Moore and A. Wetsel, Observation of discrete electronic states in a zero-dimensional semiconductor nanostructure, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 60(6), 535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Reed, R. Bate, K. Bradshaw, W. Duncan, W. Frensley and J. Lee, 
            et al., Spatial quantization in GaAs–AlGaAs multiple quantum dots, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom., 1986, 4(1), 358–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Park, D. J. Shin and J. Yu, Categorization of Quantum Dots, Clusters, Nanoclusters, and Nanodots, J. Chem. Educ., 2021, 98(3), 703–709 CrossRef CAS .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore and J. A. Christians, 
            et al., Quantum dot–induced phase stabilization of α-CsPbI3 perovskite for high-efficiency photovoltaics, Science, 2016, 354(6308), 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Emergence of colloidal quantum-dot light-emitting technologies, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7(1), 13 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Cotta, Quantum Dots and Their Applications: What Lies Ahead?, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3(6), 4920–4924 CrossRef CAS .

          A. I. Hassan and H. M. Saleh, Quantum Dots: Properties and Applications,  2021, pp. 331–348 Search PubMed .
E. H. Edwards, A. A. Fertig, K. P. McClelland, M. T. Meidenbauer, S. Chakraborty and T. D. Krauss, 
            et al., Enhancing the activity of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from CdSe quantum dots with a polyoxovanadate cluster, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56(62), 8762–8765 RSC .
D. P. Morgan and D. F. Kelley, What Does the Transient Absorption Spectrum of CdSe Quantum Dots Measure?, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(15), 8448–8455 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu, Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, Alternative routes toward high quality CdSe nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2001, 1(6), 333–337 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, A. Y. Nazzal, M. Xiao, Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, Photoluminescence from single CdSe quantum rods, J. Lumin., 2002, 97(3–4), 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schreder, C. Dem, M. Schmitt, A. Materny, W. Kiefer and U. Winkler, 
            et al., Raman spectroscopy of II–VI semiconductor nanostructures, CdS quantum dots, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2003, 34(2), 100–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Azpiroz, J. M. Ugalde and I. Infante, Benchmark assessment of density functional methods on group II–VI MX (M= Zn, Cd; X= S, Se, Te) quantum dots, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10(1), 76–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Donegan and Y. Rakovich, Cadmium telluride quantum dots: advances and applications, CRC Press,  2013 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen and S. O'Brien, Structure direction of II− VI semiconductor quantum dot binary nanoparticle superlattices by tuning radius ratio, ACS Nano, 2008, 2(6), 1219–1229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Cipriano, G. Di Liberto, S. Tosoni and G. Pacchioni, Quantum confinement in group III–V semiconductor 2D nanostructures, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(33), 17494–17501 RSC .
K. D. Wegner, S. Pouget, W. L. Ling, M. Carrière and P. J. C. C. Reiss, Gallium–a versatile element for tuning the photoluminescence properties of InP quantum dots, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(11), 1663–1666 RSC .
M. Ginterseder, D. Franke, C. F. Perkinson, L. Wang, E. C. Hansen and M. G. Bawendi, Scalable Synthesis of InAs Quantum Dots Mediated through Indium Redox Chemistry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(9), 4088–4092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Long, W. Zhang, J. Tian, G. Chen, Y. Liu and R. Liu, Recent research on the luminous mechanism, synthetic strategies, and applications of CuInS 2 quantum dots, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8(4), 880–897 RSC .
J. Bang, J. Park, J. H. Lee, N. Won, J. Nam and J. Lim, 
            et al., ZnTe/ZnSe (core/shell) type-II quantum dots: their optical and photovoltaic properties, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(1), 233–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kubendhiran, Z. Bao, K. Dave and R.-S. Liu, Microfluidic synthesis of semiconducting colloidal quantum dots and their applications, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(4), 1773–1790 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vasudevan, R. R. Gaddam, A. Trinchi and I. Cole, Core–shell quantum dots: Properties and applications, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 636, 395–404 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tarantini, K. D. Wegner, F. Dussert, G. Sarret, D. Beal and L. Mattera, 
            et al., Physicochemical alterations and toxicity of InP alloyed quantum dots aged in environmental conditions: A safer by design evaluation, NanoImpact, 2019, 14, 100168 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, Z. Chen, S. Gao, B. L. Goh, I. B. Samsudin and K. W. Lwe, 
            et al., Recent advances in non-toxic quantum dots and their biomedical applications, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2019, 29(6), 628–640 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lin, T. Chen, Y. Pan, Z. Yang, L. Li and K.-T. Yong, 
            et al., Biodistribution and acute toxicity of cadmium-free quantum dots with different surface functional groups in mice following intratracheal inhalation, Nanotheranostics, 2020, 4(3), 173 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, G. Lv, W. Hu, D. Li, S. Chen and Z. Dai, Synthesis and applications of graphene quantum dots: a review, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2018, 7(2), 157–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, M. Tang and T. Zhang, Review of toxicological effect of quantum dots on the liver, J. Appl. Toxicol., 2019, 39(1), 72–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sadeghi, H. Bahmani Jalali, R. Melikov, B. Ganesh Kumar, M. Mohammadi Aria and C. W. Ow-Yang, 
            et al., Stokes-shift-engineered indium phosphide quantum dots for efficient luminescent solar concentrators, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(15), 12975–12982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Bharali, D. W. Lucey, H. Jayakumar, H. E. Pudavar and P. N. Prasad, Folate-receptor-mediated delivery of InP quantum dots for bioimaging using confocal and two-photon microscopy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(32), 11364–11371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, C. Du, Z. Zhuang and W. Chen, Carbon quantum dot-based nanoprobes for metal ion detection, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(29), 6927–6945 RSC .

          M. B. Tahir, N. R. Khalid, M. Rafique, T. Iqbal, M. S. Rafique and A. Ahmed, Nanotechnology and Photocatalysis for Environmental Applications, in Micro and Nano Technologies, ed. M. B. Tahir, M. Rafique and M. S. Rafique, Elsevier,  2020, ch. 7 – Carbonaceous nanomaterials as hotocatalysts, pp. 97–117 Search PubMed .

          Y. Wang and A. Hu, Carbon quantum dots: synthesis, properties and applications,  2014, vol. 234, pp. 6921–6939 Search PubMed .
Z. Huang, Y. Shen, Y. Li, W. Zheng, Y. Xue and C. Qin, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of analogous graphene quantum dots with sp 2 hybridized carbon atom dominant structures and their photovoltaic application, Nanoscale, 2014, 6(21), 13043–13052 RSC .
R. Xie, Z. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, L. Fan and Y. Li, 
            et al., Graphene quantum dots as smart probes for biosensing, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8(20), 4001–4016 RSC .
S. Lei, M. Zeng, D. Huang, L. Wang, L. Zhang and B. Xi, 
            et al., Synergistic High-flux Oil–Saltwater Separation and Membrane Desalination with Carbon Quantum Dots Functionalized Membrane, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(16), 13708–13716 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and P. Wu, Graphene quantum dot hybrids as efficient metal-free electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5(8), 3362–3369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kou, S. Jiang, S.-J. Park and L.-Y. Meng, A review: recent advances in preparations and applications of heteroatom-doped carbon quantum dots, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49(21), 6915–6938 RSC .
Q. Li, S. Zhang, L. Dai and L.-S. Li, Nitrogen-doped colloidal graphene quantum dots and their size-dependent electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(46), 18932–18935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, Carbon quantum dots: synthesis, properties and applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(34), 6921–6939 RSC .
S. Zhu, S. Tang, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Control the size and surface chemistry of graphene for the rising fluorescent materials, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48(38), 4527–4539 RSC .
Z. Qian, J. Ma, X. Shan, H. Feng, L. Shao and J. Chen, Highly luminescent N-doped carbon quantum dots as an effective multifunctional fluorescence sensing platform, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20(8), 2254–2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang and W. Chen, Nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots: facile synthesis and application as a “turn-off” fluorescent probe for detection of Hg2+ ions, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Zhang, D.-K. Ma, Y.-G. Zhang, W. Chen and S.-M. Huang, N-doped carbon quantum dots for TiO2-based photocatalysts and dye-sensitized solar cells, Nano Energy, 2013, 2(5), 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
M. Farshbaf, S. Davaran, F. Rahimi, N. Annabi, R. Salehi and A. Akbarzadeh, Carbon quantum dots: recent progresses on synthesis, surface modification and applications, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2018, 46(7), 1331–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. R. Varma, Low-dimensional perovskites, Perovskite Photovoltaics, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 197–229 Search PubMed .

          S. C. Watthage, Z. Song, A. B. Phillips and M. J. Heben, Evolution of perovskite solar cells, Perovskite Photovoltaics, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 43–88 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Bao, Y.-C. Chang and R.-S. Liu, Perovskite Quantum Dots for Application in High Color Gamut Backlighting Display of Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(11), 3374–3396 CrossRef CAS .
Q. V. Le, K. Hong, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, Halide perovskite quantum dots for light-emitting diodes: properties, synthesis, applications, and outlooks, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 4(12), 1800335 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, G. Ding, J.-Y. Mao, Y. Zhou and S.-T. Han, Recent advances in synthesis and application of perovskite quantum dot based composites for photonics, electronics and sensors, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 21(1), 278–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. M. Yang, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen and H. Zhao, 
            et al., Under the spotlight: The organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite for optoelectronic applications, Nano Today, 2015, 10(3), 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
S. Krishnamurthy, P. Pandey, J. Kaur, S. Chakraborty, P. Nayak and A. Sadhanala, 
            et al., Organic-Inorganic Hybrid and Inorganic Halide Perovskites: Structural and Chemical Engineering, Interfaces and Optoelectronic Properties, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 54, 133002 CrossRef .
D. Chen and X. Chen, Luminescent perovskite quantum dots: synthesis, microstructures, optical properties and applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(6), 1413–1446 RSC .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Formability of ABX3 (X= F, Cl, Br, I) Halide Perovskites, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64(6), 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rahim, A. Cheng, C. Lyu, T. Shi, Z. Wang and D. O. Scanlon, 
            et al., Geometric Analysis and Formability of the Cubic A2BX6 Vacancy-Ordered Double Perovskite Structure, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(22), 9573–9583 CrossRef CAS .
R. Andoulsi-Fezei, N. Sdiri, K. Horchani-Naifer and M. Férid, Effect of temperature on the electrical properties of lanthanum ferrite, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2018, 205, 214–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Harvey, J. Messinger, K. Zhu, J. M. Luther and J. J. Berry, Investigating the effects of chemical gradients on performance and reliability within perovskite solar cells with TOF-SIMS, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(26), 1903674 CrossRef CAS .
S. Manna, M. Ghosh, R. Chakraborty, S. Ghosh and S. M. Mandal, A Review on Quantum Dots: Synthesis to In-silico Analysis as Next Generation Antibacterial Agents, Curr. Drug Targets, 2019, 20(3), 255–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Ziaudeen, R. R. Gaddam, P. K. Pallapothu, M. K. Sugumar and J. Rangarajan, Supra gap excitation properties of differently confined PbS-nano structured materials studied with opto-impedance spectroscopy, J. Nanophotonics, 2013, 7(1), 073075 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, M. Protiere and L. Li, Core/shell semiconductor nanocrystals, Small, 2009, 5(2), 154–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Tonelli, J. Venturini, S. Arcaro, J. G. Henn, D. J. Moura and A. C. Viegas, 
            et al., Novel core-shell nanocomposites based on TiO2-covered magnetic Co3O4 for biomedical applications. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B: Applied, Biomaterials, 2020, 108(5), 1879–1887 CAS .
L. A. Swafford, L. A. Weigand, M. J. Bowers, J. R. McBride, J. L. Rapaport and T. L. Watt, 
            et al., Homogeneously Alloyed CdS x Se1-x Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Characterization, and Composition/Size-Dependent Band Gap, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(37), 12299–12306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Regulacio and M.-Y. J. A. Han, Composition-tunable alloyed semiconductor nanocrystals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43(5), 621–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jang, S. Jun and L. Pu, High quality CdSeS nanocrystals synthesized by facile single injection process and their electroluminescence, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2964–2965 RSC .
H. Qian, X. Qiu, L. Li and J. Ren, Microwave-assisted aqueous synthesis: a rapid approach to prepare highly luminescent ZnSe (S) alloyed quantum dots, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(18), 9034–9040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Regulacio and M.-Y. Han, Composition-tunable alloyed semiconductor nanocrystals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43(5), 621–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, Y. Feng, W. Knoll and M. Han, Alloyed zn x cd1-x s nanocrystals with highly narrow luminescence spectral width, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125(44), 13559–13563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Swafford, L. A. Weigand, M. J. Bowers, J. R. McBride, J. L. Rapaport and T. L. Watt, 
            et al., Homogeneously Alloyed CdS x Se1-x Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Characterization, and Composition/Size-Dependent Band Gap, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(37), 12299–12306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Prospects of colloidal nanocrystals for electronic and optoelectronic applications, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(1), 389–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Drbohlavova, V. Adam, R. Kizek and J. Hubalek, Quantum dots—characterization, preparation and usage in biological systems, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2009, 10(2), 656–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. H. Hong, Ch. 1 – Introduction to Nanomaterials: Basic Proerties, Synthesis, and Characterization, in Nano-Sized Multifunctional Materials, Micro and Nano Technologies, ed. N. H. Hong, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 1–19 Search PubMed .
K. Linehan and H. Doyle, Size controlled synthesis of carbon quantum dots using hydride reducing agents, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(30), 6025–6031 RSC .
X. TingáZheng and C. MingáLi, Effect of particle shape on phagocytosis of CdTe quantum dot–cystine composites, MedChemComm, 2010, 1(1), 84–86 RSC .
R. Singh and G. Bester, Nanowire quantum dots as an ideal source of entangled photon pairs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103(6), 063601 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Towe and D. Pan, Semiconductor quantum-dot nanostructures: Their application in a new class of infrared photodetectors, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2000, 6(3), 408–421 CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Bose and W. Fan, Effect of size and shape on electronic and optical properties of CdSe quantum dots, Optik, 2018, 155, 242–250 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Costa-Fernández, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, The use of luminescent quantum dots for optical sensing, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(3), 207–218 CrossRef .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi and R. Ober, 
            et al., (CdSe) ZnS core− shell quantum dots: synthesis and characterization of a size series of highly luminescent nanocrystallites, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101(46), 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. W. Chan and S. Nie, Quantum dot bioconjugates for ultrasensitive nonisotopic detection, Science, 1998, 281(5385), 2016–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Sk, A. Ananthanarayanan, L. Huang, K. H. Lim and P. Chen, Revealing the tunable photoluminescence properties of graphene quantum dots, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(34), 6954–6960 RSC .
E. Pedrueza, A. Segura, R. Abargues, J. B. Bailach, J. C. Chervin and J. P. Martínez-Pastor, The effect of quantum size confinement on the optical properties of PbSe nanocrystals as a function of temperature and hydrostatic pressure, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24(20), 205701 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Efros, M. Rosen, M. Kuno, M. Nirmal, D. J. Norris and M. Bawendi, Band-edge exciton in quantum dots of semiconductors with a degenerate valence band: Dark and bright exciton states, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54(7), 4843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Chen, H. Wei, A. Maurice, M. Bawendi and P. Reiss, Pure colors from core–shell quantum dots, MRS Bull., 2013, 38(9), 696–702 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. LeCroy, F. Messina, A. Sciortino, C. E. Bunker, P. Wang and K. S. Fernando, 
            et al., Characteristic excitation wavelength dependence of fluorescence emissions in carbon “quantum”, dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(50), 28180–28186 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bera, L. Qian, T.-K. Tseng and P. H. Holloway, Quantum dots and their multimodal applications: a review, Materials, 2010, 3(4), 2260–2345 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sabah, S. Tasleem, M. Murtaza, M. Nazir and F. Rashid, Effect of Polymer Capping on Photonic Multi-Core–Shell Quantum Dots CdSe/CdS/ZnS, Impact of Sunlight and Antibacterial Activity, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(16), 9009–9020 CrossRef CAS .
M. Green, The nature of quantum dot capping ligands, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20(28), 5797–5809 RSC .
P. Verma and A. C. Pandey, Capped semiconductor nanocrystals for device applications, Opt. Commun., 2011, 284(3), 881–884 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Hullavarad and S. S. Hullavarad, Optical properties of organic and inorganic capped CdS nanoparticles and the effects of x-ray irradiation on organic capped CdS nanoparticles, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2008, 26(4), 1050–1057 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, R. Tang, J. L. F. Kao, S. D. Dingman and W. E. Buhro, Spectroscopic Identification of Tri-n-octylphosphine Oxide (TOPO) Impurities and Elucidation of Their Roles in Cadmium Selenide Quantum-Wire Growth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(13), 4983–4994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, P. Liu, N. T. N. Truong, U. Farva and C. Park, Photoluminescence blue-shift of CdSe nanoparticles caused by exchange of surface capping layer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(43), 20817–20823 CrossRef CAS .
B. Petrie, R. Barden and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, A review on emerging contaminants in wastewaters and the environment: current knowledge, understudied areas and recommendations for future monitoring, Water Res., 2015, 72, 3–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Grandhi and R. Viswanatha, Understanding the Role of Surface Capping Ligands in Passivating the Quantum Dots Using Copper Dopants as Internal Sensor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(35), 19785–19795 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and X. Peng, Size/Shape-Controlled Synthesis of Colloidal CdSe Quantum Disks: Ligand and Temperature Effects, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(17), 6578–6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Banerjee, S. Jia, M. L. Steigerwald and I. P. Herman, Ligand Control of Growth, Morphology, and Capping Structure of Colloidal CdSe Nanorods, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(10), 2573–2580 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patra and A. Samanta, Effect of Capping Agent and Medium on Light-Induced Variation of the Luminescence Properties of CdTe Quantum Dots: A Study Based on Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy, Steady State and Time-Resolved Fluorescence Techniques, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(31), 18187–18196 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Kortan, R. Hull, R. L. Opila, M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald and P. J. Carroll, 
            et al., Nucleation and growth of CdSe on ZnS quantum crystallite seeds, and vice versa, in inverse micelle media, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112(4), 1327–1332 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Murphy, Peer reviewed: optical sensing with quantum dots, ACS Publications,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. Labeb, A.-H. Sakr, M. Soliman, T. M. Abdel-Fattah and S. J. O. M. Ebrahim, Effect of capping agent on selectivity and sensitivity of CdTe quantum dots optical sensor for detection of mercury ions, Opt. Mater., 2018, 79, 331–335 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, H. Wang, Z. Cheng, H. J. S. Liu and A. B. Chemical, Hexametaphosphate-capped quantum dots as fluorescent probes for detection of calcium ion and fluoride, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 232, 306–312 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Niu, K. Gao, Z. Lin and W. Wu, Amine-capped carbon dots as a nanosensor for sensitive and selective detection of picric acid in aqueous solution via electrostatic interaction, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5(21), 6228–6233 RSC .

          G. Ramalingam, P. Kathirgamanathan, N. Manivannan and K. Kasinathan, Quantum Confinement Effect of 2D Nanomaterials, Quantum Dots-Fundamental and Applications, IntechOpen,  2020 Search PubMed .

          N. Ilaiyaraja, S. J. Fathima and F. Khanum, Quantum dots: a novel fluorescent probe for bioimaging and drug delivery applications, Inorganic Frameworks as Smart Nanomedicines, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 529–563 Search PubMed .
C.-Y. Li, S. K. Karna, C.-W. Wang and W.-H. Li, Spin polarization and quantum spins in Au nanoparticles, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14(9), 17618–17642 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Edvinsson, Optical quantum confinement and photocatalytic properties in two-, one-and zero-dimensional nanostructures, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5(9), 180387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hardman, A toxicologic review of quantum dots: toxicity depends on physicochemical and environmental factors, Environ. Health Perspect., 2006, 114(2), 165–172 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ranjbar-Navazi, Y. Omidi, M. Eskandani and S. Davaran, Cadmium-free quantum dot-based theranostics, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 118, 386–400 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Sargent, Colloidal quantum dot solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6(3), 133–135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shang and Z. J. Ning, Colloidal quantum-dots surface and device structure engineering for high-performance light-emitting diodes, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4(2), 170–183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang and E. R. Waclawik, Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals: controlled synthesis and surface chemistry in organic media, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(45), 23505–23527 RSC .
A. Valizadeh, H. Mikaeili, M. Samiei, S. M. Farkhani, N. Zarghami and A. Akbarzadeh, 
            et al., Quantum dots: synthesis, bioapplications, and toxicity, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7(1), 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dey, A. Govindaraj, K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, Luminescence properties of boron and nitrogen doped graphene quantum dots prepared from arc-discharge-generated doped graphene samples, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 595, 203–208 CrossRef .
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart and K. Raker, 
            et al., Electrophoretic analysis and purification of fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotube fragments, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(40), 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zuo, X. Lu, Z. Sun, Y. Guo and H. He, A review on syntheses, properties, characterization and bioanalytical applications of fluorescent carbon dots, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183(2), 519–542 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kalluri, D. Debnath, B. Dharmadhikari and P. Patra, Graphene quantum dots: Synthesis and applications, Methods Enzymol., 2018, 609, 335–354 CAS .
H. Sun, H. Ji, E. Ju, Y. Guan, J. Ren and X. Qu, Synthesis of Fluorinated and Nonfluorinated Graphene Quantum Dots through a New Top-Down Strategy for Long-Time Cellular Imaging, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21(9), 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Hydrothermal route for cutting graphene sheets into blue-luminescent graphene quantum dots, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(6), 734–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, L. Guo, J. Zhang, C. Xi, Q. Xue and H. Huang, 
            et al., Cutting sp 2 clusters in graphene sheets into colloidal graphene quantum dots with strong green fluorescence, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(8), 3314–3318 RSC .
S. Zhu, S. Tang, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Control the size and surface chemistry of graphene for the rising fluorescent materials, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48(38), 4527–4539 RSC .
H. S. Kong, B. J. Kim and K. S. Kang, Room temperature photoluminescence of PbS quantum dots: Capping agent and thermal effect, Luminescence, 2019, 34(3), 387–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Ray, A. Saha, N. R. Jana and R. Sarkar, Fluorescent carbon nanoparticles: synthesis, characterization, and bioimaging application, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(43), 18546–18551 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Kim, Y. J. Lee, C. Park, S. Yu, S. O. Won and W. S. Seo, 
            et al., Bottom-Up Synthesis of Carbon Quantum Dots With High Performance Photo-and Electroluminescence, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35(7), 1800080 CrossRef .
A. Yadegari, J. Khezri, S. Esfandiari, H. Mahdavi, A. A. Karkhane and R. Rahighi, 
            et al., Bottom-up synthesis of nitrogen and oxygen co-decorated carbon quantum dots with enhanced DNA plasmid expression, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 184, 110543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, S. Zhu, T. Feng, M. Yang and B. Yang, Evolution and synthesis of carbon dots: from carbon dots to carbonized polymer dots, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6(23), 1901316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Bertino, R. R. Gadipalli, L. A. Martin, L. E. Rich, A. Yamilov and B. R. Heckman, 
            et al., Quantum dots by ultraviolet and x-ray lithography, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18(31), 315603 CrossRef .
A. Sharma and J. Das, Small molecules derived carbon dots: synthesis and applications in sensing, catalysis, imaging, and biomedicine, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2019, 17(1), 1–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Elugoke, A. S. Adekunle, O. E. Fayemi, B. B. Mamba, E.-S. M. Sherif and E. E. Ebenso, Carbon-Based Quantum Dots for Electrochemical Detection of Monoamine Neurotransmitters, Biosensors, 2020, 10(11), 162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng and Y. Zhang, A simple and green synthesis of carbon quantum dots from coke for white light-emitting devices, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(58), 33789–33793 RSC .

          X. Liu, J. Hao, J. Liu and H. Tao, Green synthesis of carbon quantum dots from lignite coal and the application in Fe3+ detection, IOP Publishing,  2018 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Bottom-up and top-down approaches to the synthesis of monodispersed spherical colloids of low melting-point metals, Nano Lett., 2004, 4(10), 2047–2050 CrossRef CAS .

          I. de la Calle and V. Romero-Rivas, Applications of Nanomaterials, in Micro and Nano Technologies, ed. S. Mohan Bhagyaraj, O. S. Oluwafemi, N. Kalarikkal and S. Thomas, Woodhead Publishing,  2018, ch. 9 – The Role of Nanomaterials in Analytical Chemistry: Trace Metal Analysis, pp. 251–301 Search PubMed .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. T. Frederick, G. D. Lilly, E. A. McArthur and E. A. Weiss, Organic surfactant-controlled composition of the surfaces of CdSe quantum dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(7), 1078–1081 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. Malicki, M. D. Peterson, J. W. J. Slavin and E. A. Weiss, Chemical, structural, and quantitative analysis of the ligand shells of colloidal quantum dots, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25(8), 1155–1165 CrossRef CAS .
U. Resch-Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Quantum dots versus organic dyes as fluorescent labels, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5(9), 763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Quantum-dot light-emitting diodes for large-area displays: towards the dawn of commercialization, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(14), 1607022 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pu, L. Lin, D. Wang, J.-X. Wang, J. Qian and J.-F. Chen, Green synthesis of highly dispersed ytterbium and thulium co-doped sodium yttrium fluoride microphosphors for in situ light upconversion from near-infrared to blue in animals, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 511, 243–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. Pillai, P. J. Gray, C.-C. Tien, R. Bleher, L.-P. Sung and T. V. Duncan, Environmental release of core–shell semiconductor nanocrystals from free-standing polymer nanocomposite films, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3(3), 657–669 RSC .
F. Piccinno, F. Gottschalk, S. Seeger and B. Nowack, Industrial production quantities and uses of ten engineered nanomaterials in Europe and the world, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14(9), 1109 CrossRef .
Future-Markets. Future Markets Technology Reports: The Global Market for Quantum Dots.  2019, Search PubMed.

          E. Parliament, Objection to a delegated act: exemption for cadmium in illumination and display lighting applications Strasbourg, France: European Parliament (EP),  2016, Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/consultations/rohs7_en.htm .
J.-H. Jo, D.-Y. Jo, S.-H. Lee, S.-Y. Yoon, H.-B. Lim and B.-J. Lee, 
            et al., InP-based quantum dots having an InP core, composition-gradient ZnSeS inner shell, and ZnS outer shell with sharp, bright emissivity, and blue absorptivity for display devices, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3(2), 1972–1980 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jang, Y. Kim, Y.-H. Won, H. Jang and S.-M. Choi, Environmentally friendly InP-based quantum dots for efficient wide color gamut displays, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(4), 1316–1327 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, Electron–electron and electron-hole interactions in small semiconductor crystallites: The size dependence of the lowest excited electronic state, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80(9), 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, M. Carriere, C. Lincheneau, L. Vaure and S. Tamang, Synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals, focusing on nontoxic and earth-abundant materials, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(18), 10731–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Won, O. Cho, T. Kim, D.-Y. Chung, T. Kim and H. Chung, 
            et al., Highly efficient and stable InP/ZnSe/ZnS quantum dot light-emitting diodes, Nature, 2019, 575(7784), 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sadeghi, S. K. Abkenar, C. W. Ow-Yang and S. Nizamoglu, Efficient white LEDs using liquid-state magic-sized CdSe quantum dots, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 1–9 CAS .
N. Khan and N. Abas, Comparative study of energy saving light sources, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15(1), 296–309 CrossRef .
S. Pimputkar, J. S. Speck, S. P. DenBaars and S. Nakamura, Prospects for LED lighting, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3(4), 180–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Katahara, G. Li, S. Coe-Sullivan and R. H. Hurt, Degradation Products from Consumer Nanocomposites: A Case Study on Quantum Dot Lighting, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(6), 3220–3227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Z. Li and N. Ma, Next-generation DNA-functionalized quantum dots as biological sensors, ACS Chem. Biol., 2017, 13(7), 1705–1713 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, D. Pan, T. Hu, Z. Liu and X. Su, A near-infrared fluorescent bioassay for thrombin using aptamer-modified CuInS 2 quantum dots, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182(11–12), 1933–1939 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Liu, H. Liu and S. Zhang, Low-toxic Ag2S quantum dots for photoelectrochemical detection glucose and cancer cells, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 56, 307–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cui, Y.-P. Gu, L. Bao, J.-Y. Zhao, B.-P. Qi and Z.-L. Zhang, 
            et al., Near-infrared electrogenerated chemiluminescence of ultrasmall Ag2Se quantum dots for the detection of dopamine, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84(21), 8932–8935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yildiz, R. Freeman, R. Gill and I. Willner, Electrochemical, Photoelectrochemical, and Piezoelectric Analysis of Tyrosinase Activity by Functionalized Nanoparticles, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(8), 2811–2816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nakanishi, B. Ohtani and K. Uosaki, Fabrication and characterization of CdS-nanoparticle mono-and multilayers on a self-assembled monolayer of alkanedithiols on gold, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102(9), 1571–1577 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bakkers, A. Roest, A. Marsman, L. Jenneskens, L. De Jong-Van Steensel and J. Kelly, 
            et al., Characterization of photoinduced electron tunneling in gold/SAM/Q-CdSe systems by time-resolved photoelectrochemistry, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104(31), 7266–7272 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yue, F. Lisdat, W. J. Parak, S. G. Hickey, L. Tu and N. Sabir, 
            et al., Quantum-dot-based photoelectrochemical sensors for chemical and biological detection, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5(8), 2800–2814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mandal, B. Verma, J. Rani and P. K. Patel, Progressive advancement of ZnS-based quantum dot LED, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2021, 53(1), 1–20 CrossRef .
X. Jin, W. Chen, X. Li, H. Guo, Q. Li and Z. Zhang, 
            et al., Thick-shell CdZnSe/ZnSe/ZnS quantum dots for bright white light-emitting diodes, J. Lumin., 2021, 229, 117670 CrossRef CAS .
H. Osman, W. Li, X. Zhang, F. Chun, W. Deng and M. Moatasim, 
            et al., One-step hot injection synthesis of gradient alloy CdxZn1-xSySe1-y quantum dots with large-span self-regulating ability, J. Lumin., 2019, 206, 565–570 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. Zhang, T. Kamisaka, Q. Zhao and J. M. Luther, 
            et al., GeI2 additive for high optoelectronic quality CsPbI3 quantum dots and their application in photovoltaic devices, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 798–807 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, Z. Li, H. Chen, Q. Wang, L. Ding and Z. Jin, Application of perovskite nanocrystals (NCs)/Quantum dots (QDs) in solar cells, Nano Energy, 2020, 104757 CrossRef CAS .
J. Melendres-Sánchez, R. López-Delgado, G. Saavedra-Rodríguez, R. Carrillo-Torres, R. Sánchez-Zeferino and A. Ayón, 
            et al., Zinc sulfide quantum dots coated with PVP: applications on commercial solar cells, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, L. Wang, X. Ji, X. Chen and Z. Shi, Lead-Free Metal Halide Perovskites and Perovskite Derivatives as an Environmentally Friendly Emitter for Light-Emitting Device Applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11(14), 5517–5530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nasr, T. Hidouri and F. Zouidi, New Strategy against COVID-19: L-Serine Doped QDs for Fast Detection of COVID-19 and Blocking of S-Protein, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2020, 9(10), 106002 CrossRef CAS .
S. Manivannan and K. Ponnuchamy, Quantum dots as a promising agent to combat COVID-19, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2020, 34(10), e5887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Von der Kammer, P. L. Ferguson, P. A. Holden, A. Masion, K. R. Rogers and S. J. Klaine, 
            et al., Analysis of engineered nanomaterials in complex matrices (environment and biota): general considerations and conceptual case studies, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2012, 31(1), 32–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gottschalk, C. Lassen, J. Kjoelholt, F. Christensen and B. Nowack, Modeling flows and concentrations of nine engineered nanomaterials in the Danish environment, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2015, 12(5), 5581–5602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mahendra, H. G. Zhu, V. L. Colvin and P. J. Alvarez, Quantum Dot Weathering Results in Microbial Toxicity, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42(24), 9424–9430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Jiang, C.-S. Chen, J. Spurgin, K. A. Schwehr and A. Quigg, 
            et al., Aggregation, dissolution, and stability of quantum dots in marine environments: importance of extracellular polymeric substances, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(16), 8764–8772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and B. Nowack, Dynamic probabilistic material flow analysis of nano-SiO2, nano iron oxides, nano-CeO2, nano-Al2O3, and quantum dots in seven European regions, Environ. Pollut., 2018, 235, 589–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Gallagher, J. T. Buchman, T. A. Qiu, B. Zhi, T. Y. Lyons and K. M. Landy, 
            et al., Release, detection and toxicity of fragments generated during artificial accelerated weathering of CdSe/ZnS and CdSe quantum dot polymer composites, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5(7), 1694–1710 RSC .
F. Part, C. Zaba, O. Bixner, C. Zafiu, S. Hann and E.-K. Sinner, 
            et al., Traceability of fluorescent engineered nanomaterials and their fate in complex liquid waste matrices, Environ. Pollut., 2016, 214, 795–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chopra, Y. Bi, F. C. Brown, T. L. Theis, K. D. Hristovski and P. Westerhoff, Interdisciplinary collaborations to address the uncertainty problem in life cycle assessment of nano-enabled products: case of the quantum dot-enabled display, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6(11), 3256–3267 RSC .
F. C. Brown, Y. Bi, S. S. Chopra, K. D. Hristovski, P. Westerhoff and T. L. Theis, End-of-Life Heavy Metal Releases from Photovoltaic Panels and Quantum Dot Films: Hazardous Waste Concerns or Not?, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(7), 9369–9374 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Miller, A. S. Adeleye, H. M. Page, L. Kui, H. S. Lenihan and A. A. Keller, Nano and traditional copper and zinc antifouling coatings: metal release and impact on marine sessile invertebrate communities, J. Nanopart. Res., 2020, 22(5), 129 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Keller, S. McFerran, A. Lazareva and S. Suh, Global life cycle releases of engineered nanomaterials, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15(6), 1692 CrossRef .
A. Lazareva and A. A. Keller, Estimating potential life cycle releases of engineered nanomaterials from wastewater treatment plants, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2(7), 1656–1665 CrossRef CAS .

Are new quantum dot TVs bad for the environment? [press release].  2015 Search PubMed.
V. M. Fthenakis, Life cycle impact analysis of cadmium in CdTe PV production, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2004, 8(4), 303–334 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Cyrs, H. J. Avens, Z. A. Capshaw, R. A. Kingsbury, J. Sahmel and B. E. Tvermoes, Landfill waste and recycling: Use of a screening-level risk assessment tool for end-of-life cadmium telluride (CdTe) thin-film photovoltaic (PV) panels, Energy Policy, 2014, 68, 524–533 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, G. Huffman and R. J. Nalesnik, Medical waste management, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1991, 25(3), 360–363 CrossRef .
E. P. Vejerano, E. C. Leon, A. L. Holder and L. C. Marr, Characterization of particle emissions and fate of nanomaterials during incineration, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2014, 1(2), 133–143 RSC .

          N. Aich, K. Kordas, S. I. Ahmed and T. Sabo-Attwood, The Hidden Risks of E-Waste: Perspectives from Environmental Engineering, Epidemiology, Environmental Health, and Human–Computer Interaction, Transforming Global Health, Springer,  2020, pp. 161–178 Search PubMed .

          T. Smith and S. E. Director, Corporate strategies for electronics recycling: a tale of two systems, Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition, San Jose,  2003 Search PubMed .
A. M. Derfus, W. C. W. Chan and S. N. Bhatia, Probing the cytotoxicity of semiconductor quantum dots, Nano Lett., 2004, 4(1), 11–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Zhang, K. Li, Y. Yao, J. Niu and Y. Chen, Oxidative dissolution of polymer-coated CdSe/ZnS quantum dots under UV irradiation: Mechanisms and kinetics, Environ. Pollut., 2012, 164, 259–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar and C. Zhou, The race to replace tin-doped indium oxide: which material will win?, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(1), 11–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Domingos, C. Franco and J. P. Pinheiro, Stability of core/shell quantum dots—role of pH and small organic ligands, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20(7), 4872–4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, K. T. Ho, R. M. Burgess and M. Cashman, Aggregation, Sedimentation, Dissolution, and Bioavailability of Quantum Dots in Estuarine Systems, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(3), 1357–1363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Paydary and P. Larese-Casanova, Water chemistry influences on long-term dissolution kinetics of CdSe/ZnS quantum dots, J. Environ. Sci., 2020, 90, 216–233 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Adeleye, L. M. Stevenson, Y. Su, R. M. Nisbet, Y. Zhang and A. A. Keller, Influence of phytoplankton on fate and effects of modified zerovalent iron nanoparticles, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50(11), 5597–5605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zeng, A. Ramos-Ruiz, J. A. Field and R. Sierra-Alvarez, Cadmium telluride (CdTe) and cadmium selenide (CdSe) leaching behavior and surface chemistry in response to pH and O2, J. Environ. Manage., 2015, 154, 78–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hedberg, E. Blomberg and I. Odnevall, In the search for nanospecific effects of dissolution of metallic nanoparticles at freshwater-like conditions: A critical review, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53(8), 4030–4044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Priester, P. K. Stoimenov, R. E. Mielke, S. M. Webb, C. Ehrhardt and J. P. Zhang, 
            et al., Effects of soluble cadmium salts
versus CdSe quantum dots on the growth of planktonic Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43(7), 2589–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vučemilović, N. Vukelić and T. Rajh, Solubility and photocorrosion of small CdS particles, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1988, 42(1), 157–167 CrossRef .
A. S. Adeleye, J. R. Conway, T. Perez, P. Rutten and A. A. Keller, Influence of extracellular polymeric substances on the long-term fate, dissolution, and speciation of copper-based nanoparticles, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48(21), 12561–12568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Adeleye and A. A. Keller, Interactions between algal extracellular polymeric substances and commercial TiO2 nanoparticles in aqueous media, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50(22), 12258–12265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Sunda and J. A. M. Lewis, Effect of complexation by natural organic ligands on the toxicity of copper to a unicellular alga, Monochrysis lutheri1, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1978, 23(5), 870–876 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, H. Liu, J. Liu, K. N. Haley, J. A. Treadway and J. P. Larson, 
            et al., Immunofluorescent labeling of cancer marker Her2 and other cellular targets with semiconductor quantum dots, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21(1), 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Jaiswal, H. Mattoussi, J. M. Mauro and S. M. Simon, Long-term multiple color imaging of live cells using quantum dot bioconjugates, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21(1), 47–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Mulvihill, S. E. Habas, I. Jen-La Plante, J. Wan and T. Mokari, Influence of size, shape, and surface coating on the stability of aqueous suspensions of CdSe nanoparticles, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(18), 5251–5257 CrossRef CAS .
E. Morelli, P. Cioni, M. Posarelli and T. Gabellieri, Chemical stability of CdSe quantum dots in seawater and their effects on a marine microalga, Aquat. Toxicol., 2012, 122, 153–162 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, A. S. Adeleye, Y. Huang, F. Li and A. A. Keller, Heteroaggregation of nanoparticles with biocolloids and geocolloids, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 226, 24–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Conway, A. S. Adeleye, J. Gardea-Torresdey and A. A. Keller, Aggregation, dissolution, and transformation of copper nanoparticles in natural waters, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(5), 2749–2756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Keller, A. S. Adeleye, J. R. Conway, K. L. Garner, L. Zhao and G. N. Cherr, Comparative environmental fate and toxicity of copper nanomaterials, NanoImpact, 2017, 7, 28–40 CrossRef .
J. A. Rochira, M. V. Gudheti, T. J. Gould, R. R. Laughlin, J. L. Nadeau and S. T. Hess, Fluorescence intermittency limits brightness in CdSe/ZnS nanoparticles quantified by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(4), 1695–1708 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Rocha, T. Gomes, C. Cardoso, J. Letendre, J. P. Pinheiro and V. S. Sousa, 
            et al., Immunocytotoxicity, cytogenotoxicity and genotoxicity of cadmium-based quantum dots in the marine mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis, Mar. Environ. Res., 2014, 101, 29–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bayati, J. Dai, A. Zambrana, C. Rees and M. F. de Cortalezzi, Effect of water chemistry on the aggregation and photoluminescence behavior of carbon dots, J. Environ. Sci., 2018, 65, 223–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Elimelech, J. Gregory and X. Jia, Particle deposition and aggregation: measurement, modelling and simulation, Butterworth-Heinemann,  2013 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Li, Y. Huang, X. Wang, X. Zhang and X. Wang, 
            et al., Adsorption, aggregation, and deposition behaviors of carbon dots on minerals, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(11), 6156–6164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, B. Chen and B. Xing, technology. Aggregation
kinetics and self-assembly mechanisms of graphene quantum dots in aqueous solutions: Cooperative effects of pH and electrolytes, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(3), 1364–1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Frank, L. R. Sigmon, A. R. Deline, R. S. Lankone, M. J. Gallagher and B. Zhi, 
            et al., Photochemical Transformations of Carbon Dots in Aqueous Environments, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54(7), 4160–4170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dager, T. Uchida, T. Maekawa and M. Tachibana, Synthesis and characterization of mono-disperse carbon quantum dots from fennel seeds: photoluminescence analysis using machine learning, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 1–12 CAS .
W. G. Van Sark, P. L. Frederix, A. A. Bol, H. C. Gerritsen and A. Meijerink, Blueing, bleaching, and blinking of single CdSe/ZnS quantum dots, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3(10), 871–879 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pechstedt, T. Whittle, J. Baumberg and T. Melvin, Photoluminescence of colloidal CdSe/ZnS quantum dots: the critical effect of water molecules, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(28), 12069–12077 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Van Sark, P. L. Frederix, D. J. Van den Heuvel, H. C. Gerritsen, A. A. Bol and J. N. Van Lingen, 
            et al., Photooxidation and photobleaching of single CdSe/ZnS quantum dots probed by room-temperature time-resolved spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105(35), 8281–8284 CrossRef CAS .
J. Durn, M. Guindo and A. V. Delgado, science i. Electrophoretic properties of colloidal dispersions of monodisperse zinc sulfide: effects of potential-determining ions and surface oxidation, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1995, 173(2), 436–442 CrossRef .
X. Chen, G. Fang, C. Liu, D. D. Dionysiou, X. Wang and C. Zhu, 
            et al., Cotransformation of carbon dots and contaminant under light in aqueous solutions: a mechanistic study, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53(11), 6235–6244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Adeleye, K. T. Ho, M. Zhang, Y. Li and R. M. Burgess, Fate and transformation of graphene oxide in estuarine and marine waters, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53(10), 5858–5867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pakarinen, E. J. Petersen, L. Alvila, G. C. Waissi-Leinonen, J. Akkanen and M. T. Leppänen, 
            et al., A screening study on the fate of fullerenes (nC60) and their toxic implications in natural freshwaters, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2013, 32(6), 1224–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and B. Nowack, Environmental risk assessment of engineered nano-SiO2, nano iron oxides, nano-CeO2, nano-Al2O3, and quantum dots, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2018, 37(5), 1387–1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Bouldin, T. M. Ingle, A. Sengupta, R. Alexander, R. E. Hannigan and R. A. Buchanan, Aqueous toxicity and food chain transfer of quantum dots™ in freshwater algae and Ceriodaphnia dubia, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2008, 27(9), 1958–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Al-Salim, E. Barraclough, E. Burgess, B. Clothier, M. Deurer and S. Green, 
            et al., Quantum dot transport in soil, plants, and insects, Sci. Total Environ., 2011, 409(17), 3237–3248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Navarro, M. A. Bisson and D. S. Aga, Investigating uptake of water-dispersible CdSe/ZnS quantum dot nanoparticles by Arabidopsis thaliana plants, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211, 427–435 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhang, T. Hua, F. Xiao, C. Chen, R. M. Gersberg and Y. Liu, 
            et al., Uptake and accumulation of CuO nanoparticles and CdS/ZnS quantum dot nanoparticles by Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani in hydroponic mesocosms, Ecol. Eng., 2014, 70, 114–123 CrossRef .
P. Modlitbová, P. Pořízka, K. Novotný, J. Drbohlavová, I. Chamradová and Z. Farka, 
            et al., Short-term assessment of cadmium toxicity and uptake from different types of Cd-based Quantum Dots in the model plant Allium cepa L, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2018, 153, 23–31 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Modlitbová, K. Novotný, P. Pořízka, J. Klus, P. Lubal and H. Zlámalová-Gargošová, 
            et al., Comparative investigation of toxicity and bioaccumulation of Cd-based quantum dots and Cd salt in freshwater plant Lemna minor L, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2018, 147, 334–341 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xu, G. Deng, S. Liu, S. Chen, D. Cui and L. Yang, 
            et al., Free cadmium ions released from CdTe-based nanoparticles and their cytotoxicity on Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Metallomics, 2010, 2(7), 469–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ž. Jurgelėnė, N. Kazlauskienė, D. Montvydienė, V. Kulvietis, R. Rotomskis and K. Jokšas, Embryotoxicity of Quantum Dots in Rainbow Trout Oncorhynchus mykiss During the Hatching Period, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2018, 101(2), 191–196 CrossRef PubMed .
W. K. Boyes, B. L. M. Thornton, S. R. Al-Abed, C. P. Andersen, D. C. Bouchard and R. M. Burgess, 
            et al., A comprehensive framework for evaluating the environmental health and safety implications of engineered nanomaterials, Crit. Rev. Toxicol., 2017, 47(9), 771–814 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bundschuh, J. Filser, S. Lüderwald, M. S. McKee, G. Metreveli and G. E. Schaumann, 
            et al., Nanoparticles in the environment: where do we come from, where do we go to?, Environ. Sci. Eur., 2018, 30(1), 6 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. G. Navarro, D. F. Watson, D. S. Aga and S. Banerjee, Natural Organic Matter-Mediated Phase Transfer of Quantum Dots in the Aquatic Environment, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43(3), 677–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Canesi, C. Ciacci, R. Fabbri, A. Marcomini, G. Pojana and G. Gallo, Bivalve molluscs as a unique target group for nanoparticle toxicity, Mar. Environ. Res., 2012, 76, 16–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Holbrook, K. E. Murphy, J. B. Morrow and K. D. Cole, Trophic transfer of nanoparticles in a simplified invertebrate food web, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3(6), 352–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-M. Lee and Y.-J. An, Evidence of three-level trophic transfer of quantum dots in an aquatic food chain by using bioimaging, Nanotoxicology, 2015, 9(4), 407–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Gupta, A. Kumar, V. A. Senapati, A. K. Pandey, R. Shanker and A. Dhawan, Laboratory Scale Microbial Food Chain To Study Bioaccumulation, Biomagnification, and Ecotoxicity of Cadmium Telluride Quantum Dots, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(3), 1695–1706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Werlin, J. H. Priester, R. E. Mielke, S. Krämer, S. Jackson and P. K. Stoimenov, 
            et al., Biomagnification of cadmium selenide quantum dots in a simple experimental microbial food chain, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6(1), 65–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koo, J. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. Zhu, E. W. Chehab and V. L. Colvin, 
            et al., Fluorescence Reports Intact Quantum Dot Uptake into Roots and Translocation to Leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana and Subsequent Ingestion by Insect Herbivores, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(1), 626–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Lewinski, H. Zhu, H.-J. Jo, D. Pham, R. R. Kamath and C. R. Ouyang, 
            et al., Quantification of Water Solubilized CdSe/ZnS Quantum Dots in Daphnia magna, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44(5), 1841–1846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Nilsson, On Food Vacuoles in Tetrahymena pyriformis GL, J. Protozool., 1977, 24(4), 502–507 CrossRef .
A. Feswick, R. J. Griffitt, K. Siebein and D. S. Barber, Uptake, retention and internalization of quantum dots in Daphnia is influenced by particle surface functionalization, Aquat. Toxicol., 2013, 130, 210–218 CrossRef PubMed .
M. de Vasconcelos Lima, M. I. de Andrade Pereira, P. E. Cabral Filho, W. Nascimento de Siqueira, H. A. Milca Fagundes Silva and E. J. de França, 
            et al., Studies on Toxicity of Suspensions of CdTe Quantum Dots to Biomphalaria glabrata Mollusks, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2019, 38(10), 2128–2136 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bruneau, M. Fortier, F. Gagne, C. Gagnon, P. Turcotte and A. Tayabali, 
            et al., Size distribution effects of cadmium tellurium quantum dots (CdS/CdTe) immunotoxicity on aquatic organisms, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2013, 15(3), 596–607 RSC .
M. Bottrill and M. Green, Some aspects of quantum dot toxicity, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(25), 7039–7050 RSC .
L. Hu, C. Zhang, G. Zeng, G. Chen, J. Wan and Z. Guo, 
            et al., Metal-based quantum dots: synthesis, surface modification, transport and fate in aquatic environments and toxicity to microorganisms, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(82), 78595–78610 RSC .
A. N. Parks, L. M. Portis, P. A. Schierz, K. M. Washburn, M. M. Perron and R. M. Burgess, 
            et al., Bioaccumulation and toxicity of single-walled carbon nanotubes to benthic organisms at the base of the marine food chain, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2013, 32(6), 1270–1277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Freixa, V. Acuña, J. Sanchís, M. Farré, D. Barceló and S. Sabater, Ecotoxicological effects of carbon based nanomaterials in aquatic organisms, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 619–620, 328–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Leigh, J. Bouldin and R. Buchanan, Effects of Exposure to Semiconductor Nanoparticles on Aquatic Organisms, J. Toxicol., 2012, 2012, 397657 Search PubMed .
P.-C. L. Hsu, M. O'Callaghan, N. Al-Salim and M. R. H. Hurst, Quantum dot nanoparticles affect the reproductive system of, Caenorhabditis elegans, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2012, 31(10), 2366–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Pace, E. K. Lesher and J. F. Ranville, Influence of stability on the acute toxicity of CdSe/ZnS nanocrystals to daphnia magna, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2010, 29(6), 1338–1344 CAS .
N. Chen, Y. He, Y. Su, X. Li, Q. Huang and H. Wang, 
            et al., The cytotoxicity of cadmium-based quantum dots, Biomaterials, 2012, 33(5), 1238–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Marmiroli, G. O. Lepore, L. Pagano, F. d'Acapito, A. Gianoncelli and M. Villani, 
            et al., The fate of CdS quantum dots in plants as revealed by extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7(4), 1150–1162 RSC .
K. Yao, X. Lv, G. Zheng, Z. Chen, Y. Jiang and X. Zhu, 
            et al., Effects of Carbon Quantum Dots on Aquatic Environments: Comparison of Toxicity to Organisms at Different Trophic Levels, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52(24), 14445–14451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Munari, J. Sturve, G. Frenzilli, M. B. Sanders, P. Christian and M. Nigro, 
            et al., Genotoxic effects of Ag2S and CdS nanoparticles in blue mussel (Mytilus edulis) haemocytes, Chem. Ecol., 2014, 30(8), 719–725 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Santos, A. S. Miguel, A. Macovei, C. Maycock, A. Balestrazzi and A. Oliva, 
            et al., CdSe/ZnS Quantum Dots trigger DNA repair and antioxidant enzyme systems in Medicago sativacells in suspension culture, BMC Biotechnol., 2013, 13(1), 111 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, H. He, Y.-Y. Wang, R. Yan, L.-J. Zhou and Y.-z. Liu, 
            et al., New aspects of the environmental risks of quantum dots: prophage activation. Environmental Science, Nano, 2018, 5(7), 1556–1566 CAS .
S. Deng, P. P. Jia, J. H. Zhang, M. Junaid, A. P. Niu and Y. B. Ma, 
            et al., Transcriptomic response and perturbation of toxicity pathways in zebrafish larvae after exposure to graphene quantum dots (GQDs), J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 357, 146–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pagano, M. Caldara, M. Villani, A. Zappettini, N. Marmiroli and M. Marmiroli, In Vivo-In Vitro Comparative Toxicology of Cadmium Sulphide Quantum Dots in the Model Organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9(4), 512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Majumdar, L. Pagano, J. A. Wohlschlegel, M. Villani, A. Zappettini and J. C. White, 
            et al., Proteomic, gene and metabolite characterization reveal the uptake and toxicity mechanisms of cadmium sulfide quantum dots in soybean plants, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6(10), 3010–3026 RSC .
M. Marmiroli, L. Pagano, M. L. Savo Sardaro, M. Villani and N. Marmiroli, Genome-Wide Approach in Arabidopsis thaliana to Assess the Toxicity of Cadmium Sulfide Quantum Dots, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48(10), 5902–5909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Marmiroli, L. Pagano, F. Pasquali, A. Zappettini, V. Tosato and C. V. Bruschi, 
            et al., A genome-wide nanotoxicology screen of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants reveals the basis for cadmium sulphide quantum dot tolerance and sensitivity, Nanotoxicology, 2016, 10(1), 84–93 CAS .
F. Gagne, J. Auclair, P. Turcotte, M. Fournier, C. Gagnon and S. Sauve, 
            et al., Ecotoxicity of CdTe quantum dots to freshwater mussels: Impacts on immune system, oxidative stress and genotoxicity, Aquat. Toxicol., 2008, 86(3), 333–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Blickley, C. W. Matson, W. N. Vreeland, D. Rittschof, R. T. Di Giulio and P. D. McClellan-Green, Dietary CdSe/ZnS quantum dot exposure in estuarine fish: Bioavailability, oxidative stress responses, reproduction, and maternal transfer, Aquat. Toxicol., 2014, 148, 27–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Maselli, A. Siciliano, A. Giorgio, A. Falanga, S. Galdiero and M. Guida, 
            et al., Multigenerational effects and DNA alterations of QDs-Indolicidin on Daphnia magna, Environ. Pollut., 2017, 224, 597–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, K. F. Lin, X. Sun, Q. X. Dong, C. J. Huang and H. L. Wang, 
            et al., Toxicological effect of MPA-CdSe QDs exposure on zebrafish embryo and larvae, Chemosphere, 2012, 89(1), 52–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Sun, L. Chen, K.-F. Lin, Q.-X. Dong and C.-J. Huang, 
            et al., Toxicological effect of joint cadmium selenium quantum dots and copper ion exposure on zebrafish, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2012, 31(9), 2117–2123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Q. Yan, R. Xing, Y.-F. Zhou, K.-L. Li, Y.-Y. Su and J.-F. Qiu, 
            et al., Reproductive toxicity and gender differences induced by cadmium telluride quantum dots in an invertebrate model organism, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(1), 34182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. King-Heiden, P. N. Wiecinski, A. N. Mangham, K. M. Metz, D. Nesbit and J. A. Pedersen, 
            et al., Quantum Dot Nanotoxicity Assessment Using the Zebrafish Embryo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43(5), 1605–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Morelli, P. Cioni, M. Posarelli and E. Gabellieri, Chemical stability of CdSe quantum dots in seawater and their effects on a marine microalga, Aquat. Toxicol., 2012, 122, 153–162 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, Y. Gong and R. Han, Cadmium Telluride Quantum Dots (CdTe-QDs) and Enhanced Ultraviolet-B (UV-B) Radiation Trigger Antioxidant Enzyme Metabolism and Programmed Cell Death in Wheat Seedlings, PLoS One, 2014, 9(10), e110400 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Weis and P. Weis, Pollutants as developmental toxicants in aquatic organisms, Environ. Health Perspect., 1987, 71, 77–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosone, L. Mattera, V. Marchesano, A. Quarta, A. S. Susha and A. Tino, 
            et al., Mechanisms underlying toxicity induced by CdTe quantum dots determined in an invertebrate model organism, Biomaterials, 2012, 33(7), 1991–2000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, W. Lin, B. Lin, K. Wu, H. Fan and Y. Yu, Persistent DNA methylation changes in zebrafish following graphene quantum dots exposure in surface chemistry-dependent manner, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2019, 169, 370–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Q. Contreras, M. Cho, H. Zhu, H. L. Puppala, G. Escalera and W. Zhong, 
            et al., Toxicity of Quantum Dots and Cadmium Salt to Caenorhabditis elegans after Multigenerational Exposure, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47(2), 1148–1154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-E. Buffet, A. Zalouk-Vergnoux, L. Poirier, C. Lopes, C. Risso-de-Faverney and M. Guibbolini, 
            et al., Cadmium sulfide quantum dots induce oxidative stress and behavioral impairments in the marine clam Scrobicularia plana, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2015, 34(7), 1659–1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, K. F. Lin, Y. N. Miao, Q. X. Dong, C. J. Huang and H. L. Wang, 
            et al., Toxicity assessment of zebrafish following exposure to CdTe QDs, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 213, 413–420 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Katsumiti, D. Gilliland, I. Arostegui and M. P. Cajaraville, Cytotoxicity and cellular mechanisms involved in the toxicity of CdS quantum dots in hemocytes and gill cells of the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis, Aquat. Toxicol., 2014, 153, 39–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Jackson, H. E. Pace, A. Lanzirotti, R. Smith and J. F. Ranville, Synchrotron X-ray 2D and 3D elemental imaging of CdSe/ZnS quantum dot nanoparticles in Daphnia magna, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394(3), 911–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Zhang, Y. L. Jiang, C. S. Chen, D. Creeley, K. A. Schwehr and A. Quigg, 
            et al., Ameliorating effects of extracellular polymeric substances excreted by Thalassiosira pseudonana on algal toxicity of CdSe quantum dots, Aquat. Toxicol., 2013, 126, 214–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, I. S. Cole and Q. Li, The toxicity of graphene quantum dots, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(92), 89867–89878 RSC .
S. Ouyang, X. Hu and Q. Zhou, Envelopment–Internalization Synergistic Effects and Metabolic Mechanisms of Graphene Oxide on Single-Cell Chlorella vulgaris Are Dependent on the Nanomaterial Particle Size, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(32), 18104–18112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, J. Li, Y. Song, H. Zhao, Z. Wei and X. Li, 
            et al., Synthesis of ginsenoside Re-based carbon dots applied for bioimaging and effective inhibition of cancer cells, Int. J. Nanomed., 2018, 13, 6249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Ankley, R. S. Bennett, R. J. Erickson, D. J. Hoff, M. W. Hornung and R. D. Johnson, 
            et al., Adverse outcome pathways: A conceptual framework to support ecotoxicology research and risk assessment, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2010, 29(3), 730–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Geitner, C. Ogilvie Hendren, G. Cornelis, R. Kaegi, J. R. Lead and G. V. Lowry, 
            et al., Harmonizing across environmental nanomaterial testing media for increased comparability of nanomaterial datasets, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7(1), 13–36 RSC .
D. A. Notter, D. M. Mitrano and B. Nowack, Are nanosized or dissolved metals more toxic in the environment? A meta-analysis, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2014, 33(12), 2733–2739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. F. Silva, T. Andreani, A. Gavina, M. N. Vieira, C. M. Pereira and T. Rocha-Santos, 
            et al., Toxicological impact of cadmium-based quantum dots towards aquatic biota: Effect of natural sunlight exposure, Aquat. Toxicol., 2016, 176, 197–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Sources:   
          Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster,  2021, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/), Accessed 3 June 2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
          OxfordLanguages, Oxford-English Dictionary,  2021,(https://languages.oup.com). Accessed 9 June 2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
          Sigma-Aldrich,  2021, (https://www.sigmaaldrich.com), Accessed 9 June 2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; G. D. Stucky and J. E. MacDougall, Quantum confinement and host/guest chemistry: probing a new dimension, Science, 1990, 247(4943), 669–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
          The Free Dictionary, Farlex,  2021, (https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com), Accessed 9 June 2021 Search PubMed .
D. G. Goodwin Jr, A. S. Adeleye, L. Sung, K. T. Ho, R. M. Burgess and E. J. Petersen, Detection and quantification of graphene-family nanomaterials in the environment, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52(8), 4491–4513 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tang, Y. Wu, C. N. Ryan, S. Yu, G. Qin and D. S. Edwards, 
            et al., Distinct expression profiles of stress defense and DNA repair genes in Daphnia pulex exposed to cadmium, zinc, and quantum dots, Chemosphere, 2015, 120, 92–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, K. Ji, J. Kim, C. Park, K. H. Lim and T. H. Yoon, 
            et al., Acute Toxicity of Two CdSe/ZnSe Quantum Dots with Different Surface Coating in Daphnia magna Under Various Light Conditions, Environ. Toxicol., 2010, 25(6), 593–600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Srivastava, S. Han, C.-C. Tu and L. Jing, Phototoxicity Generated by Silicon Quantum Dot Nanoparticles on Zebrafish Embryos, ACS Appl. Bio. Mater., 2019, 2(7), 2872–2878 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pasquali, C. Agrimonti, L. Pagano, A. Zappettini, M. Villani and M. Marmiroli, 
            et al., Nucleo-mitochondrial interaction of yeast in response to cadmium sulfide quantum dot exposure, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 324, 744–752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Scebba, D. Tognotti, G. Presciuttini, E. Gabellieri, P. Cioni and D. Angeloni, 
            et al., A SELDI-TOF approach to ecotoxicology: comparative profiling of low molecular weight proteins from a marine diatom exposed to CdSe/ZnS quantum dots, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2016, 123, 45–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, Y. Park, T. H. Yoon, C. S. Yoon and K. Choi, Phototoxicity of CdSe/ZnSe quantum dots with surface coatings of 3-mercaptopropionic acid or tri-n-octylphosphine oxide/gum arabic in Daphnia magna under environmentally relevant UV-B light, Aquat. Toxicol., 2010, 97(2), 116–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peyrot, C. Gagnon, F. Gagne, K. J. Willkinson, P. Turcotte and S. Sauve, Effects of cadmium telluride quantum dots on cadmium bioaccumulation andmetallothionein production to the freshwater mussel, Elliptio complanata, Comp. Biochem. Physiol., Part C: Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2009, 150, 246–251 Search PubMed .
J. M. Gonçalves, T. Rocha, N. C. Mestre, T. G. Fonseca and M. J. Bebianno, Assessing cadmium-based quantum dots effect on the gonads of the marine mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis, Mar. Environ. Res., 2020, 156, 104904 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, R. Hao, L. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Effects of TiO2, SiO2, Ag and CdTe/CdS quantum dots nanoparticles on toxicity of cadmium towards Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2018, 156, 75–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† This is CEMM/ACESD Contribution ORD-043039.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1en00712bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Environmental significance
Because of their ubiquitous use in electronic imaging, lighting and displays, global production of quantum dots (QDs) is predicted to increase 200% yearly in the next several decades with QDs entering the environment through manufacturing and improper disposal. The majority of QDs are metal-based but new varieties (e.g., carbon-based) are increasingly common, with environmental exposures and effects largely unknown. Critical data gaps for understanding the environmental fate, exposures, and effects of QDs are barriers for performing risk assessments and implementing regulations. This review addresses the exposure and effects literature on terrestrial and aquatic environments, identifies critical data gaps, defines key terms, and recommends future research to inform environmental decision-making for years to come as QD use in consumer products increases.


 	Fig. 1  Examples of common quantum dots (QDs) including (a) a metal-based QD (i.e., CdSe core with a ZnS shell) and (b) a simple graphene sheet carbon-based QD discussed in this review. In this figure, colored spheres represent clustered layers of atoms including cadmium (blue), selenium (red), zinc (yellow), sulfur (green), and carbon (orange).	 

Metallic	I–III–VI	Copper indium disulfide	CuInS2
II–VI	Cadmium selenide	CdSe
Cadmium sulfide	CdS
Cadmium telluride	CdTe
Zinc selenium	ZnSe
Zinc sulfide	ZnS
III–V	Indium phosphide	InP
Indium arsenic	InAs
IV–VI	Lead selenium	PbSe
Lead sulfide	PbS

	
Shell materials

Zinc sulfide	ZnS
Cadmium sulfide	CdS
Indium arsenic	InAs

	
Capping agents

Bovine serum albumin	BSA
Carboxylic acid	COOH
Di-n-octylphosphine oxide	DOPO
Dihydrolipoic acid	DPA
Fatty amines	—
Mercaptopropionic acid	MPA
Mercaptoundecanoic acid	MUA
Polydiallydimethyl ammonium chloride	PDDA
Polyacrylate acid	PAA
Polyethylenimine ethylenediamine	PEI
Polyethylene glycol	PEG
Polymaleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene	PMAO
Primary amines	—
Butylamine	BA
Decylamine	DA
Hexylamine	HA
Hexadecylamine	HDA
Thioglycolic acid	TGA
Tetraethyl orthosilicate	TEOS
Trioctyl phosphine	TOP
Trioctyl phosphine oxide	TOPO
Carbon-based	
	Carbon	CQD
Graphene	GQD
Nanodots	NQD
Perovskite	
	Cesium lead tri-iodine	CsPbI3
Cesium lead tri-bromide	CsPbBr3

 	Fig. 2  Selected physicochemical properties of QDs: (A) structural classification of QDs; effect of QD size on (B) energy band gap and (C) emission spectra.	 

 	Fig. 3  Quantum dot applications trend data in 2018 and 2030. Data source.138	 

 	Fig. 4  Typical lifecycle of QDs/QD-enabled products and their possible environmental exposure pathways. Note, occupational and consumer exposure are beyond the scope of this review.	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of typical QD characteristics including (a) agglomeration and colloidal stability, (b) structure, and (c) effects of environmental conditions (i.e., pristine and weathered) on the dissolution of the QD core releasing cadmium ions. The depicted QDs are composed of cadmium-selenide (CdSe) nanocrystal cores and zinc-sulfide (ZnS) shells.	 


CdS-GSH	Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)	Hemocytes	24 h	
In vitro exposure	—	9.761	Katsumiti et al., 2014 (ref. 277)
CdS-GSH	Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)	Gill cells	24 h	
In vitro exposure	—	9.213	Katsumiti et al., 2014 (ref. 277)
CdSe	Algae (Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata)	—	96 h	25 °C; continuous light	0.0371	9.638	Bouldin et al., 2008 (ref. 222)
CdSe/ZnS	
Daphnia pulex
	Juvenile (5–7 days)	48 h	20 °C; 16:8 h L:D	1.13 nM	0.168617	Tang et al., 2015 (ref. 289)
CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	48 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light	—	51.1	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	48 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight	—	11.2	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	96 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light	—	7.7	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnSe-GA/TOPO	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	96 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight	—	1.4	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnSe-MPA	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	48 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light	—	391.7	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnSe-MPA	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	48 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight	—	384.5	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnSe-MPA	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	96 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; UV-B light	—	55.8	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnSe-MPA	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates (<24 h)	96 h	21 ± 1 °C; static exposure renewed at 48 h; full sunlight	—	28.1	Lee et al. 2010 (ref. 290)
CdSe/ZnS-PMAO	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates	24 h	22 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D	3.1 nM	0.244	Lewinski et al., 2010 (ref. 239)
CdSe/ZnS-MUA	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates	48 h	20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 5 nm diameter red QDs	0.11	0.09	Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)
CdSe/ZnS-MUA	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates	48 h	20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 2 nm diameter green QDs	0.35	0.27	Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)
CdSe/ZnS-PEG-COO-	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Embryo 4–6 h	120 h	28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h	22.44	3.147508	King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)
CdSe/ZnS-PEG-NH2	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Embryo 4–6 h	120 h	28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h	15.71	2.360631	King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)
CdSe/ZnS-PEG-OCH3	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Embryo 4–6 hpf	120 h	28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h	33.66	4.721262	King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)
CdSe/ZnS-PEO	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates	48 h	20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 2 nm diameter green QDs	0.77	0.12	Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)
CdSe/ZnS-PEO	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates	48 h	20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 5 nm diameter red QDs	3.84	1.46	Pace et al., 2010 (ref. 250)
CdSe/ZnS-PLL	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Embryo 4–6 h	120 h	28 °C; static exposure renewed every 24 h	3.3079	0.786877	King-Heiden et al., 2009 (ref. 268)
CdSe–COOH	
Amerimysis bahia
	48 h old	48 h	20 °C; 16:8 h light dark; 7 day aged QDs	0.74	0.057	Xiao et al., 2017 (ref. 189)
CdSe–COOH	
Amerimysis bahia
	48 h old	96 h	20 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 7 day aged QDs	0.29	0.023	Xiao et al., 2017 (ref. 189)
CdSe–COOH	
Amerimysis bahia
	48 h old	7 day	20 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 7 day aged QDs	0.29	0.023	Xiao et al., 2017 (ref. 189)
CdSe-MPA	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Embryos 6 hpf	120 h	28 ± 0.5 °C; 14:10 h L:D	1.98	—	Zhang et al., 2012 (ref. 265)
CdTe	
Daphnia pulex
	Juvenile (5–7 days)	48 h	20 °C; 16:8 h L:D	3.29 nM	0.112411	Tang et al., 2015 (ref. 289)
CdTe	
Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)	3 weeks old with 1–2 buds	24 h	18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7	—	1.4	Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)
CdTe	
Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)	3 weeks old with 1–2 buds	48 h	18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7	—	1.1	Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)
CdTe	Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)	3 weeks old with 1–2 buds	72 h	18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7	—	0.72	Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)
CQDa	
Daphnia magna
	Neonates	48 h	25 ± 2 °C	160.3	—	Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)
CQDa	Phytoplankton (Scenedesmus obliquus)	—	96 h	25 ± 2 °C; 12:12 h L:D	74.8	—	Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)
CQDa	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Adults	96 h	25 ± 2 °C	97.5	—	Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)
Silicon QD	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Embryos (26 hpf)	120 h	28 °C	40	—	Srivastava et al., 2019 (ref. 291)


Cadmium-based QDs
CdS	—	Bakers' yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)	Strain BY4742	28 °C	Oxidative stress; increased ROS; decreased GSH; decreased respiratory cytochromes; mitochondrial dysfunction and disrupted morphology	75 mg L−1 QD	75–150 mg L−1 QD	Cadmium ion	Pasquali et al., 2017 (ref. 292)
CdS	MPEG-SH	Blue mussel (Mytilus edulis)	Hemocytes	15 °C; 4 h exposure	Increased genotoxicity and double strand breaks	10 mg L−1 QD	0.1–10 mg L−1 QD	Ions and particles	Munari et al., 2014 (ref. 254)
CdS	GSH	Clam (Scrobicularia plana)	Adults (2.7 ± 0.5 g wet wt)	15 °C; 24 h dark; 14 day static exposure and daily renewal	Impaired foot movement (behavior); accumulation of Cd in clam tissue; increased CAT, SOD, and GST activity; increased CSP-3-like (caspase) activity	10 μg Cd per L	—	Ions and particles	Buffet et al., 2015 (ref. 275)
CdS	—	Daphnid (Daphnia magna)	Neonates (<24 h old)	20 ± 2 °C and 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure	Increased immobilization post UV exposure	0.376 mg L−1	0.38–1 mg L−1	Cadmium ion	Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)
CdS	GSH	Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)	Hemocytes and gill cell	24 h in vitro exposure: 18 °C	Reduced cell viability; oxidative stress through increased ROS, increased DNA damage; increased lysosomal acid phosphatase and multixenobiotic resistance activity; increased internalization of QD into hemocytes; gill cells more sensitive than hemocytes	1 mg Cd per L, hemocytes; 5 mg Cd per L gill cells	0.001–100 mg Cd per L	Cadmium ion	Katsumiti et al., 2014 (ref. 277)
CdS	TOPO	Soybeans (Glycine max)	11 d seedlings	24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure	Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways	200 μg mL−1 vermiculite	—	Particles	Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)
CdS	PVP	Soybeans (Glycine max)	11 d seedlings	24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure	Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways	200 μg mL−1 vermiculite	—	Particles	Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)
CdS	MAA	Soybeans (Glycine max)	11 d seedlings	24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure	Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways	200 μg mL−1 vermiculite	—	Particles	Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)
CdS	GLY	Soybeans (Glycine max)	11 d seedlings	24 °C and 16:8 h L:D; 30% humidity; 14 day exposure	Altered metabolism; downregulation of GSH pathways; upregulation of amino acid biosynthesis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glycolysis pathways	200 μg mL−1 vermiculite	—	Particles	Majumdar et al. 2019 (ref. 259)
CdS/CdTe	COOH	Mussel (Elliptio complanata)	Adult mussel hemolymph	15 °C; 21 h exposure; QD allowed to aggregate and size fractionated	Increased cytotoxicity; increased phagocytosis in large particles; stimulated immunoactivity	0.42 μg mL−1	0.18–2.7 μg ml−1 Cd	Cadmium ions and aggregates	Bruneau et al., 2013 (ref. 243)
CdS/CdTe	COOH	Mussel (Mytilus edulis)	Adult mussel hemolymph	15 °C; 21 h exposure; QD allowed to aggregate and size fractionated	Increased cytotoxicity; reduced phagocytosis in small particles and increased phagocytosis in large particles; stimulated immunoactivity	0.86 μg mL−1	0.18–2.7 μg ml−1 Cd	Cadmium ions and nanoparticles	Bruneau et al., 2013 (ref. 243)
CdS/CdTe	COOH	Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)	Fish leukocytes	Harvested from head kidney tissues; 21 h exposure; QD allowed to aggregate and size fractionated	Decreased cell viability; increased phagocytosis in multiple particle sizes; increased immunoactivity and phagocytic efficiency	0.43μg mL−1 Cd	0.18–2.7 μg ml−1 Cd	Cadmium ions and aggregates	Bruneau et al., 2013 (ref. 243)
CdSe	PMAO or PEI	
Bacillus subtilis
	—	37 °C; 48 h exposure	Increased mortality	40 nM QD	10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd	Metal ions	Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)
CdSe	PMAO or PEI	
Escherichia coli
	—	37 °C; 48 h exposure	Reduced growth	>40 nM QD	10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd	Metal ions	Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)
CdSe	MPS	
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
	—	30 °C; pH 7.4; 24 h dark; 24 h exposure	Reduced growth; increased mortality; ROS formation; QD internalization	10 mg L−1 Cd	10–125 mg L−1 Cd	Metal ions and particles	Priester et al., 2009 (ref. 194)
CdSe	PSMA	Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)	—	21 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; seawater; 5 h and 3 day exposures	Increased Cd release and internalization with increased salinity; increased phytochelatins	0.5 nM QD (240 nM Cd equivalent)	0.4–1 nM QD (20–480 nM Cd equivalent)	Cadmium ion	Morelli et al., 2012 (ref. 202)
CdSe	—	Protozoa (Tetrahymena thermophila)	—	30 °C; QD-exposed bacteria prey; 24 h exposure	Impaired growth and movement; oxidative damage; reduced digestion; low QD degradation after trophic transfer; cadmium biomagnification	3.311 ± 152 mg L−1 Cd in prey bacteria	
	Cadmium ions	Werlin et al., 2011 (ref. 237)
CdSe/ZnS	—	
Bacillus subtilis
	
	37 °C; 48 h exposure with weathered QDs	Reduced growth and increased mortality from weathered QDs	10 nM QD	10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd	Metal ions	Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)
CdSe/ZnS	—	
Escherichia coli
	—	37 °C; 48 h exposure with weathered QDs	Reduced growth and increased mortality from weathered QDs	10 nM QD	10 mg L−1; 1 g L−1 Cd	Metal ions	Mahendra et al., 2008 (ref. 168)
CdSe/ZnS	PSMA	Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)	—	21 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; seawater; 5 h and 3 day exposures	Decreased growth rates; increased phytochelatins and ROS; increased SOD and CAT activity; increased Cd release with increased salinity	0.5 nM QD (240 nM Cd equivalent)	0.4–1 nM QD (20–480 nM Cd equivalent)	Cadmium ion and nanoparticle	Morelli et al., 2012 (ref. 202)
CdSe/ZnS	PSMA	Marine diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)	—	21 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; seawater: 7–8 days exposure	Decreased growth rate; growth inhibition; significant protein profile using SELDI-TOF-MS biomarker detection	2.5 nM QD	—	Ions and particles	Scebba et al., 2016 (ref. 293)
CdSe/ZnS	MSA	
Caenorhabditis elegans
	Adults	15 °C; 6 day exposure	Impaired reproduction and fecundity; higher embryo mortality; prematurely laid embryos; higher frequency of phenotypic deformity; reduced life span	0.10 μM	0.01–1 μM QD	Nanoparticles	Hsu et al., 2012 (ref. 249)
CdSe/ZnS	PEG, NH2, or COOH	
Ceriodaphnia dubia
	Adult (>72 h)	24 ± 1 °C; 24 h dark; 24 h static exposure; 24 h depuration	Higher levels of QD-COOH retained after depuration; QDs crossed interstitial barrier	8 nM QD	—	Nanoparticles	Feswick et al., 2013 (ref. 241)
CdSe/ZnS	MUA	
Daphnia magna
	
	36 h exposure; 3 nm green QDs	QDs localized to gut and intestines; QDs did not dissolve; QDs may have aggregated in exposure media prior to ingestion	15 nmol L−1 QD	
	Particles	Jackson et al., 2009 (ref. 278)
CdSe/ZnS	MUA	
Daphnia magna
	—	36 h exposure; 6 nm red QDs	QDs localized to gut and intestines; QDs did not dissolute; QDs may have aggregated in exposure media prior to ingestion	15 nmol L−1 QD	
	Particles	Jackson et al., 2009 (ref. 278)
CdSe/ZnS	PEG, NH2, or COOH	
Daphnia magna
	Adult (>72 h)	24 ± 1 °C; 24 h dark; 24 h static exposure followed by 24 h depuration	Internalization of QDs (QD body burdens order COOH > NH2 > PEG); QDs crossed interstitial barrier	8 nM QD	—	Nanoparticles	Feswick et al., 2013 (ref. 241)
CdSe/ZnS	PAA, PMAO, PEG	
Daphnia magna
	Neonate	22 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; pH 7.2–7.6; 24 h exposure; 48 h depuration	Increased mortality; incomplete gut clearance during depuration; increased QD retention with feeding; cadmium and nanoparticle accumulation	7.7 nM QD (0.6 ppm Cd)	—	Nanoparticles	Lewinski et al., 2010 (ref. 239)
CdSe/ZnS	GA	
Daphnia magna
	Juvenile (4–6 d)	20 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 48 h static exposure; UV-B irradiation	Decreased survival; increased ROS production; increased Cd2+ release with UV-B irradiation	30 μg L−1 QD	0, 0.95, 3, 9.5, 30, and 94.9 μg L−1 QDs	Cadmium ion	Kim et al., 2010 (ref. 294)
CdSe/ZnS	MPA	
Daphnia magna
	Juvenile (4–6 d)	20 ± 1 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 48 h static exposure; UV-B irradiation	Decreased vitellogenin expression with UV-B; increased Cd2+ release with UV-B irradiation	3 μg L−1 QD	0, 0.95, 3, 9.5, 30, and 94.9 μg L−1 QDs	Cadmium ion	Kim et al., 2010 (ref. 294)
CdSe/ZnS	MPA	
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa)	Cells	24 °C; 24 h dark	Increased SOD, catalase, and glutathione reductase activity; increased single and double strand breaks; upregulation of DNA repair enzymes and antioxidant defense genes	10 nM QD	10, 50 and 100 nM QD	Particles	Santos et al., 2013 (ref. 255)
CdSe/ZnS	COOH	Plant (Arabidopsis thaliana)	Rosette production stage (3–4 weeks)	Hoaglands solution; 27 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; pH 6.0; 1–7 day exposures; humic acid co-exposure	Intact QDs absorbed into root cell wall (no internalized QDs); cadmium ion internalized into cells; increased oxidative stress through decreased GSH in treatment with humic acids	5.8 nM QD (5 μg mL−1 Cd)	—	Cadmium ions	Navarro et al., 2012 (ref. 224)
CdSe/ZnS	PEG-COO–	Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)	Embryos (eyed egg stage)	10 ± 0.5 °C; pH 8.0; 24 h dark; 14 day static exposure	Increased mortality; increased gill ventilation frequency; increased heart rate; decreased behavioral responses; increased developmental malformations; QD localized in the gills/head	4 × 10–9 mol L−1 QD	—	Ions and particles	Jurgelėnė et al., 2018 (ref. 229)
CdSe/ZnS	—	Atlantic killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus)	Adults	20 °C; 16:8 h L:D; 20 ± 2 ppt salinity; static; fed 2× daily QD discs; 85 day exposure	Maternal transfer of Cd into eggs; increased male expression of vitellogenin; impaired fecundity; cadmium accumulation in liver	10 μg QD per day	1–10 μg QD per day	Ions	Blickley et al., 2014 (ref. 263)
CdSeS/ZnS	COOH	Bacteria (Vibrio fischeri)	—	QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 30 min exposure	EC20 of bioluminescence inhibition for 30 min exposure pre and post UV exposure	0.293 mg L−1 (pre), 0.012 mg L−1 (post)	QDs 0.209–0.75 mg L−1	Cadmium ion	Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)
CdSeS/ZnS	COOH	Green algae (Chlorella vulgaris)	—	20 ± 3 °C; 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure	Reduced growth rate	0.251 μg L−1	QDs 0.209–0.75 mg L−1	Cadmium ion	Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)
CdSeS/ZnS	COOH	Microalgae (Raphidocelis subcapitata)	—	20 ± 3 °C; 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure	Reduced growth rate	0.625 mg L−1	0.209–0.75 mg L−1	Cadmium ion	Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)
CdSeS/ZnS	COOH	Crustacean (Daphnia magna)	Neonates (<24 h old)	20 ± 2 °C; 16:8 h L:D; QDs weathered for 24 h in sunlight; 48 h static exposure	Increased immobilization post UV exposure	0.263 mg L−1 EC20 (pre), 0.526 mg L−1 EC20 (post),	0.282 to 0.75 mg L−1	Cadmium ion	Silva et al. 2016 (ref. 286)
CdSe/CdZnS	PAA-EG	
Arabidopsis thaliana
	—	23 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 75% humidity	Leaf chlorosis; QD translocation to leaves	10 μg mL−1	—	Ions and particles	Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)
CdSe/CdZnS	PEI	
Arabidopsis thaliana
	—	23 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 75% humidity	Leaf chlorosis; decreased leaf size; QD translocation to leaves	10 μg mL−1	—	Ions and particles	Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)
CdSe/CdZnS	PAA-EG	Caterpillar (Trichoplusia ni)	Newly hatched	23 °C; 24 h continuous light; 50% humidity; 7 day exposure	Reduced weight gain; trophic transfer of QDs	10 μg mL−1	—	Ions and particles	Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)
CdSe/CdZnS	PEI	Caterpillar (Trichoplusia ni)	Newly hatched	23 °C; 24 h continuous light; 50% humidity; 7 day exposure	Reduced weight gain; trophic transfer of QDs	10 μg mL−1	—	Ions and particles	Koo et al., 2015 (ref. 238)
CdTe	TGA	Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)	Inoculated fresh stock	21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure	Decreased growth rate; internalization of QDs; increased Cd internal concentration	200 ng mL−1 Cd	100–300 ng mL−1 Cd	Cadmium ion	Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)
CdTe	COOH	Protozoan (Paramecium caudatum)	—	22 °C; 24 h D; 24–72 h exposure	Bioaccumulation of QDs; biomagnification of QDs through trophic transfer (BMF = 1.1–1.4); decreased bacterial grazing ability with increasing exposure; decreased reproductive potential; decreased growth rate	25 mg L−1	25–75 mg L−1	Particles	Gupta et al., 2017 (ref. 236)
CdTe	TGA	Freshwater polyp (Hydra vulgaris)	3 weeks old with 1–2 buds	18 °C; 12:12 h L:D; pH 7; 24, 48, and 72 h exposures	Impaired reproduction (budding rate); impaired regenerative capability; decreased reproduction; decreased cell proliferation; increased apoptosis	0.4 mg L−1 Cd	1–100 nM QD (0.04–4.0 mg L−1 Cd)	Particles	Ambrosone et al., 2012 (ref. 272)
CdTe	TGA	Freshwater mussel (Elliptio complanate)	Adults	15 °C; 24 h static exposure	Altered metallothionein concentrations in gill, digestive gland, and gonads; accumulation of Cd in gills and digestive tissues	1.6 mg L−1 Cd	0–8 mg Cd per L	Cadmium ion	Peyrot et al., 2009 (ref. 295)
CdTe	TGA	Freshwater mussel (Elliption complanate)	Mature, 5–7 cm shell length	15 °C; 8:16 h L:D; freshwater; static 24 h exposure	Oxidative stress through increased LPO in gills; reduced phagocytic activity and hemocyte viability; genotoxicity through increased DNA strand breaks; increasing aggregation of QDs in FW	1.6 mg L−1	1.6–8 mg L−1	Cadmium ions and nanoparticles	Gagne et al., 2008 (ref. 262)
CdTe	COOH	Mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis)	Adults	16.6 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 36‰ salinity; 14 day; static-renewal	Cd accumulation in gonads; decreased superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione-S-transferase activity; increased glutathione peroxidase activity; metallothionein induction in females; increased lipid peroxidation	10 μg L−1 QD	—	Cadmium ion and nanoparticle	Gonçalves et al. 2020 (ref. 296)
CdTe	Ala and gly	Domestic silk moth (Bombyx mori)	48 h-old 5th instar	25 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 70–90% humidity; single 10 μL QD injection; 6–120 h sampling time	Cytotoxicity, oxidative stress, and reproductive impairment; increased ROS in gonads; increased apoptosis and autophagy; decreased sperm production and quality; reduced fertilization rate; sex-specific toxicity differences	0.32 nmol QD	0.32–0.64 nmol QD	Ions and particles	Yan et al., 2016 (ref. 267)
CdTe	GSH	Freshwater macrophyte (Lemna minor)	—	OECD test 221; 24 ± 2 °C; pH 6.8 ± 0.1; 7 day exposure	Inhibited growth rate and biomass	0.03 mg L−1 Cd	0.01–15 mg L−1	Cadmium ions	Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 226)
CdTe	MPA	Freshwater macrophyte (Lemna minor)	—	OECD test 221; 24 ± 2 °C; pH 6.8 ± 0.1; 7 day exposure	Inhibited growth rate and biomass: cadmium bioaccumulation	0.02 mg L−1 Cd	0.01–15 mg L−1	Cadmium ions	Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 226)
CdTe	—	Onion (Allium cepa)	1–2 g bulbs	22 ± 1 °C; 15:9 h L:D; 24 and 72 h exposures	Lower root growth; cadmium dissolution and uptake in roots	30 μm	30–100 μm Cd	Cadmium ions	Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 227)
CdTe/ZnS	—	Onion (Allium cepa)	1–2 g bulbs	22 ± 1 °C; 15:9 h L:D; 24 and 72 h exposures	Low particle dissolution and cadmium uptake; particles adsorbed on roots	>100 μm	30–100 μm Cd	—	Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 227)
CdTe/CdS/ZnS	—	Onion (Allium cepa)	1–2 g bulbs	22 ± 1 °C; 15:9 h L:D; 24 and 72 h exposures	Lower root growth; cadmium dissolution and uptake in roots	30 μm	30–100 μm Cd	Cadmium ions	Modlitbová et al., 2018 (ref. 227)
CdTe	MPA	Wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum)	5 day old	25 °C; 8:16 h L:D; 5 day exposure	Decreased root and shoot growth; increased lipid oxidation; increased MDA	25 mg L−1 QD	25–400 mg L−1 QD	Ions and particles	Chen et al., 2014 (ref. 270)
CdTe	MPA	Wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum)	5 day old	25 °C; 8:16 h L:D; UV-B radiation (10 kJ m−2 d−1); 5 day exposure	Increased apoptosis and DNA damage; decreased chlorophyll a and b; increased ROS; increased SOD and dehydroascorbate activity; decreased CAT, ascorbate peroxidase, and glutathione peroxidase activity; increased Cd accumulation in roots; reduced plant height and root length; increased release of Cd	200 mg L−1 QD	—	Ions and particles	Chen et al., 2014 (ref. 270)
CdTe/CdS	COOH	Freshwater algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii)	—	25 ± 1 °C; 14:10 h L:D; freshwater; 96 h exposure	Reduced growth; synergistic effects with Cd ion co-exposure which increased cytotoxicity	3.571 mg L−1 QD	0.5–6 mg L−1 QD	Ions and particles	Yu et al., 2018 (ref. 297)
CdTe/CdS	TGA	Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)	—	21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure	Decreased growth rate; increased Cd internal concentration	300 ng mL−1 Cd	100–300 ng mL−1 Cd	Cadmium ion	Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)
CdTe/SiO2	TGA	Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)	—	21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure	Decreased growth rate; increased Cd internal concentration	300 ng mL−1 Cd	100–300 ng mL−1 Cd	Cadmium ion	Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)
CdTe/ZnS	TGA	Diatom (Phaeodactylum tricornutum)	—	21 ± 1 °C; pH 7.5; seawater; 6 day exposure	Increased Cd internal concentration	>300 ng mL−1 Cd	100–300 ng mL−1 Cd	Cadmium ion	Xu et al., 2010 (ref. 228)
Non-metal QDs
InZnP	GSH	Human	Skin cells	37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs	Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation	>200 nM pristine QD	6.25–200 nM Qd	Ions and secondary degradation products	Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)
InZnP/ZnS	PEN	Human	Skin cells	37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs	Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation;	6.25 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD	6.25–200 nM QD	Ions and secondary degradation products	Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)
InZnP/ZnS	GSH	Human	Skin cells	37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs	Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation	6.25 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD	6.25–200 nm QD	Ions and secondary degradation products	Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)
InZnPS	PEN	Human	Skin cells	37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs	Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation; reduced metabolic activity	12.5 nM weathered QD; 50 nM pristine QD	6.25–200 nm QD	Ions and secondary degradation products	Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)
InZnPS	GSH	Human	Skin cells	37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs	Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation;	12.5 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD	6.25–200 nm QD	Ions and secondary degradation products	Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)
InZnPS/ZnS	PEN	Human	Skin cells	37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs	Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation;	12.5 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD	6.25–200 nm QD	Ions and secondary degradation products	Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)
InZnPS/ZnS	GSH	Human	Skin cells	37 °C; 24 h exposure; UV weathered and pristine QDs	Increased mortality from weathered QDs; reduced cell proliferation	12.5 nM weathered QD; >200 nM pristine QD	6.25–200 nM QD	Ions and secondary degradation products	Tarantini et al., 2019 (ref. 23)
Silicon QD	Sulfonate	
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Embryos (26 hpf)	28 °C; 120 h exposure; co-exposure with 450 nm blue LED light for 6 h	Blue light increased silicon QD toxicity; increased malformation and mortality rate	40 mg L−1	10–50 mg L−1 QD	
	Srivastava et al., 2019 (ref. 291)
Carbon-based QDs
CQDa	—	
Phytoplankton (Scenedesmus obliquus)	—	25 ± 2 °C; 12:12 h L:D; 24–96 h exposure	Oxidative stress and ROS formation; increased LPO and SOD activity; growth inhibition; reduced chlorophyll a	50 mg L−1 QD	5–500 mg L−1 QD	
	Yao et al., 2018 (ref. 253)
GOQDb	—	
Green algae (Chlorella vulgaris)	—	24 ± 0.5 °C; 24–96 h exposure	Oxidative stress and ROS formation; increased SOD activity; increased cell permeability; reduced mitochondrial membrane potential; altered cell morphology; inhibited cell division	0.01 mg L−1	0.01–10 mg L−1	Nanoparticles	Ouyang et al., 2015 (ref. 281)
GQDc	—	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	4 hpf	28 °C; 14:10 h L:D; 7 day exposure	Upregulation of inflammatory and detoxifying genes; induction of AP-1 transcription factor for downstream regulation; activated acute inflammatory responses and redox signaling pathway; increased apoptosis	25 μg mL−1	0–100 μg mL−1	GQD particles	Deng et al., 2018 (ref. 257)
GQDc	Reduced	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Adult	26 ± 0.5 °C; 12:12 h L:D; static exposure renewed daily; 7 day exposure; 14 day recovery	Increased DNA methylation in gill, liver, and intestines; increased DNA methylation in liver and intestine after recovery period	2 mg L−1 QD	2–50 mg L−1 QD	Particles	Hu et al., 2019 (ref. 273)
GQDc	Hydroxylated (OH)	
Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Adult	26 ± 0.5 °C; 12:12 h L:D; static exposure renewed daily; 7 day exposure; 14 day recovery	Increased DNA methylation in gill, liver, and intestines	2 mg L−1 QD	2–50 mg L−1 QD	Particles	Hu et al., 2019 (ref. 273)
GQDc	Aminated (NH2)	Zebrafish (Danio rerio)	Adult	26 ± 0.5 °C; 12:12 h L:D; static exposure renewed daily; 7 day exposure; 14 day recovery	Increased DNA methylation in gill, liver, and intestines; increased DNA methylation in liver and intestine after recovery period	2 mg L−1 QD	2–50 mg L−1 QD	Particles	Hu et al., 2019 (ref. 273)

 	Fig. 6  Example adverse outcome pathway (AOP) for the molecular initiating events (MIE) of oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species formation associated with QD exposure resulting in a cascade of negative effects to aquatic organisms. Blue arrows indicate induction pathways and red arrows indicate inhibitory pathways. Dashed arrows indicate indirect and proposed effects.	 
Acute toxicity	Adverse effect causing mortality to exposed organisms
Adverse outcome pathway (AOP)	Conceptual framework describing a pathway for assessing hazards to organisms and population (including humans) health. Also see molecular initiating event (MIE)
Agglomeration	Clustering of more than two nanoparticles, including quantum dots, resulting in increasing size of the growing particle. In this report, equivalent to aggregation
Aggregation	See Agglomeration
Alloying quantum dot	Semiconducting quantum dots formed by combining two semiconductors with different band gap energies resulting in properties distinct not only from the properties of their bulk counterparts but also from those of their parent semiconductors
Band gap	Difference in energy between the valence band and the conduction band of a solid material (such as an insulator or semiconductor) consisting of the range of energy values forbidden to electrons in the material
Benthic	Aquatic organisms, structures and functions associated with the sediments
Bioaccumulation	Accumulation of chemicals, materials or substances within the tissues of an organism
Bioavailability	Expression of chemical, material or substance present in a form that results in an exposure to an organism causing bioaccumulation and/or adverse effects
Biomagnification	As a result of trophic transfer, an increase in bioaccumulation of chemicals, materials or substances moving up the food chain
Bohr radius	Radius of the smallest or ground-state electron orbit in the hydrogen atom, equal to about 5.29 × 10−9 centimeter
Capping agents	In this report, equivalent to capping ligands and surface coatings
Chemiluminescence	Luminescence (such as bioluminescence) due to chemical reaction
Colloidal stability	Ability of particles to remain suspended in solution
Conduction band	Range of permissible energy values which an electron in a solid material allows the electron to dissociate from a particular atom and become a free charge carrier in the material
Crystalline size	Dimensions of a crystal
Cytotoxicity	Adverse effects of a compound (toxicity) to cells
Dispersibility	Quality or state of being distributed in a system or environment
Dissolution	In this report, the act or process of dissolving
Electrical conductivity	Magnitude of the capability to conduct electricity
Electrical double layer	Region existing at the boundary of two phases and assumed to consist of two oppositely charged layers (such as a layer of negative ions adsorbed on colloidal particles that attracts a layer of positive ions in the surrounding electrolytic solution)
Electromagnetic radiation	Form of energy in waves including ultraviolet (UV), visible, and infrared (IR) regions
Electron–hole pairs	Two electrons belonging to one atom or shared by two atoms as a chemical bond. Same as excitons
Electrostatic forces	Electrostatic interactions existing in attractive and repulsive forms between particles caused by their electric charges
Emission spectra	Electromagnetic spectrum deriving its characteristics from the material of which the emitting source is made and from the way in which the material is excited
Epigenetic	Heritable changes leading to different phenotypes due to changes in gene expression without alteration of DNA sequences
Eukaryote	Domain (Eukarya) or a higher taxonomic group (Eukaryota) above the kingdom including organisms composed of one or more cells containing visibly evident nuclei and organelles
Euphotic zone	Upper depths of a water body where light penetrates and supports plant growth
Excitation energy	Minimum amount of energy required to convert a normal stable molecule into a reactive molecule
Excitons	See electron–hole pair
Fluorescence	Luminescence caused by the absorption of radiation at one wavelength followed by nearly immediate re-radiation (or emission) usually at a different wavelength that ceases almost at once when the incident radiation stops.
Graphene	Extremely electrically conductive form of elemental carbon composed of a single flat sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a repeating hexagonal lattice.
Graphene oxide	Oxidized form of graphene in which oxygen and hydrogen moieties are components of the carbon structure.
Hetero-agglomeration	Agglomeration involving different particles, including nanoparticles. In contrast, homo-agglomeration involves agglomeration of particles of the same type
Humic acid	Natural dissolved and particulate organic matter formed by the degradation of terrestrial and aquatic biomass.
Hydrodynamic diameter	Diameter of a particle in liquid solution
Immunotoxicity	Chemical, material or substance which causes toxicity to the immune system
Incandescent	Of, relating to, or being light produced by incandescence (i.e., white, glowing, or luminous with intense heat)
Ionic	Characterized by metals in the form of ions. Often more bioavailable than other forms of metals enhancing the probability of causing adverse effects
Ionic strength	Expression of presence of dissolved ions in aqueous solution (e.g., seawater)
Isoelectric point	Point or narrow range on a pH scale at which a reactive molecule or surface carries no electrical charge, or in which the negative and positive charges are equal resulting in a net zero charge
Liquid crystal display (LCD)	Image based on an organic liquid whose physical properties resemble a crystalline formation of loosely ordered molecular arrays similar to a regular crystalline lattice and an anisotropic refraction of light (i.e., refraction light in multiple directions rather than one direction (isotropic))
Luminescence	Low-temperature emission of light (as by a chemical or physiological process)
Median effect concentration	Concentration of a chemical, material or substance causing a 50% sublethal effect (e.g., reduced growth, reproduction). Also, known as the EC50
Median lethal effect concentration	Concentration of a chemical, material or substance causing 50% mortality. Also known as the LC50
Molecular initiating event (MOI)	Initial interaction between a chemical, material or substance and a biomolecule causally linked to a negative outcome via a pathway. Also see adverse outcome pathway (AOP)
Monochromaticity	Consisting of one color
Monodispersed colloids	Colloidal particles of uniform size in a dispersed phase
No observable effect concentration	Highest concentration tested of a chemical, material or substance without a statistically-significant adverse effect. Also known as the NOEC
Nanocomposite materials	Nanomaterials put together molecule by molecule
Nanocrystal	Crystal with nanoscale dimensions
Nanomaterials	Substances consisting of nanoparticles with nanoscale dimensions
Nanoparticles	Particle whose size is measured in nanometers
Oxidative stress	Physiological stress on the body caused by the cumulative damage of reactive oxygen species and/or free radicals inadequately neutralized by antioxidants
Oxyanions	Anion containing one or more oxygen atoms bonded to another element (as in the sulfate and carbonate ions)
Pelagic	Aquatic organisms living primarily in the water column
Perovskite	Mineral consisting of an oxide of calcium and titanium sometimes containing rare earth elements. Because of unique properties, increasingly used in the quantum dot industry
Photo-bleaching	Removal of color by light energy
Photoluminescence	Luminescence in which the excitation is produced by ultraviolet (UV), visible, and infrared (IR) electromagnetic radiation
Photolysis	Chemical decomposition caused by radiant energy (such as light)
Photooxidation	Oxidation under the influence of radiant energy (such as light)
Photostability	Resistant to degradation under the influence of radiant energy and especially of light
Photovoltaic	Generation of voltage when radiant energy falls on the boundary between dissimilar substances (such as two different semiconductors)
Physicochemical properties	Characteristics of a chemical, material or substance describing physical and chemicals traits (e.g., water solubility, vapor pressure)
Precipitate	Descent of a chemical, material or substance from solution into a solid phase
Prokaryote	Unicellular microorganisms lacking a distinct nucleus and membrane-bound organelles classified as a kingdom (Prokaryotae synonym Monera) or into two domains (Bacteria and Archaea)
Product lifecycle	Series of stages through which an industrial or consumer item (i.e., the product) passes during its lifetime from manufacturer to disposal
Quantum confinement	Restriction of the electronic wave function to smaller and smaller regions of space
Quantum dot	Engineered semiconductor nanocrystal with unique fluorescent, quantum confinement and quantum yield properties
Quantum efficiency	Ratio of the number of photoelectrons released in a photoelectric process to the number of radiation quanta absorbed
Quantum yield	See quantum efficiency
Salting-out effect	Phenomena in which high ionic strength solutions cause dissolved substances and colloidal particles to precipitate from solution. Common when freshwater meets saltwater in estuaries
Sedimentation	Process of forming or depositing sediment including natural and anthropogenic particles
Semiconducting nanocrystal	Nanoscale crystal with the characteristics of a semiconductor
Spectral purity	Spectrum in which the dispersion is highly discriminative such that the light is practically monochromatic
Sublethal toxicity	Adverse effect causing non-lethal impacts potentially including cytotoxicity, transcriptomic alteration, immunotoxicity, reproductive, growth and developmental effects, transgenerational toxicity, and behavior effects
Teratogenic	Adverse effects causing physical malformations in the developing embryo
Thermal stability	Ability to resist degradation resulting from heat
Toxicokinetics	Study of the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination of hazardous chemicals, materials and substances by an organism
Transgenerational toxicity	Adverse effect to an organism caused by transfer from an ancestor
Transcriptomic alteration	Modification of an organism's messenger RNA, or mRNA, molecules
Transformation	Process of altering a chemical, material or substance includes alterations caused by chemical reactions or interactions
Trophic transfer	Exchange of a chemical, material or substance from one biological level of organization to another biological level (e.g., from a plant consumer to a predator)
Tunable wavelength	Ability to control a wavelength
Valence band	Range of permissible energy values of the highest energies an electron can have and still be associated with a particular atom of a solid material
Zero-dimensional	Without dimensions in any direction
Footnotes
† This is CEMM/ACESD Contribution ORD-043039.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1en00712b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
