Modification of micro/nanoscaled manganese dioxide-based materials and their electrocatalytic applications toward oxygen evolution reaction  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA09165H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA09165H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 6688-6746Modification of micro/nanoscaled manganese dioxide-based materials and their electrocatalytic applications toward oxygen evolution reaction

        
          
            Gaihua 
            He
          
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Ye 
            Liao
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Pharmacy, Jinzhou Medical University, Jinzhou 121001, P. R. China
bCollege of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Comparative Medicine, Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, PR China. E-mail: ghHe2020@yeah.net
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116085, P. R. China
Received 
      24th November 2022
    , Accepted 21st February 2023First published on 15th March 2023AbstractManganese dioxide (MnO2) has been considered one of the most attractive materials for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) due to its low cost, natural abundance, easy synthesis, multiple morphology and polymorph, environmental friendliness, and high potential theoretical catalytic performance. However, the unsatisfactory oxygen evolution reaction (OER) efficiency of MnO2-based materials has confined their practical applications. Fortunately, recently, enormous efforts have been invested to improve the oxygen evolution reaction efficiency and clarify underlying mechanisms. Here, the aim is to exhaustively summarize the recent advances in the application of manganese dioxide and its composites as electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction. Fundamentally, the mechanisms and correlatively critical parameters of OER catalysis are discussed. Moreover, the diverse preparation routes of MnO2 nanomaterials are itemized elaborately. The morphology control, structure construction, facet engineering, element doping, and construction of binary/ternary heterojunctions are presented. Their applications in OER catalysis are also highlighted. Finally, a proposal for the research gaps and perspective on the challenges and development direction for future research on nanostructured MnO2-based materials in the field of OER catalysis applications has been propounded. Therefore, this review provides basic guidance for the rational design and construction of high-efficiency MnO2-based catalysts for OER.Gaihua HeGaihua He received her PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 2020. She is now a University Distinguished Professor at Jinzhou Medical University, China. Her group is engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials. Her research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry and biological medicine.Ye LiaoYe Liao is currently a student at Yangzhou University of College of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Comparative Medicine, Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, China. His research mainly focuses on electrochemistry, and biotechnology.
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of urbanization and science-technology, energy exhaustion, and environmental pollution have pushed renewable energy sources to the forefront.1,2 Therefore, it is essential to discover efficient and sustainable technologies for environmental purification and crises.3–5 Electrochemical water splitting has been recognized as a promising approach for efficient and clean energy conversion with zero carbon emissions.6–9
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is a critical process, with the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) for electrochemical water splitting. In particular, OER is very crucial in a wide range of energy conversion and storage technologies. The key issue is to develop highly active electrocatalysts to address the sluggish dynamics of OER. Tremendous research attention has been paid to this challenging conundrum. Noble metal oxides are regarded as the benchmark catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction with the obtained rapid reaction kinetics.10–15 Unfortunately, the natural scarcity, inferior resistance to poisoning, and high cost of these noble metal catalysts remain major obstacles to their practical applications. Recently, noble metal-free electrocatalysts fabricated for oxygen evolution reactions include metal oxides,16 metal nitrides and oxynitrides,17 metal carbides and carbonitrides,18 metal sulfides,19 metal halides,20 hydroxides,21 and other carbon-based materials,22–27 organic–inorganic hybrid materials,28–32 zeolite,33 and nanoclays.34,35 Transition metal oxides have attracted a lot of attention as a class of electropositive oxides with abundant catalytic sites, as well as for their structural stability, chemical tunability, environmental friendliness, and simplicity of synthesis. Among multiplex catalysts, MnOx has gained widespread respect for its unique properties, such as earth-abundance, low cost, low toxicity, environmental compatibility, and large surface area. Since the discovery of PSII systems in nature, the search for active MnOx materials as artificial water-splitting catalysts has a long history and extremely high potential theoretical catalytic performance. Among the diverse MnOx, MnO2 is polycrystalline with various morphologies. Through the basic [MnO6] structural unit, different stacking and connection modes are formed into different tunnel structures, and then generate a variety of crystallographic forms and morphologies. The application of MnO2 in water-splitting systems is described in detail. Compared with the other 3d metal oxides such as Co3O4, NiO and Fe-based oxide, manganese dioxide (MnO2) has the advantages of high oxygen storage capacity, rich redox chemistry, self-repairing, and high surface-area utilization owing to different kinds of crystal structures (α-, β-, γ-, σ- and λ-MnO2) and nanostructures (nanorods, nanowires, nano-sheets, nanotubes, etc).36–38 However, most polycrystalline MnO2 exhibit limited electrocatalytic OER activity due to their poor conductivity, perfect lattice structure, and half-filled T2g orbitals. But Mn has a number of variable valences, which are favorable for facilitating charge transfer during electrolytic oxygen conversion. More importantly, the morphology, crystal structure, and surface chemical state of MnO2 can be tuned to further promote its catalytic properties. Strategies such as heteroatom doping, morphological tuning, heterostructure formation, conductor support, defect engineering, and valence regulation have been implemented to optimize the catalytic performance of MnO2.
However, several drawbacks still limit the catalytic efficiency of MnO2. Firstly, nanosized MnO2 agglomerates are prone to fragmentation due to their high surface energy during catalytic reactions. In addition, MnO2 is difficult to apply in aqueous media and recover due to its tendency to levitate in water. Secondly, the low catalytic activity at low temperatures limits further practical applications due to the sluggish chemical dynamics. Thirdly, the catalytic mechanism still needs to be implemented and the active sites should be clearly defined.
Hence, in the past decades, significant efforts have been made on MnO2-based materials, which offer considerable methods for high-efficiency water splitting applications. Although some reviews have reported MnO2-based materials on the topic of electrocatalytic water oxidation.39–42 A systematic overview of frontier scientific research on OER catalysis is still lacking. It will give instructions for the proper design and construction of MnO2-based materials for OER applications. Herein, the topic will be reviewed as the following aspects (Scheme 1):
 Scheme 1  A schematic overview of micro/nanoscaled manganese dioxide materials. 
(1) introducing MnO2 polymorphic phase structures;
(2) introducing common preparation methods of MnO2;
(3) modification of MnO2 single species by morphology control, structure construction, facet engineering, and element doping; the design and fabrication of MnO2-based composites via the construction of the homojunction and MnO2 binary/ternary heterojunctions;
(4) systematically summarizing OER applications in water splitting;
(5) generalizing the research gaps and outlooking the perspective of MnO2-based materials in the field of water decomposition.
2. Polymorphic phase structures
Generally [MnO6] octahedral units offer angles or edges to form crystalline MnO2 materials with various tunnels and layered structures.43 In nature, there are six main MnO2 types, namely, α-, β-, γ-, ε-, δ-, and λ-MnO2 (Fig. 1).44 Among them, α-, β- and γ-MnO2 belong to a 1D tunnel structure, δ-MnO2 is a two-dimensional (2D) layered structure, and λ-MnO2 is divided into the three-dimensional network structure. Specifically, α-MnO2 is made up of [MnO6] octahedral double strands, shared with a corner in adjacent double chains along the c-axis. Thus, α-MnO2 possesses (2 × 2) and (1 × 1) tunnel structures, in which the sizes of the tunnels are 4.6 Å and 1.89 Å, respectively. Most metal cations (K+, NH4+, Fe2+,…) and micromolecules (water, NH3, …) can be accommodated in the large (2 × 2) tunnel. In β-MnO2, the manganese (Mn) atoms occupy the center of the [MnO6] octahedron, while the oxygen (O) atoms are arranged in the six vertices with hexagonal close-packed structure. The [MnO6] octahedron of β-MnO2 exhibits a (1 × 1) tunnel, and the size is 1.89 Å. These narrow tunnels make only small ions (H+, Li+) to accommodate. γ-MnO2 grows with (1 × 1) and (1 × 2) tunnels alternately, forming a hexagonal closely packed structure. In γ-MnO2, disordered and irregular alternate growth exists in the tunnel, which results in poor crystals due to the defects and vacancies. The [MnO6] octahedron of δ-MnO2 consists of a 2D infinite layer, in which Mn atoms occupy the holes of the [MnO6] octahedron, and O atoms form a close hexagonal structure. The interlayer distance affords 7.0 Å. Alternately, empty layers can host holes rich in metal cations, water molecules, and other substances. While λ-MnO2 is a typical 3D spinel structure with a (1 × 1) tunnel. In the base of the MnO2 crystallographic characteristics, their thermodynamic morphologies can be obtained by the single-crystal chemical bonding theory (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Thermodynamic morphology based on the crystallographic characteristics of α-, β-, γ-, ε-, δ-, λ-MnO2. On the basis of the chemical bonding theory of single crystals, the thermodynamic morphology of MnO2 can be calculated. 
3. Preparation method of manganese dioxide materials
In order to broaden the range of applications of MnO2 materials, various fabrication methods have been reported to produce MnO2 materials with different morphologies, polymorphs, high porosity, and large specific surface areas. Common preparation methods include electrodeposition techniques, hydrothermal methods, sol–gel methods, microwave-assisted methods, electrostatic spinning techniques, and template-assisted preparation methods, etc.
3.1 Electrodeposition technique
At present, the electrodeposition methods are mainly divided into electrochemical deposition and electrophoretic deposition. Electrochemical deposition is the process of depositing metal oxides from their aqueous solution by the action of an electric field. Electrophoretic deposition is the deposition of colloidal particles in a dispersion medium under the action of an applied DC power supply, which moves in a directional manner towards the cathode or anode, thus depositing on both poles. A combination of electrochemical deposition and electrophoretic deposition has also been used to synthesize such compounds. By controlling the deposition rate, MnO2 electrodes of different densities and morphologies were obtained by electrodeposition on anode or cathode substrates in a solution containing manganese ions. MnO2 prepared by electrodeposition techniques is simple and easy to manipulate, without the use of polymer binders, and is free from contamination, and mild reaction conditions. It has been widely used in the field of electrochemical energy storage.45,46 Depending on the deposition method, electrodeposition techniques can be divided into three categories, namely, constant-current deposition, constant-voltage deposition, and cyclic voltammetry. MnO2 prepared by different techniques present different morphologies and crystal structures, which directly affect their physical and chemical properties. For example, Chen et al.47 used constant-current electrochemical deposition technology to electrodeposit ε-MnO2 with a nanometer flower-like structure on the substrate in a three-electrode system using manganese nitrate and sodium nitrate as electrode liquid. The specific capacitance of the composite electrodes can reach 1230 F g−1. In addition, the prepared MnO2-CNT-sponge supergiant exhibits excellent capacitive properties and cycle stability with power and energy densities up to 63 kW kg−1 and 31 W h kg−1. Su et al.48 prepared MnO2-PeDOT:PSS composite by a one-step deposition process using manganese acetate and polyethoxythiophene (sodium styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the electrolyte in a two-electrode system, in which MnO2 showed weak crystallinity. The specific capacity reaches 1670 mF cm−2 at the current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Wang et al.49 prepared MnO2–NiFe electrode with high activity and cost-effective performance through a simple electrodeposition process, which showed excellent activity. Wu et al.50 took titanium dioxide nanoarray (TNAs) as the carrier and modified TNAs with manganese dioxide and Pd by two-step electrodeposition treatment. The prepared Pd–MnO2/TNAs composite structure showed excellent electrocatalytic activity. Studies have shown that a very short deposition time is detrimental to the formation of oxide particles, and a very long time can lead to excessive oxide loading and affect the stability of the product. It is important to note, however, that the structure of the MnO2 on the electrode can be designed in advance to meet the performance requirements of the electrode, such as high capacitance, excellent stability, and recovery capability. Efforts have been made to utilise this electroplating-based deposition method in order to easily obtain diverse and flexible structures, such as wires, sheets, or spheres of MnO2.
3.2 Hydrothermal method
In a closed system, the reaction is facilitated by using high-temperature and high-pressure conditions to increase the temperature to the saturation vapor pressure. The hydrothermal method has many advantages, such as it is not bound by the template, the initial reactants do not need to be soluble, the nanomaterials can be synthesised more easily by choosing the right temperature, time, etc. The synthesis is carried out in a confined space, minimising external interference and greatly improving the purity of the resulting products, which is one of the most commonly used synthesis methods in practice. Manganese dioxide nanostructures of various shapes and sizes can be produced by hydrothermal synthesis, which has the advantages of high purity, good dispersion, complete crystalline shape, and controlled grain size. However, it is more tedious than other synthesis methods due to the high temperature and pressure environment. At present, hydrothermal methods have been widely used to synthesize MnO2 with specific sizes and morphologies, for example, nanoparticles,51,52 nanosheets,53 flower-like structures,54 nanotube shapes,55 nanowire or rod shape structures,56,57etc. Wei et al.58 prepared a novel 2D long-range ordered β-MnO2 by a one-step hydrothermal method. The network structure, consisting of uniformly interwoven nanowires, allowed sufficient contact with the electrolyte and reduced the polarization of the electrodes. This material can be used as an electrode in supercapacitors with excellent electrochemical properties and a specific capacity of up to 453 F g−1. Lu et al.59 successfully embedding Fe3+, Co2+, and Ni2+ into the manganese dioxide layer containing nickel foam (NF) by a hydrothermal method and ion exchange method, and obtained Fe–MnO2/NF, Co–MnO2/NF, and Ni–MnO2/NF. Fe–MnO2/NF showed excellent performance with low over-potential (330 mV at 20 mA cm−2) and Taffeal slope (51 mV dec−1). Han et al.60 prepared porous Co3O4@MnO2/Ni nanomaterials by a hydrothermal method. At low charge/discharge voltages of 300 mA g−1 and 0.76 V, the catalyst exhibited a durable cycle lifetime of 170 cycles. Du et al.61 prepared MnO2/Co3O4 catalyst by a two-step hydrothermal method, which was used as a new air electrode material. Co3O4 nanoparticles were uniformly coated on the surface of MnO2 nanotubes. The combination of Co3O4 and MnO2 nanotubes effectively enhanced the cyclic stability and reduces the charging potential. Liao and colleagues62 prepared nickelsiron embedded K0.23MnO2 cubic nanoflower (Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs) through a hydrothermal reaction. Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2CNFs-300 showed good OER activity, with an overpotential of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2, significantly higher than Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2CNFs (302 mV), K0.23MnO2Ns (355 mV) and IrO2 (297 mV). Xiong et al.63 prepared NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 through a simple two-step hydrothermal method. NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 perfectly integrated and optimized the advantages of multilayer Ni3S2 and MnO2, achieving the fast dynamics and superior performance required for overall water decomposition in alkaline media. Zhang et al.64 prepared core-double shell electrodes by coating manganese dioxide nanorods on carbon spheres (CS) by a hydrothermal method. MnO2 nanorods were further dispersed with Pd nanoparticles of 40–50 nm diameters, which acted as OER electrocatalysts. In the hydrothermal method, the final product properties depend on the hydrothermal conditions (time, temperature, solution concentration, pH value, pressure, and exterior reaction environment). Various MnO2-based architectures can be fabricated at pre-designed reaction conditions in different kinds of structures. However, the main challenge in hydrothermal synthesis is to achieve control of crystal growth, which determines the structure, size, and dimensions of the nanostructures, and this remains to be addressed.
3.3 Sol–gel method
As a common material synthesis process, the sol–gel method is based on the hydrolysis of condensed metal alcohol salts or inorganic salts and their gradual transformation into gels, which are then treated accordingly to obtain powdered materials. The products prepared by the sol–gel method are homogeneously dispersed on a chemical scale and have a high degree of purity. However, due to the long reaction time and agglomeration during calcination, it is often used in combination with other synthesis methods such as the template method to improve the sol–gel method and to produce more complete and regular nanomaterials. A technical method for converting a precursor solution containing Mn2+ into a solid MnO2 powder or film. The sol–gel method can effectively control the purity, composition, and homogeneity of the product to obtain high-quality MnO2. However, sol–gel reactions require the use of large amounts of organic solvents, which limits the large-scale preparation of MnO2 electrodes to a certain extent. Reddy et al.65 used sodium fumarate as an organic solvent to reduce sodium manganate and potassium permanganate, and successfully prepared two forms of MnO2 by a sol–gel method, which showed a maximum specific capacity of 130 F g−1. Kim et al.66 selectively electrodeposited Co3O4 and MnO2 on 3D porous nickel foam (NiF) by a simple agarose gel-mediated method. This new structure improved the catalytic activity of OER and ORR with little physical interference to the catalytic function.
3.4 Microwave-assisted method
Different from the traditional oil bath and hydrothermal method, microwave-assisted preparation can heat the material rapidly inside by microwave radiation, and the radiation frequency commonly used is 0.3–2.45 GHz.67 The highly homogeneous structure of MnO2 can be obtained using microwave-assisted methods. For example, Meher et al.68 successfully prepared α-MnO2 with a high specific surface area (155 m2 g−1), high crystallinity, large pore volume (0.67 cm3 g−1), and spherical porous graded form by the microwave-assisted method. In addition, the α-MnO2 prepared by microwave synthesis displayed better electrochemical performance than the traditional reflow method. The specific capacity of α-MnO2 can reach 168 F g−1, and the capacity retention rate of 91.4% after 400 cycles of charge and discharge. To better control the morphology, phase state, and size distribution of the product and to prepare MnO2 quickly and efficiently, the scientists combined microwave and hydrothermal methods. For example, Chen et al.69 prepared different forms (including flake, rod, and line) and different crystal forms (including α, β, and γ phases). Compared to single microwave and hydrothermal methods, MnO2 active material prepared in this way has better crystalline and electrochemical properties and significantly shorter reaction times.
3.5 Electrospinning technique
Using the principle of electrostatic repulsion between surface charges, MnO2 precursor solutions are uniformly sprayed onto the substrate surface at high voltage through an injection nozzle to form quantities of specific size and morphology. Electrostatic spinning technology is widely used in the preparation of flexible energy storage devices because of its simplicity, low relative cost, and large-scale production.70,71 Li et al.71 mixed PVP and manganese acetate tetrahydrate as the precursor solution and successfully prepared MnO2 nanofibers by electrostatic spinning technology. The flexible capacitor has a specific capacity of up to 645 F g−1 and 95% of the initial capacity was retained after 2000 cycles using an ordered population of 10 nm MnO2 nanoparticles as the electrode material.
3.6 Template-assisted preparation method
The template method is an effective bottom-up synthesis method that is widely used for the synthesis of nanostructures of various sizes and shapes. In general, the template-based synthesis process consists of different steps that can be broadly divided into three stages: (1) preparation of the template, (2) construction of the material of interest on the template surface by applying conventional synthetic methods (condensation, redox, and electrochemistry), (3) removal of the template by selective etching or calcination strategies. It is worth noting that these template methods produce target designs with specific shapes and sizes. Based on the different types of templates, the preparative methods can be divided into hard template preparation methods and soft template preparation methods. Among them, the hard template-assisted preparation method uses a number of materials with specific structures to support the synthesis of MnO2. Synthesis methods include the aforementioned hydrothermal, sol–gel, and electrodeposition methods to obtain MnO2 nanostructures of different sizes and morphologies. Common hard templates include mesoporous silica,72 silica spheres,73 porous anodic alumina (AAO),74 naturally grown diatoms,75 polycarbonate membranes,76 and carbon nanotubes.77 Li et al.78 prepared 3D hollow layered MnO2 by the template-assisted hydrothermal method. Using diatoms with three different growth forms as templates, the fabricated MnO2 electrode material fully reproduced the characteristics of diatoms with high porosity, large specific surface area, and low volume density, and exhibited electrochemical performances. In order to shorten the ion diffusion distance and speed up the kinetic reaction in the electrochemical reaction, Duay et al.79 synthesized 1D layered MnO2 complex array using template-assisted electrodeposition technology. With the highly ordered and porous structure of AAO (aperture range: 10–200 nm, length range: 1–50 mm, density range: 109–1011 cm−2), the diameter and length of the prepared MnO2 nanowires can also be controlled artificially, thus, effectively improving the electrochemical performance. Boyjoo et al.80 synthesized hollow MnO2 spheres using SiO2 nanospheres as sacrificial hard templates. The SiO2@MnO2 core–shell spheres were obtained by MnO2 coating on SiO2, calcinated at 300 °C, and removed the template by NaOH etching.
The method of soft template-assisted preparation involves inducing MnO2 to self-assemble by using soft templates, commonly used templates include surfactants, organic molecules, microemulsions, and block copolymers.81 The use of surfactants can not only reduces the surface tension of the material during the reaction but also effectively reduces the agglomeration effect and the preparation of MnO2 with a high specific area. Compared to the hard template-assisted preparation method, the soft template-assisted preparation method is simpler and cheaper. Liu et al.82 obtained monolayer MnO2 nanosheets by one-step synthesis of the redox reaction between sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and potassium permanganate. During the reaction, SDS not only acted as a reducing agent to reduce potassium permanganate but also dominated the formation process of monolayer MnO2. The progressive hydrolysis process of the SDS controls the rate of the redox reaction, which is a key factor in the formation of the monolayer MnO2 nanosheets. Moreover, the monolayer MnO2 nanosheets prepared as electrode materials for supercapacitors showed excellent pseudocapacitance performance. In addition to SDS, surfactants have also been reported to include polyethylene glycol (PEG), polyethylene pyrrolidone (PVP), tetraoctyl ammonium bromide (TOAB) and cetyltrimethylamine bromide (CTAB).
There are various preparation methods for MnO2, and different preparation methods have their own advantages and disadvantages. The hard template-assisted preparation methods can be used to synthesize MnO2 with specific structure and morphology to better control the size and homogeneity of the product, but the subsequent removal of the template is complicated and costly. Soft template-assisted preparation methods by adjusting the type, and composition of the surface active agents can directly affect the product morphology and structure of MnO2, the mesoporous structure obtained was MnO2, but surfactants removal required a lot of time, and residual surfactant produced larger interfacial resistance, having a direct impact on the electrochemical properties of the electrodes. Electrodeposition technology, hydrothermal method, sol–gel method, microwave-assisted method, electrostatic spinning technology, and other methods do not need the use of the template, the preparation cost is lower, relatively simple and easy, and can regulate the composition and morphology of the product as required, as well as increasing defects and improve the performance of MnO2-based materials. It has more advantages in mass production and preparation.
Gao et al.83 proved that the template mesostructure can influence the amount and the kind of acid site, reduction ability, and influence the catalytic performance of the MnO2. The catalytic reduction of NOx into NH3 of MnO2 templated from 3D mesoporous material displayed better performance than that of the other MnO2. 2D-MnO2 and 3D-MnO2 were also prepared by Bai et al.84via the hard template method for low-temperature oxidation of ethanol. Zhang et al.85 prepared mesoporous MnO2 (M−MnO2) with SBA-15 as the hard template. The ordered MnO2 nanorods exhibited efficient catalytic ozonation of phenol due to the mass transport and active sites exposed with high surface area.
3.7 Ultrasonic method
Acoustic wave-based synthesis is a facile top-down method that has become an effective strategy for the fabrication of nanoparticles. This facile method is commonly used to reduce the size and thickness of 2D materials, resulting in nano-sized dots. Due to the weak van der Waals forces, these pre-engineered or commercially available multilayer 2D MnO2 sheets can be subjected to a simple ultrasonic treatment in ice water to obtain fewer layers of MnO2 than in larger MnO2 sheets. In addition to obtaining thinner MnO2 nanoflakes or even monolayers of MnO2, multilayer MnO2 nanoblocks were initially prepared and exfoliated into thin flakes. In this case, the precursors of the multilayer MnO2 nanoblocks and the etching process played a crucial role in the preparation of uniform-size MnO2 nanosheets. Balakumar et al.86 synthesized uniform α-MnO2 nanorods via the ultrasonication method using the ultrasonic bath at 20 kHz and 100 W. The α-MnO2 nanorods presented efficient catalytic conversion of methylene blue, one of the refractory pollutants. The catalytic conversion reached 99.7% efficiency with good reliability and catalytic cycling stability. Efforts have also been made to produce ultra-thin MnO2 nanosheets. Efficient ultrasonic methods can be used to prepare MnO2-based quantum dots. However, this method has the major disadvantage of low quantum yields and must be improved.
3.8 Gas–solid liquid method (VLS method)
In 1964, Wagner and Ellis proposed the mechanism of VLS crystal growth to explain the formation of silicon whiskers.87 In this method, the reactants are deposited on a low-temperature substrate and grown into a one-dimensional structure by gas transport, which is the traditional method for growing one-dimensional materials by gas reaction or physical evaporation of metallic organic compounds at high temperatures. Research show that nanoparticles react in a gaseous state at the first melting temperature of nanoscale droplet formation, forming low eutectic alloy droplets by transit and impurities (catalysts) at low temperatures, which later reach supersaturation as the concentration increases and the crystalline interfacial layer precipitates nucleation (or by heterogeneous nucleation) on the surface of the substrate. As the interfacial layer continues to absorb reactive molecules in the gas phase and in the crystal nucleus, the whisker continuously advances one step towards crystallization. The circular alloy droplets are then lifted upwards until they cool and form small solidified droplets. The results showed that the VIS growth method has the advantages of easy manipulation, easy control, and good product crystallinity. The VLS method involves the gas-phase transport of reactants at a constant temperature, the preparation of catalysts, and the growth of one-dimensional nanowires. Kim et al.88 synthesized rod-like spinel nanostructured LiMn2O4 through this method, and studied its related properties as cathode material of the lithium-ion battery.
3.9 Ion exchange method
Crystalline compounds of lamellar or tunnel manganites have a pore structure, which presupposes ion exchange. By controlling reaction conditions, organic ions or metal ions pass through the pore or interlayer vacancy area of the manganese oxide crystal compound in ion exchange or the REDOX mode and then obtained modified crystalline manganese oxide compound by the hydrothermal or calcination treatment.89,90 Djerdj et al.91 used birnessite manganese oxide as the precursor of the reaction, by exchanging Mg2+ into the precursor layer by the ion exchange method, and then combined it with hydrothermal treatment to prepare the 2 × 4 tunnel manganese oxide. Yan et al.92 made use of the differences in solubility of different substances to prepare metal oxides such as zinc oxide, copper oxide, alumina, and manganese trioxide with various micrometer and nanometer morphologies by the ion exchange method, and the morphology of different products such as pH value, temperature and reagent types accompanying the reaction system also changed accordingly. Yang et al.93 prepared MnO2 nanosheets embedded with transition metal cations (Cu2+, Co2+, Fe3+, Ni2+ and Zn2+) by a simple cation exchange method. Among them, Ni–MnO2 showed excellent performance. Compared with other metal cationic embedded MnO2 nanosheets, the activity of Ni–MnO2 was very low, and the overpotential (η = 330 mV) at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 was significantly lower than that of MnO2 (η = 581 mV).
3.10 Thermal decomposition method
Thermal decomposition methods are often referred to as high-temperature assisted cleavages of the chemical linkages established between precursors to create new structures. Similarly, at high temperatures, the chemical bonds in the Mn-based precursors can be broken and re-formed as MnO2. The classical thermal decomposition method was developed by LaMer and Dinegar,94 who believed that the preparation of monodisperse nanocrystals required a short, discontinuous nucleation process, and then the growth of crystal nuclei was controlled. Thermal decomposition at different temperatures produces MnO2 with different crystal structures, however, it should be noted that the appropriate temperature plays a key role in the purity of the desired end product. On this basis, Cheng et al.95 obtained nano-MnO2 with different crystal shapes and morphologies by the hydrothermal treatment of Mn(NO2)2 solutions with different concentrations. The precursor manganese citrate was prepared with manganese acetate and citric acid as raw materials, and then calcination of the precursor at 300 °C for a certain time to obtain a black powder of γ-MnO2. Characterization tests indicated that it had a tunneling structure, and electrochemical studies indicated a specific capacitance of as high as 109.76 F g−1. Zhang et al.96 prepared spherical nano MnO2 by decomposition of precursor manganese acetyl acetonate(II) by adjusting the heating rate, (2/3 < x < 1). Zhang et al.97 synthesized β-MnO2 nanorods by thermal decomposition of precursor MnOOH obtained by hydrothermal treatment of KMnO4 in ethanol solution. The prepared β-MnO2 nanorods demonstrated excellent catalytic oxidation of methylene blue dye via a Fenton-like reaction. Ye et al.98 synthesized FeC/MnO2 composites at a pyrolysis temperature of 800 °C and a ratio of 1/1 of Fe/Mn precursor. The reaction kinetics of the synthesized FeC/MnO2 was improved and the current density of LSV was better than that of the ruthenium dioxide catalyst. The solvothermal decomposition method has the following advantages: (1) high-temperature reactions can be carried out in organic solvents so that some substances cannot react at low temperaturesand may thermally decompose or initiate reactions in organic solvents. (2) The solvent reactants are likely to generate highly reactive intermediates to replace the solid phase in the soft chemical synthesis of some substances, metastable substances with special optical, electrical, and magnetic properties can be obtained by this method. (3) The reaction in the solvent can effectively prevent the pollution of oxygen in the atmosphere or inhibit the oxidation process of the product, which is very conducive to the preparation of high-purity material. However, it is worth noting that the effects of high temperatures on all reactants should be carefully considered.
Among the various synthetic strategies mentioned above, the hydrothermal method has the advantages of simplicity of operation, low cost, and rapid synthesis, which is the most widely used method for the preparation of MnO2-based nanostructures. Nevertheless, the main challenge of hydrothermal synthesis is to control the crystal growth and thus determine the nanostructure, size, and dimensions.99 While electrodeposition techniques are commonly used to fabricate MnO2 supercapacitor electrodes.100 In this regard, different types of electrodeposition, such as dynamic potential, constant current, and constant potential have been applied to prepare MnO2 layers with different crystal structures.101 It is important to note that the structure of MnO2 on the electrode can be designed in advance to meet the performance requirements of the electrode such as high capacitance, excellent stability, and recovery.102,103 Efforts have been made to obtain a variety of diverse and flexible structures conveniently using the electrodeposition technique. Although thermal decomposition, acoustic chemistry, microwave-assisted, electrospinning, and gas–solid liquid methods offer higher efficiency, obtaining morphologically homogeneous structures of manganese dioxide-based systems is very challenging because the generated products are too disordered. In addition, inhomogeneous-shaped products during the thermal decomposition reduce the mass yield, leading to difficult MnO2 separation and stringent temperature regulation. The size is adjusted by the regulation of crystal production. To meet the need to fabricate complex structures, such as hollow structures, the products of substrate-free redox methods undergo hydrothermal synthesis, which is regulated by crystal production to create more precisely controllable structures, in terms of size. For this purpose, electrochemical and template-based synthesis techniques often rely on substrates, which contribute to different structures and numerous designs consistent with further functional processes. Electrochemistry, sol–gel methods, microwave-assisted methods, template synthesis, and so on are usually dependent on substrates, which contribute to a variety of structures and numerous designs consistent with further functional processes. For example, hard template-assisted preparation methods can be used to synthesise MnO2 with specific structures, morphologies, and better control of the size and homogeneity of the product, but subsequent removal of the template is more complex and costly. Soft-template-assisted preparations can directly influence the morphology and structure of the MnO2 product by adjusting the type and composition of the surfactant, resulting in mesoporous MnO2, but surfactant removal is time-consuming and residual surfactant can generate high interfacial resistance, which directly affects the electrochemical performance of the electrode. However, substrate stability is highly considered during structure design, reaction conditions, and product isolation, which remains a major challenge in the fabrication process. Electrodeposition technology, hydrothermal method, sol–gel method, microwave-assisted method, electrostatic spinning technology, and other methods do not require the use of templates, have lower preparation costs, are relatively more simple and easy to use, and can be adjusted according to the need to control the composition of the product, morphology, and the addition of defects to improve the electrochemical properties of MnO2-based energy storage devices, more advantageous for large-scale production. To meet the need of fabricating complex structures, such as hollow structures and core–shell structures, combining multiple synthesis methods or developing new technologies can help fabricate more precise and controllable structures, sizes, and diversity, which are being prospected to bring new and flourishing opportunities.104
Until now, significant progress has been made, and the development of efficient and controllable scalable methods for the synthesis of micro/nano MnO2 is still necessary. To date, micro/nanocomposites with specific functionalities can only be prepared on a laboratory scale in low yields and in a time-consuming manner. Further research is focused on developing advanced synthesis techniques for structurally and compositionally controllable MnO2 materials, improving their stability and conductivity, revealing the relationship between morphology, crystallinity, composition, and properties, and further exploring the catalytic mechanism of MnO2 materials during the electrochemical processes. Although these challenges remain, the rapid development of nanotechnology has given such functional materials a bright future in electrochemistry. Through the continued research efforts on materials, scientists, chemists, and engineers in this exciting field, the practical application of MnO2 in electrochemical oxygen evolution reactions may eventually be realised.
4. Modification of MnO2 materials
MnO2 is undoubtedly one of the most promising materials for environmental applications. In the past few years, many encouraging strategies have been developed to modulate MnO2-based materials, such as morphology control (1D, 2D, 3D), structure construction (hollow structure, ultrathin structure, mesoporous structure), facet engineering, element doping (metal and nonmetal doping) for single MnO2 species, as well as the design and fabrication of MnO2-based composites by homojunction construction and binary or ternary heterojunction construction.
4.1 Morphology control and structure design
Based on the single-crystal chemical bonding theory, various thermodynamic and dynamical morphologies can be obtained due to the preparation method and the polymorphic nature of MnO2. Enriched morphology control and structure construction can increase the specific surface area, boost oxygen vacancies and surface defect formation, facilitate mass transport and light harvesting, accelerate charge motion, and improve the electron–hole pair separation efficiency. Hence, numerous control growth strategies have been put forward (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Recently reported modifications of MnO2 materials. 

4.1.1. Morphology control. 
Manganese dioxide nanomaterials, where one or more dimensions exist at the nanoscale, offer the ability to modify the properties of the material, or indeed simply offer new properties by adjusting the size scale.
4.1.1.1 1D MnO2 structure. 
1D MnO2 structures with controllable morphology and architecture have been fabricated to take advantage of the unique anisotropic properties. Wang et al.105 prepared nanosized rod-like, wire-like and tubular α-MnO2 and flower-like spherical Mn2O3 using a hydrothermal or solution method with toluene catalysts. The high concentration of oxygen adspecies and good low-temperature reducibility are conducive to catalytic performance, making the catalytic performance sequence of α-MnO2 nanorods > α-MnO2 nanotubes > Mn2O3 nanoflowers > α-MnO2 nanowires. Shi et al.106 also synthesized tetragonal α-MnO2 nanorods, hexagonal ε-MnO2 flower-like nanospheres, and tetragonal β-MnO2 dumbbells using toluene as a catalyst. The catalytic activities for toluene followed the order of α-MnO2 nanorods > ε-MnO2 flower-like nanospheres > β-MnO2 dumbbells, which is consistent with the sequence of their oxygen adspecie concentrations and low-temperature reducibility. Saputra et al.107 prepared one-dimensionalα-MnO2 nanowires, β-MnO2 nanorods and γ-MnO2 nanofibres for catalytic phenol degradation. α-MnO2 nanowires displayed high activity, low activation energy, and stable performance for phenol degradation due to double tunneled structure, high surface area, and oxygen loss. The crystal phase and channel structures are important for the catalytic activity of the MnO2 nanorods. Liang et al.108 synthesized α-, β-, γ-, and δ-MnO2 nanorods as catalysts for CO oxidation. The catalyst activities accorded the order of α- ≈ δ- > γ- > β-MnO2. Different phases of MnO2 nanorods, namely α-, β-, γ-, and mixed-phase MnO2, were synthesized by Chen et al. via the hydrothermal method.109 The catalytic activity during the thermal decomposition of ammonium perchlorate was related to the size of the MnO2 phase but was not controlled. Mixed-phase MnO2 with an average diameter of 9.5 nm exhibited the best catalytic activity and the lowest high-temperature peak of ammonium perchlorate by 132.4 °C. α-, β-, δ-, γ-MnO2 with various morphologies were prepared for catalysis of toluene combustion.110 The γ-MnO2 possessed the best activity due to three-dimensional macroporous and mesoporous morphology.
Meanwhile, MnO2 nanowires/nanorods have also been reported, such as α-MnO2 nanowires for supercapacitor electrodes and photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes,111 α-MnO2 nanowires for degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol,112 α-MnO2 nanorods for selective reduction of NO and N2O with CO,113 α-MnO2 nanorods catalytic conversions toward methylene blue,86 α-MnO2 and β-MnO2 nanorods for catalytic decoloration of the dye with H2O2,114 β-MnO2 nanorods for catalytic oxidation of methylene blue dye decoloration of the dye with H2O2.115 β-MnO2 nanorods for H2O2 decomposition,97 ε-MnO2 nanorods for transformation of 17β-estradiol in humic acid solution,116 β-MnO2 nanowires for phenol degradation.117
In addition, Luo et al.118 successfully synthesized tetragonal α-MnO2 nanotubes by a facile hydrothermal method with high-quality crystalline. α-MnO2 nanotube can be used as an ozonation nanocatalyst for phenol degradation.119 α-MnO2 nanotube-supported noble metal Au–Pd alloy showed catalytic activity for the oxidation of acetone/ethyl acetate, toluene/m-xylene, acetone/m-xylene, and ethyl acetate/m-xylene mixtures.120 Zheng et al.121 successfully prepared β-MnO2 nanotubes in the presence of poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) via dissolution-recrystallization process. Liu et al.122 synthesized K-birnessite nanobelts through hydrothermally treatment. α-MnO2 nanobelts also showed a promising selective catalytic reduction with high NO conversions and a wide operating temperature window.123
Sinha et al.124 found that δ-MnO2 nanosheets could transform into α-MnO2 nanowires via an ozone-assisted hydrothermal method due to dissolution-recrystallization. The synthesized α-MnO2 nanowires were used for the hydrolysis of benzonitrile to benzamide. Luo et al.125 reported that α-MnO2 nanofibers can be converted from δ-MnO2 nanoparticles via the hydrothermal reaction in the presence of graphene oxide. The α-MnO2 nanofibers with long, compact, and uniform nanofiber morphology displayed effective antimony removal.
4.1.1.2 2D MnO2 structure. 
In the past decade, controlled 2D nanostructures were developed for disparate environmental applications. Wang et al.126 constructed 2D layered birnessite-type MnO2 with surface pits for formaldehyde catalytic oxidation. The high catalytic activity for formaldehyde oxidation was ascribed to the larger specific surface area and unsaturated manganese and oxygen atoms provided by the surface pits. 2D nano-sized δ-MnO2 with surface pits were also proved to enhance the photocatalytic oxidation of CO.127 Chen et al.128 synthesized a series of nickel doping birnessite-type δ-MnO2 with abundant surface pits. The MnNi0.09 sample displayed highly efficient catalysis for propane oxidation, in which the conversion could reach 90% at 220 °C and apparent activation energy was as low as 33.6 kJ mol−1. The surface pits facilitated the dissociation of propane and the mobility of oxygen along the conduction channels.
4.1.1.3 3D MnO2 structure. 
3D assemblies constructed from simple components with ordered morphology could achieve certain unconventional advantages, inheriting the exceptional properties of their building units, such as 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanorods/wires, and 2D nano-structures. Das et al.129 synthesized δ-MnO2 flowery nanocomposites over the clay nanotube surface by light-assisted decomposition of the manganese precursor. The obtained δ-MnO2 flowery nanostructures induced enhanced photocatalytic activity of dyes. Meanwhile, 3D δ-MnO2 nanoflowers had been employed for the oxidative desulfurization of thiophenes,130 capturing soot particulates,131 and tetracycline degradation.132 β-MnO2 bipyramid prisms were synthesized by Wang et al.133via the F anion-assisted hydrothermal method. The branched β-MnO2 bipods were successfully prepared for catalytic degradation of methylene blue.134 Additionally, Lin et al.135 fabricated ε-MnO2 nanoflowers by the facile decomposition reaction. The ε-MnO2 nanoflowers showed great potential for Pb(II) removal from wastewater. The maximum adsorption capacity for Pb(II) reached 239.7 mg g−1 due to the electrostatic interaction and structural tunnels of ε-MnO2 nanoflowers. Porous ε-MnO2 microcubes with a 3D architecture were successfully prepared via glucose-urea-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of MnCO3-carbon composites followed by annealing.136 The porous ε-MnO2 microcubes improved the catalytic activity of the complete oxidation of toluene because of the high porosity, lattice oxygen reactivity, reducibility, and Mn4+ fraction.
Although the crystalline form and morphology of MnO2 can be effectively controlled by adjusting the hydrothermal reaction temperature, time, molar ratio of precursors, pH value, and the concentration of surfactants, its bulk solid structure still suffered from disadvantages such as low specific surface area and few active sites. An effective solution to overcome these drawbacks is to replace the bulk solid structures with some advanced structures such as hollow structures, ultrathin structures, and mesoporous structures because of their structural and performance advantages.


4.1.2. Hollow structure construction. 
Further structural design has been executed in order to gain a deeper understanding of the influence of manganese dioxide morphology and the structure on performance. Hollow MnO2 spheres were prepared for the catalytic oxidation of formaldehyde.80 γ- and δ-MnO2 could be obtained by simple modification in the precursor addition protocols. The high surface area, hierarchical pore size, and the presence of oxygen vacancies due to the high mobility of oxygen species lead to catalytic activity. MnO2 hierarchical hollow nanostructures were prepared under controlled preparation conditions for water treatment.137 Hierarchical hollow microspheres and microcubes of MnO2 nanosheets can be obtained by self-assembly from different morphologies of MnCO3 precursors by adding the (NH4)2SO4 solution in the reaction system. Tan et al.138 prepared porous 3D MnO2 hollow microspheres by the self-template process for the degradation of bisphenol A. MnO2 porous hollow microspheres possessed enhanced activity owning to hollow-mesoporous shell spherical structure. Ultrathin MnO2 hollow nanoballoons with a large ratio interface to total atoms were synthesized by inflating MnO2 with CO2 followed by instant freezedrying.139 Ultrathin MnO2 hollow nanoribbons have been shown to be highly catalytic for the long-term durability and efficacy for the breakdown of methylene blue dye. Ge et al.140 synthesized hierarchical flower-like iron containing γ-MnO2 hollow microspheres for arsenic transformation. Yang et al.141 constructed ramsdellite MnO2 hollow spheres for the purification of benzene by a facile method. Closely stacked sheets constitute the resulting MnO2 hollow spheres. The highly efficient catalytic activity is attributed to the lattice oxygen activity inspired by solar irradiation. Li et al.142 also synthesized hierarchical hollow MnO2 microspheres for the oxidation of benzene. Discus-like nanoplatelets and nanorods are composed of hierarchical hollow MnO2 microspheres. Hollow urchinlike α-MnO2 nanostructures were synthesized by Zhou et al.143 with three types, namely, columnar nanorod clusters, tetragonal nanorod clusters, and tetragonal nanotube clusters. The tetragonal nanorod clusters show the best microwave absorption properties among the good matching of electromagnetic impedances.


4.1.3. Ultrathin structure construction. 
Wang et al.144 confirmed that single-layered MnO2 nanosheets were promising for next-generation paper-like spintronics. The single-layered MnO2 nanosheet showed halfmetallicity with a wide range of vacancy concentrations of Mn and O. Zhao et al.145 developed monolayer thick δ-MnO2 nanosheet arrays on nickel foam for bifunctional electrodes for water splitting. The bifunctional electrode displayed excellent oxygen evolution reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction activity since the ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets contained abundant oxygen vacancies, giving half-metallic properties and strong H2O adsorption. Miao et al.146 constructed ultra-thin MnO2 nanosheets via H2O swelling followed by a cetyltrimethylammonium bromide-intercalation exfoliation. The ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets were 1–2 layers thick and had rich surface oxygen vacancies. These benefitted the oxidation of formaldehyde. Moreover, MnO2-pillared layered manganese oxide could be fabricated for capacitive behavior147 and ultrathin manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanosheets for HCHO adsorption and removal,148 and for catalytic activity in the water oxidation reaction.149


4.1.4. Construction of the mesoporous structure. 
Jiao et al.150 synthesized mesoporous β-MnO2 as the electrode for rechargeable lithium batteries for the first time. The obtained mesoporous β-MnO2 displayed highly crystalline walls with ordered pore structure. It accommodated invertible intercalated Li, preserving the crystal structure on the cycle and maintaining the ordered renormalization instead of switching to the spinel structure. This is different from electrochemical reactions with nanoparticulate β-MnO2 or chemical intercalation into the bulk β-MnO2. Mesoporous MnO2 were synthesized from mesostructured silicas (KIT-6, SBA-15, MCM-41) as hard templates.83 Mesoporous MnO2 templated from KIT-6 exhibited the best catalytic performance among the three types of mesoporous MnO2, inducing 100% NOx conservation from 75 °C to 275 °C, as well as good resistance of SO2 and H2O. Bai et al.84 also reported 3D mesoporous MnO2 showing catalytic activity for ethanol in low-temperature, primarily due to good reducibility, Mn4+ ions, and numerous surface adsorbed oxygen species. Meanwhile, mesoporous MnO2 was prepared for the catalytic ozonation of phenol.85 3D macroporous and mesoporous γ-MnO2 afforded the excellent catalytic performance of toluene.110 The macroscopic and enigmatic morphology provided accessible molecules to the catalyst and improved the mobility of the Olatt. Macro–mesoporous ε-MnO2 was observed for HCHO oxidation in good catalytic stability.151 This is due to the formation of meso/macroporous structures with high surface area and good accessibility to active surface sites.
In summary, manganese dioxide is available in many forms such as nanowires, nanotubes, nanosheets, nanoboxes, microflowers, mesopores, and hollow spheres, which can be effectively applied for electrocatalytic water splitting. Among different morphologies, mesoporous and hollow sphere nanostructures can provide more catalytically active sites due to their porous structure and large surface area. Therefore, the electrocatalysis of oxygen evolution reaction (OER) using α-MnO2 mesoporous or hollow spheres can provide low electrochemical polarisation as well as good cycling stability. The α-MnO2 showed higher OER performance, which can be attributed to the combined effect of its electrical conductivity and intrinsic tunnel size. The layered δ-MnO2 exhibited excellent OER catalytic activity due to its abundant O vacancies and associated Mn3+ active sites.

4.2 Engineering crystal facets
The activity of the exposed crystal facets directly influences the physical chemistry of the material. Crystalline materials with different exposed crystal faces usually have different physicochemical properties because their exposed crystal faces have different exposed atoms, distorted electronic structures, and different surface active sites. It is also important to realize the controllable synthesis of highly active surfaces for materials. Rong et al.152 synthesized α-MnO2 nanowires with majorly exposed high-index {310} with the assistance of a capping agent of oxalate ions for the catalytic oxidation of formaldehyde. The resulting α-MnO2 nanowires with exposed {310} facets endowed better activity for formaldehyde oxidation compared to α-MnO2 with low-index facets ({100} and {110}). 100% of 100 ppm of HCHO were mineralized into CO2 at 60 °C, which is better than some catalysts supported by Ag. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations also confirmed that the {310} facets with high surface energy can facilitate O2 and H2O adsorption/activation and benefit oxygen vacancies generation, which significantly enhanced activity for HCHO oxidation. α-MnO2 nanofibers also showed high adsorption capacity for As(III) depending on the (1 0 0) facet. The As(III) formed stable complexes on (1 0 0). The maximum adsorption capacity was higher than that reported for α-MnO2, β-MnO2, and γ-MnO2. Yao et al.153 controlled the morphology of β-MnO2 by K cations, which affected the α-K0.5Mn4O8 intermediate phase formation and the subsequent phase transition process. High concentration of K cations in the precursor gradually changed β-MnO2 from bipyramid prism ({100} + {111} facets) to an octahedron structure ({111} facets). β-MnO2 octahedrons with highly exposed {111} facets donated better rate crystals than the bipyramid prism structure as the cathode for Li-ion batteries. Besides, the team also found that β-MnO2 crystals with highly exposed {100} and {111} facets reduced the charge and discharge overpotential of the cathode catalysts in Li–O2 batteries.154 The solution mechanism was facilitated by {111} facets of β-MnO2 for the formation of Li2O2 toroids and the surface mechanism was catalyzed by the {100} facets for the generation of detrimental Li2O2 thin films. The difference in the LiO2 intermediate adsorption energies on the {100} and {111} facets led to different formation mechanisms. Chen et al.155 used first-principle calculations to investigate the electrochemical performances of different surfaces of β-MnO2. The {001} surface of β-MnO2 afforded superior surface adsorption pseudocapacitance and lower ion diffusion barrier, in which surface F-termination promoted a large percentage growth of the {001} surface in β-MnO2. Wei et al.156 synthesized column β-MnO2 [CM] with mainly the {110} facet and pincer β-MnO2 [PM] with {110} and {101} facets for the adsorption and oxidation of arsenic. The adsorption and oxidation of β-MnO2 was significantly depended on pH.
The integrated λ-MnO2 with numerous (311) facets with the functional groups of poly(mphenylenediamine) form core–shell MnO2@poly(m-phenylenediamine) (MnO2@PmPD). The distinct adsorption towards Pb ions from water by MnO2@PmPD was attributed to the synergistic effects between λ-MnO2 and PmPD, in which, Pb and O atom interacted on the surface of λ-MnO2. DFT calculations revealed the adsorption affinity toward Pb was in the order of (311) > (111) > (400) > (440) facets. The adsorption of λ-MnO2 toward Pb was facet-dependent. The high calculated adsorption energy reflected that the (311) facet was the predominantly adsorption site. δ-MnO2 flower-like nanospheres were prepared by Chu et al.157 through Mo doping. Mo–MnO2 (001) slabs could enhance the conductivity of MnO2 and activate the inert Mn sites to synergistically boost the NRR (N2 reduction reaction) and suppress HER.
Crystalline materials with different exposed crystal faces often have different physicochemical properties because their exposed crystal faces have different exposed atoms, distorted electronic structures, and different surface active sites. Therefore, much work has been done to prepare crystals with highly reactive exposed surfaces. Crystal facet engineering is an effective strategy for regulating the catalytic activity, exposing the corresponding special crystalline surfaces respectively, and thus modulating the oxygen vacancy concentration, so that they show significant differences in activity as catalysts for oxygen evolution reactions.
4.3 Metal and nonmetal doping
The morphology and polymorphism of MnO2 can be regulated by doping, which affects the specific surface area, surface species, electronic structure, oxygen–manganese bond strength, etc. The synergistic effect can modify the optoelectronic properties and improve the adsorption and catalytic properties. Hence, great efforts must be devoted to metal doping or nonmetal doping in MnO2. Generally, heteroatom doping can effectively modulate the intrinsic properties of MnO2, thus contributing to the modification of the adsorption and catalytic activity. The active centres in these systems can be oxygen atoms in the vicinity of the dopant or the dopant itself. Metal combinations are expected to improve the OER performance in terms of intrinsic activity or number of active sites, which has been strategically considered. To improve the intrinsic activity of the active site, the adsorption energy of the existing active site can be optimised by introducing exotic atomic doping to position the active site closer to its peak in the volcanic plots. In addition, the doping of the exotic atoms can provide additional active sites by activating inert atomic sites, leading to catalytic enhancement. In principle, the adsorption energy of an intermediate is determined by the electronic structure of the catalyst surface. Foreign atoms have two main effects on the electronic structure, the ligand effect and the strain effect. The ligand effect refers to the perturbation of the electronic structure caused by the charge transfer between adjacent metals. As multiple metals have different electron-giving capabilities, the charge transfer occurs via shared oxygen ions, thus changing the electronic structure of the catalyst surface. The strain effect arises from changes in the surface lattice parameters. The addition of foreign atoms inevitably alters the lattice parameters and thus the degree of overlap between atomic orbitals, resulting in a change in the electronic structure. Ligand effects and strain effects are usually inseparable as they occur simultaneously in polymetallic oxides. Therefore, the electronic structure of the modified manganese oxides is considered to be the combined result of these two effects. In the preparation of MnO2 by heteroatom doping, the doping of metal cations is easily achieved. In most cases, effective doping of the metal cations can be achieved by simply adding a cation salt to the MnO2 precursor solution. There is a large body of literature on the enhancement of the adsorption and catalytic activity of MnO2 by doping with various metal cations. However, few reports exist on the doping of MnO2 with non-metallic anions under harsh conditions.

4.3.1. Alkali metals doping. 
Umek et al.158 used the ion exchange process and subsequent thermal treatment to synthesize α-MnO2 nanorods with different potassium contents. The high potassium content increases the decomposition temperature of MnO2. Yin et al.159 synthesized different MnO2 structures by controllable cations. α-MnO2 was formed when K+ amount was higher than H+, whereas β-MnO2 structures grew when H+ amount was high. δ-MnO2 was obtained under the high K+ concentration. The specific capacitance strongly depended on the crystallographic structure, which followed the order α-MnO2 > δ-MnO2 > β-MnO2 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. Besides, initially, the increasing content of K+-doped MnO2 was found to obviously improve the catalytic performance for HCHO oxidation160 and high-performance electrode for aqueous supercapacitor161 because of the considerable lattice oxygen activity enhancement. Kang et al.162 reported that the catalyst performance for formaldehyde oxidation can be improved by Na+ modification. Meanwhile, the remaining anion on the support acted as a mild poison by covering the surface active site of the manganese oxides. The enhancing effect of anions in the salts followed the order of CO32− > SO42− > NO3−.


4.3.2. Transition metal doping. 
Gao et al.163 synthesized transition metal (Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu)-doped α-MnO2 nanowires by the hydrothermal method as CO oxidation catalysts. Among them, Cu-doped α-MnO2 nanowires showed nearly 100% conversion of CO. Density functional theory calculations proved that Cu doping facilitated the oxygen vacancy formation in MnO2, which is the rate-determining step for the CO oxidation reaction, easier than that by Fe-, Co-, and Ni-doped and pristine MnO2. Fan et al.164 investigated Fe-doped α-MnO2 nanorods for the catalytic removal of NOx and chlorobenzene. Embedding Fe yielded (t2g)3(eg)1 configuration of Mn3+, which anisotropically distorted the a-MnO2 lattice and significantly increased the Mn–O bond length along the local z direction. Ge et al.165 fabricated hierarchical fower-like Fe-doped γ-MnO2 hollow microspheres assembled by thickness-tunable nanosheets for phosphate removal. The crystal structure, morphology, surface characteristics, and nanosheet thickness of γ-MnO2 could be changed by Fe doping, which further tailored the phosphate removal performance. In particular, the hierarchical MnO2 microspheres with 15 at% Fe incorporation achieved completely low concentration phosphate (below 10 ppm) removed at a dosage of 0.5 g L−1 with selectivity, ascribed to the increased surface specific area and fully exposed active sites of the hierarchical micro/nanostructures. Chen et al.166 constructed cobalt-doped MnO2 nanofibers for propane oxidation. The optimized MnCo0.2 nanofibers exhibited the propane conversion of 50% and 90% at 205 and 223 °C, respectively. Co2+ doped α-MnO2 also exhibited superior resistibility to water vapor, which was in comparison with the catalytic activity of some noble metal catalysts.167 The mobility of the active oxygen species and the redox capacity of MnO2 were enhanced by doped Co2+. Dong et al.168 found that nickel doping could improve the catalytic properties of α-MnO2. Significantly, substitutional Ni2+ doping in octahedra MnO6 frameworks not only improved redox properties but also promoted toluene adsorption by forming lattice oxygen mobility and more active lattice oxygen. The doping of W6+ into MnO2 was obtained for the ozone decomposition catalyst.169 Doping tungsten changed the morphology from nanorods to nanoparticles, which greatly increased the specific surface area, acid sites, and oxygen vacancies of MnO2. The W–MnO2 achieved 50% decomposition efficiency for 120 ppm ozone with high ability under dry conditions. Ma et al.170 also synthesized tungsten-doped layered MnO2 nanosheets (W–MnO2) for photo-assisted catalytic combustion of benzene. W doping induces abundant VO and intensified covalent interactions in the W–O bonds, which served as active sites for O2 chemisorption and facilitated O2 polarization and e− transfer, respectively. Yang et al.171 synthesized vanadium-doped MnO2 with poorer crystallinity, exposure of high-index facets such as (301) and (211), and larger specific surface area. Vanadium doping benefits ozone decomposition due to numerous oxygen vacancies and acid sites on the catalyst.


4.3.3. Rare-earth metal doping. 
Liu et al.172 reported the samarium doping todorokite-type MnO2 can boost the catalytic oxidation of airborne benzene. Sm0.01MnO2 (atomic ratio of Sm/Mn was 0.01) showed 100% benzene conversion for 229 ppm at 150 °C and above under 120 L g−1 h−1, and almost no residual benzene was detected at 200 °C and above, even at 240 L g−1 h−1. Li et al.173 revealed that Ti-doped δ-MnO2 showed good catalytic oxidation properties over benzene. Ti doping induces active oxygen formation and abundant pore structures, facilitating gas diffusion and reactions. La doping can improve the oxygen reactivity of MnOx.174 La doping clearly affects the crystal structure, lattice defects, surface phase composition, reduction properties, and apparent morphology of the La0.4–MnOx catalysts. Ce-doped α-MnO2 contributes to the low-temperature selective catalytic reduction of NO.175


4.3.4. Other metal doping. 
Hu et al.176 prepared Al-doped α-MnO2via the hydrothermal method with high mass-loading pseudocapacitor and improved conductivity. By modifying and optimizing the chemical composition, Al-doped α-MnO2 could achieve a high energy density of 2.42 mW h cm−3 and power density of 5.72 W cm−3.


4.3.5. Nonmetal doping. 
In addition to metal cation doping, much research has been performed on nonmetal anionic doping of MnO2, which also affected intrinsic properties.177 Ke et al.178 prepared nitrogen-doped manganese oxide (N–MnO2) for oxidative activity catalysts. N–MnO2 showed >99.9% selectivity of 2,5-diformylfuran and 100% conversion of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural. Nitrogen doping increases the sites of the surface defect and coordination of unsaturated Mn sites, greatly promoting oxidative activity. He et al.179 further studied the effects of N-doping sites, electronic structures, and valence states in MnO2 lattice. The interstitial N-doping MnO2 showed excellent catalytic activity for arcinogenic HCHO decomposition compared to the substitutional N-doped MnO2. This was attributed to the effective narrowing of the band gap and enhanced electron transport. B-doped MnO2 nanosheets were fabricated as electrocatalysts for the nitrogen reduction reaction.180 It has been shown that B-doping can induce abundant O-vacancy, which promoted conductivity and enhanced the intrinsic nitrogen reduction reaction activity of MnO2.
Doping can optimize the crystal structure of manganese dioxide, increase the defect sites, provide additional reactive oxygen species, and improve the structural stability of the catalyst. Different ions embedded in the interlayer or even replacing the atoms in the crystal cause local structural disorder in MnO2, producing a lattice distortion. The lattice distortion and surface-suspended bonds favor the generation of catalytically active *OOH intermediates, which is essential for the OER process. In addition, amorphous electrocatalysts have high structural flexibility due to the relatively loose stacking of atoms, allowing the catalytic active sites to adapt to the flexible geometry required for electrocatalysis.

5. Fabrication of MnO2-based composites
Constructing composites is an effective strategy to promote the properties of MnO2. Recently, multifarious MnO2-based composites have been explored to expand the applications of MnO2 (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Recently reported MnO2-based composites for environmental applications. 
5.1 Homojunctions heterojunction
Homojunctions are made of identical semiconductor materials. Due to their interfacial polarization or better impedance matching properties, the construction of homojunctions can promote enhanced photoelectrochemical properties of the material, as well as adsorption and catalytic properties. Therefore, coupling MnO2 components with different crystalline phases or crystalline planes or sizes to form MnO2/MnO2 homogeneous junctions can provide a new strategy to enhance adsorption and catalytic properties without relying on additional semiconductors. Various MnO2/MnO2 homojunctions have been developed for different applications. Ma et al.181 constructed hierarchical α-MnO2 nanowires@ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets core–shell nanostructure, consisting of ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets with a few atomic layers well grown on the surface of ultralong α-MnO2 nanowires. The first specific capacitance of the hierarchical α-MnO2 nanowires@ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheet nanostructure reached 153.8 F g−1 with a discharge current density of 20 A g−1, and the cycling stability was retained at 98.1% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. The excellent rate capacity and stability were attributed to the stable structural backbone provided by the 1D α-MnO2 nanowire core, more reactive active sites created by an ultrathin 2D δ-MnO2 nanosheet shell, and the synergistic effects of different dimensions. The hierarchical α-MnO2@δ-MnO2 core–shell nanostructure was also synthesized from δ-MnO2 nanosheets vertically grown on α-MnO2 nanowires.182 The specific capacitance reached up to 206 F g−1 and the energy density achieved 12.9 W h kg−1 at a power density of 230 W kg−1. γ-MnO2/α-MnO2 ellipsoids were also synthesized by shape-preserving KMnO4 oxidation of MnCO3 ellipsoids at relatively low temperatures, followed by thermal treatment in air.183 The γ-MnO2/α-MnO2 ellipsoids comprising γ-MnO2 cores inside the hollow α-MnO2 shells exhibited excellent ability to remove organic pollutants and heavy metal ions without any other additive containing core/shell structure. α-MnO2@L-MnO2 heteroepitaxy was oriented with growth of layered-MnO2 nanosheets (L-MnO2) over α-MnO2 nanotubes backbones.184 The α-MnO2@L-MnO2 showed enhanced activity of HCHO oxidation at room temperature.
5.2 MnO2/semiconductor binary heterojunction
The construction of heterojunctions is an effective strategy to promote the enhanced catalytic adsorption performance of MnO2. A variety of MnO2-based heterojunctions have been reported for different applications.

5.2.1. MnO2/metal. 
MnO2–Au NPs are decorated MnO2 nanowires with ultrasmall Au nanoparticles (3 nm) used for silane oxidation and H2 production.185 The catalysts displayed good stability and recyclability (Fig. 4a–f). Au NPs can facilitate oxidative processes and thus yield high performance towards the oxidation of hydrosilanes. The Auδ+ species and oxygen vacancies concentration at the catalyst surface represented highly catalytically active sites towards oxidation reactions. The ultra-small size of Au NPs at the MnO2 surface enabled the exposure of high-energy Au surfaces/facets, high surface-to-volume ratios, and their uniform dispersion. Ag-deposited three-dimensional (3D) MnO2 porous hollow microspheres (Ag/MnO2 PHMSs) were prepared by the redox precipitation method for catalytic ozonation of methyl mercaptan.186 Optimal Ag/MnO2 PHMSs could completely degrade 70 ppm CH3SH within 600 s. Single-atom Ag chains supported on hollandite-type manganese oxide (HMO) nanorods were constructed using Ag atoms dispersed and migrated along the external surfaces to the ends and consecutively inserted in the tunnels of the HMO nanorods (Fig. 4g–r).187 The formed single-atom Ag chain displayed excellent activity for HCHO oxidation at low temperatures due to the lattice oxygen and molecular oxygen. Single-atom Pt into MnO2 was synthesized by a one-pot hydrothermal process.188 100% conversion of 0.42 ppm toluene was achieved at 28 °C under the high gas-hourly-space-velocity of 300 L g−1 h−1 and 100% conversion of 10 ppm toluene was achieved at 80 °C and complete oxidation into CO2 at 220 °C. The metal-semiconductor nano-heterojunctions (MnO2–Au) were formed by deposited Au nanoparticles (NPs) on MnO2.189 MnO2–Au hybrid materials demonstrated good thermal catalytic conversion performances of p-amino thiophenol to p,p′-dimercaptoazobenzene. K-doped MnO2–Au displayed superior catalytic activity relative to Na-doped MnO2–Au due to the narrower band gap. Zhu et al.190 also reported K-doped δ-MnO2 nanoflowers decorated with Au nanoparticles (MnO2–Au) for enhanced surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-mediated activities for the oxidation of p-aminothiophenol to p,p′-dimercaptoazobenzene.
 Fig. 4  (a) Strategy for the synthesis of MnO2 nanowires decorated with ultrasmall Au NPs, which was based on the reduction of AuCl4−(aq) to Au by BH4− in the presence of PVP, EG as the solvent, and 90 °C as the reaction temperature. (b–e) HRTEM images of MnO2–Au NPs depicting the ultrasmall and monodisperse Au NPs size as well as their uniform distribution over the MnO2 surface. The lattice fringe orientations in the phase-contrast HRTEM images (d and e) show that both the MnO2 nanowires and Au NPs were single crystalline. (f) Proposed mechanism for silane oxidation and hydrogen production reactions catalyzed by MnO2–Au NPs. TEM and HRTEM images and the corresponding structural models of Ag/HMO and AgHMO. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. (g) TEM image of Ag/HMO. (h) TEM image of the SNP (white dotted circles) supported on a typical HMO nanorod with a [001] growth direction. (i) HRTEM image of Ag/HMO showing a hexagonal SNP. (j) HRTEM image of the Ag particle of Ag/HMO. (k) Structural model of the Ag particle supported on the {110} side-facet of the HMO. (l) TEM images of Ag-HMO. Inset: TEM image of Ag-HMO showing flat {001} facets at the ends of Ag-HMO nanorods (scale bar: 50 nm). (m) TEM image and (n) HRTEM image of an Ag-HMO nanorod with a [001] growth direction, indicating the Ag atom chains. (o) Auto-correlation function analysis and (p) simulated images of the panel (h) showing Ag single-atom chains. Scale bar: 0.5 nm in the panel (o). (q and r) Single-atom Ag chains inside the tunnels of HMO viewed from the [0_11] and [001] directions. (m) Atom arrangement on the {001} facet of Ag-HMO. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


5.2.2. MnO2/metal oxide semiconductors. 
Semiconductor metal oxides are considered to be candidate materials for the study of thermocatalysts and visible photocatalysts and have attracted much attention in recent years. MnO2-metal oxide semiconductor heterojunctions have been successfully prepared for use in different environments. MnO2/metal oxides semiconductor heterojunctions are promising candidates for heterojunction catalysts because of their significant advantages such as low cost, environmental friendliness, and efficient separation of photogenerated carriers. Wu et al.191 designed a porous α-MnO2/Mn3O4 nanostructure with numerous interfaces using a topotactic transformation synthesis strategy (Fig. 5a–i). The α-MnO2/Mn3O4 composition showed enhanced catalytic oxidation activity with good stability for toluene abatement under the radiation of sunlight. This is due to the numerous close interfaces, even direct Z-scheme junctions, more oxygen vacancies at the surface for the absorption of more O2 molecules, and more superoxide radicals per unit time. The Mn3O4–MnO2 heterojunction was synthesized using an amorphous MnO2 shell-coated tetragonal hausmannite Mn3O4 core.192 Mn3O4–MnO2 exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity with the degradation efficiency of methylene blue up to 93.5% within 1 h. Yan et al.193 designed TiO2-decorated the acid-treated MnOx octahedral molecular sieve (OMS-5(H)@TiO2) catalyst with improved alkali-resistant NOx reduction at low temperature (Fig. 6 a–g). The excellent OMS-5(H)@TiO2 catalysts showed trapping of alkali metals and high deNOx activity due to the structure, further accelerating the high ratio of Mn4+ and Oα by decorating with TiO2. MnO2@CeO2–MnO2 ball-in-ball binary oxide hollow spheres were prepared by employing carbon spheres (CSs) as sacrificial templates (Fig. 6h–q).194 The excellent catalytic activity stems from the hierarchical porous structure, high surface area, and strong synergistic interaction between CeO2 and MnO2. Heterostructured nanocatalysts consisting of ε-MnO2 nanowires and CeO2 nanoparticles were constructed by applying pulsed currents sequentially for the selective catalytic reduction of NOx with NH3 (Fig. 6r–v).195 Other binary heterojunctions have also been reported by researchers, such as ellipsoid α-Mn2O3@α-MnO2 core/shell nanocomposites for decomposition of phenolics in aqueous solutions,196 core–shell MnO2@TiO2 for U(VI) adsorption,197 MnO2/TiO2 nano-tube arrays for photoelectrodes,198 TiO2/MnO2 nanostructure for vacuum ultraviolet photocatalytic oxidation of toluene,199 MnO2/CeO2–MnO2 hierarchical binary oxide for Hg0 removal,200 MnO2/CeO2 for catalytic ultrasonic degradation of methyl orange,201 CeO2-doped MnO2 catalysts for toluene combustion,202 MnO2(x)–CeO2 for HCHO removal,203 CeO2 nanowires/MnO2 nanosheets heterogeneous structure for catalytic CO oxidation,204 α-MnO2@CeO2 for catalytic reduction of NO,205 trepang-like CeO2@MnO2 nanocomposite for soot oxidation,206 MnO2@Co3O4 for catalytic toluene oxidation,207 3D Co3O4@MnO2 heterostructures for supercapacitor electrodes and photocatalysts,208 mesoporous Co3O4/MnO2 nanoparticles for phenol degradation,209 CuO/MnO2 nanorod array films for catalytic oxidation of acid fuchsin dye,210 layered CuO–δ-MnO2 hybrid composites for catalytic toluene oxidation,211 ZnO Capped MnO2 nanostructures for microwave absorption,212 MnO2/Al2O3 for catalytic ozonation of toluene.213
 Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis of the hierarchically porous hybrid α-MnO2/Mn3O4 from the precursor δ-MnO2. (b–d) SEM images of α-MnO2/Mn3O4. Distribution analysis of two components of the hierarchically porous α-MnO2/Mn3O4 nanostructure. (f–i) HRTEM image and corresponding FFT pattern of α-MnO2/Mn3O4. (d) HAADF-STEM image of a broken α-MnO2/Mn3O4 particle and (f) the corresponding EELS map of merging. The EELS spectra were collected with a dispersion of (h) 641.7 eV and (g) 644 eV, representing MnII, III3O4, and α-MnIVO2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.191 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image, (b) HRTEM image, (c) HAADF image, and (d–f) energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping of Mn, Ti, and K elements over the K-OMS-5(H)@TiO2 catalyst. (g) Schematic diagram of the promotional effects of TiO2-decorated OMS-5(H) catalysts. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of Ce–Mn composite hollow spheres. (i–k) SEM and TEM images of CSs@CeO2 core–shell spheres (l–n) CSs@MnO2/CeO2–MnO2 yolk–shell spheres (o–q) MnO2/CeO2–MnO2 hollow spheres. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (r) Low-magnification and (s) high-magnification FESEM images of MnO2–CeO2 composite nanocatalysts on the cordierite filters. (t) HRTEM image of MnO2–CeO2 composite nanocatalysts. The inset in (t) is the fast-Fourier-transform (FFT) image of the yellow circled region. (u) SAED pattern of the ε-MnO2-CeO2 nanocatalyst. Diffraction spots of MnO2 NWs and CeO2 NPs are marked by a ring and triangle, respectively, by indexing the plane. (v) Schematic diagram for experimental preparation procedure for MnO2–CeO2 nanocatalysts and the selective catalytic reaction of NOx with NH3. Reproduced with permission.195 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 


5.2.3. MnO2/oxysalts. 
Oxysalts are widely used as efficient adsorption and catalytic materials in fields such as water treatment and air purification. Therefore, the combination of oxysalts with MnO2 to overcome the low surface area of oxysalts and the disadvantages of MnO2 by easily reconstituting photocarriers has been extensively investigated in recent years. Rod-like MnO2/LaMnO3 perovskites were synthesized by the hydrothermal treatment and the acid etching of bulk LaMnO3 perovskite precursor for toluene oxidation conversion (Fig. 7a–k).214 The enhanced catalytic performance was ascribed to the good dispersion of the active sites and the high fraction of Mn4+, which increases the adsorption sites of the reactants and catalyst at low temperatures. CuBi2O4/MnO2 composite was constructed as a photoactivator of peroxymonosulfate.215 It can efficiently eliminate ceftiofur, tetracycline, and lomefloxacin within 40 min. The bi2MoO6–MnO2 hybrid was applied for ethyl acetate degradation.216 The excellent catalytic performance was attributed to plasma-generated species such as high-energy electrons, O and O3, with a removal efficiency of 100% for ethyl acetate, 70% selectivity of CO2, and 99% selectivity for COx. α-MnO2/Cu(NO3)2 was developed as catalysts for the oxidation of 5-[(formyloxy)methyl]-furfural to maleic anhydride.217 The synergy of α-MnO2/Cu(NO3)2 ensured a high yield of maleic anhydride through an MnIV/MnII redox couple facilitated by the redox cycle of CuII/CuI and NO3−/NO2/NO with the assistance of O2. Sea-buckthorn-like MnO2/TNTs composites have been developed using amorphous MnO2 nanoparticles decorated with titanate nanotubes for 17β-estradiol (E2) degradation.218 The heterojunction structure of MnO2 and titanate results in the suppression of electron–hole recombination and the enhancement of visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity. The synergy of pre-oxidation and photocatalysis led to high reactivity on activated E2 radical and ˙OH coupling.
 Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis path and morphologic transformation of LMO-NH, (b) LMO-NH of La, Mn, and O; SEM patterns of (c) LMO, (d) LMO-N, (e) LMO-H, and (d) LMO-NH; TEM images of (e) LMO and (f–j) LMO-NH; and HRTEM images of (j) LMO and (k) LMO-NH. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, other MnO2/oxysalts binary heterojunctions have also been designed, such as MnO2/LaMnO3 catalyst for toluene removal,219 γ-MnO2/SmMnO3 catalyst for deep catalytic oxidation of gaseous benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and o-xylene,220 BiFeO3–MnO2 composite for mineralization of bisphenol A,221 MnO2/ZnFe2O4 hybrid for activate peroxymonosulfate,222 snowflake-like MnO2@NiCo2O4 composites for electromagnetic wave absorption.223


5.2.4. MnO2/conducting-polymer. 
Conductive polymers have received increasing attention in the last decade as unique advanced polymer-based materials. It combines both the electrical conductivity and flexibility of polymers with the properties of nanofillers and has gained interesting applications in multidisciplinary fields. In recent years, the combination of MnO2 with conductive polymers has been considered a promising composite material and has also attracted considerable interest. When MnO2 is compounded with a conducting polymer, new or enhanced chemical properties can be imparted to improve the catalytic and adsorption properties.
MnO2/polyaniline (PANI) coaxial nanocables were fabricated using MnO2 nanorods as the reactive templates for polymerization using the oxidative template route.224 The MnO2 nanorods were coated with PANI and accompanied by dissolution. The MnO2/PANI coaxial nanocables were applied in the oxidative degradation of rhodamine B. Polyaniline spherical and cubic shell nanostructures were controlled-fabricated using MnO2 hollow hierarchical nanostructures with different morphologies as reactive templates.225 These nanostructures exhibited multiple redox behavior during the potentiodynamic cycle in acidic media at the potential. Hollow polydopamine@α-MnO2 microspindles were synthesized for electromagnetic wave absorption with tunable absorption frequency governed by the aspect ratio.226 The maximum reflection loss and absorption bandwidth increase and then decreased upon increasing the aspect ratio. The hollow polydopamine@α-MnO2 microspindles with an optimized aspect ratio for the cavity of ∼2.8 achieved the strongest reflection of −21.8 dB at 9.7 GHz and 3 mm thickness.


5.2.5. MnO2/carbon materials. 
Carbon nanomaterials have been widely used to enhance the properties of MnO2-based materials. Mesostructured MnO2-carbon nanotube (CNT) composite consisted of oriented CNTs on vertical-aligned MnO2 nanosheets (tube-on-sheet) for electrodes.227 The vertically-aligned nanosheets shorted the ion diffusion path, the hierarchical porous structure increased specific surface areas and active sites, and the in situ formed CNTs enhanced conductivity with structural stability (Fig. 8a–g). MnO2 nanoflowers conformally electrodeposited onto carbon nanotube (CNT) conductive textile fibers also effectively decreased the ion diffusion and charge transport resistance in the electrode.228 MnO2@Nano hollow carbon sphere (MnO2@NHCS) nanocomposites were applied for the degradation of bisphenol A (BPA) (Fig. 8h–m).229 95.3% BPA could be removed within 10 min. Carbon cloth (CC)-supported MnO2 composites (MnO2-CC) were formed by dispersing porous MnO2 nanosheets uniformly on the CC surface (Fig. 8n–v).230 It displayed Joule thermal properties, efficient conversion of electrical energy into thermal energy, and long-term HCHO removal. MnO2/CNTs consisted of amorphous MnO2 nanosheets coated on the surfaces of carbon nanotubes for the decomposition of ozone.231 The catalytic activity was enhanced by the electron transfer ability of the support. C@MnO2 core–shell composites were developed with graphitized tunable hollow carbon sphere as the core and sheetlike MnO2 particles as the shell.232 The hollow C@MnO2 achieved an optimal reflection loss of −53.5 dB at 1.5 mm thickness, and the bandwidth was around 4.8 GHz. MnO2/GFF (bifunctional graphene fin foam) was constructed for the oxidation of toluene.233 MnO2/GFF catalyst could effectively convert renewable solar energy into heat (absorption of >95%) and exhibited excellent self-cleaning capability induced by solar irradiation with superior long-term catalytic stability of 72 h at 1 sun. Highly uniform cotton cloth@MnO2 (CC@MnO2) hierarchical structures were fabricated for microwave absorption materials. The well-designed CC@MnO2 sample exhibited distinct absorption performance with a maximum reflection loss of −53.2 dB at 5.4 GHz and effective bandwidth of 5.84 GHz at 2 mm thickness.234 α-MnO2 nanostructures with various morphologies were synthesized on the surface of the woven Kevlar fiber (WKF) via the hydrothermal method under different reaction conditions. WKF/MnO2 nanofibers/PES/PANI-RGO (2.0%) composites exhibited superior electromagnetic parameters. The reflection loss reached −36.5 dB at a frequency of 11.8 GHz.235 The CNT-based framework effectively enhanced the electrochemical stability.236 MnO2-decorated N-doped carbon nanotube boosted formaldehyde oxidation activity at low temperatures.237 Graphene/MnO2 nanostructured materials were applied for electrochemical capacitors,238 similarly, tin-doped manganese dioxide/CNT nanocomposites (Sn–MnO2/CNT) for the removal of anionic dye and thiourea sensing,239 graphene-MnO2 nanostructure for formaldehyde oxidation,240 needle-like MnO2 on graphene oxide coupled with peroxymonosulfate for the degradation of norfloxacin,241 hierarchical petal-on-petal MnO2/vertical graphene foam for the decomposition of toluene,242 3D MnO2/N-doped graphene hybrid aerogel for ibuprofen oxidation243 have also been reported for environmental purification.
 Fig. 8  (a) Fabrication process of tube-on-sheet CNTs/MnO2 nanocomposites. SEM images of (b) Mn–Co–O precursors, (c) Co–MnO2 nanosheets; TEM image of (d) Co–MnO2 nanosheets dissolve Co nanoparticles; SEM image (e), TEM image (f) and HRTEM image (g) of CNTs/MnO2 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (h) The schematic illustration of synthesis MnO2@NHCS, (i) and (j) TEM images of pure NHCS at different magnification; (k) and (l) TEM images of MnO2@NHCS at different magnification; (m) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mapping images of MnO2@NHCS. Reproduced with permission.229 © 2018 Published by Elsevier B.V. (n) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the MnO2–CC electrothermal textile. (o–p) SEM images, (q and r) EDS mapping, (s) cross-sectional SEM image, (t) TEM, (u, inset) HRTEM image, and (v) photograph of the MnO2–CC textile. Reproduced with permission.230 © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 

5.3 MnO2-based ternary heterojunctions

5.3.1. MnO2/semiconductor/semiconductor ternary heterojunctions. 
To date, various MnO2/semiconductor ternary heterojunctions have been reported, with significantly enhanced adsorption and catalytic properties compared to binary heterojunctions. Mn2O3/Mn3O4/MnO2 heterostructures were generated using oxone (0.3 mM) induced Mn2O3 (0.2 g L−1) under visible light (Fig. 9a–h).244 The Mn2O3/Mn3O4/MnO2 heterostructure achieved 95.6% removal and 63.9% mineralization of ciprofloxacin (cipro) under visible light irradiation for 40 min. Fe2O3-decorated SiO2/MnO2 microjets were synthesized for the simultaneous removal of industrial organic pollutants and heavy metals present in wastewater (Fig. 9i–q).245 The average speed achieved was 485 ± 32 μm s−1 (∼28 body length per s) at 7% H2O2. MnOx–CeO2–Al2O3 microspheres were designed via spray drying for monolithic honeycomb catalyst.246 The enhanced catalytic activity of the obtained MnOx–CeO2–Al2O3 delivered N2 selectivity of 94.5% and NOx conversion of 97.4% at 150 °C due to the increasing Olatt sites. Moreover, CuO and MnO2 on the surface wall of mesoporous TiO2 were synthesized for the catalytic reduction of NO with NH3,247 CuO–MnO2–Fe2O3/c-Al2O3 were reported for the catalytic oxidation of HgO.248
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM, (b and c) TEM, and (d) HRTEM images of fresh Mn2O3; (e) SEM, (f) TEM and (g–h) HRTEM images of Mn2O3/Mn3O4/MnO2. Reproduced with permission.244 © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (i) SEM image of the SiMnOx microjet, inset corresponding to the cavity of the tube, (j) TEM image of the SiMnOx microjet (k) SEM image of the FeSiMnOx microjet, blue solid inset corresponding to the tube cavity and red dotted inset corresponding to γ-Fe2O3 NPs on the outer surface, (l) TEM image of the FeSiMnOx microjet, (m) magnification of the red dotted lines in (k), (n) EDX spectrum of the FeSiMnOx microjet, (o) EDX mapping of the FeSiMnOx microjet, and (p) element profile of FeSiMnOx (represented by a red dotted line). (q) Chemical fabrication of mesoporous Fe2O3/SiO2–MnO2 (FeSiMnOx) microjets for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants and removal of heavy metals. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 


5.3.2. MnO2/semiconductor/conductor ternary heterojunctions. 
Combining the SPR effect of heterojunctions and metals is an effective strategy to further improve the catalytic activity of MnO2. Some metal monomers can produce the SPR effect. Therefore, the construction of MnO2/semiconductor/metal ternary heterojunctions is an effective way to achieve the SPR effect combined with heterojunctions, which can be widely used to enhance the catalytic performance of MnO2. MnO2@NiCo2O4@Ni foam was developed through a three-dimensional hierarchical MnO2@NiCo2O4 core–shell nanowire grown on the carrier surface of nickel foam arrays.249 The MnO2@NiCo2O4@Ni foams retained high NO conversion, superior catalytic cycle stability, and good H2O resistance due to the high surface area of Ni–Co nanowires, the high dispersion of manganese oxides, and the synergistic catalytic effect between Ni, Co, and Mn multiple oxides. Mn3O4/MnO2-cubic Ag3PO4 were prepared for the degradation of phenanthrene (Fig. 10a–j).250 The Mn3O4/MnO2-cubic Ag3PO4 exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light illumination with exposed {1 0 0} facets, and phenanthrene removal of ∼12% was achieved. Cubic hollow Co/N/C@MnO2 core–shell structure was synthesized via a self-templated and eco-friendly route to boost microwave absorption (Fig. 11a–g). Polydopamine (PDA) acted as a carbon source and hierarchical MnO2 nanosheets were incorporated to improve the impedance mismatch by introducing hierarchical MnO2 sheets and modulating filler loading to regulate the excessive permittivity in Co/N/C.251 Co/N/C@MnO2 composites displayed excellent microwave absorption properties due to synergetic effects of excellent impedance match at the filler loading of 15 wt%, and dramatical electromagnetic wave attenuation ability arising from multiple helpful constituents, abundant interfaces, and extraordinary hollow structure (Fig. 11k). CoFe@C@MnO2 hierarchical nanocubes were designed using CoFe nanoparticles embedded within porous carbon and growing MnO2 nanoparticles on the nanocubes (Fig. 11a′–g′). The synthesized CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes achieved excellent absorption bandwidth owing to the dielectric losses of carbon and MnO2, magnetic losses of the CoFe alloy nanoparticles, interfacial polarization between the CoFe alloy, carbon shell, and MnO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 11k′).252
 Fig. 10  FESEM and TEM images of the (a and b) cAP and (c–f) of 0.4 wt% MnOx-cAP composite. (g) and (h) are the SAED pattern and HRTEM image of 0.4 wt% MnOx-cAP composite, respectively. (i) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the MnOx-cAP photocatalyst and VPCB system. (j) Proposed degradation mechanism. Reproduced with permission.250 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Fig. 11  FESEM images of (a) ZIF-67 nanocubes, (b) Co/N/C nanoboxes, (c) hierarchical Co/N/C@MnO2. TEM images of (d) ZIF-67@PDA yolk–shelled structure, (e) Co/N/C nanoboxes, and (f) hierarchical Co/N/C@MnO2. (g) The corresponding SAED pattern. (h–i) High-resolution TEM images of Co/N/C and MnO2 sheets, respectively. (j) Illustration of the fabrication process of hierarchical Co/N/C@MnO2. (k) Schematic mechanisms of EM wave absorption for Co/N/C@MnO2 composites. Reproduced with permission.251 © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. SEM and TEM images of the CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes (a′–c′) SEM and (e′) TEM images of CoFe PB@MnO2, (d′) SEM, (f′) TEM and (g′) HRTEM images of CoFe PB@MnO2 nanocubes, (h′) and (i′) elemental mappings of the CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes. (j′) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CoFe@C and CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes. (k′) The absorbing mechanism of as-prepared samples. Reproduced with permission.252 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Yolk–shell Fe3O4@carbon@MnO2 microspheres were synthesized by coating, carbonization, and etching processes. The MnO2 shell plays a significant role in the Fe3O4@carbon@MnO2 composite. Wherein, it restricts the electrical polarization between the carbon shell and the Fe3O4 core and improves the impedance matching. The yolk–shell Fe3O4@carbon@MnO2 composite exhibited excellent electromagnetic wave absorption performance, which was contributed by the hollow yolk–shell structure, and the effective complementary between the Fe3O4 core and the carbon@MnO2 double-layer shells.253 The olive-like γ-Fe2O3@C core–shell spindles of different shell thicknesses and γ-Fe2O3@C@α-MnO2 spindles of different volumes of dipolar-distribution cavities were successfully prepared by controlling the reaction time of dopamine polymerization and adjusting the chemical etching time, respectively. The γ-Fe2O3@C@α-MnO2 spindle with controllable cavity volume exhibited an effective bandwidth of 9.2 GHz after chemical dipolar etching of the core.254 The reduced graphene oxide/molybdenum disulfide/potassium-alpha manganese dioxide (RGO/MoS2/K-α-MnO2) composites were reported via an improved hydrothermal method. The uniform K-α-MnO2 nanospheres as antennas were distributed on the surface of RGO/MoS2 composites, resulting in a balance between dielectric loss and magnetic loss.255 Nickel foam (NF)-supported Pt/MnNi@NF catalyst was prepared through the growth of manganese dioxide-nickel(II) hydroxide (MnO2–Ni(OH)2) hierarchical nanosheets and subsequent impregnation-borohydride-reduction to deposit well-dispersed platinum (Pt) nanoparticles (NPs).256 Surface hydroxyl (OH) groups of MnO2 and Ni(OH)2 were beneficial to the adsorption of HCHO, while Pt NPs facilitated the formation of active oxygen species. Besides, oxygen vacancies on the MnO2 surface are helpful for the migration of the active oxygen species. CeO2@Au@CeO2–MnO2 sandwich-hollow structure was designed by successive interfacial redox reaction.257 The prepared CeO2@Au@CeO2–MnO2 catalyst displayed high catalytic activity in the reduction of 4-nitrophenol in the liquid phase and CO oxidation in the gas phase. The sandwich-like MnO2–Pd–CeO2 hollow spheres were designed by depositing tiny Pd nanoparticles on the outer surface of the MnO2 shell and CeO2 overcoating served as nanotraps to anchor the Pd particles for CO oxidation.258 The synthesized MnO2–Pd–CeO2 hollow spheres exhibited excellent stability and activity owing to the sandwich-like structure and the strong synergistic effect between Pd and hierarchical porous MnO2–CeO2 shells. Additionally, other MnO2-based ternary heterojunctions have also been reported, such as Pt/MnO2@Mn3O4 catalyst for toluene oxidation,259 multi-shell Fe2O3@MnOx@CNTs for catalytic reduction of NO with NH3,260 Fe3O4@MnO2/CT for the removal of Pb2+ from water,261 3D γ-MnO2@ZnFe2O4/rGO nanohybrid for phenol degradation.262


5.3.3. Other MnO2-based ternary heterojunctions. 
Additionally, other MnO2-based ternary heterojunctions have also been reported, for instance, sponge@C@MnO2 for indoor toluene removal,263 MnO2/polydopamine (PDA)/polyacrylonitrile (PAN) (MnO2/PDA/PAN fibers) for the removal of Pb2+ from water,264 polyaniline/manganese dioxide/titanium dioxide (PANI/MnO2/TiO2) for the reduction of Cr6+ from wastewater.265
The surface and interface are the main sites for the electrocatalytic reactions, and the design of electrocatalysts by regulating the surface intrinsic structure and constructing heterogeneous interfaces can significantly reduce the overpotential and improve stability. This section summarizes the research progress for surface/interface modulation strategies for oxygen evolution reaction, especially the modulation methods for the intrinsic structure of the catalyst, the concentration of the distributed surface defects, and the construction of the heterogeneous surface/interface that can effectively enhance the catalytic activity. It could offer a method for constructing efficient and stable electrocatalysts in terms of the influence of the surface/interface modulation on the microstructure and electronic states, and introduce the application of the surface/interface modulation strategy in OER.

6. Fundamentals of the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
The OER process consists of multiple electron transfer steps of electrochemical reactions with hysteresis. The catalytic mechanism has been frequently described in terms of the adsorbate evolution mechanism.
6.1 Mechanism of the OER
In the neutral and alkaline media, the four-electron pathway is as follows. Reactions 1–4:266–273 * + OH− → OH* + e−(1) OH* + OH−− → O* + H2O + e−(2) O* + OH− → OOH* + e−(3) OOH* + OH− → O2 + H2O + e− + *(4)
Further derivation. 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−(5)
In an acidic medium, OER is viewed as proceeding through the following four steps: * + 2H2O → OH* + H2O + H+ + e−(6) OH* + H2O → O* + H2O + H+ + e−(7) O* + H2O → OOH* + H+ + e−(8) OOH* → O2 + H+ + e− + *(9)
Further derivation, 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−(10)where * denotes active sites on the surface of the catalyst, OH*, O*, and OOH* are intermediates formed during the four OER steps. All these four-electron pathways are thermodynamically uphill.274,275 The biggest energy barrier is the rate-limiting step. The binding energies of the intermediates before and after each reaction determine the potential.267 When the energy barrier of the OH* → O* and O* → OOH* steps are equal, the OER overpotential is the smallest. Therefore, the activity of the catalyst is optimized when it can catalyze the OH* → O* and O* → OOH* steps with similar overpotentials.268
6.2 Parameters for OER
Some critical parameters are summarized to evaluate and compare the oxygen-catalytic properties of different catalysts.

6.2.1. Potential and overpotential. 
The theoretical equilibrium potential is 1.23 V for the OER. The overpotential (η) represents the potential at a certain current density minus 1.23 V.276 The current density at 10 mA cm−2 (j = 10) is usually regarded as a standard to assess the OER catalytic activity of different OER catalysts.277,278 Additionally, the onset potential (the potential at the current density of 1 mA cm−2) is another important potential parameter.279 Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) can be generally used to obtain the above potential parameters.


6.2.2. Tafel slope. 
The Tafel plot is the curve of overpotential versus logarithm value of current density in the LSV curves, which reflects the electrochemical kinetics referring to an electrochemical reaction rate to the overpotential.280,281 The Tafel equation is an empirical formula, whose mathematical expression is η = α + b log(j), where η represents overpotential, j denotes current density, α is a constant, and b is called the Tafel slope. The Tafel slope obtained from the Tafel plot is related to the electrostatic dynamics. In general, a smaller Tafel slope indicates a faster electrochemical reaction rate.


6.2.3. Stability. 
The ability of the oxygen catalysts to maintain their catalytic activity refers to the change in the catalytic activity over time. The chronopotentiometry (CP) method was used to evaluate the stability of the oxygen catalysts for OER. The variation of the potential at a fixed current density after a long time was negligible, indicating robust stability. Besides, cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves can also be used to assess the stability of the oxygen catalysts at somewhat higher scan rates, which are obtained through LSV measurements. The small shift of the potential manifests good stability towards oxygen catalytic reactions.


6.2.4. Exchange current density. 
The exchange current density (j0) is another important descriptor of OER kinetics and reflects the intrinsic electron transfer rate between the electrode and the electrolyte. The exchange current density is the current density in the absence of net electrolysis at η = 0. Currently, exchange current density cannot be measured directly by electrochemical methods and can only be calculated by the Tafel equation. Typically, good electrocatalysts have a high exchange current density.


6.2.5. Turnover frequency. 
Turnover frequency denotes the intrinsic catalytic activity of a catalyst, defined as the rate at which the amount of product generated is normalised by the number of active sites. However, in practice, it is difficult to detect the exact number of active sites, especially on solid-state multiphase electrocatalysts. By counting the total number of active species involved in an electrochemical system, including chemically inert species or buried species, the number of active sites is often overestimated.


6.2.6. Faraday efficiency. 
Faraday efficiency is the conversion efficiency of the electron-generating products such as molecular O2 and H2. The Faraday efficiency of an OER is the ratio of the experimental to the theoretical value of oxygen production. There are two general methods to determine the Faraday efficiency of OER. In the first method, the theoretical amount of O2 produced was calculated by the integration of chronoamperometric or chronopotential analysis. The actual amount of O2 gas produced was measured by conventional water–gas displacement, gas chromatography, or fluorescence spectroscopy. Another method is based on a rotating ring-disk electrode in which a finely polished glass carbon disk and a platinum ring assembly are used. The same potential window of the OER is applied to the disk region.


6.2.7. Electrochemically active surface area. 
The electrochemically active surface area is highly dependent on the different electrochemical processes and catalytic materials. There are several methods for measuring the electrochemically active surface area of different materials, such as the redox peak area integration method, hydrogen underpotential deposition, carbon monoxide dissolution, and double-layer capacitance methods. The evaluation methods and results of the electrochemically active surface area often differ for different electrochemical reactions and materials. The electrochemically active surface area of the material should not be used as a key criterion for comparing the active properties of materials in different studies. Instead, it is recommended to use the electrochemically active surface area to compare similar materials in the same study.


6.2.8. Mass and specific activities. 
The mass activity, defined as the normalised current of the mass loading of the target catalyst at a specific overpotential, is becoming increasingly important when evaluating the catalytic performance of OER electrocatalysts, especially when considering the catalyst cost. Therefore, mass activity is often used as a key evaluation parameter for noble metal-based materials and less important for non-precious metal-based catalysts. Another key evaluation parameter for OER is a specific activity, normalised by the electrochemically active surface area of the catalyst. The normalisation of the specific activity value over the electrochemically active surface area is more reflective of the true activity of the catalyst and has therefore received more attention. Unfortunately, accurate measurement and comparison of the electrochemically active surface area of different materials is somewhat difficult, which makes the normalised specific activity on the electrochemically active surface area a less practical evaluation parameter. In addition, benchmark overpotentials should be defined to determine mass activity and specific activity for better comparison.

7. Applications of MnO2 and its composites for OER
In recent decades, MnO2 and MnO2 composites have been extensively used in electrocatalysis in recent decades. However, their relatively low conductivity, catalytic activity, and ease of recycling in electrolytes limit their wide range of applications as catalysts. Hence, great efforts have been made to partially compensate through structural optimization and composition design.
7.1 MnO2
Generally, different polymorphs of MnO2 have an obvious influence on the OER activity. Meng et al.282 have proposed that the electrocatalytic activities in OER are strongly dependent on the crystallographic structures, and follow the order of α-MnO2 > AMO > β-MnO2 > δ-MnO2. The overpotential of α-MnO2 arrived at 490 mV at 10 mA cm−2, and the stability reached 3 h. This can be further improved by adding Ni2+. The abundant di-μ-oxo bridges existing in α-MnO2 as the protonation sites, the mixed valence (AOS = 3.7), and the lowest charge transfer resistances (91.8 Ω at η = 430 mV) were attributed to the superior OER activity. Different crystallographic and morphologies of MnO2 nanostructures have been prepared by the facile template-free hydrothermal method.283 The OER activity follows the order α-MnO2 > α-MnO2/β-MnO2 > broken β-MnO2 > β-MnO2. The intrinsic Mn atom activity in α-MnO2 and large electrochemical active surface area induced by high BET surface area improved the catalytic activity in the oxygen evolution reaction. Mesoporous γ-MnO2 obtained at the low annealing temperature was found with catalytic activity in the oxygen evolution reaction due to the highly porous and defect-rich structure.284 The overpotential reached 427 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
Meanwhile, the catalytic properties of MnO2 are affected by the different morphology. Nano-wires, nano-tubes, and nano-particles α-MnO2 have been prepared with controlled α crystallographic forms as catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction.285 Among the three α-MnO2 shapes, the nano-wire catalyst showed the best performance. The first principles-based density functional theory (DFT) calculations proved the affinity of (310) crystallographic planes toward the water molecule and its exposure to the reaction interface facilitated the adsorption of the reactant on the catalyst surface, showing superior catalytic activity. The effect of the morphology of α-MnO2 on OER activity and resultant electrolyser performance has also been investigated thoroughly by Gupta.286 Three distinct α-MnO2 shapes, namely nanotubes, nanorods, and nanowires were employed. MnO2 nanowires exhibited high OER activity due to the large specific surface areas, high electrical conductivity, low surface average Mn oxidation states, and rich content of the 211 facet (Fig. 12a–f). Two kinds of three-dimensional (3D) radial α-MnO2 (dandelion- and urchin-like) catalysts were readily fabricated via two different redox reactions through the hydrothermal method.287 As a result, the dandelion-like α-MnO2 displayed a higher electrocatalytic performance than urchin-like α-MnO2, with an overpotential of 90 mV lower for OER, higher mass activity, and lower Tafel slope. The superior electrochemical activities of dandelion-like α-MnO2 can be attributed to the relatively larger electrochemical active surface area, less charge transfer resistance, and richer defects. Porous β-MnO2 nanoplates with high surface area showed superior catalytic performance, reducing overpotential to 450 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slop of 78.2 mV dec−1. The catalytic activity was greatly enhanced due to the increased density of active Mn in unique 2D morphology and porosity. Au loading blockage and deterioration of catalytic activity demonstrated the significance of surface-bound catalytic Mn sites of porous β-MnO2 nanoplates.288 2D (SBA-15, MCM-41) and 3D (KIT-6, MCM-48) silica-template-derived MnO2 electrocatalysts were prepared using a nanocasting route.289 The MnO2 nanostructure derived from KIT-6 showed comparable activity to the benchmark catalyst RuO2. This is attributed to the enhancement of mass transport and electronic mobility of 3D template-derived MnO2, favored by interconnected network structures compared to that of 2D MnO2 materials.
 Fig. 12  X-ray diffraction patterns of the different MnO2 nano shapes (a) pristine, (b) after stability testing in 0.1 M NaOH at 40 C for 36 h. IR corrected linear sweep voltammograms at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 (c), chronoamperometry at 1.7 V (RHE) (d), Nyquist plot at 1.7 V (RHE) (e), IR-corrected Tafel curves of various MnO2 nano shapes on the Au electrode in 0.1 M KOH solution (f). Reproduced with permission.286 © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
In addition, Mn3+ species also influence the properties of MnO2. Takashima et al.290 elucidated that the stabilization of surface-associated intermediate Mn3+ species relative to charge disproportionation was verified to be an effective strategy to lower the overpotential for water oxidation by MnO2 using the in situ spectroelectrochemical techniques. Morgan Chan et al. rationalized that Mn3+ was stabilized kinetically in tetrahedral sites and induced the presence of strain on the oxide lattice, leading to a favorable disposition of the oxide-based vs. metal-based energy levels that favored enhanced OER activity.291 The inherent instability of Mn3+ was also found to play a significant role in the electrooxidation reaction.292 MnO2 electrocatalysts showed pH-dependent activity. The onset potential of the water oxidation was approximately 1.5 V from pH 4–8 but sharply shifted to negative at pH > 8. The concentration of oxygen defects also affected the OER catalysis. The oxygen-vacancy-bearing oxide enables more positive potential, and a higher current (Fig. 13a–h).293 δ-MnO2 layers were produced in situ from the spinel structure accompanied by Mn dislocation, dissolution, the insertion of water/cations between layers, and layer-breaking, generating various defective structures (Fig. 13i–o).294 The first principles calculations confirmed that a special edge site neighboring Mn vacancies had been taken for the active site and provided the best OER activity. α-(K)MnO2 had been modified by the heat treatment in He, H2O/He and O2/N2 atmospheres, removing lattice oxygen and preventing α-MnO2 from collapsing and reducing to Mn2O3.295 The OER performance was enhanced owing to the increasing number of structural defects, Mn3+ centers, and μ-oxo bridges. The overpotential reached 60 mV at a current density of 10 mV cm−2.
 Fig. 13  (a) Structure of rutile-type MnO2 with oxygen vacancies. (b) XRD patterns of different oxides. The symbols * and + denote Mn3O4 and MnOOH, respectively. (c) and (d) HRTEM images of pristine β-MnO2 (c) and β-MnO2 heated in Ar (d), the insets show the FFT patterns. (e) Constructed models of perfect and oxygen-vacant hydroxylated β-MnO2 (110) surfaces. (f) and (g) Configurations of O2 (f) and OOH (g) adsorbed on different surfaces. (h) Energy profiles and configurations of ORR on β-MnO2 surfaces with one (Path I) and two (Path II) oxygen vacancies. Asterisk denotes the adsorbed species. TS = transition state. Reproduced with permission.293 Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Crystal structures of (i) spinel Mn3O4, (j) layered δ-MnO2 in polyhedral representations. (k) The morphology change during spinel-to-layer transition as revealed from Kim's TEM. In (k) the layered δ-MnO2 sheets were gradually peeled off from the spinel surface and (l) shows the enlarged local view where the layered δ-MnO2 sheet starts to drop from the pristine spinel surface. Copyright from the Wiley group. (m) Scheme for the mechanism of spinel-to-layer phase transition (the dotted box indicates the solid-to-solid phase transition step of spinel H0.5MnO2). (n) Energetic profiles for solid-to-solid phase transition of H0.5MnO2 (black solid curve) and MnO2 (red dashed curve) (o) side view of key intermediate states of H0.5MnO2 during the phase transition viewed from [11_20] (using δ-MnO2 as the reference). In (o), the octahedral sites along the A row are all occupied by Mn ions, while only half of the octahedral sites along the B row are occupied, forming an ordered Mn-vacancy structure in the MnO2 layers. Red ball: O; white ball: H; violet ball: Mn; yellow ball: Mnic. Reproduced with permission.294 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The stabilization of non-native or metastable polymorphs is a modulation of the electrocatalytic active sites in the electronic structure that enhances the electrocatalytic activity of the OER. α/NN2–MnO2 exhibited a higher specific activity due to its high electronic conductivity and showed a high OER activity, correlated with low oxygen vacancy formation energy.296 The electronic origin of the OER activity has been attributed to a shift of the valence Mn-d band closer to the Fermi level, resulting in stronger O adsorption. These results suggest that both the conductivity and oxidation state of the active sites in the polymeric structures play a dominant role in determining the electrocatalytic OER activity and can be engineered to design better OER catalysts.
7.2 Doped MnO2
Cation substitution can improve the electrocatalyst performance of manganese oxide. The electrocatalytic activity of birnessite for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) by intercalating Ni2+ ions into the interlayer region exhibits an overpotential of 400 mV at 10 mA cm−2.297 Incorporating Co3+ in-layer and interlayer of δ-MnO2 can reduce the overpotential of 360 mV and increase the turnover number (8×), overpotential (by 360 mV) and increasing turnover number (8×).298,299 The results reveal that the optimal dopant for Co into birnessite was 33%, and the conductivity, density of active sites, and electron transfer rates were optimized without compromising the birnessite structures. The addition of Co2+/Mo2+ to the electrolytic manganese dioxide was beneficial for the OER in the acid solution. The overpotential of 305 mV showed better performance than that of the commercial IrO2/Ti sheet (341 mV) at 100 mA cm−2.300 Furthermore, Co2+ doping significantly contributed to the charge transfer kinetics and synergistic coupling effects, which enhanced the catalytic activity of MnO2 with an overpotential of 279 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 14).301 Based on the density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the enhanced catalytic activity mainly originated from better conductivity and the decreased adsorption energy barrier of OH− on the O sites neighboring the doped Co and oxygen vacancies (Fig. 15). The buserite-type MnO2 thin film structure was fabricated via electrodeposition and the subsequent ion-exchange.302 Isolated Co2+ buserite produces fast electron transfer and high utilization efficiency, which is beneficial for OER catalysis. The overpotential of 0.4 V was obtained as well as a mass activity of 63.5 A g−1 with good stability in the long term. Lee and co-workers also found that V- and Co-substituted α-MnO2 materials rendered excellent bifunctional electrocatalytic functionalities with lowered overpotentials and enhanced current densities for oxygen evolution (OER) and oxygen reduction reactions (ORR).303 The charge transfer kinetics, electrical conductivity, and electrochemical active area were enhanced due to the local symmetry of partial substitution of V and Co ions into 1D α-MnO2 nanowires, which was beneficial for the oxygen electrocatalytic functionality. The overpotential of the Co-substituted derivative α-Mn0.9Co0.1O2 was 0.46 V and for V-substituted derivative α-Mn0.9V0.1O2, it was 0.49 V at the current density of 10 mA cm−2. Li et al.304 also synthesized Ca and Ag co-doping MnO2 nanowires by the impregnation method, taking advantage of the unique tunnel structure of α-MnO2 nanowires. The structural stability, catalytic activity, and electronic conductivity were analyzed for both pure and doped α-MnO2. Pd-doped α-MnO2 was identified as the only catalyst that could outperform pristine α-MnO2 due to the increasing electron conductivity and broadened band gap. Meanwhile, the theoretical calculations of the density functional manifested Pd doped α-MnO2 featured low overpotential among the doped catalysts and pure α-MnO2. The doping of the heteroatom Bi-metal element can effectively increase the Mn3+ fractional variation, greatly promoting the OER activity of MnO2. Ru substituted α-MnO2 nanowires revealed remarkable improvement in the electrocatalyst activities for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which was superior to and/or compatible with those of commercial noble metal electrocatalysts of Ir/C.305 Electronegative Ru4+ replacing the Mn4+ ion was quite effective in weakening the adjacent (Mn–O) bonds due to bond competition, contributing to the stable Jahn–Teller active Mn3+ species, along with providing electrocatalytically active Ru (Fig. 16). Lübke et al.306 also reported that Ru-doped α-MnO2 displayed attractive bifunctional catalytic activities. Ru dopants affected the physical properties and improved the electronic conductivity of the host α-MnO2.
 Fig. 14  Typical SEM images of the products after the reaction for (a and e) 20 min, (b and f) 1 h, (c and g) 4 h, and (d, h) 8 h. (i) Schematic illustration for the formation procedure of Co–MnO2 composite. OER electrocatalytic properties of catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (j) Polarization curves and (k) corresponding Tafel plots of Co–MnO2|O V (8 h), MnO2, RuO2, and GC. (l) Scan rate dependence of the average capacitive current densities at the open circuit potential for Co–MnO2|O V and MnO2. (m) Nyquist plots of the as-prepared samples for modified electrodes recorded at a constant overpotential of 200 mV. (n) Disk and ring currents of the Co–MnO2|O V catalyst on an RRDE (1600 rpm) with a ring potential of 1.5 V (vs. RHE). (o) Time dependence of catalytic current density during electrolysis at a static potential. Reproduced with permission.301 © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
 Fig. 15  (a) The charge density distribution difference between MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. The yellow and blue spheres represent positive and negative charges, respectively. (b) Calculated DOS of MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. (c) Reaction coordinates of OER on MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. (d) Top view of the slab models used to describe MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. (e) Polarization curves of Co–MnO2|OV, NiMnO2|OV, Fe–MnO2|OV and MnO2 for OER in 1 M KOH. (f) Comparison of the current density at a potential of 1.60 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.301 © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
 Fig. 16  (a and b) OER polarization curves, (c) Tafel plots, (d) EIS data, (e) equivalent circuit for EIS analysis, and (f) X-band EPR spectra (parallel mode) for the Ru-substituted α-Mn1−xRuxO2 1D nanowires and the physical mixture of α-MnO2 and RuO2 (mole ratio of 8:2). In (e), the Re, Rct, and CPE represent the electrolyte resistance, charge transfer resistance, and constant phase element, respectively. Reproduced with permission.305 © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
McKendry et al.307 synthesized KxFe[Co0.16Mn0.84O2] by doping Co3+ into the manganese oxide lattice and Fe2+ in the interlayer region simultaneously. The OER electrocatalysis was enhanced, the overpotential (η) lowered to 375 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope (b) arrived at 56 mV dec−1, which surpassed that of the standard potassium birnessite (η ≈ 800 mV, b = 240 mV dec−1) and cobalt-doped birnessite (η ≈ 750 mV, b = 230 mV dec−1). Ni–Fe-doped K0.23MnO2 cubic nanoflowers (Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2CNFs-300) were fabricated using the controllable sacrificial template of the Prussian-blue-analogue and subsequent annealing process as highly active bifunctional catalysts for oxygen evolution reactions (OER) and hydrogen evolution reactions (HER).62 Unique cubic nanoflower morphology, rich defects of oxygen vacancies, and doping effect of Ni and Fe endowed Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2CNFs-300 with excellent electrocatalytic performances. It required overpotentials of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and 320 mV at 100 mA cm−2 for OER, and the Tafel slope afforded a small value of 42.3 mV dec−1. Additionally, the overall water splitting displayed a low cell voltage of 1.62 V at 10 mA cm−2 with good durability, which was even superior to that of Pt/C‖IrO2. The theory calculations manifested that Ni and Fe-doped δ-MnO2 could not only enhance the conductivity but also decreased the barriers for adsorption free-energy in active sites during water splitting (Fig. 17). Fe, V, Co, and Ni-doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets have been sedimented on carbon fiber paper via co-electrodeposition.308 The conductivity of the metal-ion-doped MnO2 was improved. The obtained composite achieved a low overpotential of 390 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 18). Yang et al.309 investigated the effect of transition metal cations Ni2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, and Fe3+ into the interlayer region of the octahedral-layered MnO2 nanosheets. The results showed that the intercalation of Ni2+ afforded remarkable enhancement of OER activity with long-term stability. The lowest overpotential of the Ni-doped MnO2 nanosheets achieved 330 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and the highest TOF is 0.0356 s−1, which is superior to other intercalated MnO2 nanosheets and pristine MnO2 nanosheets. Tripkovic et al.298 analyzed Cr, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, Mg, Al, Ga, In, Sc, Ru, Rh, Ir, Pd, Pt, Ti, Zr, Nb, and Sn-doped α-MnO2 using density functional theory calculations for the OER.
 Fig. 17  (a) LSV curves, (b) the onset potentials and overpotentials, and (c) the corresponding Tafel plots of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300, Ni–Fe– K0.23MnO2 CNFs, K0.23MnO2 NS, and IrO2 toward OER. (d) LSV curves initially and after 3000 cycles of CVs, and (e) chronopotentiometric curves of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 for OER. (f) Nyquist plots of the three catalysts. Reproduced with permission.62 © 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 18  (a) LSV curves of the CFP, the metal-ion-doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet/CFP, and the IrO2/CFP composite electrodes measured in 1 m KOH with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, where the current is normalized by the geometrical area of the carbon fiber paper. (b) CV curves of the different composite electrodes in 1 m KOH at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (c) The Cdl by plotting the current density variation against the scan rate to fit a linear regression. (d) Tafel slopes (iRs-corrected) derived from the LSVs in (a). (e) Nyquist plots of the EIS of the different composite electrodes (Z′′: imaginary impedance, Z′ real impedance). The illustration in the figure shows the plots at high-frequency regions. (f) Galvanostatic measurements at a current density of 20 mA cm−2 for the different composite electrodes. Reproduced with permission.308 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
7.3 Heterostructure composites

7.3.1. MnO2/metal composites. 
The Pb–MnO2 composite anode showed a lower OER overpotential than the Pb–Ag anode in the Mn-free electrolyte. The application of Pb–MnO2 could reduce the energy consumption of zinc electrowinning in the absence of manganese ions. The Pb–MnO2 anode generated a very uniform, dense, and strongly adherent anodic MnO2 layer, which could cause a higher charge transfer resistance and/or lower the density of active sites for the OER. On the other hand, the MnO2 layers deposited on the smooth Pb–Ag anode are flaky, porous, and loosely adhered.310 Pb/Pb–MnO2 composite anodes were reported to afford the preferable oxygen evolution activity at the beginning of the polarization.311 Meanwhile, Li and co-workers also revealed that Pb/Pb–MnO2 composite anode exhibited a very high oxygen evolution activity at the very beginning of electrolysis, in which the reaction was controlled by the transformation step of intermediates. Then, the activity diminished.311,312 In addition, Mohammadi et al. found that Mn2+ in the sulfuric acid electrolyte strongly influenced the oxygen evolution activity and corrosion behaviour of the Pb/Pb–MnO2 anode. A low concentration of Mn2+ in the electrolyte could improve oxygen evolution, but a high concentration of Mn2+ in the electrolyte impeded oxygen evolution from the composite anode.313 Moreover, Xu et al.314 successfully designed gold-decorated 2D δ-MnO2 nanosheet composites by introducing the plasmonic effects. The composite showed excellent OER catalytic performance under green laser irradiation. The overpotential decreased from 0.38 to 0.32 V via tuning of the laser intensity from 100 to 200 mW, which was comparable to that of IrO2 and RuO2 catalysts. The plasmon-induced hot-electron excitation, as the effective electron trapper, confined the outer electrons of Mn4+ and led to the formation of the active sites. δ-MnO2 nanosheet arrays were synthesized on the nickel foam.145 The obtained NS-MnO2 exposed abundant active sites with large specific surface area for the electrocatalytic reactions and numerous oxygen vacancies accompanied by the unsaturated Mn3+. These contributed to excellent OER performance, offering high electrical conductivity, improving charge-transfer properties, and promoting H2O adsorption for overall water splitting (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves for OER at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Tafel plots for OER. (c) LSV curves for HER at 5 mV s−1. (d) Tafel plots for HER. (e) Nyquist plots for NS-MnO2 and NF (the inset shows the equivalent electrical circuit from the fitted impedance spectra). (f) Current density versus time (I–t) curves of HER and OER for NS-MnO2. Reproduced with permission.145 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


7.3.2. MnO2/metal oxide composites. 
The highly crystalline MnO2@TiO2 arrays with novel tube-in-tube nanostructure were obtained by introducing MnO2 nanotubes on the inner wall of the TiO2 nanotubes.315 The different diameters of MnO2 nanotubes in TiO2 nanotubes modulated the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) activity. The high intrinsic activity, the diffusion of active species from the large surface area, good conducting pathways provided by continuous MnO2 nanotubes, and the synergistic effect of the heterocomplex favored the performance of the oxygen evolution reaction. Frydendal et al.316 also confirmed that the stabilization of MnO2 with small amounts of TiO2 can lead to the improvement of stability for the oxygen evolution catalyst. IrO2 lattice strain was rationally manipulated on α-MnO2 nanorods as an efficient catalyst for water splitting (Fig. 20a–f).317 Interestingly, the OER activity of the obtained composites increased with the decrease in the growth quality of IrO2, highly reducing the dosage of precious iridium. The lattice strain in the IrO2-induced lattice mismatch in the underlying interface was beneficial for enhancing the OER activity. The prepared IrO2@Mn-5 possessed a mass activity of 3.7 times than IrO2 and displayed equivalent stability (Fig. 20g–n). IrO2/MnO2 was also cultivated hydrothermally to boost the oxygen evolution reaction.318 The intrinsic activity of IrO2/MnO2 was largely enhanced. In particular, the onset potential of Ir0.4/Mn0.6 was 1.437 V, and the overpotential was 1.516 V. The efficient electrocatalysts were derived from the Jahn–Teller distortion in the IrO2 octahedral structure and the eg orbital was partly filled after coupling with MnO2. In addition, Ti-supported IrO2(x) + MnO2(1−x) coatings were prepared by the thermal decomposition of the H2IrCl6 and Mn(NO3)2 mixture.319 The coating composition, preparation temperature, and reaction potential were explored in detail with respect to the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The Ti/IrO2(0.7) β MnO2(0.3) presented two distinct linear regions in the Tafel lines, in which one of the slopes was close to 62 mV dec−1 in the low potential region and the other was close to 135 mV dec−1 in the high potential region.320
 Fig. 20  HRTEM images of (a) pure IrO2 NPs. (b–f) Of IrO2@Mn-1, IrO2@Mn-2, IrO2@Mn-3, IrO2@Mn-4, and IrO2@Mn-5, respectively. (g) The electrochemically active surface area (ECSAs) variation trend under different compositional IrO2@α-MnO2. (h) OER polarization curves of the prepared catalyst. The inset is the required overpotential to achieve 10 mA cm−2. All measurements were performed in 0.1 M HClO4 under a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The iR loss from the solution resistance was corrected. The catalyst loading mass was ∼0.2 mg cm−2 and the electrode area was 0.25 cm−2. (i) Nyquist plots of prerecorded catalysts at 1.25 V vs. SCE. (j) The variation trend of turnover frequency (TOF) at different compositions. All currents were selected at the overpotential of 323 mV, which corresponded to IrO2 with a 10 mA cm−2 overpotential. (k) k2-normalized Ir-LIII edge EXAFS of IrO2@Mn-5 and IrO2. Phase corrections were applied, and the k-range was 2–14 Å. The different scattering paths are indicated in a crystal structure diagram of the IrO2 unit cell. (l) The c/a ratio variation with IrO2 mass fraction. The cell parameters were extracted from the IFEFFIT fitting. (m) Relationship between The OER activity and the lattice strain of IrO2. The OER activity is expressed by the intrinsic TOF. (n) Diagram of the process of α-MnO2 substrate induces the lattice strain of IrO2. The lattice mismatch at their interface results in the modifications of the crystal structure, which exhibited a compression in the c-axis; these modifications are responsible for the variations of the c/a ratio of IrO2 on the α-MnO2. It also meant that the IrO6 geometry transferred from the D2h symmetry to a relatively elongated structure. Reproduced with permission.317 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 


7.3.3. MnO2/non-metallic composites. 
MnO2@mpg-C3N4 3D-hierarchical heterostructures were rationally designed by growing MnO2 nanowires on a mesoporous carbon nitride.321 The overpotential and Tafel slope were lowered down compared to those of the MnO2 nanowires. The MnO2/monolayer g-C3N4 with Mn vacancies was constructed for the overall Z-scheme water splitting through the in situ embedding of MnO2 nanoflower into the monolayer g-C3N4 matrix.322 The promoted H2O adsorption and Z-scheme charge transfer contributed to the overall excellent water splitting, which was induced by partially defective Mn3+ active sites in the obtained composite. Carbon-quantum-dots-embedded MnO2 nanoflowere were successfully prepared through microwave-assisted hydrothermal incorporation.323 The resultant CDs-MnO2 was endowed with high surface areas, enhanced conductivity, as well as fast charge transfer pathways. Thus, it showed greatly promoted the electrocatalytic activity for OER with high stability. Remarkably, the optimal CDs0.15–MnO2 afforded the overpotential of only 343 mV and the Tafel slope of 43.6 mV dec−1 at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Furthermore, δ-MnO2 spontaneously coated on the oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes were synthesized by simple immersion of the o-MWCNTs into the KMnO4 solution. The enhanced water oxidation catalyst was attributed to the core–shell structure, in which the outer region was catalytic MnO2 and the inner region was highly conductive o-MWCNTs.324 FeC/MnO2 composites were synthesized with a 1/1 ratio of Fe/Mn precursor at the pyrolysis temperature of 800 °C (Fig. 21a–h).98 The current density of FeC/MnO2 was better than that of the ruthenium dioxide catalyst (Fig. 21i–o).
 Fig. 21  (a) SEM images of FeMn-MOF; (b and c) Low and high magnification SEM images of FeC/MnO2 nanocubes; (d and e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of FeC/MnO2 nanocubes; (g) EDX elemental mapping images of Fe, Mn, C, and O for FeC/MnO2 nanocubes. (h) Schematic figure illustrating the synthesis process of the FeC/MnO2 catalyst. OER electrochemical measurements. (i) LSV, (j) onset potential, (k) Tafel curves, and (l) EIS Nyquist plots of FeC/MnO2 and compared samples in 1 M KOH for OER with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 at a room temperature. (m) The current density as a function of the scan rate for different as-obtained catalysts. (n) Time-dependent current density curves over the FeC/MnO2 during electrolysis at 10 mA cm−2. (o) Illustrative scheme of the electron transport path in the OER reaction. Reproduced with permission.98 © 2021 Elsevier Ltd and Techna Group S.r.l. All rights reserved. 


7.3.4. MnO2/metal/non-metallic multicomponent composites. 
MnO2–CoP3 nanowire arrays were developed on Ti mesh as an efficient OER electrocatalyst.325 The prepared MnO2–CoP3/Ti demanded only 288 mV up to 10 mA cm−2, which was lower than that of MnO2/Ti with good electrochemical durability. Amorphous mixed-metal oxyhydroxides on ultrathin MnO2 nanosheet arrays were designed for efficient electrocatalytic oxygen evolution by surface-guided strategy.326 The fabricated unique ammo@MnO2/NF showed improved OER catalytic performance. The overpotential required only 232 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2, much smaller than 307 mV shown by Ni–MnO2 nanosheet arrays with high stability (Fig. 22). Active amorphous catalyst layers and efficient charge transport collectively contributed to the greatly improved catalyst activity. The Ni/DMTD/MnO2 catalyst was obtained by simply mixing MnO2 NWs, Ni2+, and DMTD (1,3,4-thiadiazole-2,5-dithiol).327 The synergistic effect of MnO2 NWs and Ni/DMTD, and the subsistent pyridine N and Ni3+ could facilitate the performance of OER activity in an alkaline solution. The overpotential of 0.262 V was achieved at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with durability and the Tafel slope reached 69.46 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH. The core–shell structural mesoporous NiO/MnO2@PANI materials were reported to be excellent electrocatalysts (Fig. 23a–e). NiO/MnO2@PANI offered a low overpotential of 345 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for OER, which was comparable to the state-of-the-art Ir catalysts (Fig. 23g–j).328 The outstanding electrocatalytic activity is mainly ascribed to the accessible mesoporous structure, high surface area, and good electrical conductivity of PANI, as well as the synergistic effect of the specific core–shell structure.
 Fig. 22  (a) iR-corrected LSV polarization curves of NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2 electrodes, (b) Overpotentials required for j = 10, 50, 100 mA cm−2 of the tested electrodes, (c) Tafel plots of NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2 electrodes, (d) Chronopotentiometric measurement on ammo@MnO2 for OER at the current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2, (e) capacitive current density versus the scan rate for NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2, and (f) EIS Nyquist plots of NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2 electrodes under the overpotential of 315 and 365 mV for OER. All tests were carried out in 1 m KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.326 © 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 23  TEM images for (a) NiO/MnO2 and (b) NiO/MnO2@PANI. (b1) SAED pattern, and (b2) HRTEM image for NiO/MnO2@PANI. HAADF-STEM images for (a1) NiO/MnO2 and (b3) NiO/MnO2@PANI. EDX elemental mapping images for (a2–4) NiO/MnO2 and (b4–8) NiO/MnO2@PANI. SEM images of (c) γ-MnO2, (d) NiO/MnO2, and (e) NiO/MnO2@PANI. Insets are the low-magnification images of the selected area. OER properties of different catalysts were measured in 0.1 M KOH solution at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (g) LSV curves (scan rate of 10 mV s−1). (h) Tafel slopes calculated from LSV curves. (i) Nyquist plots obtained from EIS measurements at a potential of 1.71 V (vs. RHE) under a frequency range of 0.1–105 Hz. (j) Chronopotentiometry curves for NiO/MnO2 and NiO/MnO2@PANI. Reproduced with permission.328 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Ternary MnO2/NiCo2O4/nickel foam (NF) was fabricated by the hydrothermal method as an efficient electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction.329 The excellent conductivity of the supported NF skeleton enhanced intrinsic activity with the hierarchical structure and synergistic interactions of the vertically-aligned MnO2/NiCo2O4 nanoflakes covering the surface of the NF-facilitated excellent electrocatalysts for OER. The overpotential achieved was 340 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, lower than that of the non-vertical MnO2/NiCo2O4/NF sample. The Pd–MnO2/CS three-dimensional structure was prepared from urchin-like α-MnO2 nanorods deposited on the carbon spheres and Pd particles vertically aligned on the α-MnO2 shell.330 The obtained Pd–MnO2/CS demonstrated better activity and stability compared to MnO2/CS and Pd/CS as a superior catalyst in OER. Fe–Mn–O hybrid nanosheets were synthesized via a facile reflux reaction and subsequent calcination (Fig. 24a–i).331 It showed enhanced OER catalytic ability compared to individual FeOOH and MnO2. The onset potential was lower, up to 1.46 V and the Tafel slope was small at 63.9 mV dec−1. It afforded a low overpotential of 273 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 25a–d). The superior OER performance could be attributed to the low-crystallinity atomically-thin nanosheet structure at only ≈1.4 nm, exposing plentiful reactive sites and ensuring efficient interaction with electrolytes, superior charge transport ability, and enhanced intrinsic catalytic activity. MnO2/graphene/carbon nanotubes were fabricated by a facile one-pot reaction process, which was applied as the efficient bifunctional oxygen catalysts.332 The synergistic effects between MnO2 nanorods and graphene and hybrid carbon matrix, consisting of the CNT matrix and graphene, provided a large surface area and improved the conductivity. These accelerated superior stability and surprisingly excellent bifunctional oxygen electrode activity was comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. Ji et al.333 carried out a study of nanoporous cerium oxide nanowire arrays on titanium grids (NP–CeO2/TM) derived by acid etching from MnO2–CeO2/TM, where MnO2 was selectively etched by oxalic acid as a pore-forming agent. Np–CeO2/TM showed good stability, attributed to NP's strong electron transport capacity, as well as larger surface area and more exposed catalytic sites of the nanoporous structure.
 Fig. 24  XRD patterns of the as-achieved single FeOOH, MnO2, and Fe–Mn–O NSs (a). SEM images of Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC at different magnifications (b and c). TEM and HRTEM images of Fe–Mn–O NSs (d–f), and (f) is the magnified image of the white square area in (e). EDX elemental maps of the as-synthesized Fe–Mn–O nanosheets (g). AFM image (h) and the corresponding height profiles (i) of Fe–Mn–O nanosheets (the numbers 1, 2, and 3 correspond to the line scan number in (e)). Reproduced with permission.331 © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 25  Polarization curves for CC, RuO2/CC, single FeOOH/CC, MnO2/CC, and Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC electrode (iR corrected) in 1 m KOH at 5 mV s−1 (a); the onset potential and overpotential (η) of the as-prepared electrodes at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 (b); the corresponding Tafel plots (c); stability test of the Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC electrode in a KOH solution (1 m) before and after 2500 cycles (d). The inset image shows the chronopotentiometric curve (voltage vs. time) for the hybrid electrode at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.331 © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The combination of Co3O4 and MnO2 nanotubes effectively enhanced the cyclic stability and reduced the charging potential. Han et al.60 prepared porous Co3O4@MnO2/Ni nanomaterials by the hydrothermal method. At low charge/discharge voltages of 300 mA g−1 and 0.76 V, the catalyst exhibited a durable cycle lifetime of 170 cycles. Kim et al.66 selectively electrodeposited Co3O4 and MnO2 onto three-dimensional porous NiF through a simple agarose gel-mediated method, in an attempt to prepare MnO2–Co3O4 electrode with little physical interference to catalytic function. The new structure improved the catalytic activity of OER and ORR compared to the pure metal oxide electrodes. The MnO2–Co3O4 electrodes showed excellent stability and cycling performance even at 100 cycles. Du et al.61 prepared MnO2/Co3O4 catalyst by a two-step hydrothermal method as a new air electrode material. Co3O4 nanoparticles were uniformly coated on the surface of the MnO2 nanotubes. Lee and colleagues334 prepared MnO2-coated hexagonal Co3O4 nanosheets as bifunctional catalysts. Like the MnO2/Co3O4 catalyst, spatially-controlled NiCo2O4@MnO2 core–shell nanoarrays with hollow NiCo2O4 cores and MnO2 flake shells are also prepared as an efficient catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction.335 Xiong et al.325 constructed MnO2–CoP3 nanowire arrays on Ti (MnO2–COP3/Ti) as an efficient electrocatalyst with good stability (Fig. 26a–f). The overpotential of the MnO2–COP3/Ti composite was 288 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which was superior to that of MnO2/Ti (408 mV) and CoP3/Ti (322 mV) (Fig. 26g–k). The excellent performance was attributed to the enhanced conductivity of MnO2 combined with CoP3/Ti and the synergistic effect. Ultrathin CoNi-sulfide nanosheet array-anchored MnO2 nanoparticles (U–CoNi–S-NSA/MnO2) were prepared by a spontaneous redox reaction between the CoNi-sulfide nanosheet and MnO4− at room temperature.336 Compared with other electrocatalysts, U–CoNi–S-NSA/MnO2 exhibited higher OER activity and higher current density at each potential. This may be attributed to the abundance of active centers in the U–CoNi–S-NSA/MnO2 catalyst on the ultrathin nanosheets and MnO2 NPs, as well as, the rapid electron transfer in the layered nanostructures.
 Fig. 26  (a) XRD pattern of MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (b) SEM images of MnO2/Ti. (c) SEM images of MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (d) TEM image of MnO2–CoP3. (e) HRTEM image of MnO2–CoP3. (f) Elemental mapping images for MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (g) LSV curves for MnO2–CoP3/Ti, MnO2/Ti, CoP3/Ti, RuO2/Ti, and bare Ti mesh. (h) Tafel plots for MnO2–CoP3/Ti, MnO2/Ti, RuO2/Ti, and CoP3/Ti. (i) Time dependence of the potential at 0.88 V without iR correction. (j) Capacitive current densities at 1.10 V as a function of scan rate for MnO2/Ti and MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (k) Nyquist plots for MnO2/Ti and MnO2–CoP3/Ti at 0.798 V without the iR correction. All the experiments were conducted in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.325 © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Nickel–iron embedded K0.23MnO2 cubic nanoflowers (NiFeK0.23MnO2 CNFs) were prepared by the hydrothermal reaction (Fig. 27a–l).62 Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 showed the best OER activity with an overpotential of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which was better than Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs (302 mV), K0.23MnO2 NS (355 mV) and IrO2 (297 mV). Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 showed the best OER catalytic kinetics due to the large number of exposed surfaces, the abundance of oxygen vacancies, and the synergistic effect of nickel and iron (Fig. 27m–x). NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 was prepared by a simple two-step hydrothermal conversion method (Fig. 28a–i).63 NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 perfectly integrated and optimized the advantages of multilayer Ni3S2 and MnO2, and achieved the fast kinetics and excellent performance required for the overall water decomposition in alkaline media (Fig. 28j–m). This excellent electrocatalytic performance was due to the effective adsorption and cleavage of H2O molecules on the catalyst surface caused by the highly exposed fractional heterogeneous interface (Fig. 28n–q).
 Fig. 27  (a) XRD patterns of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300, Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs, and K0.23MnO2 NS. (b and c) FESEM, (d) TEM, and (e–f) HRTEM images of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300. (h–k) Elemental mapping images of Mn, Ni, Fe, and O for the single Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 in (g). (l) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300. (m) LSV curves, (n) the onset potentials and overpotentials, and (o) the corresponding Tafel plots of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300, Ni–Fe– K0.23MnO2 CNFs, K0.23MnO2 NS, and IrO2 toward OER. (p) LSV curves initially and after 3000 cycles of CVs, and (q) chronopotentiometric curves of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 for OER. (r) Nyquist plots of the three catalysts. Top views of the (001) planes for (s) K0.23MnO2 model and (t) Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 model. (u) DOS of the two models. (w) The charge density distribution difference between the two models; the yellow and blue spheres represent positive and negative charges, respectively. Reaction coordinates of the two models for (w) OER and (x) HER. The insets in (u) show the adsorption models of OH*, O*, and OOH* on the oxygen vacancy sites for OER, and the insets in (f) show the adsorption model of H* on the O site for HER. The purple, green, orange, red, and gray spheres represent the Mn, Ni, Fe, O, and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.62 © 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2. (b–d) SEM images of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2. (e–g) TEM images, (h) AFM images, and (i) TEM mapping of the fabricated NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 heterogeneous array. (j–k) CV curves and Tafel plots of NF, NF–Ni3S2, NF–Ni(OH)2/MnO2, NF–Ni3S2/MnO2, and NF–IrO2/C for OER in 1.0 M KOH. (l) Polarization curves of NF, NFNi3S2, NF–Ni(OH)2/MnO2, NF–Ni3S2/MnO2, and NF–IrO2/C for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. (m) Long-term durability test of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 at 1.6 V for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. Inside: SEM image of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 after 48 h hydrolytic dissociation. (n) Schematic illustration of water activation, H* intermediate formation, and hydrogen generation processes on the NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 hybrid catalyst in 1.0 M KOH. (o) Schematic illustration of OH− activation, OH*/O*/OOH* generation and oxygen formation processes on NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 hybrid catalyst in 1.0 M KOH. (p and q) Calculated reaction energy diagram at different stages of H2O dissociation toward H2 and O2 generation in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.63 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
In summary, the applications of MnO2 engineered MnO2 and its derivative composites for OER applications are comprehensively introduced in Table 1. The table shows extensively the synthesis methods, morphologies, and their derived composites for some types of MnO2. Meanwhile, the effects of the composites, structure, and morphology of MnO2 on the OER properties are extensively presented.337–340
Table 1 Summary of preparation methods and OER catalytic performances of MnO2-based catalysts




Catalysts
Synthetic method
Overpotential (V)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Ca (mF cm−2)
Loading amount (mg cm−2)
Electrolyte/aq
Ref.




α-MnO2-SF
Redox reaction
0.489
77.5




0.1 M KOH

276



α-MnO2 nanorods
Hydrothermal method
0.45
73.1
3.225
0.40
1.0 M KOH

277



Mesoporous MnOx
Solvothermal method
0.427
120
112
1.00
1.0 M KOH

278



α-MnO2 nanowires
Hydrothermal method


110


0.14
0.1 M KOH

279



α-MnO2 nanostructures
Hydrothermal method
0.37
58


0.275
0.1 M KOH

280



3D radial α-MnO2
Hydrothermal method
0.09
155
9.07
0.038
0.1 M KOH

281



β-MnO2 nanoplates
Solution route
0.45
78.2


0.40
1.0 M KOH

282



β-MnO2(KTT-6)
Hard template-derived
0.61
60
119.5
0.204
0.1 M KOH

283



Cryptomelane-type MnO2
Thermal treatments
0.44
49.8
3.1 ± 0.10
0.21
0.1 M KOH

289



δ-MnO2 naosheets
In situ method
0.32
40


1.59
1.0 M KOH

139



δ/NH3–MnO2
Hydrothermal method
0.49
118
0.488
1.00
1.0 M NaOH

290



Ni intercalated birnessite
Wet chemical ion exchange
0.40
60
2.62
0.28
1.0 M KOH

291



Ni–MnO2
Cation exchange
0.33
23.7
15.8


1.0 M KOH

93



Co doped birnessite
Hydrothermal method
0.42
81


0.28
1.0 M KOH

293



Co-doped MnO2/N–CNF
Spontaneous redox reaction
0.279
75
15.9
0.56
1.0 M KOH

295



Co/MnO2
Electrodeposition
0.40
60




1.0 M KOH

296



α-Mn0.9V/CO0.1O2
Hydrothermal method
0.46
120


0.67
1.0 M KOH

297



MnO2-7.6%CO
Hydrothermal method


57


0.2
1.0 M KOH

300



KXFe[CO0.16Mn0.84O2]
Intercalation
0.375
56


1.0
1.0 M KOH

301



Doped MnO2/CFP
Electrodeposition
0.39
104
11.3


1.0 M KOH

302



Ni–MnO2 nanosheets
Heating reflux
0.33
23.7
15.8
0.4
1.0 M KOH

303



Au–MnO2 hybrid catalysts
Hydrothermal method
0.32
68


4.0
1.0 M NaOH

308



Ti-stabilized MnO2
Reactive sputter deposition
0.4
170




0.05 M H2SO4

310



Co3O4/MnO2
Hydrothermal method


34


0.1
0.1 M KOH

61



IrO2@α-MnO2
Hydrothermal method
0.275
59


0.2
0.05 M H2SO4

311



CDs0.15-MnO2 catalyst
Microwave-assisted method
0.343
43.6
11.9
0.3
1.0 M KOH

317



MnO2–CoP3/Ti
Hydrothermal method
0.288
65
0.091


1.0 M KOH

319



ammo@MnO2
Galvanic replacement
0.232
36
2.93


1.0 M KOH

320



MnO2–NiFe/Ni
Electrodeposition
0.226
251.3




1.0 M KOH

49



Ni/DMTD/MnO2
Hydrothermal method
0.26
69.46


0.0796
1.0 M KOH

321



NiO/MnO2@PANI
Hydrothermal method
0.75
42


0.245
0.1 M KOH

322



MnO2/NiCo2O4/NF
Hydrothermal method
0.34
139
105


1.0 M KOH

323



Fe–Mn–O NS/CC
Heating reflux
0.273
63.9
116.3


1.0 M KOH

324



Pd–MnO2/CS
Hydrothermal method




52.8
0.1
0.1 M KOH

64



Np-CeO2/TM
Acid etching
0.279
47
0.74
1.9
1.0 M KOH

326



U–CoNi–S-NSA/MnO2
Spontaneous redox process
0.17
67
21.7
1.0
1.0 M KOH

328



Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs
Hydrothermal method
0.27
42.3
122.8
2.0
1.0 M KOH

62



NF–Ni3S2/MnO2
Hydrothermal method
0.26
61
118.3


1.0 M KOH

63



NiCo2O4@MnO2
Hydrothermal method
0.337
89
0.141
0.6
1.0 M KOH

329



(P–PbO2)–MnO2
Electrodeposition
0.476
196




1.63 M H2SO4

330



MnO2–CoFe2O4/C
Hydrothermal method


130


0.455
0.1 M KOH

331



Co3O4–MnO2-CNT
Gas-phase synthesis
0.42
66


0.233
0.1 M KOH

332







7.3.5. The uniqueness of MnO2 electrocatalyst compared with other OER materials. 
Current OER electrocatalysts at the industrial level are highly dependent on noble metal catalysts, mainly iridium (Ir) and ruthenium (Ru) based catalysts, especially under acidic conditions. However, the high cost, low crustal reserves, and relatively poor stability of noble metal OER electrocatalysts have hindered their large-scale commercialisation. This provides a strong incentive to promote research into non-precious metal-based OER electrocatalysts. Overall, the stable operation of non-precious metal-based electrocatalysts in acidic media is a great challenge.340–345 Fortunately, some non-precious metal-based OER electrocatalysts, such as manganese oxides, earth-rich metal phosphates, and borates, have recently been reported to be able to catalyse OER under neutral, acidic, and basic conditions and to be comparable to noble metal-based electrocatalysts. Non-precious metal base metals and alloys often need to be stabilised by a host (e.g. carbon materials) or saturated with highly electronegative elements as they cannot survive directly in harsh acidic and alkaline media.345 A great deal of research work has been devoted to investigating the OER activity of metal oxide catalysts containing transition metals, and various metal oxide families such as chalcocite, spinel, and layer structure type families that exhibit significant activity towards OER.342 These transition metal-based oxides are low-cost, easy to synthesise, and environmentally benign.344 In addition, they are stable in alkaline solutions and show moderate conductivity, which makes them good candidates for electrocatalytic OER. For example, spinel-like compounds have good electrical conductivity and high anodic potential in alkaline solutions and can be used as electrocatalysts for OER. Most spinel oxides used for OER are iron-based (ferrite) and cobalt-based compounds doped with other transition metals/alkali metals such as Mn, Ni, Cu, Zn, and Li. In various studies, spinel bimetallic oxides have been shown to have better OER activity than monometallic spinel oxides, suggesting that the different metal ions in spinel metal oxides may play different roles. Furthermore, transition metal oxide catalysts can structurally possess a rich combination of transition metals, especially chalcogenide and spinel-type structures, as the transition metals can have different oxidation states and coordination environments, which leads to a fully tunable OER behaviour. Furthermore, compounds belonging to the family of layered structure types have been extensively studied due to their incredibly high OER activity. Among other things, doping is an effective way to promote the OER activity of compounds in this family. In addition to these three families of compounds, other metal oxides also have good OER activity, some of which are formed in situ and are suitable for OER in neutral electrolytes. Various efforts and systematic studies based on these metal oxides have provided insightful observations that contribute to the understanding of the underlying mechanisms of OER. However, the disadvantage of metal oxide electrocatalysts is usually their poor electrical conductivity. On the other hand, non-oxide catalysts such as metal-sulfide compounds, metal-nickel-based compounds as well as organometallics (metal coordination complexes) have also been reported as promising electrocatalytic materials for OER and may be good candidates for overall hydrolysis reactions. However, in contrast to metal oxide catalysts for electrocatalytic OER, non-oxide catalysts for OER have only recently been reported in small quantities. Metal sulphide compounds show good OER activity in alkaline electrolytes with low overpotentials and good long-term stability. In the case of metal-sulphur compounds, their OER overpotential is usually slightly higher than that of metal-sulphur compounds. Organometallic compounds are suitable for studying the mechanism of OER because of their tunable molecular/electronic structures.343 However, their low electrocatalytic activity towards OER usually hinders their development in practice. By dispersing organometallics on specific substrates (graphene or reduced graphene oxide), researchers can greatly improve their corresponding activity. In addition to these metal-based electrocatalysts, a number of non-metallic carbon-based electrocatalysts have also been investigated for OER with moderate OER activity. Carbon-based materials such as carbon black, carbon nanotubes, and graphene doped with N, O, and S are good conductors, chemically inert to acidic and basic electrolytes, and are used for OER activity.
Among these non-precious metal catalysts, manganese dioxide (MnO2) has received increasing attention due to its high earth abundance, low cost, balanced activity stability, high oxygen storage capacity, rich redox chemistry, self-healing properties, and high surface area utilisation. Manganese dioxide (MnO2) with different crystal structures (α-, β-, γ-, σ- and λ-MnO2) and nanostructures (nanorods, nanowires, nanosheets, nanotubes, etc.), were identified as the active centre for Mn3+ intermediates in MnO2 as an OER catalyst over the entire pH range. Strategies such as heteroatom doping, morphology tuning, heterostructure formation, conductor support, defect engineering, and valence modulation were employed to effectively optimise the catalytic performance of MnO2.15,39,41
In brief, an efficient electrocatalyst should be a good conductor and have moderate adsorption energy on the surface of the electrocatalyst for oxygen intermediates such as hydrogen peroxide and superoxide (the binding energy for these oxygen intermediates is neither strong nor weak). In addition, a good redox (ability to lose or gain electrons) centre may be an effective electrocatalyst and a highly active site would be required for catalytic ability. Furthermore, it is important for the electrocatalyst to be resistant to electrolyte corrosion, especially at high anodic potentials (i.e., no phase change) or where the transition phase is stable and does not dissolve in the electrolyte. Based on these criteria, several key strategies can be developed to design a good OER electrocatalyst. Firstly, the conductivity of the electrocatalyst must be very high. The conductivity of the electrocatalyst is important because one of the duties of the electrocatalyst is to transfer carriers from the metal electrode to the adsorbed intermediate. The introduction of exogenous elements, mixing with conductive materials, and changing the morphology have great potential to improve the conductivity of electrocatalysts, not only in terms of conductivity but also in other ways to improve the catalytic ability. Secondly, the electrocatalyst should be able to withstand redox reactions at high anode potentials in the electrolyte without phase degradation. This is due to the fact that during OER these electrocatalysts may transform into other phases and dissolve in the electrolyte or be gradually stripped from the electrode during OER. The addition of other elements to the electrocatalyst in order to improve the stability of the electrocatalyst is a good strategy for extending the electrocatalyst's lifetime. In addition, the decay of OER electrocatalysts can be attributed to phase changes that result in the newly formed phase falling off the electrocatalyst (due to lattice mismatch). In such cases, a buffer layer can be deposited between the electrolyte and the electrocatalyst to minimise the problem of exfoliation of the newly formed phase to enhance its OER durability.


7.3.6. Suggestion of the large-scale preparation with high consistency for Mn dioxide-based catalysts. 
Currently, the important challenge for Mn dioxide-based catalysts is the large-scale preparation with high consistency. In various synthetic strategies, manganese dioxide nanoparticles synthesised by hydrothermal methods have high purity and good dispersion, making it easy to obtain nanoparticles with controlled morphology. The process is also simpler and less costly, so the common method for preparing nanostructured materials is now hydrothermal. Examples can be synthesised including but not limited to nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nano-urchins, and nanotubes. This method is widely used and can be applied to the preparation of different nanostructured materials, but the process requires attention to the reaction conditions: choosing the right reaction temperature, time, active filler, and solvent. For example, the addition of surfactants can reduce agglomeration and improve dispersion, and when polymers are used, the cross-linked structure of the polymers can lead to products with a special shape. The surfactant-added manganese dioxide nanoparticles have a large specific surface area and form special bonds between the manganese ions and the surfactant, resulting in growth in specific directions. In order to better control the morphology, phase, and size distribution of the products and to prepare MnO2 quickly and efficiently, scientists have used a combination of hydrothermal and other synthetic methods such as microwave methods. For example, Chen et al.69 used microwave hydrothermal methods to prepare MnO2 in different morphologies and crystalline forms in aqueous systems of manganese chloride and potassium permanganate, which resulted in better crystallinity and better electrochemical properties of the MnO2 active material than those prepared using the single microwave and hydrothermal methods, by significantly reducing the reaction time. To meet the needs of complex structures such as hollow structures, the products of the substrate-free redox methods are hydrothermally synthesised and adjusted by crystal production to produce more precisely controlled structures, sizes, and dimensions. Additionally, inspired by natural methods, a large number of natural microorganisms can be used to synthesise a wide range of metal nanoparticles, including intracellular and extracellular preparation strategies.346–348 Biological methods using microorganisms offer advantages over traditional chemical synthesis methods in terms of ease of synthesis, biocompatibility, and environmental friendliness. Microbial synthesis of MnO2 systemic structures usually involves reacting the residue of the microbial medium with the Mn precursor solution, as the microbial medium supernatant contains components with reducing ability. For example, washed brewer's yeast cell precipitates showed the ability to synthesise MnO2 nanoparticles involving various proteins and cell wall components.349 The results demonstrate that the synthesis of MnO2 nanostructures is due to the self-assembly and tight stacking of MnO2 spheres at the nanoscale. In conclusion, due to its eco-friendly nature, this innovative biosynthesis will undoubtedly open new opportunities for the extraordinary diversity of assembly modes to flourish.104

8. Summary and prospect
Exploring efficient and inexpensive oxygen catalysts is at the heart of one of the most crucial energy storage and conversion technologies. MnO2 is one of the most promising catalytic materials for water decomposition due to its unique properties. Encouraging breakthroughs have been made over the past decade. This review provides systematic guidance on the common preparation methods and modifications of MnO2. Meanwhile, it also offers an overview summary of the applications in OER catalysts.
Although abundant synthetic methods and regulatory strategies have been proposed for MnO2-based materials, the catalytic performance in the interrelated oxygen evolution reactions has been boosted. It is recognized that MnO2-based materials are still in their infancy for catalytic applications. Therefore, there is still plenty of challenge and space for a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms and further efficiency improvements in OER catalysts.
(1) Morphological design and polymorph control bring advantages to MnO2 materials such as augmenting specific surface areas, facilitating the surface defects and oxygen vacancies, accelerating mass transport, and facilitating charge motion. Although various morphologies and crystal structures have been developed for OER catalytic activity enhancement in MnO2 materials, mechanical stability is still lacking. Structural collapse results in poor catalytic performance in high-temperature or humidity environments. Therefore, more attention should be given to improving the stability of MnO2 under extreme conditions. The relationship between morphological and crystal structure diversity and catalytic activity of MnO2 is in urgent need of elucidation. The generated Mn3+ by the produced surface intermediates during the OER process is unstable in acidic solutions and undergoes self-disproportionation reactions to form Mn2+ and Mn4+. Mn2+ may dissolve in the electrolyte before oxidising back to Mn3+, which accounts for its instability in acidic electrolytes. Under alkaline conditions (pH > 9), this self-disproportionation reaction is inhibited due to the higher stability of Mn3+, resulting in a better OER electrocatalytic capacity for the application of δ-MnO2 in alkaline solutions (higher specific genus of Mn3+).
Although a variety of superior morphologies and advanced structures have been developed to improve the catalytic efficiency of MnO2 materials, their mechanical and thermal stability remains inadequate. During the adsorption and catalytic reactions (especially at high temperatures or high humidity), these advanced structures may undergo a certain degree of collapse, leading to a reduction in the specific surface area, a decrease in the number of exposed active sites, and ultimately an inability to adequately maintain high catalytic efficiency or even become inactivated. Although some are promising, strategies have been proposed to improve the mechanical and thermal stability of MnO2 nanostructures, such as adding a protective shell to the catalyst, but they have not been explored enough. In view of this, new strategies need to be explored to obtain better structures with superior mechanical and thermal stability. In future research, we should pay more attention to the latest reported strategies and techniques to improve the stability of MnO2 nanostructures using emerging technologies and methods. The instability of manganese dioxide-based catalysts consists of two main categories: material instability and reaction instability. Material instability is independent of the test conditions and is usually related to material corrosion. For manganese dioxide-based catalysts, material stability can be improved by compositional adjustments, elemental substitution/doping, and new stable structural innovations. To improve the mechanical and thermal stability of MnO2 nanostructures, several strategies have been proposed, such as the addition of a protective shell to the catalyst. Core–shell structured materials formed by encapsulating the manganese dioxide catalyst with part or all of the carbon shell provide stability and performance advantages due to the protective and conductive nature of the carbon shell layer. A highly graphitised carbon shell contributes to the stability of the material, manganese dioxide-based core–shell structured material catalysts. The degradation of the activity of this catalyst is closely related to the interaction between the carbon shell and the metal core. However, the increase in the current corresponding to the reduction of manganese dioxide during the potential cycling clearly shows the loss of the carbon shell and the exposure of the inner core. In this case, the loss of carbon is considered to be the main mechanism of catalyst degradation, since once the carbon shell is partially or completely removed, the manganese dioxide core of the catalyst can no longer be protected under the harsh OER conditions. The degraded core may weaken the interaction between the core and the carbon shell, thus hindering the modification of the electronic structure and reducing the inherent activity of the carbon shell. Additionally, MnO2 nanoparticles deposited on conductive carriers, such as carbon materials and nickel foam, can further enhance their activity and stability at different pH ranges (pH 1–14) and catalytic activity. Operational instability arises from the processes affecting the stability of the manganese dioxide-based catalysts during electrochemical testing, often arising from potentially-induced elemental dissolution and/or structural/phase evolution. A lower operational (anodic) potential is a possible way to mitigate catalyst degradation as it significantly prevents the catalyst from being exposed to higher anodic potentials. However, this requires a significant increase in OER activity, and therefore, high-activity OER catalysts should be developed to exceed the baseline catalyst and meet the requirements of high current densities at lower operating voltages.
(2) MnO2 with different crystallographic facets present divergent catalytic properties. The exposed facets are dominated by reaction conditions such as reaction temperature, time, concentration pH, and cations. However, the specified and precise exposed facets are still difficult to obtain in a controlled synthesis process. Thus, systematically studying different crystal facets and seeking efficient ways to synthesize specific facets is a great challenge. In addition, each facet of MnO2 is needed to verify its special functions.
(3) Doping is an effective means to modify the intrinsic properties of MnO2, affecting the crystal structure, morphology, chemical bond strength, and electronic structure. This reduces the formation energy of oxygen vacancies and thus facilitates oxygen mobility. The above-mentioned properties favor the OER catalytic properties of MnO2. Although great efforts have been made in doped MnO2, a systematic study of anionic doping is still lacking. Moreover, a deeper understanding of the dopant sites is needed for the interpretation of the effect of doping on MnO2 catalysts.
(4) Homojunction structures have been shown to be an effective strategy for the design and preparation of MnO2-based composites and for improving the catalyst performance. Although the construction of MnO2-based homojunctions for OER applications has been explored somewhat, almost all reported MnO2-based homojunctions for OER applications at this stage are composed of MnO2 with different crystalline phases, while few MnO2-based homojunctions composed of different crystalline planes or different sizes have been reported. Therefore, it is necessary and valuable to carry out research in this area. In addition, the currently-reported MnO2-based homogeneous structures are relatively simple, with only core–shell structures reported between the two types of MnO2, which poses difficulties in further improving their specific surface area and interfacial active sites. In view of this, there is an urgent need to develop more advanced structures between the two MnO2 types, such as ultra-thin 2D/2D structures, yolk structures, and hollow cages.
(5) Coupling different materials with MnO2 can highlight the OER catalytic properties of MnO2. Various materials have been compounded with MnO2, such as metals, metal oxides, and carbon. It should broaden the scope of MnO2 composites. For example, phosphates and sulfides, and even polycompounds (like quaternary or five-element compounds) are worth exploring. In addition, more tractable, efficient, and cost-effective methods are expected to be developed to construct high-quality MnO2-based heterojunctions with improved performance.
(6) Nanosized MnO2 particles are prone to agglomeration due to their high surface energy. They also tend to float in the water and are difficult to separate. This results in poor catalytic stability and recycling of MnO2. MnO2-based materials remain a significant obstacle for large-scale practical applications for water decomposition. Continued efforts will be made in the future to improve catalytic stability and recovery by leveraging the latest reported strategies and technologies using emerging technologies and methodologies.
(7) Surface/interface modulation strategies can be effective in enhancing the catalytic activity in oxygen evolution reactions. However, there is still room to research the following methods and techniques: the direct observation and evaluation of active sites at the catalyst surface/interface, whether experimentally or using a theory, the synergistic catalytic mechanism between different components in multi-component catalysts, the in situ characterisation of the catalyst surface/interface composition, structure and catalytic interaction in real-time catalytic processes, and the large-scale preparation of high-performance catalysts.
(8) Defect engineering has become a common and popular strategy for the preparation of high-performance manganese dioxide-based electrocatalysts. However, the precise preparation of MnO2-based electrocatalysts with specific defect types remains a challenge. In addition, the currently reported MnO2 defective electrocatalyst materials are not yet sufficient for practical industrial production needs. Therefore, methods for the large-scale preparation of high-performance manganese dioxide defective catalysts must be further investigated and developed. In contrast, the role of defects in the catalytic process remains unclear. Although commonly used characterisation techniques are able to characterise defects in defect-based catalyst materials, the presence of defects inevitably alters the local electronic structure, leading to unsaturated coordination states and modulated reactivity. Therefore, how to maintain the stability or reconfiguration of the defect structure during the actual catalytic process needs further investigation. On the other hand, the synergistic interaction between multiple defects, the dynamic evolution of the structure, and the reaction mechanism of the adsorbed intermediates are still unclear and need to be further investigated in depth using advanced in situ characterisation techniques (satisfying both temporal and spatial resolution).
(9) The effect of the chemical valence of manganese (Mn3+ and Mn4+) in manganese dioxide-based electrocatalysts on the catalytic reaction is also controversial. Some researchers believe that the presence of Mn3+ plays a negative role as it leads to the instability of MnO2. They suggest that the antibonding eg1 electrons of Mn3+ (t2g3eg1) lead to longer and weaker Mn–O bonds than those of Mn4+. These weaker Mn–O bonds are more easily broken, leading to the instability of MnO2. Other researchers take the opposite view. They believe that the presence of Mn3+ plays a positive role, as it creates an electrostatic equilibrium leading to the formation of oxygen vacancies and promoting catalytic reactions. Therefore, the mechanism of the catalytic oxidation of oxygen vacancies on the MnO2 surface needs to be further investigated.
(10) Currently, most of the mechanism-related studies are limited to the distribution and morphology of the discharge products. However, the mechanisms associated with the specific growth processes of these discharge products on the electrode surface have not been investigated in depth on MnO2-based catalysts. An in-depth understanding of these mechanisms could help explore more suitable catalysts. Therefore, it is of great interest to conduct corresponding studies based on superior in situ characterisation techniques and theoretical calculations.
(11) The water-splitting process involves an anode OER and a cathode HER at a theoretical voltage of 1.23 V. Of these, the OER electrocatalyst should have excellent catalytic activity under alkaline conditions, while the HER electrocatalyst requires an acidic solution to achieve this. Several studies have been reported on the application of MnO2-based nanomaterials as bifunctional catalysts for the whole hydrolysis process. Therefore, it is crucial to explore MnO2-based nanomaterials that can effectively promote faster kinetics of two opposite reactions at the same pH environment.
Author contributions
Gaihua He and Ye Liao conceived the original concept. Gaihua He and Ye Liao designed the experiments. Gaihua He prepared the materials and performed most characterizations. Ye Liao carried out magnetic property measurements and analysis. Gaihua He plotted all figures and wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. Ye Liao revised and edited the manuscript. All authors engaged in the analysis of experimental results and manuscript edition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Supported by Program for the Basic Research Project of the Education Department of Liaoning Province (LJKQZ202114), the Liaoning Provincial Natural Science Foundation Project (2022-BS-317), the 2021 Youth Science and Technology Talents Support Plan from Boze Project of Jinzhou Medical University (JYBZQT204210006), the Entrepreneurship and Innovation Training Program For College Students (S202110160006), and the Introduction of Talent Start-up Fund (173211008), Liaoning Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Bioactive Substances and Technological Innovation Center of Liaoning Pharmaceutical Action and Quality Evaluation (2022-01).
References
N. Uddin, H. Zhang and Y. Du, 
            et al., Structural-phase catalytic redox reactions in energy and environmental applications, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(9), 1905739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. An, B. Joshi and A. L. Yarin, 
            et al., Supersonic cold spraying for energy and environmental applications: one-step scalable coating technology for advanced micro- and nanotextured materials, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(2), 1905028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, A. D. Dwivedi and W. N. Lee, 
            et al., Application of nanotechnologies for removing pharmaceutically active compounds from water: development and future trends, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5(1), 27–47 RSC .
G. H. Jeong, S. P. Sasikala and T. Yun, 
            et al., Nanoscale assembly of 2D materials for energy and environmental applications, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(35), 1907006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Yang, M. Gao and M. Hong, 
            et al., Visible-to-NIR photon harvesting: progressive engineering of catalysts for solar-powered environmental purification and fuel production, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(47), 1802894 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng and H. Xue, 
            et al., Metal-organic frameworks/graphene-based materials: preparations and applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(47), 1804950 CrossRef .
S. Zheng, X. Li and B. Yan, 
            et al., Transition-metal (Fe, Co, Ni) based metal-organic frameworks for electrochemical energy storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(18), 1602733 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Zhang and Y. Li, 
            et al., All-wood, low tortuosity, aqueous, biodegradable supercapacitors with ultra-high capacitance, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(2), 538–545 RSC .
C. S. Liu, J. Li and H. Pang, Metal-organic framework-based materials as an emerging platform for advanced electrochemical sensing, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 410, 213222 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, T. Zhao and T. Chen, 
            et al., Engineering noble metal nanomaterials for environmental applications, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(17), 7502–7519 RSC .
A. Corma and P. Serna, Chemoselective hydrogenation of nitro compounds with supported gold catalysts, Science, 2006, 313(5785), 332–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, M. Yang and C. Ke, 
            et al., Platinum-group-metal catalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells: From catalyst design to electrode structure optimization, EnergyChem, 2020, 2(1), 100023 CrossRef .
C. Wei, R. R. Rao and J. Peng, 
            et al., Recommended practices and benchmark activity for hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalysis in water splitting and fuel cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(31), 1806296 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Osgood, S. V. Devaguptapu and H. Xu, 
            et al., Transition metal (Fe, Co, Ni, and Mn) oxides for oxygen reduction and evolution bifunctional catalysts in alkaline media, Nano Today, 2016, 11(5), 601–625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, S. Zheng and S. Cao, 
            et al., Advances in the application of manganese dioxide and its composites as electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(36), 18492–18514 RSC .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin and W. Choi, 
            et al., Environmental applications of semiconductor photocatalysis, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95(1), 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, P. Liu and J. Jiang, 
            et al., Recent advances in nanostructured metal nitrides for water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(41), 19912–19933 RSC .
J. Chen, Q. Huang and H. Huang, 
            et al., Recent progress and advances in the environmental applications of MXene related materials, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(6), 3574–3592 RSC .
T. Di, Q. Xu and W. K. Ho, 
            et al., Review on metal sulphide-based Z-scheme photocatalysts, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11(5), 1394–1411 CrossRef CAS .
B. Balasubramaniam, N. Singh and P. Kar, 
            et al., Engineering of transition metal dichalcogenide-based 2D nanomaterials through doping for environmental applications, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2019, 4(4), 804–827 RSC .
S. Hao, L. Chen and C. Yu, 
            et al., NiCoMo hydroxide nanosheet arrays synthesized via chloride corrosion for overall water splitting, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(4), 952–959 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, J. Wang and X. Chen, 
            et al., Application of graphene-based materials in water purification: from the nanoscale to specific devices, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5(6), 1264–1297 RSC .
M. S. Mauter and M. Elimelech, Environmental applications of carbon-based nanomaterials, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42(16), 5843–5859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, X. Tan and Y. Liu, 
            et al., Biomass-derived porous graphitic carbon materials for energy and environmental applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(12), 5773–5811 RSC .
Z. Bo, S. Mao and Z. J. Han, 
            et al., Emerging energy and environmental applications of vertically-oriented graphenes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(8), 2108–2121 RSC .
S. Zhou, L. Zhou and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Upgrading earth-abundant biomass into three-dimensional carbon materials for energy and environmental applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(9), 4217–4229 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan and Y. H. Ng, 
            et al., Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)-based photocatalysts for artificial photosynthesis and environmental remediation: are we a step closer to achieving sustainability?, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(12), 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mon, R. Bruno and J. Ferrando-Soria, 
            et al., Metal–organic framework technologies for water remediation: towards a sustainable ecosystem, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(12), 4912–4947 RSC .
J. Meng, X. Liu and C. Niu, 
            et al., Advances in metal-organic framework coatings: versatile synthesis and broad applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49(10), 3142–3186 RSC .
C. Sanchez, P. Belleville and M. Popall, 
            et al., Applications of advanced hybrid organic–inorganic nanomaterials: from laboratory to market, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40(2), 696–753 RSC .
Q. L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Metal–organic framework composites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(16), 5468–5512 RSC .
J. Liu, L. Chen and H. Cui, 
            et al., Applications of metal–organic frameworks in heterogeneous supramolecular catalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(16), 6011–6061 RSC .
S. E. Lehman and S. C. Larsen, Zeolite and mesoporous silica nanomaterials: greener syntheses, environmental applications and biological toxicity, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2014, 1(3), 200–213 RSC .
E. Ruiz-Hitzky, P. Aranda and M. Darder, 
            et al., Hybrid materials based on clays for environmental and biomedical applications, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20(42), 9306–9321 RSC .
B. Biswas, L. N. Warr and E. F. Hilder, 
            et al., Biocompatible functionalisation of nanoclays for improved environmental remediation, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48(14), 3740–3770 RSC .
D. Yu, J. Yao and L. Qiu, 
            et al., In situ growth of Co3O4 nanoparticles on α-MnO2 nanotubes: a new hybrid for high-performance supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(22), 8465–8471 RSC .
M. M. Najafpour, M. Kompany-Zareh and A. Zahraei, 
            et al., Mechanism, decomposition pathway and new evidence for self-healing of manganese oxides as efficient water oxidizing catalysts: new insights, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42(40), 14603–14611 RSC .
W. Tang, M. Yao and Y. Deng, 
            et al., Decoration of one-dimensional MnO2 with Co3O4 nanoparticles: a heterogeneous interface for remarkably promoting catalytic oxidation activity, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 709–718 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, H. Miao and R. Hu, 
            et al., Manganese dioxides for oxygen electrocatalysis in energy conversion and storage systems over full pH range, J. Power Sources, 2021, 494, 229779 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hu, Y. Yao and Y. Cui, 
            et al., Strategies for the enhanced water splitting activity over
metal–organic frameworks-based electrocatalysts and photocatalysts, Mater. Today Nano, 2021, 15, 100124 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, Y. Fan and R. Ye, 
            et al., MnO2-based materials for environmental applications, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33(9), 2004862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Kumbhar, H. Lee and J. Lee, 
            et al., Recent advances in water-splitting electrocatalysts based on manganese oxide, Carbon Resour. Convers., 2019, 2(3), 242–255 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, C. Sun and D. Xue, Morphology engineering of high performance binary oxide electrodes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(2), 732–750 RSC .
Y. F. Li, S. C. Zhu and Z. P. Liu, Reaction network of layer-to-tunnel transition of MnO2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(16), 5371–5379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, T. Ayvazian and J. Kim, 
            et al., Mesoporous manganese oxide nanowires for high-capacity, high-rate, hybrid electrical energy storage, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(10), 8275–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, S. Yang and L. Wan, 
            et al., Electrodeposition of manganese oxide nanosheets on a continuous three-dimensional nickel porous scaffold for high performance electrochemical capacitors, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi and L. Hu, 
            et al., High-performance nanostructured supercapacitors on a sponge, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(12), 5165–5172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, C. Yang and C. Xu, 
            et al., Co-electro-deposition of the MnO2-PEDOT: PSS nanostructured composite for high areal mass, flexible asymmetric supercapacitor devices, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(40), 12432–12440 RSC .
P. Wang, Y. Lin and L. Wan, 
            et al., Construction of a janus MnO2-NiFe electrode via selective electrodeposition strategy as a high-performance bifunctional electrocatalyst for rechargeable zinc-air batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(41), 37701–37707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, B. Wang and Z. Liu, Tailoring electronic structure of Pd nanoparticles via MnO2 as electron transfer intermediate for enhanced hydrogen evolution reaction, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 748, 137405 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Moon, H. Munakata and K. Kajihara, 
            et al., Hydrothermal synthesis of manganese dioxide nanoparticles as cathode material for rechargeable batteries, Electrochemistry, 2013, 81(1), 2–6 CrossRef CAS .
K. Selvakumar, 
            et al., Physiochemical investigation of shape-designed MnO2 nanostructures and their influence on oxygen reduction reaction activity in alkaline solution, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(12), 6604–6618 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, D. Cao and Y. Wang, 
            et al., Hydrothermal deposition of manganese dioxide nanosheets on electrodeposited graphene covered nickel foam as a high-performance electrode for supercapacitors, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, P. Yu and H. Zhang, 
            et al., Rapid hydrothermal synthesis of hierarchical nanostructures assembled from ultrathin birnessite-type MnO2 nanosheets for supercapacitor applications, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 89, 523–529 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, H. Xia and J. Y. H. Fuh, 
            et al., Growth of single-crystal α-MnO2 nanotubes prepared by a hydrothermal route and their electrochemical properties, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193(2), 935–938 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, H. Zhang and P. Chen, 
            et al., Self-assembled three-dimensional hierarchical graphene hybrid hydrogels with ultrathin β-MnO2 nanobelts for high performance supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(4), 1540–1548 RSC .
D. Su, H. J. Ahn and G. Wang, Hydrothermal synthesis of α-MnO2 and β-MnO2 nanorods as high capacity cathode materials for sodium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(15), 4845–4850 RSC .
C. Wei, H. Pang and B. Zhang, 
            et al., Two-dimensional β-MnO2 nanowire network with enhanced electrochemical capacitance, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3(1), 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. Lu, H. Wang and Y. Sun, 
            et al., Charge state manipulation induced through cation intercalation into MnO2 sheet arrays for efficient water splitting, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 127894 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, F. Cheng and C. Chen, 
            et al., A Co3O4@ MnO2/Ni nanocomposite as a carbon-and binder-free cathode for rechargeable Li-O2 batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3(6), 866–871 RSC .
G. Du, X. Liu and Y. Zong, 
            et al., Co3O4 nanoparticle-modified MnO2 nanotube bifunctional oxygen cathode catalysts for rechargeable zinc-air batteries, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(11), 4657–4661 RSC .
H. Liao, X. Guo and Y. Hou, 
            et al., Construction of defect-rich Ni-Fe-doped K0.23MnO2 cubic nanoflowers via etching prussian blue analogue for efficient overall water splitting, Small, 2020, 16(10), 1905223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, L. Xu and C. Jin, 
            et al., Interface-engineered atomically thin Ni3S2/MnO2 heterogeneous nanoarrays for efficient overall water splitting in alkaline media, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zhang, J. Y. Feng and T. Zhu, 
            et al., Pd-doped urchin-like MnO2-carbon sphere three-dimensional (3D) material for oxygen evolution reaction, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Reddy and R. G. Reddy, Sol-gel MnO2 as an electrode material for electrochemical capacitors, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124(1), 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Kim, H. H. Sun and A. Manthiram, Design of a sectionalized MnO2–Co3O4 electrode via selective electrodeposition of metal ions in hydrogel for enhanced electrocatalytic activity in metal–air batteries, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lai, Y. Wang and X. Wang, 
            et al., Fabrication and engineering of nanostructured supercapacitor electrodes using electromagnetic field-based techniques, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3(1), 1700168 CrossRef .
S. K. Meher and G. R. Rao, Enhanced activity of microwave synthesized hierarchical MnO2 for high performance supercapacitor applications, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 317–328 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, Y. Dong Noh and K. Li, 
            et al., Microwave-hydrothermal crystallization of polymorphic MnO2 for electrochemical energy storage, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(20), 10770–10779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, X. Zhao and Z. Huang, 
            et al., Freestanding composite electrodes of MnOx embedded carbon nanofibers for high-performance supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(74), 39087–39094 RSC .
X. Li, G. Wang and X. Wang, 
            et al., Flexible supercapacitor based on MnO2 nanoparticles via electrospinning, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(35), 10103–10106 RSC .
H. Chen, X. Dong and J. Shi, 
            et al., Templated synthesis of hierarchically porous manganese oxide with a crystalline nanorod framework and its high electrochemical performance, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17(9), 855–860 RSC .
X. Tang, Z. Liu and C. Zhang, 
            et al., Synthesis and capacitive property of hierarchical hollow manganese oxide nanospheres with large specific surface area, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193(2), 939–943 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Y. Zhao and G. Yang, 
            et al., Mesoporous nanowire array architecture of manganese dioxide for electrochemical capacitor applications, Chem. Commun., 2009,(48), 7575–7577 RSC .
Y. X. Zhang, M. Huang and F. Li, 
            et al., One-pot synthesis of hierarchical MnO2-modified diatomites for electrochemical capacitor electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 449–456 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, Y. Zhang and F. Li, 
            et al., Self-assembly of mesoporous nanotubes assembled from interwoven ultrathin birnessite-type MnO2 nanosheets for asymmetric supercapacitors, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4(1), 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. Ma, Q. Cheng and V. Pavlinek, 
            et al., Morphology-controllable synthesis of MnO2 hollow nanospheres and their supercapacitive performance, New J. Chem., 2013, 37(3), 722–728 RSC .
F. Li, Y. Xing and M. Huang, 
            et al., MnO2 nanostructures with three-dimensional (3D) morphology replicated from diatoms for high-performance supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(15), 7855–7861 RSC .
J. Duay, S. A. Sherrill and Z. Gui, 
            et al., Self-limiting electrodeposition of hierarchical MnO2 and M (OH) 2/MnO2 nanofibril/nanowires: mechanism and supercapacitor properties, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(2), 1200–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Boyjoo, G. Rochard and J. M. Giraudon, 
            et al., Mesoporous MnO2 hollow spheres for enhanced catalytic oxidation of formaldehyde, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2019, 20, 00091 Search PubMed .
M. Huang, F. Li and F. Dong, 
            et al., MnO2-based nanostructures for high-performance supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(43), 21380–21423 RSC .
Z. Liu, K. Xu and H. Sun, 
            et al., One-step synthesis of single-layer MnO2 nanosheets with multi-role sodium dodecyl sulfate for high-performance pseudocapacitors, Small, 2015, 11(18), 2182–2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, Y. Han and J. Mu, 
            et al., 2D, 3D mesostructured silicas templated mesoporous manganese dioxide for selective catalytic reduction of NOx with NH3, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 516, 254–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bai, J. Li and J. Hao, 1D-MnO2, 2D-MnO2 and 3D-MnO2 for low-temperature oxidation of ethanol, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 241–250 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Zhuang and S. Liu, 
            et al., Catalytic ozonation of phenol enhanced by mesoporous MnO2 prepared through nanocasting method with SBA-15 as template, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(4), 103967 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balakumar, J. W. Ryu and H. Kim, 
            et al., Ultrasonic synthesis of α-MnO2 nanorods: an efficient catalytic conversion of refractory pollutant, methylene blue, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2020, 62, 104870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Vapor-liquid-solid mechanism of single crystal growth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4(5), 89–90 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Kim, P. Muralidharan and H. W. Lee, 
            et al., Spinel LiMn2O4 nanorods as lithium ion battery cathodes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(11), 3948–3952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jothiramalingam, B. Viswanathan and T. K. Varadarajan, Synthesis and structural characterization of copper incorporated manganese oxide OMS-2 materials synthesized via potassium birnessite, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 100(2–3), 257–261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Ji and S. Zhang, 
            et al., Synthesis of a novel polyaniline-intercalated layered manganese oxide nanocomposite as electrode material for electrochemical capacitor, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173(2), 1017–1023 CrossRef CAS .
I. Djerdj, D. Arcon and Z. Jagličić, 
            et al., Nonaqueous synthesis of manganese oxide nanoparticles, structural characterization, and magnetic properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(9), 3614–3623 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan and D. Xue, General, spontaneous ion replacement reaction for the synthesis of micro-and nanostructured metal oxides, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(4), 1581–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Su and L. Zhang, 
            et al., Intercalating MnO2 nanosheets with transition metal cations to enhance oxygen evolution, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11(6), 1689–1700 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. LaMer and R. H. Dinegar, Theory, production and mechanism of formation of monodispersed hydrosols, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72(11), 4847–4854 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, J. Zhao and W. Song, 
            et al., Facile controlled synthesis of MnO2 nanostructures of novel shapes and their application in batteries, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45(5), 2038–2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Zhang and X. H. Chen, Morphology-controllable synthesis and characterization of hierarchical 3D Co1−xMnxO Nanostructures, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(19), 9442–9447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, H. Wang and Z. Yang, 
            et al., Promotion of H2O2 decomposition activity over β-MnO2 nanorod catalysts, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 304(1–3), 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, F. Hu and D. Yu, 
            et al., Hierarchical FeC/MnO2 composite with in-situ grown CNTs as an advanced trifunctional catalyst for water splitting and Metal–Air batteries, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47(13), 18424–18432 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, S. Song and H. Zhang, Hydrothermal synthetic strategies of inorganic semiconducting nanostructures, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(13), 5714–5743 RSC .
S. Dong, J. Xi and Y. Wu, 
            et al., High loading MnO2 nanowires on graphene paper: Facile electrochemical synthesis and use as flexible electrode for tracking hydrogen peroxide secretion in live, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 853, 200–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Mishra, C. S. Prajapati and P. P. Sahay, Supercapacitive performance of electrochemically synthesized nanocrystalline MnO2 films using different plating solutions: A comparative study, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 749, 172–179 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, Y. Wang and J. A. Tang, 
            et al., In situ growth of MnO2 nanosheets on activated carbon fibers: a low-cost electrode for high performance supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(18), 14819–14825 RSC .
S. Kong, K. Cheng and T. Ouyang, 
            et al., Freestanding MnO2 nanoflakes on carbon nanotube covered nickel foam as a 3D binder-free supercapacitor electrode with high performance, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 786, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kotov and P. S. Weiss, Self-assembly of nanoparticles: a snapshot, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(4), 3101–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Dai and J. Deng, 
            et al., Manganese oxides with rod-, wire-, tube-, and flower-like morphologies: highly effective catalysts for the removal of toluene, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(7), 4034–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shi, F. Wang and H. Dai, 
            et al., Rod-, flower-, and dumbbell-like MnO2: Highly active catalysts for the combustion of toluene, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 433, 206–213 CrossRef .
E. Saputra, S. Muhammad and H. Sun, 
            et al., Different crystallographic one-dimensional MnO2 nanomaterials and their superior performance in catalytic phenol degradation, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47(11), 5882–5887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liang, F. Teng and G. Bulgan, 
            et al., Effect of phase structure of MnO2 nanorod catalyst on the activity for CO oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(14), 5307–5315 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen and D. Zhu, Effects of different phases of MnO2 nanorods on the catalytic thermal decomposition of ammonium perchlorate, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41(5), 7054–7058 CrossRef CAS .
W. Si, Y. Wang and Y. Peng, 
            et al., A high-efficiency γ-MnO2-like catalyst in toluene combustion, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(81), 14977–14980 RSC .
B. Yin, S. Zhang and Y. Jiao, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of ultralong MnO2 nanowires as high performance supercapacitor electrodes and photocatalysts with enhanced photocatalytic activities, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16(43), 9999–10005 RSC .
H. Zhou, X. Zhu and B. Chen, Magnetic biochar supported α-MnO2 nanorod for adsorption enhanced degradation of 4-chlorophenol via activation of peroxydisulfate, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 724, 138278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shan, Y. Zhu and S. Zhang, 
            et al., Catalytic performance and in situ surface chemistry of pure α-MnO2 nanorods in selective reduction of NO and N2O with CO, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(16), 8329–8335 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cao, L. Su and X. Zhang, 
            et al., Hydrothermal synthesis and catalytic properties of α-and β-MnO2 nanorods, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45(4), 425–428 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Yang and X. Wang, 
            et al., Large-scale synthesis of β-MnO2 nanorods and their rapid and efficient catalytic oxidation of methylene blue dye, Catal. Commun., 2006, 7(6), 408–412 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, S. Liang and F. Kang, 
            et al., Transformation of 17β-estradiol in humic acid solution by ε-MnO2 nanorods as probed by high-resolution mass spectrometry combined with 13C labeling, Environ. Pollut., 2016, 214, 211–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, H. Yang and K. He, 
            et al., β-MnO2 nanowires: a novel
ozonation catalyst for water treatment, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 85(3–4), 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, H. T. Zhu and H. M. Fan, 
            et al., Synthesis of single-crystal tetragonal α-MnO2 nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(33), 12594–12598 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Y. Dong and P. Jiang, 
            et al., An α-MnO2 nanotube used as a novel catalyst in ozonation: performance and the mechanism, New J. Chem., 2014, 38(4), 1743–1750 RSC .
Y. Xia, L. Xia and Y. Liu, 
            et al., Concurrent catalytic removal of typical volatile organic compound mixtures over Au-Pd/α-MnO2 nanotubes, J. Environ. Sci., 2018, 64, 276–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, S. Sun and W. Fan, 
            et al., One-step preparation of single-crystalline β-MnO2 nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(34), 16439–16443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, R. Ma and Y. Ebina, 
            et al., Synthesis and delamination of layered manganese oxide nanobelts, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(26), 6504–6512 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, J. Xie and H. Hu, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of Mn-based nanobelts with high catalytic activity for selective catalytic reduction of nitrogen oxides, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Sinha, M. Pradhan and T. Pal, Morphological evolution of two-dimensional MnO2 nanosheets and their shape transformation to one-dimensional ultralong MnO2 nanowires for robust catalytic activity, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(45), 23976–23986 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, C. Hu and X. Meng, 
            et al., Antimony removal from aqueous solution using novel α-MnO2 nanofibers: equilibrium, kinetic, and density functional theory studies, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5(3), 2255–2264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Zhang and P. Zhang, Layered birnessite-type MnO2 with surface pits for enhanced catalytic formaldehyde oxidation activity, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(12), 5719–5725 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Zhang and J. Bian, 
            et al., Promoted oxygen activation of layered micro-mesoporous structured titanium phosphate nanoplates by coupling nano-sized δ-MnO2 with surface pits for efficient photocatalytic oxidation of CO, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Jia and R. Ran, 
            et al., Nickel doping MnO2 with abundant surface pits as highly efficient catalysts for propane deep oxidation, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 1129–1137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, A. Samanta and S. Jana, Light-assisted synthesis of hierarchical flower-like MnO2 nanocomposites with solar light induced enhanced photocatalytic activity, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5(10), 9086–9094 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Alheety, S. A. Al-Jibori and A. Karadağ, 
            et al., A novel synthesis of MnO2, nanoflowers as an efficient heterogeneous catalyst for oxidative desulfurization of thiophenes, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2019, 20, 100392 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. Chen and J. Yu, 
            et al., Interphase strengthening birnessite MnO2 coating on three-dimensional Ni foam for soot removal, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 568, 157–167 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mahamallik, S. Saha and A. Pal, Tetracycline degradation in aquatic environment by highly porous MnO2 nanosheet assembly, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 276, 155–165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Deng and G. Zhu, 
            et al., Fluoride anions-assisted hydrothermal preparation and growth process of β-MnO 2 with bipyramid prism morphology, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15(34), 6682–6689 RSC .
G. Cheng, L. Yu and T. Lin, 
            et al., A facile one-pot hydrothermal synthesis of β-MnO2 nanopincers and their catalytic degradation of methylene blue, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 217, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lin and Z. Chen, A facile one-step synthesized epsilon-MnO2 nanoflowers for effective removal of lead ions from wastewater, Chemosphere, 2020, 250, 126329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. N. Dinh, C. C. Nguyen and T. L. T. Vu, 
            et al., Tailoring porous structure, reducibility and Mn4+ fraction of ε-MnO2 microcubes for the complete oxidation of toluene, Appl. Catal.,
A, 2020, 595, 117473 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Fei, Y. Cui and X. H. Yan, 
            et al., Controlled preparation of MnO2 hierarchical hollow nanostructures and their application in water treatment, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(3), 452–456 CrossRef .
X. Tan, Y. Wan and Y. Huang, 
            et al., Three-dimensional MnO2 porous hollow microspheres for enhanced activity as ozonation catalysts in degradation of bisphenol A, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 321, 162–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shang, B. Xie and Y. Li, 
            et al., Inflating strategy to form ultrathin hollow MnO2 nanoballoons, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(6), 5916–5921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, J. Liu and X. Song, 
            et al., Hierarchical iron containing γ-MnO2 hollow microspheres: a facile one-step synthesis and effective removal of As(III) via oxidation and adsorption, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 301, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Li and M. Mao, 
            et al., UV-visible-infrared light driven thermocatalysis for environmental purification on ramsdellite MnO2 hollow spheres considerably promoted by a novel photoactivation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(3), 2350–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, X. Wu and Y. Chen, Synthesis of hierarchical hollow MnO2 microspheres and potential application in abatement of VOCs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(21), 11040–11046 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, X. Zhang and J. Wei, 
            et al., Morphology-controlled synthesis and novel microwave absorption properties of hollow urchinlike α-MnO2 nanostructures, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(5), 1398–1402 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Zhang and X. Hang, 
            et al., Half-metallicity in single-layered manganese dioxide nanosheets by defect engineering, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127(4), 1211–1215 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, C. Chang and F. Teng, 
            et al., Defect-engineered ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheet arrays as bifunctional electrodes for efficient overall water splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(18), 1700005 CrossRef .
L. Miao, Q. Nie and J. Wang, 
            et al., Ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets for optimized hydrogen evolution via formaldehyde reforming in water at room temperature, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 466–476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Z. H. Liu and S. Qiao, 
            et al., Fabrication of MnO2-pillared layered manganese oxide through an exfoliation/reassembling and oxidation process, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189(2), 1278–1283 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rong, P. Zhang and J. Wang, 
            et al., Ultrathin manganese dioxide nanosheets for formaldehyde removal and regeneration performance, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 1172–1179 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kuo, W. Li and L. Pahalagedara, 
            et al., Understanding the role of gold nanoparticles in enhancing the catalytic activity of manganese oxides in water oxidation reactions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(8), 2345–2350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, Mesoporous crystalline β-MnO2-a reversible positive electrode for rechargeable lithium batteries, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19(5), 657–660 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Dhainaut and G. Rochard, 
            et al., Hierarchical porous ε-MnO2 from perovskite precursor: Application to the formaldehyde total oxidation, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rong, P. Zhang and F. Liu, 
            et al., Engineering crystal facet of α-MnO2 nanowire for highly efficient catalytic oxidation of carcinogenic airborne formaldehyde, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(4), 3435–3446 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yao, G. M. Odegard and Z. Huang, 
            et al., Cations controlled growth of β-MnO2 crystals with tunable facets for electrochemical energy storage, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 301–311 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yao, Y. Yuan and G. Tan, 
            et al., Tuning Li2O2 formation routes by facet engineering of MnO2 cathode catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(32), 12832–12838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, K. Xu and X. Ji, 
            et al., Promoted electrochemical performance of β-MnO2 through surface engineering, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(17), 15176–15181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, Z. Wang and J. Yan, 
            et al., Adsorption and oxidation of arsenic by two kinds of β-MnO2, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 373, 232–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chu, Y. Liu and Y. Li, 
            et al., Multi-functional Mo-doping in MnO2 nanoflowers toward efficient and robust electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118525 CrossRef CAS .
P. Umek and R. C. Korošec, The impact of K+ content on the structural transformations and morphological changes during the thermal treatment of α-MnO2 nanorods, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47(6), 1523–1528 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yin, S. Zhang and H. Jiang, 
            et al., Phase-controlled synthesis of polymorphic MnO2 structures for electrochemical energy storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(10), 5722–5729 RSC .
S. Rong, K. Li and P. Zhang, 
            et al., Potassium associated manganese vacancy in birnessite-type manganese dioxide for airborne formaldehyde oxidation, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8(7), 1799–1812 RSC .
T. Xiong, W. S. V. Lee and J. Xue, K+-intercalated MnO2 electrode for high performance aqueous supercapacitor, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(10), 5619–5626 CAS .
Q. Kang, L. Vernisse and R. C. Remsing, 
            et al., Effect of interlayer spacing on the activity of layered manganese oxide bilayer catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(5), 1863–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, C. Jia and L. Zhang, 
            et al., Tuning chemical bonding of MnO2 through transition-metal doping for enhanced CO oxidation, J. Catal., 2016, 341, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fan, K. Li and Y. Peng, 
            et al., Fe-Doped α-MnO2 nanorods for the catalytic removal of NOx and chlorobenzene: the relationship between lattice distortion and catalytic redox properties, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21(46), 25880–25888 RSC .
X. Ge, X. Song and Y. Ma, 
            et al., Fabrication of hierarchical iron-containing MnO2 hollow microspheres assembled by thickness-tunable nanosheets for efficient phosphate removal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(38), 14814–14826 RSC .
L. Chen, J. Ding and J. Jia, 
            et al., Cobalt-doped MnO2 nanofibers for enhanced propane oxidation, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(7), 4417–4426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Zhou and L. Wang, 
            et al., Cobalt-doped K-OMS-2 nanofibers: A novel and efficient water-tolerant catalyst for the oxidation of carbon monoxide, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9(7), 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, J. Zhao and J. Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Synergy of Mn and Ni enhanced catalytic performance for toluene combustion over Ni-doped α-MnO2 catalysts, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Jia and Y. Liu, 
            et al., The effect of tungsten doping on the catalytic activity of α-MnO2 nanomaterial for ozone decomposition under humid condition, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 562, 132–141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, J. Wang and Y. Dang, Photo-assisted oxidation of gaseous benzene on tungsten-doped MnO2 at lower temperature, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, P. Zhang and J. Jia, Vanadium-doped MnO2 for efficient room-temperature catalytic decomposition of ozone in air, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 484, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Yan and W. Gao, 
            et al., Samarium doping boosts catalytic oxidation of airborne benzene over todorokite-type MnO2, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 500, 144043 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, W. Li and Y. Deng, 
            et al., Effective Ti doping of δ-MnO2via anion route for highly active catalytic combustion of benzene, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(19), 10275–10282 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, H. Y. Shih and R. C. Wu, 
            et al., The Different Morphology of Co3O4 Catalysts and Application in the Abatement of Carbon Monoxide, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2021, 21(12), 6082–6087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, J. Liu and W. Su, 
            et al., Controllable synthesis of Ce-doped α-MnO2 for low-temperature selective catalytic reduction of NO, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7(7), 1565–1572 RSC .
Z. Hu, X. Xiao and C. Chen, 
            et al., Al-doped α-MnO2 for high mass-loading pseudocapacitor with excellent cycling stability, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 226–234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Wang and X. Xu, 
            et al., Recent advances in anion-doped metal oxides for catalytic applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(13), 7280–7300 RSC .
Q. Ke, Y. Jin and F. Ruan, 
            et al., Boosting the activity of catalytic oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to 2, 5-diformylfuran over nitrogen-doped manganese oxide catalysts, Green Chem., 2019, 21(16), 4313–4318 RSC .
T. He, X. Zeng and S. Rong, The controllable synthesis of substitutional and interstitial nitrogen-doped manganese dioxide: the effects of doping sites on enhancing the catalytic activity, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(17), 8383–8396 RSC .
K. Chu, Y. Liu and Y. Cheng, 
            et al., Synergistic boron-dopants and boron-induced oxygen vacancies in MnO2 nanosheets to promote electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(10), 5200–5208 RSC .
Z. Ma, G. Shao and Y. Fan, 
            et al., Construction of hierarchical α-MnO2 nanowires@ ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets core-shell nanostructure with excellent cycling stability for high-power asymmetric supercapacitor electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(14), 9050–9058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, L. Li and L. Song, 
            et al., Co2+ induced phase transformation from δ-to α-MnO2 and their hierarchical α-MnO2@ δ-MnO2 nanostructures for efficient asymmetric supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(20), 12661–12668 RSC .
J. Cao, Q. Mao and L. Shi, 
            et al., Fabrication of γ-MnO2/α-MnO2 hollow core/shell structures and their application to water treatment, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(40), 16210–16215 RSC .
J. Zhou, L. Qin and W. Xiao, 
            et al., Oriented growth of layered-MnO2 nanosheets over α-MnO2 nanotubes for enhanced room-temperature HCHO oxidation, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 233–243 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. M. Silva, C. M. Kisukuri and T. S. Rodrigues, 
            et al., MnO2 nanowires decorated with Au ultrasmall nanoparticles for the green oxidation of silanes and hydrogen production under ultralow loadings, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 35–43 CrossRef .
D. Xia, W. Xu and Y. Wang, 
            et al., Enhanced performance and conversion pathway for catalytic ozonation of methyl mercaptan on single-atom Ag deposited three-dimensional ordered mesoporous MnO2, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52(22), 13399–13409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, X. Gu and Q. Cao, 
            et al., Catalytically active single-atom sites fabricated from silver particles, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124(17), 4274–4279 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, S. Sui and X. Zheng, 
            et al., One-pot synthesis of atomically dispersed Pt on MnO2 for efficient catalytic decomposition of toluene at low temperatures, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117878 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, X. Liu and C. Wang, 
            et al., Tuning thermal catalytic enhancement in doped MnO2-Au nano-heterojunctions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(19), 17444–17451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, C. Wang and P. H. C. Camargo, 
            et al., Investigating the effect of MnO2 band gap in hybrid MnO2–Au materials over the SPR-mediated activities under visible light, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(3), 925–931 RSC .
P. Wu, S. Dai and G. Chen, 
            et al., Interfacial effects in hierarchically porous α-MnO2/Mn3O4 heterostructures promote photocatalytic oxidation activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118418 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. Nan and Z. Zhao, 
            et al., Energy-efficient fabrication of a novel multivalence Mn3O4-MnO2 heterojunction for dye degradation under visible light irradiation, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 509–517 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, Y. Gu and L. Han, 
            et al., Dual promotional effects of TiO2-decorated acid-treated MnOx octahedral molecular sieve catalysts for alkali-resistant reduction of NOx, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(12), 11507–11517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Cao and C. A. Wang, 
            et al., Design and preparation of MnO2/CeO2-MnO2 double-shelled binary oxide hollow spheres and their application in CO oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(13), 8670–8677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, B. C. Park and Y. S. Jeon, 
            et al., MnO2 nanowire-CeO2 nanoparticle composite catalysts for the selective catalytic reduction of NOx with NH3, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(38), 32112–32119 CrossRef CAS .
E. Saputra, H. Zhang and Q. Liu, 
            et al., Egg-shaped core/shell α-Mn2O3@ α-MnO2 as heterogeneous catalysts for decomposition of phenolics in aqueous solutions, Chemosphere, 2016, 159, 351–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Q. Zhao and D. Wei, 
            et al., Simple construction of core-shell MnO2@TiO2 with highly enhanced U (vi) adsorption performance and evaluated adsorption mechanism, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6(4), 1011–1021 RSC .
Q. Ma, H. Wang and H. Zhang, 
            et al., Fabrication of MnO2/TiO2 nano-tube arrays photoelectrode and its enhanced visible light photoelectrocatalytic performance and mechanism, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 189, 193–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Wu and Y. H. Kwok, 
            et al., In situ synthesis of heterojunction TiO2/MnO2 nanostructure with excellent performance in vacuum ultraviolet photocatalytic oxidation of toluene, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118034 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, B. Mu and D. Yuan, 
            et al., Design of MnO2/CeO2-MnO2 hierarchical binary oxides for elemental mercury removal from coal-fired flue gas, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 333, 186–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, G. Zhang and Q. Zhang, MnO2/CeO2 for catalytic ultrasonic degradation of methyl orange, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2014, 21(3), 991–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, F. Jing and J. Yan, 
            et al., Highly effective self-propagating synthesis of CeO2-doped MnO2 catalysts for toluene catalytic combustion, Catal. Today, 2017, 297, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guan, Q. Huang and J. Ma, 
            et al., HCHO removal by MnO2 (x)-CeO2: influence of the synergistic effect on the catalytic activity, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 59(2), 596–608 CrossRef .
H. Du, Y. Wang and H. Arandiyan, 
            et al., Design and synthesis of CeO2 nanowire/MnO2 nanosheet heterogeneous structure for enhanced catalytic properties, Mater. Today Commun., 2017, 11, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gan, K. Li and W. Yang, 
            et al., Core-shell-like structured α-MnO2@ CeO2 catalyst for selective catalytic reduction of NO: Promoted activity and SO2 tolerance, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123473 CrossRef CAS .
N. Feng, Z. Zhu and P. Zhao, 
            et al., Facile fabrication of trepang-like CeO2@MnO2 nanocomposite with high catalytic activity for soot removal, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 146013 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ren, S. Mo and J. Fan, 
            et al., Enhancing catalytic toluene oxidation over MnO2@Co3O4 by constructing a coupled interface, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41(12), 1873–1883 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Z. Han and W. Yang, 
            et al., 3D Co3O4@ MnO2 heterostructures grown on a flexible substrate and their applications in supercapacitor electrodes and photocatalysts, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45(42), 16850–16858 RSC .
H. Liang, H. Sun and A. Patel, 
            et al., Excellent performance of mesoporous Co3O4/MnO2 nanoparticles in heterogeneous activation of peroxymonosulfate for phenol degradation in aqueous solutions, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 127, 330–335 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Yang and X. Zhu, 
            et al., An outward coating route to CuO/MnO2 nanorod array films and their efficient catalytic oxidation of acid fuchsin dye, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53(23), 9608–9615 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Luo and Y. Liu, 
            et al., Self-propagated flaming synthesis of highly active layered CuO-δ-MnO2 hybrid composites for catalytic total
oxidation of toluene pollutant, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(26), 21798–21808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, Y. Duan and H. Pang, 
            et al., Superior microwave absorption based on ZnO capped MnO2 nanostructures, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7(15), 2000407 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liping, Z. Jianguo and Y. Lixian, 
            et al., Room temperature catalytic ozonation of toluene over MnO2/Al2O3, Chin. J. Catal., 2011, 32(6–8), 904–916 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, Q. Liu and Z. Zhao, 
            et al., Enhanced low-temperature activity of toluene oxidation over the rod-like MnO2/LaMnO3 perovskites with alkaline hydrothermal and acid-etching treatment, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59(14), 6556–6564 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, L. Nengzi and X. Li, 
            et al., Construction of CuBi2O4/MnO2 composite as Z-scheme photoactivator of peroxymonosulfate for degradation of antibiotics, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 386, 124011 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Chen and Z. Wang, 
            et al., A novel hybrid Bi2MoO6-MnO2 catalysts with the superior plasma induced pseudo photocatalytic-catalytic performance for ethyl acetate degradation, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 339–350 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jia, Z. Si and Y. Feng, 
            et al., Oxidation of 5-[(Formyloxy) methyl] furfural to maleic anhydride with atmospheric oxygen using α-MnO2/Cu(NO3)2 as catalysts, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(21), 7901–7908 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, J. Chang and H. Zhao, 
            et al., Sea-buckthorn-like MnO2 decorated titanate nanotubes with oxidation property and photocatalytic activity for enhanced degradation of 17β-estradiol under solar light, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(5), 2123–2133 CrossRef CAS .
W. Si, Y. Wang and S. Zhao, 
            et al., A facile method for in situ preparation of the MnO2/LaMnO3 catalyst for the removal of toluene, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50(8), 4572–4578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Li and H. Zhang, 
            et al., In situ fabrication of highly active γ-MnO2/SmMnO3 catalyst for deep catalytic oxidation of gaseous benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and o-xylene, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 362, 178–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Liu and S. Zhang, 
            et al., Enhanced mineralization of bisphenol A by eco-friendly BiFeO3–MnO2 composite: Performance, mechanism and toxicity assessment, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 122883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Sun and H. M. Ang, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of hierarchically structured magnetic MnO2/ZnFe2O4 hybrid materials and their performance in heterogeneous activation of peroxymonosulfate, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(22), 19914–19923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei, X. Wang and Y. Zheng, 
            et al., Facile preparation of snowflake-like MnO2@ NiCo2O4 composites for highly efficient electromagnetic wave absorption, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25(32), 7695–7701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, M. Wang and S. Cao, 
            et al., Reactive template strategy for fabrication of MnO2/polyaniline coaxial nanocables and their catalytic application in the oxidative decolorization of rhodamine B, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1(42), 13197–13202 RSC .
J. Fei, Y. Cui and X. Yan, 
            et al., Controlled fabrication of polyaniline spherical and cubic shells with hierarchical nanostructures, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(11), 3714–3718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. She, H. Bi and Z. Wen, 
            et al., Tunable microwave absorption frequency by aspect ratio of hollow polydopamine@ α-MnO2 microspindles studied by electron holography, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(15), 9782–9789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jia, Y. Cai and X. Zheng, 
            et al., Mesostructured carbon nanotube-on-MnO2 nanosheet composite for high-performance supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(45), 38963–38969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, W. Chen and X. Xie, 
            et al., Symmetrical MnO2-carbon nanotube-textile nanostructures for wearable pseudocapacitors with high mass loading, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(11), 8904–8913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, F. Wang and P. Ou, 
            et al., High efficiency and rapid degradation of bisphenol A by the synergy between adsorption
and oxidization on the MnO2@ nano hollow carbon sphere, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 360, 223–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zou, Q. Nie and X. Zhang, 
            et al., Electrothermal regeneration by Joule heat effect on carbon cloth based MnO2 catalyst for long-term formaldehyde removal, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, Y. Fang and L. He, 
            et al., Efficient catalytic removal of airborne ozone under ambient conditions over manganese oxides immobilized on carbon nanotubes, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9(15), 4036–4046 RSC .
L. Yang, H. Lv and M. Li, 
            et al., Multiple polarization effect of shell evolution on hierarchical hollow C@MnO2 composites and their wideband electromagnetic wave absorption properties, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123666 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bo, S. Yang and J. Kong, 
            et al., Solar-enhanced plasma-catalytic oxidation of toluene over a bifunctional graphene fin foam decorated with nanofin-like MnO2, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(7), 4420–4432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Wang and W. You, 
            et al., Enhanced polarization from flexible hierarchical MnO2 arrays on cotton cloth with excellent microwave absorption, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(28), 13269–13281 RSC .
A. Hazarika, B. K. Deka and K. Kong, 
            et al., Microwave absorption and mechanical performance of α-MnO2 nanostructures grown on woven Kevlar fiber/reduced graphene oxide-polyaniline nanofiber array-reinforced polyester resin composites, Composites, Part B, 2018, 140, 123–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Chi and Q. Han, 
            et al., α-MnO2 nanofibers/carbon nanotubes hierarchically assembled microspheres: Approaching practical applications of high-performance aqueous Zn-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2019, 443, 227244 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, X. Yang and J. Strong, 
            et al., MnO2-decorated N-doped carbon nanotube with boosted activity for low-temperature oxidation of formaldehyde, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 396, 122750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, L. Hu and M. Vosgueritchian, 
            et al., Solution-processed graphene/MnO2 nanostructured textiles for high-performance electrochemical capacitors, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(7), 2905–2911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Saharan, A. K. Sharma and V. Kumar, 
            et al., Multifunctional CNT supported metal doped MnO2 composite for adsorptive removal of anionic dye and thiourea sensing, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 221, 239–249 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, H. Tian and J. He, 
            et al., Graphene-MnO2 hybrid nanostructure as a new catalyst for formaldehyde oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(41), 23660–23668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Li and J. He, 
            et al., Nano-hybrids of needle-like MnO2 on graphene oxide coupled with peroxymonosulfate for enhanced degradation of norfloxacin: A comparative study and probable degradation pathway, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 562, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Z. Bo and H. Yang, 
            et al., Hierarchical petal-on-petal MnO2/vertical graphene foam for postplasma catalytic decomposition of toluene with high efficiency and ultralow pressure drop, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57(45), 15291–15300 CAS .
Q. Dong, J. Wang and X. Duan, 
            et al., Self-assembly of 3D MnO2/N-doped graphene hybrid aerogel for catalytic degradation of water pollutants: structure-dependent activity, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 1049–1058 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Z. Zhao and N. Li, 
            et al., Visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation of ciprofloxacin by a ternary Mn2O3/Mn3O4/MnO2 valence state heterojunction, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 805–813 CrossRef CAS .
K. Villa, J. Parmar and D. Vilela, 
            et al., Metal-oxide-based microjets for the simultaneous removal of organic pollutants and heavy metals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(24), 20478–20486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, F. Yu and M. Zhu, 
            et al., Microspherical MnO2-CeO2-Al2O3 mixed oxide for monolithic honeycomb catalyst and application in selective catalytic reduction of NOx with NH3 at 50–150 °C, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 346, 182–192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, M. Lv and W. Luo, 
            et al., Exposed metal oxide active sites on mesoporous titania channels: a promising design for low-temperature selective catalytic reduction of NO with NH3, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(30), 3783–3786 RSC .
P. Wang, S. Su and J. Xiang, 
            et al., Catalytic oxidation of Hg0 by CuO–MnO2-Fe2O3/γ-Al2O3 catalyst, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 225, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Xu and H. Li, 
            et al., Rational design and in situ fabrication of MnO2@NiCo2O4 nanowire arrays on Ni foam as high-performance monolith de-NOx catalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(21), 11543–11553 RSC .
H. Cai, L. Sun and Y. Wang, 
            et al., Unprecedented efficient degradation of phenanthrene in water by intimately coupling novel ternary composite Mn3O4/MnO2–Ag3PO4 and functional bacteria under visible light irradiation, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 1078–1092 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, M. He and Y. Zhou, 
            et al., Metal–organic frameworks self-templated cubic hollow Co/N/C@MnO2 composites for electromagnetic wave absorption, Carbon, 2020, 156, 378–388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Yang and M. Li, 
            et al., Heterostructured CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes for efficient microwave absorption, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 123039 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, M. Li and L. Yang, 
            et al., Constructing uniform Fe3O4@C@MnO2 microspheres with yolk-shell interior toward enhancement in microwave absorption, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 817, 152795 CrossRef CAS .
W. You, H. Bi and W. She, 
            et al., Dipolar-distribution cavity γ-Fe2O3@C@α-MnO2 nanospindle with broadened microwave absorption bandwidth by chemically etching, Small, 2017, 13(5), 1602779 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Hu, Y. Fang and J. Wang, 
            et al., Novel hierarchical RGO/MoS2/K-α-MnO2 composite architectures with enhanced broadband microwave absorption performance, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(44), 13878–13886 RSC .
S. Huang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, 
            et al., Hierarchical Pt/MnO2-Ni (OH)2 hybrid nanoflakes with enhanced room-temperature formaldehyde oxidation activity, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(9), 12481–12488 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Y. Wang and Y. Wei, 
            et al., Successive interfacial reaction-directed synthesis of CeO2@ Au@ CeO2-MnO2 environmental catalyst with sandwich hollow structure, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(14), 11595–11603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Li and C. A. Wang, 
            et al., The rational design of sandwich-like MnO2-Pd-CeO2 hollow spheres with enhanced activity and stability for CO oxidation, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(14), 6776–6783 RSC .
X. Duan, Z. Qu and C. Dong, 
            et al., Enhancement of toluene oxidation performance over Pt/MnO2@ Mn3O4 catalyst with unique interfacial structure, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 503, 144161 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cai, H. Hu and H. Li, 
            et al., Design of multi-shell Fe2O3@ MnOx@ CNTs for the selective catalytic reduction of NO with NH3: improvement of catalytic activity and SO2 tolerance, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(6), 3588–3598 RSC .
H. Yang, M. Lu and D. Chen, 
            et al., Efficient and rapid removal of Pb2+ from water by magnetic Fe3O4@ MnO2 core-shell nanoflower attached to carbon microtube: adsorption behavior and process study, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 563, 218–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Mady, M. L. Baynosa and D. Tuma, 
            et al., Heterogeneous activation of peroxymonosulfate by a novel magnetic 3D γ-MnO2@ ZnFe2O4/rGO nanohybrid as a robust catalyst for phenol degradation, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 946–956 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miao, Y. Xie and Y. Xia, 
            et al., Facile photo-driven strategy for the regeneration of a hierarchical C@ MnO2 sponge for the removal of indoor toluene, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 404–413 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, R. Zhao and S. Chao, 
            et al., Polydopamine coating assisted synthesis of MnO2 loaded inorganic/organic composite electrospun fiber adsorbent for efficient removal of Pb2+ from water, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 344, 277–289 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vellaichamy, P. Periakaruppan and B. Nagulan, Reduction of Cr6+ from wastewater using a novel in situ-synthesized PANI/MnO2/TiO2 nanocomposite: renewable,
selective, stable, and synergistic catalysis, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5(10), 9313–9324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, C. Wei and Z. Huang, 
            et al., A review on fundamentals for designing oxygen evolution electrocatalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49(7), 2196–2214 RSC .
C. Han, W. Li and H. Liu, 
            et al., Design strategies for developing non-precious metal based bi-functional catalysts for alkaline electrolyte based zinc-air batteries, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6(9), 1812–1827 RSC .
J. S. Kim, B. Kim and H. Kim, 
            et al., Recent progress on multimetal oxide catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(11), 1702774 CrossRef .
S. H. Q. Q. Nian-Tzu Suen and H. M. Chen, Electrocatalysis for the oxygen evolution reaction: recent development and future perspectives, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(2), 337–365 RSC .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung and Q. Quan, 
            et al., Electrocatalysis for the oxygen evolution reaction: recent development and future perspectives, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(2), 337–365 RSC .
C. Han, W. Li and H. K. Liu, 
            et al., Design strategies for developing non-precious metal based bi-functional catalysts for alkaline electrolyte based zinc–air batteries, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6(9), 1812–1827 RSC .
J. S. Kim, B. Kim and H. Kim, 
            et al., Recent progress on multimetal oxide catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(11), 1702774 CrossRef .
J. Song, C. Wei and Z. F. Huang, 
            et al., A review on fundamentals for designing oxygen evolution electrocatalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49(7), 2196–2214 RSC .
D. A. Agyeman, Y. Zheng and T. H. Lee, 
            et al., Synergistic catalysis of the lattice oxygen and transition metal facilitating ORR and OER in perovskite catalysts for Li-O2 batteries, ACS Catal., 2020, 11(1), 424–434 CrossRef .
X. Rong, J. Parolin and A. M. Kolpak, A fundamental relationship between reaction mechanism and stability in metal oxide catalysts for oxygen evolution, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(2), 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Wu, X. F. Lu and S. Q. Zang, 
            et al., Non-noble-metal-based electrocatalysts toward the oxygen evolution reaction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(15), 1910274 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, C. Sun and Z. Jin, 
            et al., Carbon for the oxygen reduction reaction: a defect mechanism, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(22), 11736–11739 RSC .
Q. Zhao, Z. Yan and C. Chen, 
            et al., Spinels: controlled preparation, oxygen reduction/evolution reaction application, and beyond, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117(15), 10121–10211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiong, X. Wang and W. Li, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of iron phosphide nanorods for efficient and durable electrochemical oxygen evolution, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52(56), 8711–8714 RSC .
Z. Wang, B. Xiao and Z. Lin, 
            et al., In-situ surface decoration of RuO2 nanoparticles by laser ablation for improved oxygen evolution reaction activity in both acid and alkali solutions, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 54, 510–518 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, G. F. Han and H. J. Noh, 
            et al., Boosting oxygen reduction catalysis with abundant copper single atom active sites, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(8), 2263–2269 RSC .
Y. Meng, W. Song and H. Huang, 
            et al., Structure-property relationship of bifunctional MnO2 nanostructures: highly efficient, ultra-stable electrochemical water oxidation and oxygen reduction reaction catalysts identified in alkaline media, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(32), 11452–11464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Han, Y. Liu and W. Hu, 
            et al., Crystallographic structure and morphology transformation of MnO2 nanorods as efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 163(2), 67–73 CrossRef .
S. Lian, M. P. Browne and C. Domínguez, 
            et al., Template-free synthesis of mesoporous manganese oxides with catalytic activity in the oxygen evolution reaction, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1(4), 780–788 RSC .
K. Selvakumar, S. M. Senthil Kumar and R. Thangamuthu, 
            et al., Development of shape-engineered α-MnO2 materials as bi-functional catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction and oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline medium, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39(36), 21024–21036 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gupta, K. Selvakumar and N. Lakshminarasimhan, 
            et al., The effects of morphology, microstructure and mixed-valent states of MnO2 on the oxygen evolution reaction activity in alkaline anion exchange membrane water electrolysis, J. Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228131 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, L. Yu and B. Lan, 
            et al., Three-dimensional radial α-MnO2 synthesized from different redox potential for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalytic activities, J. Power Sources, 2017, 362, 332–341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. S. Kim and H. Baik, 
            et al., Porous β-MnO2 nanoplates derived from MnCO3 nanoplates as highly efficient electrocatalysts toward oxygen evolution reaction, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(32), 26535–26539 RSC .
K. Selvakumar, S. M. S. Kumar and R. Thangamuthu, 
            et al., 2D and 3D Silica-template derived MnO2 electrocatalysts towards enhanced oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction activity, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5(24), 3980–3990 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takashima, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Inhibition of charge disproportionation of MnO2 electrocatalysts for efficient water oxidation under neutral conditions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(44), 18153–18156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Morgan Chan, D. A. Kitchaev and J. Nelson Weker, 
            et al., Electrochemical trapping of metastable Mn3+ ions for activation of MnO2 oxygen evolution catalysts, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2018, 115(23), 5261–5268 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Takashima, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Mechanisms of pH-dependent activity for water oxidation to molecular oxygen by MnO2 electrocatalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(3), 1519–1527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, T. Zhang and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Enhancing electrocatalytic oxygen reduction on MnO2 with vacancies, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(9), 2474–2477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li and Z. Liu, Active Site Revealed for Water Oxidation on Electrochemically Induced δ- MnO2: role of spinel-to-layer phase transition, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(5), 1783–1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Antoni, D. M. Morales and J. Bitzer, 
            et al., Enhancing the water splitting performance of cryptomelane-type α-(K)MnO2, J. Catal., 2019, 374, 335–344 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Gupta, A. Bhandari and S. Saha, 
            et al., Modulating oxygen evolution reactivity in MnO2 through polymorphic engineering, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(36), 22345–22357 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Thenuwara, E. B. Cerkez and S. L. Shumlas, 
            et al., Nickel confined in the interlayer region of birnessite: an active electrocatalyst for water oxidation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(35), 10381–10385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tripkovic, H. A. Hansen and T. Vegge, Computational screening of doped α-MnO2 catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, ChemSusChem, 2018, 3(11), 629–637 CrossRef PubMed .
I. G. Mckendry, A. C. Thenuwara and S. L. Shumlas, 
            et al., Systematic doping of cobalt into layered manganese oxide sheets substantially enhances water oxidation catalysis, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57(2), 557–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Delgado, M. Minakshi and J. Mcginnity, 
            et al., Co/Mo bimetallic addition to electrolytic manganese dioxide for oxygen generation in acid medium, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and W. Wu, 
            et al., Cobalt-doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets with abundant oxygen vacancies supported on functionalized carbon nanofibers for efficient oxygen evolution, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujimoto, T. Okada and M. Nakayama, Enhanced oxygen evolution reaction activity of Co ions isolated in the interlayer space of buserite MnO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(15), 8406–8413 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jang Mee Lee, Remarkable influence of the local symmetry of substituted 3d metal, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 269, 354–360 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Liu and Y. Zhao, 
            et al., Significance of surface trivalent manganese in the electrocatalytic activity of water oxidation in undoped and doped MnO2 nanowires, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7(12), 1848–1856 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang, X. Jin and S. M. Oh, An effective way to improve bifunctional electrocatalyst activity of manganese oxide via control of bond competition, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lübke, A. Sumboja and L. Mccafferty, 
            et al., Transition-metal-doped α-MnO2 nanorods as bifunctional catalysts for efficient oxygen reduction and evolution reactions, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3(9), 2613–2622 CrossRef .
I. G. Mckendry, L. J. Mohamad and A. C. Thenuwara, 
            et al., Synergistic in-layer cobalt doping and interlayer iron intercalation into layered MnO2 produces an efficient water oxidation electrocatalyst, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(9), 2280–2285 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ye, T. Li and G. Ma, 
            et al., Metal-ion (Fe, V, Co, and Ni)-doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets supported on carbon fiber paper for the oxygen evolution reaction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(44), 1704083 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. S. Su and L. Zhang, 
            et al., Intercalating MnO2 nanosheets with transition metal cations to enhance oxygen evolution, ChemCatChem, 2019, 6(11), 1689–1700 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Lai, Y. Li and L. X. Jiang, 
            et al., Electrochemical performance of a Pb/Pb-MnO2 composite anode in sulfuric acid solution containing Mn2+, Hydrometallurgy, 2012, 115–116, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. X. Jiang and X. J. Lv, 
            et al., Oxygen evolution and corrosion behaviors of co-deposited Pb/Pb-MnO2 composite anode for electrowinning of nonferrous metals, Hydrometallurgy, 2011, 109(3–4), 252–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lai, Y. Li and L. Jiang, 
            et al., Electrochemical behaviors of co-deposited Pb/Pb-MnO2 composite anode in sulfuric acid solution-Tafel and EIS investigations, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 671, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mohammadi and A. Alfantazi, The performance of Pb-MnO2 and Pb-Ag anodes in 2 Mn(II)-containing sulphuric acid electrolyte solutions, Hydrometallurgy, 2015, 153, 134–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, P. Gu and D. J. S. Birch, 
            et al., Plasmon-promoted electrochemical oxygen evolution catalysis from gold decorated MnO2 nanosheets under green light, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(31), 1801573 CrossRef .
X. Li, M. Zhang and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Controlled synthesis of MnO2@TiO2 hybrid nanotube arrays with enhanced oxygen evolution reaction performance, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(31), 14369–14378 CrossRef CAS .
R. Frydendal, E. A. Paoli and I. Chorkendorff, 
            et al., Toward an active and stable catalyst for oxygen evolution in acidic media: Ti-stabilized MnO2, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(22), 1500991 CrossRef .
W. Sun, Z. Zhou and W. Q. Zaman, 
            et al., Rational Manipulation of IrO2 lattice strain on α-MnO2 nanorods as a highly efficient water-splitting catalyst, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(48), 41855–41862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. W. Q. S. Zhou, Cultivating crystal lattice distortion in IrO2via coupling with MnO2 to boost the oxygen evolution reaction with high intrinsic activity, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(39), 4959–4962 RSC .
Z. Ye, H. Meng and D. Sun, Electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) investigation of the oxygen evolution reaction mechanism of Ti/IrO2+MnO2 electrodes in 0.5m H2SO4 solution, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 621(1), 49–54 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ye, H. Meng and D. Chen, 
            et al., Structure and characteristics of Ti/IrO2(x)+MnO2(1-x) anode for oxygen evolution, Solid State Sci., 2008, 10(3), 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
G. Elmacı, A. S. Ertürk and M. Sevim, 
            et al., MnO2 nanowires anchored on mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride (MnO2@mpg-C3N4) as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(33), 17995–18006 CrossRef .
Z. Mo, H. Xu and Z. Chen, 
            et al., Construction of MnO2/Monolayer g-C3N4 with Mn vacancies for Z-scheme overall water splitting, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, J. Wang and K. Wang, 
            et al., Carbon-quantum-dots-embedded MnO2 nanoflower as an efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution in alkaline media, Carbon, 2019, 143, 457–466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, Y. Liu and Y. Ding, 
            et al., MnO2 spontaneously coated on carbon nanotubes for enhanced water oxidation, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(80), 11938–11941 RSC .
X. Xiong, Y. Ji and M. Xie, 
            et al., MnO2-CoP3 nanowires array: An efficient electrocatalyst for alkaline oxygen evolution reaction with enhanced activity, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 86, 161–165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, D. Han and W. B. Xu, 
            et al., Surface-guided formation of amorphous mixed-metal oxyhydroxides on ultrathin MnO2 nanosheet arrays for efficient electrocatalytic oxygen evolution, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(27), 2001059 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of Ni based metal-organic frameworks wrapped MnO2 nanowires with high performance toward electrochemical oxygen evolution reaction, Talanta, 2018, 186, 154–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, M. Wang and W. Wang, 
            et al., Hierarchical Mesoporous NiO/MnO2 @PANI core-shell microspheres, highly efficient and stable bifunctional electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution and reduction reactions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(49), 42676–42687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, X. Shang and W. Gao, 
            et al., Ternary MnO2/NiCo2O4/NF with hierarchical structure and synergistic interaction as efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 719, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Feng and T. Zhu, 
            et al., Pd-doped urchin-like MnO2-carbon sphere three-dimensional (3D) material for oxygen evolution reaction, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Teng, X. Wang and J. Liao, 
            et al., Atomically thin defect-rich Fe-Mn-O hybrid nanosheets as high efficient electrocatalyst for water oxidation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(34), 1802463 CrossRef .
D. Ye, T. Wu and H. Cao, 
            et al., Electrocatalysis of both oxygen reduction and water oxidation using a cost-effective three-dimensional MnO2/graphene/carbon nanotube, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(34), 26710–26715 RSC .
Y. Ji, J. Liu and S. Hao, 
            et al., Full water splitting by a nanoporous CeO2 nanowire array under alkaline conditions, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7(13), 2533–2537 RSC .
K. T. Lee, C. B. Tsai and W. H. Ho, 
            et al., Superabsorbent polymer binder for achieving MnO2 supercapacitors of greatly enhanced capacitance density, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12(7), 886–889 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xue, H. Yu and Y. Li, 
            et al., Spatially-controlled NiCo2O4@ MnO2 core-shell nanoarray with hollow NiCo2O4 cores and MnO2 flake shells: an efficient catalyst for oxygen evolution reaction, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29(28), 285401 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Hu, X. Liu and B. Zhu, 
            et al., Redox route to ultrathin metal sulfides nanosheet arrays-anchored MnO2 nanoparticles as self-supported electrocatalysts for efficient water splitting, J. Power Sources, 2018, 398, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, J. Masa and E. Madej, 
            et al., Co3O4-MnO2-CNT hybrids synthesized by HNO3 vapor oxidation of catalytically grown CNTs as OER electrocatalysts, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7(18), 3027–3035 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Jiang and F. Liu, 
            et al., Novel phosphorus-doped PbO2-MnO2 bicontinuous electrodes for oxygen evolution reaction, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(46), 24020–24028 RSC .
Y. Wang, Q. Liu and T. Hu, 
            et al., Carbon supported MnO2-CoFe2O4 with enhanced electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 403, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Wang and B. Yang, 
            et al., Highly active ruthenium sites stabilized by modulating electron-feeding for sustainable acidic oxygen-evolution electrocatalysis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15(6), 2356–2365 RSC .
Z. F. Huang, J. Song and L. Pan, 
            et al., Carbon nitride with simultaneous porous network and O-doping for efficient solar-energy-driven hydrogen evolution, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 646–656 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. Wang and Z. Li, 
            et al., Designing 3d dual transition metal electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction in alkaline electrolyte: Beyond oxides, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105162 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, Y. Zhao and X. Yang, 
            et al., Metal-organic frameworks with assembled bifunctional microreactor for charge modulation and strain generation toward enhanced oxygen electrocatalysis, ACS Nano, 2022, 16(6), 9523–9534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule and S. Li, 
            et al., Bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting from an iron/nickel-based bimetallic metal-organic framework/dicyandiamide composite, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130(29), 9059–9064 CrossRef .
W. Li, C. Wang and X. Lu, Integrated transition metal and compounds with carbon nanomaterials for electrochemical water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(7), 3786–3827 RSC .
S. V. Otari, R. M. Patil and S. J. Ghosh, 
            et al., Intracellular synthesis of silver nanoparticle by actinobacteria and its antimicrobial activity, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 136, 1175–1180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Jo, P. Singh and Y. J. Kim, 
            et al., Pseudomonas deceptionensis DC5-mediated synthesis of extracellular silver nanoparticles, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2016, 44(6), 1576–1581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Manivasagan, S. Y. Nam and J. Oh, Marine microorganisms as potential biofactories for synthesis of metallic nanoparticles, Crit. Rev. Microbiol., 2016, 42(6), 1007–1019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Salunke, S. S. Sawant and S. I. Lee, 
            et al., Comparative study of MnO2 nanoparticle synthesis by marine bacterium Saccharophagus degradans and yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2015, 99, 5419–5427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Gaihua He	Gaihua He received her PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 2020. She is now a University Distinguished Professor at Jinzhou Medical University, China. Her group is engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials. Her research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry and biological medicine.
Ye Liao	Ye Liao is currently a student at Yangzhou University of College of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Comparative Medicine, Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, China. His research mainly focuses on electrochemistry, and biotechnology.

 	Scheme 1  A schematic overview of micro/nanoscaled manganese dioxide materials.	 

 	Fig. 1  Thermodynamic morphology based on the crystallographic characteristics of α-, β-, γ-, ε-, δ-, λ-MnO2. On the basis of the chemical bonding theory of single crystals, the thermodynamic morphology of MnO2 can be calculated.	 

 	Fig. 2  Recently reported modifications of MnO2 materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Recently reported MnO2-based composites for environmental applications.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Strategy for the synthesis of MnO2 nanowires decorated with ultrasmall Au NPs, which was based on the reduction of AuCl4−(aq) to Au by BH4− in the presence of PVP, EG as the solvent, and 90 °C as the reaction temperature. (b–e) HRTEM images of MnO2–Au NPs depicting the ultrasmall and monodisperse Au NPs size as well as their uniform distribution over the MnO2 surface. The lattice fringe orientations in the phase-contrast HRTEM images (d and e) show that both the MnO2 nanowires and Au NPs were single crystalline. (f) Proposed mechanism for silane oxidation and hydrogen production reactions catalyzed by MnO2–Au NPs. TEM and HRTEM images and the corresponding structural models of Ag/HMO and AgHMO. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. (g) TEM image of Ag/HMO. (h) TEM image of the SNP (white dotted circles) supported on a typical HMO nanorod with a [001] growth direction. (i) HRTEM image of Ag/HMO showing a hexagonal SNP. (j) HRTEM image of the Ag particle of Ag/HMO. (k) Structural model of the Ag particle supported on the {110} side-facet of the HMO. (l) TEM images of Ag-HMO. Inset: TEM image of Ag-HMO showing flat {001} facets at the ends of Ag-HMO nanorods (scale bar: 50 nm). (m) TEM image and (n) HRTEM image of an Ag-HMO nanorod with a [001] growth direction, indicating the Ag atom chains. (o) Auto-correlation function analysis and (p) simulated images of the panel (h) showing Ag single-atom chains. Scale bar: 0.5 nm in the panel (o). (q and r) Single-atom Ag chains inside the tunnels of HMO viewed from the [0_11] and [001] directions. (m) Atom arrangement on the {001} facet of Ag-HMO. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis of the hierarchically porous hybrid α-MnO2/Mn3O4 from the precursor δ-MnO2. (b–d) SEM images of α-MnO2/Mn3O4. Distribution analysis of two components of the hierarchically porous α-MnO2/Mn3O4 nanostructure. (f–i) HRTEM image and corresponding FFT pattern of α-MnO2/Mn3O4. (d) HAADF-STEM image of a broken α-MnO2/Mn3O4 particle and (f) the corresponding EELS map of merging. The EELS spectra were collected with a dispersion of (h) 641.7 eV and (g) 644 eV, representing MnII, III3O4, and α-MnIVO2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.191 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image, (b) HRTEM image, (c) HAADF image, and (d–f) energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping of Mn, Ti, and K elements over the K-OMS-5(H)@TiO2 catalyst. (g) Schematic diagram of the promotional effects of TiO2-decorated OMS-5(H) catalysts. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of Ce–Mn composite hollow spheres. (i–k) SEM and TEM images of CSs@CeO2 core–shell spheres (l–n) CSs@MnO2/CeO2–MnO2 yolk–shell spheres (o–q) MnO2/CeO2–MnO2 hollow spheres. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (r) Low-magnification and (s) high-magnification FESEM images of MnO2–CeO2 composite nanocatalysts on the cordierite filters. (t) HRTEM image of MnO2–CeO2 composite nanocatalysts. The inset in (t) is the fast-Fourier-transform (FFT) image of the yellow circled region. (u) SAED pattern of the ε-MnO2-CeO2 nanocatalyst. Diffraction spots of MnO2 NWs and CeO2 NPs are marked by a ring and triangle, respectively, by indexing the plane. (v) Schematic diagram for experimental preparation procedure for MnO2–CeO2 nanocatalysts and the selective catalytic reaction of NOx with NH3. Reproduced with permission.195 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis path and morphologic transformation of LMO-NH, (b) LMO-NH of La, Mn, and O; SEM patterns of (c) LMO, (d) LMO-N, (e) LMO-H, and (d) LMO-NH; TEM images of (e) LMO and (f–j) LMO-NH; and HRTEM images of (j) LMO and (k) LMO-NH. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Fabrication process of tube-on-sheet CNTs/MnO2 nanocomposites. SEM images of (b) Mn–Co–O precursors, (c) Co–MnO2 nanosheets; TEM image of (d) Co–MnO2 nanosheets dissolve Co nanoparticles; SEM image (e), TEM image (f) and HRTEM image (g) of CNTs/MnO2 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (h) The schematic illustration of synthesis MnO2@NHCS, (i) and (j) TEM images of pure NHCS at different magnification; (k) and (l) TEM images of MnO2@NHCS at different magnification; (m) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mapping images of MnO2@NHCS. Reproduced with permission.229 © 2018 Published by Elsevier B.V. (n) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the MnO2–CC electrothermal textile. (o–p) SEM images, (q and r) EDS mapping, (s) cross-sectional SEM image, (t) TEM, (u, inset) HRTEM image, and (v) photograph of the MnO2–CC textile. Reproduced with permission.230 © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM, (b and c) TEM, and (d) HRTEM images of fresh Mn2O3; (e) SEM, (f) TEM and (g–h) HRTEM images of Mn2O3/Mn3O4/MnO2. Reproduced with permission.244 © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (i) SEM image of the SiMnOx microjet, inset corresponding to the cavity of the tube, (j) TEM image of the SiMnOx microjet (k) SEM image of the FeSiMnOx microjet, blue solid inset corresponding to the tube cavity and red dotted inset corresponding to γ-Fe2O3 NPs on the outer surface, (l) TEM image of the FeSiMnOx microjet, (m) magnification of the red dotted lines in (k), (n) EDX spectrum of the FeSiMnOx microjet, (o) EDX mapping of the FeSiMnOx microjet, and (p) element profile of FeSiMnOx (represented by a red dotted line). (q) Chemical fabrication of mesoporous Fe2O3/SiO2–MnO2 (FeSiMnOx) microjets for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants and removal of heavy metals. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  FESEM and TEM images of the (a and b) cAP and (c–f) of 0.4 wt% MnOx-cAP composite. (g) and (h) are the SAED pattern and HRTEM image of 0.4 wt% MnOx-cAP composite, respectively. (i) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the MnOx-cAP photocatalyst and VPCB system. (j) Proposed degradation mechanism. Reproduced with permission.250 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 11  FESEM images of (a) ZIF-67 nanocubes, (b) Co/N/C nanoboxes, (c) hierarchical Co/N/C@MnO2. TEM images of (d) ZIF-67@PDA yolk–shelled structure, (e) Co/N/C nanoboxes, and (f) hierarchical Co/N/C@MnO2. (g) The corresponding SAED pattern. (h–i) High-resolution TEM images of Co/N/C and MnO2 sheets, respectively. (j) Illustration of the fabrication process of hierarchical Co/N/C@MnO2. (k) Schematic mechanisms of EM wave absorption for Co/N/C@MnO2 composites. Reproduced with permission.251 © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. SEM and TEM images of the CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes (a′–c′) SEM and (e′) TEM images of CoFe PB@MnO2, (d′) SEM, (f′) TEM and (g′) HRTEM images of CoFe PB@MnO2 nanocubes, (h′) and (i′) elemental mappings of the CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes. (j′) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CoFe@C and CoFe@C@MnO2 nanocubes. (k′) The absorbing mechanism of as-prepared samples. Reproduced with permission.252 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 
* + OH− → OH* + e−	(1)
OH* + OH−− → O* + H2O + e−	(2)
O* + OH− → OOH* + e−	(3)
OOH* + OH− → O2 + H2O + e− + *	(4)
4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−	(5)
* + 2H2O → OH* + H2O + H+ + e−	(6)
OH* + H2O → O* + H2O + H+ + e−	(7)
O* + H2O → OOH* + H+ + e−	(8)
OOH* → O2 + H+ + e− + *	(9)
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(10)

 	Fig. 12  X-ray diffraction patterns of the different MnO2 nano shapes (a) pristine, (b) after stability testing in 0.1 M NaOH at 40 C for 36 h. IR corrected linear sweep voltammograms at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 (c), chronoamperometry at 1.7 V (RHE) (d), Nyquist plot at 1.7 V (RHE) (e), IR-corrected Tafel curves of various MnO2 nano shapes on the Au electrode in 0.1 M KOH solution (f). Reproduced with permission.286 © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Structure of rutile-type MnO2 with oxygen vacancies. (b) XRD patterns of different oxides. The symbols * and + denote Mn3O4 and MnOOH, respectively. (c) and (d) HRTEM images of pristine β-MnO2 (c) and β-MnO2 heated in Ar (d), the insets show the FFT patterns. (e) Constructed models of perfect and oxygen-vacant hydroxylated β-MnO2 (110) surfaces. (f) and (g) Configurations of O2 (f) and OOH (g) adsorbed on different surfaces. (h) Energy profiles and configurations of ORR on β-MnO2 surfaces with one (Path I) and two (Path II) oxygen vacancies. Asterisk denotes the adsorbed species. TS = transition state. Reproduced with permission.293 Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Crystal structures of (i) spinel Mn3O4, (j) layered δ-MnO2 in polyhedral representations. (k) The morphology change during spinel-to-layer transition as revealed from Kim's TEM. In (k) the layered δ-MnO2 sheets were gradually peeled off from the spinel surface and (l) shows the enlarged local view where the layered δ-MnO2 sheet starts to drop from the pristine spinel surface. Copyright from the Wiley group. (m) Scheme for the mechanism of spinel-to-layer phase transition (the dotted box indicates the solid-to-solid phase transition step of spinel H0.5MnO2). (n) Energetic profiles for solid-to-solid phase transition of H0.5MnO2 (black solid curve) and MnO2 (red dashed curve) (o) side view of key intermediate states of H0.5MnO2 during the phase transition viewed from [11_20] (using δ-MnO2 as the reference). In (o), the octahedral sites along the A row are all occupied by Mn ions, while only half of the octahedral sites along the B row are occupied, forming an ordered Mn-vacancy structure in the MnO2 layers. Red ball: O; white ball: H; violet ball: Mn; yellow ball: Mnic. Reproduced with permission.294 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Typical SEM images of the products after the reaction for (a and e) 20 min, (b and f) 1 h, (c and g) 4 h, and (d, h) 8 h. (i) Schematic illustration for the formation procedure of Co–MnO2 composite. OER electrocatalytic properties of catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (j) Polarization curves and (k) corresponding Tafel plots of Co–MnO2|O V (8 h), MnO2, RuO2, and GC. (l) Scan rate dependence of the average capacitive current densities at the open circuit potential for Co–MnO2|O V and MnO2. (m) Nyquist plots of the as-prepared samples for modified electrodes recorded at a constant overpotential of 200 mV. (n) Disk and ring currents of the Co–MnO2|O V catalyst on an RRDE (1600 rpm) with a ring potential of 1.5 V (vs. RHE). (o) Time dependence of catalytic current density during electrolysis at a static potential. Reproduced with permission.301 © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The charge density distribution difference between MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. The yellow and blue spheres represent positive and negative charges, respectively. (b) Calculated DOS of MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. (c) Reaction coordinates of OER on MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. (d) Top view of the slab models used to describe MnO2 and Co–MnO2|OV. (e) Polarization curves of Co–MnO2|OV, NiMnO2|OV, Fe–MnO2|OV and MnO2 for OER in 1 M KOH. (f) Comparison of the current density at a potential of 1.60 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.301 © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a and b) OER polarization curves, (c) Tafel plots, (d) EIS data, (e) equivalent circuit for EIS analysis, and (f) X-band EPR spectra (parallel mode) for the Ru-substituted α-Mn1−xRuxO2 1D nanowires and the physical mixture of α-MnO2 and RuO2 (mole ratio of 8:2). In (e), the Re, Rct, and CPE represent the electrolyte resistance, charge transfer resistance, and constant phase element, respectively. Reproduced with permission.305 © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) LSV curves, (b) the onset potentials and overpotentials, and (c) the corresponding Tafel plots of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300, Ni–Fe– K0.23MnO2 CNFs, K0.23MnO2 NS, and IrO2 toward OER. (d) LSV curves initially and after 3000 cycles of CVs, and (e) chronopotentiometric curves of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 for OER. (f) Nyquist plots of the three catalysts. Reproduced with permission.62 © 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) LSV curves of the CFP, the metal-ion-doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet/CFP, and the IrO2/CFP composite electrodes measured in 1 m KOH with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, where the current is normalized by the geometrical area of the carbon fiber paper. (b) CV curves of the different composite electrodes in 1 m KOH at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (c) The Cdl by plotting the current density variation against the scan rate to fit a linear regression. (d) Tafel slopes (iRs-corrected) derived from the LSVs in (a). (e) Nyquist plots of the EIS of the different composite electrodes (Z′′: imaginary impedance, Z′ real impedance). The illustration in the figure shows the plots at high-frequency regions. (f) Galvanostatic measurements at a current density of 20 mA cm−2 for the different composite electrodes. Reproduced with permission.308 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves for OER at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Tafel plots for OER. (c) LSV curves for HER at 5 mV s−1. (d) Tafel plots for HER. (e) Nyquist plots for NS-MnO2 and NF (the inset shows the equivalent electrical circuit from the fitted impedance spectra). (f) Current density versus time (I–t) curves of HER and OER for NS-MnO2. Reproduced with permission.145 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  HRTEM images of (a) pure IrO2 NPs. (b–f) Of IrO2@Mn-1, IrO2@Mn-2, IrO2@Mn-3, IrO2@Mn-4, and IrO2@Mn-5, respectively. (g) The electrochemically active surface area (ECSAs) variation trend under different compositional IrO2@α-MnO2. (h) OER polarization curves of the prepared catalyst. The inset is the required overpotential to achieve 10 mA cm−2. All measurements were performed in 0.1 M HClO4 under a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The iR loss from the solution resistance was corrected. The catalyst loading mass was ∼0.2 mg cm−2 and the electrode area was 0.25 cm−2. (i) Nyquist plots of prerecorded catalysts at 1.25 V vs. SCE. (j) The variation trend of turnover frequency (TOF) at different compositions. All currents were selected at the overpotential of 323 mV, which corresponded to IrO2 with a 10 mA cm−2 overpotential. (k) k2-normalized Ir-LIII edge EXAFS of IrO2@Mn-5 and IrO2. Phase corrections were applied, and the k-range was 2–14 Å. The different scattering paths are indicated in a crystal structure diagram of the IrO2 unit cell. (l) The c/a ratio variation with IrO2 mass fraction. The cell parameters were extracted from the IFEFFIT fitting. (m) Relationship between The OER activity and the lattice strain of IrO2. The OER activity is expressed by the intrinsic TOF. (n) Diagram of the process of α-MnO2 substrate induces the lattice strain of IrO2. The lattice mismatch at their interface results in the modifications of the crystal structure, which exhibited a compression in the c-axis; these modifications are responsible for the variations of the c/a ratio of IrO2 on the α-MnO2. It also meant that the IrO6 geometry transferred from the D2h symmetry to a relatively elongated structure. Reproduced with permission.317 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) SEM images of FeMn-MOF; (b and c) Low and high magnification SEM images of FeC/MnO2 nanocubes; (d and e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of FeC/MnO2 nanocubes; (g) EDX elemental mapping images of Fe, Mn, C, and O for FeC/MnO2 nanocubes. (h) Schematic figure illustrating the synthesis process of the FeC/MnO2 catalyst. OER electrochemical measurements. (i) LSV, (j) onset potential, (k) Tafel curves, and (l) EIS Nyquist plots of FeC/MnO2 and compared samples in 1 M KOH for OER with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 at a room temperature. (m) The current density as a function of the scan rate for different as-obtained catalysts. (n) Time-dependent current density curves over the FeC/MnO2 during electrolysis at 10 mA cm−2. (o) Illustrative scheme of the electron transport path in the OER reaction. Reproduced with permission.98 © 2021 Elsevier Ltd and Techna Group S.r.l. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) iR-corrected LSV polarization curves of NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2 electrodes, (b) Overpotentials required for j = 10, 50, 100 mA cm−2 of the tested electrodes, (c) Tafel plots of NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2 electrodes, (d) Chronopotentiometric measurement on ammo@MnO2 for OER at the current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2, (e) capacitive current density versus the scan rate for NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2, and (f) EIS Nyquist plots of NF, Ni–MnO2, and ammo@MnO2 electrodes under the overpotential of 315 and 365 mV for OER. All tests were carried out in 1 m KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.326 © 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 23  TEM images for (a) NiO/MnO2 and (b) NiO/MnO2@PANI. (b1) SAED pattern, and (b2) HRTEM image for NiO/MnO2@PANI. HAADF-STEM images for (a1) NiO/MnO2 and (b3) NiO/MnO2@PANI. EDX elemental mapping images for (a2–4) NiO/MnO2 and (b4–8) NiO/MnO2@PANI. SEM images of (c) γ-MnO2, (d) NiO/MnO2, and (e) NiO/MnO2@PANI. Insets are the low-magnification images of the selected area. OER properties of different catalysts were measured in 0.1 M KOH solution at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (g) LSV curves (scan rate of 10 mV s−1). (h) Tafel slopes calculated from LSV curves. (i) Nyquist plots obtained from EIS measurements at a potential of 1.71 V (vs. RHE) under a frequency range of 0.1–105 Hz. (j) Chronopotentiometry curves for NiO/MnO2 and NiO/MnO2@PANI. Reproduced with permission.328 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  XRD patterns of the as-achieved single FeOOH, MnO2, and Fe–Mn–O NSs (a). SEM images of Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC at different magnifications (b and c). TEM and HRTEM images of Fe–Mn–O NSs (d–f), and (f) is the magnified image of the white square area in (e). EDX elemental maps of the as-synthesized Fe–Mn–O nanosheets (g). AFM image (h) and the corresponding height profiles (i) of Fe–Mn–O nanosheets (the numbers 1, 2, and 3 correspond to the line scan number in (e)). Reproduced with permission.331 © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 25  Polarization curves for CC, RuO2/CC, single FeOOH/CC, MnO2/CC, and Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC electrode (iR corrected) in 1 m KOH at 5 mV s−1 (a); the onset potential and overpotential (η) of the as-prepared electrodes at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 (b); the corresponding Tafel plots (c); stability test of the Fe–Mn–O NSs/CC electrode in a KOH solution (1 m) before and after 2500 cycles (d). The inset image shows the chronopotentiometric curve (voltage vs. time) for the hybrid electrode at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.331 © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) XRD pattern of MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (b) SEM images of MnO2/Ti. (c) SEM images of MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (d) TEM image of MnO2–CoP3. (e) HRTEM image of MnO2–CoP3. (f) Elemental mapping images for MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (g) LSV curves for MnO2–CoP3/Ti, MnO2/Ti, CoP3/Ti, RuO2/Ti, and bare Ti mesh. (h) Tafel plots for MnO2–CoP3/Ti, MnO2/Ti, RuO2/Ti, and CoP3/Ti. (i) Time dependence of the potential at 0.88 V without iR correction. (j) Capacitive current densities at 1.10 V as a function of scan rate for MnO2/Ti and MnO2–CoP3/Ti. (k) Nyquist plots for MnO2/Ti and MnO2–CoP3/Ti at 0.798 V without the iR correction. All the experiments were conducted in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.325 © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) XRD patterns of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300, Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs, and K0.23MnO2 NS. (b and c) FESEM, (d) TEM, and (e–f) HRTEM images of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300. (h–k) Elemental mapping images of Mn, Ni, Fe, and O for the single Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 in (g). (l) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300. (m) LSV curves, (n) the onset potentials and overpotentials, and (o) the corresponding Tafel plots of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300, Ni–Fe– K0.23MnO2 CNFs, K0.23MnO2 NS, and IrO2 toward OER. (p) LSV curves initially and after 3000 cycles of CVs, and (q) chronopotentiometric curves of Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs-300 for OER. (r) Nyquist plots of the three catalysts. Top views of the (001) planes for (s) K0.23MnO2 model and (t) Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 model. (u) DOS of the two models. (w) The charge density distribution difference between the two models; the yellow and blue spheres represent positive and negative charges, respectively. Reaction coordinates of the two models for (w) OER and (x) HER. The insets in (u) show the adsorption models of OH*, O*, and OOH* on the oxygen vacancy sites for OER, and the insets in (f) show the adsorption model of H* on the O site for HER. The purple, green, orange, red, and gray spheres represent the Mn, Ni, Fe, O, and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.62 © 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2. (b–d) SEM images of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2. (e–g) TEM images, (h) AFM images, and (i) TEM mapping of the fabricated NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 heterogeneous array. (j–k) CV curves and Tafel plots of NF, NF–Ni3S2, NF–Ni(OH)2/MnO2, NF–Ni3S2/MnO2, and NF–IrO2/C for OER in 1.0 M KOH. (l) Polarization curves of NF, NFNi3S2, NF–Ni(OH)2/MnO2, NF–Ni3S2/MnO2, and NF–IrO2/C for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. (m) Long-term durability test of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 at 1.6 V for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. Inside: SEM image of NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 after 48 h hydrolytic dissociation. (n) Schematic illustration of water activation, H* intermediate formation, and hydrogen generation processes on the NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 hybrid catalyst in 1.0 M KOH. (o) Schematic illustration of OH− activation, OH*/O*/OOH* generation and oxygen formation processes on NF–Ni3S2/MnO2 hybrid catalyst in 1.0 M KOH. (p and q) Calculated reaction energy diagram at different stages of H2O dissociation toward H2 and O2 generation in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.63 © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

α-MnO2-SF	Redox reaction	0.489	77.5	
	
	0.1 M KOH	
276

α-MnO2 nanorods	Hydrothermal method	0.45	73.1	3.225	0.40	1.0 M KOH	
277

Mesoporous MnOx	Solvothermal method	0.427	120	112	1.00	1.0 M KOH	
278

α-MnO2 nanowires	Hydrothermal method	
	110	
	0.14	0.1 M KOH	
279

α-MnO2 nanostructures	Hydrothermal method	0.37	58	
	0.275	0.1 M KOH	
280

3D radial α-MnO2	Hydrothermal method	0.09	155	9.07	0.038	0.1 M KOH	
281

β-MnO2 nanoplates	Solution route	0.45	78.2	
	0.40	1.0 M KOH	
282

β-MnO2(KTT-6)	Hard template-derived	0.61	60	119.5	0.204	0.1 M KOH	
283

Cryptomelane-type MnO2	Thermal treatments	0.44	49.8	3.1 ± 0.10	0.21	0.1 M KOH	
289

δ-MnO2 naosheets	In situ method	0.32	40	
	1.59	1.0 M KOH	
139

δ/NH3–MnO2	Hydrothermal method	0.49	118	0.488	1.00	1.0 M NaOH	
290

Ni intercalated birnessite	Wet chemical ion exchange	0.40	60	2.62	0.28	1.0 M KOH	
291

Ni–MnO2	Cation exchange	0.33	23.7	15.8	
	1.0 M KOH	
93

Co doped birnessite	Hydrothermal method	0.42	81	
	0.28	1.0 M KOH	
293

Co-doped MnO2/N–CNF	Spontaneous redox reaction	0.279	75	15.9	0.56	1.0 M KOH	
295

Co/MnO2	Electrodeposition	0.40	60	
	
	1.0 M KOH	
296

α-Mn0.9V/CO0.1O2	Hydrothermal method	0.46	120	
	0.67	1.0 M KOH	
297

MnO2-7.6%CO	Hydrothermal method	
	57	
	0.2	1.0 M KOH	
300

KXFe[CO0.16Mn0.84O2]	Intercalation	0.375	56	
	1.0	1.0 M KOH	
301

Doped MnO2/CFP	Electrodeposition	0.39	104	11.3	
	1.0 M KOH	
302

Ni–MnO2 nanosheets	Heating reflux	0.33	23.7	15.8	0.4	1.0 M KOH	
303

Au–MnO2 hybrid catalysts	Hydrothermal method	0.32	68	
	4.0	1.0 M NaOH	
308

Ti-stabilized MnO2	Reactive sputter deposition	0.4	170	
	
	0.05 M H2SO4	
310

Co3O4/MnO2	Hydrothermal method	
	34	
	0.1	0.1 M KOH	
61

IrO2@α-MnO2	Hydrothermal method	0.275	59	
	0.2	0.05 M H2SO4	
311

CDs0.15-MnO2 catalyst	Microwave-assisted method	0.343	43.6	11.9	0.3	1.0 M KOH	
317

MnO2–CoP3/Ti	Hydrothermal method	0.288	65	0.091	
	1.0 M KOH	
319

ammo@MnO2	Galvanic replacement	0.232	36	2.93	
	1.0 M KOH	
320

MnO2–NiFe/Ni	Electrodeposition	0.226	251.3	
	
	1.0 M KOH	
49

Ni/DMTD/MnO2	Hydrothermal method	0.26	69.46	
	0.0796	1.0 M KOH	
321

NiO/MnO2@PANI	Hydrothermal method	0.75	42	
	0.245	0.1 M KOH	
322

MnO2/NiCo2O4/NF	Hydrothermal method	0.34	139	105	
	1.0 M KOH	
323

Fe–Mn–O NS/CC	Heating reflux	0.273	63.9	116.3	
	1.0 M KOH	
324

Pd–MnO2/CS	Hydrothermal method	
	
	52.8	0.1	0.1 M KOH	
64

Np-CeO2/TM	Acid etching	0.279	47	0.74	1.9	1.0 M KOH	
326

U–CoNi–S-NSA/MnO2	Spontaneous redox process	0.17	67	21.7	1.0	1.0 M KOH	
328

Ni–Fe–K0.23MnO2 CNFs	Hydrothermal method	0.27	42.3	122.8	2.0	1.0 M KOH	
62

NF–Ni3S2/MnO2	Hydrothermal method	0.26	61	118.3	
	1.0 M KOH	
63

NiCo2O4@MnO2	Hydrothermal method	0.337	89	0.141	0.6	1.0 M KOH	
329

(P–PbO2)–MnO2	Electrodeposition	0.476	196	
	
	1.63 M H2SO4	
330

MnO2–CoFe2O4/C	Hydrothermal method	
	130	
	0.455	0.1 M KOH	
331

Co3O4–MnO2-CNT	Gas-phase synthesis	0.42	66	
	0.233	0.1 M KOH	
332


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
