Recent progress of gold nanostructures and their applications  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP01549A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP01549A
(Review Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 18545-18576Recent progress of gold nanostructures and their applications

        
          
            Khadiga Ali 
            Dahan†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Juan 
            Xu
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Caixia 
            Kan
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Physics, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China. E-mail: xujuan@nuaa.edu.cn; cxkan@nuaa.edu.cn
bMIIT Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Materials and Physics, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
Received 
      6th April 2023
    , Accepted 18th May 2023First published on 7th June 2023AbstractFor noble metals, such as gold (Au) and silver (Ag), it is well-known that surface plasmons of their nanocrystals have significant spatial confinement and propagation loss due to the strong damping effect and the scattering between the plasmons and phonons. Noble metal nanostructures are usually referred to as “plasmonic nanostructures” in many studies. Based on the resonance effect of surface plasmons, the electromagnetic field can be localized on the subwavelength scale, which induces a booming new field of nanophotonics. Among the various nanostructures, Au nanostructures have received extensive attention both in fundamental research and technological fields due to their unique localized surface plasmon characteristics. These characteristics include strong optical extinction, near-field enhancement, and far-field scattering. By changing either the morphological parameters or the surrounding medium of nanostructures, the localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of Au nanostructures can be tuned in a large spectral region from visible to near infrared (Vis-NIR) wavelength. Corresponding to the experimental research, there are several numerical techniques that enable modeling the optical characteristics of Au nanostructures in different shapes and assemblies. The most popular technique is the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method for modeling various nanostructures and nanoscale optical devices. The accuracy of the computational models has been proven by reliable experimental data. In this review, we focused on Au nanostructures of different morphologies, such as nanorods, nanocubes, nanobipyramids and nanostars. Then combined with FDTD simulations, we described the effect of morphological parameters and the surrounding medium on the SPR properties of Au nanostructures. More and more achievements indicate that the surface plasmon effect is promising in many technical fields. In the last part, we summarize some typical applications of plasmonic Au nanostructures, such as high sensitivity sensors, photothermal conversion with hot electron effects and photoelectric devices, as well as plasmonic nanolasers.
1. Introduction
Noble metal nanostructures, especially made from Au and Ag, have attracted a lot of attention in the fields of both scientific research and technical applications.1–6 Since the unique size-and shape-dependent properties and potentials are highly related to the localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect, noble metal nanostructures are known as “plasmonic nanostructures”. In the past two decades, great efforts have been made to design and create Au and Ag nanostructures with a variety of morphologies. It is considered that controlling the shape of nanostructures is one of the most effective ways to alter the optical, electronic, and catalytic properties of metal nanostructures.7–9 In particular, anisotropic elongated nanostructures, such as Au nanorods (Au NRs), Au nanobipyramids (Au NBPs), and Ag nanorods (Ag NRs), are of interest due to the extremely shape-dependent plasmonic features that they possess. There are usually two different plasma resonances for them, known as the transverse surface plasmon resonance (SPRT) and longitudinal surface plasmon resonance (SPRL). Usually for Au nanostructures, the dominated SPRL mode in the spectra can be controlled in a large wavelength area depending on the aspect ratio (AR), which can be defined as the length/width ratio. However, the SPRT mode is weak and is located at about 530 nm.10,11
Plasmonic nanostructures may be engineered to suit specific technological requirements and solve obstacles in a variety of fields, including optoelectronics,12–18 surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) sensors,19–21 solar cells,22,23 biological/chemical sensors,24–31 and catalysis.32–37 Nanostructured materials offer adjustable physicochemical features, such as light absorption, colour change, chemical composition, preparation mode, and electrical and thermal properties, which may be tailored to meet specific requirements.38 On the other hand, the plasmonic characteristics of colloidal metal nanoparticles can be tuned by varying the dielectric environment, composition, and dimensions, and that constitutes an appealing strategy for adjusting their properties and further development of innovative usage in the near future.
Plasmonic behaviour is the collective oscillation of conduction electrons in metals.39 The presence of interfaces is critical to the production of plasmonic phenomena (metal-vacuum and metal-dielectric). Plasmon modes are typically surface modes, which can be either locally confined to the interface or propagate along the surface. Because of this, plasmonics is considered to be a subfield of nanophysics, and the majority objects in research hot fields are nanoparticles and thin films.40 Today, noble metals (e.g. Au and Ag), Cu, Al and graphene, as well as highly doped oxides, are among the commonly used plasmonic materials. Because of changes in the carrier concentration, carrier mobility, and Ohmic loss, the nanostructures of these materials exhibit significantly different plasmonic capabilities. Many researchers have focused their attention on Au and Ag nanostructures, mostly because of the adjustable plasmonic properties in the visible to near infrared range and their chemical stability. Because the plasmonic characteristics are highly dependent on their geometry (size and shape), there has been significant progress in the use of chemical approaches to carefully regulate their growth, as well as advancements in a diverse range of characterization techniques.41
The rich plasmonic properties of nanostructures are controllable by variation of their shape and composition, and they are very sensitive to changes in their surroundings, making them excellent candidates for use as sensors.42 Also their ability to sustain surface plasmons can aid in interacting with light in various ways.43 Additionally, plasmonic nanostructures exhibit various distinct characteristics, including a substantial electromagnetic field enhancement, a high photothermal conversion efficiency, and a broad spectrum response. These characteristics provide them with enormous potential for a wide range of applications, spanning from clinical treatment and diagnostics to optoelectronic control. As a result, a new study topic known as “nanoplasmonics” has arisen, which has drawn enormous attention from a huge community of researchers from a wide range of academic disciplines, such as chemistry, materials science, optics, engineering, and biology. Fig. 1 provides a schematic representation of a synopsis of the numerous subfields that fall under the umbrella of nanoplasmonics.41
 Fig. 1  A picture of the different subfields that are being studied right now under the topic of nanoplasmonics. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
Plasmonic nanostructures are generally prepared through chemical methods. With the development of colloidal chemistry, the synthesis of plasmonic nanostructures and advanced characterization have a significant impact on the nanoplasmonics subject. For the time being, many fabrication equipment and methods for plasmonics studies have been constructed and developed for realizing nanostructures with improved physicochemical properties and expanding applications in many fields. They are simple chemistry, but they can meet complex physics, as outlined by Y. Xia et al.35 Au nanostructures of various morphologies can be produced in solid forms as nanospheres, nanorods, nanostars, nanoplates, and nanocubes, depending on the synthetic protocol used44,45 (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the Au nanostructure formation mechanism with various sizes and shapes by the chemical reduction method. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011. 
Owing to the rapid development of surface plasmon related issues in nanoplasmonics, new structures, effects and applications experienced an explosive research growth in very recent years. Therefore, it is of great importance to make a timely summary and outlook of these active issues. This review will focus on discussing Au nanostructures with tunable SPR properties, plasmonic behaviour of their coupling system and applications. We begin with Au nanostructures and their plasmonic resonance, which provides the most physical insight into metallic nanoparticle–light interactions and tunable extinction plasmonic properties.
2. Au nanostructures with tunable SPR
In particular, Au nanostructures are one of the most important nanomaterials that are both extremely versatile and easily accessible. For many applications, Au nanostructures have become the promising candidates because of the high chemical stability, controllable synthesis and ability of surface functionalization. Most importantly, the SPR responses of Au nanostructures can be attributed to their unique carrier concentration, mobility, and interband transitions, which can be tuned from 520 nm to 2000 nm.46–48 The SPR wavelength of Au nanostructures is determined by a variety of factors, including the distribution of surface charges, and the environment.49 The successful preparation of Au nanostructures in a variety of shapes has been achieved through the development of improved technologies. The seed-mediated growth process is one of the most effective methods for the manufacturing of Au nanostructures with homogeneous size and morphology, particularly for Au NRs and Au NBPs. The crystal structures of the seeds (see Fig. 3(a)–(c)) determined the crystallinity and forms of the final nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 3(d)–(f).50 The final products also depend on the preparation parameters, such as the ripening temperatures, concentration and addition time of surfactants, and the ripening time and pH of the solution system.
 Fig. 3  Three different structures for Au seeds and the corresponding production. (a–c) Single-crystal, single-twinned crystal, and five-fold-twinned crystal, respectively. (d–f) Au nanostructures created with above seeds. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers, copyright 2020. 
In recent years, research efforts have focused on the design and synthesis of nanostructures with different shapes, such as nanorods, nanobipyramids, nanocubes, and nanostars. Here, we present some research progress of Au nanostructures of these various shapes.
2.1. Gold nanorods (Au NRs)
In the past two decades, Au NRs have attracted much attention for widespread applications owing to their highly adjustable morphology, unique anisotropic plasmonic properties, and widely adjustable plasmon wavelength. And there are a huge number of research works performed on Au NRs. Due to the structural anisotropy, Au NRs present two distinct SPRL and SPRT modes. With the increase in the aspect ratio, the SPRL of Au NRs exhibits a linear increase from the visible to the infrared region.51–54 Au NRs possess high electromagnetic field enhancement at two ends and extremely large extinction cross-sections. On the other hand, because of different linkages between Au NRs and molecules, changes in dielectric and inter-particle spacing result in an obvious SPR shift, which is particularly well suited for detection of certain molecules. Driven by these fascinating optical phenomena and sensitive responses to the external environment, the application prospect of Au NRs has penetrated into new generation of photonic devices and biomedical fields, including optoelectronics,55 sensing,56 photocatalysis,57 Raman detection,58 drug carriers,59 imaging,60 and medical diagnosis61,62
The preparation of Au NRs with controlled morphology, narrow size distribution, and high purity is of great significance. With the development of colloidal chemistry, metal nanostructures can be fabricated through wet-chemical methods. For the preparation of Au NRs, many different high-quality and low-cost technologies have been developed, including seed mediated growth,63–65 electrochemical and photochemical methods,66–68 and seedless growth.69,70
As one of the chemical methods, the seed-mediated technique has become a classic and the most widely used method for the synthesis of Au NRs. The work describing the seed-mediated protocols was pioneered by Murphy and El-Sayed teams. Then many groups continuously optimized this seed growth of Au NRs with a variety of additives. In the seed-mediated procedure, three steps are involved, the nucleation of seeds, preparation of growth solution and the controlled growth of the seed particles in the growth solution. Usually, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and other surfactants are applied to direct the growth of anisotropic crystals from small Au nanoparticle (∼2 nm in diameter) seeds with a trace of Ag+ ions, the growth solution CTAB or other surfactants.71–73 Au NRs with desired aspect ratios can be obtained by adjusting the parameters in the reaction system, comprising the Au precursor (HAuCl4), Ag+, reducing agent, surfactant, and halide ions, and the environmental conditions. Each parameter in the reaction system will influence the final production, even the existence of trace Ag+ ions.
For example, the seeds produced in the presence of CTAB have a single-crystalline cuboctahedral structure, which typically gives final single-crystalline Au NRs. It has been shown that nanorods grow longitudinally along the100 direction and have an octagonal cross-section. After the addition of Au seeds into the growth solution, Au atoms initially grow at almost the same rate along the symmetry-equivalent directions on the seed. Another key parameter is the addition of trace of Ag+ ions, which play an essential role in breaking the growth symmetry. The role of Ag+ ions in the seed mediated procedures was enhanced to induce the formation of single crystals through direct adsorption on the CTA+ in the form of a CTA+–AgBr2− complex. The concentration of Ag+ ions during growth can determine the particle size at which the symmetry breaks and the aspect ratio of the resultant Au NRs.74–76 As shown in Fig. 4, overgrown Au seeds remain spherical and multiply twinned particles in the absence of Ag+ ions, while Au seeds overgrown in the presence of Ag+ ions are anisotropic in single crystalline nature.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed key steps of the symmetry breaking process in single-crystal Au NR growth. (b) Au seed particles overgrown in the absence of Ag+ ions remain spherical and multiply twinned. (c) Au seeds overgrown in the presence of Ag+ ions are anisotropic. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Then the Au NRs will undergo isotropic overgrowth, leading to the exposure of the (200) facets and hence the creation of cuboidal Au nanocrystals. It is worth noting that one may create Au nanostructures of various sizes and forms using the same Au NRs as the seeds by carefully altering the CTAB content in the growth solution, as well as the pH value. In contrast, the Au seeds nucleated in citrate or in an Ag+-free environment typically have a multiply twinned structure, which usually gives Au NRs with a pentagonal cross-section. The multiply twinned Au NRs are bound by (200) and (220) facets while the tips are bound by five triangular (111) faces and five (111) twin boundaries run longitudinally along the nanorod. Furthermore, different head shapes for Au NRs can be produced by subsequent overgrowth using the growth solution made of the reactants at varying concentrations. In particular, their end shapes are highly dependent on the synthetic conditions. Fig. 5(a)–(d) show the TEM images of monodisperse Au NRs using different additives and the corresponding photographs of aqueous dispersion of Au NRs with different aspect ratios with the growth direction agent CTAB.77
 Fig. 5  TEM images and photograph of the corresponding aqueous dispersion of monodisperse Au NRs using additives of salicylate-based sodium salt (a and b), aromatic acid (c) and AgNO3 (d). Scale bars: (a–c) 200 nm, and (d) 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (e and f) Colloid photograph and UV-Vis absorbance spectra of Au NRs with SPR peaks labelled on the bottle. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. copyright 2012. 
The beautiful colours of Au colloids have attracted tremendous attention due to their historical applications in art, as shown in Fig. 5(e). Au NRs are also promising candidates in the optics and other plasmon related fields because they have two SPRs, as shown in Fig. 5(f), as well as large and controllable tunability spanning the visible and near-infrared (Vis-NIR) regions by simply varying the aspect ratio, strong chemical stability, and biocompatibility under biological conditions.79 The SPR effects in Au NRs produce two extinction bands, in which the transverse SPR band is positioned at about 520 nm and the longitudinal one is located at a longer wavelength tunable in the Vis-NIR regions.80 The intensity of the transverse SPR band is relatively low, and it is almost independent of the aspect ratios. On the other hand, the intensity of the longitudinal SPR band is significantly strong and obvious, and it is heavily dependent on the aspect ratios.81
It is also found that the SPR properties are also sensitive to the assembly styles, such as side-by-side, end-to-end, and ring modes. Fig. 6 shows two typical assemblies of Au NRs in the presence of Cys and HS-PEG-SH. The optical spectra show the SPR red-shift and blue shift, respectively, for the end-to-end and side-by-side assemblies of Au NRs.82 More detailed description can be obtained from ref. 83. Usually, TEM images present Au NR assembly with end-to-end or side-by-side modes, as shown in Fig. 6(a)–(f). It is difficult to determine whether a particular assembly truly occurred in solution or it arose from the solvent evaporation during the TEM sample preparation, since the TEM technique generally requires a dried sample. Ke et al., found that the red colour of Au NRs dispersed in water changed immediately with the addition of strong polar ether of tetrahydrofuran, as shown in Fig. 7(a). They presented the detailed colour change evolution by adding different amounts of tetrahydrofuran. Comparing the experimental and simulated optical spectra of Au NRs, it is clear that the side-by-side assembly process of the Au NRs with tetrahydrofuran is driven by van der Waals attraction between the Au NRs and the steric repulsion at the ends of nanorods.84
 Fig. 6  TEM images of mono-dispersed Au NRs (a) for end-to-end assembly (b and c) and side-by-side assembly of the dimer (d), trimer (e), and tetramer (f). (g and h) Schematic diagrams for the Cys induced end-to-end assembly and HS-PEG-SH induced side-by-side assembly of Au NRs. (i and j) Absorption spectra with time for the assembly process of Au NRs. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Colours of Au NRs dispersed in H2O, tetrahydrofuran (THF), mixture with increasing THF/H2O ratio. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Digital picture of four cycles of end-to-end assembly and disassembly of Au NRs induced by 3-mercaptopropionic acid. (c) Extinction spectra of Au NR colloids recorded after four cycles of assembly and disassembly. The assembly was induced by adjusting the pH of the solution to 9.6 and the disassembly was achieved by adjusting the pH to 3.1. The black spectrum is of the original Au NR colloid. (d) Extinction spectra of Au after four cycles of side-by-side assembly and disassembly of Au NRs. The assembly was induced by controlling the pH to 6.2 and the disassembly was induced by adjusting the pH to 3.2. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright 2008. 
In addition to the assembly of Au NRs possibly induced by the surface tension change of polar solvents, the pH of the colloid can also influence the state of the Au NRs. The reversible assembly and disassembly of Au NRs in both end-to-end and side-by-side fashions were systematically studied by Wang's group.73 They demonstrated pH-controlled reversible assembly and disassembly of Au NRs in aqueous solutions using various assembling agents, and found that the assembly occurred at higher pH and disassembly occurred at lower pH in the presence of 3-mercaptopropionic acid. The assembly is induced at lower pH and the disassembly is induced at higher pH with the agent of cysteine. The assembled and disassembled Au NRs exhibit clearly different colours in a highly reproducible manner, which further indicates the robustness of this pH-controlled reversible assembly process.
2.2. Gold nanobipyramids (Au NBPs)
Despite the excellent plasmonic properties and various applications demonstrated for Au NRs, they still possess several shortcomings, such as large size and shape distributions, large narrow full width at half maximum (FWHM) values, and round end shape with small local electric field enhancement. Au NBPs are another class of emerging and versatile plasmonic nanocrystals. The elongated Au NBPs feature a pentagonal base and two acute apexes. Similar to that in Au NRs, the longitudinal SPR wavelengths can be modified by altering the height to base-edge length ratio. One of the most intriguing properties of Au NBPs is their high monodispersity and therefore suppressed inhomogeneous spectral broadening of the plasmon peaks. Moreover, Au NBPs are more chemically stable than Au NRs. Au NBPs possess larger figure of merit (FOM) values than Au NRs. Their local electric field enhancements are several times larger than those of Au NRs.
In the fabrication of Au NBPs, great efforts have been devoted to purifying the product. Because the particle volumes of the coexistent spherical Au nanoparticles (NPs) and Au NBPs in the products are similar, it is difficult to separate Au NBPs out of the products using conventional centrifugation. One static precipitation method was developed for the preparation of high-purity (approaching 100%) and size-controlled Au NBPs, as typically carried out by the J. F. Wang group.86 They proposed the purification steps of Au NBPs, involving the seed-mediated growth, Ag overgrowth, depletion induced self-separation, and chemical etching, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 8(a). Fig. 8(b)–(e) show the TEM images of the sample corresponding to the process of Fig. 8(a). In the extinction spectra (Fig. 8(f)) of the five purified Au NBP samples, the SPR wavelengths can be tuned in a large spectral region from 700 to 1200 nm. They also compared the plasmonic characteristics of Au NBPs and Au NRs. The results indicate that Au NBPs generally exhibit better plasmonic properties than Au NRs, including narrower size and shape distributions, smaller FWHM values of 60 and 105 nm for the same longitudinal plasmon peaks as that of Au NRs, as shown in Fig. 8(g)–(i).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustrating the Au NBP purification steps. (b–e) TEM images of the sample after the purification process. (f) Extinction spectra of the five Au NBP samples after purification. (g–i) TEM images and normalized extinction spectra of the Au NBPs and Au NRs dispersed in aqueous solutions. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright, 2015. 
In addition to the better plasmonic properties, Au NBPs also exhibit stronger two-photon photoluminescence (TPPL) and stronger SERS. Fig. 9(a)–(e) compare the TPPL and SERS of Au NBPs with those of Au NRs of a similar SPR position at 744 nm and 840 nm. Comparison of the stronger TPPL properties between Au NBPs and Au NRs is shown in Fig. 9(f). The Au NBP samples were found to perform better in TPPL than the Au NR samples. The TPPL intensity of the 744 nm Au NBP sample was 4.1 times that of the 744 nm Au NR sample, and the TPPL intensity ratio between the 840 nm Au NBPs and Au NRs samples was 13.5, which is useful for two-photon biological imaging and photo-thermal therapy. The narrower peak widths and larger electric field enhancements of Au NBPs are beneficial to plasmon-enhanced spectroscopy. They further compared the SERS performances between Au NBPs and NRs, as indicated in Fig. 9(g). The results indicate that the Au NBP sample gives much stronger SERS signals than the Au NR sample. Therefore, Au NBPs will be an attractive candidate for various plasmonic applications in sensing, biomedicine, and plasmon-enhanced spectroscopies.
 Fig. 9  TEM images of the Au NBP and NR samples with SPR positioned at 744 nm (a and b) and 840 nm (c and d). Extinction spectra of the four samples dispersed in aqueous solutions (e). TPPL (f) and SERS spectra of the four samples (g). Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright 2015. 
Although both Au NRs and Au NBPs showed promising plasmonic properties, they are still unstable in harsh environments or high temperatures. In recent years, research on alloyed and bimetallic structures has become a focus for many researchers for their increased stability and enhanced physicochemical qualities. Wang et al.87,88 developed a novel effective method using a wet-chemical approach to obtain core–shell NRs, in which the core is uniform Au NBPs enveloped in an AuxAg1−x alloyed nanoshell. Fig. 10(a) represents the synthetic procedure of Au NBP@AuxAg1−x NRs. It has been demonstrated that the five-fold twinned Au NBP@AuxAg1−x NRs efficiently combine the advantages of the AuBP core and the Au–Ag alloy shell. Furthermore, they combine the advantages of Au and Ag, demonstrating the outstanding thermal and chemical stability, high refractive index sensitivity, and a robust SERS effect even when exposed to extreme conditions. In addition, the sensitivity of the refractive index depends on the size, shape, and composition of the crystal.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic approach of Au NBP@AuxAg1−xNRs, in which HAuCl4 and AgNO3 solutions were added simultaneously and slowly into the Au BP seed solution at a slow rate during the synthetic approach. (b) Transmission electron microscopy image of the pre-synthesized Au NBP core. (c) High-resolution HAADF-STEM picture of Au NBP@AuxAg1−x NRs, demonstrating a distinct core–shell interface. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from IOP Publishing Ltd, copyright 2020. 
Based on the overgrowth of five-fold twinned Au NBPs into pentagonal rods, nanoframes with both high specific surface and promising plasmonic properties can be fabricated. The synthesis of Au NBPs embedded in ultrathin alloyed metal (Au, Pd, and Pt) nanoframes, with one of the plasmon modes extremely similar to that of the Au NBPs (Fig. 11(a)),89 has been successfully achieved by Zhu et al. The synthesis is facilitated by the application of an Ag coating to Au NBPs. It is hypothesized that the good plasmonic capabilities of the Au NBP-embedded ultrathin metal nanoframes are due to the little influence of the ultrathin metal nanoframes on the AuBPs, which has been demonstrated in TEM images in Fig. 11(b). The deposition of the ultrathin metal nanoframes on the Au NBPs causes a slight shift of the longitudinal plasmon peak, which is accompanied by slight peak broadening and intensity reduction, as shown in Fig. 11(c). In response to an increase in the number of metal atoms added, the nanostructure transforms from the original nanoframe shape to a nanocage shape. This approach has also been successfully used for Au NBPs@Ag NRs of varying lengths, as well as Au NBPs of varying longitudinal dipolar plasmon wavelengths, among other materials. In the application test, it was found that the Au NBP-embedded ultrathin alloyed metal nanoframes exhibited an excellent surface enhanced Raman scattering effect, outstanding in situ reaction probing performance, and high catalytic properties.89
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic depicting the synthetic process. (b and c) TEM images and extinction spectra of the Au NBP sample and the Au NBP-embedded metal (Au, Pd, and Pt) nanoframe samples. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
In addition to the nanoframe along the edges of pentagonal columns, there are two sharp tips that caused widespread interest simultaneously. Under laser irradiation, a strong electromagnetic field generated from Au NBP tips, which can be quickly accumulated and transferred to neighboring hetero-nanostructures. The typical structures have been reported by the group of J. F. Wang.90 More currently, by using the N-deacetylation reaction from nonfluorescent amplex red to fluorescent resorufin as a model reaction, the catalytic properties of Pt all-covered Au NBPs and Pt end-deposited Au NBPs were compared, as described in ref. 91 The results (Fig. 12) show that the end-deposited bimetallic nanostructures can maintain a strong electromagnetic field and further promote the generation and transfer of energetic hot electrons for photo-catalysis. Moreover, it is also demonstrated that masking of the side surface has little effect on the catalytic activity by silica coating on the side surface of Pt end-deposited Au NBPs (Pt–Au NBPs@ SiO2). The contributions from the tips play a key role in the overall photocatalytic activity for Pt end-deposited Au NBPs.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the catalytic process from silica-coated Au NBPs. (b) TEM images of Au NBPs, all-covered Pt–Au NBPs, and end-deposited Pt–Au NBPs. (c) the reaction of amplex red to fluorescent resorufin during the catalytic process. (d) Fluorescence intensity versus time trajectories of end-deposited Pt–Au NBPs and Pt–Au NBPs@ SiO2 under catalysis, respectively. (e) Statistical analysis of the reaction rate changes for three different structures. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
2.3. Gold nanocubes (Au NCs)
It is known that the rich edges and sharp corners of metal nanostructures generate a significantly enhanced localized electromagnetic field on individual nanoparticles or between coupled nanoparticles. One typical plasmonic nanostructure is the nanocube. Metallic nanocubes have been a highly studied nanostructure owing to their properties and flat surfaces for building assembled blocks of face-to-face assembled cube dimers. Among plasmonic NCs, although Ag nanocubes have been utilized more heavily because of their facile synthetic method and strong plasmonic properties, Au NCs are more beneficial as Au nanoparticles offer good chemical stability, capabilities in various surface modifications, conjugation chemistries, biocompatibility, and tunable plasmonic properties.
Usually, Au NCs can be synthesized using the most common fabrication process, namely the seed-mediated growth method, by adjusting the experimental parameters such as the pH value, metal precursor concentration, and surfactant chain length.92 Ahn et al. introduced the synthesis of uniform Au NCs using a seed-mediated method with a CTAB surfactant and ascorbic acid (AA) as the ligand and reducing agent, respectively.93 They found that the morphology of the final product can be controlled to be of rod-shaped, cubo-octahedral, cube, and rhombohedral dodecahedral nanocrystals by adjusting the CTAB and AA concentrations in the growth solution. Focusing on the role of CTAB, they found that cubes were readily synthesized over a wider range of AA concentrations as the concentration of CTAB increased.
Park et al., reported a synthetic strategy to form Au NCs with precisely controlled edge size, ranging from 17 to 78 nm.94 By controlling the concentration of bromide ions, they also precisely controlled the edge sharpness and size of Au NCs, yielding sharp-cornered or round-cornered Au NCs in a highly selective manner, as shown in Fig. 13(a). Then they further investigated the effect of bromide ions on the growth kinetics of Au NC corner sharpness. At low bromide densities, the number of adsorbed bromide ions is insufficient to block the (200) facet completely. Hence, the relative growth-rate difference between [200] and [111]/[220] directions is less significant, producing round-cornered Au NCs. When a sufficient amount of facet-directing agents is provided, effective and preferential binding to the (200) facet decreases the reduction rate, while the (111)/(220) facets are less affected by bromide ions, maximizing the growth-rate difference between (200) and the other two facets to be sharp-cornered Au NCs. They controlled the size and corner sharpness by simultaneously adjusting the volume of seed solution. With a decreasing seed volume, the edge length increased from 17 to 78 nm, as shown in Fig. 13(b). The normalized UV-vis spectra of a series of Au NC solutions show a gradual red-shift as the corner sharpens and the edge length increases.
 Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis of corner-sharpness-controlled Au NCs with varied bromide densities. (b) TEM images of Au NCs with different amounts of seed and bromide; the insets show representative single-particle images to clearly visualize the sharpness difference. The numbers in the labels correspond to the edge length, and R and S indicate the round-cornered and sharp-cornered Au NCs, respectively. (c) Normalized UV-vis spectra of a series of Au NC solutions. The scale bars in (b) indicate 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Jeon et al.95 evaluated the influence that the shape and vertices of Au NCs had on the sensitivity of homogeneous SPR inflection points to the changes in the refractive index (RI). This was done by comparing Au NCs to Au nanospheres (Au NSs) that were of a comparable size. According to the findings, watching the frequency shifts of the SPR peaks does not provide a better level of RI sensitivity than tracking the homogenous SPR inflection points. This is the case for both Au NCs and Au NSs. In addition, in the homogeneous SPR inflection points, the RI sensitivity of single Au NCs with vertices was shown to be greater than that of single Au NSs of a size comparable to their own. As a result, they offered a more in-depth understanding of the RI sensitivity of homogeneous SPR inflection points of Au NCs with vertices for the purpose of their use in SPR-based biosensors.
They employed dark-field microscopy in their prior work to find a novel plasmon resonance effect for a single Ag NC. In this effect, the plasmon line form has two separate peaks when the particles are positioned on a glass substrate. This phenomenon can be seen for a single Ag NC. It was discovered that the bluer peak has a higher FOM for chemical sensing applications than other particle shapes that have been studied in the past. The correctness of spectrum assignments was validated by a comparison of the observed data with FDTD electrodynamics simulations, which will be present in the following part.
Pellarin et al. reported Fano transparency in rounded Au and Ag nanocube dimers induced by gap plasmon coupling, as shown in Fig. 14(d)–(f).96 The agreement between the experiment and simulations is quite satisfactory both qualitatively (especially for the appearance of a Fano dip) and quantitatively. With an decrease in the interparticle distance or an increase in the values of the edge rounding, the Fano dip is pronounced in the extinction spectra. They suggested that dimers of Au and Ag nanocubes form model plasmonic systems where the localized plasmon resonances sustained by each particle not only hybridize but also coexist with excitations of a different nature: surface plasmon polaritons confined within the Fabry–Perot cavity were delimited by facing cube surfaces. The strong coupling between one of these highly localized modes and the highly radiating longitudinal dipolar plasmon of the dimer is responsible for the formation of a Fano resonance profile and the opening of a spectral window of anomalous transparency for the exciting light.
 Fig. 14  Change in the LSPR scattering spectra of single Au NS (a) and Au NC (b) in the different local RI media: air, water, and oil. (c) LSPR wavelength shifts for Au NS (red) and Au NC (blue) as a function of the local RI of medium. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (d) Experimental and simulated extinction (solid black line), scattering (solid red line), and absorption (solid blue line) cross-sections measured for a dimer of two Au nanocubes of 160 nm side length (TEM image in the inset). (e) Experimental extinction cross-sections for three Au and three Ag nanocube dimers (solid black line). The red lines are simulations using the cube morphology obtained from TEM images. The interparticle distance deff (indicated in blue). (f) Extinction, scattering, and absorption cross-sections calculated for 50 nm Ag NC dimers of various edge curvatures (rc = 1, 2, 5, and 8 nm). The gap thickness d is adjusted so that the resonance (red arrow) remains located at about 630 nm. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
2.4. Gold nanostars
Au nanostars are unique anisotropic nanostructures composed of one solid metal core and several sharp branches with prolate spheroidal shape. Au nanostars in the form of multipod were first reported in 2007 based on protocols for producing Au decahedral and octahedral nanoparticles. At the same time, the Peter Nordlander group numerically simulated the optical properties of nanostars, and indicated that the nanostar core serves as a nanoscale antenna, dramatically increasing the excitation cross-section and the electromagnetic field enhancements of the tip plasmons.97 More and more research was carried out experimentally for the synthesis of Au nanostars. Their surface plasmon, substantially depending on their morphology, also has two types, longitudinal SPR in the Vis-NIR region related to the number and length of their branches and transverse SPR decided by their core sizes.98–100 The corners and tips are high-index facets, leading to their high chemical and catalytic activities. Moreover, Au nanostars can intensify substantial electromagnetic field enhancement at their tips and surrounding, contributing to an enhancement factor for Raman signals and high sensitivity. The cancer diagnostic and therapeutic applications were carried out by Pearl et al. on human lung carcinoma cells.101 Strong emission of Au nanostars was observed and the fluorescence lifetime was found to be less than 0.5 ns that make it well-distinguishable in cellular and tissue samples. The cell killing effect of Au nanostars was observed under NIR light irradiation. An excellent photon-to-heat conversion efficiency confirms Au nanostars as a promising agent for photothermal treatment.
The synthesis of nanostars has been introduced by enhancing small-seeded Au nanoparticles (5 nm in diameter) and subsequently forming spikes on the amplified nanoparticles (Fig. 15(a)). For enhancement, the seed colloid (100 μL, 65 nM) and HAuCl4 solution (200 μL, 50 mM) were mixed with 10 mL of deionized water, followed by adding ascorbic acid solution (200 μL, 100 mM). The resulting solution was stirred for 1–2 minutes, and the color changed from yellow to pink. A seeded Au NP with a diameter of 5 nm (Fig. 15(b)) exhibits a dipolar plasmon resonance at λ = 519 nm, as shown in Fig. 15(c) (black curve of the scattering spectrum). The size of the seed nanoparticles was increased by reducing Au ions, forming larger nanoparticles with a diameter of 70 nm (Fig. 15(b)). The enlarged nanoparticles show a slightly red-shifted resonance at λ = 543 nm (Fig. 15(c), blue curve). Finally, by reducing the Au on the Ag deposition sites, the spikes grow on top of the nanoparticles. The spiked nanoparticles resonate at λ = 809 nm, and this redshift after spike enhancement is caused by the excitation of longitudinal plasmon modes in the nanostar spike. The change of the scattering spectrum can be calculated by FDTD, as shown in Fig. 15(d). In particular, the simulated field distribution around the nanostar shows a significant enhancement of the local field strength compared to spherical nanoparticles (70 nm in diameter) (Fig. 15(e)). Experimental spectra and simulations suggest that nanostars will provide much greater field enhancement than spherical nanoparticles.102
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of nanostar synthesis. (b) TEM image of Au nanoparticles. (c) Extinction spectra of 5 nm Au nanoparticles (black), 70 nm Au nanoparticles (blue), and Au nanostars (red). (d) Scattering spectra of the corresponding nanoparticles simulated by FDTD. (e) Simulated local field distribution around a 70 nm Au spherical nanoparticle at λ = 532 nm, an Au nanostar at λ = 532 nm, and an Au nanostar at λ = 773 nm. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
3. Numerical analysis for SPR of nanostructures
3.1. Localized SPR
Localized SPR is an optical surface phenomenon caused by metal nanoparticles, which are non-propagating excitations of conduction electrons (Fig. 16(a)).12,103 The brilliant colours produced by particles in both transmitted and reflected light as a result of resonantly enhanced absorption and scattering are a conspicuous consequence of this. Propagating plasmons are evanescent electromagnetic waves that propagate over flat, smooth metal-dielectric interfaces and are caused by oscillations of the conduction electrons in the metal,104 as shown in Fig. 16(b), whereas localized SPR occurs within the nanostructure.12 If we consider the case of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), the electrons and holes propagate in the x-and y-directions along with the metal-dielectric interface for distances on the order of tens to hundreds of microns, and decay in the z-direction with 1/e decay lengths on the order of 200 nm. In the case of localized surface plasmons, light interacts with particles that are considerably smaller than the wavelength of the incident light. An oscillating plasmon is produced, which oscillates locally around the nanoparticle at a frequency known as the SPR (Fig. 16(c)). It is similar to the SPR in which the changes in the local dielectric environment can cause the localized SPR to behave differently,103 with the result being coherent localized plasmon oscillations with a resonant frequency that strongly depends on the composition, size, geometry, dielectric environment, and separation distance of nanoparticles,105 in addition to the RI of the environment around it. Moreover, localized optical modes can be detected when surface plasmons are constrained in periodic, colloidal, and other nanosystems.
 Fig. 16  (a) Localized SPR occurs when the frequency of the electron oscillations is in phase with the frequency of the incoming light at the nanoscale (at the wavelength of the light). Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Walter de Gruyter, copyright 2019. (b) Propagating SPR and (c) localized SPR. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Annual Reviews Inc., copyright 2007. 
The SPR properties for noble metals can be studied using UV-Vis-NIR extinction spectroscopy. Among metal nanostructures, Au and Ag nanostructures are the most popular choices for optical, catalytic, and biological applications because of their distinctive physico-chemical properties. The LSPR of Au and Ag nanostructures is the most interesting feature of these noble metal nanostructures, as it lies within the visible (vis) and near infrared (NIR) spectral ranges. It is the LSPR, which results from d–d band transitions, that makes Au and Ag nanostructures so well-suited for use in the medical field.106
Experimentally, metal nanostructure colloids are a highly dispersed object system, and their colour or spectrum shows the average effect of light response of a large number of nanoparticles. Therefore, the homogeneity of the sample in terms of morphology and size is very important. Otherwise, in order to understand the optical properties of the samples, we should analyse the optical properties of different nanostructures. With the realization of the dielectric function of metallic nanoparticles, now one can calculate or simulate the optical properties of isolated nanoparticles of arbitrary shapes using numerical analytic formula or numerical simulation. The localized surface plasmon describes the absorption and scattering response of metal nanostructures to electromagnetic fields by solving the Maxwell equations with special boundary conditions. Here, we mainly summarize the numerical simulation on the optical properties of isolated nanospheres and ellipsoidal nanoparticles.
3.2. Numerical simulation of particles
The electric field around the localized plasmons is increased by many orders of magnitude, and its strength decreases exponentially as the distance between them increases. These resonances cause severe optical absorption or scattering, as well as strong electromagnetic fields, to occur.12 These are broadly controllable by the manipulation of their size, structure, and composition.107,108 Many distinct single particle spectroscopic approaches have been developed over the years to evaluate the optical properties of plasmonic nanoparticles that are free of size and shape dispersion. These approaches are based on nanoparticle extinction, scattering, or absorption. When the resonance maximum is reached, a plasmonic nanoparticle has the ability to absorb and scatter light from a much broader region than its physical size. The absorption and scattering properties of Au NPs are among their most alluring features.109,110 The combination of these two processes is referred to as extinction, and it describes the entire loss that the incident radiation suffers as a result of these processes. The LSPR dominates the optical cross-sections of nanoparticles, which is a function of energy.
The Mie theory approximation of the absorption and scattering of a metallic sphere in the lengthy electrostatic dipole limit is the most fundamental theory available for simulating the optical characteristics of nanoparticles.111 In brief, when the size of nanoparticles is much smaller than the wavelength, the scattering/absorption of small particles can be simplified to solve the polarization of small particles in a uniform electric field. In the study of plasmon properties of noble metal nanostructures, only relative permittivity (εm) of nanostructures needs to be considered due to the non-magnetic properties of noble metals, as demonstrated in the following:112 (1)where (λ) denotes the wavelength of the light, εm denotes the dielectric constant of the non-absorbing surrounding medium, VNP denotes the volume of the nanoparticle, Yi denotes a geometrical factor (Yi = 2 in a sphere), and ε(ω) denotes the frequency (ω) dependent complex dielectric function. ε(ω) = εr(ω) + εi(ω)(2)The quasistatic expression of the extinction cross-section (σExt) in a spherical Au NP can be derived from eqn (1), which states is the following: (3) (4)where σExt is the extinction, ω is the angular frequency of the extinction radiation, VNP is the nanoparticle volume (for a sphere, ), εm is the dielectric constant of the medium surrounding the metallic nanosphere, and εi and εr are the imaginary and real portions of the metallic nanoparticles dielectric function, respectively. When spheroidal shape particles are taken into consideration, the term εr + 2εm that is found in the denominator of eqn (3) is changed to εr + xεmeqn (4), where ‘x’ is a geometrical factor that varies depending on the shape of the spheroid and ranges from ‘2’ for a sphere to ‘17’ for a spheroid with an aspect ratio of 5:1. This results in a significant reliance of λmax on the particle shape. From eqn (3), it is also seen that extinction would be maximal when:εr + 2εm = 0 or εr = −2εm
Now, the extinction spectra can be obtained by using FORTRAN, MATLAB and other scientific calculation software. For a small sized nanosphere, it is clear that the conditions for the occurrence of plasmon resonance in nanoparticles is that εr = −2εm (note that εi is usually very small). For Au NSs in water, the theoretical resonance absorption peak is ∼520 nm consistent with the experimental observations.
The resonant peak at εr = −2εm, which in the case of Ag and Au, appears in the visible part of the spectrum. The LSPR spectrum of an isolated metallic nanosphere that is immersed in an external dielectric medium will rely on the nanoparticle's radius, the nanoparticle material (εi, εr), and the dielectric constant (εm) of the nanoenvironment. This is plainly obvious. When the nanoparticles in question are not spherical, the extinction spectrum will be affected by the nanoparticle's diameter, height, and shape.12,111–113
From eqn (4), it is apparent that:
(i) The plasmonic characteristics are defined by its ε(ω);
(ii) σExt is proportional to the particle volume;
(iii) When the denominator is minimal, the localized SP can be excited at the frequency under the condition:112 εr(ω) ≈ −xεm(ω)(5)
(vi) it is clear that the plasmon resonance location is determined by the real portion of the dielectric function εr, whereas the linewidth is determined by the imaginary part of εi.114
The condition of an SPR is defined by eqn (5). It is abundantly clear that the frequency of the SPR may be tuned by altering the εm(ω) of the medium in which it is conducted. However, the frequency is also strongly affected by the size, and shape of the nanoparticles, as discussed in Section 3.3.1.
Usually, for metal nanoparticles with a small effective radius or volume, the absorption intensity of the nanoparticles is strong, while the scattering is very weak. And the extinction can be represented in terms of absorption:115 (6)where Yi is the related to the shape parameter, also known as the depolarization factor, and the expression as  (Li along the direction of the i-axis of the nanostructures). When shape factor L = 0 (Y goes to infinity) exemplifies an unlimited columnar structure running along the axis of ellipsoid symmetry with increasing ratio; when , (2 in Y) exemplifies the sphere, and when L = 1, (0 in Y) exemplifies a flat disk, and also the RI sensitivity of the SPR depends on the nanostructure geometry (Yi). The FWHM of the resonant absorption band using the Taylor expansion of σabs near the LSPR can be illustrated as follows: (7)
According to this equation, it would be advantageous for a metal to have a smaller FWHM if its imaginary dielectric function were smaller, and if its real component had a steeper gradient. The plasmonic quality factor QSPR can be used to quantify the SPR intensity considerations.87 There is no standard formula for the quality factor because it depends on the NP shape. However, at low loss and in the quasistatic regime (i.e. when the nanoparticles are much smaller than the wavelength of light), QSPR can be expressed as:112 (8)
From eqn (8), the SPR quality factor is defined only by the complex dielectric function of the material, regardless of the nanoparticle shape or the dielectric environment. Although the Mie theory successfully explains the observation of an absorption band for metal nanoparticles in the visible range of wavelengths for particle sizes of less than 10 nm, it hardly explains the observed shifts in the absorption peaks with a change in the particle size. This is because the Mie theory is based on the assumption that metal nanoparticles have a size of less than 10 nm. Because of this, it is important to take into account the dielectric constant, which is not only dependent on the wavelength (or frequency), but also on the particle size. In the case of metals, the Drude model provides a more accurate description of the dielectric response of electrons. The Drude model, which describes the dielectric response of free electrons in a metal, serves as the foundation for the SPR hypothesis.116
3.3. Parameters affecting SPR
The physical factors of the system, such as the size, shape, and material of the nanoparticle, as well as the refractive index of its surroundings, totally influence the spectrum features of the SPR.114

3.3.1. Nanoparticles size and shape. 
Generally, SPR modes are essential in sensing and signal transmission applications. When designing such devices, it is important to tune the plasmon energy and line width by adjusting the particle geometry. So scientists are particularly interested in noble metal nanoparticles for their unique characteristics that can be tailored depending on the shape and size of the nanoparticles. Because the SPR can strongly enhance the electromagnetic fields around a particle, they have been used to develop spectral techniques, such as SERS.117 In order to adapt SPR absorption from the Vis-NIR region, different forms have been manufactured, including spheres, triangles, cubes, prisms, bipyramids, octahedrons, nanorods, nanoshells, and nanostars. Additionally, structured array films have also been created.105 The TEM images of Au NPs of various forms are shown in Fig. 17(a). The extinction spectra of Au NPs are depicted in Fig. 17(b) and (c). There is a single peak for the surface plasmon of Au nanospheres and nanocubes, while the surface plasmon peaks of Au nanobranches, nanorods, and nanobipyramids can be broken down into two main categories. The first one is in the transverse direction and the second one is in the longitudinal direction.118
 Fig. 17  (a) TEM images of Au NPs in a variety of configurations: nanospheres, nanocubes, nanostars (or nanobranches), nanorods, and nanobipyramids, respectively. (b) Extinction spectra (curves: a–e) of Au nanospheres, nanocubes, and nanorods with aspect ratios of 2.4, 3.4, and 4.6, respectively. (c) Extinction spectra (curves: a–e) of Au NBPs with aspect ratios of 1.5, 2.7, 3.9, and 4.7, and nanobranches, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2008. 
A number of design rules have been obtained based on discrete dipole approximation (DDA) predictions of LSPR spectra for different nanoparticle shapes. First, the dipole resonance peaks are red-shifted with increasing corner sharpness and particle anisotropy. Second, the LSPR peak intensity increases with particle symmetry. Third, the number of LSPR depends on the number of polarization modes in the nanostructure.119 The number of modes in which a certain nanoparticle may be polarized is what determines the number of resonance absorption peaks that can be found in a specific nanoparticle. Compared to isotropic spherical particles, anisotropic nanoparticles have a greater propensity to produce several SPR peaks, as seen in Fig. 18. For instance, nanorods that may be polarized along two axes, such as the transverse and the longitudinal SPR peaks, which is consistent with eqn (3). The relative magnitude of the cross-section for absorption and scattering is affected, in part, by the size of the nanoparticles. Absorption is the most important mechanism for nanoparticles with a size of less than 20 nm. The cross-section of scattering increases with either an increase in the physical dimensions or the effective size of nanoparticles. This connection, which is reliant on size but tends to be independent of the aspect ratio of the nanoparticles, is often described as a ratio of scattering to absorption.105 Spectral shifts related to SPR of nanoparticles are impacted to a higher degree by a departure from spherical geometry than by an increase in size. This is because divergence from spherical geometry is more common.120 The creation of “hotspot” locations is the primary objective while choosing amongst the many different designs. Concurrently, there is a trade-off in the breadth of an SPR peak, since this normally increases as the sharpness of a tip or edge increases. This results in a somewhat smaller peak width.121
 Fig. 18  Calculated extinction (black), absorption (red), and scattering (blue) spectra of Ag nanoparticles of different shapes. (a) The calculated spectra for the 40 nm Ag sphere shows two resonance peaks: a resonance peak at 410 nm and a weaker resonance at 370 nm. (b) The calculated spectra of the 40 nm Ag cube shows more peaks and red-shifted, as it has several distinct symmetries for dipole resonance. (c–e) Calculated extinction absorption and scatting spectra of the 40 nm Ag tetrahedron, octahedron and triangular plate, respectively. (f) Calculated extinction spectra of Ag rectangular bars with different aspect ratios. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011. 
The size of the particle has an effect on the SPR peak as well as the bandwidth. The size factor has the potential to alter the catalytic behaviour of a SPR-based catalyst. According to previous studies, the SPR band seen in the optical extinction spectra of Au NP dispersions is formed by the total of scattered and absorbed photons, with the percentage of scattered photons being substantially dependent on the particle size, the extinction cross-section of an Au NP may be expressed as:112 σExt = σAbs + σsca(9)where σAbs is the absorption cross-section and σsca is the scattering cross-section. The extinction cross-section is linked to the observed transmittance (Tras) and absorbance (Abs) for a sample composed of N identical Au NPs in a volume V by: (10) (11)where I0(ω) and I(ω) are the incident and transmitted light intensities, respectively, ω is the frequency, and I is the sample's optical path. Because Tras is exponentially related to σExt, even a small increase in the cross-section results in a significant increase in light extinction. For Au NPs of size dλ, where λ is the wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation, absorption dominates over scattering.112 When the size of Au NPs is tiny in comparison to the wavelength of light, the electric field distribution along the particle is nearly uniform, electron cloud polarization is coherent in each point of the metal, and dipolar plasmon oscillations are produced in each point of the metal. The opposite is true when the size of the Au NP is comparable to or greater than the resonant electromagnetic wavelength: the electric field distribution along the particle is non-uniform, electron cloud polarization is no longer coherent at each point of the metal, and multipolar plasmon oscillations are stimulated. Increases in the size of the Au NPs cause a widening and red-shift of the SPR in the optical absorption spectra, which is due to the extrinsic size effect.122
When it comes to these elongated nanoparticles, observations have shown that a blue shift occurs when one approaches the isotropicity of particle size. Sharp tips on Ag–Au nanocubes, Au nanostars, Au nanotriangles, and Au nanocrescents, on the other hand, may generate red-shift in the plasmonic spectra of the materials.123 When it comes to RI sensitivity, it has been shown both empirically and via electrodynamic simulations that particle form is very important. In particular, nanoparticles with sharp tips exhibit significantly greater RI sensitivities than that predicted solely by their aspect ratios. There have been several novel nanoparticle designs produced during the last decade, each with increasing RI sensitivity.
In the case of Au nanobipyramids, the truncations on the equatorial corners have some effects as well. The form dependence of the surface plasmon band is influenced by the presence of such imperfections in the surface.


3.3.2. The aspect ratio of nanostructures. 
Many of the optical, electrical, and catalytic properties of nanoparticles are greatly influenced by the geometry of the particles. This is very important for the design of nanomaterials as well as their applications. However, controlling the morphology of nanostructures is a challenge. Au NPs can be tuned to exhibit significant absorptions over a wide range of wavelengths, including VIS and NIR.9,118 According to Gans theory, the scattering or absorption cross-sections and plasmon wavelengths vary with the size and shape of nanorods. The calculated extinction cross-sections of nanorods are shown in Fig. 19. The SPRL is generally linearly dependent on the aspect ratio.63 The RI sensitivity of spheroidal particles is affected not only by the composition of the material and the size of the particles, but also by the aspect ratio of the particles.122 When the aspect ratio increases, there is a little shift to the blue in the wavelength of the mode that travels in the transverse direction (Fig. 19(a) and (c)). On the other hand, the SPRT of the nanorods has a behaviour that is not nearly as sensitive as the SPRL. Because of the change in aspect ratio, it can red-shift by up to several hundred nanometers. Because of the increased polarizability of the nanorods while they are in the SPRL state, as shown in Fig. 19(b), the dependence of theSPRL wavelength on the aspect ratio is significantly increased, and there is linear relationship between the RI sensitivities and aspect ratio of the nanorods (see Fig. 19(d)).63 The index sensitivities of both nanorods and nanobipyramids increase when the aspect ratios are increased. Furthermore, the shape and size of Au nanostructures are critical determinants in influencing the RI sensitivity.
 Fig. 19  (a) The extinction spectra under transverse excitation with an increase the aspect ratio of Au NRs. (b) Under longitudinal excitation, the extinction spectra are dependent on the aspect ratio of nanorods. The aspect ratio of the Au NR is altered from 1.5 to 6, while the diameter of the nanorod remains constant at 5 nanometers. The increasing direction of the aspect ratio of Au NR is indicated by the green arrows in the image. (c) The relationship between the aspect ratio of Au NRs and the wavelength of transverse plasmons. (d) The longitudinal plasmon wavelength is generally linearly dependent on the aspect ratio. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 
More recently, Wang simulated isotropic nanospheres (AuxAg1−xNSs) with diameters of 44 nm to investigate the effect of metal composition and aspect ratio on the RI sensitivity.87 Because the aspect ratio of the AuxAg1−x NS is smaller than that of the AuBP@AuxAg1−x NR, the relative plasmon shifts of the AuxAg1−xNS concerning the change in the surrounding refractive index are not as large as those of the AuBP@AuxAg1−xNR. So the AuxAg1−x NS has lower RI sensitivity than the AuBP@AuxAg1−x NR. In general, the index sensitivities of Au nanoparticles increase as the apexes become more pointed.
Experimentally, theSPRL features of Au NRs may be continually modified by modifying their aspect ratio to create optical extinction ranging from the visible to the near-infrared, which could be advantageous for (bio)chemical sensors.124 By increasing the aspect ratios of Au NRs, the strong SPRL mode can be adjusted in the range of 600–1800 nm and the weak SPRT absorption located ∼530 nm, as shown in Fig. 20(a). Fig. 20(b) shows the extinction (red), scattering (blue) and absorption (black) spectra of Au NRs with aspect ratios of 2.1 and 3.0 estimated using Gans theory. Increasing the aspect ratio lead to the continued red shift of the longitudinal plasmon peaks. Moreover, the intensity of the scattering peak in the spectrum increases with an increase in the size of Au NRs. Additionally, the SPRL is particularly sensitive to εm, which makes plasmonic nanorods suitable substrates for targeted SPR sensing.114
 Fig. 20  (a) Absorption spectra of AuNRs with different aspect ratios. The longitudinal SPRL and transverse SPR mode are marked corresponding to the morphology. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the NTT, copyright 2009. (b) Calculated extinction, scattering, and absorption spectra (red, blue, and black, respectively) for ellipsoids with an aspect ratio (AR) of 2.1 (solid line) and 3.0 (dashed line) using Gans theory. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 


3.3.3. Medium refractive index. 
It is known that the Au nanostructures have strong SPR properties, and the SPR peaks redshift with an increase in the environment's refractive index. For example, the colour of Au NRs colloids changes when embedded in different solvents of varying refractive indexes. The previous experimental data show that both the peak wavelength and the FWHM increase with an increase in the refractive index (n).72 The nanorods can induce more polarization charges around the nanorod, as shown in Fig. 21(a). When the nanorod is subjected to external electromagnetic stimulation, the Coulombic restoring force that acts on the free electrons in the nanorod will be subjected to higher screening. As a result of the diminished restoring force, a decrease in the plasmon resonance energy is observed, which corresponds to a red shift of the plasmon resonance peak. The calculated extinction spectra of the nanorods in solutions with varying refractive indices reveal a more pronounced redshift than the measured extinction spectra. An increase in the refractive index of 0.4 can cause a plasmon shift of the SPRL to be 120 nm (Fig. 21(b)). According to this case, the longitudinal plasmon shift is proportional to the refractive index (Fig. 21(c)). Many experimental measurements have confirmed the linear relationship between the two variables.63
 Fig. 21  The effect of the refractive index of the solution on plasmon resonance. (a) Schematic of an Au NR immersed in a solution. (b) The extinction spectra of an Au NR with different refractive indexes increased from 1.3 to 1.7. The LSPR peaks of the nanostructures exhibit gradual redshifts at different angles as the refractive index increases. (c) A linear correlation is observed when the LSPR shift is plotted as a function of the refractive index of the liquid mixtures. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 
Experimental results by the C. Kan group have shown that as the refractive index and Ag concentrations increase, the SPRL peaks of the nanostructures exhibit gradual redshifts at various refractive indexes, as shown in Fig. 22(a). When the SPRL shift is shown as a function of the liquid mixing (Fig. 22(b)), a linear correlation is found, with the slopes of the curves representing the RI sensitivities. This demonstrates that the RI sensitivities of AuxAg1−x NSPs enhance significantly with an increase in the Ag content. Moreover, the obtained dielectric data were employed in the FDTD solutions to simulate the optical spectra of the alloy nanostructures with varying Ag concentrations, and the measured results quite agree with the values predicted from FDTD simulations, as shown in Fig. 22(c) and (d).87
 Fig. 22  (a) The normalized extinction spectra of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs (x: 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8) dispersed in water–glycerol mixtures. The SPRL positions of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs red shift with the increasing refractive index of the surrounding medium as indicated by the red arrows. (b) The metal concentration dependence of the resonance wavelength shifts with the refractive index of the mixtures changing from 1.3334 to 1.4452. The slope of the linear plot increasing with Ag concentration represents the RI sensitivity. (c) The FDTD calculated extinction spectra and (d) RI sensitivity of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs (x: 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8) with refractive index increasing from 1.3334 to 1.4452. The LSPR positions of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs red shift with the increasing refractive index of the surrounding medium as indicated by the red arrows. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
It is possible to determine the functional form of the SPR peak wavelength's dependency on the dielectric function of the medium by using the analytical method. The minimum of the denominator (eqn (6)) determines the resonance frequency (ωres), and this requirement may be further reduced εr(ω) + Yiεm = 0 for the noble metals, especially in the Vis-NIR frequency range where εi is minimal. The simplified real part of the dielectric function is shown as follows: (12)where ωp is the plasma frequency, and (ωres) may also be represented as: (13)After converting from frequency to wavelength λp = 2πc/ωp and then dielectric constant to the index of refraction , we can also express the resonance wavelength . The aforementioned formula may be expressed as follows:122,123 (14)where nm is the refractive index of the medium, λp is the SPR wavelength in the bulk material, and c is the light speed. As shown by the relationship, the SPR peak wavelengths are linearly related to the refractive indexes for a short range of refractive indexes nm.123Fig. 23(a) shows a plot of eqn (14) for λp across a suitable range of nm.122
 Fig. 23  (a) Linear relationship of the LSPR peak wavelength on the refractive index according to the Drude model, and the (b) explanation for the FOM of the SPR. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. 
In general, changes in the refractive index of the surrounding medium have an essentially linear effect on the SPR peak wavelength, as shown in Fig. 23. So the RI sensitivity (S) for a given nanoparticle type is commonly expressed as nanometres of peak shift per refractive index unit (nm per RIU),122 There are many different types of nanostructures, each with its own unique shape and metal type that may affect the SPR sensitivity to changes in the refractive index. Because even a tiny change in the refractive index of the surrounding medium may induce a noticeable spectral shift and a visible change in intensity at the same wavelength, a high FOM resulting from a narrow line width is very desirable. A greater magnitude of the real dielectric function and a smaller imaginary dielectric function of Ag makes the plasmon resonance of Ag nanostructures more sensitive to changes in the index than that of Au nanostructures.125
The mathematical expression for the sensitivity of the refractive index, denoted by the letter S, may be determined by performing a partial differentiation of the surface plasmon wavelength λres with regard to the refractive index of the surrounding medium nm, as shown in eqn (15):87 (15)It is abundantly obvious from eqn (15) that the RI sensitivity of the SPR is dependent not only on the nanostructure geometry (Yi), but also on the metal composition, that is, the bulk plasma frequency (ωp), and ε∞. The SPR spectroscopy relies on the response of localized plasmon bands to changes in the surrounding dielectric medium. The FOM is defined by the sensitivity of the RI and the FWHM.125 FOM is dependent on both S and the maximum line width (Δλ) (Fig. 23(b)).122 (16) (17)

4. Optical properties for Au nanostructure assembly
Through adjusting the chemical method, noble metal nanostructures of arbitrary geometries, such as nanorods, nanorod dimers,82,83,126 nanobipyramids,87,89 nanocubes, nanocuboids,127 and nanostars,97 can be obtained. The experimental optical properties of these nanostructure monomers are in good agreement with those determined via numerical simulations. Among the numerical simulations, the FDTD method was widely used to calculate the optical response of noble metal nanostructures of arbitrary geometries to an incident light wave and the surface plasmon properties, such as absorption and scattering cross-sections as well as the local electric-field enhancements, can be obtained using this method. The FDTD method is considered a powerful and adaptable technique for studying the optical properties of metal nanostructures.128,129 By assembling the nanostructure into complex and closely coupled structures, more and more unique physical phenomena appeared. In addition to the SNOM technique, such properties are generally difficult to measure experimentally through far-field spectroscopy. However, the FDTD can be used to calculate the optical properties of the coupled metal nanostructures.130 Here we summarize the optical properties of different Au nanostructure assembly through comparing the simulated and experimental results.
4.1. Au NR assembly
When two Au NRs are brought into close proximity with one another and separated by a nanogap, a phenomenon known as near-field coupling between the surface plasmons of the neighbouring Au NRs can take place. This type of coupling results in a larger local electric field enhancement in the gap region as well as rich changes in the extinction spectra, as shown in Fig. 24.126,131–134 Plasmon coupling between nanorod configuration results in an enhancement of the local electric field, which has significant implications for optical sensing,135 and also optical phenomena associated with the nanorod assembly transitions can be used as a powerful technique in chemical and biological sensing.136 As mentioned above, when Au NRs are close to each other, there are more abundant changes in the colours and SPR shifting due to the coupling effect. Because of the complex self-assembly process of Au NRs in the liquid phase, there will be various Au NR assembly structures. Under this case, FDTD simulation can be used to infer the assembly mode of Au NRs by a comparison of the experimentally measured spectra with the simulated results.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic diagrams of the end-to-end (EE) side-by-side coupled Au NR dimers and their corresponding core–shell structures covered with silica. (b) Calculated absorption spectra of the GNR monomer, EE and SS dimer (solid line) and their corresponding core–shell structures (dash line). (c) The calculated electric field intensity enhancement contours for the monomer, SS dimer and EE dimer, and (d) the corresponding core–shell structures, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 

Fig. 25 shows the experimental spectra, TEM images and FDTD simulated spectra for Au NRs of different assemblies by increasing the number of NRs. For the side-by-side assembly of Au NRs, the SPRL peak blue shifts to the short wavelength region, and the SPRT resonant peak appears slightly red shifted with the increase of the number of monomers. Fig. 25(b) shows the spectra of the side-by-side assembly of Au NRs (gap distance d = 1 nm), corresponding to the experimental spectra evolution Fig. 25(a). The difference in absorption strength is mainly due to the number decrease in the assemblies in the colloidal sample with the assembly process. For the end-to-end assembly of Au nanorods, the SPRL of the assembly red shifts, and the position of the SPRT peak has no obvious shift Fig. 25(d). The SPRL position and shift evolution of the FDTD simulated spectra agree well with the experimental results Fig. 25(c). Additionally, the FDTD results show that the spacing between nanorods also affects the position and intensity of SPRL. For these two cases, the coupling effect decreases with the increase of the spacing between Au NRs, and eventually becomes the optical spectra of the highly dispersed Au nanosystem.82
 Fig. 25  (a) Experimental spectra for side-by-side assembly of Au NRs with increasing time. Insets show the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the different number side-by-side oriented Au NRs. (b) The calculated SPRL absorption spectra for side-by-side assembled Au nanorods with increasing rod number. (c) Experimental spectra for end-to-end assembly of Au NRs with increasing time, inset shows the TEM images of oriented Au NRs. (d) The calculated SPRL absorption spectra for the incident polarized light parallel to the end-to-end oriented Au NRs with different numbers. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015. 
The curved surfaces between adjacent nanoparticles also play an important role in the optical properties of the dimer. This has been investigated via FDTD numerical simulation. When one or more curved facets are present on the surface of Au NRs in close coupling arrangements, the coupling effect causes two separate resonance modes. Bonding dipolar plasmons and higher multipolar bonding dimer modes can give rise to the appearance of two plasmon resonance modes. In addition to this, the curved interface of the Au NRs dimer will cause a greater localized field to be produced. In contrast to the single Au NR, the linked plasmon resonance modes in dimers are more sensitive to the structural geometry, as shown in Fig. 26.126
 Fig. 26  FDTD-simulated absorption spectra of Au NR dimer, showing the effect of end curvature on the optical properties. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Optical Society, copyright 2017. 
4.2. Nanorod–nanosphere system
In addition to the nanorod multimers with side-by-side and end-to-end configurations, complex structures of rod–sphere–rod multimers were studied by Kumar et al., through experimental synthesis and calculations.137 The modelled coupling plasmon resonance spectra are in accordance with the experimental results, which demonstrate that horizontal polarization can induce an anti-bonding mode in the high-energy region. For the dimer, excitation of the anti-bonding mode leads to electric field reduction due to repulsive coupling, and the magnitude of the electric field is weaker than that for the corresponding bonding mode.
For the plasmon coupling between one Au nanorod and a small Au nanosphere heterodimer, the spatial perturbation of the nanosphere leads to distinct spectral changes of the heterodimer, as shown in Fig. 27. When the nanosphere is located at the end of the nanorod, two scattering peaks are detected, with the higher-energy one much weaker than the lower-energy one. The two scattering peaks of the heterodimer arise from the plasmon coupling between the nanorod and nanosphere. When the nanosphere is moved from the end through the shoulder to the side of the nanorod at a fixed gap distance, the intensity of the higher-energy peak gets relatively stronger, and the two peaks become closer spectrally. When the nanosphere is at the exact central side of the nanorod, the two scattering peaks coalesce into one.
 Fig. 27  The plasmon coupling between one Au NR and a small Au NS located at different positions around the nanorod. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
Furthermore, when a sphere is introduced between the two rods, the magnitude of the electric field enhancement for the anti-bonding mode remains close to that of the bonding mode, as shown in Fig. 28. More significantly, the “hot-spots” for the trimer are stronger than those for the dimer in the antibonding mode case. Such strong surface plasmon coupling was also observed from core–satellite nanoassemblies, which appears significantly red-shifted from the SPR of the constituting nanoparticles.139,140
 Fig. 28  (a) Scattering spectra of nanorod–nanoparticle bend trimers with angles of (a) ∼165°, (b) ∼90°. Inset shows the relevant SEM images of the nano-assemblies. Scale bar = 100 nm. The vertical and the horizontal polarization directions, and the spectra corresponding to these polarization directions are plotted in the respective colours. (c) Calculated scattering spectra and schematic views of the surface charge distributions associated with bonding modes with trimer angles. The gaps between the particles are fixed at 0.5 nm for modelling. (d) Peak wavelength of the bonding mode plotted as a function of the angle. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 
For understanding the bonding and anti-bonding modes, Naomi J. Halas and Peter Nordlander proposed the concept of plasmon hybridization, which greatly simplifies the understanding of local SPR coupling.141 The end-to-end model is similar to the σ hybridization of p orbital electrons in atom, while the side-by-side model is similar to the π hybridization of p orbital electrons in the outer layer of atoms. For each coupled nanostructure, there are broad bright bonding states and dark narrow anti-bonding states. Compared with the bonding orbital, the antibonding orbitals with high energy are difficult to be excited by the light due to zero total dipole moment. The modes with zero total moment or weak dipole coupling is called subradiation, and its modes are usually narrow bands with a long lifetime. When the coupled systems are more complex, the hybrid orbital model is still applicable.
Lorentzian formula was regarded as the fundamental line-shape of a resonance for many years. Usually, the presence of several independent resonances is simply considered to be the sum of the intensities of the individual resonances. In short, the interference effects owing to interacting resonances are not present in most typical resonance phenomena. When a certain asymmetry is introduced into the coupled system, photonic crystals and metamaterials, the interference effect between different plasmonic resonance modes can be detected. In this case, the Fano resonance effect caused by destructive interference may be observed. This Fano effect can strongly reduce the absorption and scattering of the nanostructures, leading to the well-known phenomenon of electromagnetic transparency, which is normal for complex structures.
4.3. Coupling nanocubes and nanocuboids
For more complex structures with broken symmetry, Fano resonances can arise due to the interaction of narrow dark modes with broad bright modes. A rich resonance spectrum emerges due to the hybridization of the plasmons of individual nanostructure components into bonding and antibonding combinations of plasmon modes. Verellen and coworkers presented an experimental investigation of Fano interference phenomena in individual plasmonic nanocomposites,142 including particle-rod heterodimers, dolmens or nanocuboids (see Fig. 29) and disk-near-ring. Fano resonances are induced by the coupling of dark quadrupolar and higher order modes with bright dipolar mode.
 Fig. 29  Fano resonance of two dolmen structures with different sizes. (a and c) Experimental and numerical (b and d) extinction spectra, respectively, with polarization as defined by the arrows in inset of (a and c) (scale bar: 100 nm). Insets of (b and d) are the calculated surface charge distributions of the dipolar mode and the Fano extinction dip, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. 
From the large dolmen (Fig. 29(c)), the Fano interference is clearly visible respectively at wavelengths of 850 and 1100 nm in the experimentally obtained extinction spectrum for polarization perpendicular to the pair axis (inset: blue curve). This result is in good agreement with the spectra obtained from the FDTD simulations shown in panel Fig. 29(b). From the surface charge distributions, presented in set of (d), it is apparent that the monomer dipole and quadrupole modes are mixed with each other, which makes the identification of the individual modes somewhat more difficult. Then they carried out the experiments to show how the experimentally obtained extinction spectra for both polarizations highlighted in Fig. 29(a) evolve into each other for changes of the in-plane polarization direction in 10° steps. Furthermore, it is found that the Fano line-shapes depend sensitively on the dielectric gap between the individual resonators.
Since the Fano resonances were realized in plasmonic materials and metamaterials, this effect has been of great interest, as summarized by Halas.143 The unique properties associated with this line-shape are highly promising for potential applications. The sensitive spectral response of the heterodimer to the spatial perturbation of the nanosphere offers an approach to designing plasmon rulers of two spatial coordinates for sensing. The design of Fano resonances into optical systems may give rise to ultrasensitive media for chemical or bio-sensing, and new types of optical switches, interferometers, nanoantennas, displays, and other devices.
4.4. Coupling nanocubes and nanoparticles
To compare the coupling effect of sharp and smooth surface, the coupled Au nanocube and nanosphere (Au NC–Au NS) system will be very interesting for the rich sharp corners, flat edges and large contact areas of nanocubes. D. Lee and S. Yoon assembled heterodimers where Au nanocubes with an edge length of 84 nm are linked to Au nanospheres with diameter 55 nm through their vertices or edges via 1,8-octanedithiol.144 Regioselective disintegration of CTAB on the vertices and edges of Au NCs using acetonitrile permits the formation of Au NC–Au NS dimers in high yield, as shown in Fig. 30(a). Strong plasmonic interactions between the Au NCs and Au NSs produce the longitudinal plasmon coupling band at 790 nm, significantly red-shifted from the surface plasmon resonance band of the isolated Au NCs (λ = 581 nm) or Au NSs (λ = 534 nm), as indicated by Fig. 30(b). For comparison, they prepared two nanoassemblies consisting of only spherical nanoparticles: core–satellites and clusters consisting of more than four Au nanoparticles, as indicated in Fig. 30(c1)–(c3).
 Fig. 30  (a) TEM images of the prepared Au NC–Au NS dimers, (b) UV-vis extinction spectrum for the Au NC–Au NS dimers dispersed in solution (solid line). For comparison, the UV-vis extinction spectra for the Au NSs (dotted line) and Au NCs (dashed line) used to assemble these dimers are included after being normalized to the 564 nm band intensity. The inset shows a photograph of the sample containing the dispersed Au NC–Au NS dimers. (c1–c3) Assembly schemes of three nanoassemblies and (d1–d3) corresponding Raman spectra, for the nanoassemblies supported on glass slides: (c1) Au NC (84 nm)–Au NS (55 nm) dimers, (c2) Au NS core (92 nm)–Au NS satellite (55 nm) assemblies, and (c3) Au NS clusters that consist of one 55 nm Au NS and three 58 nm Au NSs. In the Raman spectra, νT, ρ, and δ denote the stretching, rocking, and bending vibrational modes, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 
Despite the small number of 1,8-octanedithiol molecules confined to the nanogap region between the AuNC vertex and the AuNS surface, the intense Raman signal observed for the AuNC–AuNS dimers (on the order of 1010) confirms that strong SERS occurs in the dimers, as shown in Fig. 30(d1)–(d3). The strong Raman peak of the C–S stretching mode from the transform of 1,8-octanedithiol (720 cm−1), marked with a star, and the absence of a peak from the gauche form (620–660 cm−1) indicate that 1,8-octanedithiol constructs highly ordered self-assembled monolayer structures between Au NCs and Au NSs.
In the Raman spectrum, they observed that the 1,8-octanedithiol from the Au NC–Au NS dimers with a 1 × 1010 enhancement factor, which is much larger than that for assemblies consisting of only Au NSs, such as core–satellites (enhancement factor ∼108) and clusters (enhancement factor ∼107). It is believed that the nanoparticle shape and nanogap junction cause the differing SERS effects. The nanogaps in the Au NC–Au NS dimers are formed between the sharp curvature of the Au NCs (vertices and edges) and round Au NS surfaces, whereas smooth surfaces form the gap for core–satellite and Au NS clusters. Therefore, the local electric field is more strongly enhanced in the Au NC–Au NS dimers, which significantly increases the SERS effect. The resonant peak at 790 nm may also contribute to enhancing the Raman signal. However, the effect seems less important because the core–satellites support larger SERS than the clusters even though their plasmon coupling band is farther away from the Raman excitation laser wavelength. FDTD simulations also proved that even with the resonant excitation for all three nanoassemblies, Au NC–Au NS dimers yield the largest SERS effect.
5. Application of plasmonic Au nanostructures
Under excitation, surface plasmon can either propagate on a planar metallic surface as SPP or be confined to the particles known as localized SP, providing a novel means of enhancing light–matter interaction at the nanoscale. Especially for the localized SP of metal nanostructures, it has the characteristics or advantages of selective light scattering and absorption, electric field localization and strong enhancement. More and more achievements show that surface plasmons are promising in the fields of biology, chemistry, materials, energy, catalysis, and so on. Here, we present some typical applications of surface plasmon in biomedical sensing and imaging, cancer therapy, drug delivery, catalysis, nanophotonics, and optoelectronics.
5.1. In biomedical fields

5.1.1. Biological imaging. 
Au nanostructures have attracted extensive attention in medical applications for their ability to bind thiol and amine groups, which allows the modification for biological activities. Among them, Au NRs are considered the most promising candidate because the synthetically tunable plasmon wavelengths of Au NRs make them feasible for imaging with different excitation wavelengths, especially for those using NIR techniques. The Au NRs do not suffer from photo-bleaching as encountered with traditional dyes and semiconductor nanocrystals under the same conditions of light illumination, which makes them the most stable imaging agents, and the Au NR surfaces can be easily functionalized with a variety of chemical or biological groups to enable targeted imaging as well as integration with other imaging modalities. It has been established that antibody-labelled Au NRs can be used for cancer diagnosis through the use of dark-field scattering imaging and that they are capable of selectively binding to cancer cells by identification of the over-expressed EGFR on the cell surface (Fig. 31(a)).145
 Fig. 31  (a) Cancerous hematopoietic stem cells with anti-EGFR-conjugated Au NRs positioned on the cytoplasm membranes are seen here in a dark-field scattering image. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2006. (b) Imaging of two-photon stimulated photoluminescence of KB cancer cells with folate-conjugated Au NRs. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright 2007. Photographs (left) and photoacoustic imaging (right) of tumour-bearing mice using the GRPR-targeted large (c) and small (d) AuNRs. The PA signal intensities are displayed as colour maps, overlaid with the ultrasound images for anatomical information. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
In addition to monitoring the kinetics of cellular uptake, similar techniques have been used to transport Au NRs to specific locations in the body. The dependence of the plasmon wavelength of Au NRs on the aspect ratio also enables multiplexed imaging. The simultaneous imaging of numerous biomarkers on the surface of human breast epithelial cells has been accomplished by the use of Au NRs with varying aspect ratios. In addition, because of Au NRs’ anisotropic optical response, they may be used to follow the motions of objects within cell settings. The two-photon excited photoluminescence of Au NRs can be used to distinguish between their targeting of cancer biomarkers on cytoplasmic membranes, as shown in Fig. 31(b).146 It is possible to detect many nanoparticles simultaneously both inside and outside the vascular system using this polarization-dependent spectral contrast approach, which opens up the possibility of a wide range of biological applications.
It is well known that the SPR of Au NRs can red-shift to the NIR region with increasing aspect ratio. Within the NIR-II region of 1000–1200 nm, the 1050–1150 nm range is where blood-laden tissue generates the lowest PA background noise. Similar to photovoltaics where light is converted to electricity, photoacoustic generation is an energy conversion process, in which light is converted to ultrasound. Using Au NRs with SPR located at the NIR-II, scientists realized improved PA molecular imaging. For example, Chen et al., have developed a protocol to synthesize the Au NRs with SPR absorbing at 1064 nm within the NIR-II window, ensuring low background noise from endogenous absorbers in tissue.147 They found that the small Au NRs are 3 times more thermally stable than the large Au NRs under nanosecond laser irradiation. Due to enhanced delivery, targeting, thermal stability and surface-to-volume ratio, the small GRPR-targeted Au NRs show statistically significant higher PA signal than large Au NRs (Fig. 31(c) and (d)), confirming that the small Au NRs have enhanced photoacoustic-signal-generation efficiency, higher tumour-penetration efficiency and higher binding specificity compared with their large counterparts. These unexpected findings, confirmed using theoretical and numerical analysis, show that the PA signal is not only proportional to the optical absorption of the nanoparticle solution but also to the surface-to-volume ratio of the nanoparticles.
Many new possibilities for in vivo optical molecular imaging are opened up by this technology, which allows for the viewing of numerous contrast agents at the same time with micrometer scale resolution and millimetre scale depth. In lymphatic research, this technique could be utilized to map lymphangiogenesis in tumors, which is a critical aspect in cancer progression and immunotherapy treatment options. It is important to note that lymph node metastasis has a significant clinical impact, and this technique could be used to detect sentinel lymph nodes or lymphangiogenesis biomarkers. A possible use of this technology would be to investigate the role of the lymphatic system in the brain, as well as its relationship to neurodegenerative illness.


5.1.2. Therapy and drug delivery. 
In recent years, Au nanostructures have attracted a lot of interest for their potential as drug delivery vehicles, as presented in Fig. 32. Au NRs have the advantages of being tiny, great light absorption particularly in the NIR range, high photo-thermal conversion efficiencies, and easy to conjugate with targeted compounds and pharmaceuticals. A contemporary method involves exposing DNA–Au NR complexes to NIR laser pulses, which results in DNA release as a result of photo-induced morphological changes in the nanorod.71 When El-Sayed et al. published their initial paper in 2001, they described how the use of Au NRs for photo-thermal cancer therapy had been demonstrated.148 They demonstrated how Au NRs were selectively bound to human oral cancer cells. The photo-thermal heating of the Au NRs occurs when the cells are exposed to a near-infrared continuous wave laser. The cancer cells are killed as a result of the photo-thermal heating. Following the publication of their ground-breaking study, numerous efforts have been undertaken to include Au NRs in cancer cell therapies. Using an NIR laser to irradiate Au NRs, researchers investigated the spatiotemporal temperature distribution and cell death that resulted.63 Assemblies of metal nanoparticles have also been employed in therapeutic applications, e.g., in photo-thermal cancer therapy. Metal nanoparticles exhibit light absorption in the Vis-NIR spectral range, which is several orders of magnitude stronger than that exhibited by conventional laser phototherapy agents.43
 Fig. 32  Biomedical applications enabled by different types of Au nanomaterials. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Due to their larger electric field enhancements and polarizabilities, Au NRs and other anisotropic nanostructures are more advantageous than their spherical counterparts for plasmonic sensing.149 In the biomedical application especially for cancer treatment, Zhang and co-workers developed mesoporous silica-coated Au NRs (Au@SiO2) as a versatile platform for imaging, chemotherapeutics, and hyperthermia.29 The Au@SiO2 thus possesses both the unique functions of mesoporous silica nanoparticles and Au NRs, and also provides a new functionality: light controlled drug release. The Au@SiO2–DOX with laser irradiation thus provides two therapeutic modes: chemotherapy through low-power-density laser-triggered DOX release, and hyperthermia therapy under high-power-density laser irradiation. The inner Au NR core functions both as an imaging agent and a hyperthermia agent. The outer mesoporous SiO2 shell exhibits the potential for allowing a high drug payload, thus posing itself as an effective drug carrier. Additionally, the protection of the SiO2 shell guarantees the utilization of the NIR-transparent window provided by the Au NR core in complex biological environments. The mesoporous SiO2-coated Au NRs (Au@SiO2) created a novel feature: NIR laser-controlled drug release. With integrated functions, such multifunctional theranostic systems are critical to optimize the therapeutic efficacy and to improve the safety of therapeutic regimes (Fig. 33). The combination of chemotherapy and hyperthermia in a single platform can, therefore, extend their applications and might be employed synergistically to treat high-risk tumors with a goal of complete tumor eradication.29
 Fig. 33  (a) Schematic illustration of mesoporous SiO2-coated Au NRs (Au@SiO2) as a novel multifunctional theranostic platform for cancer treatment. TEM images of (b) Au NRs and (c) Au@SiO2, (d) A549 cells are treated with Au@SiO2–DOX for 12 h and then radiated for 3 min using a NIR laser with low power density of 20 W cm−2 to avoid killing A549 cells directly. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright 2012. 

5.2. In sensors
Plasmonic nanostructures have found widespread application in the development of two distinct types of sensors, namely surface plasmon sensors and SERS sensors.

5.2.1. SPR sensing. 
SPR and LSPR sensing technology have been widely used for the detection of biological and chemical analytes, environmental monitoring, and medical diagnostics since the first application of the SPR phenomenon for gas detection and biologic sensing in 1983.150 SPR sensing technology has been widely used for the detection of biological and chemical analytes, environmental monitoring, and medical diagnostics in the past two decades, including drug screening, food safety and security,104 and pH sensing.123 Furthermore, the SPR based sensing approaches have grown in power, accuracy, selectivity, and sensitivity. They are also becoming more widely used. Increasing the electric field intensity around an SPR sensor causes it to become more sensitive to changes in the surrounding medium.123
Two types of SPR sensors have been developed, each with a distinct design: the metallic grating SPR sensor and the racetrack resonator SPR sensor. The sensitivity of a metallic grating SPR sensor for gas detection is extremely high, and a thin Pd film placed on the grating surface is utilized as a transducer in addition to the grating surface itself. For the design of the grating-based SPR hydrogen sensor, the sensitivity, as well as the width of the SPR curves and reflective amplitude, are all taken into account simultaneously, and a set of optimized structural parameters is presented.151 The racetrack resonator SPR sensor has a broad linear detection range of analyte RI and a high extinction ratio. Furthermore, the plasmonic resonator architecture offers a promising realization for extremely effective modulators and wide band transmitters and receivers.152 Au NRs have a number of characteristics that make them an excellent sensing platform, including their simplicity of synthesis, chemical stability, photostability, and biocompatibility. In addition, since detection events between the analyte and receptors occur on the particle surface, a high surface-to-volume ratio may be used to improve sensitivity. Also, the surface can be changed with a variety of organic and biological ligands to make it easier for the analyte to interact with it. It also has large extinction cross-sections, which in the best situations allows for the use of single nanoparticle sensors or even single-molecule assays.112
Because of their great confinement and increase in the electromagnetic field near the surface, both the SPR and LSPR based structures are attractive platforms for optical sensors. Towards the middle of Fig. 34, you can see the typical diagrams of SPR and LSPR, which are employed for sensing. In contrast to the SPR structure, which has a typical decay length of 100–600 nm, the LSPR structure has a substantially lower decay length of 5–60 nm. In this way, it is believed that the SPR structure is superior for the detection of bigger biomolecules, whilst the LSPR structure is superior for the detection of smaller biomolecules. Optical plasmonic sensors have previously demonstrated the capacity to detect changes in real time without the need for labels, as well as remarkable sensitivity. They have been used successfully in a variety of fields, including chemistry, biology, medicine, and food safety, among others. In general, the single mode of SPR and LSPR sensors, as well as their hybrid modes, serves as the primary driving forces behind these sensors. Optimisation of plasmonic sensors may be achieved by modifying their geometric shapes and functional materials. SPR and LSPR have the benefit of being adjustable in terms of wavelength, intensity, and phase.153
 Fig. 34  The representative diagrams of SPR used for sensing. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from MDPI (Basel, Switzerland), copyright 2021. 


5.2.2. Chemical and biochemical sensing. 
Using the refractive index change-induced plasmon shift as a starting point, scientists have been able to fabricate ultrasensitive, light-weight, and remotely accessible chemical and biological sensors.72 Among the many potential uses for metal nanoparticle assemblies, the one that has received the greatest attention and development has been their use in chemical and biochemical sensing applications. Plasmonic NP assemblies with controllable structures are required in SERS-based quantitative sensing. This application requires structural optimization of plasma components. Under optimized conditions, up to 1012-fold SERS signal enhancement can be observed due to the enhanced local electromagnetic field combined with chemical enhancement.43 As a result of their unique absorption and scattering properties, Au NRs have attracted considerable attention as instruments for biological sensing, imaging, drug administration, and therapies, as shown in Fig. 35. The link between the Au NR size, shape, and environment as a result of variations in dielectric and interparticle spacing makes these materials useful as sensors.71
 Fig. 35  Two Au colloidal methods for home pregnancy test and 2019-ncov detection. Reproduced from website of ref. 154. 
In recent two years, colloidal Au nanostructures have been used with high sensitivity to some typical molecular targets. One mature application of Au colloids is the pregnancy test, as shown in Fig. 35(a). With the epidemic outbreak of global Novel Coronavirus 2019 (abbreviated as 2019-ncov), the State Food and Drug Administration approved the novel coronavirus antibody detection reagent. The main detection methods are the colloidal gold method and the magnetic particle chem-luminescence method. The product is presented in Fig. 35(b). The 2019-ncov antigen test card (Colloidal Gold immunochromatography) contains colloidal Au labelled novel coronavirus recombinant antigen and Au labelled rabbit IgG antibody, and is coated with the mixture of anti-human IgM and anti-human IgG in the nitrocellulose-membrane. Detection line and the quality control line are coated with sheep anti-rabbit IgG. In the presence of novel coronavirus antibody in the sample, the “novel coronavirus antigen colloidal gold, coronavirus antibody, anti-human IgM/IgG” complex is formed in the nitro cellulose membrane detection line to coagulate and display colour, indicating a positive result.154


5.2.3. SERS sensors. 
Plasmonic amplification of Raman signals is the method that SERS sensors use to function. The detection of vibrational and rotational properties of molecules can be done using Raman scattering, which is the result of inelastic light scattering. SERS is a technology that has a lot of potential for use in sensing applications since it can overcome issues such as low sensitivity and excessive background interference. Since the first successful implementation of SERS for the detection of a single molecule in 1997.155 The domains of biosensing and nanomedicine have seen significant expansions in their applications of this technology. The great majority of SERS sensors have been developed over the past 20 years, employing colloidal nanoparticle SERS systems. This is the case for the vast majority of SERS sensors. Colloidal nanoparticles used in SERS sensor systems are only suitable for use as in-solution detection probes. This is because colloidal nanoparticles can experience unwanted aggregation in biological matrices.
SERS is a potent and attractive spectroscopic approach for the sensitive detection of low-concentrated analyte molecules on metal surfaces, which benefits considerably from the strong electromagnetic enhancement associated with the chemical excitation generating local plasmonic fields on such surfaces. SERS is largely dependent on the interaction between the adsorbed molecules and surface of plasmonic nanostructures, and the later one was caused by anomalous surface enhancement.130 Currently, the electromagnetic field enhancement may be directly detected on metal nanoparticles with SPR in the Vis-NIR region, such as Au, Ag, and Cu nanostructures. This optical flexibility and the significant electromagnetic field augmentation give various advantages to plasmonic nanoparticles.156
Compared with the SERS sensors based on monoelemental Au nanostructures, bimetallic nanocrystals exhibit stronger SERS activity than single metals and are therefore more appropriate as SERS substrates. Au and Ag are common bimetallic metal materials that display surface plasmon characteristics upon excitation by incoming visible light, and their SERS activity has been extensively investigated. Although Ag nanocrystals are known to boost high magnetic field strength to enhance SERS activity, Au nanocrystals are easier to manufacture, and their biocompatibility and stability make them commonly used. Currently, the development of Au–Ag bimetallic nanocrystal SERS substrates to combine the advantages of both is growing, such as Au NBP@AgPt hollow nanostructures, Au NBP-embedded ultrathin metal (Au, Pd, and Pt) nanoframes and nanocages.
The SERS characteristics of the Au NBP@AgPt hollow nanostructures are good when excited at 785 nm, making them suitable for in situ monitoring of metal catalyzed reduction and oxidation reactions. Their findings demonstrate a universal approach for the fabrication of Au NBP-embedded Ag–Pt bimetallic hollow nanostructures with good plasmonic characteristics, which will be useful for a wide range of plasmon-based catalytic applications in the future.157 Also, the Au NBP-embedded ultrathin metal (Au, Pd, and Pt) nanoframes possess an excellent SERS effect and outstanding in situ reaction probing performance.89
SERS spectra can provide “fingerprints” for recognizing chemical species in neighbouring surfaces, making it a promising tool for in situ observation of catalytic processes. Combining the merits of the plasmonic properties of noble metal NRs, excellent stabilities of alloys, and superior catalytic activities of porous structures, porous AuAg NRs were used as a Raman probe for the in situ monitoring the catalytic oxidation of tetramethylbenzidine and reduction of 4-nitrothiophenol (4-NTP).158Fig. 36(a) shows the schematic diagram for the reduction of 4-NTP to 4-ATP. Color-coded intensity map of time-resolved SERS signals clearly demonstrated that the intensity of 1340 cm−1 band of 4-NTP decreased gradually and vanished finally, accompanied by the emergence of a new band at 1590 cm−1 corresponding to the phenol-ring mode of 4-ATP, as shown in Fig. 36(b) and (c).
 Fig. 36  (a) Schematic diagram for the reduction of 4-NTP to 4-ATP. (b) Color-coded intensity map of time-dependent SERS signals obtained from 4-NTP adsorbed on the surfaces of porous AuAg NRs at different reaction times. (c) Representative SERS signals acquired from 4-NTP at different reaction times, indicating the formation of 4-ATP. (d) Raman spectra of powdery 4-NTP and 4-ATP samples. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
In the SERS technology, the resolution of tip enhanced Raman spectroscopy can reach a sub-nanometer scale. The sensitivity is high enough to detect a single chemical bond, which provides a powerful mean for studying various chemical components and chemical reactions at the surface interface.159 However, the biggest problem of tip enhanced Raman spectroscopy is still the probe reliability. And study on the high-performance, chemically stable probes with high efficiency is still an important and challenging subject.

5.3. Hot electron effect
In metals with high concentration of free electrons, the proportion of radiation recombination in metal microstructures is very weak, which is quite different from the excitation and radiation recombination of semiconductors. When the incident light on the nanostructure is resonant with LSP, the photon energy drives the surface of plasmons to produce collective oscillation within 10 fs, during which the electron energy is higher than the Fermi level and becomes high-energy electrons. In the following 100 fs, the internal damping effects, such as phonon scattering, lattice defects and Landau damping, lead to excitation dephasing to produce electron–hole pairs. Through the scattering between electrons and optical phonons, the energy of electrons is finally transferred to phonon vibration energy after excitation (∼1 ps). Then the phonon energy is transformed into the heat energy of lattice vibration (∼10 ps), generating localized heat in the nanometer sized region. The localized energy dissipated into the environmental medium through the process of heat radiation and heat conduction after ∼1000 ps. The mechanism and energy conversion process is presented in Fig. 37.160 The photothermal conversion can be regulated and localized in a nanogap or nanometer sized cavity. Each stage of these energy transfer processes can be used for a specific application. Many research papers and some review articles have dealt with the plasmon related applications.161
 Fig. 37  The timescales and mechanism and energy conversion process of LSP after irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Optical Society, copyright 2017. 

5.3.1. For new energy source and solar conversion. 
Under optical excitation, plasmon quantum can either decay radiatively into a photon or nonradiatively into an electron–hole pair. The most likely electron–hole pair formation occurs when the plasmon quantum excites an electron from the Fermi level to an occupied state below the vacuum level. These hot electrons can transfer into specific electronic states of molecules adsorbed on the metal surface, inducing processes such as molecular dissociation and chemical reactions.
Mukherjee et al.,162 reported experimental evidence of room temperature photocatalytic dissociation of H2. The reaction can only be enabled by hot electrons generated by surface plasmon decay from small Au nanoparticles supported on TiO2 matrix. The dissociation of H2 process was probed by detecting the formation of HD molecules from the dissociations of H2 and D2. The photocatalysis was confirmed with and without laser illumination. They also observed a steady increase of photocatalytic rate with increasing Au loading, showing a strong dependence on Au nanoparticle concentration for HD generation. As shown in Fig. 38, the hot electrons are initially excited at the Au nanoparticle surface. Then hot electrons soon lose coherence and form a nonequilibrium Fermi–Dirac type distribution which thermalizes by Auger scattering. The narrow bonding and broad antibonding states of adsorbed H2 are denoted as B and AB, respectively. The hot electrons in the high energy tail have sufficient energy to transfer into the antibonding state of the H2 molecule, creating a transient negative ion. Then the transient negative ion transfers the electron back to the Au NP surface, where it returns to the ground-state potential energy continuum and dissociates.
 Fig. 38  (a) Mechanistic representation of H2 dissociation on the Au NP surface. (b) Schematic of hot electron excitation in Au NPs showing: d-band electron–hole pair excited above the Fermi level upon plasmon decay. The narrow bonding and broad antibonding states of adsorbed H2 are denoted as B and AB, respectively. (c) Schematic of Fermi–Dirac type distribution of hot electrons permitting hot electron transfer into the antibonding state of H2. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
Due to the unique optical absorption and thermal localization characteristics of the plasmon absorber, researchers have greatly improved the efficiency of solar energy generation through material selection, structural design and system optimization. It is expected that the solar photo-thermal effect can be widely used in the fields of seawater desalination, sewage treatment, high-temperature steam sterilization and power generation. At the same time, some scientific problems, such as the photo-thermal conversion mechanism of thermal and dynamic processes and the precise control of thermal effects in time and space, can be solved with the development of ultrafast spectroscopy technology.
Most recently, due to the unique capability of broadband light harvesting and pronounced electromagnetic enhancement, plasmonic nanostructures have been demonstrated for promising applications in a new sustainable field of plasmon enhanced water purification. Chen et al.,163 demonstrated asymmetric plasmonic structures for dual functions of solar water purification and pollution detection, as presented in Fig. 39(a). Such impressive performances in solar thermal conversion and chemical sensing stemmed from the broadband and efficient light absorption (solar absorptivity of more than 90%) as well as pronounced local field enhancement, respectively. As an example of functional integration, this dual functional plasmonic structure can enable on-site pollution detection and purification of water.
 Fig. 39  (a) Schematic of the integrated dual-functions of plasmonic structures: plasmonic heating and spectroscopic amplification. The dark side (facing up towards the light) for the solar water purification and the shiny side (facing down towards the laser illumination) for the pollution detection. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Elsevier]. (b) Schematic of an ideal plasmonic absorber based on nanoporous alumina template. (c) Self-assembly of Au nanoparticles on nanoporous templates to form plasmonic absorbers, and experimental setups for solar steam generation with the solar simulator off/on. (d) Experimental absorption spectra measured by an integrated sphere in the Vis-NIR regimes and mid-infrared regime. The thin red, thin black, and thick black lines represent the bare nanoporous templates Au/NPT (Au-deposited nanoporous template) and Au/D-NPT (Au-deposited disordered nanoporous template) samples, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016. 
The concept of complex plasmonic structures based on Au nanostructures with integrated functionalities opened up exciting opportunities for advanced plasmonic science. In 2016, through physical vapour deposition and assembly of Au nanoparticles in the Al2O3 template, Zhou et al., achieved plasmon absorber with high efficiency in the ultra wide range of 400 nm–10 μm, as shown in Fig. 39(b)–(d).164 More strikingly, the minimal absorbance of the Au/D-NPT (thick black line in Fig. 39(d)) was increased to 98.6% and an average of absorbance reached >99% over the mid-infrared spectrum. Because of its efficient light absorption, strong field enhancement, and porous structures, which together enable not only efficient solar absorption but also significant local heating and continuous stream flow, plasmonic absorber–based solar steam generation has high efficiency under solar irradiation. Through depositing Pb, Au, Ag particle mixture evenly into the pores of natural wood, M. Zhu obtained plasmonic wood absorbers with excellent performance for solar steam generation.165


5.3.2. For photoelectric devices. 
Another important application of the hot electron effect of the localized plasmons is the enhancement or tunability in the photoelectric device. Metal nanostructures generate “hot electrons” from light by creating surface plasmons.166 There are several proposed metal-to-semiconductor charge-separation pathways. Based on the conventional plasmon-induced hot-electron transfer (PHET) mechanism, the reported efficiencies of devices based on this PHET concept are often low (1–2%) because the plasmon decays into a hot electron–hole pair within the metal via Landau damping on time scales of a few to tens of femtoseconds. Hot-electron transfer competes with electron relaxation through rapid electron–electron scattering on time scales of hundreds of femtoseconds.167 Metal-to-semiconductor hot-electron transfer efficiencies can be enhanced if the competition with ultrafast electron–electron scattering in the metal can be avoided. One approach is to create a direct metal-to-semiconductor interfacial charge-transfer transition that can be directly excited to promote an electron from the metal into the semiconductor conducting band. However, these interfacial transitions are often too weak as compared with bulk metal transitions. A desirable photo-induced hot-electron transfer pathway would combine the strong light-absorbing power of plasmonic transitions with the superior charge-separation.
In 2015, Wu et al. first proposed and experimentally demonstrated a plasmon-induced interfacial charge-transfer transition (PICTT) pathway in the CdSe–Au NR heterostructure (Fig. 40).168 In this PICCT pathway, strong Au–CdSe interactions led to strong plasmon damping in the Au tip, as shown in Fig. 40(a). When the plasmon was excited along the nanorod axis, transient absorption anisotropy showed more efficient (>24%) Au-to-CdSe charge transfer, and the charge-separation efficiencies were independent of excitation photon energy. The damped plasmon decays via direct excitation of an interfacial electron–hole pair (with an electron in CdSe and a hole in Au). The electronic structure of CdSe–Au NRs can be viewed as a combination of the strongly interacting tip region, which resembles the CdSe–Au dimers with strongly damped plasmon and exciton bands. The center part is similar to the unperturbed CdSe nanorods, as shown in Fig. 40(b). Direct evidence to support this proposed mechanism was obtained through ultrafast transient absorption study. A pump laser with a photon energy below the CdSe band gap was used to excite the Au tip, and the electron transferred to the CdSe domain was probed through the bleaching of the exciton.
 Fig. 40  (a) One representative TEM image of CdSe–Au NRs (inset: a representative high-resolution TEM image). (b) Schematic electronic structure of CdSe–Au NRs, composed of a strongly damped Au tip with broadened electronic levels and a central region with relatively unperturbed discrete levels (1σe, 1πe, and 1σh). The green dashed arrow indicates the interband transition in the visible (Vis) spectrum, the red arrow indicates the intraband transition in the IR spectrum, and the green solid arrow indicates electron transport in the nanorod. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015. 
In high-performance luminescence, integrating plasmonic nanostructures into the UV luminescence system is one promising method to enhance the ultraviolet luminescence efficiency. Lighting colours are tuned in the visible spectral band. In particular, by incorporating Au quasiparticle nanofilms, the incandescent lighting features can further be modulated, such as the emission peaks and the modulation of lighting regions. Therefore, individual ZnO:Ga microwire (MW) based incandescent emitters can undertake a new function of the oldest, affordable, and easily prepared light sources. However, preliminary, individual ZnO:Ga MWs being treated as efficient incandescent light sources can also open up intriguing scientific questions, and possible applications of linear, transparent, flexible displays and optical interconnects with electronic circuits.169 Sun et al. developed wavelength-tunable incandescent-type light sources comprising individual Ga-doped ZnO MWs coated with Au NRs (Au NRs@ZnO:Ga MW) that were able to switch between different wavelengths.170 It is possible to achieve wavelength-tunable near-infrared light emission, particularly by altering the aspect ratio of the Au NRs (Fig. 41), with the dominant emission peak spanning the visible to near-infrared spectral bands. It has been discovered that the creation and injection of nonequilibrium hot electrons produced by Au-NR plasmons can be responsible for the wavelength-tunable incandescent-type illumination characteristics, which can be exploited to improve the emission characteristics of Au NRs.170
 Fig. 41  (a) The extinction spectra of Au NRs with SPR at 725 nm. The scale bar of inset is 100 nm. (b–f) SEM images of Au NR decorated ZnO:Ga MWs, I–V curves and the EL spectra. (g and h) The EL photograph of the ZnO:Ga MWs with and without the Au NR decoration. The scale bar is 200 μm. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from OSA Publishing, copyright 2020. 
Similar to the Au nanostructures applied in photoelectric devices, plasmonic nanostructures with SPR located in the UV region can also be used to enhance the luminescence performance. A single AgNPs@ZnO:Ga MW was used as an active layer, in the study by Zhou et al., and heterojunction diodes with strong, steady, and spectrally pure UV emission were created using this active layer.171 The excitation of hybrid quadrupole plasmons and the subsequent nonradiative decay of these plasmons have been thoroughly researched. In addition to providing deep insights into manipulating high-order plasmonic oscillations, this work also has the potential to be used in the development of a more cost-effective alternative to traditional ultraviolet light-emitting devices and diodes by taking advantage of large-sized plasmonic nanoparticles The manufacture of individual ZnO:Ga MWs coated with isolated metallic nanoparticles with controlled sizes and gap distances opens up new paths for the construction of novel optoelectronic devices with excellent performance and efficiency, among other things. Miao et al. reported that the Rh nanocubes of high purity and controlled sizes with a plasmonic response in the UV spectral region were successfully synthesized.172

5.4. Plasmonic nanolaser
The plasmonic nanolaser (also called SPASER abbreviated for “surface plasmon amplification by stimulated emission of radiation”) is an active nanosystem including a gain medium and a nanoplasmonic metal core. It was theoretically predicted in 2003 by Bergman and Stockman from Georgia State University.173 Then various kinds of surface plasmon nanolasers with new structures have been constructed. SPPs are among the most promising candidates for subwavelength optical confinement. Nanolasers applied the idea of SPP effect that can break through the diffraction limit. However, long-range SPPs have only demonstrated optical confinement comparable to that of conventional dielectric wavelength because of practical issues of optical losses and stringent fabrication demands. Research on nanolasers focused on minimizing the metal loss and realizing the electric pump at room temperature and a low threshold.
Nanolasers based on surface plasmons are not pumping and feedback of optical resonators in optical systems. Under the irradiation of electromagnetic waves, the stimulated oscillation of free electrons can produce strong localized SPR on the nanoscale. The oscillation in the resonant cavity was amplified by the gain medium and laser emission can be achieved.
In 2008, F. Oulton proposed a novel scheme and designed a waveguide structure composed of semiconductor–insulator–metals for Fabry–Perot mode laser operation.174 The gain medium of the laser is semiconductor nanowires. And the photons generated by nanowires are coupled with free electrons on the metal surface to form surface plasmons. The plasmon propagates along the direction of the nanowire and oscillates in the Fabry–Perot cavity formed by reflection at both ends of the nanowire. In 2012, researchers at the University of California demonstrated the first thresholdless laser and the smallest room temperature nanolaser using plasmonic nanoscale coaxial structures.175 Since then, the effect was observed in many semiconductor systems.176–178
More recently, L. M. Tong group reported the direct observation of lasing in microfiber-coupled single plasmonic nanoparticles enabled by strongly coupling one Au NR with the whispering gallery cavity of a dye-doped polymer microfiber (with diameter down to 2.0 μm).179 Under the excitation of 532 nm nanosecond pulses laser, laser scattering can be obtained on the Au NR (Fig. 42). This new laser can not only greatly reduce the energy loss in metal, but also realize long-distance surface plasmon wave transmission. At the same time, the threshold of the laser is reduced, which makes it possible for the nanolaser to work at room temperature. Once the nanolaser with low threshold and high integration is successfully developed, the size of photonics devices will be greatly reduced. Thus, the mismatch between photonic devices and electronic devices will be improved, and the product size in the optoelectronic industry will be reduced. Nanolasers with high performance will be great in biosensors, precision measurement, and so on. Among the applications of nanolasers, the “killer” application will be ultrafast, high-density on-chip communications for future information processing.
 Fig. 42  Design of a microfiber-coupled single plasmonic nanorod laser. (a) Schematic illustration of a strong mode coupling-enabled hybrid photon-plasmon laser, realized by placing one Au NR on the surface of a dye-doped polymethyl methacrylate microfiber suspended between two glass substrates. (b) Close-up view of the lasing structure. The inset shows a schematic diagram showing gain accumulation. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2022. 
Optical pumping has played an important role in proof-of-concept studies and in revealing basic physical effects. However, for certain applications, electrical injection is necessary, especially for semiconductor-based nanolasers with intended applications in integrated photonic circuits. Electrical injection in plasmonic nanolasers presents both interesting opportunities and challenges. The challenges involve the increased degree of difficulty in the fabrication of high-quality metallic structures with small features. There are also intrinsic issues related to the increased contact resistance for smaller structures.
5.5. Plasmonic antenna for light rectification
Plasmonic antennas are tiny metallic structures that can convert optical signals into DC current and manipulate light at the nanoscale. The approach has been used in a variety of applications, from improving the sensitivity of biosensors to enhancing the performance of solar cells. In addition, it shows promise for high-frequency wireless power transmission and, possibly, future rectifying light-harvesting systems. A new type of rectifying antenna based on plasmonic carrier generation was demonstrated by Mupparapu et al. The antenna consists of an Au antenna (conical) and is coupled to a TiOx/Ti insulator–metal (planar) substrate through its tip-apex, as shown in Fig. 43(a), all together forming a rectifying system (AC rectifier). The conical shape makes it possible for an improved current generation to be based on plasmon-mediated electromagnetic-to-electron conversion. This is an effect that exploits the nanoscale-tip contact of the rectifying antenna, and it is proportional to both the antenna resonance and the surface-electron scattering. Notably, this method allows for rectification to take place at 280 THz (1064 nm). Eventually, it has been shown that the conical rectifying antenna may function at 384 THz (780 nm) (Fig. 43(b)), which paves the way for the development of efficient antennas operating in the visible spectrum.180
 Fig. 43  (a) Illustration of a nanorectenna illuminated by an externally propagating collimated beam. (b) The actual materials involved in the cone fabrication (Au and Pt–C versus Au) together with the substrate when estimating the frequency of the cone resonances, the absorption maps at 280 THz (1064 nm) and 384 THz (780 nm) show an absorption mostly localized at the apex region. (c) Image captured by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) showing the nanocone generated on an AFM milled probe before (core made by Pt–C) and after (Au coating). The dots in red depict the radius of the tip (different coating thicknesses have been considered for an overall tip radius in the range of 20–40 nm). Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright 2022. 
6. Limitations and challenges
Nowadays, plasmon is not only a concept in fundamental research, but also one source of technology. For example, the plasmon photo-thermal effect can catalyse water decomposition and carbon dioxide reduction. Using this catalysis reaction, photosynthetic new energy can be obtained just from water and carbon dioxide. In spite of our modern understanding in the plasmonics of metal nanomaterials, there are still many limitations, unknowns and challenges in this field.
The first challenge is the synthesis process. Usually, plasmonic Au nanostructures have achieved precise regulation on morphology and size using surfactants assisted wet chemical methods. Colloidal methods have also demonstrated their flexibility of incorporating different Au nanoparticles into defined hybrid systems with controlled geometries. However, surfactants should be removed in practical applications, which can cause aggregation and deformation of the Au nanostructure, thereby impacting the optical properties and further applications. For the case of growth mechanism, due to the lack of direct means to characterize the nucleation and growth of nanostructures in a liquid environment at the atomic scale, many scientific problems about the growth mechanism of nanocrystals have not yet formed theories. The chemical synthesis is by far still an art, not a science at present.35
The second issue is the practical applications. Despite the fact that sensing techniques based on surface-enhanced spectroscopy and SPR effect have been extensively studied, the exploration of new methods that overcome existing drawbacks and improve the sensing performance is consistently pursued. It is worth pointing out that these results have showed fundamental feasibility of new sensing methods, but there is still a long way to go before these can be translated into practical sensing devices. Taking the SERS for example, the laser power on a substrate of low SERS-activity has to be high, causing potential heat damage to the sample; In the SERS, the intrinsic spectral information is hidden or lost and the spectral analysis becomes complicated.181 Moreover, the molecules are usually irreversibly adsorbed on the metal surface so that the SERS-substrates are not reusable, increasing the cost of SERS sensing devices. Also, refinement of assay workflows could promote the practical applications of some SERS-based circulating tumor detection strategies. For example, SERS detection requires multiple labelling, which needs to be further simplified to improve the detection efficiency.182
Although the plasmonic effects were found to be useful in enhancing the performance of catalysis and photoelectric devices, it remains a major challenge to apply these techniques for characterizing catalysts under the temperature and pressure conditions at which catalysis actually happens. The dynamic picture of in situ characterization of catalysts and catalytic processes should to be constructed under realistic reaction conditions. Therefore, in addition to the commercialization of noble metal nanostructures, for the practical application, there are many important issues that need be solved such as their scale-up synthesis and stability under industrial reaction conditions, and the regeneration and recycling in applications.
As for the case of Au nanostructures, Au NRs are one of the most versatile plasmonic nanostructures for their numerous unique functionalities and potential applications in a broad range of scientific as well as technological scenarios. However, many important issues still need to be further explored. For example, the long term stability of Au NRs and precise control of orientations and nanogaps in Au NR assemblies are urgent tasks. Although scientific studies of Au-NR-based SERS techniques are comprehensive and abundant, debates have existed for years on the mechanism of Au NR based photocatalysis, focusing on the plasmon-induced hot electron generation or the rise in the local temperature caused by the plasmonic photothermal conversion effect.
Another important reason for the huge interest in the plasmonic Au nanostructures is their potential for thermoplasmonic cancer therapy.183 Au NRs with tunable SPR in the NIR region have been extensively studied and effective in different biological cells as well as medical applications. It is also known that lasers operating in the NIR regime can penetrate centimeters into tissue; hence, utilizing fiber optics and endoscopes, most sites in the human body can be reached. However, practical implementation of Au NRs in real-life medical treatment may bring about potential damage to the human body due to the toxic molecules on the surface of Au NRs. Therefore, important challenges need to be solved before this therapy can be employed for humans. Moreover, efficient strategies for delivery of nanostructures to precise tumor sites need to be developed.
7. Conclusions and remarks
In summary, we present a brief overview of Au nanostructures in this review, including complex nanostructures based on Au nanocrystals of different morphologies, such as nanorods, nanocubes, nanobipyramids, and nanostars. Then we described the effect of nanoparticle size, shape, aspect ratio, medium refractive index, and assembly on the SPR properties of Au nanostructures by comparing the experimental and simulation results. This review focused on the closely coupled assembly of Au nanostructures with unique physical phenomena. Associated applications of Au nanostructures are also discussed. Rapid development in the synthesis and fabrication techniques resulted in the availability of systematically designed plasmonic materials and devices, which not only widened the scope of applications of plasmons and hot carriers but also advanced experimental discoveries.
Fully understanding the enhancement effect of plasmons and their internal physical process can effectively promote the application, especially for the coupling structures with controllable energy exchange and transfer path. Among these issues, some related works should be developed simultaneously, such as theoretical models and calculation methods, design and preparation, characterization and testing, ultrafast time resolution and high resolution space detection technology.
Author contributions
K. A. Dahan and Y. Li wrote the article, J. Xu collected relevant information, and C. X. Kan modified the article.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11974182 and 11874220), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. NC2022008).
Notes and references
R. Jin, Y. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901–1903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Maillard, S. Giorgio and M.-P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 2466–2470 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jin, Y. Charles Cao, E. Hao, G. S. Métraux, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Nature, 2003, 425, 487–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310–325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, X. Wu, D. Liu, L. Feng, K. Zhang, W. Chu, W. Zhou and S. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3203–3208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, X. Wu, D. Liu, Z. Li, W. Chu, L. Feng, K. Zhang, W. Zhou and S. Xie, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 3465–3470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Busbee, S. O. Obare and C. J. Murphy, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 414–416 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4065–4067 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link, M. B. Mohamed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3073–3077 CrossRef CAS .
C.-X. Kan, J.-J. Zhu and X.-G. Zhu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 155304 CrossRef .
X. Wang, C. Kan, J. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Jiang and Y. Ni, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 295303 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kasani, K. Curtin and N. Wu, Nanophotonics, 2019, 8, 2065–2089 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zeng, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, X.-Q. Dinh, X. Yu and F. Luan, Plasmonics, 2011, 6, 491–506 CrossRef CAS .

          Y.-J. Lu, J. Kim, H.-Y. Chen, C. Wu, N. Dabidian, C. E. Sanders, C.-Y. Wang, M.-Y. Lu, B.-H. Li and X. Qiu, CLEO: Science and Innovations, 2012, p. CTh5C.7.
Y. K. Lee, C. H. Jung, J. Park, H. Seo, G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4251–4255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, M. Dridi, J. Y. Suh, C. H. Kim, D. T. Co, M. R. Wasielewski, G. C. Schatz and T. W. Odom, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 506–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Oulton, V. J. Sorger, T. Zentgraf, R.-M. Ma, C. Gladden, L. Dai, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nature, 2009, 461, 629–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Noginov, G. Zhu, A. Belgrave, R. Bakker, V. Shalaev, E. Narimanov, S. Stout, E. Herz, T. Suteewong and U. Wiesner, Nature, 2009, 460, 1110–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moskovits, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 485–496 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Herrera, A. C. Padilla and S. P. Hernandez-Rivera, Nanomaterials, 2013, 3, 158–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mu, X. Zhao, Z. Xie, Y. Zhao, Q. Zhong, L. Bo and Z. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 1607–1613 RSC .
S. Manzhos, G. Giorgi, J. Lüder and M. Ihara, Adv. Phys.: X, 2021, 6, 1908848 Search PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Bauer, N. S. Birenbaum and G. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 517–526 RSC .
A. J. Haes, S. Zou, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, T. Sun and K. T. Grattan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 332–351 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Yonzon, C. L. Haynes, X. Zhang, J. T. Walsh and R. Van Duyne, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 78–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W.-Y. Sun, D.-L. Ma, E. L.-M. Wong and C.-M. Che, Dalton Trans., 2007, 4884–4892 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Wang, X. Jiang, X. Li, Z. Hu, Y. Ji, X. Wu and C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1418–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abbas, M. Fei, L. Tian and S. Singamaneni, Plasmonics, 2013, 8, 537–544 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wijaya and K. Hamad-Schifferli, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9966–9969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Neri, S. Garcia Martin, C. Pezzato and L. J. Prins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1794–1797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhan, Y. Shu, Y. Sheng, H. Zhu, Y. Guo, L. Wang, Y. Guo, J. Zhang, G. Lu and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4494–4498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dhiman, B. Chalke and V. Polshettiwar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1935–1940 RSC .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12663–12676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gleiter, Acta Mater., 2000, 48, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and N. J. Halas, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 338–348 CrossRef CAS .
G. Manfredi, Preface to special topic: Plasmonics and solid state plasmas, Phys. Plasmas, 2018, 25, 031701 CrossRef .
L. M. Liz-Marzán, C. J. Murphy and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3820–3822 RSC .
Y. Ni, C. Kan, J. Xu and Y. Liu, Superlattices Microstruct., 2018, 114, 124–142 CrossRef CAS .
A. Klinkova, R. M. Choueiri and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3976–3991 RSC .
J. Langer, D. Jimenez de Aberasturi, J. Aizpurua, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, B. Auguié, J. J. Baumberg, G. C. Bazan, S. E. J. Bell, A. Boisen, A. G. Brolo, J. Choo, D. Cialla-May, V. Deckert, L. Fabris, K. Faulds, F. J. García de Abajo, R. Goodacre, D. Graham, A. J. Haes, C. L. Haynes, C. Huck, T. Itoh, M. Käll, J. Kneipp, N. A. Kotov, H. Kuang, E. C. Le Ru, H. K. Lee, J.-F. Li, X. Y. Ling, S. A. Maier, T. Mayerhöfer, M. Moskovits, K. Murakoshi, J.-M. Nam, S. Nie, Y. Ozaki, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Perez-Juste, J. Popp, A. Pucci, S. Reich, B. Ren, G. C. Schatz, T. Shegai, S. Schlücker, L.-L. Tay, K. G. Thomas, Z.-Q. Tian, R. P. Van Duyne, T. Vo-Dinh, Y. Wang, K. A. Willets, C. Xu, H. Xu, Y. Xu, Y. S. Yamamoto, B. Zhao and L. M. Liz-Marzán, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 28–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Nguyen, D.-J. Kim and K.-S. Kim, Micron, 2011, 42, 207–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Chang and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1427–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Chang, M. T. Gole and C. J. Murphy, MRS Bull., 2020, 45, 387–393 CrossRef .
F. J. Garcia de Abajo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17983–17987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, C. Kan, Y. Lou, Y. Liu, Y. Ni, S. Ke, C. Wang, X. Zhu and Z. Chen, J. Nanophotonics, 2020, 14, 016004 CAS .
N. S. Abadeer, M. R. Brennan, W. L. Wilson and C. Murphy, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8392–8406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Vigderman and E. R. Zubarev, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1450–1457 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, L. Jin, H. Caglayan, J. Chen, G. Xing, C. Zheng, V. Doan-Nguyen, Y. Kang, N. Engheta and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2804–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Xia, Z. Lu, G. Li, J. Chen, Y. Deng, S. Li, F. Zhou and N. He, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1794–1798 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, F. Bai and H. Fan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11956–11966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, F. Yang, T. Ming, R. Xiong, P. Wang and J. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 213704 CrossRef .
B. Wu, D. Liu, S. Mubeen, T. T. Chuong, M. Moskovits and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, X. Zhuo and J. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3054–3099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zijlstra, P. M. R. Paulo and M. Orrit, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 379–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Neretina and M. A. El-Sayed, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4880–4910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Locatelli, I. Monaco and M. C. Franchini, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21681–21699 RSC .
H. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
Y. Xia, K. D. Gilroy, H. C. Peng and X. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 60–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Walsh, W. Tong, H. Katz-Boon, P. Mulvaney, J. Etheridge and A. M. Funston, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2925–2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. R. Miranda and T. Ahmadi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15724–15734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Abdelmoti and F. P. Zamborini, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13511–13521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Raj and S. A. John, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 27–31 CrossRef .
C. Bullen, M. J. Latter, N. J. D’Alonzo, G. J. Willis and C. L. Raston, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4123–4125 RSC .
S. E. Lohse, J. R. Eller, S. T. Sivapalan, M. R. Plews and C. J. Murphy, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4135–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Stone, S. Jackson and D. W. Wright, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2011, 3, 100–109 CAS .
J. Pérez-Juste, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Mulvaney, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1870–1901 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, X. Cheng, H. Zhang, X. Bai, R. Ai, L. Shao and J. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13342–13453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Jackson, J. R. McBride, S. J. Rosenthal and D. W. Wright, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5261–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Walsh, S. J. Barrow, W. Tong, A. M. Funston and J. Etheridge, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 715–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tong, M. J. Walsh, P. Mulvaney, J. Etheridge and A. M. Funston, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3549–3559 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, L. Jin, H. Caglayan, J. Chen, G. Xing, C. Zheng, V. Doan-Nguyen, Y. Kang, N. Engheta, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2804–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Vigderman, B. P. Khanal and E. R. Zubarev, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4811–4841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Gabudean, M. Focsan and S. Astilean, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12240–12249 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eustis and M. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16350–16356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Reguera, J. Langer, D. J. de Aberasturi and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Colloidal Synthesis of Plasmonic Nanometals, Jenny Stanford Publishing,  2020, pp. 713–754 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, C. Kan, Y. Li, H. Xu, Y. Ni and D. Shi, Plasmonics, 2015, 10, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Kan, Y. Li, H. Xu, Y. Ni and D. Shi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 253105 CrossRef .
S. Ke, C. Kan, J. Liu and B. Cong, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2690–2696 RSC .
Z. Sun, W. Ni, Z. Yang, X. Kou, L. Li and J. Wang, Small, 2008, 4, 1287–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, X. Zhuo, S. Li, Q. Ruan, Q. H. Xu and J. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 801–812 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Kan, J. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Jiang and Y. Ni, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 14932–14940 RSC .
X. Wang, C. Kan, J. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Jiang and Y. Ni, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 295303 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Cui, Y. Guo, S. Cheng, C. Kan and J. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3198–3207 RSC .
X. Zhu, H. Jia, X. M. Zhu, S. Cheng, X. Zhuo, F. Qin, Z. Yang and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700016 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Z. Ye, L. Wei, J. Yuan and L. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 12842–12849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Sau and C. J. Murphy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8648–8649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Ahn, H.-E. Lee, K. Jin and K. T. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6861–6868 RSC .
J.-E. Park, Y. Lee and J.-M. Nam, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6475–6482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Jeon, P. V. Tsalu and J. W. Ha, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pellarin, J. Ramade, J. M. Rye, C. Bonnet, M. Broyer, M.-A. Lebeault, J. Lermé, S. Marguet, J. R. G. Navarro and E. Cottancin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11266–11279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. L. Nehl, J. H. Hafner and P. Nordlander, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 729–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Kumar, I. Pastoriza-Santos and G. A. Rodrıguez-González, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015606 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Garcia-Leis, A. Torreggiani, J. V. Garcia-Ramos and S. Sanchez-Cortes, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13629–13637 RSC .
Y. Xianyu, Y. Lin, Q. Chen, A. Belessiotis-Richards, M. M. Stevens and M. R. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 9891–9896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Pearl, E. V. Perevedentseva, A. V. Karmenyan, V. A. Khanadeev, S. Y. Wu, Y. R. Ma, N. G. Khlebtsov and C. L. Cheng, J. Biophotonics, 2022, 15, e202100264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, N. Kim, J. Park and Z. H. Kim, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 987–994 RSC .
K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Yonzon, E. Jeoung, S. Zou, G. C. Schatz, M. Mrksich and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12669–12676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Petryayeva and U. J. Krull, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 706, 8–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Vilímová and K. Šišková, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2185 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ni, X. Kou, Z. Yang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 677–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Park, S. Biswas, S. Kanel, D. Nepal and R. A. Vaia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5918–5926 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 409–453 Search PubMed .
J. C. Scaiano and K. Stamplecoskie, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1177–1187 Search PubMed .
A. J. Haes and R. P. Van Duyne, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379, 920–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Amendola, R. Pilot, M. Frasconi, O. M. Maragò and M. A. Iatì, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 203002 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Haes, C. L. Haynes, A. D. McFarland, G. C. Schatz, R. P. Van Duyne and S. Zou, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
J. Olson, S. Dominguez-Medina, A. Hoggard, L.-Y. Wang, W.-S. Chang and S. Link, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 40–57 RSC .
K.-S. Lee and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19220–19225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. K. Kulkarni, Nanotechnology: principles and practices, Springer,  2015 Search PubMed .
E. Ringe, M. R. Langille, K. Sohn, J. Zhang, J. Huang, C. A. Mirkin, R. P. Van Duyne and L. D. Marks, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1479–1483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Kou, Z. Yang, W. Ni and J. Wang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5233–5237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. Rycenga, S. E. Skrabalak, B. Wiley and Y. Xia, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 167–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32–41 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Sherry, R. Jin, C. A. Mirkin, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2060–2065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jana, M. Ganguly and T. Pal, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 86174–86211 RSC .
H. Nakashima, NTT Tech. Rev., 2009, 7, 1–5 Search PubMed .
L. J. Sherry, S.-H. Chang, G. C. Schatz, R. P. Van Duyne, B. J. Wiley and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2034–2038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ni, C. Kan, J. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Xu and C. Wang, Appl. Opt., 2017, 56, 8240–8245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Cortie, F. Liu, M. D. Arnold and Y. Niidome, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9103–9112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Myroshnychenko, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, I. Pastoriza-Santos, A. M. Funston, C. Novo, P. Mulvaney, L. M. Liz-Marzán and F. J. G. De Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1792–1805 RSC .
Z. Yang, Q. Li, F. Ruan, Z. Li, B. Ren, H. Xu and Z. Tian, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2010, 55, 2635–2642 CrossRef .
A. I. Pérez-Jiménez, D. Lyu, Z. Lu, G. Liu and B. Ren, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 4563–4577 RSC .
J. Liu, C. Kan, D. Shi, S. Ke and Y. Liu, Superlattices Microstruct., 2017, 110, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Biswas, J. Duan, D. Nepal, R. Pachter and R. Vaia, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2220–2225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Woo, L. Shao, H. Chen, Y. Liang, J. Wang and H.-Q. Lin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5976–5986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Funston, C. Novo, T. J. Davis and P. Mulvaney, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Wei, K. Chen and G. Ge, Strongly coupled nanorod vertical arrays for plasmonic sensing, Wiley Online Library,  2013 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zhu, L. Xu, W. Chen, H. Kuang, L. Liu, A. Agarwal, C. Xu and N. A. Kotov, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 5604–5607 CrossRef .
J. Kumar, X. Wei, S. Barrow, A. M. Funston, K. G. Thomas and P. Mulvaney, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4258–4264 RSC .
L. Shao, C. Fang, H. Chen, Y. C. Man, J. Wang and H.-Q. Lin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1424–1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gandra, A. Abbas, L. Tian and S. Singamaneni, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2645–2651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yoon, J. Lim and S. Yoon, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7199–7208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Prodan, C. Radloff, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Science, 2003, 302, 419–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Verellen, Y. Sonnefraud, H. Sobhani, F. Hao, V. V. Moshchalkov, P. V. Dorpe, P. Nordlander and S. A. Maier, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1663–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luk’Yanchuk, N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. T. Chong, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707–715 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lee and S. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7873–7882 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tong, Y. Zhao, T. B. Huff, M. N. Hansen, A. Wei and J. X. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3136–3141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Chen, Y. Zhao, S. J. Yoon, S. S. Gambhir and S. Emelianov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 465–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, M. Yang, B. Pang, M. Vara and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10410–10488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liedberg, C. Nylander and I. Lunström, Sens. Actuators, 1983, 4, 299–304 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, Y. Lu, J. Chen, R. Zheng, P. Wang and H. Ming, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 18599–18604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, P. Wang, C. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Lu, H. Ming and Q. Zhan, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 124517 CrossRef .
Q. Duan, Y. Liu, S. Chang, H. Chen and J. H. Chen, Sensors, 2021, 21, 5262 CrossRef PubMed .

          https://www.biochemtron.com/news/company/2020-05-16/1402.html, https://www.snwimedical.com/display.php?id=114.
S. Y. Chou and P. R. Krauss, Microelectron. Eng., 1997, 35, 237–240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, C. Kan, C. Miao, C. Wang, J. Wei, Y. Ni, B. Lu and D. Shi, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Q. Yun, C. Wang, M. Li, S. Cheng, Q. Ruan, X. Zhu and C. Kan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 23663–23672 RSC .
S. Ke, C. Kan, X. Zhu, C. Wang, W. Gao, Z. Li, X. Zhu and D. Shi, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 91, 262–269 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Cui, B.-S. Yeo, T. Schmid, C. Hafner and R. Zenobi, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1401–1405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper, L. Zeng, G. Ni, J. K. Tong, Y. Tsurimaki, Y. Huang, L. Meroueh, G. Mahan and G. Chen, Adv. Opt. Photonics, 2017, 9, 775–827 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. He, W. Guo, Y. Hu, J. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Chem. Rev., 2017, 118, 2927–2954 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, L. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Nie, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song and Y. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. Xu, P. Yu and Z. Wang, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 021305 CAS .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. Mcbride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Mao, M. Jiang, J. Ji, Y. Liu and C. Kan, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 33298–33311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, M. Jiang, W. Mao, C. Kan, C. Shan and D. Shen, Photonics Res., 2020, 8, 91–102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, M. Jiang, Y. Wu, K. Ma, Y. Liu, P. Wan, C. Kan and D. Shi, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 1340–1351 RSC .
C. Miao, H. Xu, M. Jiang, Y. Liu, P. Wan and C. Kan, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 20920–20929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Bergman and M. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 027402 CrossRef PubMed .
R. F. Oulton, V. J. Sorger, D. Genov, D. Pile and X. Zhang, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 496–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khajavikhan, A. Simic, M. Katz, J. Lee, B. Slutsky, A. Mizrahi, V. Lomakin and Y. Fainman, Nature, 2012, 482, 204–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, J. Dai, G. Zhu, G. Zhu, Y. Lin, J. Li and Z. Shi, Laser Photonics Rev., 2014, 8, 469–494 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernandez-Bravo, D. Wang, E. S. Barnard, A. Teitelboim, C. Tajon, J. Guan, G. C. Schatz, B. E. Cohen, E. M. Chan and P. J. Schuck, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1172–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Stockman, Adv. Photonics, 2020, 2, 054002 CAS .
N. Zhou, Y. Yang, X. Guo, J. Gong, Z. Shi, Z. Yang, H. Wu, Y. Gao, N. Yao and W. Fang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabn2026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mupparapu, J. Cunha, F. Tantussi, A. Jacassi, L. Summerer, M. Patrini, A. Giugni, L. Maserati, A. Alabastri and D. Garoli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103785 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7188–7216 RSC .
J. Wang, K. M. Koo, Y. Wang and M. Trau, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jauffred, A. Samadi, H. Klingberg, P. M. Bendix and L. B. Oddershede, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8087–8130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A picture of the different subfields that are being studied right now under the topic of nanoplasmonics. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the Au nanostructure formation mechanism with various sizes and shapes by the chemical reduction method. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 3  Three different structures for Au seeds and the corresponding production. (a–c) Single-crystal, single-twinned crystal, and five-fold-twinned crystal, respectively. (d–f) Au nanostructures created with above seeds. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed key steps of the symmetry breaking process in single-crystal Au NR growth. (b) Au seed particles overgrown in the absence of Ag+ ions remain spherical and multiply twinned. (c) Au seeds overgrown in the presence of Ag+ ions are anisotropic. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images and photograph of the corresponding aqueous dispersion of monodisperse Au NRs using additives of salicylate-based sodium salt (a and b), aromatic acid (c) and AgNO3 (d). Scale bars: (a–c) 200 nm, and (d) 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (e and f) Colloid photograph and UV-Vis absorbance spectra of Au NRs with SPR peaks labelled on the bottle. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of mono-dispersed Au NRs (a) for end-to-end assembly (b and c) and side-by-side assembly of the dimer (d), trimer (e), and tetramer (f). (g and h) Schematic diagrams for the Cys induced end-to-end assembly and HS-PEG-SH induced side-by-side assembly of Au NRs. (i and j) Absorption spectra with time for the assembly process of Au NRs. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Colours of Au NRs dispersed in H2O, tetrahydrofuran (THF), mixture with increasing THF/H2O ratio. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. (b) Digital picture of four cycles of end-to-end assembly and disassembly of Au NRs induced by 3-mercaptopropionic acid. (c) Extinction spectra of Au NR colloids recorded after four cycles of assembly and disassembly. The assembly was induced by adjusting the pH of the solution to 9.6 and the disassembly was achieved by adjusting the pH to 3.1. The black spectrum is of the original Au NR colloid. (d) Extinction spectra of Au after four cycles of side-by-side assembly and disassembly of Au NRs. The assembly was induced by controlling the pH to 6.2 and the disassembly was induced by adjusting the pH to 3.2. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustrating the Au NBP purification steps. (b–e) TEM images of the sample after the purification process. (f) Extinction spectra of the five Au NBP samples after purification. (g–i) TEM images and normalized extinction spectra of the Au NBPs and Au NRs dispersed in aqueous solutions. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright, 2015.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM images of the Au NBP and NR samples with SPR positioned at 744 nm (a and b) and 840 nm (c and d). Extinction spectra of the four samples dispersed in aqueous solutions (e). TPPL (f) and SERS spectra of the four samples (g). Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic approach of Au NBP@AuxAg1−xNRs, in which HAuCl4 and AgNO3 solutions were added simultaneously and slowly into the Au BP seed solution at a slow rate during the synthetic approach. (b) Transmission electron microscopy image of the pre-synthesized Au NBP core. (c) High-resolution HAADF-STEM picture of Au NBP@AuxAg1−x NRs, demonstrating a distinct core–shell interface. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from IOP Publishing Ltd, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic depicting the synthetic process. (b and c) TEM images and extinction spectra of the Au NBP sample and the Au NBP-embedded metal (Au, Pd, and Pt) nanoframe samples. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the catalytic process from silica-coated Au NBPs. (b) TEM images of Au NBPs, all-covered Pt–Au NBPs, and end-deposited Pt–Au NBPs. (c) the reaction of amplex red to fluorescent resorufin during the catalytic process. (d) Fluorescence intensity versus time trajectories of end-deposited Pt–Au NBPs and Pt–Au NBPs@ SiO2 under catalysis, respectively. (e) Statistical analysis of the reaction rate changes for three different structures. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis of corner-sharpness-controlled Au NCs with varied bromide densities. (b) TEM images of Au NCs with different amounts of seed and bromide; the insets show representative single-particle images to clearly visualize the sharpness difference. The numbers in the labels correspond to the edge length, and R and S indicate the round-cornered and sharp-cornered Au NCs, respectively. (c) Normalized UV-vis spectra of a series of Au NC solutions. The scale bars in (b) indicate 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 14  Change in the LSPR scattering spectra of single Au NS (a) and Au NC (b) in the different local RI media: air, water, and oil. (c) LSPR wavelength shifts for Au NS (red) and Au NC (blue) as a function of the local RI of medium. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (d) Experimental and simulated extinction (solid black line), scattering (solid red line), and absorption (solid blue line) cross-sections measured for a dimer of two Au nanocubes of 160 nm side length (TEM image in the inset). (e) Experimental extinction cross-sections for three Au and three Ag nanocube dimers (solid black line). The red lines are simulations using the cube morphology obtained from TEM images. The interparticle distance deff (indicated in blue). (f) Extinction, scattering, and absorption cross-sections calculated for 50 nm Ag NC dimers of various edge curvatures (rc = 1, 2, 5, and 8 nm). The gap thickness d is adjusted so that the resonance (red arrow) remains located at about 630 nm. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of nanostar synthesis. (b) TEM image of Au nanoparticles. (c) Extinction spectra of 5 nm Au nanoparticles (black), 70 nm Au nanoparticles (blue), and Au nanostars (red). (d) Scattering spectra of the corresponding nanoparticles simulated by FDTD. (e) Simulated local field distribution around a 70 nm Au spherical nanoparticle at λ = 532 nm, an Au nanostar at λ = 532 nm, and an Au nanostar at λ = 773 nm. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Localized SPR occurs when the frequency of the electron oscillations is in phase with the frequency of the incoming light at the nanoscale (at the wavelength of the light). Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Walter de Gruyter, copyright 2019. (b) Propagating SPR and (c) localized SPR. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Annual Reviews Inc., copyright 2007.	 
	(1)
ε(ω) = εr(ω) + εi(ω)	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
εr + 2εm = 0 or εr = −2εm
εr(ω) ≈ −xεm(ω)	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 17  (a) TEM images of Au NPs in a variety of configurations: nanospheres, nanocubes, nanostars (or nanobranches), nanorods, and nanobipyramids, respectively. (b) Extinction spectra (curves: a–e) of Au nanospheres, nanocubes, and nanorods with aspect ratios of 2.4, 3.4, and 4.6, respectively. (c) Extinction spectra (curves: a–e) of Au NBPs with aspect ratios of 1.5, 2.7, 3.9, and 4.7, and nanobranches, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 18  Calculated extinction (black), absorption (red), and scattering (blue) spectra of Ag nanoparticles of different shapes. (a) The calculated spectra for the 40 nm Ag sphere shows two resonance peaks: a resonance peak at 410 nm and a weaker resonance at 370 nm. (b) The calculated spectra of the 40 nm Ag cube shows more peaks and red-shifted, as it has several distinct symmetries for dipole resonance. (c–e) Calculated extinction absorption and scatting spectra of the 40 nm Ag tetrahedron, octahedron and triangular plate, respectively. (f) Calculated extinction spectra of Ag rectangular bars with different aspect ratios. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011.	 
σExt = σAbs + σsca	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 19  (a) The extinction spectra under transverse excitation with an increase the aspect ratio of Au NRs. (b) Under longitudinal excitation, the extinction spectra are dependent on the aspect ratio of nanorods. The aspect ratio of the Au NR is altered from 1.5 to 6, while the diameter of the nanorod remains constant at 5 nanometers. The increasing direction of the aspect ratio of Au NR is indicated by the green arrows in the image. (c) The relationship between the aspect ratio of Au NRs and the wavelength of transverse plasmons. (d) The longitudinal plasmon wavelength is generally linearly dependent on the aspect ratio. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Absorption spectra of AuNRs with different aspect ratios. The longitudinal SPRL and transverse SPR mode are marked corresponding to the morphology. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the NTT, copyright 2009. (b) Calculated extinction, scattering, and absorption spectra (red, blue, and black, respectively) for ellipsoids with an aspect ratio (AR) of 2.1 (solid line) and 3.0 (dashed line) using Gans theory. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 21  The effect of the refractive index of the solution on plasmon resonance. (a) Schematic of an Au NR immersed in a solution. (b) The extinction spectra of an Au NR with different refractive indexes increased from 1.3 to 1.7. The LSPR peaks of the nanostructures exhibit gradual redshifts at different angles as the refractive index increases. (c) A linear correlation is observed when the LSPR shift is plotted as a function of the refractive index of the liquid mixtures. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) The normalized extinction spectra of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs (x: 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8) dispersed in water–glycerol mixtures. The SPRL positions of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs red shift with the increasing refractive index of the surrounding medium as indicated by the red arrows. (b) The metal concentration dependence of the resonance wavelength shifts with the refractive index of the mixtures changing from 1.3334 to 1.4452. The slope of the linear plot increasing with Ag concentration represents the RI sensitivity. (c) The FDTD calculated extinction spectra and (d) RI sensitivity of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs (x: 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8) with refractive index increasing from 1.3334 to 1.4452. The LSPR positions of AuBP@AuxAg1−xNRs red shift with the increasing refractive index of the surrounding medium as indicated by the red arrows. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 23  (a) Linear relationship of the LSPR peak wavelength on the refractive index according to the Drude model, and the (b) explanation for the FOM of the SPR. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011.	 
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic diagrams of the end-to-end (EE) side-by-side coupled Au NR dimers and their corresponding core–shell structures covered with silica. (b) Calculated absorption spectra of the GNR monomer, EE and SS dimer (solid line) and their corresponding core–shell structures (dash line). (c) The calculated electric field intensity enhancement contours for the monomer, SS dimer and EE dimer, and (d) the corresponding core–shell structures, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Experimental spectra for side-by-side assembly of Au NRs with increasing time. Insets show the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the different number side-by-side oriented Au NRs. (b) The calculated SPRL absorption spectra for side-by-side assembled Au nanorods with increasing rod number. (c) Experimental spectra for end-to-end assembly of Au NRs with increasing time, inset shows the TEM images of oriented Au NRs. (d) The calculated SPRL absorption spectra for the incident polarized light parallel to the end-to-end oriented Au NRs with different numbers. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 26  FDTD-simulated absorption spectra of Au NR dimer, showing the effect of end curvature on the optical properties. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Optical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 27  The plasmon coupling between one Au NR and a small Au NS located at different positions around the nanorod. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Scattering spectra of nanorod–nanoparticle bend trimers with angles of (a) ∼165°, (b) ∼90°. Inset shows the relevant SEM images of the nano-assemblies. Scale bar = 100 nm. The vertical and the horizontal polarization directions, and the spectra corresponding to these polarization directions are plotted in the respective colours. (c) Calculated scattering spectra and schematic views of the surface charge distributions associated with bonding modes with trimer angles. The gaps between the particles are fixed at 0.5 nm for modelling. (d) Peak wavelength of the bonding mode plotted as a function of the angle. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 29  Fano resonance of two dolmen structures with different sizes. (a and c) Experimental and numerical (b and d) extinction spectra, respectively, with polarization as defined by the arrows in inset of (a and c) (scale bar: 100 nm). Insets of (b and d) are the calculated surface charge distributions of the dipolar mode and the Fano extinction dip, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) TEM images of the prepared Au NC–Au NS dimers, (b) UV-vis extinction spectrum for the Au NC–Au NS dimers dispersed in solution (solid line). For comparison, the UV-vis extinction spectra for the Au NSs (dotted line) and Au NCs (dashed line) used to assemble these dimers are included after being normalized to the 564 nm band intensity. The inset shows a photograph of the sample containing the dispersed Au NC–Au NS dimers. (c1–c3) Assembly schemes of three nanoassemblies and (d1–d3) corresponding Raman spectra, for the nanoassemblies supported on glass slides: (c1) Au NC (84 nm)–Au NS (55 nm) dimers, (c2) Au NS core (92 nm)–Au NS satellite (55 nm) assemblies, and (c3) Au NS clusters that consist of one 55 nm Au NS and three 58 nm Au NSs. In the Raman spectra, νT, ρ, and δ denote the stretching, rocking, and bending vibrational modes, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Cancerous hematopoietic stem cells with anti-EGFR-conjugated Au NRs positioned on the cytoplasm membranes are seen here in a dark-field scattering image. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2006. (b) Imaging of two-photon stimulated photoluminescence of KB cancer cells with folate-conjugated Au NRs. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright 2007. Photographs (left) and photoacoustic imaging (right) of tumour-bearing mice using the GRPR-targeted large (c) and small (d) AuNRs. The PA signal intensities are displayed as colour maps, overlaid with the ultrasound images for anatomical information. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 32  Biomedical applications enabled by different types of Au nanomaterials. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Schematic illustration of mesoporous SiO2-coated Au NRs (Au@SiO2) as a novel multifunctional theranostic platform for cancer treatment. TEM images of (b) Au NRs and (c) Au@SiO2, (d) A549 cells are treated with Au@SiO2–DOX for 12 h and then radiated for 3 min using a NIR laser with low power density of 20 W cm−2 to avoid killing A549 cells directly. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 34  The representative diagrams of SPR used for sensing. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from MDPI (Basel, Switzerland), copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 35  Two Au colloidal methods for home pregnancy test and 2019-ncov detection. Reproduced from website of ref. 154.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Schematic diagram for the reduction of 4-NTP to 4-ATP. (b) Color-coded intensity map of time-dependent SERS signals obtained from 4-NTP adsorbed on the surfaces of porous AuAg NRs at different reaction times. (c) Representative SERS signals acquired from 4-NTP at different reaction times, indicating the formation of 4-ATP. (d) Raman spectra of powdery 4-NTP and 4-ATP samples. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 37  The timescales and mechanism and energy conversion process of LSP after irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Optical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Mechanistic representation of H2 dissociation on the Au NP surface. (b) Schematic of hot electron excitation in Au NPs showing: d-band electron–hole pair excited above the Fermi level upon plasmon decay. The narrow bonding and broad antibonding states of adsorbed H2 are denoted as B and AB, respectively. (c) Schematic of Fermi–Dirac type distribution of hot electrons permitting hot electron transfer into the antibonding state of H2. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Schematic of the integrated dual-functions of plasmonic structures: plasmonic heating and spectroscopic amplification. The dark side (facing up towards the light) for the solar water purification and the shiny side (facing down towards the laser illumination) for the pollution detection. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Elsevier]. (b) Schematic of an ideal plasmonic absorber based on nanoporous alumina template. (c) Self-assembly of Au nanoparticles on nanoporous templates to form plasmonic absorbers, and experimental setups for solar steam generation with the solar simulator off/on. (d) Experimental absorption spectra measured by an integrated sphere in the Vis-NIR regimes and mid-infrared regime. The thin red, thin black, and thick black lines represent the bare nanoporous templates Au/NPT (Au-deposited nanoporous template) and Au/D-NPT (Au-deposited disordered nanoporous template) samples, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) One representative TEM image of CdSe–Au NRs (inset: a representative high-resolution TEM image). (b) Schematic electronic structure of CdSe–Au NRs, composed of a strongly damped Au tip with broadened electronic levels and a central region with relatively unperturbed discrete levels (1σe, 1πe, and 1σh). The green dashed arrow indicates the interband transition in the visible (Vis) spectrum, the red arrow indicates the intraband transition in the IR spectrum, and the green solid arrow indicates electron transport in the nanorod. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) The extinction spectra of Au NRs with SPR at 725 nm. The scale bar of inset is 100 nm. (b–f) SEM images of Au NR decorated ZnO:Ga MWs, I–V curves and the EL spectra. (g and h) The EL photograph of the ZnO:Ga MWs with and without the Au NR decoration. The scale bar is 200 μm. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from OSA Publishing, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 42  Design of a microfiber-coupled single plasmonic nanorod laser. (a) Schematic illustration of a strong mode coupling-enabled hybrid photon-plasmon laser, realized by placing one Au NR on the surface of a dye-doped polymethyl methacrylate microfiber suspended between two glass substrates. (b) Close-up view of the lasing structure. The inset shows a schematic diagram showing gain accumulation. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 43  (a) Illustration of a nanorectenna illuminated by an externally propagating collimated beam. (b) The actual materials involved in the cone fabrication (Au and Pt–C versus Au) together with the substrate when estimating the frequency of the cone resonances, the absorption maps at 280 THz (1064 nm) and 384 THz (780 nm) show an absorption mostly localized at the apex region. (c) Image captured by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) showing the nanocone generated on an AFM milled probe before (core made by Pt–C) and after (Au coating). The dots in red depict the radius of the tip (different coating thicknesses have been considered for an overall tip radius in the range of 20–40 nm). Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright 2022.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
