An overview on Sb-based intermetallics and alloys for sodium-ion batteries: trends, challenges and future prospects from material synthesis to battery ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA12063D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA12063D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5164-5196An overview on Sb-based intermetallics and alloys for sodium-ion batteries: trends, challenges and future prospects from material synthesis to battery performance

        
          
            Shreya 
            Sarkar
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Sebastian C. 
            Peter
          
        
      *ab
aNew Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore-560064, India. E-mail: sebastiancp@jncasr.ac.in; sebastiancp@gmail.com;  Fax: +91-80-22082627;   Tel: +91-80-22082998
bSchool of Advanced Materials, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore-560064, India
Received 
      11th December 2020
    , Accepted 15th January 2021First published on 15th January 2021AbstractSodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have emerged as a potential alternative to lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), which is attributed to their cost-effectiveness and the natural abundance of sodium in the Earth's crust. However, constrained by their low energy density and poor cycling stability, the development of highly efficient anode materials for SIBs is the need of the hour. Solid-state alloying reactions can be beneficial to enhancing energy density and hence metal alloy based anode materials are considered as emerging materials for SIBs. Antimony (Sb) is one of the most important SIB anode materials owing to its high theoretical capacity and judicious reaction potential. Hence, Sb-based alloys and intermetallics have also evolved as potential candidates for SIBs. However, the major development is impeded by the volume changes associated with the sodiation/desodiation reaction. In this review we place emphasis on Sb based alloys and intermetallics and have summarized recent developments in this field of energy storage. Herein, we have discussed design strategies, developments made so far, the probable challenges and relevant mitigation-related issues associated with Sb based alloys and intermetallics.
1. Introduction
The most significant issues faced by modern human society are dwindling energy sources and environmental pollution. Clean energy technologies like solar, wind and tidal energy have large-scale applications but are constrained by geography or the prevailing climate. Hence, it is of utmost importance to develop cost-effective, safe and environment-friendly energy storage devices that transcend these constraints. In this regard lithium-ion batteries currently dominate the transportation and electronic industries as alternatives to fossil fuel-based energy, owing to their high energy density, longevity and low maintenance cost. However, constrained by the low abundance in the Earth's crust and uneven geographical distribution of Li, it has become increasingly difficult to meet increasing energy demands using LIBs alone.1–3 Sodium being similar to lithium with respect to its chemistry has emerged as a suitable and promising alternative to Li. Owing to the wide abundance of Na and its low cost, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) can be used for large-scale energy storage ranging from renewable energy sources to smart grid applications (Fig. 1a).4–7 Electrode materials used for LIBs were tried to be utilised for SIBs owing to these chemical properties. However, the larger ionic radius of Na (1.02 Å) compared to Li (0.76 Å) is not only a detriment to the capacity but also results in inferior rate capability, poor cyclability, and incomplete electrochemical performance owing to its sluggish reaction kinetics. These challenges also exist for hard carbon, the most extensively used anode material in SIBs. Hence, there is an urgent need to develop electrode materials that can mitigate these issues. Typically, the electrodes (anode and cathode) in a SIB are immersed in an electrolyte with a porous polymer-based separator acting as a membrane for the passage of Na+ ions and prevention of a short-circuit (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of physical and chemical properties between Li and Na and (b) schematic representation of the working principle of a sodium ion battery with antimony based anode materials. 
The charging process involves extraction of sodium ions from the positive (cathode) host and sodium ion insertion in the anode while migrating through the electrolyte. Discharging involves the reverse process. Five different types of crystal structures have been widely explored as cathode materials for SIBs, i.e., (i) layered transition metal oxides of the type NaMO2 (M = Co, Mn, Fe or Ni), which have the ability to form 1D-, 2D- or 3D-type channels facilitating pathways for sodium-ion diffusion, (ii) phosphate polyanions which can alter the energetics of transition metal redox couples, (iii) NASICON-type materials which exhibit high ionic mobility along with rhombohedral R symmetry, (iv) sodium fluorophosphates, including Na2MnPO4F, NaVPO4F, Na3V2(PO4)2F3, Na1.5VOPO4F0.5 and Na2FePO4F, with tunnel-like structures for sodium-ion transport and (v) Prussian blue analogues with a cubic framework (KM2(CN)6) with M at the corners of a cube. However, lucid designing of anode materials requires the voltage potential to be low with a typical range of 0.0–2.0 V vs. Na/Na+. Hence, three types of materials have been considered as anode materials for SIBs: (i) carbonaceous materials like hard carbon, graphite and carbon nanofibres, (ii) transition metals like Fe, Cu, and Co and p-block elements like Sn, Sb, Bi, P, etc., based compounds that are capable of forming stable alloys with sodium and (iii) transition metal oxides and chalcogenides.8 Amongst them, Sb and Sb-based materials have materialized as promising anodes for SIBs attributed to their relatively low prices and high reversible capacities delivered over a continuous sodiation/desodiation cycling process. For example, porous nickel supported SnSb alloy anodes demonstrated a capacity retention of 580 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles at a high current density of 2 A g−1.
The working principle of SIBs is similar to that of LIBs, where Na+ ions migrate from the cathode to the anode to form chemical bonds and store energy upon charging. The redox processes occurring simultaneously at the cathode and anode during charging/discharging cycles thereby facilitate the conversion of chemical energy to electrical energy. The mechanism involved in sodium storage is quite similar to that in LIBs and three different kinds of mechanisms are involved in sodium storage for anode materials (Fig. 2):
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the possible reaction mechanisms in anode materials for SIBs. 
(1) Insertion/deinsertion.
(2) Conversion reaction.
(3) Alloying/dealloying reaction.
The most widely investigated anode material exhibiting an intercalation type mechanism is hard carbon which is benefitted by its large interlayer spacing of 0.352 nm, which is capable of accommodating Na+ ions whereas that of graphite is 0.335 nm.9 Titanium-oxide based materials like Na2Ti3O7 and Li4Ti5O12 also exhibit an intercalation type mechanism and have been explored extensively.10–12 However, the intercalation-type materials are constrained by low sodium storage capacity, which limits their large-scale applications. Anode materials undergoing a conversion or an alloying type reaction have been known to deliver capacities that are two/three times higher than those of intercalation materials.13–33
However, what poses a serious challenge for conversion/alloying anode materials is their large volume expansion that leads to capacity decay and electrode pulverization. Additionally, Solid Electrolyte Interface (SEI) layer formation due to the reaction between the organic electrolyte and the electrode results in lowering the efficacy of the anode material, thereby hindering its wide-scale application. Nevertheless, the SEI layer prohibits further contact between the active electrode material and the electrolyte leading to improved efficiency of the electrodes during charge/discharge. But, electrode/electrolyte reactions can be induced again as the volume changes occurring during charge/discharge can ruin the SEI layer, which causes the exposure of the fresh electrode to the electrolyte. It is mostly metal oxides,34,35 sulphides,36,37 selenides,38,39 phosphides,40,41 antimonides,42,43 stannides,44,45 and bismuthides46 that undergo the conversion or alloying type mechanism. However, each of these materials has its own intrinsic challenges. Rigorous research is being conducted by the SIB community to mitigate these challenges using innovative material design, novel electrolytes, etc., along with in-depth understanding of the reaction mechanism and kinetics.
2. Electrochemical properties of SIB anode materials
The electrochemical properties of SIB materials have been extensively discussed in several reviews.8,47–50 However, this section briefly summarizes those properties to highlight the necessity of material design as a part of improving battery performance. Currently most of the reports focus on oxides or chalcogenides as they are relatively easy to synthesize. However, there are a small number of reports on the use of alloys and intermetallics, focusing on their structural properties that are tailor-made to function as efficient anode materials.
2.1 Gravimetric and volumetric capacities
Supplying electrical energy to power electronic devices is the fundamental application of batteries. But the amount of energy that can be stored in a battery is solely dependent on the intrinsic properties of the electrode materials since it is determined by the capacity of the electrodes and their working voltage. Specific/gravimetric capacity is one of the crucial parameters which determines the efficacy of a battery. It can be defined as the number of Na+ ions stored in the electrode per unit mass and is controlled by the number of electrons/ions being transferred during redox processes and the molar mass of the electrode material. Volume capacity, on the other hand, is defined by the number of Na+ ions stored per unit volume of the electrode and this is expected to be a crucial parameter for close-packed battery materials, where storage space is limited. Hence, in order to have high gravimetric and volumetric capacities electrodes should be capable of transferring higher numbers of electrons/ions during redox processes while also having high energy density. Neglecting the void space between particles, the theoretical capacities can be calculated based on the density of the original electrode material before Na+ ion insertion. Anode materials with high gravimetric and volumetric capacities are always preferred but challenges lie with respect to their poor cycling capacity and sluggish reaction kinetics.
2.2 Energy and power densities
The energy yield of a battery is proportional to the capacity and working potentials of the electrode materials. Theoretically, the standard voltage of the plateau is determined by the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) of an electrode, expressed as:51ΔG = −nFE°where F is the Faraday constant, n is the number of electrons transferred and E° is the standard potential of the electrode.
However, drift from the standard potential is often expected due to common factors like polarization,52 different electrolyte materials,53 and nanostructuring54 along with solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer formation55 and this in turn impacts the measured working potentials of anode materials. Half-cell potentials determined from charge/discharge curves measured against Na metal are used to determine the working voltages of electrodes. An anode material with a low potential is expected to have high average working voltage since energy density is directly proportional to the working voltage. However, potential values as low as 0 (vs. Na/Na+) favor the formation of Na dendrites, which pose serious safety concerns.
Power density, i.e. power per unit volume, which delineates the ability to generate instant energy output, is one of the most crucial parameters to assess the electrochemical performance of anode materials in SIBs. Power density is also dependent on the capacity and average working potentials at high current densities and is hence governed by the reaction kinetics at the electrode surface.56 The power density of an electrode is calculated using the values obtained from galvanostatic charge/discharge.
2.3 Coulombic efficiency
The charge/discharge reaction of an electrode material involves decomposition of the electrolyte via consumption of Na+ ions, whereas some Na+ ions remain trapped inside the material. Therefore, output charge is not the same as the number of electrons/ions transferred during the redox process. Coulombic efficiency is thereby defined as the ratio of ions participating in the faradaic reactions to the total input of ions in the electrode. In SIBs, the expected coulombic efficiency is usually higher than 95% with it being significantly low in the first cycle as SEI layer formation takes place with the concomitant formation of irreversible sodiation products. However, to comply with the Na+ ions consumed during the irreversible reaction in sodiation, the weight of the electrode increases, leading to a lower energy density of the full battery.57
Based on these fundamental requirements, several materials such as carbonaceous materials, metal oxides,34,35 sulfides,36,37 phosphides,40,41 antimonides,42,43 bismuthides,46 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),58 MXenes,59etc., have been exploited as anode materials for SIBs (Fig. 3). Nevertheless, a considerable amelioration of energy density-related issues necessitates strong redox chemistry that involves prominent solid state reactions like alloying. Sodiation takes place at a low potential for alloying and thereby enables high energy density and hence, an alloying reaction is favored. Even though the majority of p-block elements can form stable alloys with sodium, antimony (Sb) has emerged as a potential candidate amongst other elements for SIBs due to its several attractive properties (to be discussed in the subsequent sections). SIBs can be more competitive to LIBs if alloy-based anodes can facilitate desired rate capacities and cyclability. This review is focused on the alloys and intermetallics of Sb with secondary elements for high energy SIBs with an emphasis on material design, electrochemical performance and the reaction mechanism. Also, the various techniques used to understand the mechanisms have been discussed. However, no particular focus has been given to antimony based oxides, sulfides and selenides since progress on these materials in both LIBs and SIBs has already been discussed in earlier reviews.60,61 However, several anode materials like oxides, chalcogenides, and Ti and carbon-based materials have been explored extensively as anode materials for SIBs. Furthermore, alloys and intermetallics are also gaining attraction as anode materials for SIBs, owing to their ability to form stable binary alloys with sodium, exhibiting high capacities and stability for improved electrochemical performance. M–Sb based alloys and intermetallics (where M is an active/inactive material to be discussed in detail in the later sections) can convert to M:Sb composites after the first cycle. This metal M can act as a mechanical buffer to accommodate volume changes that could lead to disintegration. Hence, intermetallic and alloy based compounds demonstrate an extra advantage owing to their structural features that can combat the issues due to large volume changes upon potential cycling.
 Fig. 3  Comparison of the electrochemical properties of different anode materials for SIBs. 
3. Properties and structure
Hard carbon has emerged as an alternative to other carbon-based anode materials but is constrained by its low energy density for SIBs. However, for a promising advancement of SIBs, the development of alloyed anodes is crucial, which can facilitate an improvement in the energy density. Group IVA and VA elements like Si, Ge, Sn, P, Sb and Bi are amongst those which have the capability to form stable binary alloys with sodium, thus providing high charge capacity by accommodating high relative ratios of Na+. These elements are highly favored as anode materials because of their high specific capacities and low redox potentials. However, due to its unique structural features, Sb has emerged as a rising star for SIBs amongst the other p-block elements. Sb is known to have a puckered layered structure with an ideal interlayer spacing for Na+ ion insertion along with high conductivity and energy density, and good chemical and thermal stability. In contrast, other p-block elements like Si crystallize in a diamond like structure with insufficient space for Na+ ion insertion and are prone to oxidation in air (Fig. 4 and Table 1).
 Fig. 4  Crystal structure of Sb in comparison with other potential group 14 anodes for SIBs. 
Table 1 Comparison of the density, reaction potential, conductivity and theoretical capacities of Sb with other p-block elements




Element
Density (g cm−3)
Gravimetric theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
Volumetric theoretical capacity (mA h cm−3)a
Conductivity (S m−1)
Reaction potential (V vs. Na/Na+)





a Volumetric theoretical capacity = gravimetric theoretical capacity × density.





P
2.34
2596
9786
2.52 × 10−4
0.2–0.5



Sb


6.68


660


4411


2.56 × 10

6



0.4–0.8



Bi
10.02
386
3765
7.7 × 106
0.2–0.8


Si
2.35
1787
4200
2.52 × 10−4
0.2–0.5


Sn
7.28
847
7236
9.090 × 106
0.2–0.4


Ge
5.35
1622
8683
2.17
0.2–0.6




Furthermore, many side reactions of Sb with ester electrolytes, which are triggered due to its operational potential of ∼0.5 V (vs. Na/Na+) that lies just below the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals of the electrolytes, have no adverse effect on battery performance. The electrochemical reaction of Na with Sb is less complicated in comparison to Si, Ge and Sn as it involves the formation of a smaller number of intermediate phases in charge/discharge. These striking features of Sb make it an appealing option for its application as an anode material in SIB. The other elements As and Pb are omitted from this comparison as they are toxic in nature.
4. Reaction mechanism
Qian et al. revealed the mechanism of Sb alloying with Na during charge/discharge reactions.62 The cyclic voltammogram of the Sb/C electrode revealed the presence of two pairs of redox couples at 0.65/0.93 V and 0.40/0.78 V, which hinted towards the possibility of Na alloying/dealloying reactions. Na–Sb alloys exist in two different phases: monoclinic NaSb and hexagonal Na3Sb phases. Hence, the redox potentials obtained from the CV curves could be defined as follows: Sb + Na+ + e− → NaSb(1) NaSb + 2Na+ + 2e− → Na3Sb(2)
Although the CV curve and charge–discharge profile indicate a two-step alloying mechanism, the phase change of NaxSb could not be detected at different stages of charge/discharge due to a loss of crystallinity at the electrode surface. However, to obtain clarity on the mechanism of Na insertion in Sb, Bagetto et al. undertook a detailed study using various techniques (discussed later in this review) and proposed that the first and subsequent cycles of Na insertion in Sb are associated with the formation of an amorphous NaxSb phase.63 They identified the formation of a hexagonal Na3Sb phase at the end of complete sodiation, which is amorphous in nature because of the long-range strain arising from Na-vacancies. They also found that the local environment of Sb in the amorphous NaxSb phase was found to be similar to that of NaSb during the discharge phase as observed via various operando techniques.64 Theoretical studies by Caputo et al. inferred that NaSb and Na3Sb are the two optimized structures attained during discharge, which was found to be consistent with previously reported experimental results.65 The sodiation–desodiation mechanism of Sb in SIBs can be predicted as follows (Fig. 5):66
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the mechanism of Na ion insertion in Sb and (b) schematic diagram showing the five key states of the Sb–C framework film anode during cycling, corresponding to different crystalline phases/crystal structures (Sb, NaSb, and Na3Sb) at a specific charge–discharge voltage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2019 Cell Press. 
1st sodiation: c-Sb → a-Na3−xSb + c-NaSb → c-Na3Sb(3)
1st desodiation: c-Na3Sb → a-Na1.7Sb → a-Na1.0Sb → a-Na1.0Sb + c-Sb(4)
2nd sodiation: a-Na1.0Sb + c-Sb → a-Na1.7Sb + c-Sb(5) a-Na1.7Sb + a-Na3−xSb → a-Na3−xSb → c-Na3Sb(6)where a = amorphous and c = crystalline.
5. Critical challenges
Despite all the appealing properties, the stability achieved by bulk Sb is far from meeting the actual demand of the SIB industry. More importantly, what impedes its large-scale application as an anode material is the large volume expansion (Sb: 390%) that is accompanied after full sodiation. This results in fractures or cracks at the electrode surface, thereby leading to enormous capacity loss during prolonged cycling. Presently there are two probable ways to mitigate this issue: (i) nanostructuring which can provide sufficient space to accommodate the volume expansion occurring during prolonged cycling and (ii) alloying Sb with a second element M to form MxSby compounds, where M can be either chemically active or inactive. This process of alloying has received increased attention from the SIB community as the presence of two phases can act as a mutual buffer for each other and hence negate the volume changes due to sodium insertion/extraction.
Even though Sb-based alloys have received considerable attention, the mechanism of Na ion insertion appears to be slightly different than that of monometallic Sb. The electrochemical process is expected to take place first via an irreversible activation step as follows:67 3MSb + 3Na+ + 3e− → Na3Sb + 3M(7)
After the conversion of the alloy into a Sb:M composite the usual sodiation of Sb takes place as follows: Na3Sb → Sb + 3Na+ + 3e−(8) Sb + 3Na+ + 3e− → Na3Sb(9)
According to this mechanism, the first desodiation step leads to the formation of a Na3Sb alloy, whereas dealloying–alloying takes place after the first discharge leading to the formation of a Sb/Na3Sb phase. If metal M is active in addition to accommodating the volume changes it will add to the specific capacity of the anode, whereas M when inactive will only aid by acting as a mechanical buffer to accommodate the volume changes.
Even though Sb based anodes and cathodes synthesized by various technologies have been extensively reported for SIBs, half-cell studies mostly predominated and very little attention has been paid to fabricating full-cell configurations and their performances. One critical challenge with respect to full cell studies is that they give the real-time application of these materials in the commercial sector. Alloy based electrodes need to be compatible with suitable cathode materials in order to achieve maximum cell performance. Hence, the compatibility of the electrodes is crucial and poses as a serious challenge to the SIB community. Nevertheless, it is of utmost importance to focus more research on the development and testing of full cells based on Sb-derived anodes and cathodes.
Another key challenge of commercializing SIBs is to improve their electrochemical performance to be comparable to that of LIBs. In most of the Sb based alloys and intermetallics, coin cells have been used for evaluating the electrochemical performance. However, upscaling the SIB coin cell to pouch cells with low cost and high energy capacity can deliver much higher charge capacity, thus realizing a battery system with commercial applications.
6. Material designing strategies for different Sb based anodes
As discussed in the earlier section, high specific capacities can be achieved by using anode materials that are capable of alloying. Anodes that are endowed with high electrical conductivity and lower volume expansion upon alloying with Na+ will account for high rate performance and enhanced cycling stability. Hence, material design plays a pivotal role in developing highly efficient alloying anodes for SIBs. Several design strategies have been employed to improve the electrochemical performance of the anode for SIBs resulting in high rate capacity and cycle performance. In addition to alloying (Fig. 6a), several approaches can be distinguished in material synthesis strategies: (i) nanostructuring, (ii) use of conductive matrices, (iii) development of heterostructures, (iv) morphological control and (v) dealloying. In this section we have discussed how different Sb based anode materials have been fabricated using these synthetic strategies that achieved improved electrochemical performance (Fig. 6). The utilization of these strategies in the development of Sb-based alloys and intermetallics and their improved electrochemical performance however have been taken into account in detail in the prevailing sections.
 Fig. 6  Strategies and design principles for the fabrication of Sb-based alloys and intermetallics: (a) nanostructuring, (b) alloying, (c) use of a conductive matrix, (d) dealloying, (e) morphology control and (f) heterostructure formation. 
6.1 Nanostructuring
Nanocrystalline materials have several advantages over their bulk counterparts due to their ultrasmall dimensions.68 Not only does nanostructuring improve energy efficiency but it also shortens the ion diffusion pathway by providing larger surface areas and increased adsorption sites. Shorter diffusion pathways ensure faster reaction kinetics, which is one of the most significant challenges of SIB research. Also, they have the ability to withstand the stress and strain generated during the cycling of the electrode (Fig. 6a and b).
Saadat et al. designed a series of ZnSb nanostructures – nanoflakes, nanowires and nanoparticles with controlled composition using an electrodeposition technique. Interconnected nanoflakes exhibited an exceptionally high discharge capacity and stable performance in comparison to nanoparticles and nanowires. The open structure enhanced the surface area and small crystal grains in the interconnected ZnSb nanoflakes resulted in improved electrochemical performance, facilitating easy ion diffusion and buffering of volume changes during the cycling process.69 In another example, Zhu et al. fabricated 1D CoSb3 nanochains wrapped in carbon layers. The nanostructuring and presence of carbon layers aided in buffering volume changes during electrochemical cycling, accounting for better cycling performance.70
6.2 Use of a conductive matrix
Nanostructuring can result in enhanced cycling stability but adversely affects the electrode due to the polarization of the electrode with increasing cycle number. 2D layered-structure carbon materials like graphite or graphene can provide increased mechanical strength due to their layered structure, enhancing the conductivity and high flexibility while accommodating enormous volume changes (Fig. 6c).
Jia et al. introduced centrifugally spun SnSb@rGO@CMF composites as anodes for SIBs.71 The SnSb@rGO@CMF composite anode had excellent initial reversible capacity (350.3 mA h g−1), outstanding initial coulombic efficiency (68.2%), and superior capacity retention (91.1%) over 200 cycles at 50 mA g−1. This composite anode not only had high sodium storage capacity but also maintained significant structural integrity. The rGO@Sb–Ni framework was developed by Wu et al. using a gel-enabled methodology. Reduced GO immobilized on a cyanogel based Ni–Sb framework manifested a high capacity of 468 mA h g−1 with a stable cycle life upto 500 cycles.72 Jia et al. fabricated rGO incorporated SnSb@carbon nanofibers (SnSb@rGO@CNF) with an aim to sustain the structural stability during prolonged charge–discharge cycles.73 This nanocomposite delivered a charge capacity of 490 mA h g−1 with a high capacity retention of 87.2% and coulombic efficiency of 97.9% in the 200th cycle. Approximately 20–30 nm sized SnSb nanoparticles uniformly distributed on rGO were synthesized by Ji et al. delivering a charge capacity of 407 mA h g−1 with capacity retention for more than 80 cycles.29 3D FeSb supported on nanoporous carbon (3DFeSb@NC) fabricated by Wang et al. is another example in this category which mitigates volume change during the cycling process while enhancing electronic conductivity with sufficient active sites for sodium storage.75
6.3 Dealloying
Dealloying refers to selective removal of an element from the catalyst or template surface leading to the formation of nanoporous or hollow structures either through wet chemical etching or by applying an electric potential (Fig. 6d). Using this concept of dealloying Liu et al. fabricated Sb nanoparticles for SIBs. This method of dealloying facilitated morphology and size control in which Sb acts as the porous-structure forming element and Al as the sacrificial element to be dealloyed.76 The 3D porous framework and interconnected nanopores provided a greater number of active sites and accommodated the volume changes associated with Na ion extraction/insertion. A Sb2O3@Sb nanocomposite was obtained by dealloying of Mg90Sb10 alloy using tartaric acid.77 The ultrafine mesoporous Sb2O3@Sb structure delivered an ultrahigh specific capacity (659 mA h g−1), overwhelming rate capability (200 mA h g−1 at 29.7 A g−1) and excellent cycling stability with 99.8% capacity retention. Dealloying of ternary Mg precursors was employed by Gao et al. to fabricate Sb–Bi alloys as an anode material for SIBs. The nanoporous Bi2Sb6 alloy demonstrated ultra-long cycling performance of 10000 cycles with a capacity retention of 72%.78
6.4 Morphological control
Synthesizing nanoparticles with different morphologies is a pivotal factor in modulating the capacity of anode materials (Fig. 6e), since morphological control assists the exposure of specific planes of the nanoparticle. The difference in the composition of the exposed planes can facilitate varied sodium ion diffusion resulting in variation in the capacity of the electrode materials. For example, Liu et al. developed coral-like and honey-comb like antimony nanoparticles. The coral-like nanoparticles delivered a charge capacity of 573.8 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at a rate of 100 mA g−1 with good rate capability as an anode for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), which was attributed to the intricate electrode design that facilitated structural integrity and high sodium-ion accessibility.79
6.5 Developing heterostructures
Heterostructures are expected to enhance the kinetics of the reaction due to increased conductivity and exposure of more catalytically active sites (Fig. 6f), which is efficiently exploited in battery research. In addition, they are also known to enhance the mechanical strength of the structure. Kim et al. fabricated MxSb–Al2O3–C (M = Ni, Cu and Fe) heterostructures as efficient anode materials for SIBs,80 which exhibit a capacity retention of >70% at a high current density of 10 A g−1. The presence of a metal framework stabilizes active Sb resulting in low impedance of the electrode structure, supplemented with a matrix comprising ceramic oxide and conductive carbon. The presence of the matrix further prevents agglomeration, while buffering volumetric changes in (de)sodiation during the cycling life of the electrode. The same group exploited the performance of SnSb–TiC–C heterostructures as an anode for SIBs.81 SnSb–TiC–C delivered a charge capacity of 650 mA h g−1 with nearly 100% coulombic efficiency and a capacity retention of 400 mA h g−1. The heterostructure exhibited 1.3 times higher sodium storage capacity in comparison to SnSb/C attributed to the presence of electrochemically active SnSb in a conductive matrix of TiC and carbon. Furthermore, Kim et al. also investigated the electrochemical performance of an FeSb–TiC–C heterostructure with Na that delivered a capacity retention of 210 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and significantly high rate capability as compared to Sb/C.82
Lee et al. designed a 3D heterostructure with Ni as the core, a NiSb interface and attached Sb crystals by pulsed electrodeposition (3D/Sb/NiSb/Ni).83 It exhibited outstanding sodium storage capacity with a capacity retention of 391 mA h g−1 at 66 mA g−1 after 300 cycles. Sb is firmly held by the 3D metal substrate that acts a current collector and by interfacial alloying. An excellent synthetic strategy was devised by Dong et al. to furnish ZnSb–Sb2S3@C core–double shell polyhedron-based heterostructural anodes for SIBs.84 Sulfurization between Zn2+ derived from ZIF-8 and S2− from thioacetamide with subsequent cation exchange between Zn2+ and Sb3+ led to the formation of this heterostructured anode. The introduction of a carbon shell into the structure not only enhanced the structural integrity but also accommodated the volume changes during potential cycling. This heterostructure comprising a ZnSb core and Sb2S3/C shell facilitated electron infiltration that shortened the Na+ diffusion pathway and improved the reaction kinetics while preventing the pulverization of the electrode. This engineered heterostructure model exhibited an outstanding sodium storage capacity of 630 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles.
7. Sb-based alloys and intermetallic anodes
In the previous sections, we have discussed that Sb is a high capacity anode owing to its reaction mechanism for sodium storage. However, as mentioned in the earlier sections, the sodiation/desodiation reaction involves enormous volume changes that lead to the pulverization of electrodes and hence capacity fades. Alloying Sb with a secondary element like Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Mo, Sn, Zn, Bi, etc., (Fig. 7) is used as a strategy to combat issues related to capacity degradation.
 Fig. 7  Different metals used for alloying with Sb and their classification. 
Sb can form both alloys and intermetallic compounds with transition metals and other p-block elements. Alloys and intermetallics have been extensively explored for various electrochemical reactions like water splitting, fuel cells and also for energy storage. Since they are thermodynamically stable they are less susceptible to surface rearrangements and phase segregation under electrochemical working conditions, which makes them potential materials for applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage.85–94 Based on the ability to form stable alloys with sodium, the secondary elements can be classified as active or inactive. Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Mo do not react with Na during the sodiation/desodiation process and hence do not contribute to the capacity. They maintain the stability of the electrodes and ameliorate the electrochemical performance of the anode material in addition to preventing the aggregation of the active atoms. Sn, Bi and Zn however are active metals as they can form stable alloys with sodium thereby contributing to the overall capacity, hence improving the performance. During charging/sodiation, the secondary element is extracted from the structure, whereas they are inserted during the desodiation process by maintaining the electrode structure.95,96
7.1 Inactive intermetallic anodes

7.1.1 Cu–Sb. 
Cu2Sb is one of the most widely exploited Sb-based intermetallic SIB anodes, which is facilitated by the high conductivity of Cu. A schematic of various synthetic strategies to obtain Cu2Sb is given in Fig. 8. Chae et al. presented a novel nanostructure of Cu2Sb dispersed in a highly conductive TiC matrix and C developed by a high energy mechanical milling technique (Fig. 8a).97 The Cu2Sb–TiC–C composite exhibited improved electrochemical performance with a capacity retention value of 87% at 50 cycles, as well as high-rate capability with a capacity retention of 73% at 5000 mA g−1. Further addition of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) led to much better cyclability (88% after 100 cycles) and improved high-rate capability (78% at a current rate of 10 A g−1). A thin and stable SEI layer formation, smaller resistance and better dispersion of the active material in the highly conductive TiC and C matrix were proposed as the reasons for its high electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 8  Development of Cu–Sb based alloys and intermetallics using various synthetic strategies. (a) Mechanical milling, (b) galvanic replacement, (c) electrodeposition and (d) magnetron sputtering. Panel (b) is reproduced from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Electrodeposition is one of the most attractive techniques as it does not involve the use of binder additives and this in turn ensures an excellent electrical contact between the active materials and substrates facilitating enhanced electrochemical performance. Nam et al. prepared a 3D porous Sb/Cu2Sb composite by electrodeposition on a Cu foam substrate (Fig. 8b).98 A morphology similar to that of Cu foam was attained for the composite which exhibited excellent cycling and rate capabilities. The charge capacity was sustained at 485.86 mA h g−1 for over 120 cycles with a coulombic efficiency of around ∼97% and a capacity retention of ∼70% at 0.1 C-rate with a high current density of 3 C-rate. This outstanding rate capability is only due to the porous structure with a high surface area facilitating efficient Na+ transfer from the solvent to the electrode. The capacity retention is an indication of the Sb/Cu2Sb composite structure being highly stable at a high C-rate.
Although Cu2Sb anode materials developed using electrodeposition showed enhanced performance, the technique is complicated and difficult to control. To overcome these limitations of electrodeposition, Wang et al. developed a one-pot replacement reaction to synthesize a Cu2Sb/Cu electrode for Na-ion storage (Fig. 8c).99 Cu2Sb nanoparticles on Cu foil were formed by the replacement of Sb3+ by Cu in ethanol solution at room temperature; hence the Cu2Sb/Cu electrode can be used as a conductive agent and binder-free anode for SIBs.99 This composite exhibited fast transmission of electrolyte penetration and Na+ diffusion due to the integration of a nanoporous structure.
Furthermore, the porous structure benefitted from the close contact between Cu foil and Cu2Sb facilitating faster electron transmission, with the added benefit of buffering volume changes during sodiation/desodiation. The intrinsic contact of Cu2Sb nanoparticles with the Cu foil resulted in gaining a charge capacity of 312.8 mA h g−1 with extended cycling stability upto 100 cycles with a coulombic efficiency of ∼98% and a capacity retention of 98.5%.
Bagetto et al. investigated Cu2Sb thin films (Fig. 8d) and characterised the properties of the material as anodes for SIBs.100 Cu2Sb was found to exhibit a low voltage (0.55 V), high C-rate (10C) and high capacity (250 mA h g−1) as an anode for SIBs with more than 88% capacity retention. Cu2Sb showed low impedance and fast reaction kinetics exhibiting high rate capability with 70% maximum capacity delivered at10 C-rate. However, the reversibility of Cu2Sb depended on the morphology of the electrode films.


7.1.2 Ni–Sb. 
In comparison to Cu, alloying Sb with Ni resulted in better rate capability and capacity retention with moderate capacity due to increased conduction that can reduce the agglomeration and interfacial charge-transfer resistance. The construction of hollow composites emerged as an appealing solution to enhance the cycle-life of Sb based anodes. However, subsequent transformation into nanoparticles and aggregation into clusters hinder the advantages of hollow structures. Using a facile and low temperature approach, Liu et al. reported 3D NiSb hollow nanospheres utilizing a Ni nanosphere precursor and subsequent galvanic replacement of Sb ions (Fig. 9a).30 It delivered a high discharge capacity of 632 mA h g−1, which is close to theoretical capacity for Na3Sb formation, corroborating the full utilization of the active Sb component. High average coulombic efficiency was achieved with a capacity retention of 500 mA h g−1 for upto 70 cycles.101,102 These highly favored electrochemical characteristics arise from the synergistic effect of 3D-hollow interconnected nanospheres encapsulated in a 3D nickel matrix. Efficient electron transport is favored and volume changes upon (dis)charging are accommodated due to the presence of additional elastic buffer spaces.
 Fig. 9  Development of Ni–Sb based alloys and intermetallics using varied synthetic strategies. Individual panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 30 and 103–105. (a) Development of hollow nanospheres, (b) sol-gel based synthesis, (c) development of heterostructure and (d) development of nanosheets. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Lin et al. extended this concept by fabricating a robust hollow NiSb alloy confined in a 3D interconnected carbon matrix (NiSb⊂3DCM) using Ni polymer gels and 3DCM (Fig. 9b).103 The attained charge capacity was 407.3 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 94.3% upto 400 cycles. Excellently coated and confined by the 3D carbon matrix, hollow NiSb spheres are capable of Na intercalation and deintercalation in the confined space with minimized volume change and maximized structural stability. Meanwhile, due to the interconnected conducting network and high permanent porosity of the hollow NiSb⊂3DCM composite, a significantly high rate capacity is achieved.
Lee et al. deposited Sb on a Ni foil current collector via pulsed electrodeposition that led to the formation of a gradational heterostructure of Sb/NiSb/Ni (Fig. 9c).104 This strategic design facilitated an in situ interfacial alloying between Ni and Sb, which favors strong binding of Sb and enables volume expansion through the formation of an incomplete alloy. Like earlier work by Liu et al.,30 the insertion of three Na+ ions is proposed in this case as well. However, a better discharge capacity of 645 mA h g−1 was achieved with a capacity retention of 391 mA h g−1 upto 300 cycles.
NiSb2–Sb2O3 nanosheets synthesized by galvanic replacement of nickel nanosheets prepared by the seed growth method (Fig. 9d) were reported by Nguyen et al.,105 demonstrating a remarkable cycling stability (over 250 cycles) with high coulombic efficiency (∼99%), reversible sodium storage capacity (∼382 mA h g−1), and excellent rate capability (∼315 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1). The Ni active phase and presence of a layered structure functioned as buffer spaces to accommodate volume changes exhibited by Sb and prevented the collapse of the electrodes during cycling. This nanostructuring facilitated a shorter Na+ diffusion length thereby enhancing the reaction kinetics, while providing a larger surface area that resulted in effective electrolyte penetration and interface reactions.105
The already discussed NiSb anodes are based on a slurry-casting strategy in which the active material is mixed with a nonconductive binder and conductive carbon before assembling the battery cell. However, the binder being inactive and insulating impedes electron transport, lowers the electrical conductivity and thereby reduces the overall gravimetric and volumetric energy density of the battery. To combat these issues, Zheng et al. developed a binder-free Sb/NiSb anode by electrochemical deposition with good adhesion and excellent electrical conductivity.106 The mechanism of Na storage was similar to that of previously reported NiSb anode materials involving the formation of a Na3Sb phase at full sodiation. Significantly high electrochemical performance prevailed due to the cauliflower-shaped microstructure that facilitated substantial interspacing for electron transfer and Na-ion diffusion. Additionally, inactive Ni provided good conductivity and structural reinforcement that accommodated the large volume changes during the cycling process.


7.1.3 Fe–Sb. 
FeSb2 has already been explored as a potential intermetallic for LIBs with a theoretical capacity of 537 mA h g−1.107 However, large hysteresis and an average reaction voltage of around 1.5 V leading to a loss of more than 1 V energy impede the wide-scale application of Fe-based materials compared to low voltage metallic anodes.108 An attempt to explore the same material for SIB resulted in a reversible capacity of 360 mA h g−1, which is lower than that of the theoretical capacity.109
With the aim to improve this observed electrochemical performance of FeSb2 and shed new light on the mechanistic aspect of Na-ion insertion, Darwiche et al. probed this material for SIBs.110 The FeSb2 anode prepared using carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) as the binder and carbon black as the additive resulted in a significantly high reversible capacity of 540 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 440 mA h g−1 up to 130 cycles. Electrochemical grinding resulted in improved ionic conductivity and decreased kinetic limitations.
Manthiram et al. further exploited the effect of FEC on the electrochemical properties of the FeSb alloy dispersed in a conductive matrix of TiC and carbon developed by high energy mechanical milling.82 The FeSb–TiC–C anode exhibited a capacity retention of 99% with a reversible capacity of 210 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and high rate capability. The addition of the FEC additive further enhanced the cycle life with a capacity retention of 91% even after 250 cycles and a superior rate capability of ∼80% at 10000 mA g−1 due to the formation of a stable thin SEI layer and small charge transfer resistance.
In another study, Edison et al. demonstrated the fabrication of FeSb using an industrially viable melt-spinning process,111 which delivered a discharge capacity of 466 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 current with a capacity retention of 95% after 80 cycles and an outstanding rate capability of 300 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1. In addition to the crystallinity of the FeSb phase, the highly conductive Fe matrix acted as a host to accommodate Sb atoms, aiding in volume expansion during prolonged cycling of the electrode.


7.1.4 Co–Sb. 
Co has been proved as a prospective material for relieving the volume changes during the cycling process and forming a stable SEI thin film.19,20 Han et al. designed N-doped CoSb@C nanofibers via electrospinning with the benefit of improved electronic conductivity due to the presence of defect sites formed by the single electron pairs from nitrogen.112 A significantly high capacity of 708 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 was achieved after 200 cycles. This outstanding electrochemical performance is attributed to the raised shape of the active material that provides sufficient contact with the electrolyte thereby benefitting the storage of Na+ ions. Co can form a stable SEI layer buffering volume changes by the formation of a buffer phase. Additionally, the 3D network structure along with 1D carbon nanofibers preserves the electrical contact, which mitigates the probable structural collapse during the cycling process.


7.1.5 Mo–Sb. 
Bagetto et al. designed Mo3Sb7 thin films by magnetron sputtering as anode material for SIBs.113 The thin films showed a reversible capacity of 330 mA h g−1 when cycled with Na with a good retention capacity of 280 mA h g−1 at a current of 100 C-rate. However, XRD analysis revealed that the electrode remained amorphous at full discharge, which is consistent with the reaction of SnSb with Na but contradicts that of Cu2Sb. Additionally, XPS analysis showed the formation of an organic layer (mainly carbonates) in the case of Na and the formed SEI layer is thinner when cycled with Na due to the visibility of the electrode material upon desodiation.


7.1.6 Si–Sb. 
With the expectation that Si can contribute more than ∼300 mA h g−1 found for elemental films when added to another high capacity material, Kalisvaart et al. reported the electrochemical properties of Sb–Si co-sputtered alloys with Na.114 The Sb–Si alloys exhibit a capacity of 663 mA h g−1 after 140 cycles with negligible degradation upto 200 cycles. In the full sodiation state of co-sputtered alloys, a mixture of Na3Sb and NaxSi was evidenced; however, sodiation led to the formation of a single amorphous phase.

7.2 Active intermetallic and alloy based anodes
Although the inactive components of Sb-based intermetallics improve the cycling performance of the battery along with preserving the electrode stability, this is negated by their inability to provide capacity by alloying with Na. Hence the capacity density of Sb-based anodes is decreased. Consequently, the SIB community used Na-active metals to form intermetallics that not only enhances the capacity but also enhanced the capacity density of the electrodes. The elements Zn, Ag, Al, Ge, Sn and Bi have been employed as active components as they can form stable alloys with Sb thereby contributing to the overall capacity.

7.2.1 Zn–Sb. 
Zn has been widely explored as an efficient anode material for LIBs with it being earth abundant, thereby reducing the effective cost of the battery.65,115 Inspired by its promising performance for LIBs, Liao et al. designed nano-dimensional ZnSb (theoretical capacity: 430 mA h g−1) to assess its performance in SIBs.116 Using a self-designed CVD equipment they fabricated ZnSb nanowires in a quasi-oriented configuration quite similar to that of nanowire flowers. The as-synthesized 3D ZnSb nanowire balls exhibited an impressive capacity retention of 86% with a capacity of 377 mA h g−1 upto 100 cycles (Fig. 10). During sodiation the alloying reaction between ZnSb and Na+ resulted in the formation of Na3Sb and NaZn13 phases as the discharged products which is quite unfamiliar as compared to other systems like Cu2Sb, FeSb, etc. This unique 3D structural design facilitated enhanced electronic conductivity, small size and sufficient contact with the electrolyte accounting for the impressive electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 10  Synthetic scheme and SEM images of the ZnSb nanowire balls on a graphite substrate: the low magnification image, closer views of several nanowire balls, the high magnification characterization of a nanowire ball, and the cross-sectional feature of the nanowires. The SEM images are reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Further to understand the electrochemical performance of ZnSb without the use of an additive like FEC, Choi et al. designed a ZnSb/C composite using a high energy mechanical milling technique.117 Despite the absence of FEC, the ZnSb/C composite showed an enhanced first coulombic efficiency and maintained a capacity of 298 mA h g−1 for 30 cycles. The addition of FEC in general is expected to increase the irreversible capacity and resistance of the electrode, but in this case, the improved electrochemical behaviour without FEC is attributed to the buffering effect of the amorphous conductive carbon matrix and the electronic compensation of the metallic Zn, which enable the accommodation of volume changes during sodiation and desodiation.
In another study, crystalline Zn4Sb3 and amorphous ZnSb thin films formed by electrodeposition of Sb onto Zn substrates using a pH neutral aqueous gluconate-chloride electrolyte showed superior performance to Zn–Sb composites.118 Crystalline Zn4Sb3 delivered a reversible capacity of 450 mA h g−1, whereas that obtained for the amorphous Zn–Sb phase was 357 mA h g−1. The superior electrochemical performance of the crystalline phase can be ascribed to the ability of Zn4Sb3 to react directly with Na forming the Na3Sb phase across the entire electrode, while simultaneously extruding Zn so that Na+ transfer is not impeded. The homogeneity of the crystalline phase reduces variation in Zn concentrations making full Sb readily available for the reaction, whereas in the amorphous phase Sb may remain trapped in Zn-rich areas making it inaccessible to Na, thereby creating volumes of material that are practically inactive.


7.2.2 Sn–Sb. 
SnSb is one of the most studied alloys for the SIB application with the first ever report by Xiao et al. in SIBs.119 A reversible sequential reaction mechanism for sodiation/desodiation of SnSb with Na was predicted and has been previously reported with the aid of various characterization techniques:120–123 SnSb + Na ↔ Na3Sb + Sn ↔ Na3Sb + Na15Sn4(10)
The enhanced stability of the electrode is attributed to the co-existence of Sn- and Sb-rich phases that would self-support each other.
He et al. designed pure monodisperse SnSb nanocrystals (NCs) obtained by the reduction of Sn nanocrystals and SbCl3 in oleylamine (Fig. 11a).124 The obtained SnSb nanocrystals delivered a charge capacity of 350 mA h g−1 with cycle life upto 100 cycles and a capacity of 230 mA h g−1 at 13.2 A g−1. The absence of oleylamine led to agglomeration, which had a negative impact on the cycling life. However, Walter et al. prepared SnSb NCs using an inexpensive and scalable colloidal method using borohydride as the reducing agent.125 An outstanding Na storage capacity with only ∼5% capacity loss over 100 cycles at a rate of 5000 mA g−1 was achieved. The absence of surfactants leads to enhancement in capacity since storage capacity is likely to decrease in the presence of insulating agents on the surface accounting for better performance in comparison to that of SnSb NCs reported by He et al.124 However, these SnSb NCs exhibited a noteworthy capacity of 400 mA h g−1 at 2.7 V, when assembled in a full cell battery.
 Fig. 11  Synthesis of Sn–Sb alloys and intermetallics based on the wet chemical approach. Individual panels (b, d, e and f) have been reproduced with permission from ref. 28, and 126–128. (a) Colloidal method, (b) carbonization, (c) solvothermal method, (d) carbothermal method, (e) hydrothermal method and (f) electrospinning. Copyright 2018, Wiley. Copyright 2018, Wiley. Copyright 2014, Wiley. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
In another approach, Zhu et al. designed SnS/SnSb nanoparticle decorated carbon nanofibers (SnS/SnSb@C) using vulcanization since a lucid way to alleviate volume changes during cycling is the usage of different redox potentials of metals (Fig. 11b).126 A significantly high discharge capacity of 1028 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and an excellent rate capability of 159 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 along with a capacity retention of 270 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles were achieved. This unprecedented electrochemical performance was attributed to the different (de)sodiation potentials of Sn and Sb that led to buffering of volume changes in addition to the origin of defects in carbon nanofibers with sulfur doping that promotes faster sodium diffusion kinetics.
To improve the stability and rate performance of the SnSb electrode, Ji et al. designed a hybrid consisting of SnSb embedded in a rGO matrix (Fig. 11c).29 This firm anchoring of the nanoalloy on the rGO matrix aided in preventing agglomeration and buffering the volume changes during (de)sodiation along with the enhancement of electronic conductivity. These structures are also known to have high ductility and superplasticity and therefore can survive rigorous volume changes. The rGO–SnSb hybrid exhibited a rate performance of 80 mA h g−1 at 15 A g−1 with a capacity retention of 361 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles at 0.1 A g−1. The stress relaxation of nanostructures is faster than that of their bulk counterparts; therefore, Youn et al. fabricated uniformly distributed SnSb nanostructures on nitrogen doped carbon (SnSb/NC) (Fig. 11d).127 This nanostructuring can mitigate the volume change during cycling and enhance electronic conductivity. SnSb/NC delivered 244 mA h g−1 capacity after 100 cycles at 0.1 A g−1 in contrast to 188 and 88 mA h g−1 exhibited by Sb/NC and Sn/NC respectively. In stepwise sodiation/desodiation, Sn and Sb in SnSb also functioned as an inert buffer matrix for each other, thereby decelerating the capacity fade and accounting for high rate capability in comparison to elemental Sn and Sb. Li et al. using the CVD and hydrothermal techniques engineered a coaxial SnSb core/carbon nanotube-based shell material anchored directly on graphene sheets (SnSb/CNT@GS) (Fig. 11e).28 The SnSb/CNT@GS electrode retained a capacity of 360 mA h g−1 upto 100 cycles. The addition of graphene facilitated strong structural integrity of the electrode as it enabled uniform distribution of SnSb nanoparticles on the surface, thereby enhancing the conductivity. Ji et al. fabricated porous carbon nanofiber (CNF) supported tin–antimony (SnSb) alloys (CNF–SnSb) using electrospinning and a thermal treatment and explored the impact of controlled SEI formation on the electrochemical performance (Fig. 11f).128 CNF–SnSb manifested a reversible capacity of 350 mA h g−1 with 99.4% capacity retention for more than 200 cycles and a high rate capability of 110 mA h g−1 at a high current rate of 20C.
Zhang et al. reported a method wherein a porous nickel scaffold@SnSb (PNS@SnSb) material was prepared by an electroplating and template removal method (Fig. 12a), followed by the electrodeposition of SnSb.129 The developed hollow structures accommodated the implicit dissipation of volume changes that is expected to occur during (de)sodiation due to the presence of large void spaces. The SnSb films firmly adhered to the PNS interface, which eliminated the possibility of agglomeration and hence aided in enhancing the structural integrity. This unique design of anode materials delivered an outstanding stability of 1000 cycles with a capacity retention of 275 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1.
 Fig. 12  Synthesis of Sn–Sb alloys and intermetallics using both wet and solid-state based techniques. (a) Electrodeposition, (b) top-down in situ synthesis of 3D SnSb@N-PG, (c) NaCl template method, (d) melt spinning, (e) dealloying and (f) ethaline-based solution electrodeposition. Individual panels have been reproduced with permission from ref. 129–134. Copyright 2017, Wiley. Copyright 2018, Wiley. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
SnSb-in-plane nanoconfined in a 3D N-doped porous graphene network (3D SnSb@N-PG) was designed by Qin et al. using an NaCl template method in combination with spray drying (Fig. 12b).130 This manner of nanostructuring not only buffered volume changes but also enhanced the structural integrity and conductivity of the electrode. Both experimental and theoretical calculations demonstrate that the engineering of 3D SnSb@N-PG assisted excess interfacial sodium storage leading to an enhanced capacity and stability. A nearly 100% capacity retention after 4000 cycles with a capacity of 190 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 was observed. This exceptional electrochemical performance is due to the 3D N-graphene network that reduced the Na+ ion diffusion pathway, thereby improving the diffusion rates apart from enhancing the conductivity. The uniform distribution and ultrasmall size of the SnSb nanoparticles led to the full utilization of active materials even at a higher rate of cycling ensuring exceptional stability and charge storage capacity.
Using the NaCl template method, Wang et al. prepared 3D SnSb@SnOx/SbOx@C multicore–shell nanostructures with a SnSb core and SnOx/SbOx@C shell that led to enhanced interfacial interaction between SnSb and the carbon network, thereby facilitating ion diffusion (Fig. 12c).131 The graphitic carbon shells and the 3D graphene-like carbon network prohibited the agglomeration and pulverization of SnSb due to the high mechanical strength of the structure, while ameliorating the cohesivity and conductivity of the electrode. This unique amorphous multicore structure delivered a specific charge capacity of 337.3 mA h g−1 with superior rate capability and a capacity retention of 80% after 500 cycles. However, a pseudocapacitive mechanism dominates for Na+ storage at high current density accounting for an excellent rate capability of 244.4 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1.
A similar report by Choi et al. demonstrated porous carbon free SnSb (PCF–SnSb) as an anode for SIBs developed using melt-spinning and chemical etching with a Si/SnSb precursor (Fig. 12d).132 A reversible capacity of 481 mA h g−1 with an initial high coulombic efficiency of 80% in addition to 99% capacity retention upto 100 cycles was achieved. The formation of Na3Sb and NaZn14 upon sodiation and its recombination into the original SnSb structure upon desodiation confirmed the mechanism of Na+ ion insertion as conversion/recombination during sodiation/desodiation. The porous structure design accommodated the volume changes in addition to improving mechanical strength and conductivity.
The chemical dealloying of the Mg90Sn5Sb5 alloy led to the formation of a bimetallic single phase nanoporous SnSb alloy with a bicontinuous ligament-channel structure (Fig. 12e).133 Excellent cycling stability of 100 cycles with a capacity of 506.6 mA h g−1 and a superior rate capability of 458.2 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 was observed due to the porous structure of the nano-sized ligaments and the alloying effect of SnSb. The electrochemical performance of this anode in a full cell delivered a discharge capacity of 386.4 mA h g−1. Additionally, the full cell retained a capacity of 388.6 mA h g−1 even after 200 cycles, which clearly overcomes the most prominent drawbacks of the SIB technology.
Ethaline-based solution electrodeposition of SnSb was reported for the first time by Ma et al. (Fig. 12f).134 Electrodeposited SnSb films without the use of a binder and additive delivered a discharge capacity of 548.2 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 95 and 90.5% after 300 cycles and 500 cycles respectively. Continuous volumetric expansion and pulverization resulted in the isolation of the active material and growth of a SEI layer on the newly exposed surface, thereby causing loss in capacity after 800 cycles. However, an outstanding rate capability of 440 mA h g−1 was evidenced at 10C rate, which corroborates the exceptional stability of the material. The electrochemical performance further improved on the addition of FEC.


7.2.3 Sb–Bi. 
Bismuth (Bi) is one of the pnictogen elements having physicochemical properties similar to those of Sb and is known to have exhibited flat potential curves for lithiation/delithiation.135,136 To alleviate the volume changes and expected similar reaction chemistry of Na to Li, Zhao et al. reported Sb–Bi alloys developed using the high energy milling method. Bi0.57Sb0.43–C exhibited a charge capacity of 375 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 293 mA h g−1 (78%) after 50 cycles and a rate capability of 326 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1.137 Hence, Sb–Bi alloys having a theoretical capacity of 469 mA h g−1 are promising anode materials to host Na ions. The synergistic effect between Sb and Bi attenuates the polarization problems associated with (de)sodiation, significantly improving the initial coulombic efficiency, cycle performance and rate capacity. Using 3D architecture designing, Ni et al. fabricated durian inspired triangular arrays of a Bi0.75Sb0.25 alloy electrodeposited on a Cu substrate (Fig. 13a).138 The Bi0.75Sb0.25 array electrode demonstrated robust sodium storage performance exhibiting a capacity of 370 mA h g−1 along with a rate capability of 335 mA h g−1 at 2.5 A g−1 and an appreciable capacity retention of 87% over 2000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1. A noteworthy specific energy of 203 W h kg−1 in a full cell battery established this as an efficient anode for SIBs. The durian-like shape exposes a large electrode surface area to the electrolyte, thereby providing a maximum electrochemical surface area; the optimal composition of the alloy counterbalances the electrode stability and capability; due to the pyramidal shape, a concentrated region of Na+ is established near their sharp tips, which facilitates ion transport and electron conduction.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of durian-like Bi0.75Sb0.25 pyramid arrays. TEM, HRTEM and elemental mapping images of a single pyramid of durian-like Bi0.75Sb0.25 arrays and (b) atomic structures of (Bi and Sb), Na (Bi and Sb) and Na (Bi and Sb) respectively, upon the sodiation (stages 1 and 2) and desodiation (stages 3 and 4) processes in BixSby alloys. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 and 74. Copyright, 2018. Wiley. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Using the dealloying strategy of ternary Mg-based precursors, Zhao et al. fabricated nanoporous BixSby (x = 2.6; 4.4; 6.2) alloys as an anode material for SIBs, which combines the high theoretical capacity of Sb and small volume expansion of Bi.78
The atomic ratios of Bi/Sb exhibited a significant effect on the capacity and nanoporous Bi2Sb6 demonstrated the best electrochemical performance delivering an unrivalled capacity of 562.1 mA h g−1 with an ultra-long cycle life of 10000 cycles having a capacity loss of only 0.0072% per cycle (Fig. 13b). This impressive performance of Bi2Sb6 was attributed to (i) the nanoporous structure that facilitated easy permeation of sodium ions through its abundant channels, (ii) the conductive network that aided in accelerating electron transport and reduced the ohmic resistance and (iii) the appropriate Bi/Sb atomic ratio that provides sufficient mechanical strength that enables the ability to buffer volume changes.

7.3 Other antimonides
To achieve better electrochemical performance besides binary alloys, ternary alloys have also been reported. Apart from being used alone to alloy with Sb more than one active metal was combined in order to achieve improved electrochemical performance and stability of the electrode. Farbod et al.26 reported the first ternary Sn50Ge25Sb25 thin film alloy as a SIB anode material, which demonstrated the most promising electrochemical performance with a capacity of 833 mA h g−1 and retained a capacity of 622 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. A significantly high rate capability of 381 mA h g−1 was achieved at a current density of 8500 mA g−1. The amorphous matrix comprising all three elements acts as a mechanical buffer reducing the local fracture or cracking of the electrode surface. The remarkable capacity enhancement in the ternary alloys is due to the ability of Ge nanocrystals alloyed with Sn to sodiate beyond the 1:1 Na:Ge ratio that has been previously reported. TEM and HRTEM analysis further revealed Na segregation within the film near the current collector interface upon the second discharge followed by delamination from the current collector.
Zhao et al.139 synthesized a Bi0.94Sb1.06S3–graphite nanorod cluster composite as an anode for SIBs in comparison to their binary chalcogenide counterparts Bi2S3 and Sb2S3. The Bi0.94Sb1.06S3–graphite nanorod cluster delivered a reversible capacity of 564 mA h g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of 78% and a remarkable capacity retention of 79% after 200 cycles. In contrast, its binary counterparts exhibited capacity retentions of only 54% and 10% for Bi2S3 and Sb2S3, respectively. The synergistic effect between Sb and Bi accounted for the better cycling performance and depicted that both conversion and alloying reaction mechanisms take place in the Bi0.94Sb1.06S3–graphite nanorod cluster as compared to only the conversion mechanism in the binary counterparts, thereby providing the improved electrochemical performance of the ternary compound.
Although nanostructuring is known to slow down the capacity fade, it is limited by the ability to scale up reactions. To address this issue, Zhang et al. fabricated a ternary Sn5SbP3/C composite using the ball milling method.140 Microstructural analysis of the ball milled Sn5SbP3/C composite showed the presence of micrometer range agglomerates of active nano-Sn4P3, SnSb and Sn. Carbon not only provides mechanical strength as a conductive matrix but also benefits the cycle life of the electrode. Sn4P3, SnSb and Sn phases act as the cushion to buffer the volumetric changes during prolonged cycling of the electrode. The Sn5SbP3/C composite exhibited a charge capacity of 352 mA h g−1 higher than that of binary Sn4P3/C and SnSb/C, wherein a synergy between these multiphase nanostructures exists on a conductive matrix as Sn4P3 has high capacity with low conductivity, whereas Sn and SnSb are expected to have high electrical conductivity. The large reversible capacities of Sb and Te coupled with the highly desirable fracture resistance of Bi led Orzech et al. to design a ternary Bi–Sb–Te (Bi0.25Sb1.75Te3) alloy as an anode for SIB.141 Micron-sized Bi0.25Sb1.75Te3 showed an excellent charge capacity of 450 mA h g−1 with a high capacity retention of 91% after 200 cycles with 99.9% coulombic efficiency outperforming the electrochemical performance of the binary counterparts. The substitution of small quantities of Sb into Bi led to improved electrochemical performance with enhanced electrical conductivity. However, interestingly it was observed that micron-sized particles facilitated better performance and stability as compared to the nano-sized particles which is due to the presence of a thick SEI layer formed by the inorganic species in the nanostructure, resulting in a lower first cycle efficiency and poor rate capability, whereas a flexible thinner SEI layer is formed in the bulk material. At higher potential, Sb–Bi acts as a buffer to alleviate the volume changes when Te is active. whereas at lower potential Te acts as a spectator and moderates the continuous expansion/contraction during cycling. During the first charge, Na2Te, Na3−xSb and NayBi1−xSbx phases are formed for micron-sized Bi0.25Sb1.75Te3, whereas the nano-counterpart is expected to be unstable and sodiation occurs in the three single elements instead.
Xie et al. investigated ternary Sn–Bi–Sb, where all the elemental components are active towards sodium.142 The Sn10Bi10Sb80 alloy delivered a charge capacity of 650 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 99% (621 mA h g−1) after 100 cycles. However, the capacity retention of the pure elemental anodes was significantly improved with a minute reduction in specific capacity. The excellent performance of the Sn10Bi10Sb80 alloy is credited to the substitutional dissolution of Bi and Sn in the Sb lattice, thereby strengthening the solid solution and hence accounting for higher resistance to internal stress along with a change in the number of distinct sodiation processes that led to lesser volume expansion and lowering of internal stress.
Pahari et al. investigated ordered intermetallic Cu3ZnSb as an anode for SIB, which delivered a charge capacity of 323 mA h g−1 with a retention capacity of 252 mA h g−1.143
Madhavi et al. reported a microstructurally engineered ternary FeSnSb alloy prepared by a rapid solidification technique as a SIB anode.144 This technique led to the generation of nanocrystalline domains that aided in mitigating the volume stresses during the cycling of the electrode. The FeSnSb alloy delivered a charge capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1 for over 120 cycles and a capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at a high current of 2 A g−1. A high capacity of 298 mA h g−1 at 2.98 V was achieved for a full cell battery with over 99% coulombic efficiency. The structural integrity could mitigate the stress and strain generated during (de)sodiation, thereby facilitating its magnificent electrochemical performance.
All the intermetallics and alloys based on Sb studied for SIBs are listed in Table 2 and the battery performances are pictorially represented in Fig. 14.
Table 2 Comparison of the electrochemical performance of various Sb based alloys and intermetallics




Family
Material
Synthesis method
Capacity
Cycling stability
Cycle number
Average working potential (vs. Na/Na+)
Electrolyte
Ref.




Cu–Sb
Cu2Sb thin films
High-energy mechanical milling
250 at 10C rate
175
250
0.55
1 M NaClO4 in PC

100



Sb/Cu2Sb
Electrodeposition
486 at 3C rate
340
120
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in PC and FEC

98



Cu2Sb–TiC–C
High-energy mechanical milling
320 at 4C rate
307
50
0.6
1 M NaClO4 in PC and EC

97



Cu2Sb/Cu
Galvanic replacement
318.4 at 0.08 A g−1
311
200
0.8
1 M NaClO4 in PC and FEC

99



Cu2Sb
Magnetron sputtering
300 at 10C rate
250
200
0.2
1 M NaClO4 in PC and FEC

145



Ni–Sb
3D-NiSb hollow interconnected nanospheres
Low temperature solution synthesis
632 at 0.1C rate
500
70
0.74
1 M NaClO4 in PC

30



Sb–NiSb–Ni heterostructures
Electrodeposition
502 at 10C rate
391
300
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in PC/FEC

83



NiSb in a 3D interconnected carbon matrix
Polymer gel based solution synthesis
405 at 0.1 A g−1
366
400
0.21
1 M NaClO4 in PC/FEC

17



NiSb–Sb2O3 nanosheets
Solution synthesis
564 at 10C rate
382
250
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC

11



Sb/NiSb composites
Electrodeposition
600 at 100 mA g−1
521
100
0.6
1 M NaClO4 in EC/FEC

106



Fe–Sb
FeSb2
High-energy mechanical milling
360 at 10C rate
—
—
0.7
1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC

109



FeSb2 with a binder
High-energy mechanical milling
540 at 10C rate
440
130
0.5
1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC

110



Fe1.18Sb1.82 nanoparticles
Solid-state synthesis
426 at 60 mA g−1
100
200
0.25
1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC

159



FeSb–TiC–C nanocomposites
High-energy mechanical milling
215 at 24 mA g−1
200
100
0.68
1 M NaClO4 in PC

82



FeSb
Melt spinning
466 at 50 mA g−1
442
80
0.8
1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC

111



Co–Sb
CoSb@C nanofibers
Electrospinning
449 at 100 mA g−1
250
500
0.5
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC

112



CoSb
High-energy mechanical milling
211 at 60 mA g−1
200
50
0.6
1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC

94



Mo–Sb
Mo3Sb7 thin films
High-energy mechanical milling
330 at 10C rate
280
20
0.8
1 M NaClO4 in PC

113



Si–Sb
Sb–Si co-sputtered alloys
Magnetron sputtering
663 at 10C rate
660
140
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC

114



Zn–Sb
3D ZnSb nanowires
Chemical vapor deposition
450 at 20 mA g−1
377
100
0.8
—

116



ZnSb/C nanocomposites
High-energy mechanical milling
300 at 50 mA g−1
298
30
0.8
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC

117



Zn4Sb3 nanowires
Chemical vapor transport
395 at 0.1C rate
300
200
—
1 M NaClO4 in PC

173



Zn4Sb3@Zn thin films
Electrodeposition
450 at 1C rate
405
250
0.5
1 M NaClO4 in PC

118



Sn–Sb
SnSb/C
High-energy mechanical milling
544 at 100 mA g−1
435
50
0.3
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC

119



SnSb thin films
Magnetron sputtering
700 at 100 mA g−1
550
150
0.5
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC

121



SnSb nanocrystals
Colloidal synthesis
370 at 0.5C rate
350
100
0.6
1 M NaClO4 in PC

124



SnSb nanoalloys
Colloidal synthesis
890 at 200 mA g−1
845.5
100
0.55
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC

125



rGO–SnSb nanocomposites
Hydrothermal synthesis


361
80
0.75
1 M NaPF6 in EC, EMC and FEC

29



SnSb@SnOx/SbOx@C
NaCl template method
337.3 at 0.1 A g−1
269
500
0.69
1 M NaClO4 in EC/EMC and FEC

131



3D SnSb@nitrogen doped porous graphene network
NaCl template method
500 at 0.1 A g−1
400
100
0.65
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC

130



SnSb/CNT@graphene nanosheets
Hydrothermal synthesis
422
360
100
0.7
1 M NaClO4 in PC

28



Porous nickel scaffold@SnSb
Electroplating and template removal
906 at 10C rate
275
1000
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC

129



Nanoporous SnSb alloy
Chemical dealloying
508 at 0.1 A g−1
506
100
0.65
1 M NaClO4 in PC

133



Porous SnSb alloy
Arc melting
481 at 0.1 A g−1
390
100
0.6
1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC

132



SnSb thin films
Electrodeposition
543 at 0.5C rate
520.8
300
0.8
1 M NaPF6 in DMC

134



Porous carbon nanofiber supported SnSb alloys
Electrospinning
350 at 0.2C rate
346.5
200
0.6
1 M NaPF6 in EC/DEC

128



SnSb nanostructures on nitrogen doped carbon
Solution based synthesis
300 at 0.1 A g−1
244
100
0.3
1 M NaPF6 in EC/DEC

127



SnS/SnSb@C
Vulcanization
1028 at 50 mA g−1
270
200
0.62
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC

126



Bi–Sb
Bi0.57Sb0.43–C
High energy mechanical milling
375 at 0.1 A g−1
293
50
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC

137



Nanoporous BixSby alloys
Chemical dealloying
463 at 1 A g−1
210
500
0.8
1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC

78



Durian shaped Bi0.75Sb0.25 alloys
Electrodeposition
335 at 2.5 A g−1
291.4
2000
0.6
1 M NaPF6 in diglyme

138



Ternary
Sn50Ge25Sb25 thin film alloys
Magnetron sputtering
658 at 10C rate
300
40
0.4
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC

26



Bi0.94Sb1.06S3–graphite nanorod cluster
High energy mechanical milling
564
445.5
200
0.7
1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC

139



Sn5SbP3/C composite
High energy mechanical milling
352 at 2 A g−1
432
200
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in PC

140



Bi0.25Sb1.75Te3
High energy mechanical milling
566
254.7
100
0.8
1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC

141



Sn10Bi10Sb80 alloy
Magnetron sputtering
627
621
100
0.7
1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC

142



FeSnSb alloys
Solid state synthesis
520 at 0.1 A g−1
500
120
0.75
1 M NaClO4 in PC

144





 Fig. 14  Comparison of Sb based alloys and intermetallics with respect to their reversible capacities and stability. References correspond to the materials compared in Table 2. 
8. Techniques to unravel the mechanism of Na ion insertion in Sb based anodes
An in-depth understanding of the scientific aspects related to SIBs such as charge storage, performance degradation and reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces requires detailed analysis using various spectroscopic and diffraction techniques. In situ/operando techniques involving X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray absorption (XAS), Transmission Emission Microscopy (TEM) and Mössbauer spectroscopy function as powerful tools to investigate and monitor the changes of the crystal structure, morphology, electronic structure and chemical composition of electrode materials in electrochemical cells during operation. This gives a realistic understanding of the actual mechanism along with increasing the opportunity to improve the performance of existing systems, while enabling the development of new systems.

In situ measurements provide better reliability and precise data analysis since the reaction taking place at a desired sample location can be readily investigated. Furthermore, electrochemical, physical or chemical processes occurring on a single sample or device under operational conditions can be easily monitored using operando techniques that give closer to real-time operation information along with the investigation of fast-transient processes occurring during electrochemical or chemical reactions.112 However, taking into consideration the complexities involved in the reaction associated with SIBs, a combination of multiple in situ characterization techniques is required to have an explicit understanding of how the physical/chemical properties are related to the electrochemical performance.
8.1 X-ray diffraction
The crystal structure of the electrode materials and the properties of a battery material like energy density, capacity and rate capability are closely interrelated. Hence, it is of utmost importance to analyze the structural changes occurring on the electrode surface during the electrochemical process including the lattice parameters, phase transition and occupancy of atoms. In situ XRD provides detailed information regarding phase transformation and crystal structures at different stages of Na insertion/extraction (Fig. 15). In an earlier section, a few ex situ XRD data were mentioned to support the electrochemical performance. In this section, a few examples are discussed to explain how extensively this technique has been used in SIBs.
 Fig. 15  Schematic and images of various cell setups used for in situ X-ray measurements. (a) RATIX cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2012, International Union of Crystallography. (b) Modified coin cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright, 2016, Elsevier. (c) A solid gel-type cell for soft XAS, reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Argonne's multipurpose in situ X-ray (AMPIX) cell, reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2012, International Union of Crystallography. (e) Pouch cell, reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group, and (f) capillary type cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Zhang et al. investigated the mechanism of Na ion insertion in an electrodeposited Sb/NiSb anode and proposed an alloying reaction type of mechanism.106In situ XRD confirmed that no insertion step is involved in the reaction due to the absence of any peak shift in the first discharge and exclusion of a crystalline phase. The presence of the main diffraction peaks of NiSb even at the end of sodiation indicated that Sb did not react completely with Na during sodiation, which is ascribed to the steric hindrance of Na+ diffusion. Additionally, new peaks corresponding to the hexagonal Na3Sb phase were evidenced along with two new peaks at 31.5° and 38.1° ascribed to Na2CO3, which is the main component of the SEI layer. These findings using in situ XRD demonstrated that Sb-based alloys undergo sodium storage using a multi-step process that proceeds through the formation of an intermediate amorphous NaxSb phase with its immediate transformation into the Na3Sb phase via a conversion mechanism.102 Furthermore, Bagetto et al. observed a decrease in the XRD peak intensities of FeSb2 during sodiation with the concomitant appearance of broad peaks due to the Na3Sb phase. From the absence of any other crystalline phase intermediate during the first two cycles, a conversion between nanocrystalline Na3Sb and an amorphous Na–Fe–Sb phase was proposed.109
The mechanism of Na-ion insertion has been unraveled using ex situ XRD, XPS and XAS corresponding to 3 Na-ion insertion during sodiation (eqn (10)) by Nam et al.98 xNa+ + Cu2Sb + ySb → Cu2Sb + Sb + yNa+(11)
The formation of NaxSb with the exclusion of Cu is initiated in sodiation with the Sb/Cu2Sb composite forming the Na3Sb phase upon full sodiation. However, at the beginning of desodiation, crystalline Na3Sb is converted into an amorphous NaxSb phase, where Sb atoms are liberated from NaxSb and alloy with Cu to form Cu2Sb. Hence, the electrode retains its initial structure with little amount of Sb, thereby indicating a reversible reaction between Cu2Sb and Na.
The phase transition to Na3Sb occurred upon full sodiation which was indicated by the broad humps matching the expected diffraction lines of this phase. However, detailed investigation of Na ion insertion into the Cu2Sb structure was done by Bagetto et al. extending XRD investigation using Mo Kα radiation at several electrode potentials during the first and second cycles.145 Thin film Cu2Sb electrodes demonstrated a capacity of 400 mA h g−1 with capacity retention upto 200 cycles. The mechanism of Na-ion insertion has been unraveled using XRD and XAS corresponding to 3 Na-ion insertion during sodiation. However, the formation of Cu2Sb during desodiation upto 1.5 V with lower cutoff currents indicated a reversible reaction between Cu2Sb and Na. 3Na + 3Cu2Sb → Na3Sb + 6Cu(12)
XRD has also been used to understand whether the mechanism involves a single step or multiple steps. One such example has been analysis on a Bi–Sb based alloy, where the (de)sodiation mechanism of Bi2Sb6 is exploited using operando XRD and showed a two-step sodiation reaction: (Bi, Sb) → Na(Bi, Sb) → Na3(Bi, Sb) and the inverse during the desodiation reaction: Na3(Bi, Sb) → Na(Bi, Sb) → (Bi, Sb).74
For FeSb2, Bagetto et al. explored the mechanism using ex situ XRD along with 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy.109 XRD predicted the formation of the Na3Sb phase at sufficiently high Na concentration along with an amorphous Fe4Sb phase. The formation of the Fe4Sb phase and the absence of full desodiation from NaxSb phase domains accounts for the less observed reversible capacity. The fraction of Sb atoms initially present in FeSb2 remains bonded to Fe forming Fe4Sb and to a very small extent Fe forms a matrix around Na3Sb particles to accommodate the volume changes. A similar study was done on a ternary Sn5SbP3/C composite and XRD confirms the formation of Na3Sb, Na3.75Sn and Na3P as the major phases upon discharge, while the Na3Sb phase remains during charging indicating a two-step conversion and alloying mechanism.140 XRD was also crucial in confirming the controversial mechanism proposed by the electrochemical measurements. One such example is the work on electrodeposited SnSb thin films. XRD confirmed the reappearance of the crystalline SnSb phase after the first cycle, which contradicts a previously reported interaction mechanism of Na+ ions with SnSb that hinted towards the formation of amorphous features immediately at the end of the first cycle.121 What was inferred is that though the reformation of electrodeposited SnSb takes place, with Sn and Sb having similar local environments, long range ordering is lost with cycling.
8.2 X-ray absorption spectroscopy

In situ XAS can provide practical information about the changes in the oxidation state, chemical environment and local structure of each individual element in a multi-component system, thereby helping to understand the active element of a redox process during charge/discharge.148 There are several in situ cell designs proposed for in situ XAS measurement. Bagetto et al. explored the mechanism of the reaction of Na with Cu2Sb using EXAFS and XANES. Cu–K edge XANES spectra of Cu2Sb during discharge showed photon energy in between those of Cu2Sb and Cu suggesting the formation of NaxCu2−ySb and Cu.145 However, the Fourier transformed Cu–K edge of discharged Cu2Sb was similar to that of Cu foil with a reduced coordination number due to the extraction of Cu by Na at the atomic level. A significantly larger R and Debye–Waller factors of the discharged electrode compared to that of the charged and pristine electrode highlight the presence of remaining Na in the structure, which has an intense impact on the local ordering and this observation complements the presence of a disordered amorphous structure that was evidenced using XRD very well.
8.3 Mössbauer spectroscopy
This γ-ray based resonance spectroscopy technique is a highly sensitive technique to probe the local electronic structure as it can detect even the most acute changes in the chemical environment of the nucleus including changes in the valence state, the effect of different ligands on the surface of the atoms and the magnetic environment of the material. Its ability to probe the relative concentration of different spin-states of the metal element makes it more sensitive in comparison to XPS or XAS. Mössbauer spectroscopy with 57Fe, 129I, 119Sn and 121Sb nuclei is widely used in SIBs to determine the chemical formula and changes in the valence state of the respective metal centers during charge/discharge. Using 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy, Bagetto et al. investigated the changes in the local environment of FeSb2 upon Na extraction/insertion.109 A well-resolved doublet of FeSb2 due to the formation of an Fe-rich Fe4Sb alloy was gradually converted into a doublet and singlet with a negative isomer shift and quadrupole splitting during desodiation. The latter signal is due to the presence of superparamagnetic Fe resulting from the formation of pure nano-Fe domains during discharge. This clearly confirms that Fe is not involved in the reaction mechanism as reported earlier. In the first sodiation, conversion to the Na3Sb phase takes place which is similar to the mechanism of FeSb2 (ref. 110) with Li.107 Iron forms α-Fe nanoparticles containing Sb as a substitutional impurity in the bcc metal lattice.
A 57Fe isomer shift for an Fe–Sb thin film alloy prepared using magnetron sputtering was reported by Chien et al.152 A linear relationship of the isomer shift was established as a function of Fe content in an Fe1−xSb alloy, in which the isomer shift was found to be almost constant at a lower Fe content (<0.5), which coincided with the earlier reported isomer shift values of Fe1+xSb153,154 and FeSb2.155–157 To elucidate exclusively the role of Sb and Fe in the electrochemical reaction of FeSb2 with Na, Fehse et al. used for the first time both operando Sb K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy and 57Fe synchrotron Mössbauer spectroscopy.158 Combining the insights of these two spectroscopic techniques, it was predicted that during the first sodiation FeSb2 transformed into amorphous Na3Sb and Fe nanoparticles and the dimensionality was validated by the obtained hyperfine parameters. However, upon desodiation Fe continued to remain in a metallic form with superparamagnetic properties, while Sb formed an amorphous metallic Sb phase consistent with previous findings of Sb phases undergoing conversion and/or alloying reaction mechanisms.82,159 The second sodiation led to the formation of Na3Sb analogous to the first sodiation. However, no intermediate formation of a Na–Sb phase was evident during sodiation. And yet these findings by Fehse et al. did not support the report of an Fe4Sb phase by Bagetto et al.109 This report focused on the usage of synchrotron Mössbauer spectroscopy to elucidate the reaction mechanism under realistic cycling conditions, electrode loading and acquisition time which appeared to be implausible by laboratory Mössbauer spectroscopy without using FeSb2 isotopically enriched in 57Fe. The sensitivity of these techniques is very crucial to propose the mechanism clearly. One such example is that Tran et al. elucidated the electrochemical properties of another Fe–Sb system (Fe1.18Sb1.82) with Na.159 However, ex situ XRD could not detect the Fe4Sb, Fe or NaxSb phases as seen in other cases except that the main discharge product is still Na3Sb.
8.4 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Real-time TEM techniques have emerged as a powerful tool to envisage the underlying mechanism of Na ion insertion in electrode materials in SIBs and rationalize the observed gradual capacity decay, thermal runaway and overcharge instability. A collection of different in situ TEM techniques is illustrated in Fig. 16.160,161
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the cell set-up used for in situ TEM measurements: (a) cryo-TEM holder, reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) The experimental setup of the open-cell approach using an ionic liquid as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Poseidon 500 in situ electrochemical-scanning/TEM system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2014, Cambridge University Press. (d) In situ TEM observation of the electrochemical reaction using an electrochemical liquid cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM analyses of a graphene liquid cell (GLC). Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) In situ TEM biasing of a nanobattery mounted on a TEM grid showing the triangular geometry of the cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2014, Cambridge University Press. (g) Electrochemical cell used for in situ TEM measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 

In situ TEM can address the real and critical battery challenges like dendrite growth, cathode oxygen release, anode phase transformation and crystal expansion.162–164,170 Nie et al. addressed one of the most significant challenges of the SIB technology, i.e., the low rate of sodium insertion/deinsertion due to the larger size of Na and complicated redox reactions.172 The authors demonstrated that the reversible sodium storage speed can exceed 297 nm s−1 in ZnSb intermetallic nanowires, which is one to three orders higher in magnitude than for nanowires that have been tested through in situ TEM (Fig. 17). Despite undergoing a reversible expansion of 83%, no visible cracks or fractures were observed during an ultrafast (dis)charging process. The fast reaction kinetics is attributed to the fast Na+ diffusion provided by the intermediate NaZnSb phase formed during the desodiation phase of the first cycle.
 Fig. 17  (a) Synthetic scheme and (b) electron diffraction pattern of a pristine Zn4Sb3 nanowire with the [21] zone axis, and the Zn4Sb3 nanowire after the first sodiation and first desodiation respectively. (c) Atomic scale HAADF image of the pristine Zn4Sb3 nanowire with the [21] zone axis, atomic scale HAADF image of the newly formed NaZn13 with the [001] zone axis after the first sodiation and atomic scale HAADF image of the formed NaZnSb with the [110] zone axis after the first desodiation respectively and (d) atomic scale HAADF image of the formed Zn with the [010] zone axis after the first desodiation (here, Na, Zn, and Sb atoms are indicated in yellow, blue, and violet colors, respectively). The scale bar is 1 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright, 2016, Wiley. 
Xie et al. investigated the rationale for enhanced cycling stability of the β-SnSb phase using in situ TEM.121 The inspection of in situ TEM showed an increase in the diameter of SnSb nanowires due to Na ion uptake during sodiation with concomitant volume expansion by 210% after 60 minutes of sodiation, suggesting that Sb sodiates first resulting in the formation of mixed amorphous-NaxSny and crystalline-Na15Sn4 phases (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  
In situ TEM analysis of the sodiation–desodiation of a co-sputtered SnSb film during the first cycle. (a) Bright-field micrographs and associated measured electron diffraction patterns as well as simulations during sodiation. (b) Same analysis during desodiation. (c) Schematic illustration of the proposed phase transition of β-SnSb during the sodiation–desodiation cycle and. (d) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiencies of Sn and Sb as well as a trilayer Sn/Si(2 nm)/Sb film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright, 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Bright-field TEM images showed that with the progress of desodiation the sodiated SnSb film shrinks due to the extraction of Na. By combining the SnSb phase diagram along with ex situ XRD and in situ TEM analyses, it was proposed that the process of sodiation led to the sequential formation of Na3Sb and Na15Sn4 phases, while desodiation occurs first in the Na15Sn4 phase followed by the Na3Sb phase leading to the re-formation of the β-SnSb phase.
Furthermore, Gutiérrez-Kolar et al. employed the same technique to investigate the mechanism and kinetics of (de)sodiation of SnSb thin films.173In situ TEM showed the presence of diffused rings in the SAED pattern during sodiation, suggesting the formation of amorphous phases. Additionally, the images were further analysed to track changes in the size of the reaction zone as a function of reaction time. An initial fast diffusion rate was found, which gradually degraded as Na ions are transported through the amorphous phase, which hinders the rate capability of the developed SnSb thin films.
Using a combination of XRD, TEM and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in our earlier work, we proposed the mechanism of Na ion insertion into a CoSb lattice synthesized using the ball milling technique through ex situ XRD, TEM, and XPS.94 A reversible capacity of 211 mA h g−1 was obtained at a high current of 60 mA g−1 without the use of FEC as the additive. As was evidenced from ex situ XPS and TEM analyses, the obtained low reversible capacity during the first discharge is due to incomplete sodiation as a certain fraction of Sb atoms bonded to Co still remained as an inactive Co4Sb phase along with the formation of Na3−xSb. Hence, two-sodium ion insertion was predicted in comparison to typical 3 sodium ion insertion for other Sb alloys. The formation of Co4Sb was further complemented by XPS analysis (Fig. 19). Upon desodiation, the Na3−xSb alloy underwent dealloying to form metallic Na and Sb, which was complemented again by ex situ XRD and XPS. Hence, this provided a platform to elucidate the fundamental rationale behind low practical capacity as compared to theoretical capacity.
 Fig. 19  Predicted mechanism of Na ion insertion in the CoSb intermetallic anode and the respective structural changes. Color code: red, Co; green, Sb; blue, Na. Partially filled circles indicate the respective atomic deficiency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright, 2020, American Chemical Society. 
9. Effect of electrolytes and binders on SIB performance
Electrolytes play a pivotal role in determining the electrochemical performance of SIBs. Electrolytes are used to enhance the stability and ionic conductivity and provide electronic insulation.174,175 Immense progress has been made in developing efficient electrolytes for SIBs. However, what is of utmost importance is achieving appropriate balance between electrochemical performance and cost without compromising on the safety. The widely used electrolytes in SIBs are NaPF6, NaClO4, NaCF3SO3 (non-aqueous sodium salt containing electrolytes), ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonate (PC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC), and diethyl carbonate (DEC) (alkaline carbonate-based solvents). In Sb based alloy and intermetallic anodes, the electrolytes used should have the ability to form a stable SEI layer to accommodate the large volume changes. The impact of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) as an additive was discussed and it was predicted that the absence of FEC led to the formation of a surface film on the electrode particles, which reduced the charge-transfer resistance upon sodiation with a concomitant increase upon desodiation (Fig. 20). FEC curbs the growth of this film at low voltages and decreases the charge-transfer resistance at any stage. Hence, a positive influence of the additive was observed on capacity retention upon cycling.
 Fig. 20  Schematic representation of the effect of FEC in SIBs (a) and (b) the effect on SEI stability with FEC concentration, respectively. 
The impact of FEC was exploited in other reports and one example is the work done by Tran et al.159 on FeSb, where they predicted that the absence of FEC led to the formation of a surface film on the FeSb electrode particles, which reduced the charge-transfer resistance upon sodiation with a concomitant increase upon desodiation. FEC curbs the growth of this film at low voltages and decreases the charge-transfer resistance at any stage. Hence, a positive influence of the additive was observed on capacity retention upon cycling.159
The effect of FEC in a 1 M NaClO4 electrolyte on the formation of a SEI layer for SnSb/C anodes was investigated by Che et al.176 FEC addition resulted in the repression of the electrolyte decomposition with improved mechanical and chemical properties of the SEI layer. The stabilized SEI layer aided in achieving high electrochemical performance. A comparative study of FEC-free and FEC-containing electrolytes (1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC) was done by Lu et al.177 A thick unstable SEI film comprising Na2CO3, ROCO2Na, and RONa (R = alkyl groups) was formed in the FEC-free electrolyte in comparison to a dense thin SEI film containing fluorine salts like NaF, F-ROCO2Na, and FRONa in the FEC-containing electrolyte. The FEC-containing electrolyte prohibited the decomposition of EC and DEC resulting in much higher cycling stability in the presence of FEC. In CNF–SnSb, the presence of FEC reduced the decomposition of the electrolyte and chemical composition of the cycled electrode via a surface passivation layer, thereby forming a stable and uniform SEI film, which enabled a high reversible capacity of 350 mA h g−1 with 99.4% capacity retention for more than 200 cycles and a high rate capability of 110 mA h g−1 at a high current rate of 20C. The decomposition of the electrolyte in the absence of FEC can result in structural blockage leading to excess SEI layer formation that can impede the reaction kinetics of the electrodes leading to capacity loss upon potential cycling.128
Ether-based electrolytes have also been used in recent scenario in order to achieve improved electrochemical performance.178–180 Brehm et al. reported SnSb composites with diglyme as the electrolyte for SIBs.180 They found that the diglyme based electrolyte led to the formation of a thinner and more elastic SEI film that exhibited higher ionic diffusivity and stiffness than EC/DEC-derived ones. Diglyme showed better electrochemical performance in terms of coulombic efficiency, rate capacity and cycling stability.
10. Full cell performance
The majority of the above discussed Sb-based alloys and intermetallics concentrated their studies. However, what is crucial for the large-scale commercialization of SIBs is their full-cell performance, which is critical since compatibility with counter electrodes is crucial. Matching highly efficient anodes with high performance cathodes to achieve significant electrochemical performance is one of the critical challenges in SIB technology. Although an olivine based cathode exhibited high performance in full cell LIBs,181–183 its sodium analogue NaFePO4 is not known to show any such activity. A sodium superionic conductor (NASICON) is a widely investigated cathode material that matches well with Sb and Sb-based alloys and intermetallic compounds for full cell applications in SIBs (Fig. 21a). Fransson et al. integrated a Cu2Sb anode with NASICON type Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) for full cell SIBs.95 This full cell assembly demonstrated an average voltage of 2.7 V with a discharge capacity of 211 mA h g−1 that remained stable upto 14 cycles. Lu et al. reported SnSb alloys blended with rGO as the anode material.184 Using this as the anode after mixing with hard carbon, a full cell was assembled with a NVP cathode. An operational voltage of 3.2 V was achieved with a capacity of 326 mA h g−1, a coulombic efficiency of 68.47% and stability upto 100 cycles. FeSb alloy nanoribbons fabricated by Edison et al. exhibited a half-cell capacity of 450 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 with a steady maintenance of the initial capacity after 80 cycles (Fig. 21b and c).111 The pre-treated FeSb alloy along with a layered oxide based (Na2/3MnO2) cathode delivered a charge capacity of 350 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 along with excellent cycling stability. A full cell developed by Liu et al. comprising 3D-interconnected NiSb hollow nanospheres as the anode and a Na0.4Mn0.54Co0.46 cathode delivered a capacity of 451 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 with a working potential of 3 V.30
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of a SIB full cell using antimony based alloys and intermetallics as anode materials, (b) typical galvanostatic discharge–charge profiles of the Na3V2(PO4)3/Cu2Sb full cell at 0.25 A g−1 (based on the anode) and a “NKU” logo powered by the full cell (inset) and (c) photograph showing an LED powered by a NMO/MS_FeSb couple (b and c), reproduced with permission from ref. 99 and 118. Copyright, 2017, American Chemical Society. Copyright, 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Liang et al. developed a full cell comprising a P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 cathode and 3D Sb–Ni nanoarrays.185 P2-type mixed transition metal layered frameworks have also been considered as promising cathode materials that match well with Sb anodes. The full cell delivered a superior rate performance of 434.2 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1 with a high energy density of approximately 100 W h kg−1. CuSbS2 nanowires fabricated by Shi et al. when assembled in a full cell with a P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O2 cathode showed an average discharge voltage of 2.7 V with an energy density of 93 W h kg−1.186 Utilizing another layered transition metal oxide NaNi1/3Mn1/3Fe1/3O2 cathode in a SIB full cell assembly with a SnSb–C anode, a gravimetric energy density of 145 kW h g−1 was achieved by Zhou et al.187 A SnSb nanocrystal-based anode when assembled with a Na1.5VPO4.8F0.7 cathode for full cell SIBs delivered a capacity of 400 mA h g−1 with a working voltage of 2.7 V.125 Oh et al. demonstrated the full battery performance of 3D-interconnected hollow NiSb nanospheres by employing Na0.4Mn0.54Co0.46O2 as the cathode. Na0.4Mn0.54Co0.46O2/NiSb displayed a charge capacity of 451 mA h g−1 with 75% capacity retention upto 20 cycles. The achieved full battery performance was superior to that of Na[Ni0.25Fe0.5Mn0.25]O2@C//Fe3O4 and Na0.80Li0.12–Ni0.22Mn0.66O2//SnS2@graphene full batteries.101,102
Nevertheless, significant progress has been made in the development of sodium-ion full cells comprising Sb-based alloys and intermetallics as anodes and various cathode materials. The commercial application of full cells is still constrained by low coulombic efficiency, inferior cycling performance and rate capacities along with cost issues, electrolyte composition and development of compatible anodes and cathodes.
11. Summary and future outlook
In this review, we have summarized the recent progress of Sb-based alloys and intermetallics as anode materials for SIBs. Sb has emerged as a potential candidate for SIBs due to its high theoretical capacity, high conductivity and low working potentials. In this review, we first introduced the advantages of SIBs over LIBs with a detailed discussion regarding the desirable features of good anode materials. However, the most intricate challenge for Sb and its alloy based compounds is the inevitable volume changes occurring during the charge/discharge process. Subsequently, we introduced the various Na storage mechanisms in Sb and Sb-based alloys with a parallel discussion about material design strategies that include alloying, nanostructuring, morphology control, use of heterostructures and so on. Ultrasmall particles embedded on a suitable conductive matrix aided in effective buffering of the volume changes and prevention of agglomeration and concomitant shortening of Na+ ion diffusion pathways, which eventually benefits in achieving high capacity and cycling stability. In addition, it was seen that hollow or porous nanostructures provided sufficient space for accommodating the volume changes with increasing the Na+ ion diffusion rates, thus facilitating enhanced cycling stability and rate performance.
Even though several strategies have been employed to achieve highly efficient anode materials for SIBs, there is still room for improvement in order to commercialize their large-scale applications. Antimony based intermetallics and alloys have only been exploited on the lab-scale and their large-scale production is not a cost-effective process. There is an acute need for the optimization of the process with an aim to reduce costs for their industrial implementation. Hence, designing an anode material with high capacity, high rate performance and cycling stability, which can be employed as an industrial material, i.e., being able to be fabricated easily at low costs, remains one of the most intricate challenges associated with SIBs. Additionally, most of the Sb-based alloys and intermetallics that have been investigated so far have shown promising efficiency for half-cells only. Though a few advancements have been made in recent years in the study of full cells, mitigating some of the critical challenges like cost-ineffectiveness, choice of electrolytes, and matching cathode and anode materials remains a hurdle in their commercialization. Full cell testing involves several issues associated with them: materials with a large surface area can lead to the formation of an extra SEI layer, which lowers the coulombic efficiency leading to limited Na+ in full cells; hollow or porous structures have low packing density, which causes a reduction in the volume energy density of full cells; and devising high performance cathode materials that emulate the discussed anode materials is one major challenge. An in-depth understanding of the mechanism associated with sodium storage in Sb-based alloys and intermetallics can rationalize the superior electrochemical performance of these anode materials when complemented with both experimental and theoretical analyses and thus aid towards mitigating these challenges. DFT calculations can provide theoretical models to simulate the electrochemical reaction mechanism, pathways for Na+ ion diffusion in the electrode, electrolyte and their interfaces and the mechanism for the SEI layer formation. Operando techniques (in situ XRD, TEM, Mössbauer, EXAFS, etc.) can provide real time analysis under operational conditions and hence they can directly reveal the phase transformations and volume changes that the electrode undergoes upon charge/discharge. Hence, the dominant factors affecting the electrochemical performance can be acquired by combining all these techniques. With precise composition control, DFT modelling and elaborate interface design, anode materials with enhanced electrochemical performance can be realized more efficiently.
Clearly antimony-based alloys and intermetallics play an inevitable role as anode materials for SIBs. They have their own impediments and require increasing efforts to make them ideal for wide-scale applications. Improvement and enhancement are required in the method of designing of the electrode, electrolyte, binder, additives and finally full cell assembly. A considerable number of Sb-based alloys and intermetallics discussed in the review demonstrated high capacity attributed to their synthetic strategy. Nevertheless, their scalability becomes insuperable owing to the complex parameters imposed during synthesis. Additionally, since these materials undergo an alloying mechanism, volume expansion still remains a constrain, which must be taken into account while synthesizing the active material. Hence, hollow structured materials emerge as more effective anode materials since volume expansion can be buffered without the loss of active material from the surface of the current collector even if minor cracks appear during prolonged cycling. The electrolyte used also has a major influence on the cell performance since the theoretical capacities of different electrolytes are different with NaClO4 having a theoretical capacity of 219 mA h g−1, whereas NaPF6 exhibits a capacity 160 mA h g−1, which shows that when NaPF6 is replaced with NaClO4, the mass is reduced by 47%. Therefore, it can be said that lower mass and increased solubility are two of the major criteria to be taken into account while selecting the electrolyte.
In this review we tried to provide an outline of how the material selection, structure of the materials and synergistic effects can modulate the electrochemical performance. Materials exhibiting high theoretical capacity and low cost are the desired anodes for SIBs. While designing materials, the focus should be on maintaining the structural integrity of the electrode. This review provides an overview to the researchers in designing and commercialization of Sb based alloys and intermetallics in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR) and the Department of Science and Technology (DST, India), for financial support. SS thanks the JNCASR for the research fellowship and SCP thanks the DST for the Swarnajayanti Fellowship (Grant Number: DST/SJF/CSA-02/2017-18).
References
Y. Zheng, T. Zhou, X. Zhao, W. K. Pang, H. Gao, S. Li, Z. Zhou, H. Liu and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700396 CrossRef .
N. Ortiz-Vitoriano, N. E. Drewett, E. Gonzalo and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1051–1074 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Shao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. He, R. Han, G. Wei and Y. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5569–5572 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Qiao, G. Wei, S. Li, Z. Lu, X. Wang and X. Lou, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 11, 274–281 CrossRef .
Y. Qiao, M. Ma, Y. Liu, S. Li, Z. Lu, H. Yue, H. Dong, Z. Cao, Y. Yin and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15565–15574 RSC .
S. Zhang, F. Yao, L. Yang, F. Zhang and S. Xu, Carbon, 2015, 93, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, D. Su, D. Sanmukuraj, T. Rojo, M. Armand and G. Wang, Electrochem. Energy Storage, 2018, 1, 200–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stevens and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fu, J. Ni, Y. Xu, Q. Zhang and L. Li, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4544–4551 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, H. Xu, T. Zhou, Z. Guo, L. Chen, M. Yan, L. Mai, P. Hu, S. Cheng and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600322 CrossRef .
F. Wang, X. Wu, C. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Fu, Y. Wu and X. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3570–3611 RSC .
K. Dai, H. Zhao, Z. Wang, X. Song, V. Battaglia and G. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Z. Jia, Y. Chen, N. Weadock, J. Wan, O. Vaaland, X. Han, T. Li and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3093–3100 CrossRef CAS .
A. Darwiche, C. Marino, M. T. Sougrati, B. Fraisse, L. Stievano and L. Monconduit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20805–20811 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Datta, R. Epur, P. Saha, K. Kadakia, S. K. Park and P. N. Kumta, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 316–322 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hou, M. Jing, Y. Yang, Y. Zhu, L. Fang, W. Song, C. Pan, X. Yang and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16189–16196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. Han, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Zheng, K. Xu, L. Hu and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6378–6386 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Ko and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12322–12324 RSC .
L. Wu, X. Hu, J. Qian, F. Pei, F. Wu, R. Mao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 323–328 RSC .
A. Darwiche, R. Dugas, B. Fraisse and L. Monconduit, J. Power Sources, 2016, 304, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Abel, Y.-M. Lin, T. de Souza, C.-Y. Chou, A. Gupta, J. B. Goodenough, G. S. Hwang, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18885–18890 CrossRef CAS .
D. Su, S. Dou and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
B. Farbod, K. Cui, W. P. Kalisvaart, M. Kupsta, B. Zahiri, A. Kohandehghan, E. M. Lotfabad, Z. Li, E. J. Luber and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4415–4429 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Abel, M. G. Fields, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15860–15867 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, K. H. Seng, D. Li, Y. Xia, H. K. Liu and Z. Guo, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1466–1476 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, W. Zhou, V. Chabot, A. Yu and X. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24895–24901 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Wang, L. Gu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 389–398 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Hu, M. Zhou, H. Tao, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Q.-Q. Ren, H. Li and Z.-W. Fu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1462–1464 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, Y. Jiang, W. Sun, H. Wang, C. Jin and M. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19449–19455 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yang, D. M. Zhang, L. Du and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12663–12671 RSC .
S. Wang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805432 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, B. Y. Guan, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7739–7743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, X. Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7744–7748 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Zhang, J. H. Jia, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 439–449 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, X. Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9859–9863 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, Y. Park, A. Choi, N. S. Choi, J. Kim, J. Lee, J. H. Ryu, S. M. Oh and K. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, J. Mao, Y. Zhu, C. Luo, L. Suo, T. Gao, F. Han, S.-C. Liou and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500174 CrossRef .
K. H. Seng, Z. P. Guo, Z. X. Chen and H. K. Liu, Adv. Sci. Lett., 2011, 4, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
L. Baggetto, E. Allcorn, R. R. Unocic, A. Manthiram and G. M. Veith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11163–11169 RSC .
X. Zhou, L. Yu, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601177 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Ni, S. V. Savilov and L. Li, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 13719–13727 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
T. Parveen, M. Siddiq, N. Shahzad, R. Ihsan, A. Ahmad and M. I. Shahzad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 119, 109549 CrossRef .
W. T. Jing, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2913–2933 RSC .
Z. Liu, T. Song and U. Paik, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8159–8193 RSC .

          A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner, J. Leddy and C. G. Zoski, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .
A. Nyman, T. G. Zavalis, R. Elger, M. Behm and G. Lindbergh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1236–A1246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, E. Marchante, M. Courty, J. M. Tarascon and M. R. Palacín, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8572–8583 RSC .
M. Okubo, E. Hosono, J. Kim, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, T. Kudo, H. Zhou and I. Honm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7444–7452 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, W. Murata, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, T. Ozeki, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, K. Gotoh and K. Fujiwara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3859–3867 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yui, M. Hayashi and J. Nakamura, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22406 CrossRef CAS .
T. Horiba, T. Maeshima, T. Matsumura, M. Koseki, J. Arai and Y. Muranaka, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, X. Tang and Y. Wong, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 3, 127–154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lei, Z. C. Yan, W. H. Lai, S. L. Chou, Y. X. Wang, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 3, 766–792 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, J. J. Gaumet and L. Q. Mai, Rare Met., 2017, 36, 321–338 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Wei, T. Zhai and H. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 437–455 RSC .
J. Qian, Y. Cheng, L. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7070–7072 RSC .
L. Bagetto, P. Ganesh, C.-N. Sun, R. A. Meisner, T. A. Zawodzinski and G. M. Veith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7985–7994 RSC .
L. Baggetto, H.-Y. Hah, J.-C. Jumas, C. E. Johnson, J. A. Johnson, J. K. Keum, C. A. Bridges and G. M. Veith, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 329–336 CrossRef CAS .
R. Caputo, J. Electron. Mater., 2015, 45, 999–1010 CrossRef .
K. Subramanyan and V. Aravindan, Chem, 2019, 5, 3096–3126 CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Wang, L. Gu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 389–398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gate, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saadat, Y. Y. Tay, J. Zhu, P. F. Teh, S. Maleksaeedi, M. M. Shahjamali, M. Shakerzadeh, M. Srinivisan, B. Y. Tay, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and Q. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1032–1038 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, T. Sun, J. Chen, W. Shi, X. Zhang, X. Lou, S. Mhaisalkar, H. H. Hng, Y. Boey, J. Ma and Q. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5333–5339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, M. Dirican, J. Zhu, C. Chen, C. Yan, P. Zhu, Y. Li, J. Guo, Y. Caydamli and X. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 752, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, A. Zhang, L. Peng, F. Zhao, Y. Tang, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 759–767 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, M. Dirican, C. Chen, J. Zhu, P. Zhu, C. Yan, Y. Li, X. Dong, J. Guo and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9696–9703 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, W. Zhou, V. Chabot, A. Yu and X. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24895–24901 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, K. Dong, D. Wang, S. Luo, X. Liu, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Hao, C. He, C. Shi and N. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123327 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Feng, X. Bian, J. Liu, H. Xu and Y. An, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1222–1233 RSC .
W. Ma, J. Wang, H. Gao, J. Niu, F. Luo, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 247–256 CrossRef .
H. Gao, J. Niu, C. Zhang, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3568–3577 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Feng, X. Biang, J. Liu and H. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1229–1236 RSC .
I. T. Kim, E. Allcorn and A. Manthiram, Energy Technol., 2013, 1, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, S. O. Kim and A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 848–854 CrossRef .
I. T. Kim, E. Allcorn and A. Manthiram, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12884–12889 RSC .
C. W. Lee, S. Park, H. J. Song and D. W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 479–489 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, C. Li, X. Ge, Z. Li, X. Miao and L. Yin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6474–6482 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jana, U. Subbarao and S. C. Peter, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 160–169 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, U. Subbarao and S. C. Peter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15950–15960 RSC .
R. Jana, A. Bhim, P. Bothra and S. C. Peter, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2922–2927 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Sarma, U. Subbarao, Y. Khulbe, R. Jana and S. C. Peter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23369–23381 RSC .
V. S. Marakatti, S. C. Sarma, B. Joseph, D. Banerjee and S. C. Peter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3602–3615 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Marakatti, N. Arora, S. Rai, S. C. Sarma and S. C. Peter, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7325–7388 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, R. Jana, Suchitra, U. V. Waghmare, B. Kuppan, S. Sampath and S. C. Peter, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7459–7467 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jana and S. C. Peter, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 242, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, R. Borah, A. L. Santosha, R. Dhanya, C. Narayana, A. J. Bhattacharya and S. C. Peter, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 791–800 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, A. Chaupattnaik, S. D. Ramarao, U. Subbarao, P. Barpanda and S. C. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 15757–15768 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. L. Fransson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek, K. Edstrom, J. O. Thomas and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 317–323 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morcrette, D. Larcher, J. M. Tarascon, K. Edstrom, J. T. Vaughey and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5339–5345 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Chae, J. Hur and I. T. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 1890–1893 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Nam, K.-S. Hong, S.-J. Lim and H.-S. Kwon, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 423–427 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. Wang, N. Zhang, F. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 256–262 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bagetto, E. Allcorn, A. Manthiram and G. M. Veith, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 168–171 CrossRef .
S. M. Oh, S. T. Myung, C. S. Yoon, J. Lu, J. Hasson, B. Scrosati, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1620 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qu, C. Ma, G. Ji, C. Xu, J. Xu, Y. S. Meng, T. Wang and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3854 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, G. Wang, X. Xiong, J. Zheng, X. Ou and C. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, J. C. Kim, S. Park, H. J. Song and D. W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 479–489 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Nguyen, T. T. Salunkhe, T. N. Vo, H. W. Choi, Y. C. Lee, J.-S. Choi, J. Hur and I. T. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 414, 470–478 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Zheng, J. H. You, J. J. Fang, G. P. Tu, W. Q. Rong, W. J. Li, Y. X. Wang, S. Tao, P. Y. Zhang, S. Y. Zhang, S. Y. Shen, J. T. Li, L. Huang and S. G. Sun, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, X. B. Zhao, G. S. Cao, M. J. Zhao, Y. D. Zhong and L. Z. Deng, Mater. Lett., 2003, 57, 4673–4677 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kitajou, J. Yamaguchi, S. Hara and S. Okada, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 39 CrossRef .
L. Bagetto, H. Y. Hah, C. E. Johnson, C. A. Bridges, J. A. Johnson and G. M. Veith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9538–9545 RSC .
A. Darwiche, M. Toiron, M. T. Sougrati, B. Fraisse, L. Stievano and L. Monconduit, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 588–592 CrossRef CAS .
E. Edison, S. Sreejith and S. Madhavi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39399–39406 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, K. Zhu, P. Liu, Y. Chao and L. Jiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25268–25273 RSC .
L. Bagetto, E. Allcorn, R. R. Unocic, A. Manthiram and G. M. Vieth, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11163–11169 RSC .
W. P. Kalisvaart, B. C. Olsen, E. J. Luber and J. M. Buriak, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2205–2213 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Park, C. K. Lee and C. M. Park, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5830–5833 RSC .
S. Liao, Y. Sun, J. Wang, H. Cui and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choi, C. W. Ha, H. Y. Choi, H. C. Shin and S. M. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2015, 159, 349–352 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Jackson, S. Green and A. L. Prieto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7447–7450 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, Y. Cao, J. Xiao, W. Wang, L. Kovarik, Z. Nie and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3321–3323 RSC .
M. Fehse, M. T. Sougrati, A. Darwiche, V. Gabaudan, C. La Fontaine, L. Monconduit and L. Stievano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8724–8734 RSC .
H. Xie, X. Tan, E. J. Luber, B. C. Olsen, W. P. Kalisvaart, K. L. Jungjohann, D. Mitlin and J. M. Buriak, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1670–1676 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Kalisvaart, H. Xie, B. C. Olsen, E. J. Luber and J. M. Buriak, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5133–5139 CrossRef CAS .
A. Darwiche, M. T. Sougrati, B. Fraisse, L. Stievano and L. Monconduit, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 32, 18–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, M. Walter, K. V. Kravchyk, R. Erni, R. Widmer and M. V. Kovalenko, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 455–459 RSC .
M. Walter, S. Doswald and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7053–7059 RSC .
J. Zhu, C. Shang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Gu, L. Zhou, H. Cheng, Y. Gu and Z. Lu, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Youn, H. Park, K. E. Loeffler, J.-H. Kim, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 391–396 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, M. Gu, Y. Shao, X. Li, M. H. Engelhard, B. W. Arey, W. Wang, Z. Nie, J. Xiao, C. Wang, J. G. Zhang and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2901–2908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Pu, Z. Liu, J. Wang, W. Wu, H. Zhang and H. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25250–25256 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, T. Wang, D. Liu, E. Liu, N. Zhao, C. Shi, F. He, L. Ma and C. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704670 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, K. Dong, D. Wang, F. Chen, S. Luo, Y. Liu, C. He, C. Shi and N. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 356–365 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choi, C. W. Ha, H. Y. Choi, J. W. Seong, C. M. Park and S. M. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2018, 386, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, K. Yin, H. Gao, J. Niu, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 349–359 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma and A. L. Preito, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6938–6941 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Yang and L. Lu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 17483–17489 RSC .
O. Croisner, T. Brousse, X. Devaux, P. Fragnaud and D. N. Schleich, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 169–174 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(8), 3096–3101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ni, X. Li, M. Sun, Y. Yuan, T. Liu, L. Li and J. Lu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 9117–9124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zhao and A. R. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6139–6145 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Mao, W. K. Pang, Z. Guo and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Orzech, F. Mazalli, J. D. McGettrick, C. Pleydell-Pearce, T. M. Watson, W. Voice, D. Jarvis and S. Margadonna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23198–23208 RSC .
H. Xie, W. P. Kalisvaart, B. C. Olsen, E. J. Luber, D. Mitlin and J. M. Buriak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9661–9670 RSC .
D. Pahari, S. Misra, P. P. Jana and S. Puruvankara, J. Solid State Chem., 2020, 292, 12660 CrossRef .
E. Edison, S. Sreejith, H. Ren, C. T. Lim and S. Madhavi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14145–14152 RSC .
L. Bagetto, K. J. Carroll, H. Y. Hah, C. E. Johnson, D. R. Mullins, R. R. Unocic, J. A. Johnson, Y. S. Meng and G. M. Veith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7856–7864 CrossRef .
H. Liu, P. K. Allan, O. J. Borkiewicz, C. Kurtz, C. P. Grey, K. W. Chapman and P. J. Chupas, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2016, 49, 1665 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Brant, D. Li, Q. Gu and S. Schmid, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. Wang, G. Liu, V. Sreenivasan, Z. Liu, Z. Hussain and W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2568 CrossRef .
O. J. Borkiewicz, B. Shyam, K. M. Wiaderek, C. Kurtz, P. J. Chupas and K. W. Chapman, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2012, 45, 1261–1269 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bak, Z. Shadike, R. Lin, X. Yu and X. Q. Yang, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 563–580 CrossRef .
J. Wang, C. Eng, Y. C. Chen-Wiegart and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7496 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Chien, G. Xiao and S. H. Liou, Hyperfine Interact., 1986, 27, 373–376 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Picone and P. E. Clark, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1979, 12, 233 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, K. S. Harchand, Vishwamittar, K. Chandra, P. Jernberg, T. Ericsson and R. Wappling, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 32, 69 CrossRef CAS .
C. Villevieille, B. Fraisse, M. Womes, J.-C. Jumas and L. Monconduit, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 324–330 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Temperley and H. W. Lefevre, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1966, 27, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
J. Steger and E. Kostiner, J. Solid State Chem., 1972, 5, 131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fehse, D. Bessas, A. Darwiche, A. Mahmoud, G. Rahamim, C. L. Fontaine, R. P. Hermann, D. Zuiton, L. Monconduit, L. Stievano and M. T. Sougrati, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. H. Tran, C. Autret, C. Damas, B. Claud-Montigny and J. Santos-Pena, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, K. Amine, J. Lu and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15806 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Erickson, C. Ghaity and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3313–3324 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Wang, J. Mater. Res., 2015, 30, 326–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, Y. He, J. Zheng and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 366–383 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, Y. Liu, A. Kushima, S. Zhang, T. Zhu, J. Li and J. Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 722–741 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Z. Shadike, R. Lin, K. Qian, H. Li, K. Li, S. Wang, Q. Lu, M. Lu, S. Ganapathy, X. Qin, Q. H. Yang, M. Wagemaker, F. Kang, X. Q. Yang and B. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806620 CrossRef .
M. Gu, L. R. Parent, B. L. Mahdi, R. R. Unocic, M. T. McDowell, R. L. Sacci, W. Xu, J. G. Connell, P. Xu, P. Abellan, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, D. E. Perea, J. E. Evans, L. J. Lauhon, J. G. Zhang, N. D. Browning, Y. Cui, I. Arslan and C. M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(12), 6106–6112 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, W.-I. Liang, H.-G. Liao, H. L. Xin, Y.-H. Chu and H. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1745–1750 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuk, H. K. Seo, J. W. Choi and J. Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7478 CrossRef .
R. R. Unocic, R. L. Sacci, G. M. Brown, G. M. Veith, N. J. Dudney, K. L. More, F. S. Walden, D. S. Gardiner, J. Damiano and D. P. Nackashi, Microsc. Microanal., 2014, 20, 452–456 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Santhanagopalan, W. Zhang, F. Wang, H. L. Xin, K. He, J. Li, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3760 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H.-C. Yu, M.-H. Chen, L. Wu, N. Pereira, K. Thornton, A. Van der Ven, Y. Zhu, G. G. Amatucci and J. Graetz, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1201 CrossRef .
A. Nie, L. Gan, Y. Cheng, X. Tao, Y. Yuan, S. Sharifi-Asl, K. He, H. Asayesh-Ardakani, V. Vasiraju, J. Lu, F. Mashayek, S. Vaddiraju, U. Schwingenschlögl and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 543–552 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Gutiérrez-Kolar, L. Bagetto, X. Sang, D. Shin, V. Yurkiv, F. Mashayek, G. M. Veith, R. Shahbazian-Yassar and R. R. Unocic, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3578–3586 CrossRef .
J. Y. Hwang, S. T. Myung and Y. K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
D. Aurbach, Y. Talyosef, B. Markovsky, E. Markevich, E. Zinigrad, L. Asraf, J. S. Gnanaraj and H.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
H. Che, S. Chen, Y. Xie, H. Wang, K. Amine, X.-Z. Liao and Z.-F. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1075–1101 RSC .
H. Lu, L. Wu, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 402–408 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, M. Park, L. Zhou, G. H. Lee, J. Shin, Z. Hu, S. L. Chou, J. Chen and Y. M. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12822–12826 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, M. Park, L. Zhou, G.-H. Lee, W. Li, Y.-M. Kang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6728–6735 CrossRef CAS .
W. Brehm, J. R. Buchheim and P. Adelhelm, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Z. Chen, L. Xiao, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703116 CrossRef .
I. Hasa, J. Hassoun, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 2152–2155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, D.-H. Seo, H. Kim, I. Park, J.-K. Yoo, S.-K. Jung, Y.-U. Park, W. A. Goddard III and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 540–545 RSC .
Y. C. Lu, N. Dimov, S. Okada and T. H. Bui, Energies, 2018, 11, 1614 CrossRef .
L. Liang, Y. Xu, L. Wen, Y. Li, M. Zhou, C. Wang, H. Zhao, U. Kaiser and Y. Lei, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3189–3201 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, W. Wang and J. Ding, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 13609–13612 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, M. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee, J. Jorne and C. Johnson, ECS Trans., 2014, 58, 59–64 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Comparison of physical and chemical properties between Li and Na and (b) schematic representation of the working principle of a sodium ion battery with antimony based anode materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the possible reaction mechanisms in anode materials for SIBs.	 
ΔG = −nFE°

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of the electrochemical properties of different anode materials for SIBs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Crystal structure of Sb in comparison with other potential group 14 anodes for SIBs.	 


P	2.34	2596	9786	2.52 × 10−4	0.2–0.5

Sb
	
6.68
	
660
	
4411
	
2.56 × 10

6

	
0.4–0.8

Bi	10.02	386	3765	7.7 × 106	0.2–0.8
Si	2.35	1787	4200	2.52 × 10−4	0.2–0.5
Sn	7.28	847	7236	9.090 × 106	0.2–0.4
Ge	5.35	1622	8683	2.17	0.2–0.6
Sb + Na+ + e− → NaSb	(1)
NaSb + 2Na+ + 2e− → Na3Sb	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the mechanism of Na ion insertion in Sb and (b) schematic diagram showing the five key states of the Sb–C framework film anode during cycling, corresponding to different crystalline phases/crystal structures (Sb, NaSb, and Na3Sb) at a specific charge–discharge voltage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2019 Cell Press.	 
c-Sb → a-Na3−xSb + c-NaSb → c-Na3Sb	(3)
c-Na3Sb → a-Na1.7Sb → a-Na1.0Sb → a-Na1.0Sb + c-Sb	(4)
a-Na1.0Sb + c-Sb → a-Na1.7Sb + c-Sb	(5)
a-Na1.7Sb + a-Na3−xSb → a-Na3−xSb → c-Na3Sb	(6)
3MSb + 3Na+ + 3e− → Na3Sb + 3M	(7)
Na3Sb → Sb + 3Na+ + 3e−	(8)
Sb + 3Na+ + 3e− → Na3Sb	(9)

 	Fig. 6  Strategies and design principles for the fabrication of Sb-based alloys and intermetallics: (a) nanostructuring, (b) alloying, (c) use of a conductive matrix, (d) dealloying, (e) morphology control and (f) heterostructure formation.	 

 	Fig. 7  Different metals used for alloying with Sb and their classification.	 

 	Fig. 8  Development of Cu–Sb based alloys and intermetallics using various synthetic strategies. (a) Mechanical milling, (b) galvanic replacement, (c) electrodeposition and (d) magnetron sputtering. Panel (b) is reproduced from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Development of Ni–Sb based alloys and intermetallics using varied synthetic strategies. Individual panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 30 and 103–105. (a) Development of hollow nanospheres, (b) sol-gel based synthesis, (c) development of heterostructure and (d) development of nanosheets. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthetic scheme and SEM images of the ZnSb nanowire balls on a graphite substrate: the low magnification image, closer views of several nanowire balls, the high magnification characterization of a nanowire ball, and the cross-sectional feature of the nanowires. The SEM images are reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 
SnSb + Na ↔ Na3Sb + Sn ↔ Na3Sb + Na15Sn4	(10)

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis of Sn–Sb alloys and intermetallics based on the wet chemical approach. Individual panels (b, d, e and f) have been reproduced with permission from ref. 28, and 126–128. (a) Colloidal method, (b) carbonization, (c) solvothermal method, (d) carbothermal method, (e) hydrothermal method and (f) electrospinning. Copyright 2018, Wiley. Copyright 2018, Wiley. Copyright 2014, Wiley. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Synthesis of Sn–Sb alloys and intermetallics using both wet and solid-state based techniques. (a) Electrodeposition, (b) top-down in situ synthesis of 3D SnSb@N-PG, (c) NaCl template method, (d) melt spinning, (e) dealloying and (f) ethaline-based solution electrodeposition. Individual panels have been reproduced with permission from ref. 129–134. Copyright 2017, Wiley. Copyright 2018, Wiley. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of durian-like Bi0.75Sb0.25 pyramid arrays. TEM, HRTEM and elemental mapping images of a single pyramid of durian-like Bi0.75Sb0.25 arrays and (b) atomic structures of (Bi and Sb), Na (Bi and Sb) and Na (Bi and Sb) respectively, upon the sodiation (stages 1 and 2) and desodiation (stages 3 and 4) processes in BixSby alloys. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 and 74. Copyright, 2018. Wiley. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

Cu–Sb	Cu2Sb thin films	High-energy mechanical milling	250 at 10C rate	175	250	0.55	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
100

Sb/Cu2Sb	Electrodeposition	486 at 3C rate	340	120	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in PC and FEC	
98

Cu2Sb–TiC–C	High-energy mechanical milling	320 at 4C rate	307	50	0.6	1 M NaClO4 in PC and EC	
97

Cu2Sb/Cu	Galvanic replacement	318.4 at 0.08 A g−1	311	200	0.8	1 M NaClO4 in PC and FEC	
99

Cu2Sb	Magnetron sputtering	300 at 10C rate	250	200	0.2	1 M NaClO4 in PC and FEC	
145

Ni–Sb	3D-NiSb hollow interconnected nanospheres	Low temperature solution synthesis	632 at 0.1C rate	500	70	0.74	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
30

Sb–NiSb–Ni heterostructures	Electrodeposition	502 at 10C rate	391	300	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in PC/FEC	
83

NiSb in a 3D interconnected carbon matrix	Polymer gel based solution synthesis	405 at 0.1 A g−1	366	400	0.21	1 M NaClO4 in PC/FEC	
17

NiSb–Sb2O3 nanosheets	Solution synthesis	564 at 10C rate	382	250	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC	
11

Sb/NiSb composites	Electrodeposition	600 at 100 mA g−1	521	100	0.6	1 M NaClO4 in EC/FEC	
106

Fe–Sb	FeSb2	High-energy mechanical milling	360 at 10C rate	—	—	0.7	1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC	
109

FeSb2 with a binder	High-energy mechanical milling	540 at 10C rate	440	130	0.5	1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC	
110

Fe1.18Sb1.82 nanoparticles	Solid-state synthesis	426 at 60 mA g−1	100	200	0.25	1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC	
159

FeSb–TiC–C nanocomposites	High-energy mechanical milling	215 at 24 mA g−1	200	100	0.68	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
82

FeSb	Melt spinning	466 at 50 mA g−1	442	80	0.8	1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC	
111

Co–Sb	CoSb@C nanofibers	Electrospinning	449 at 100 mA g−1	250	500	0.5	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC	
112

CoSb	High-energy mechanical milling	211 at 60 mA g−1	200	50	0.6	1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC	
94

Mo–Sb	Mo3Sb7 thin films	High-energy mechanical milling	330 at 10C rate	280	20	0.8	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
113

Si–Sb	Sb–Si co-sputtered alloys	Magnetron sputtering	663 at 10C rate	660	140	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC	
114

Zn–Sb	3D ZnSb nanowires	Chemical vapor deposition	450 at 20 mA g−1	377	100	0.8	—	
116

ZnSb/C nanocomposites	High-energy mechanical milling	300 at 50 mA g−1	298	30	0.8	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC	
117

Zn4Sb3 nanowires	Chemical vapor transport	395 at 0.1C rate	300	200	—	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
173

Zn4Sb3@Zn thin films	Electrodeposition	450 at 1C rate	405	250	0.5	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
118

Sn–Sb	SnSb/C	High-energy mechanical milling	544 at 100 mA g−1	435	50	0.3	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC	
119

SnSb thin films	Magnetron sputtering	700 at 100 mA g−1	550	150	0.5	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC	
121

SnSb nanocrystals	Colloidal synthesis	370 at 0.5C rate	350	100	0.6	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
124

SnSb nanoalloys	Colloidal synthesis	890 at 200 mA g−1	845.5	100	0.55	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DMC	
125

rGO–SnSb nanocomposites	Hydrothermal synthesis	
	361	80	0.75	1 M NaPF6 in EC, EMC and FEC	
29

SnSb@SnOx/SbOx@C	NaCl template method	337.3 at 0.1 A g−1	269	500	0.69	1 M NaClO4 in EC/EMC and FEC	
131

3D SnSb@nitrogen doped porous graphene network	NaCl template method	500 at 0.1 A g−1	400	100	0.65	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC	
130

SnSb/CNT@graphene nanosheets	Hydrothermal synthesis	422	360	100	0.7	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
28

Porous nickel scaffold@SnSb	Electroplating and template removal	906 at 10C rate	275	1000	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC	
129

Nanoporous SnSb alloy	Chemical dealloying	508 at 0.1 A g−1	506	100	0.65	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
133

Porous SnSb alloy	Arc melting	481 at 0.1 A g−1	390	100	0.6	1 M NaClO4 in PC/EC	
132

SnSb thin films	Electrodeposition	543 at 0.5C rate	520.8	300	0.8	1 M NaPF6 in DMC	
134

Porous carbon nanofiber supported SnSb alloys	Electrospinning	350 at 0.2C rate	346.5	200	0.6	1 M NaPF6 in EC/DEC	
128

SnSb nanostructures on nitrogen doped carbon	Solution based synthesis	300 at 0.1 A g−1	244	100	0.3	1 M NaPF6 in EC/DEC	
127

SnS/SnSb@C	Vulcanization	1028 at 50 mA g−1	270	200	0.62	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC	
126

Bi–Sb	Bi0.57Sb0.43–C	High energy mechanical milling	375 at 0.1 A g−1	293	50	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC	
137

Nanoporous BixSby alloys	Chemical dealloying	463 at 1 A g−1	210	500	0.8	1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC	
78

Durian shaped Bi0.75Sb0.25 alloys	Electrodeposition	335 at 2.5 A g−1	291.4	2000	0.6	1 M NaPF6 in diglyme	
138

Ternary	Sn50Ge25Sb25 thin film alloys	Magnetron sputtering	658 at 10C rate	300	40	0.4	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC	
26

Bi0.94Sb1.06S3–graphite nanorod cluster	High energy mechanical milling	564	445.5	200	0.7	1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC	
139

Sn5SbP3/C composite	High energy mechanical milling	352 at 2 A g−1	432	200	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
140

Bi0.25Sb1.75Te3	High energy mechanical milling	566	254.7	100	0.8	1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC	
141

Sn10Bi10Sb80 alloy	Magnetron sputtering	627	621	100	0.7	1 M NaClO4 in EC/DEC	
142

FeSnSb alloys	Solid state synthesis	520 at 0.1 A g−1	500	120	0.75	1 M NaClO4 in PC	
144


 	Fig. 14  Comparison of Sb based alloys and intermetallics with respect to their reversible capacities and stability. References correspond to the materials compared in Table 2.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic and images of various cell setups used for in situ X-ray measurements. (a) RATIX cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2012, International Union of Crystallography. (b) Modified coin cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright, 2016, Elsevier. (c) A solid gel-type cell for soft XAS, reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Argonne's multipurpose in situ X-ray (AMPIX) cell, reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2012, International Union of Crystallography. (e) Pouch cell, reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group, and (f) capillary type cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 
xNa+ + Cu2Sb + ySb → Cu2Sb + Sb + yNa+	(11)
3Na + 3Cu2Sb → Na3Sb + 6Cu	(12)

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the cell set-up used for in situ TEM measurements: (a) cryo-TEM holder, reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) The experimental setup of the open-cell approach using an ionic liquid as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Poseidon 500 in situ electrochemical-scanning/TEM system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2014, Cambridge University Press. (d) In situ TEM observation of the electrochemical reaction using an electrochemical liquid cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM analyses of a graphene liquid cell (GLC). Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) In situ TEM biasing of a nanobattery mounted on a TEM grid showing the triangular geometry of the cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2014, Cambridge University Press. (g) Electrochemical cell used for in situ TEM measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Synthetic scheme and (b) electron diffraction pattern of a pristine Zn4Sb3 nanowire with the [21] zone axis, and the Zn4Sb3 nanowire after the first sodiation and first desodiation respectively. (c) Atomic scale HAADF image of the pristine Zn4Sb3 nanowire with the [21] zone axis, atomic scale HAADF image of the newly formed NaZn13 with the [001] zone axis after the first sodiation and atomic scale HAADF image of the formed NaZnSb with the [110] zone axis after the first desodiation respectively and (d) atomic scale HAADF image of the formed Zn with the [010] zone axis after the first desodiation (here, Na, Zn, and Sb atoms are indicated in yellow, blue, and violet colors, respectively). The scale bar is 1 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright, 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  
In situ TEM analysis of the sodiation–desodiation of a co-sputtered SnSb film during the first cycle. (a) Bright-field micrographs and associated measured electron diffraction patterns as well as simulations during sodiation. (b) Same analysis during desodiation. (c) Schematic illustration of the proposed phase transition of β-SnSb during the sodiation–desodiation cycle and. (d) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiencies of Sn and Sb as well as a trilayer Sn/Si(2 nm)/Sb film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright, 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Predicted mechanism of Na ion insertion in the CoSb intermetallic anode and the respective structural changes. Color code: red, Co; green, Sb; blue, Na. Partially filled circles indicate the respective atomic deficiency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright, 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic representation of the effect of FEC in SIBs (a) and (b) the effect on SEI stability with FEC concentration, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of a SIB full cell using antimony based alloys and intermetallics as anode materials, (b) typical galvanostatic discharge–charge profiles of the Na3V2(PO4)3/Cu2Sb full cell at 0.25 A g−1 (based on the anode) and a “NKU” logo powered by the full cell (inset) and (c) photograph showing an LED powered by a NMO/MS_FeSb couple (b and c), reproduced with permission from ref. 99 and 118. Copyright, 2017, American Chemical Society. Copyright, 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
