Corroles at work: a small macrocycle for great applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00662B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00662B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1277-1335Corroles at work: a small macrocycle for great applications

        
          
            Corrado 
            Di Natale
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Claude P. 
            Gros
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Roberto 
            Paolesse
          
          
        
      c
aDepartment of Electronic Engineering, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Viale del Politecnico, 00133 Rome, Italy. E-mail: dinatale@uniroma2.it;   Tel: +39 06 72 59 73 48
bUniversité Bourgogne Franche-Comté, ICMUB (UMR CNRS 6302), 9 Avenue Alain Savary, BP 47870, 21078 Dijon, Cedex, France. E-mail: Claude.Gros@u-bourgogne.fr;   Tel: +33 03 80 39 61 12
cDepartment of Chemical Science and Technologies, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca Scientifica 1, 00133 Rome, Italy. E-mail: roberto.paolesse@uniroma2.it;   Tel: +39 06 72 59 47 52
Received 
      9th July 2021
    First published on 17th January 2022AbstractCorrole chemistry has witnessed an impressive boost in studies in the last 20 years, thanks to the possibility of preparing corrole derivatives by simple synthetic procedures. The investigation of a large number of corroles has highlighted some peculiar characteristics of these macrocycles, having features different from those of the parent porphyrins. With this progress in the elucidation of corrole properties, attention has been focused on the potential for the exploitation of corrole derivatives in different important application fields. In some areas, the potential of corroles has been studied in certain detail, for example, the use of corrole metal complexes as electrocatalysts for energy conversion. In some other areas, the field is still in its infancy, such as in the exploitation of corroles in solar cells. Herein, we report an overview of the different applications of corroles, focusing on the studies reported in the last five years.
Corrado Di Natale
Prof. Corrado Di Natale. Received a Laurea in Physics from the University of Rome La Sapienza in 1987. Since 1991, he has been with the University of Rome Tor Vergata where he is full professor of Electronics. His studies have been carried out in the field of chemical sensors, most of his contributions were in the development of porphyrinoids based electronic noses and electronic tongues and their applications to different fields such as food analysis, environmental control, and medical diagnosis. Among the various applications, he pioneered in 2003 the diagnosis of lung cancer with gas sensors. He has published more than 340 papers in refereed journal and several book chapters. His papers have been cited more than 12500 times and his h-index is 61 (source Scopus). He is co-inventor of eight patents and contributed to fund two spin-off companies.
Claude P. Gros
Prof. Claude P. Gros. Graduation in Chemistry from the Université de Bourgogne in 1995 under the supervision of Prof. R. Guilard. After a one-year post-doc position in California (UCDavis) in the lab of Prof. K. M. Smith working on chlorins and pyrroloporphyrins, he started his career as an Assistant Professor at the Université de Bourgogne, where he has been Full Professor of Organic Chemistry since 2009 (at the medicinal/pharmaceutical school). His research interests include the synthesis and reactivity of corroles, porphyrins, BODIPYs and dipyrrins and their metal complexes with applications in energy and electron transfers, gas sensors and medicinal chemistry. He is the co-author of 155 papers in international journals (H-index 40; >4350 citations), and he is the coinventor of four patents.
Roberto Paolesse
Prof. Roberto Paolesse received a Laurea degree in Chemistry (Summa cum Laude) from the University of Rome La Sapienza in 1983. After a post-doc period at the same University, he has been at the University of Rome Tor Vergata since 1986, and he is now full professor in Chemistry at the Department of Chemical Science and Technologies. His research interests cover the synthesis and characterization of porphyrinoids and their applications in chemical sensors, sensors arrays and optoelectronic devices. He serves as Associated editor of the Journal of Porphyrins and Phthalocyanines since 2006. He is author and co-author of more than 430 research articles (H-index 57-June 2021), and edited two books.
1. Introduction
In the large family of porphyrin analogs, i.e. pyrrolic macrocycles with skeletal variations in the parent porphyrin, corrole (Fig. 1) has recently assumed a protagonist role. This contracted macrocycle is not a new member because it was reported for the first time in the early 1960s, during the attempt to find a synthetic route for the preparation of Vitamin B12 by Johnson and Kay.1
 Fig. 1  The molecular structure of corrole. 
For several years, the pathways necessary to synthesize corroles2 have limited the detailed studies of its properties, until the definition of a simple route for the preparation of triarylcorroles from synthetic precursors3,4 boosted studies on the characterization and consequently on the application of corrole derivatives.
From the beginning, this macrocycle has revealed peculiar and frequently difficult to interpret behavior, which has led to several incorrect characterizations of some corrole complexes, and even the first corrole report in the literature was later amended by Johnson.5 The somewhat unpredictable behavior of corrole can be related to its structural characteristics: the contracted macrocycle imparts three pyrrolic hydrogens in the core, which leads to a non-planar structure for the free-base corrole.6 This feature causes the higher acidity of corrole than porphyrin.7 The trianionic character as a ligand makes corrole a strong σ-donor, able to stabilize coordinated metals in formally high oxidation states; however, the high electron density and high oxidation state of the metal also makes the ligand-to-metal charge transfer facile, with the formation of the corrole π–cation radical, leading to the non-innocence of corrole as a ligand.8 Corroles also possess strong emissions, with quantum yields usually significantly higher than porphyrins, making them of interest as efficient fluorophores.
All these features make corrole chemistry significantly different from that of the corresponding porphyrin and consequently interesting from the applications of these species in different exploitation fields, ranging from catalysis to sensing or clinical applications.
These aspects have been reviewed in the past9 so in this review we describe the most recent exploitations of corrole derivatives, to give an update on the different uses of corroles in different application fields. For this reason, this review has been divided into different sections, according to the various examples of corrole exploitation.
2. Catalysis
2.1 Oxidation
The exploitation of corroles as catalysts has been one of the first attempted applications of these derivatives.10 The peculiar behavior of corrole, which makes this macrocycle different from the parent porphyrin analogs while retaining some similarities, has been of interest to mimic the chemistry of the tetrapyrrole biological systems.11 Following the research wave on the oxidation of hydrocarbons catalysed by synthetic metalloporphyrins, the first examples of corrole applications were related to their use as oxidation catalysts. The interest was mainly due to the initial assumption that corrole should stabilize the higher oxidation states of coordinated metals, as intriguing mimics of biologically active species, and this feature has been the springboard for the first corrole application as oxidation catalysts soon after the reports of the synthetic routes to triarylcorroles, in particular TPFCorrH3.
This topic has facilitated an impressive boost in corrole-related papers in the first decade after the year 2000 and the results obtained have been reviewed in the past.12–18 In more recent years, the finding that the high oxidation states of corrole-coordinated metals are frequently only formal,19 due to the easy oxidation of the corrole ligand to the corresponding radical cation, and the more complex and intriguing coordination chemistry of corrole opened the applications to a wider range of reactions than hydrocarbon oxidation. However, further examples of metallocorrole-catalysed hydrocarbon oxidations have been reported in the literature, focusing the investigations on Fe and Mn derivatives.
TPFCorrFeCl has been used to catalyze the hydroxylation of cyclohexane and adamantane with m-chloroperbenzoic acid as the oxygen donor.20 In both cases, the reaction was highly selective in affording the corresponding alcohols, with no traces of ketones; high regioselectivity was also observed in the case of adamantane. The same group also studied hydrocarbon oxidation using hydroperoxides and T(2,6-F2)PCorrFeCl as the catalyst.21 In this case, different substrates, such as alkanes, alkenes, alkylbenzenes, and alcohols have been oxidized and the mechanism of the reaction evidenced the role of the iron corrole complex in activating the hydroperoxide, generating the corresponding oxygenated radical.
In subsequent investigations, the same group tested analogous Mn corrole complexes, TPFCorrMn, T(2,6-F2)PCorrMn, and the eight-brominated Br8TPFCorrMn, as catalysts for the same reactions.22,23 In the case of the adamantane oxidation, a preference for the formation of the tertiary alcohol was again observed, with the three complexes showing a similar catalytic activity.22 The catalytic system was also tested for the oxidation of cyclohexane and alkylbenzenes, affording moderate yields of the corresponding ketones and alcohols, with the fully brominated Mn derivative being the most efficient system. Spectroscopic investigations have supported the formation of the CorrMnVO, which was confirmed by following the kinetics of the reaction with 2,4,6-tris(tert-butyl)phenol. In this case, the formation of the stable phenoxyl radical via H-atom transfer could easily be identified by UV-vis spectroscopy, giving information on the possible catalytic cycle, which involves the formation of a CorrMnIVOH species, as observed in the case of the analogous complex of corrolazine.24
The three Mn corrole complexes were also tested in the alcohol oxidations with tert-butyl hydroperoxide as the oxidant. The corresponding aldehydes and ketones were obtained as reaction products, with no observation of over-oxidation species such as carboxylic acids. The perbrominated complex in this case was also the most efficient system although, in all cases, the complete bleaching of the catalyst was observed at the end of the reaction.
Zhang and coworkers reported the olefin oxidation catalysed by TPFCorrFeIII(OEt2)2 with iodobenzene diacetate as a reagent.25 This mild oxidant showed the advantage to avoid corrole bleaching, which is one of the major drawbacks in the exploitation of corrole complexes in these reactions. The catalytic activity, the product selectivity, and the stereo-retention observed in the catalytic epoxidation of cis-cyclooctene were among the major improvements obtained using iodobenzene diacetate. A catalytic cycle involving the formation of a CorrFeVO as the active oxidant species was proposed (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Catalytic cycle for cyclooctene oxidation catalysed by CorrFe.25 
The same catalytic system was tested for the oxidation of sulfides.26 In this case, two catalysts, TPFCorrFeIII(OEt2)2 and TPCorrFeIII(OEt2)2, were tested, again using iodobenzene diacetate as a mild oxidant. This choice allowed the use of the more electron-rich TPCorrFeIII(OEt2)2, which usually suffers from bleaching in the oxidation reactions. This complex showed higher catalytic activity than the perfluorinated analog, with 100% conversion of thioanisole within 1 h, with the necessary addition of a few μL of water. The reaction was also selective toward the formation of sulfoxide, without the over-oxidation to the corresponding sulfone. Other oxidants than iodobenzene diacetate gave worse results, also inducing the catalyst bleaching. In this case, a putative CorrFeVO species was also proposed as an active oxidant species but a different fate was evidenced for the transient species, which relaxed to the corresponding (Corr+˙)FeIVO in the case of TPCorr, while it underwent comproportionation in the case of TPFCorr to give the corresponding μ-oxo complex (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  The catalytic cycle for sulfide oxidation catalysed by CorrFe.26 
The same group later studied the behavior of different Mn corrole complexes in sulfide oxidation using iodobenzene diacetate.27 Taking advantage of the mild power of the oxidant, which reduces the problem of the corrole degradation, the authors tested different corrole complexes, bearing substituents with differing electronic characters on the peripheral benzene rings, to have different electron densities on the resulting Mn complexes. Both CorrMnIII(OEt)2 and CorrMnIVCl catalysts were tested, having the coordinated Mn in two different formal oxidation states.
The oxidation of sulfides mainly afforded the corresponding sulfoxides with traces of the corresponding sulfone. The CorrMnIVCl species were more active than the corresponding MnIII complexes and among them, the corroles with electron-donating substituents were more efficient than the corroles bearing electron-deficient phenyl substituents. This latter feature can be attributed to the different oxidation potentials of the complexes, which favor the more electron-rich species that are more likely to be oxidized to the active form.
The greater efficiency of the CorrMnIVCl can be attributed to a different reaction pathway with respect to the corresponding MnIII complex, as evidenced by spectroscopic and competition studies. In the case of the CorrMnIII complex, the oxidation leads to the formation of the corresponding CorrMnVO as the active oxidant, while the formation of a more powerful oxidant, the MnVIO derivative, is hypothesized for CorrMnIV.
The effect of the 10-phenyl ring substituents on the oxygen atom transfer (OAT) to thioanisole from CorrMnVO has been recently reported.28 In this case, both electronic and steric effects were taken into account with the observation that electron-withdrawing substituents accelerated the OAT process to sulfides.
The influence of appended nitrogen ligands at the 10-phenyl groups on the OAT process from CorrMnVO was also investigated by studying the epoxidation of alkenes.29 The rate of OAT was significantly increased by the presence of nitrogen ligands, with this effect following the strength of the Mn binding. The result can be reasonably attributed to the elongation of the MnO bond by the trans coordination of the N-ligand, which destabilizes the CorrMnVO species, enhancing the rate of the OAT process. The intramolecular binding is more effective than the presence of the same ligand in solution because it reduces the competitive oxidation of the ligand.
2.2 CO2 functionalization
The copolymerization of CO2 with epoxides is one of the promising processes that use this gas as a source of materials.30 Iron corrole derivatives were the first to be tested as catalysts for the preparation of polycarbonates by the copolymerization of CO2 with cyclohexene oxide, propylene oxide and glycidyl phenyl ether.31 In this work, different iron corroles were used as catalysts (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Molecular structure of CorrFe catalysts employed for CO2 copolymerization.31 
For the reaction, the addition of bis(triphenylphosphoranylidene)iminium as the co-catalyst was necessary. The products obtained with cyclohexene oxide included several carbonate groups, while with the other two monomers there were both carbonate and ether linkages.
TFPCorrFe(OEt2)2 showed the highest catalytic activity among the corrole complexes, while the importance of the corrole ligand was confirmed by the fact that the corresponding iron porphyrin complex afforded only the cyclic carbonate under the same conditions.
In the case of glycidyl phenyl ether, it is important to note that the copolymer obtained had crystalline behavior due to the presence of isotactic poly(glycidyl phenyl ether) units.
In a subsequent article, the same group studied the exploitation of Mn corroles for the copolymerization of epoxides with CO2, other than to test the same complexes in the homopolymerization of epoxides and their copolymerization with cyclic anhydrides.32 TPFCorrMn was more active than TPFCorrMnCl, even if lower than the corresponding iron corrole derivatives, however, with the advantage of a higher content of the carbonate linkages in the resulting polymer with both propylene oxide and cyclohexene oxide. Also, in this case, the catalysed polymerization needed the presence of the bis(triphenylphosphoranylidene)iminium salt as co-catalyst. The role of the counterion was also investigated, showing that chloride gave moderate catalyst activity with higher carbonate linkage content, while acetate induced higher activity, but lower carbonate linkage content. Increasing the CO2 pressure did not result in its greater inclusion in the polymeric chain.
The Mn corroles were also tested for the polymerization of epoxides and copolymerization of epoxides with cyclic anhydrides, showing that they are versatile catalysts for the preparation of a wide range of polymeric materials.
Waser, Schöfberger, and coworkers further explored the CO2 reaction of epoxides in mild conditions, testing the catalytic properties of different metal complexes of TPFCorr.33 Mn, FeCl, Co(PPh3), Cu, Sb(py), and Bi were the complexes tested in the reaction of CO2 with styrene oxide as the model substrate. The co-catalyst used in this case was tetrabutylammonium bromide as a nucleophilic halide source. The reaction was carried out at low temperature (60 °C) and atmospheric pressure of CO2, with the aim to drive the reaction towards the formation of cyclic carbonates instead of polymeric products, in this case being complementary to the systems previously reported in the literature. The results obtained showed the superior activity of the Mn complex as a catalyst and the tuning on the reaction conditions allowed the almost complete conversion of the starting styrene oxide under mild conditions and low catalyst loadings. The scope of the TPFCorrMn-catalysed reaction was also quite general, giving good results with different epoxides.
DFT calculations, combined with spectroscopic evidence, make it possible to formulate a plausible reaction mechanism, as reported in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  The reaction mechanism and calculated DFT structures of CorrMn. Adapted with permission from ref. 33, which is an open-access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY), Wiley. 
Recovering the catalyst at the end of the reaction and re-using the same complex with success demonstrated that the complex remains intact during the reaction and can be recycled for further reactions.
DFT investigations were further performed to elucidate the different factors influencing the catalytic behavior of Al corroles in the preparation of cyclic carbonates from the reaction of CO2 and epoxides, comparing them with different metalloporphyrins.34 The calculations showed a similar behavior of the Al corrole to the analogous porphyrinates, while the bis(triphenylphosphoranylidene)iminium iodide was calculated to be the best among the halogenated co-catalysts.
The reaction of CO2 with epoxidized canola oil catalysed by TPFCorrMn has been used as the intermediate step for the non-isocyanate pathway for the preparation of polyurethane.35 Polyurethane is obtained after the formation of the cyclic carbonate groups in the oil by the reaction of these groups with diamines.
The exploitation of TPFCorrMn allowed the fixation of CO2 under mild conditions, reducing the reaction times to  of the time needed by other catalysts reported in the literature.
More recently, two articles reported the exploitation of corrole complexes for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.36,37 In the first article,36 a PEG-functionalized Co(PPh3) corrole was used to functionalize a carbon paper electrode for the electroreduction of CO2 to mainly ethanol in slightly acidic water solution (pH = 6). The corrole was obtained by the reaction of TPFCorrH3 with thiol-substituted PEG(7)–OMe groups; the nucleophilic substitution at the para positions of the peripheral phenyl groups afforded the corrole reported in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Molecular structure of a PEG-ylated corrole exploited for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.36 
The peripheral substitution was employed to obtain a good dispersion of the corrole on the electrode surface. The reduction of the complex led to the formation of a (CorrCoI)2− species; the complex was deposited on a carbon paper electrode and it was able to catalyze the CO2 reduction to methanol and ethanol in aqueous solution at pH = 6 (0.1 M phosphate buffer). The catalyst was stable under the reaction conditions and the faradaic efficiency was stable at around 48% over the reduction process. The reaction carried out in D2O/H2O mixture indicated that the source of the protons is the solvent, as supported by the presence of deuterated species among the reaction products, evidenced by GC/MS. EPR measurements indicated the presence of a CoIII–CO2−˙ species, supporting the reduction of CO2 to CO2−˙ by the (CorrCoI)2− complex. The pathways reported in Fig. 7 illustrate the formation of the different reaction products.
 Fig. 7  Catalytic cycle for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 by CorrCo. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36, which is an open-access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 2019 Springer Nature. 
In the second article, the Mn complex of the same corrole was exploited to catalyze the CO2 reduction to acetic acid.37 Different from Co complexes, Mn(III) corroles have no axial ligands and, as a consequence, the axial positions are free to coordinate with nucleophile species for CO2 reduction. The same conditions of the Co complex were exploited to study the catalytic behavior of the Mn corrole. The electrochemical reduction of the MnIIIcorrole was first metal-centered (MnIII/MnII), while the second was ligand-centered to give a MnIIcorrole anion radical. The second reduction wave increases under a CO2 atmosphere and the same behavior was observed when the Mn corrole was deposited onto the carbon paper electrode. The analysis of the products obtained showed the presence of methanol and acetate in solution, with H2 and CO as the gas species. Acetate was the main product when the electrolysis was carried out at −1.25 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), with a FE of 63%. Also, in this case, the reaction carried out in the D2O/H2O mixture indicated the solvent as the proton source, while the reaction in the presence of 13CO2 indicated carbon dioxide as the carbon source for the formation of acetate. UV-vis characterization of the species formed during the reaction in CAN solutions suggested the formation of the [MnII(OH)2]− as the active reducing species.
Corrole derivatives have demonstrated peculiar catalytic activity in the conversion of CO2, which is nowadays a fundamental need; the ability of corroles to stabilize the formally high oxidation states of coordinated metals and to also undergo reduction to form highly reactive complexes with metal in low oxidation states is the key feature that justifies the superior characteristics of corrole derivatives.
The demonstrated ability of corrole to catalyze the CO2 reduction to precious chemical products can represent a promising pathway to face this environmental concern.
2.3 Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)
The electrocatalytic reduction of molecular oxygen to water is one of the most important steps in the energy conversion processes operated by devices such as fuel cells. The four-electron redox process should be catalysed due to the slow kinetics and to avoid the competing production of hydrogen peroxide; although the catalyst of choice is platinum, the high cost of this noble metal hampers its large-scale application and for this reason, the search for cheap and efficient catalysts is currently a hot research topic. Molecular catalysts can represent a promising solution and metal complexes of corroles have been reported as the most efficient among them. The previous works on corrole ORR applications have been reviewed by Gross and Mahammed38 and here, we report the studies performed in the last five years.
One of the major problems to be solved for the application of corrole complexes is to avoid the production of hydrogen peroxide, formed as an intermediate by two-electron reduction, and to drive the reaction towards the formation of water by a four-electron process. Looking at the biological systems, the first approach was to use binuclear complexes, such as co-facial porphyrin–corrole dyads, where the proximity of two metal centers allows the synergic 4e-reduction of the molecular oxygen.39 While the synthetic access to these dyads prevents their wide applications, the preparation of systems where the corrole sub-units are held close together, with the aim to induce the synergic reduction of O2, has been a promising approach.
From this point of view, the electropolymerization of triarylcorroles bearing electroactive substituents in the peripheral positions has been proposed as a practical approach for the preparation of efficient catalysts.
Friedman et al. reported the electropolymerization of T(4-NH2P)CorrCo(PPh3); Co and Fe have been reported as the most efficient first-row transition metals for the target reaction by both theoretical calculations40 and experimental comparison of the performances of first-row transition metal complexes of a β-bromo-substituted corrole as electrocatalysts for the ORR in alkaline solutions (Fig. 8).41
 Fig. 8  Molecular structure of corrole complexes exploited as electrocatalysts for the ORR in alkaline solutions.41 
In this study, the corrole complexes were adsorbed on BP2000 electrodes. This carbon surface demonstrated a certain ORR catalytic activity in alkaline solutions, attributed to the quinone groups present on the BP2000 surface; Mn and Ni derivatives did not show catalytic activity for the ORR process, while Cu corrole contributed to the catalytic process by driving the reaction toward a 2 + 2e− process. Co and Fe corrole complexes were the most active, able to catalyze the 4-e− reduction of O2 with performances comparable with those of Pt nanoparticles.
Supported by these results, Friedman et al. carried out the electropolymerization of T(4-NH2P)CorrCo(PPh3) by cyclic voltammetry (CV), obtaining conductive films on ITO-coated electrodes (Fig. 9), chosen to obtain insights into the structure of the film obtained.42
 Fig. 9  Electropolymerization of T(4-NH2P)CorrCo(PPh3). Reproduced from ref. 42, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
The formation of the film was attributed to the formation of pyrazine bridging units, according to the mechanism reported in Fig. 10, on the basis of the spectroscopic insights.
 Fig. 10  Mechanism of the formation of pyrazine bridging units. Reproduced from ref. 42, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
For the ORR process, the electropolymerization was carried out on a glassy carbon (GC) electrode and then on a high-surface-area carbon electrode, the black pearls 2000 (BP2000). The ORR was carried out in both acidic (0.5 M H2SO4) and basic (0.1 M KOH) solutions, comparing the performances of both the monomer and the electropolymerized film. The latter showed better catalytic activity, with an increase in the performance in basic solutions and BP-2000 electrode, where the process was almost completely a 4-e− reduction, in particular, a 2 + 2-e− process, confirming that the proximity of the macrocycles in the polymeric chain allowed a stepwise reduction of O2, as evidenced by an additional wave in the CV, typical of hydrogen peroxide reduction.
Following the same approach, a different monomer has been more recently tested for the preparation of electropolymerized film, the 5,15-D(4-NH2Ph)10-FPCorrCo(PPh3), where in the 10 meso-position, the 4-aminophenyl group is substituted by a pentafluorophenyl substituent.43 The introduction of the pentafluorophenyl group is justified by its possibility to be modified by the introduction of different substituents with the consequent possibility of modifying both the steric and electronic character of the polymeric chain formed by electropolymerization of the 5,15-substituents. The electropolymerization was performed on a GC electrode, under conditions similar to those of the analogous T(4-NH2P)CorrCo(PPh3); although, with only two electroactive substituents, the characterization of the electropolymerized film showed characteristics similar to those of T(4-NH2P)CorrCo(PPh3) in terms of both spectroscopic and morphology features. Also, in this case, the activity of the electropolymerized films in the ORR process was compared with that of the deposited monomer, always showing a superior activity. At low polymer loadings on the electrode, the electrochemical behavior was that of a 2-e− process, while at higher loadings the number of electrons involved increased to a 3.4 value, indicating the prevalence of the 4-e− reduction. This result confirms that the proximity of the macrocycles is important to have a 2 + 2 e− reduction process.
The influence of the peripheral substituents on the catalytic behavior of Co corrole complexes has also been studied in detail. β-halogenation is one of the most exploited functionalizations for modifying the electronic properties of porphyrinoids and it has been used to make more robust triarylcorroles as oxidation catalysts. The influence of the β-halogenation of Co corroles on their ORR catalytic activity has been studied by depositing the complexes reported in Fig. 11 on GC and BP2000 electrodes.44
 Fig. 11  Molecular structure of β-halogenated Co corroles employed as ORR catalysts.44 
On the GC electrode, the catalytic activity of the complexes showed the following order, both in acidic and alkaline solutions: Co–Br8 > Co–Cl8 ∼ Co–H8 > Co–F8. This result has been rationalized in terms of combination among the contrasting inductive electron-withdrawing and mesomeric electron-releasing properties of the halogens. However, on a BP2000 coated electrode, where corrole complexes always show better performances, the best results have been obtained with the TPFCorrCo lacking β-substituents, where the reaction was mostly involving 4-e− (3.6), indicating that the peripheral substitution is not beneficial for the catalytic activity of Co corrole.
In a further attempt to define the different parameters involved in the corrole ORR catalysis, the influence of proton donor groups on the 10-phenyl group of the corrole Co complex (Fig. 12a and b) has been studied.45
 Fig. 12  Molecular structures of Co corroles exploited as ORR catalysts.45–47 
The rationale of the substitution was to investigate the possible interaction of the carboxylic group with the Co ion in the O2 coordination, driving the ORR to the desired 4-e− pathway. Also, in this case, the experiments were carried out in alkaline and in acidic solutions, using GC and BP2000 electrodes. In alkaline solution (0.1 M KOH) and with a GC electrode the Co corroles catalyze the ORR via the 2-electron pathway, with the ortho isomer showing the lowest overpotential for the reaction.
Since BP2000 has always induced an increase in the catalytic performances of corrole complexes, the same experiments were repeated on these electrode surfaces. This improvement was effectively observed, with leveling the differences of the potentials for all the complexes but the para-isomer showed an ORR closer to the desired 4-e− mechanism (3.1). DFT calculations were performed to elucidate the results obtained in terms of the solvation of the Co corroles onto the BP2000 surface, which differently stabilized the intermediate products of the O2 reduction, favoring the para complex in performing the 4-e− mechanism for the ORR process. In acidic solution, the solvation term is less effective because of the neutral nature of the intermediate and the favored 2-e− mechanism is operative.
To investigate the mechanism of the influence of the carbon support on the catalytic activity of the metallocorroles for the ORR, different carbon surfaces were functionalized with Br8TPFCorrFe and compared with BP2000, which always shows the best catalytic behavior when functionalized with corroles for the electrocatalytic ORR.48 The influence of the carbon surfaces on the catalytic activity of the deposited corrole complex could be related to a different loading of the complex, or the interactions between the complex and surface, or, finally, to the corrole aggregation, depending on the porosity of the surface. Spectroscopic and microscopic investigation indicated that the porosity of the carbon support plays a fundamental role: BP2000 has the highest amount of 20–25 nm pore sizes, which are the right dimensions to accommodate corrole complexes in close proximity, helping their interactions that are critical for optimizing the ORR process.
This result evidenced the importance of the corrole dimensions on the ORR catalytic activity and led the researchers to look to novel corrole-bearing substituents that can influence both the electronic and size-related properties of catalysts. In particular, the –CF3 group as the meso-substituent attracted some attention because it is a small and strong electron-withdrawing substituent, two features that are particularly promising for the target application.
For this reason, the ORR catalytic behavior of TFMCorrCo (Fig. 12c and d) deposited on BP2000 electrode was compared with that of TPFCorrCo in both alkaline and acidic solutions.47
As previously observed, the catalytic activity, for both complexes, was higher in alkaline solution, and the TFMCorrCo showed a lower overpotential than TPFCorrCo. This feature is particularly interesting because for other species, the deposition onto BP2000 induced a levelling of the potential values, removing the differences observed in solution.35 XPS characterization indicated the strong interactions of TFMCorrCo with the carbon surface, probably through the quinone-like groups present in the BP2000 surface. For both complexes, the ORR mechanism was through a 2 + 2 e− pathway.
To further detail the different parameters that govern the ORR process, the influences of pH and peripheral substituents were studied via the comparison of the catalytic behavior of three Co corrole complexes (Fig. 12a–c),46 with the support of DFT calculations.
The study demonstrated that there is a change in the ORR mechanism depending on the solution pH, and the variation depends on the pKa of both the inner core N atoms and carboxylate group, moving from a proton-controlled mechanism at low pH to an electron-transfer-controlled mechanism at higher pH. As a consequence, the overpotential, the stability, and the operating mechanism of the catalyst depend on a complex balancing of the electronic characteristics of the peripheral substituents because high electron-withdrawing characteristics favor the 2 + 2 or 4 e− mechanism, while lower overpotential and durability are obtained by weakening these properties.
An interesting approach for the development of efficient ORR electrocatalysts has been the integration of corrole complexes with carbon nanostructures, such as carbon nanotubes (CNT). A route for the preparation of these hybrid catalysts is to take advantage of π–π interactions between corroles and CNT. For this reason, Cao and coworkers synthesized the 10-pyrene-substituted corrole complex 10-pyrDFPCorrCo (Fig. 13) and deposited it onto multiwalled CNTs; the performances of the system for both the ORR and oxygen evolution were evaluated in acidic solution (0.5 M H2SO4) and compared with those of the unsubstituted TPFCorrCo.49
 Fig. 13  Molecular structure of the 10-pyrenyl-substituted Co corrole employed as the ORR catalyst.49 
The hybrid CNT/10-pyDFPCorrCo material was deposited onto a GC electrode and it showed significant catalytic activity for the reduction of molecular oxygen, with a larger overvoltage than the unsubstituted TPFCorrCo tested under the same conditions and with a catalytic activity better than that of Pt on carbon materials. The pyrene moiety enabled strong π–π interactions of the complex with MWCNT, increasing the catalytic activity and also the composite material stability. 10-pyDFPCorrCo was not dissolved by extraction with CH2Cl2, different from the unsubstituted corrole complex. A further advantage of the strong π–π interactions is related to a faster electron transfer from the electrode to the complex, also improving the 4-e reduction selectivity of the O2 reduction.
Another possibility explored by the same group was to graft the corrole onto the surface of CNTs by a selected functional group. The chosen solution was to take advantage of the click chemistry route by reacting the azide-substituted 10-az-DFPCorrCo with an alkyne functionalized CNT (Fig. 14).50
 Fig. 14  Structure of the corrole grafted onto CNT by click-chemistry.50 
Grafting the corrole onto the CNT surface influenced the rate of the electronic communication between the macrocycle and the electrode through the CNT, favoring the 4e− pathway for the ORR mechanism.
The characterization of the grafted hybrid material, compared with those obtained by non-covalent deposition of 10-pyrDFPCorrCo and TPFCorrCo, demonstrated the reduced loading of CorrCo for the grafted material, but rotating ring-disk electrode measurements showed that the number of electrons involved in the reaction was close to 4 (3.73), slightly higher than that of non-covalent hybrid materials. Both results indicated the plausible ORR pathway; it is known that monomeric corroles catalysed the 2e− reduction of O2, with the 4e− reaction thanks to the aggregation of macrocycles in the solid-state, which allows the formation of dimeric species required for water formation. In the case of the grafted CorrCo-CNT, the formation of these dimeric species is not possible, and the 4e− ORR can be reasonably explained with the rapid electron transfer rate between the corrole and the electrode. A further advantage of the grafted system was related to the stability because the corrole cannot be washed away by organic solvents, as occurs for non-covalent functionalized electrodes.
The same approach was exploited for the direct functionalization of Fe3O4 electrodes, following the pathway reported in Fig. 15.51
 Fig. 15  Functionalization steps of Fe3O4 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 51, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2019. 
The functionalized electrode was tested for the ORR and Oxygen Evolution Reaction (OER) at neutral pH for their application in Zn–air batteries. SEM and XRD characterization confirmed the grafting of the corrole onto the villi-like electrode surface. Electrocatalytic ORR was performed in 0.1 M phosphate buffer at pH = 7.0. The functionalized electrode showed an almost 4e− ORR (3.97 registered e−), outperforming both the bare electrode and the electrode with the corrole simply drop coated. The electrode was stable for 1000 CV cycles, while the efficiency of a commercial Pt/C electrode significantly decreased under the same conditions. These results allowed the testing of the electrode in a Zn–air battery operating in neutral electrolyte, showing high performance and durability, also being the first of this kind of batteries.
A further detail that was investigated to shed light on the ORR mechanism is related to the influence of the Co corrole axial ligands.52 In this case, the ORR electrocatalytic performances of PPh3 and bis-py complexes of Co corrole grafted or TPFCorrCo physically adsorbed on CNT were compared in 0.1 M KOH alkaline solution (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Molecular structures and deposition techniques for the grafting and dispersion of Co corroles on CNT.52 
The results obtained confirmed the superior performances of the grafted complexes and, among them, the best results were obtained with the PPh3 complex, which presented the lowest overpotential, with a significant difference from that of the bis-py complex. This result is in agreement with the importance of the electron donor ligand characteristic in the increase in O2 binding and consequently, the electron transfer for the ORR. On the other hand, the less efficient electrocatalytic activities of the dispersed TPFCorrCo derivatives were comparable, with no significant variation among PPh3 or py complexes. Both results can be related to the efficiency of the electron transfer process between corrole and the electrode surface: in the case of grafted corroles, the communication between the corrole and the electrode is good and the influence of ligands is important for the ORR efficiency, while for adsorbed corroles, the less effective electron transfer becomes the limiting factor, minimizing the influence of the axial ligand.
For bioelectrochemical devices, such as microbial fuel cells, it is important to develop efficient ORR electrocatalysts working in neutral solutions. For this reason, TPCorrFe and TPCorrCo have been studied in neutral pH water solution, supported on two different nitrogen-functionalized carbon supports, multiwalled CNT(N) and black pearls (BP-N).53 TPCorrFeCl demonstrated the best efficiency and, among the Co derivatives, the bis-py complex was superior to the PPh3 counterpart. This latter result was attributed to the lability of py ligands, which were easily removed upon the interaction of TPCorrCo with the nitrogen units of the carbon supports, leaving the complex ready for O2 binding, with the same process being more difficult for the analogous PPh3 complex. This hypothesis is also supported by the superior characteristics of BP-N to CNT(N) because of the higher content of pyridinic nitrogens on the BP-N surface, which makes the coordination of the corrole complex easier.
The best efficiency of the TPCorrFeCl can be related to the aggregation that the catalyst undergoes on the carbon support, as evidenced by UV-vis spectra, which is not present in the Co derivative. This aggregation can also explicate the efficiency in driving the ORR to the 4e− mechanism.
The influence of the ligand structure on the ORR electrocatalytic activity of iron complexes has been recently reported,54 where the performances of different iron complexes (Fig. 17) have been compared and the results obtained have been rationalized by using both spectroscopic techniques and DFT calculations. For the majority of these complexes, including corrole, the ORR followed a 4e− mechanism, while the electrocatalytic activity followed the sequence FeTAA > FePc > FeTPP > FeCorrole > FeTim > FeSalen. The high oxidation state and increased spin density on the coordinated iron, as determined by XANES and Mössbauer spectroscopy, were indicated as the factors influencing the ability to catalyze the O–O bond and consequently the ORR electrocatalytic activity, which was supported by DFT calculations.
 Fig. 17  Molecular structures of iron complexes tested as ORR electrocatalysts.54 
The catalytic activity of TPFCorrCo(py)2 for the 2e−/2H+ reduction of molecular oxygen to hydrogen peroxide by ferrocene or 9,10-dihydro-10-methylacridine was demonstrated.55 While the interest in the ORR has been devoted to improving the 4 e− pathway, it should also be noted that the production of hydrogen peroxide is of interest for different applications.
The spectroscopic analysis of the reaction allowed the determination of the mechanism of the catalytic cycle. The HClO4 leads to the removal of the py axial ligands with the formation of the tetra-coordinated TPFCorrCo, which, in acidic conditions, is oxidized to the corresponding π–cation radical complex, with the formation of O2H. In the case of ferrocene, this proton-coupled electron transfer was the rate-determining step of the reaction. The mechanism of the catalytic cycle is reported in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  The catalytic cycle for the ORR catalysed by TPFCorrCo.55 
When ferrocene was replaced with acridine, a 2e− reductant, the rate-determining step became the electron transfer to the reductant. The titanyl complex of TPPH2 was used to detect the H2O2 formation, showing an almost 100% efficiency.
2.4 Water oxidation
Water oxidation is an important process for energy conversion, admirably performed in Nature by Photosystem II. In this process, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is the kinetically slow process that limits the efficiency of water splitting and, considering that this reaction is the reverse of the ORR, metal complexes of corrole have also been studied to catalyze this process, in some cases for both ORR and OER.
For this reason, Cobalt corrole complexes have been intensively studied, with TPFCorrCo as the prototypical example.56 Also in this case the effect of the trans ligand on the efficiency of the OER has been investigated.56 The substituted pyridines and the other donor compounds reported in Fig. 19 were tested as axial ligands of TPFCorrCo.
 Fig. 19  Axial Ligands of TPFCorrCo employed to study their influence on the OER catalytic activity.56 
TPFCorrCo undergoes two oxidation waves; the first one is mostly ligand centered, as evidenced by spectroscopic characterization, with UV-vis showing a significant decrease in the Soret and Q bands, and EPR showing a signal of an organic radical. These features indicated the formation of a Co(III) corrole π–cation radical species. The second wave is responsible for the water oxidation, and it showed a strong dependence on the donor characteristics of the axial ligand. Electron donor ligands make the catalytic activity of TPFCorrCo more efficient, with lower overpotentials and higher catalytic current. The proposed catalytic cycle is reported in Fig. 20.
 Fig. 20  The catalytic cycle for the ORR catalysed by TPFCorrCo.56 
The trans ligand is proposed to weaken the CoO bond, favoring the subsequent attack of the water molecule.
Gross and coworkers studied in detail the mechanism of the OER, investigating the nature of the intermediates, using TPFCorrCo as the catalyst.57 The comparison of the CVs of TPFCorrCo and the analogous TPFCorrAl provided information on the oxidation products. For TPFCorrCo, the oxidation can be both ligand- or metal-centered, in the case of the Al counterpart, only ligand-based processes are possible. The spectroelectrochemical analysis allowed the confirmation that while the first oxidation is ligand centered, the second wave also involves the metal by electron transfer from the coordinated cobalt to the doubly oxidized corrole. To investigate the pH effect on the OER, TBAOH was added to the TPFCorrCo solution; the effect obtained was an increase in the catalytic activity, with the emergence of a second oxidation wave in the CV spectrum (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  CV spectra in water/acetonitrile solution with (continuous line) and without (dotted line) TPFCorrCo in different amounts of TBAOH. Reproduced from ref. 57, with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
This result suggested the presence of a second water oxidizing species in basic conditions. The hypothesis is the binding of hydroxide as a ligand and to obtain more insight into this hypothesis, TBAOH was replaced with TBAF. Also, in this case, two oxidation waves were observed, requiring a smaller amount of TBAF, indicating that the coordination of F− to the Co center in this case also led to the formation of the additional oxidizing species. EPR characterization showed, however, that in the case of hydroxide addition a cobalt superoxide complex (TPFCorrCoO2)− was formed, by a first reduction of the Co center operated by OH−, then the formed Co(II) binds molecular oxygen to form the superoxide species.
The influence of peripheral substituents on the efficiency of the OER has also been investigated. Substituents bearing pendant phosphonic groups were introduced at the 10-position of a 5,15-bis(pentafluorophenyl)corrole (Fig. 22).58
 Fig. 22  Molecular structures of functionalized Co corroles exploited as OER catalysts.58 
The electrocatalytic OERs were performed by the deposition of the complexes onto FTO electrodes and the reaction was carried out in phosphate buffer solutions at pH = 7. The CH2PO(OH)2 derivative showed the best performance, with a small overpotential value. The substituent effect is related to its action as an intramolecular base helping the formation of the O–O bond. The same result was obtained using GC electrodes.
The importance of the formation of corrole–CNT hybrids on the electrode surface for the OER and Hydrogen Evolution Reaction (HER) catalytic efficiencies was investigated in a wide pH range.59 Both covalent grafting (Fig. 23) and simple dispersion (Fig. 24) were exploited with the Co corroles reported in the figures.
 Fig. 23  Preparation pathways for the covalent grafting of Co corroles onto CNTs.59 
 Fig. 24  Dispersion of Co corroles onto CNTs.59 
The CV characteristics of the three Co corrole complexes were similar in acetonitrile solution. The hybrid corrole–CNT materials, obtained by covalent attack for azidocorrole and supramolecular interaction for pyrene and unsubstituted corrole, were deposited on GC electrodes and their efficiencies for both the OER and HER in acidic (0.5 M H2SO4) and basic (1 M KOH) solutions were investigated. In both cases, the shortest grafted corrole gave the best results, followed by similar pyrene and long grafted corroles and with TPFCorrCo being the less efficient. Also, in this case, the result obtained can be attributed to the best electronic communication between the hybrid material and the electrode, as in the case of the ORR. It is, however, worth noting that the catalytic system was efficient for both the HER and OER in a wide pH range, being the first to perform in this way.
Another feature investigated for developing optimized catalysts for the OER is the influence of the electronic character of the meso aryl substituents. While TPFCorrCo has been the reference complex for these studies, it is known that electron-donating substituents will favor the OER. For this reason, two 4-amino phenyl groups have been introduced at the 5,15-positions of the corrole ring to obtain the DAFPCorrCo(py)2.60
The CV of the complex in acetonitrile showed two oxidation and two reduction peaks. The electrocatalytic behavior of DAFPCorrCo(py)2 was demonstrated in acetonitrile in the presence of water and TFA. While the first oxidation and reduction peaks were not affected by the presence of water and TFA, the second oxidation peak registered the OER and the second reduction peak, the HER. The performances for these reactions were then studied in heterogeneous conditions, by depositing DAFPCorrCo(py)2 onto the surface of a GC electrode; the experiments were carried out in acidic (0.5 M H2SO4) and basic (KOH 1 M) solutions. Also, in this case, it was possible to observe the catalytic activity of the complex for both the OER and HER, with low overpotentials for both of them.
The OER catalytic activities of the 5,15-dpM-10oMCorrCo(py)2 and 5,15-DN-10oMCorrCo(py)2 (Fig. 25) were also investigated to explore the influence of the meso aryl substituents.61
 Fig. 25  Molecular structures of Co corrole complexes exploited as OER catalysts.61 
The presence of meso aryl groups with fewer electron-withdrawing characteristics than the usual pentafluorophenyl substituents led to the observation of a third oxidation wave in the CV carried out in acetonitrile. The electrocatalytic activity of the complexes was studied in acetonitrile in the presence of water in homogeneous conditions and the OER was detected for the third oxidation wave. The O2 evolution for the process was confirmed by GC and with Clark electrode measurements in heterogeneous conditions, depositing the complexes onto FTO electrodes. The turnover frequency (TOF) measured was higher than that of those measured with TPFCorrCo or DAFPCorrCo(py)2. The potentials necessary for the OER, in this case, were higher than those in literature but it should be noted that in this case the third oxidation wave was exploited, while for TPFCorrCo or DAFPCorrCo(py)2, the OER was observed for the second oxidation wave. However, the impact of this potential limitation can be lowered by the observation that the potential of this process is strongly influenced by the nature of the axial ligand and a significant shift at a lower potential for the third oxidation wave was observed by increasing the water concentration, indicating the substitution of py with H2O as the CorrCo axial ligand. These results indicate a potential route for the optimization of the catalyst efficiency, by tuning the electronic characteristics of the corrole peripheral positions.
The selectivity of the OER towards the production of H2O2 has also been recently investigated.62 Although the water oxidation to O2 is thermodynamically favored, the formation of H2O2 has also been reported and its production can also be of practical interest. As such, the octabromo-substituted 5,15-dpM-10oMCorrCo(py)2 and 5,15-DN-10oMCorrCo(py)2 were studied.
The electrochemical behavior of this complex in acetonitrile was different depending on whether the conditions were homogeneous or heterogeneous. In homogeneous conditions, two oxidation waves were observed for Br8TPFCorrCo (Fig. 26) and the addition of an aqueous base led to the current increase for the second oxidation wave, indicating the presence of a catalytic process. In these conditions, the evolution of O2 with an 18% faradaic yield was observed, while 70% of H2O2 was detected in solution, indicating that the production of hydrogen peroxide is favored in homogeneous conditions.
 Fig. 26  The molecular structure of Br8TPFCorrCo employed as an OER catalyst.62 
On the other hand, Br8TPFCorrCo was deposited onto an edge-plane graphite (EPG) electrode and in this case, the water oxidation exclusively produced molecular oxygen without evidence of H2O2. Spectroelectrochemical and EPR characterizations gave some insight into the reason for this different behavior. The oxidation of Co corrole in both cases affords the [Cor˙+–CoIII–O˙−] intermediate. This species undergoes the nucleophilic attack by the hydroxide ion to give [Cor˙+–CoIII–OOH]−. In homogeneous conditions this intermediate is hydrolyzed by water, giving H2O2 and [Cor˙+–CoIII–OH]−, before being oxidized and affording O2. In heterogeneous conditions, the electron transfer is faster and for this reason, the formation of [Cor˙+–CoIII–OO˙] is prompt, leading to the O2 evolution.
While cobalt corrole complexes have been intensively studied as catalysts for the OER, only a few reports have been published on different metal complexes. The Mn complex of a water-soluble derivative of TPFCorrH3 (Fig. 27) was deposited onto the edge-plane pyrolytic graphite electrode and O2 evolution was observed by increasing the pH of the buffer solution.63
 Fig. 27  The molecular structure of the water-soluble Mn corrole studied as a catalyst for the OER.63 
This complex was also able to reduce the O2 produced during the reverse scan, demonstrating a bifunctional character. The complex was stable under the reaction conditions and the good faradaic efficiency of the related OER makes it a promising catalyst for water oxidation.
More recently, iron corroles have been tested as water oxidation electrocatalysts.64 For this purpose CorrFeCl derivatives, bearing different meso aryl substituents, have been studied, together with the corresponding μ-oxo dimers and the TPFCorr β–β′ linked dimer (Fig. 28). Their performances were then compared with those of the corresponding Co(py)2 complexes.
 Fig. 28  Molecular structures of Co and Fe corroles tested as water oxidation electrocatalysts.64 
For all the species, the CV characterization showed that the electronic character of the meso aryl substituents influenced the potential waves, with TPCorr derivatives being more likely to be oxidized and more difficult to be reduced. The μ-oxo dimers showed a marked difference in the potential waves, undergoing shifts to lower values, while the β–β′ dimers showed no significant variations with respect to the corresponding monomers, indicating the absence of electronic interactions between the two subunits.
The OER was observed for iron complexes at potentials higher than 1 V, with the lowest value necessary for TPCorrFeCl. However, the best catalytic efficiency was obtained with the fluoro-substituted corroles. For Co derivatives, the same trend was observed and TPCorrCo was not able to catalyze the OER. For the dimers, while the μ-oxo derivatives of Fe were shown to be less useful for the OER, the linear dimers demonstrated promising performances, with the dimer being superior to the corresponding monomer for the Co derivatives.
When the complexes were deposited on the surface of Nafion-coated FTO electrodes, the evolution of O2 was clearly visible upon the application of positive potentials to the water buffer solutions. TPFCorrFeCl showed a catalytic efficiency similar to that of the corresponding Co(py)2 complex, while in this case, the linear dimeric species showed lower efficiencies. The results obtained demonstrated that iron corroles can have promising roles as electrocatalysts for the OER.
Recently, Co, Mn, and Cu complexes of TFPCorrH3 and T(2,6-F2)PCorrH3 were tested as redox mediators for the OER in Li–O2 batteries.65 The role of these species is to be easily oxidized and in this form, they should oxidize the Li2O2 formed as the ORR product in the cell. A drawback that limits the efficiency of these cells is the instability of the redox mediators.66 The CV of six different corrole complexes were investigated in the diglyme solution used in Li–O2 batteries (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Molecular structures and CV spectra of metal corrole complexes. Adapted from ref. 65, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. 
From the CV, it was possible to determine that Cu complexes have the best characteristics for the target application. This hypothesis was confirmed by the comparison of the CV characteristics of the corroles together with those of some used redox mediators. After 50 cycles T(2,6-F2)PCorrCu showed the highest stability and it was also tested in the presence of O2 in conditions that can induce the formation/decomposition of Li2O2; in this case, no evidence of decomposition was observed, as confirmed by UV-vis analysis of the complex. A cycle was proposed for the catalytic action of T(2,6-F2)PCorrCu, as reported in Fig. 30.
 Fig. 30  The catalytic cycle of T(2,6-F2)PCorrCu in Li–O2 batteries. Adapted from ref. 65, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. 
To further confirm the superb performance of T(2,6-F2)PCorrCu as a redox mediator, the complex was exploited in a Li–O2 cell, cycled more than 100 times, again showing stability in the operative conditions.
2.5 Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
Metal complexes of corroles have also been exploited for the HER, which is another important process for energy conversion and is frequently coupled with the OER in the water-splitting process. Consequently, for this reaction, some of the complexes already tested for both the ORR and OER have also been involved in the HER; 10-pyrDFPCorrCoPPh3 supported on graphene has been exploited as an electrocatalyst for the HER.67 The electrocatalytic activity of 10-pyrDFPCorrCoPPh3 was compared with that of 10-pyrDFPCorrCo(py)2 and TPFCorrCo(py)2, with all the complexes loaded on graphene as the support and deposited onto GC electrodes; the experiments were carried out in aqueous solutions with pH ranging from acidic to basic conditions. In this way, it was possible to compare the influence of the pyrene substituent, the axial ligand, and the pH of the solution.
The measurements were first carried out in homogeneous conditions in acetonitrile, using benzoic acid as the proton source. The second reduction wave of complexes showed a catalytic current, confirming that Co(I) is the catalytically active species as proposed in the literature.68
10-pyrDFPCorrCoPPh3 showed the highest current under the same reaction conditions; the proposed importance of the electron donor effect of the trans ligand, which facilitates the protonation of the Co(I) species formed in the second reduction wave, could be disputed by the loss of the axial ligand that Co(III) corroles undergo upon reduction.16 On the other hand, TPFCorrCo(py)2 produced a higher current than 10-pyrDFPCorrCo(py)2 because the electron-withdrawing character of the 10-pentafluorophenyl group leads to an easier reduction of the complex with the formation of the active catalytic intermediate.
In heterogeneous conditions, the complexes were immobilized on graphene and the hybrid materials deposited on GC electrodes. The electrocatalytic activity was tested in aqueous solutions having different pH values: H2SO4 0.5 M for acidic conditions, neutral 0.1 M phosphate buffer, and 0.1 M KOH as the basic medium. The complexes were stable in these conditions and in all cases, 10-pyrDFPCorrCoPPh3 showed the best catalytic efficiency. This demonstrated once again the influence of the donor characteristics of PPh3 in the catalytic mechanism. Different from homogeneous conditions, 10-pyrDFPCorrCo(py)2 showed, in this case, higher currents than TPFCorrCo(py)2, which indicated the importance of the pyrenyl substituent in giving strong π–π interactions between corrole and the graphene support, so leading to a faster electron transfer between the corrole and the GC electrode.
The influence of the meso aryl substituents on the HER electrocatalytic efficiency of Co corrole derivatives has also been investigated.69 Seven 5,15-bis (3-nitrophenyl)-corroles bearing different halogen-substituted phenyl rings at the 10-position have been prepared and tested for the HER in acidic conditions (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  Molecular structures of trans-A2B Co corroles employed as HER catalysts.69 
In these conditions, the HER was observed for both the first and the third reduction waves, centered on formal CoIII/CoII and CoII/CoI processes, while the second reduction is in charge of the peripheral nitro groups. The catalytic current intensity of these processes depends on the acid concentration, with an increase at the third reduction with an increase in the acid concentration, and on the nature of the 10-phenyl substituent. The electron-withdrawing character increased the catalytic efficiency, with the 10-pentafluorophenyl corrole derivative being the most efficient.
Following this approach, the effects of the expansion of the meso-aryl substituents by the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction on the HER and ORR electrocatalytic activity of Co corroles were reported (Fig. 32).70,71 In the first article,70 the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction was carried out on corroles bearing the 4-Br substituent selectively at one (10-), two (5,15-) or all the meso positions, with the aim to detail the influence of both the substituent addition and the relative position on the corrole ring. The complexes were mixed with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and then deposited onto GC electrodes. The electrocatalytic activity was studied in a 0.5 M H2SO4 solution for HER and 0.1 M NaOH solution for ORR. The results obtained showed that the meso-substituent expansion is convenient for increasing the catalyst efficiency and that the expansion at the 10-position is the most effective. Regarding the electronic characteristics of the substituents, in this case, the electron withdrawing feature is the most effective for HER. The complexes were also tested in the catalysis of the ORR in both acidic and basic solutions; a positive shift of the potentials and an increase in the electrocatalytic activity with respect to the reference TPCorrCoPPh3 were observed.
 Fig. 32  Molecular structures of meso-expanded Co corroles exploited as HER and ORR electrocatalysts.70 
The same approach was recently exploited in the ring expansion at the 3-Br phenyl-substituted Co corrole complexes (Fig. 33).71 The complexes were tested under the same conditions as the corresponding para-isomers and in this case, the effect of the aryl substituents was slightly different; also the 4-nitrophenyl was again the most efficient at promoting an increase in the HER catalytic efficiency. The effect of the substituent expansion was stronger in this case than previously observed for the corresponding para-isomers.
 Fig. 33  Molecular structures of Co corroles.71 
Using similar experimental conditions, the influences of the electronic characteristics of the meso aryl substituents were investigated.72 In this case, the Co complex of trans-A2B corroles having electron-withdrawing or electron-releasing substituents at the 10-position, together with the reference phenyl group, were prepared and tested as electrocatalysts for both the HER and ORR (Fig. 34). It was found for both reactions that the best performances were obtained for the complex having the electron-releasing group at the 10-position, opening the way for a novel push–pull strategy for the development of superior electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 34  Molecular structures of 10-substituted Co corroles studied as HER and ORR catalysts.72 
The homogeneous HER was attempted using TECorrCo(py) in acetonitrile/water (2:3) solution.73 The electron-withdrawing characteristics of the meso ethoxycarbonyl groups and the improved solubility in the water mixture were the reasons for the corrole choice.
The CV of the complex was in agreement with other Co corrole behaviors, with the second reduction at −1.39 V vs. Ag/AgNO3 attributed to the formal CoII/CoI process. The electrocatalytic activity was tested in DMF, using acetic acid as the proton source. A catalytic current was observed at −1.39 V, confirming that CorrCoI is the catalytic active species. The measurements were then carried out in aqueous phosphate buffer (pH = 7), which demonstrated that TECorrCo(py) is also catalytically active for the HER in these conditions. The current was dependent on the pH of the buffer and TECorrCo(py) was stable under electrolysis and was recovered intact at the end of the process.
The photocatalytic production of H2 was also investigated using TECorrCo(py) as the photocatalyst in a three-component system, which included [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as the photosensitizer and ascorbic acid as the electron donor. The visible-light irradiation of a buffer solution at pH = 4.5 demonstrated the evolution of H2, with the amount depending on the concentration of the catalytic system. The results obtained showed moderate photocatalytic activity of TECorrCo(py).
The photocatalytic production of H2 was also investigated using Co and Fe derivatives of the corroles reported in Fig. 35, dispersed on MWCNTs as catalysts.74
 Fig. 35  Molecular structures of the A3 corroles dispersed on MWCNTs.74 
In this work, terphenyl was exploited as a photosensitizer and triethylamine as a sacrificial electron donor. The photocatalytic production of hydrogen was first carried out by dissolving corrole, terphenyl and triethylamine in dioxane under UV irradiation. The H2 evolution was observed upon water addition. The mechanism of the reaction followed different steps, as described below:  TP* + Et3N → TP˙− + Et3N˙+[MI(Cor)]2− + Et3NH+ → H[MII(Cor)]− + Et3NH[MII(Cor)]− + Et3NH+ → [MI(Cor)] +H2 + Et3NEt3N˙+ + Et3N → Et3NH+ + Et2NCHCH3Et2NCHCH3 + [MIII(Cor)] → Et2N+ + CHCH3 + [MII(Cor)]−TP˙− + [MIII(Cor)] → TP + [MII(Cor)]−TP˙− + [MII(Cor)]− → TP + [MI(Cor)]2−
Co corroles were more efficient for the HER than the corresponding Fe analogs and, among corroles, the TNPCorr gave the best performance. In these conditions, the Co corrole was not stable and decomposed at the end of the reaction, with the authors proposing the hydrogenation of the macrocycle. Although the use of TP, which has a high reduction potential, reduced the catalytic efficiency difference of the various complexes, the reaction carried out without the photosensitizer showed that the electron withdrawing character of the peripheral aryl groups increased the catalytic properties of the complex.
With this result, the TNPCorrCo was dispersed onto MWCNT and the obtained hybrid photocatalyst was tested for H2 production in the same conditions. Significantly higher amount of H2 were obtained with the hybrid material, and it is important to note that MWCNT did not produced H2 without TNPCorrCo. The system was even more efficient in formate buffer at pH = 3, due to the higher proton concentration in this solution. The results obtained were comparable with those obtained in literature by electrocatalysis. The observed improvements were attributed to the electron transfer ability of MWCNT, which accelerated the formation of the CorrCo catalytic active species.
The photoelectrocatalysis was also attempted, by application of a difference of potential under irradiation, obtaining an increase of H2 production. Probably the light irradiation accelerates the electrons flow, with also in this case a faster formation of the reduced CorrCoI active species. The catalyst however was decomposed after 30 min under photoelectrocatalysis.
TNPCorrCoPPh3 has been more recently investigated for electrocatalytic HER.75 The electrocatalytic activity was first studied in DMF using acetic acid as a proton source and comparing the performances with those of the unsubstituted TPCorrCoPPh3. The nitro substituted complex showed superior catalytic characteristics, confirming also in this case the influence of the peripheral electron-withdrawing substituents. The complex was also able to catalyze HER in aqueous neutral phosphate buffer solution and it was stable under electrolysis for 3 days.
The influence of peripheral substituents on the electrocatalytic activity of cobalt corrole has been investigated on four complexes (Fig. 36).76
 Fig. 36  Molecular structures of functionalized TPFCorrCoPPh3 complexes.76 
In this case, the reaction of ethanolamine with TPFCorrCo and 10-PhDPFCorrCo led to the substitution of the para-fluorine atoms with ethanolamine groups.
The electrocatalytic activities of these complexes for the HER were first investigated in acetonitrile solution in the presence of acetic acid as the proton source. In these conditions, the second reduction of the complexes became irreversible, indicating that the CoI corrole species is catalytically active. The wave shifted positively, indicating the formation of the CoIII–H complex. Increasing the acetic acid concentration did not induce a significant increase in the catalytic current but led to the appearance of an additional catalytic wave as the result of the CoIII–H/CoII–H process and this reduced species interacted with protons to furnish H2. A multi-way catalytic cycle was then proposed (Fig. 37). Electrolysis at controlled potential demonstrated that ethanolamine-substituted complexes showed the highest TOF, probably because the ethanolamine groups can induce a larger electron density on the corrole nucleus, facilitating hydrogen evolution. A similar pathway was observed using TFA as the proton source for TPFCorrCo and 10-PhDPFCorrCo but in the case of triethanolamine-substituted corroles, the increase in the TFA concentration led to the increase of the second reduction wave, with the direct CoIII–H involvement for the H2 production.
 Fig. 37  Catalytic cycle for hydrogen production by Co corroles.76 
The HER in aqueous medium was investigated, dissolving the catalysts in acetonitrile/water solution (2:3 v/v). The complexes were able to catalyze the HER in water and the hydrogen evolution increased with lowering the pH. A complex interplay of the steps reported in Fig. 40 contributed to the reaction.
Following the same approach, four different PPh3 Co complexes of corroles (Fig. 38) have recently been investigated for the HER.77
 Fig. 38  Molecular structures of functionalized CorrCo.77 
The electrocatalytic activities of these complexes were first tested in DMF using acids of different strengths as proton sources: acetic acid, TFA and pTsOH. Different behaviors were observed depending on the acid used, which indicated different pathways for the HER mechanism. In all cases, the acid addition changed the second reduction wave, indicating that the catalytic active species is the CoI complex. With acetic acid, the reduced corrole was protonated to give the CoIII–H species, with the formation confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy. This species needs further reduction to produce H2, as indicated by the presence of the second reduction wave in the CV, with an additional process at more negative potential; the mechanism reported in Fig. 39 has been proposed, according to the CV evidence.
 Fig. 39  Multi-way catalytic cycle for the HER catalysed by CorrCo.77 
Using TFA, the second reduction wave indicated an irreversible process and the variation observed on increasing the acid concentration indicated the coexistence of the two catalytic processes reported in Fig. 39. Furthermore, two additional waves attributable to the peripheral pyridine and amide groups were observed for peripherally-functionalized corroles, both groups cooperating to give the HER. With pTsOH, the behavior was similar to that of TFA.
The electrocatalytic activities of these complexes were then tested in an aqueous environment, represented by a 2:3 mixture of acetonitrile/water. While high TOFs were observed for all the complexes, the best performance was obtained for pAldDPFCorrCo. All the complexes were stable in the electrolytic conditions, being recovered intact after 6 h of electrolysis.
While Co corroles have been the complexes most intensively studied for the HER, recently, attention has also been addressed to copper derivatives. The first example exploited copper complexes of 5,15-bis (3-nitrophenyl)corroles bearing aryl groups at the 10-position with a different number of fluorine atoms, similar to those studied as Co complexes (Fig. 31).78 The HER was studied in benzonitrile, using TFA as the proton source; the stability of copper corroles in these conditions was confirmed by checking the invariance of the UV-vis spectra over 4 hours. The addition of TFA induced a catalytic wave at a potential close to the first reduction of the complexes, with the current increasing with the increase in the acid concentration. The best performances were obtained with the corrole having the pentafluorophenyl substituent at the 10-position. A further study was carried out later by the same group, investigating copper complexes of trans-A2B corroles reported in Fig. 40.79
 Fig. 40  Molecular structures of 10-functionalized CorrCu.79 
The HER was also studied in benzonitrile using TFA as the proton source; it was observed that while the first reduction showed a slight increase in the catalytic current, a significant catalytic wave was observed beyond the second reduction, with the 10-pentafluorophenyl-substituted corrole complex as the most active catalyst.
More recently, Gross et al. reported the HER behavior of TPFCorrCu complexes β-substituted with trifluoromethyl groups (Fig. 41).80
 Fig. 41  β-CF3-functionalized CorrCu as HER catalysts.80 
The performances of these complexes as electrocatalysts for the HER were studied in acetonitrile using TFA as the proton source. The second reduction wave changed significantly by the addition of TFA, while the first reduction process remained almost unchanged. The β-trisubstituted corrole was better than the β-four substituted, showing higher TOF and lower onset potential. Both of them performed much better than the unsubstituted TPFCorrCu. The complexes were stable in the acidic conditions for 24 hours in the dark, confirming their electrocatalytic activity for the HER in controlled potential electrolysis experiments. Attempts to characterize the nature of the product of the second reduction, as the (CorrCu)2−, were unsuccessful, not allowing the confirmation of the hypothesis of a catalytic mechanism similar to that of Co complexes.
However, it is interesting to note that the same CV behavior observed for Co and Cu complexes led Kadish et al. to propose similar redox processes for these complexes, with a non-innocent character also present for Co corrole derivatives.81 This is further support for a similar HER catalytic mechanism for these derivatives.
Even free-base corroles have been proposed as electrocatalysts for the HER. It has been reported65 that the free-base corroles were investigated as electrocatalysts for the HER.
The same electrochemical conditions for the HER were exploited and the free-base corroles were demonstrated to catalyze hydrogen evolution, and a complex catalytic mechanism was proposed, according to the results obtained (Fig. 42). Two different pathways were proposed for ethanolamine-substituted corroles with respect to the other species and the differences were justified by the presence or not of the protonation of corrole free-bases in the presence of TFA.
 Fig. 42  The proposed catalytic cycle for the HER catalysed by free-base corroles.65 
The free-base corroles were not stable under the electrolysis conditions and were decomposed during catalysis.
A detailed study of the electrocatalytic activity of TPFCorrH3 has been recently reported.82 The HER was studied in acetonitrile, using p-TsOH and benzoic acid as the proton sources. Without acid, TPFCorrH3 showed two reduction waves, corresponding to the formation of the mono and dianion corrole. The addition of p-TsOH induced a cathodic shift in the reduction potentials, with a catalytic wave increasing with the increase in the acid concentration at the second reduction potential. No catalytic activity was observed when benzoic acid was added, indicating that the acid strength is fundamental for the HER. DFT calculations, spectroscopic and spectroelectrochemical experiments allowed the formulation of the following mechanistic pathway:CorrH3 + HA → CorrH4+ + A−CorrH4+ + e− → CorrH4CorrH4 + e− → CorrH4−CorrH4− → CorrH2− + H2CorrH2− + HA → CorrH3 + A−,with the process starting with the formation of the protonated corrole, which can then be reduced, leading to H2 evolution.
First-row transition metal complexes of corrole have been demonstrated to be the most efficient alternatives to Pt catalysts for these important clean energy conversion processes, i.e., the ORR, OER, and HER. The versatility of the corroles in stabilizing both high oxidation states and reactive low oxidation states for coordinated metals makes them suitable for catalyzing the activation of small molecules, with Fe and Co complexes usually being the most active. Furthermore, the possibility of tuning the properties of corrole catalysts by synthetic modifications can allow the optimization of their characteristics, although a rational method for comparing the different results reported in the literature should be defined, to provide guidance in the target modifications and to avoid the “try and see” approach, which will result in a delay in the practical applications of these catalysts.
2.6 Miscellaneous reactions
Corrole complexes have also been exploited as catalysts in other reactions. TPFCorrCo(PPh3) has been tested as a catalyst for the hydration of terminal alkynes.83
Phenylacetylene was first used as model in this reaction carried out in methanol/H2SO4 medium, affording acetophenone as the reaction product. A complete conversion was obtained with the catalyst in a 0.3% molar ratio but optimization of the reaction conditions allowed 90% conversion with the TPFCorrCo(PPh3) concentration reduced by one order of magnitude. The increase in the H2SO4 concentration did not induce the decomposition of the catalyst. The scope of the reaction was quite good, working with both alkyl and aryl terminal alkynes, although electron-donating substituents afforded higher yields. The scale-up of the reaction to 10 g showed an appreciable 90% yield; recycling the catalyst at the end of the reaction afforded an 87% yield, indicating the stability of TPFCorrCo(PPh3) under the reaction conditions.
One-electron reduced Co corrole anions have been exploited as catalysts for the formation of heterocycles by the ring closure C–H amination reaction (Fig. 43).84
 Fig. 43  The formation of heterocycles catalysed by Co–corrole anions.84 
Considering the reaction mechanism for the reaction catalysed by analogous Co-porphyrin complexes (Fig. 44), it was surmised that the use of the reduced Co–corrole, with an increased charge density of the metal center, could help the rate-determining step of the reaction, which is the N2 evolution, with consequent oxidation of the Co.
 Fig. 44  The catalytic cycle of heterocycle formation catalysed by porphyrin Co complexes.84 
Three different corrole complexes were tested (Fig. 45) to demonstrate the influence of the electronic character of the peripheral substituents on the catalytic activity. CV characterization of the complexes allowed the choice of the right chemical reductant, able to form the first reduction species under the catalytic reaction conditions, which was cobaltocene for TPCorrCo and Br2TPCorrCo and decamethylcobaltocene for TMesCorrCo.
 Fig. 45  Molecular structures of Co corrole catalysts tested for heterocycle formation.84 
The catalytic activity of these corroles was tested in the reaction pathway previously reported; for all complexes in toluene, the reagent was completely converted and the highest yield of pyrrolidine was reached with TPCorrCo, with no linear product being obtained. In the absence of both reductant and Boc2O, the reaction did not take place, indicating that the presence of the reduced cobalt corrole is necessary for reaction success. Although the reaction was much faster than that observed with analogous porphyrins, confirming the initial hypothesis, it should be noted that 2 hours were necessary for the reaction to start, which was attributed to the low solubility of the anionic reduced corrole species in toluene. Attempts to use more polar solvents for the reaction were however not successful. It should be noted that the best yield was obtained with TPCorrCo, in contrast to the expected influence of peripheral substituents; however, both steric effects and the different solubility of the catalytic species in toluene can obscure the electronic effects on the reaction.
TpCPCorrFeCl has been exploited to build up a metal–organic framework (MOF) with the Zr6 cluster and was tested for the catalysis of hetero Diels–Alder reactions between benzaldehydes and dienes (Fig. 46).85
 Fig. 46  Hetero Diels–Alder reactions between benzaldehydes and dienes.85 
It was necessary to treat the Zr-MOF-TpCPCorrFeCl with AgBF4 to obtain (Zr-MOF-TpCPCorrFe)BF4, the active catalytic species. Dihydropyran was obtained with an almost quantitative 96% yield, significantly higher than that obtained with the analogous homogeneous iron corrole complex. The scope of the reaction was proved by the reaction of different substituted benzaldehydes, obtaining in all cases the corresponding dihydropyran in good yields, always higher than those of the homogeneous catalysts. Both electronic and steric factors influenced the reaction: while electron-donating benzaldehyde substituents favored high yields, a significant reduction was observed in the case of the sterically demanding tert-butyl substituent.
(Zr-MOF-TpCPCorrFe)BF4 was stable under the reaction conditions and it was recovered after the reaction and reused for three cycles without a significant reduction of the yield.
Penta-coordinated phosphorus corroles have been exploited as Lewis acids to catalyze different reactions.86 The complexes have been synthesized following the pathway reported in Fig. 47.
 Fig. 47  Synthetic routes to P corroles.86 
These species were exploited to catalyze different reactions, such as ketone hydrosilylation and deoxygenation using HSiEt3 as a terminal reductant. The excellent results obtained led to the testing of more challenging reactions, such as ring closure and the deoxygenation of sugars. In all these reactions, the cationic P corrole was stable and it was recovered intact at the end of the reaction.
CF3-Substituted TPFCorrPF2 were investigated as photocatalysts for the bromination of phenol with HBr.87 The presence of CF3 substituents improves the oxidizing power of the related complex, with the hypothesis that the increase of this oxidizing power improves the efficiency of the photocatalyst. Following this hypothesis, the performances of the P corroles reported in Fig. 48 were compared with those of the gallium complex because this corrole has the greatest oxidizing power in its photoexcited state. The excitation was set at 400 or 450 nm but in both cases, the (CF3)5TPFCorrPF2 was the most efficient, with the highest TON, even at 450 nm where Ga corrole absorbs more.
 Fig. 48  Molecular structures of CF3-substituted P corroles.87 
The same superior activity was observed in the case of the bromination of toluene and benzene, which produced benzyl bromide and bromobenzene. These results indicated the beneficial effects of CF3 substitution for the photocatalytic efficiency of these P corroles.
This effect was confirmed in the case of analogous CF3-substituted TPFCorr complexes of Al and Ga (Fig. 49).88
 Fig. 49  Molecular structures of Al and Ga corrole photocatalysts.88 
Also, in this case, the reaction investigated was the bromination of phenol and toluene using HBr as the bromine source, formed after the photooxidation catalysed by corrole complexes. Using a 400 nm LED for the photosensitization, a mixture of ortho- and para-bromophenol was obtained. The catalysts were stable under the reaction conditions and the best results were obtained with the (CF3)3TPFCorrGa, almost in agreement with the order of the value of the first oxidation potential, although (CF3)4TPFCorrGa was less efficient; this variation was attributed to the different absorbance of the two complexes at 400 nm.
The complexes were also tested under the same reaction conditions for the bromination of toluene, to give benzylbromide with again (CF3)3TPFCorrGa as the best catalyst. Benzaldehyde was obtained as a by-product of the reaction, although with lower TON. The possibility to use the Q band absorption for the photosensitization of these reactions was also investigated, using a LED at 600 nm and the best catalyst (CF3)3TPFCorrGa. In this case, a reduced catalytic efficiency was observed, with a significant reduction of TON, but no benzaldehyde was detected in these conditions.
3. Solar cells
Although the remarkable photophysical properties of corroles make them obvious candidates for application in organic solar cells, only sparse examples of corrole-based devices have been reported in the literature.
The first examples of such applications were reported for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and the low efficiency obtained89,90 probably discouraged further studies in this direction. The reason for these low efficiencies has been attributed to the scarce yield of the electron injection process from corrole to TiO2.85
To investigate the possibility of circumventing this drawback by synthetic modifications, Ga and P corrole complexes were exploited as chromophores in DSSCs.91 The corrole was functionalized with a peripheral carboxyl group to graft the complex onto the TiO2 surface; Ga and P have been chosen as coordinated metals because they show high fluorescence quantum yields but they have different oxidation potentials. The P complex was fully chlorinated in the β-position to obtain a further shift in the oxidation potential (Fig. 50).
 Fig. 50  Molecular structures of Ga and P corrole photosensitizers.91 
Although the cell efficiencies were again low, the P complex had the highest value (1.9%), followed by Ga and then by the fully chlorinated P corrole, which showed a very low efficiency (0.02%). The results obtained were explicated in terms of electrochemical and spectroscopic data. While the Ga derivative has an oxidation potential too low to be reduced by the redox mediator, the fully chlorinated P complex, on the other hand, has an oxidation potential too high to allow the electron injection into the TiO2 conduction band. This hypothesis was supported by the variation of the electrolyte solution, which induced changes in the potential of the TiO2 conduction band. By increasing Li+ concentration and lowering the concentration of tert-butylpyridine, the conduction band assumes the potentials are more positive, making the electron injection more favored from the Cl8 P corrole and in fact, the efficiency of the DSSC slightly increased.
Au complexes of corroles functionalized with carboxyl groups on the peripheral phenyl substituents (Fig. 51) have been tested as photosensitizers in DSSC.92
 Fig. 51  Molecular structures of TpCPCorrAu and TmCPCorrAu tested as photosensitizers in DSSC.92 
The corresponding corrole free-bases were also tested but their efficiencies were very low, below 1%. TmCPCorrAu gave the best efficiency (3.5%), much higher than that of TpCPCorrAu.
CV characterization of these corroles was carried out to elucidate the results obtained, giving insights into the energy levels for the corroles involved in these DSSCs. The oxidation potentials of all the corroles indicated that the redox mediator (I−/I3−) could reduce the oxidized corroles, and the singlet excited states for both Au and free-base corroles were also over the energy of the conduction band of TiO2, while the excited triplet state of the Au corrole was slightly below the conduction band of TiO2. Although free-base corroles have the characteristics necessary to act as photosensitizers, the low efficiencies observed are justified by low kinetics in the electron injection into the conduction band of TiO2, which cannot allow it to compete with the excitation decay, thus dropping the DSSC efficiency. The higher efficiency showed by TmCPCorrAu was attributed to a more efficient electron injection mechanism, which can be allowed by the long-lived excited triplet state, although there was the problem of the uphill energy process. On the other hand, the higher efficiency of TmCPCorrAu than the corresponding para-isomer can be reasonably attributed to both a geometric factor, which favors the interaction with the TiO2 surface, and to the energy consideration because the carboxyl groups in the meta-positions have a greater electron-withdrawing character than those in the para-positions, due to the absence of conjugation with phenyl rings. This also opens the way to the possible optimization of the photosensitizer properties of Au corroles.
To further elucidate the results obtained, a detailed investigation of the photosensitizer behavior of carboxyl-substituted Au corrole complexes was conducted, comparing them with the corresponding ReO and OsN derivatives.93 XPS characterization confirmed the previously proposed hypothesis that TmCPCorrAu has a stronger interaction with TiO2 than the corresponding para-isomer, although in this case, the difference in efficiencies reported was smaller.
However, TmCPCorrAu showed much greater power conversion efficiency (PCE) than the corresponding ReO and OsN complexes. Since the optical and electrochemical characterization clearly indicated that the electron injection is possible from the excited singlet state for all these complexes, the higher PCE for TmCPCorrAu should be justified. Transient Absorption Spectroscopy indicated that the intersystem crossing for the Au corrole was much slower than that of the other complexes. As a consequence, in the case of the Au corrole the electron injection from the excited singlet state can more efficiently compete with the intersystem crossing process, thus justifying the better performances of TmCPCorrAu as photosensitizers.
Au corroles have been also exploited in bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells (BHJSC). In these devices, excitons are generated by photoexcitation and then they move to the donor–acceptor interphase, where they dissociate to generate the photocurrent. The process that limits the efficiency of these devices is the short lifetimes and diffusion path of the excitons, which rapidly decay in both radiative and non-radiative pathways before dissociation. For this reason, the possibility of using complexes having long-lived triplet exciton states could avoid these problems, leading to increased cell efficiencies.
Au corroles present these features and have been exploited as electron donors in bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells with C70 as the electron acceptor.94 The scheme of the cells is reported in Fig. 52.
 Fig. 52  Structures of the solar cells developed by (a) vacuum deposition, (b) the solution process. Reproduced from ref. 94, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2014. 
Three different Au corroles have been investigated (Fig. 53).
 Fig. 53  Molecular structures of Au corroles.94 
The structure of the cell was obtained by the vacuum deposition of the Au corrole. TPCorrAu and TCF3PCorrAu showed the best efficiency, in the order of 3.3 and 3.9%, the highest values for this kind of compound.
Because these complexes also present good solubility, the development of solution-processed devices (Fig. 52b) using TCF3PCorrAu as the dopant in the PTB7 and PC71BM electron donor and electron acceptor polymeric species has been reported. In this device, the Au corrole can act as both the electron donor and sensitizer. The efficiency reached 6%, the best value reported for similar devices, confirming the promising characteristics of Au corroles.
A BODIPY-CorrGa dyad has also been tested as an electron donor in a small molecule BHJSC, together with PC71BM as the electron acceptor (Fig. 54).95
 Fig. 54  The structure of the BODIPY-CorrGa-based BHJSC. Reproduced from ref. 95, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
The structure of the corrole derivative is reported in Fig. 55.
 Fig. 55  The molecular structure of the BODIPY-CorrGa dyad.95 
The integration of corrole and BODIPY dyes allows for better coverage of the visible spectrum with large molar extinction coefficients. The electrochemical characterization indicated that the HOMO and LUMO energy levels match well as electron donors with those of PC71BM as the electron acceptor. A BHJSC having the structure reported in Fig. 54 and prepared by casting corrole and PC71BM showed a PCE of 2.54%. This initial PCE value was significantly increased to 6.60% by the solvent vapor annealing of the layer. It was demonstrated by a detailed characterization that this treatment from one side improves the morphology of the film and from the other reduces the charge recombination, so improving both fundamental mechanisms for the cell efficiency, i.e., the exciton generation and the consequent dissociation in free charge carriers.
Recently, a TtBuPCorrCu was exploited as the HTM in perovskite solar cells.96 In these devices the HTM has the important function of collecting holes from the perovskite and injecting them into the cathode, reducing the undesired exciton recombination at the interfaces. The most used HTM is spiro-OMeTAD, which presents some drawbacks, such as high cost and low charge mobility, making it necessary to have a doping process that is difficult to control and a source of the irreproducible performance of the cell and its overall instability and humidity sensitivity. Another important problem with spiro-OMeTAD is its thermal instability, with significant deterioration over 60 °C. For these reasons, the search for a better HTM is one of the problems to be solved for the potential introduction of perovskite solar cells in the market.
TtBuPCorrCu was applied as the HTM in a perovskite cell having the structure reported in Fig. 56, and the performances were compared with those of similar cells using Li-doped TtBuPCorrCu or spiro-OMeTAD.
 Fig. 56  The structure of the perovskite cell using TtBuPCorrCu as the HTM. Adapted from ref. 96, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2020. 
The PCE of the TtBuPCorrCu and Li-doped TtBuPCorrCu-based cells were 13.11% and 16.49%, comparable with the 19.57% obtained with spiro-OMeTAD. However, Cu corrole showed an impressive improvement in the thermal stability of the cell because the cells kept at 85 °C in ambient air for 1000 hours maintained a PCE of 42.42% and 60.39% of the initial value in the case of doped and undoped corrole, while that of spyro-OMeTAD dropped to the 6.64% of the starting value. The possibility to further improve the Cu corrole properties as HTM by rational peripheral functionalization can open the way for the exploitation of these macrocycles as optimized HTM for improved perovskite solar cells.
4. An introduction to chemical sensors and sensor arrays
Chemical sensors are devices that convert the information about the chemical state, represented by the concentration of a specific compound or the composition of a complex sample, into an analytically useful signal.97 Here, “analytically useful signal” means any signal for which an adequate and standardized metrology exists.
At the present stage of technical progress, electronics is the technology where signals can not only be measured but also processed, stored, transmitted, used to activate automatic processes, and presented to humans.98
The connection with electronics accommodates the design of sensors as devices physically connected to electronic circuits where signals (either analog or digital) carry information about the analytes to which the sensors are sensitive. The parallel advances in microelectronics and sensors are at the basis of the wide pervasiveness of electronics systems in all aspects of technology.
The logical structure of sensors and the chain of transformations leading from the concentration of an analyte to the corresponding electric signal are shown in Fig. 57. In this scheme, the sensor itself is conceptually made by two main elements: the sensitive material and the transducer.
 Fig. 57  (A) A conceptual scheme of chemical sensors. Analytes interact with the sensitive material, changing some of its physical properties (e.g. the mass: Δm, the conductivity: Δσ, the surface potential: ΔΦ; or the absorbance spectrum (ΔAλ). The transducer is a physical sensor sensitive to one of the above-mentioned physical quantities, and, from the point of view of electronics, it is a circuit element. Thus, the interaction with analytes results in a change of resistance (ΔR), or capacitance (ΔC), or transconductance (Δgm) or the frequency of a resonator (Δf). In the interface circuit, the transducer response is converted into a measurable electric signal in the domains of time and frequency (Δv(t, f)). An example of the transforms chain is shown in panel B. A material made of corrole receptor molecules is applied to coat the surface of a mass transducer. The transducer is an electromechanical resonator that forces the signal of an oscillator circuit to its own resonance frequency. A frequency meter is then applied to measure, at a given temporal rate, the circuit output. A time-variable signal manifests the adsorption of molecules onto the film of corroles. 
The sensitive material is where the chemical interaction with the analyte takes place. The interaction itself is not observable, but the interaction changes one of the more measurable physical quantities of the sensitive material. The transducer is a physical sensor aimed at measuring one of these quantities.
The targets of chemical sensors are countless. Furthermore, subtle differences in the chemical structures of analytes may result in large variations in functionalities. The complexity of the problem prompted the development of sensitive materials of different natures, ranging from inorganic metal oxides to polymers and molecular materials.
The chemistry of porphyrinoids is one of the most versatile platforms for the design of sensitive materials.12 Several properties of these molecules can be used to manifest the interactions with host molecules: for example, they are natural chromophores, are characterized by large π-aromatic systems and they are versatile chelating frameworks that can reversibly bind with environmental molecules; target analytes can also mediate both photophysical and/or redox processes.
Porphyrins have been the most frequently used porphyrinoids for sensor development. However, corroles, even though less utilized so far, are attracting significant interest because, besides sharing most of the properties of porphyrins, they are characterized by enhanced features that make them appealing for chemical sensors development.
The characteristics of corroles make them eligible to be used with several transducers, giving rise to several different kinds of chemical sensors for analytes dispersed in air and in solution.
In general, the consequence of interactions with analytes affects multiple physical quantities; therefore, the same corroles can be used with more transducers. This versatility is particularly important for chemical sensor arrays made by ensembles of sensors of different properties.
The topic of porphyrinoids-based sensors has been recently reviewed with privileged attention to porphyrins.12 In this review, the focus is on the applications of corroles as chemical sensors. The discussion is organized from the point of view of the transducers and it is introduced by an illustration of the basic features of chemical sensors and sensor arrays.
The field of sensors is extremely large, involving devices dedicated to the measurement of a large number of physical, chemical, and biological quantities.99 In spite of such a vast number of devices and purposes, the definition of chemical sensors given above can be extended to any kind of sensor. In particular, all sensors, disregarding the nature of the measured quantity, are electronic devices. Thus, the properties of sensors can be represented by a set of universal quantities that standardize the communication of the sensor performance and properties, and enable comparison among different devices.100
An important property of sensors is the capability to detect a target analyte when this is presented in a mixture with other compounds. This property is called selectivity and in a selective sensor, the sensitivity to the target compound prevails over all the others.
The large number and variety of chemical compounds make it difficult to design selective sensors. More practically, sensors can be designed with a dominant sensitivity to particular molecular motifs that can be found in different molecules.
Corroles are a typical case of a receptor capable of multiple interactions. Molecular design can emphasize one interaction over the others but the selectivity may remain limited. Non-selective sensors produce ambiguous signals, and samples made by different mixtures of compounds can result in very similar signals. So, the use of non-selective sensors is restricted only to those cases where the chemical complexity is limited and the compounds are known.
However, a lack of selectivity is typical of the olfactory neurons found in olfaction, which is the gas analyzer of animals.101
The noteworthy feature of such a system is that with a limited number of receptors, a large number of different olfactory stimuli (what we called odors) can be detected. It has been estimated that humans can detect more than trillions of different stimuli.102 Such a performance is achieved by the combinatorial selectivity of the receptors.103 In practice, each receptor is sensitive to more molecules and the same molecule may be sensed by many receptors.
The lack of selectivity of chemical sensors and olfactory receptors establishes a link between these very different kinds of “devices”, which gives rise to artificial olfaction systems.104 The term electronic nose has been reserved for systems based on arrays of sensors aimed at analyzing gaseous samples. However, the above description of olfaction is also valid for aquatic animals such as fish and amphibians. The application of the principle of the electronic nose to sensors for compounds in solution is a later development of artificial olfaction systems and arrays of sensors for solutions are usually called electronic tongues.105
Electronic noses and tongues are made by two major components: the sensor array and the data analysis.106 The sensor array reproduces the olfactory receptors neurons and it is formed by an ensemble of chemical sensors that are unselective but characterized by different sensitivity profiles. Data analysis is the analog of olfaction processing that starts in the olfactory bulb and ends in the brain where stimuli are identified and memorized. Sensor arrays produce multivariate data that need to be treated with proper multivariate data analysis techniques.107
The algorithms to treat these data are studied by chemometrics, which is diffused beyond analytical chemistry. Algorithms such as the principal component analysis (PCA) for the representation of multidimensional data are popular even to a general audience.108
The design of efficient sensor arrays requires the control of the sensitivity profile of individual sensor elements in order to emphasize the detection of a relevant category of compounds.
From this point of view, the wide synthetic flexibility of corroles provides a unique opportunity for the development of sensor arrays.
4.1 Optical sensors
In optical sensors, the interaction with the analyte is manifested by the changes in the optical properties of a sensitive material. The term optical properties indicate the modality of interaction between the electromagnetic radiation in the visible range and the material. These include both absorption and emission spectra.
Standard optical sensor arrangement is based on the illumination of the sensitive material with a light source and in the detection of light transmitted, or reflected or emitted by the material. Transmitted and reflected light are expressions of the absorption properties, while emitted light is generated as secondary emission in photoluminescence phenomena. Although the measurement setup is, in principle, simple, the quality of the analytical signals depends on several factors that require the careful design of the sensor. First of all, the choice of the light source is fundamental to capturing the relevant changes in the sensitive materials. Light sources characterized by a continuous spectrum should be preferred because they do not exclude any wavelength. Examples of continuous sources are the black body radiation emitted by incandescent bodies, such as tungsten bulb lamps. These lamps are typically used in desktop spectrophotometers but are not suitable for portable devices. A widely used alternative is the use of LEDs.109 These are miniaturized semiconductor devices that can emit a large amount of radiating power. However, the spectral intensity of LED light is non-homogeneous. White LED that should cover the whole range of visible light is characterized by a lack of intensity between the blue and green regions of the spectrum. Thus, the use of LEDs requires a careful analysis of the wavelength range of interest by the interaction with the analyte.
The detection of light is usually performed by silicon photodiodes that ensure good responsivity in the visible range. The responsivity of silicon detectors grows almost linearly with the wavelength, then they are more sensitive to red as compared to blue light where the Soret band occurs.110
The growth in the performance of consumer optoelectronics devices prompted the development of low-cost advanced optical equipment such as digital scanners and cameras embedded in ubiquitous devices such as computers, tablets, and smartphones.111 The optical sensitivity of these devices largely fits the requirements necessary to capture the optical changes occurring in sensitive layers. In silicon detectors, the optical spectra are decoded in three values approximating the human eye spectral response (RGB). The algorithm of codification is not unique and alternatives to the use of more efficient color codes have been suggested for analytical purposes.112
Optical sensors require that the receptors are either immobilized on a solid substrate or dissolved in a solution. In both cases, is important to consider that the detector receives the light from an angle of view, thus the geometry of the sensor arrangement has to be optimized in order to collect light as much as possible.
The immobilization in a solid phase requires that the sensitive receptors are absorbed, covalently or ionically, or simply encapsulated into a solid matrix that is permeable to the analyte and transparent to the light.

4.1.1 Oxygen sensors. 
5,15-Bis(pentafluorophenyl)-10-(4-methylphenyl)-corrole has been investigated as oxygen sensor.113 This corrole undergoes photobleaching under vacuum, while in the presence of molecular oxygen a significant increase of fluorescence emission is observed. This result suggests that light induces a prompt formation of a strongly emissive species from corrole in the presence of oxygen, which can be exploited for gas detection.
Oxygen sensing properties of corroles are improved when used in combination with quantum dots. An example is provided by self-assembling and micelle encapsulated quantum dots.120 In this example a fluorescent semiconductor CdSe/ZnO core–shell was coated by a self-assembled layer of a Au(III) corrole endowed with a carboxylic acid moiety to promote surface binding. The signal transduction in this system is based on the Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) where energy is transferred from the quantum dot to the corrole via a long-range dipole–dipole interaction. As a result, the emission energy of the quantum dot is decreased. Fig. 62 shows the sensor elements with and without the micelle encapsulation. The quenching of the triplet state by molecular oxygen is related to the molecular oxygen concentration by the Stern–Volmer equation:  where τ0 and τ are the radiative lifetimes of corrole without and in the presence of oxygen, kq is the quenching rate constant and [O2] is the molecular oxygen concentration. The results show that micelle encapsulation is a viable method for exploiting FRET signal transduction (Fig. 58).
 Fig. 58  Corrole-based quantum dots as oxygen sensors. Panel A shows the structures of the two corroles. Panel B shows the self-assembly of corroles onto the surface of a fluorescent nanoparticle and the direction of FRET charge transfer. Functionalized quantum dots are then encapsulated in micelles. Panel C shows the changes in the fluorescence decay. A Stern–Volmer plot of compound 1 calculated with intensity and lifetime decreases. Reproduced from ref. 115, with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. 
This study was aimed at monitoring and imaging tumor microenvironment which are found in hypoxia conditions,114 with a concentration of oxygen below 5 torr.


4.1.2 Anion sensors. 
The detection of anions is of great importance in many contexts. For instance, anions are present in many biological systems; DNA is a polyanion and most of the enzymes and co-factors are anionic. Furthermore, pollutant anions are supposed to be related to the eutrophication of rivers (from the over use of phosphate-containing fertilizers) and carcinogenesis (metabolites of nitrate).116
The fluorescence of 3-substituted TPFCorrGa complexes is found to be modulated by the concentration of various anions, such as spherical halides (F−, Cl−, Br−, and I−), linear anions CN−,117 bulky anions (such as CH3COO− and H2PO4−), and amines such as caffeine and nicotine,118 see example in Fig. 59. These systems were prepared in solid-state membranes using polyacrylamide and polymethylmethacrylate.
 Fig. 59  Scheme of the 3-substituted TPFCorrGa complex (panel A) and spectrofluorimetric titration of F− (panel B), CN− (panel C), and H2PO4− (panel C) in toluene. The insets of panels B, C and D show the response curves of emission intensity at 616 nm to the concentration of the three compounds in units of 10−5 M. Adapted from ref. 117, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014. 
The functionalization of the same Ga complex with coumarin increased the solubility of the compound and enabled the detection of various anions such as cyanide and fluoride at the sub-ppm detection limit.119
The functionalization of Ga-corrole with an 8-hydroxyquinoline moiety resulted in a pH-sensitive fluorescent dye.120 The intensity of the emission, excited at 500 nm, decreased both in acidic and basic conditions, suggesting the formation of two distinct species due to the protonation and deprotonation of the 8-hydroxyquinoline moiety (see Fig. 60). This twofold phenomenon gave rise to the symmetric detection of acidic and basic conditions.
 Fig. 60  (A) 8-Hydroxyquinoline Ga(III)corrole. (B) Proposed mechanisms of photoinduced electron transfer (PET) from 8-hydroxyquinoline and corrole in the three states, consequent to the exposure to acid and basic conditions. (C) Emission spectra as a function of pH in acidic and basic solutions. Reproduced from ref. 120, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
4.1.2.1 Fluorides. 
Silicon is one of the last complexes of corrole to be synthesized. The preparation of Si–corrole is similar to those leading to homologue complexes containing germanium or tin.
In terms of chemical sensitivity, the large energy of the Si–F bond suggests that Si–corrole may work as a fluoride sensor. Fluoride ions are hard Lewis bases, with a small ionic radius and large charge density. These unique properties of fluoride ions make it an interesting target for sensor design for its involvement in different technological, medical, and biological processes. Fluoride is an essential anion in humans where it is known to prevent dental caries.121 On the other hand, fluoride consumption at high levels is associated with conditions such as nephrotoxic changes and urolithiasis.122
The interactions with F− result in changes in both absorbance and fluorescence with high selectivity as compared to other anionic species.123Fig. 61 shows the color comparison of SiIV triarylcorrole in a DMSO/H2O) solution with 10−5 M of different anions. The distinct response to F− is preserved by Si–corrole spotted on paper and immersed in a buffered aqueous solution.
 Fig. 61  (A) Fluoride-sensitive TTCorrSi. (B) Absorbance spectra at various concentrations of F− in DMSO. (C) Colorimetric comparison of the addition of different anions in DMSO. The cuvette labeled as L shows the pristine solution. (D) Colorimetric changes in Si(IV) corrole immobilized in a paper strip at different concentrations of F− in MES buffer at pH = 5.5: (a) = 10−2 M L−1; (b) = 10−3 M L−1; (c) = 10−4 M L−1; (d) = 10−5 M L−1; (e) = 10−6 M L−1; (f) = blank solution. Reproduced from ref. 123, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2018. 
To improve the performance of the optical F− sensor, Si–corrole was embedded in highly lipophilic polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) nanofiber mats.124 The lipophilic layer is expected to improve the sensitivity, favoring the contact between the sensitive dye and the aqueous sample and improving the sensor stability. TTCorrSiOH was blended with PVDF fibers and the fluorescence was measured in a microplate. Emission intensity at either 590 nm or 635 nm showed sensitivity down to 10−5 M of fluoride in MES-buffered water.
Good sensitivity and selectivity to fluoride were also exhibited by free-base trans-A2B-corroles, where A is a nitrophenyl and B is either pentafluorophenyl, 2,6-difluoro, 3,4,5-trifluoro, or a 4-carboxymethylphenyl group.125 The immobilization of TPFCorrH3 in polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and polyacrylamide has been shown to retain the sensitivity to fluoride (see Fig. 62).118
 Fig. 62  (A) A schematic representation of a fluoride-sensitive corrole. (B) The spectrofluorometric titration of F− in toluene. The inset shows the emission intensities at 626 nm and 680 nm with respect to the concentration of F− in units of 10−5 M. (C) Spectrofluorometric titration of F− for the compound in scheme A immobilized in polyacrylamide. The insets show the dynamic response versus time for the emission at 624 and 680 nm. Adapted from ref. 118, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012. 
Another example of anion sensors showed a free-base bis-pyridylcorrole whose fluorescence emission was found to be turned on in the presence of ZnII. Studies in solution showed a 1:1 binding mode of Zn–ClO4 in the pocket of the free-base molecule.126
4.1.2.2 Cyanide. 
Cyanide is known to be one of the most poisonous anions. Its poisoning effect is due to the binding of iron in cytochrome c oxidase that interferes with charge transfer and results in general hypoxia.
The cyanide sensitivity of a derivative of the 3-substituted-TPFCorrGa complex was demonstrated in solution.117 In the presence of cyanide, a decrease in emission intensity and a red shift in the emitted light were observed. The intensity of emission at a fixed wavelength (616 and 618 nm) measured with a desktop spectrofluorometer provided a limit of detection of 0.33 μM.
Selective cyanide detection was demonstrated by TTCorrCo(PPh3) spotted on paper and imaged by a standard smartphone (Fig. 63).127 The corrole dissolved in THF was spotted onto a Whatman 1003-110 filter paper. Results enabled the detection of cyanide below 10−4 M in real samples such as tap water and the saliva of smoker and non-smoker subjects.
 Fig. 63  (A) A schematic representation of the CN−-sensitive TTCorrCo(PPh3). (B) Images taken with a smartphone in ambient light, at a color temperature of 4780 K, of the TTCorrCo(PPh3) in scheme A spotted in filter paper and exposed to a 0.01 M concentration of anions in water. Adapted from ref. 127, with permission from World Scientific, Copyright 2020. 
4.1.2.3 Iodide. 
Among the anions, iodide is an essential element due to its role in several physiological activities such as brain function and cell metabolism, and it is related to thyroid function.128 An electron-deficient Br8TPFCorrCu (B) was found to be a highly selective colorimetric sensor for iodide (see Fig. 64).129 The compound showed a colorimetric response to increasing iodide concentration with a decrease in the absorbance peak at 424 nm, and an increase in absorbance at 441 nm. The feature at 441 nm is also very selective as compared to other anions.
 Fig. 64  (A) The molecular structure of the iodide-sensitive Br8TPFCorrCu. (B) The sensitivity to I− can be explained by considering the one-electron oxidation of iodide by the highly electron-deficient Cu(II) center; the bromine atoms facilitate strong electron-withdrawing effects, resulting in the color change of the Cu–corrole complex. (C) The above-described process is highly selective to iodide as compared to other anions, as shown by the absorbance at 441 nm. Reproduced from ref. 120, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 


4.1.3 Heavy metal ions. 
Covalent organic frameworks are porous crystalline polymers endowed with tunable high porosity and low density, and these properties make them interesting in several applications.130,131 A corrole-based covalent organic framework was found to be sensitive to several metal ions (Fig. 65), in particular, Ga(III), Al(III), Cr(III), and Fe(III).132 The exposure to metal ions enhances the fluorescence properties, except in the case of Cu(II), which instead quenches the emission of light.
 Fig. 65  (A) Schematic representation of mercury-sensitive corrole. (B) Emission fluorescence at increasing concentrations of Hg2+ in toluene upon the addition of methanolic solutions of Hg(II)–acetate. Fluorescence excited at 450 nm. (C) A Stern–Volmer plot showing a limit of detection around 7 μM. (D) Comparison of the fluorescence quenching for various cations at 2 × 10−6 M in toluene. Reproduced from ref. 135, with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012. 
Mercury is one of the most toxic elements in nature. Inorganic mercury toxicity is found at concentrations of the order of 5 μg L−1.133 The sensitivity of corroles to mercury has been studied by two research groups. In the first paper, the sensitive properties of a membrane made of TPFCorrH3 were investigated.134
Corrole was mixed with poly(vinyl chloride) and dioctyl sebacate as plasticizers, and tested with respect to Hg2+. Results showed a linear response with the logarithm of the concentration of Hg2+ in the range 10−7–10−4 M. In comparison to a similar sensor made with TPPH2, the sensor exhibited a wider range of linearity and a shorter response time.
Another paper (see Fig. 68) studied additional donor–acceptor A2B-corrole systems where A was nitrophenyl, and N,N-dimethylaminophenyl, thienyl, naphthyl and tridecyloxyphenyl groups were compared as the B group.135 For the system functionalized with tridecyloxyphenyl, the Stern–Volmer plot is linear down to 10−8 M (see Fig. 66) and the system is highly selective to various cations.
 Fig. 66  (A) A schematic diagram of the solvothermal synthesis of a corrole-based covalent organic framework. (B) Vertical and lateral views of the stacking mode. (C) Absorbance and emission spectra. (D) A comparison of the emission intensity at 635 nm, excited at 425 nm, of 0.1 mg mL−1 solution of the compound in scheme A in THF. Ions were added at 2 × 10−4 M. The intensity was normalized in the blank solution. The emission was enhanced by Ga(III), Al(III), Cr(III), and Fe(III) and quenched by Cu(II). Reproduced from ref. 132, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 

4.2 Electrochemical sensors
Chemical sensors based on electrochemical processes have been in use for more than a century. Electrochemistry was developed for electric power production and storage and soon showed its potential for the detection of compounds. Usually, the realm of application of electrochemistry is the detection of compounds in electrolytic solution. However, several examples of sensors based on solid-state ionic conductors are also available.
Electrochemistry manifests the interaction at the solid–liquid interface between the sensor surface and the compound in solution. Electrochemical sensors are grouped into two main categories, namely, those working in equilibrium and those in non-equilibrium conditions. In the first category, the equilibrium of the electrochemical potentials of species in solid and solution leads to an electrode potential proportional to the concentration of the analyte in solution. These sensors are called potentiometric sensors and they are based on the measurement of the electrode potential with respect to a constant reference potential. In the second approach, the equilibrium is altered by an applied potential that can lead to redox reactions at the electrode surface with the consequent release of electrons in the solid and ions in the solution. This second approach is amperometric and it is based on the measurement of current at known applied potentials. Also, in this case, the application of the potential to the electrode needs a potential reference, which is provided by the reference electrode.
Both approaches require a specific electronic circuit at which sensitive and reference electrodes are connected. In potentiometric measurements, in order to maintain the equilibrium, no current has to flow at the electrode–solution interface. This condition is ensured by high-input impedance operational amplifiers. In amperometric measurements, the potential of the reference electrode does not have to be altered by current, thus the current flows from the sensitive electrode (working electrode) and an auxiliary electrode (counter-electrode). The three-electrode configuration is provided by a circuit, called a potentiostat, that enables the measurement of current at variable voltages in the so-called voltamperometric modality.
The continuous miniaturization of integrated electronic circuits led to the design of a single-chip potentiostat that greatly increased the miniaturization of electrochemical sensors.136

4.2.1 Cations. 
A highly selective sensor for Ag+ was developed by preparing a membrane containing TPFCorrH3 as the electroactive component, 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether (o-NPOE) as a plasticizer and the additive sodium tetraphenylborate (NaTPB).137 The response of the electrode was found to be Nernstian down to 10−5 M and selective toward a large number of mono-, bi- and tri-valent cations.
An original combination of porphyrins and corroles in the same electrode was demonstrated for the detection of K+. The two macrocycles carried the same metal atom but in different oxidation states.138 In particular, TtBuPPCo(II) and TtBuPCorrCo(III) were used to prepare a membrane containing sodium tetrakis-[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate (NaTFPB) valinomycin, 64.3% bis(2-ethylhexyl sebacate) (DOS), and 31.7% poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC).
The couple of porphyrinoids carrying cobalt at different oxidation states is expected to improve the stability of the potential. This is usually obtained by adding a redox reagent to the sensor formulation. In this approach, the redox potential is stabilized thanks to the formation of two independent irreversible redox systems, resulting in mixed potential formation. This concept was tested with respect to potassium ions by adding valinomycin, a well-known potassium-selective ionophore, as the ion-selective element in the sensor membrane composition. A similar method was previously exploited to prepare a fluorescent potassium sensor.139
The same system has been demonstrated on a disposable support such as paper (see Fig. 67); the ion-selective electrode is made by coating the paper with a carbon nanotube layer.140
 Fig. 67  (A) A schematic representation of the construction of a paper-based ion-selective sensor incorporating valinomycin as a potassium chelating element, and a mixture of Co(II) and Co(III) complexes of porphyrin and corrole in multiwalled carbon nanotubes. (B) The potentiometric response of the sensor versus the activity of K+. Electrodes were prepared with a 1:1 porphyrin/corrole ratio and for different cation exchangers (KTFB: potassium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate and NaTFBP: sodium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate) and without multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT). Adapted from ref. 140, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018. 


4.2.2 Anions. 
Corrole-based electrodes are sensitive to pH, such as in the acidic conditions of salicylic acid.141 The sensitivity to salicylic acid is improved by the addition of a cationic lipophilic salt such as tridodecylmethylammonium chloride, reaching a limit of detection of μM at pH below 4.5.
4.2.2.1 Nitrite and nitrate and nitric oxide. 
TTCorrCo has a binding affinity for nitrate and nitrite. In order to exploit this preferential binding, the corrole was embedded in a PVC plasticizer membrane and the binding of nitrite was detected via potentiometric measurement.142 The response is Nernstian with a constant slope above 10−6 M of NO2− in a phosphate buffer solution kept at pH 4.5. The detection is reversible so it can be used for continuous monitoring. Selectivity depends on the formulation of the membrane and thus on the choice of plasticizer and ion exchanger. For instance, tributylphosphate and tridodecyl methyl ammonium chloride (TDMACl) were found to increase the selectivity toward nitrate.

4.3 Resistive sensors
Resistors are the simplest electronic components, and their integration into electronic systems is the easiest. Thus, resistive sensors are available for very different quantities such as temperature, light, magnetic field, and mechanical strain.99
The fabrication of resistive sensors requires the deposition of the sensitive material onto an insulating substrate, in order to segregate the resistivity of sensors from other influences. The measure of resistance needs the presence of a couple of metal electrodes, typically made of gold. Electrodes are either deposited directly onto the substrate or on top of the sensitive material. The first case is more diffused because it allows the application of the sensitive material as the last step of sensor fabrication, avoiding any chemical contamination due to post-processing. The relationship between the conductivity of the sensitive material, which is the quantity affected by the interaction with the analyte, and the measured resistance depends on the geometry of electrodes and the distance between the electrodes. Since organic materials are usually scarcely conductive, electrodes are shaped in the form of an interdigitated pair of electrodes. The number of pairs and the distance between the electrodes can be adjusted in order to set the resistance in the MΩ range. This is obtained with a micrometer gap between the pair of electrodes. The relationship between geometry, conductivity, and resistance can be evaluated by proper geometric transform.143
Chemically sensitive resistors made of metal–oxide semiconductors, such as SnO2, have been the most diffused gas sensors in the last few decades.144 Their compatibility with microelectronic processes makes the integration of gas sensors in microsystems possible.145 In spite of these qualities, these sensors need to be operated at temperatures above 200 °C, thus requiring a non-negligible power. Furthermore, these sensors are scarcely selective and poorly flexible in terms of selectivity design. For these reasons, there has been a strong effort devoted to the design of organically conductive materials such as conductive polymers146 and conductive molecular films like phthalocyanines.147
The conductivity of corrole films is sometimes remarkable, as shown by their use as charge carriers in solar cells.96 However, the full potential of sensors based on conductive corrole films has not yet been exploited.
The affinity of corrole for nitric oxides promoted the investigation of gas sensors for the detection of NO2. This gas is a major pollutant in urban areas and is mainly produced by natural and anthropogenic processes. The long exposure to NO2 is correlated with several diseases of the respiratory tract,148 and it is correlated with the most severe consequences of COVID-19.149 NO2 can be detected with high sensitivity by using chemiluminescent methods.150 The development of low-cost detectors has been mostly based on metal oxide semiconductors that, in spite of good sensitivity, are non-selective and need to be operated at high temperatures. Corroles are good candidates for the detection of NO2 but in order to prepare a sensor, it is necessary to arrange the corrole molecules in a conductive solid-state material.
A self-arranged semiconducting nanostructure was developed with 10-HDPCorrH3 and TpMCPCorrH3.151 These molecules self-arrange in nanoneedles and nanoribbons, respectively. The aggregates of nanostructures show an ohmic conductivity that is greatly affected by the exposure to NO. Both the molecules show an n-type response to NO2 at room temperature, where the gas adsorption results in a decrease in conductivity with a limit of detection smaller than 100 ppb.
In general, resistive corrole sensors are used in donor–acceptor composites. Carbon-based materials, such as CNTs, are excellent electron acceptors that can be functionalized with donor species.152 A gas sensor example of this approach has been provided with TTCorrH3 non-covalently linked to single-wall carbon nanotubes.153 CNTs are p-type conductors, thus the injection of electrons from corroles depletes the CNTs of charge carriers with the consequent reduction of conductivity. The exposure to NO2 increases the conductivity of the sensor (Fig. 68). This effect can be explained considering that the acceptor character of NO2 drags electrons from the corrole and thus it results in the depletion of charge carriers in the CNT. The sensor has been demonstrated to detect NO2 below 50 ppb.
 Fig. 68  (A) A schematic representation of the Cu–corrole complexes sensitive to NO2. (B) Scanning electron microscopy image of the self-assembled nanostructures formed by compounds in scheme A. (C) The current–voltage curves of nanoneedles (1) and nanoribbons (2). (D) The sensor response curves fitted with a quadratic curve shows the greatest sensitivity of the nanoribbons (compound 2) as compared to the nanoneedles. Reproduced from ref. 151, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
An alternative carbon-based composite material was prepared with reduced graphene oxide. The presence of carboxyl and hydroxyl functional groups on the graphene oxide makes the structure suitable for the formation of organic frameworks incorporating macrocycles. The concept was applied to trans-A2B-type corroles such as 10-(4-chlorophenyl)-5,15-di(4-methylphenyl)-corrole and its cobalt complex154 and resulted in a sub-ppm detection limit of NO2.
A further approach to resistive chemical sensors was based on donor–acceptor couples where the electron transfer is promoted by light. These structures have been widely investigated and exploited in the so-called dye-sensitized solar cells whose heart is the interface between an organic dye and a wide bandgap semiconductor.155 Among the organic dyes, the combination of porphyrins and nanostructured titanium oxide achieved the best performance.156 The central mechanism of the dye-sensitized solar cell results in a photoconductive sensor where the illumination with visible light (captured by the organic dye) induces a change in the conductivity of the semiconductor.
A few years ago, this mechanism was also exploited for chemical sensors. The charge transfer induced by light may also occur because of a charge transfer from an adsorbed molecule to the dye. Additionally, under illumination, the dye is depleted of electrons and the charge transfer from a donor adsorbed molecule becomes more probable. This concept was first demonstrated with porphyrins-coated zinc oxide nanorods and it resulted in conductive sensors where, under visible light, the sensitivity towards donor species (such as triethylamine) is strongly increased.157
The similarities between corroles and porphyrins suggested the development of light-activated gas sensors made of corrole-coated ZnO nanoparticles.158 A one-pot fabrication procedure was prepared where corrole was added to the precursor of the ZnO hydrothermal synthesis precursor (see Fig. 69). The reaction produced nanometric particles coated with a corrole layer. These sensors, tested with a large range of volatile compounds, showed a bimodal response. The resistance decreased when exposed to donor species such as triethylamine and triethylphosphite and increased under the exposure to alcohols, alkanes, aldehydes, among others.
 Fig. 69  (A) A schematic representation of the steps for the preparation of corrole-coated ZnO nanoparticles. Corroles were added to a solution of zinc acetate dihydrate and ethanol and kept at 120 °C for 12 h. The solution was centrifuged and dried and the powder dissolved in toluene and used as a coating by drop-casting on a glass substrate endowed with gold interdigitated electrodes. (B) Transmission electron microscopy image showing that the nanoparticles have a nonmetric size and a round shape; the surface organic layer is visible in the pictures. (C) The sensor's sensitivity pattern shows the ambipolar response: electron donor species decrease the resistance (negative sensitivity), while most of the other compounds increase the resistance (positive sensitivity). Reproduced from ref. 158, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
To interpret this behavior, it is necessary to consider that the sensing material is made by an aggregate of organic-coated nanoparticles and the molecular adsorption occurs at the organic surface layer. Changes in current should be expected in cases where the organic layer is either charged or polar. However, also in the case of an electrically inert organic layer, the adsorbed molecules might increase the separation between nanoparticles, thus reducing the current.
It is important to consider that in a structured molecule, such as a corrole, several interaction mechanisms are simultaneously active. Hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces are among the most effective with respect to volatile organic compounds. Even if the largest sensitivity is observed for electron donors, any other molecule can be adsorbed and contribute to the sensor signal. Furthermore, compounds for which the sensitivity is small can occur at large concentrations, thus hindering the sensitivity towards the most sensitive species. In papers where sensors are tested only towards the dominant interaction mechanism, it is difficult to foresee the behavior with real samples.
The behaviors of corrole-based sensors were compared with those of porphyrin-based sensors.158 In particular, the sensitivities of free-base macrocycles and copper complexes of TPPH2 and TPCorrH3 were compared. Compared to porphyrins, the corrole cavity is characterized by an additional hydrogen atom that leads to a non-planar structure and a larger acidity, increasing hydrogen bond affinity, which favors the ligand as compared to alcohols and bases.159 In copper complexes, axial coordination tends to attenuate the differences. In both macrocycles, copper is in the same oxidation state; however, the electron-rich nature of corrole leads to a ligand-to-metal electron transfer that transforms the macrocycle into a cation radical. As a consequence, the facilitated reduction of copper corrole contributes to a larger sensitivity to donor ligands.
4.4 Mass sensors
The measurement of mass is a straightforward approach to detecting sorption interactions in a sensitive material.160 The implementation of this concept requires a sensor that can detect small mass increases due to the binding of airborne molecules. High-sensitivity devices are based on mechanic resonators where the resonance frequency is inversely proportional to the mass. Simple kinematics considerations have demonstrated that in these sensors, the sensitivity is proportional to the resonance frequency. High-frequency resonators are therefore necessary to achieve suitable sensitivities for detecting the binding of molecules.161 The highest mechanical resonance frequencies are found in crystals where the oscillation modes can reach frequencies in the GHz range.162 However, such large frequencies correspond to displacements at the atomic scale, which are not directly observable. Piezoelectric crystals are a noteworthy exception (e.g. quartz) where mechanical resonance is naturally associated with electric resonance.163,164 These materials, although very good electric insulators, are characterized by the equivalent circuit of a resonant circuit. Thus, when they are placed in oscillator circuits, voltage and current are driven by the mechanical resonance of the crystal. Usually, quartz crystals are used in this scope; when these crystals are used to measure mass, they are called quartz crystal microbalances (QMBs).
The first example of a corrole-based quartz microbalance sensor was given with a Langmuir–Blodgett film of DMHECorrMn.165 The characterization of the sensor showed the multiple interactions of corrole that can simultaneously interact with a wide spectrum of interaction mechanisms, from coordination, to van der Waals forces, and hydrogen bonds. Mass sensors do not select any of these interactions so the sensor was found to be sensitive to aromatics, aldehydes, alkanes, alcohols, and amines. However, the nature of the interaction can be revealed by the adsorption isotherm, which can be described as a linear combination of each interaction mechanism. Each interaction can then be described by Langmuir isotherms and the difference between isotherms is given by the affinity constant.
According to the affinity between the volatile compound and the sensitive molecule, some interactions become saturated before others, while in cases where the affinity is low, the isotherm is practically linear and it follows Henry's law of sorption from the gas to the liquid phase. In practice, the sensitivity of the sensor is greater at low concentrations and it decays as the concentration increases.
Similar behavior was found by considering the adsorption of gases on solid-state films of various Co(III) corroles. In these materials, the adsorption isotherm of carbon monoxide was compared with those of oxygen and nitrogen.166
The capability of selectively absorbing carbon monoxide as compared to other gases was preserved in sol–gel formulations167 and incorporating the corroles in meso-structured silica of the SBA-15 type.168 More recently cobalt corroles were embedded in a porous organic polymer in order to make the high surface area and the porosity size suitable for the sorption of gases such as carbon monoxide.169 The material retains the same sensitivity and selectivity toward carbon monoxide, indicating that it is a promising material for gas detection.
The material and the concept were applied to a surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensor as shown in Fig. 70.170
 Fig. 70  (A) Schematic structure of the SAW sensor; the sensitive portion of the device is the space between a couple of interdigitated electrodes. The gap between the electrodes (40 μm) determines the wavelength of the acoustic wave. (B) Top view of the SAW. Two devices are pictured, one is used as the sensor and the other as the reference. The Co–corrole film is visible in the magnified view on top of the metal electrodes in particular. (C) A comparison of the responses measured as changes in the wave phase velocity to form vapors and gases. The concentration is shown in the horizontal axis label. For H2O, the response to a change from 17% to 22% of relative humidity is plotted. (D) Changes in the response curve to CO in the presence of various interferents. The green line corresponds to the pure response to CO. In the case of interferents, the sensitivity (the slope of the response curve) increases or decreases. Adapted from ref. 170, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. 
These are high-frequency resonators that can be obtained by exploiting different acoustic phenomena such as the propagation of surface acoustic waves (SAW). In SAW devices, the acoustic wave is excited and detected by a couple of interdigitated electrodes. The mass sensitivity mechanism is different as compared to QMB. In the case of SAW, the acoustic wave travels at the surface of the crystal and then it propagates through the sensitive material. Changes in the mass of the sensitive material elicit changes in the velocity of the propagation of the acoustic wave. When the device is connected to a suitable electronic circuit, the change in the acoustic wave velocity results in changes in the frequency and phase of the electric signal.171 The frequency of the wave is determined by the gap between the electrodes and by the characteristics of materials. SAW can activate signals up to GHz and the sensitivity of the frequency shift as compared to mass is still proportional to the square of the fundamental frequency. Thus, the mass resolution is of the order of fM.
T(2,6-Cl2)PCorrCo has been chosen among the compounds scrutinized in the abovementioned papers.172 This compound shows the selective adsorption of CO and it is also quite easily obtainable from commercial products.173 Results show that the affinity between cobalt corroles and CO can be efficiently transferred to sensors. However, interference studies were limited to gases such as O2 and N2, while studies with porphyrinoids-coated QMBs show that, in general, these molecules are sensitive to a range of volatile compounds.12
The sensing mechanisms of corrole films were studied in the presence of supramolecular interactions driven by the OH functionalization of the macrocycle. It was shown that the decoration of porphyrins with OH groups in the peripheral position promotes hydrogen bonds between macrocycles, leading to a regular porous network.174 This approach has been used with corroles.175 Free-base and Cu, FeCl, and Co complexes of 5,10,15-tris-(3,5-dihydroxyphenyl)corrole were dispersed in solvent and deposited onto QMBs. Sensors were tested with gases and volatile compounds. The sensors were sensitive to CO and NO with detection limits of the order of ppm, however the sensitivity to other volatile compounds is not negligible; in particular, the abundance of OH groups promotes hydrogen bonds and thus the sensitivity to alcohols. In this regard, it is important to note that some volatile compounds (ethanol for instance) can occur at concentrations much larger than those of CO and NO.
As mentioned above, the inclusion of corroles in porous organic polymers resulted in better trapping of gas molecules;169 a similar approach was followed with a β-acrolein-substituted corrole (see Fig. 71).176 The β-functionalization of TTCorrCo derivatives enabled the introduction of an acrolein substituent that was co-polymerized with acrolein. The polymers form microspheres that can adequately form a film on the surface of a quartz microbalance. The sensor shows the typical non-selective behavior, also due to the presence of the non-specific polyacrolein. The presence of corroles induces an increase in the sensitivity to alcohols and aromatic compounds. Furthermore, the porosity of the polymers improves the response time as compared to a pure corrole film.
 Fig. 71  (A) Acrolein-substituted Co–corrole complex. (B) SEM image of corrole-polyacrolein microspheres aggregated onto the quartz microbalance surface. (C) The dynamic response of hexane shows the increase of the frequency shift and the shorter response time of corrole-polyacrolein as compared to the sensors functionalized by the pure elements. (D) A comparison of sensitivity shows the improved response of corrole-polyacrolein in particular as compared to alcohols for which the contribution of corroles is larger. Reproduced from ref. 176, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2017. 
4.5 Sensor arrays and electronic noses
The examples shown in Fig. 66 and 70 illustrate the differences between selective and non-selective sensors.
The lack of selectivity exhibited by gas sensors led to the exploitation of the combinatorial selectivity principle. In this regard, corrole-based sensors have been included in arrays in combination with porphyrin-based sensors. The effective implementation of the combinatorial selectivity principle requires that the sensors of the array are sufficiently different from each other. Thus, the modification of the macrocycle skeleton is an additional, and somewhat powerful, method for differentiating the selectivity of the sensors.
Sensors based on mass transducers allowed the investigation of the different contributions from porphyrins and corroles to the array. QMB sensors were prepared with free-base TPPH2s and TPCorrH3s and their iron and manganese complexes.177 The responses of sensors to ethanol, triethylamine ethyl acetate and dimethylformamide were measured. Results showed the influence of the macrocycle on the sensor sensitivity. The most striking difference is that the sensitivity of free-base TPCorrH3 is always larger as compared to the TPPH2. The ratio of sensitivity between free-base TPCorrH3 and free-base TPPH2 was found to be correlated to the polar surface area (PSA) of the analytes (see Fig. 72). PSA is a measure of the total surface contribution of polar atoms. It is obtained from quantum chemistry calculations and is used as an indicator in quantitative structure–activity relationship models.178 The correlation of the increase of sensitivity in corroles as compared to porphyrins suggests that the additional hydrogen atom in the corrole ring and the consequent reduction of the molecular symmetry increases the probability of polar interactions.
 Fig. 72  (A) TPPH2 and TPCorrH3 were used to functionalize the quartz microbalance. (B) The ratio of the sensitivities of TPCorrH3 and TPPH2 correlates with the polar surface area of the analyte. Et3N: triethylamine; DMF: dimethylformamide; EtOH: ethanol; EtOAc: ethyl acetate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, which is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY), MDPI. 
Less evident is the role of the macrocycle in the metal complex. However, TPPFe and TPPMn were found to be more sensitive to triethylamine and dimethylformamide as compared to the TPCorrFe and TPCorrMn.
The additional properties of corroles as compared to porphyrins enable the design of sensor arrays that have been applied in a number of different areas. In particular, it is worth mentioning that porphyrin–corroles mixed sensor arrays are particularly efficient to identify the alterations of volatile compounds in biological samples due to pathologies. The importance of these studies is based on the evidence that chemical signals captured in body secretions and excretions contain information about the cellular processes and ultimately, the health status.179 Studies indicated that patterns of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) have been shown to be related to a vast range of phenomena observable in vitro, even at the single-cell level,180 and in vivo.181,182
An OMCorrMn-coated quartz microbalance sensor was used in combination with various metal complexes of TPPH2s in the first paper, which demonstrated that an array of gas sensors can discriminate lung cancer via the analysis of exhaled breath.183 OMCorrMn demonstrated a better separation between the groups of lung cancer and controls as compared to TPPMn.
Similar sensor arrays were used in recent years to measure the volatile compounds released by murine models to study gene knockdown in colon cancer,184 the differentiation of pluripotent human stem cells,185 and the progression of malaria infection.186
A further example of the electronic nose was given by an array of four resistive porphyrins and corroles-functionalized ZnO nanoparticles assembled and tested as compared to various volatile compounds and real samples too.158 The results show that the array, although limited in terms of the number of sensors, was sensitive and selective enough to identify the various compounds. The arrangement of the volatile compounds in the PCA score plots is similar to the projection of olfactory neurons into the olfactory bulb where similar compounds were mapped in closed regions.192 Considering the similarity to the olfactory bulb, the score plot or any other equivalent representation space can be considered as a sort of olfactory atlas where the content of unknown samples can be derived. For instance, in Fig. 73 the process of the spoilage of meat points towards the region of amines that are likely the main components in a spoiled meat sample.
 Fig. 73  Score plots of pure compounds as detected by an array of porphyrins and corroles-coated ZnO nanoparticles. Arrows show the progression of the process of spoilage in whole and ground beef. Reproduced from ref. 158, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
5. Bio-applications of corroles
5.1 Medical imaging applications
Imaging techniques are perfect tools for the diagnosis of many diseases, including cancers. At the clinical stage, the most routinely used medical imaging analyses are MRI,187,188 SPECT and PET,189 with the two latter ones involving the use of radionuclides (Fig. 74).189,190 To increase the contrast in MRI, DOTA derivatives complexing gadolinium (Gd) are usually used.
 Fig. 74  Principal elements used in medical imaging (MRI, PET, SPECT and Optical Imaging).187–190 
In nuclear medicine, e.g. for PET applications, many metals are currently employed, such as 64Cu (transition metal) and 68Ga (soft metal), often coordinated by polyazamacrocycles (DOTA, DOTAGA, NODAGA, TETA,…). Corrole macrocycles can be seen as potentially good candidates for such radionuclide chelation (Cu, Ga,…) since corroles display excellent coordination properties for copper, but also for gallium, whose 68Ga isotope is increasingly used nowadays in PET imaging. Interestingly, during the last decade, the concept of coupling different medical imaging modalities to exploit the complementarities between two techniques has emerged. Based on DOTA-like and corrole macrocycles, a folate targeting (Cu)corrole–(Gd)DOTA complex that addresses requirements for bimodal MRI and PET imaging was reported (Fig. 75).191
 Fig. 75  The folate-targeting (Cu)corrole–(Gd)DOTA complex (A). An example of T1-weighted MRI phantoms (4.7 T spin echo method at 25 °C). Tubes 1–4, at different Gd concentrations (1 mM, 50 mM, 100 mM, tubes 1–8) and water (tube 9). (B) Corresponding T1-maps. Tubes 1–4, at a Gd concentration of 1 mM (tubes 1 and 5), 100 mM (tubes 2 and 6), 50 mM (tubes 3 and 7), 1 mM (tubes 4 and 8) and water (tube 9). Colored scale in milliseconds. Adapted from ref. 191, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015. 
The corresponding gadolinium Gd(III) complexes were synthesized and heterobimetallic complexes incorporating both gadolinium and copper ions were prepared. The over-expression of the folate receptor in a variety of malignant tumors, along with its limited expression in healthy tissues, makes it an attractive tumor-specific molecular target since “targeting imaging probes” is one of the hottest topics in medical imaging nowadays. The relaxivity values, evaluating the ability of magnetic compounds to increase the relaxation rates, were measured. The relaxivity value of the folate conjugate with GdDOTA but without the additional corrole ring was found to be lower (r1 = 2.6 mM−1 s−1) than the analogs bearing either a free-base corrole (r1 = 6.4 mM−1 s−1) or a copper corrole macrocycle (r1 = 6.3 mM−1 s−1). However, they were higher than the actual commercially available contrast agent ([Gd DOTA H2O], r1 = 4.2 mM−1 s−1). This may be explained by the increase in the molecular weight of the complex (higher than the Gd DOTA derivatives) inducing a slower molecular tumbling. The values obtained suggest that such complexes may be promising medical imaging agents for contrast enhancement in multimodal MRI techniques.188
A triazole-linked corrole/DOTA dyad was prepared by Cu(I)-catalysed Huisgen cycloaddition between an azido corrole and a propargyl-DOTA (Fig. 76).192
 Fig. 76  “Click”-linked corrole/DOTA dyad.192 
It was shown that microwave irradiation significantly accelerates the time of the cyclization reaction. The synthesis of heterobimetallic complexes was achieved in up to 60% isolated yield. Heterobimetallic complexes were prepared as potential MRI/PET (SPECT) bimodal contrast agents incorporating, at the same time, one metal (Mn, Gd) for the enhancement of contrast for MRI applications and one “cold” metal (Cu, Ga, In) for radionuclide imaging applications.192 Preliminary relaxivity measurements have shown that the reported complexes may be promising Contrast Agents (CA) in MRI.
Metalated corroles have been used as contrast-enhancing agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).193 Their potential for tumor-selective delivery was evaluated when encapsulated by a tumor-targeted polypeptide (Fig. 77). Among the different metals, manganese corroles exhibit shortening of the T1 relaxation time, thus leading to enhanced MRI contrast. Manganese complexes can be seen as attractive alternative MRI active contrast agents since manganese is, in vivo, one of the essential micronutrients (anticipated to be safe and biocompatible). Interestingly, the MRI contrast increases considerably after cell entry. Additionally, the corrole elicited tumor-toxicity through the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and cytoskeletal breakdown.
 Fig. 77  The effects of Ga-, Fe-, and Mn–corroles on the T1 relaxation rate and contrast change. (A) The chemical structure of a metallated sulfonated corrole. (B and C) T1 relaxation times and contrast images of different corrole complex solutions in vitro. (D) The measurement of T1 changes and (E) MR image acquisition after the delivery of indicated doses of CAs. Reproduced from ref. 193, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015. 
Lanthanide corrole complexes were reported, including lanthanum (La), terbium (Tb) and gadolinium (Gd) complexes (Fig. 78), showing for the first time that corrole macrocycle can be added to the list of potential lanthanide ligands. No MRI studies were reported in the case of the Gd complex, probably due to the lack of any water molecule in the coordination sphere of the central Gd atom, displaying, in this case, a seven-fold coordination sphere. This Gd complex was nicely prepared by the metathesis of a Li3 corrole using 1.1 equivalents of GdCl3 salt in the presence of 1.0 equivalent of 1,4,7-trimethyl-1,4,7-triazacyclononane (TACNMe3).194 The absence of any coordinated water molecule may limit their use as CA in MRI and may explain why they were not further evaluated as potential MRI Contrast Agents.
 Fig. 78  Lanthanide (La, Tb, and Gd) corrole complexes.194 
Lanthanide–corrole conjugates were reported based on the reaction of H4EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) dianhydride or H5DTPA (diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid) dianhydride with a free-base 5,15-bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-(4-aminophenyl)-corrole (Fig. 79).195 Neodymium (Nd), erbium (Er), ytterbium (Yb) and lutetium (Lu) lanthanide complexes were prepared, with the chelation occurring only via the EDTA or DTPA ligands. Photophysical studies were carried out and some corrole-sensitized 4f-luminescence was observed, also showing the time non-quenched molecular fluorescence of the corrole macrocycle (the presence of dual emission in the visible and near IR in ambient conditions was observed).
 Fig. 79  Free-base corrole/DTPA dyads and Ln complexes.195 
5.2 DNA binding and G-quadruplex interactions
DNA can lead locally to unusual secondary structures, such as DNA triplexes or quadruplexes, which result from the assembly of three or four strands. These non-usual structures represent natural barriers to DNA replication. They are thus considered as new targets with high therapeutic value. By stabilizing them with small molecules,196–198 these structures can stop replication by preventing the normal progression of enzymes. As a result, chromosomal instability that is lethal for the cell occurs. Among these unusual DNA structures, G-quadruplexes are among the most studied targets. A guanine quadruplex (called G-quadruplex) is a structure built from the stacking of several tetrads. The quadruplex structure can be formed by one, two or four strands of guanine-rich DNA or RNA, in the presence of monovalent cations such as K+ or Na+. DNA quadruplexes can be found in telomeric regions or oncogenic promoter regions, but are not restricted to these.196,199,200
The first report of water-soluble corroles and the study of their interactions with G-quadruplex was published in 2007 by Zhou and Yang.201 Two A3-corroles bearing 4-methylpyridinium or para-trimethylaminophenyl ammonium groups were prepared and studied as G-quadruplex ligands (Fig. 80). These water-soluble corroles were studied and compared to the classical, well-studied TMPyP4 porphyrin reference that is well known as a G-quadruplex stabilizer. They display higher selectivity for quadruplex DNA versus duplex DNA.
 Fig. 80  Water-soluble corroles able to interact with the G-quadruplex.201 
In the case of the para-methylpyridinium corrole, five different A3 and trans-A2B-isomers were also prepared202 and studied by shifting the methylpyridinium unit from the para- to the ortho- and meta-positions. A significant improvement in the selectivity for trans-A2B-corroles (para–meta–para, para–ortho–para methylpyridinium) over A3-corroles (meta–meta–meta, ortho–ortho–ortho,…) was observed.202 Among the metal complexes (Cu, Mn), manganese corroles bearing pyridinium groups at the 5,10,15-meso positions were shown to exert higher stabilization effects of the G-quadruplex structure.203 A gallium complex of 5,10,15-(N-methyl-4-pyridyl)corrole was also synthesized and its binding properties with c-MYC G-quadruplex DNA, a potent target for antitumor drugs, was investigated. It was shown that this gallium corrole can strongly bind to c-MYC G-quadruplex DNA mainly via a groove binding mode. Interestingly, under light irradiation, greater toxicity towards Hep G2 cancer cells was observed.204
5.3 Antiviral activities
Whereas bacterial infections can usually be treated with different classes of antibiotics, this is not the case for viral infections for which treatments are currently limited. Viruses are intracellular parasites that use the cellular functions of their hosts to enter the cell and replicate. They are known to adapt to treatment and develop resistance, leading to treatment failure. In order to avoid damaging the host cell, antiviral treatment must be able to influence viral biology without altering cellular functions. Although several treatments have been developed for a specific viral infection, broad-spectrum antivirals have yet to be developed. Therefore, there is a constant need for new generations of first-in-class anti-viral molecules that could be positioned in first-line treatment or in combination with pre-existing therapies. New antivirals should demonstrate increased efficiency, reduced side effects and high potency toward resistant strains.
Human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) is a member of the herpes virus family. It usually infects up to 80% of the general population with a prevalence rate reaching more than 90% in high-risk persons (e.g. unborn babies whose mothers become infected with CMV during the pregnancy or people with HIV). CMV is a common virus that infects people at any age and once you have been infected, the virus remains all your life. Most CMV primo-infections are silent, and most of the people who are infected have no signs or symptoms. However, CMV is the first cause of blindness in HIV patients and the first cause of foetal malformations in the case of primo-infection during pregnancy. Unfortunately, many previous vaccine approaches failed to provide complete protection against CMV. Antiviral drugs can slow virus multiplication but they cannot cure it as they do not act on the virus reservoir. Nowadays, most of the existing drugs used to treat CMV are nucleoside derivatives such as ganciclovir, valaciclovir, and cidofovir that inhibit viral replication by acting as fraudulent building blocks for viral DNA synthesis. These drugs may sometimes display adverse effects, such as myelosuppression and nephrotoxicity. They can lead also to the emergence of antiviral resistant CMV strains during long-term or repeated treatments.205–208 Recently, in the antiviral research field, numerous studies have been devoted to the development of non-nucleoside CMV inhibitors with novel mechanisms of action. New antiviral drugs must lead to more selective compounds with a broad spectrum of antiviral activity and, if possible, little or no drug-resistance induction.
Over 200 porphyrins and porphyrin derivatives were screened against hCMV and a lead corrole molecule was identified that displayed very interesting antiviral properties (Fig. 81).209 Compared to the porphyrin analog, TNPCorrH3 showed the strongest inhibitory effect on both the infection rate and activation of IE (Immediate Early) expression. Hit corrole isomers have also been shown to possess strong inhibitory effects on hCMV infection with reduced in vivo toxicity. Interestingly, porphyrin analogs (e.g. bearing nitro substituents on the meso-phenyl rings) of the hit corrole were tested for comparison but they did not display any potent antiviral activities.
 Fig. 81  Identification of the first hit.209 
A small library of nitro- and fluoro-corrole derivatives, directly inspired by the first corrole hit, was then developed during a Structure–Activity Relationship (SAR) study (Fig. 82 and 83).210,211
 Fig. 82  Structure–activity relationship study.210,211 
 Fig. 83  Selected structures among the 43 corroles tested against the pox-virus.212 
Metalated corroles (e.g. Mn, Cu) did not present any good antiviral activity and only free-base corroles bearing one or several EWG groups (e.g. –NO2 group) on the para-position of the 5,10,15-meso-phenyl ring displayed valuable antiviral activities. Based on a step-by-step SAR study (Fig. 86), forty-three different corroles were prepared and fully characterized. Different A3-corroles bearing one lipophilic halogen atom (e.g. –F, –CF3, or –Cl) and one nitro group on the phenyl rings were synthesized (Fig. 87). Some of the corroles differed only in the position of the fluorine, e.g. from the ortho- to meta-position or by the number of fluorine atoms.
A3- to trans-A2B-corroles were prepared to further study the effect (if any) of the symmetry of the corrole. The most interesting antiviral properties were obtained in the case of fluorinated-corroles without any strong –EWG group. The synthesis of different A3-corroles bearing fluoroaryl substituents at the meso-positions was thus carried out by varying the number from one to five, and also the position (ortho, meta, para) of the fluorine atoms. The permutation of the meso-aryl groups at the 5,15- to the 10-position was also studied.
Working with the human pathogenic poxvirus requires high-confinement laboratories for class 3 (Monkeypox virus, MPXV) and class 4 (Variola virus, VARV) viruses and very high security levels. One way to further investigate the antipox virus activity of compounds is to work with lower-confinement poxviruses such as the myxoma virus (MYXV). This leporipoxvirus is known to induce severe disease in rabbits and can serve as a good model to study the broad antiviral properties of any new corrole macrocycles. Very recent results have demonstrated that free-base corroles can be very effective on viruses of the poxvirus family, opening up perspectives in animal health and defense. Indeed, after screening more than 40 different corroles, a hit was identified, namely Fluocovir (corrole 35, Fig. 83). Fluocovir was injected at up to 100 times that of in vitro IC50 on New Zealand white rabbits without any sign of acute toxicity (Fig. 84). Rabbits were infected at day one by the injection of 80 plaque-forming units (pfu) of the Myxoma virus wild-type strain in the dermis of the left ear. Interestingly, in vivo studies showed symptom delay and animal weight increase upon treatment. Fluocovir was shown to display nanomolar antiviral activities even on resistant strains and is active on a large variety of dsDNA viruses. Moreover, the optimized compounds exhibit a good PK/PD profile.212 Including recent studies on hCMV, the authors have demonstrated that corrole macrocycles can now be seen as very promising agents displaying broad-spectrum antiviral activities against dsDNA viruses. By comparison, the porphyrin analogs are less efficient than their corrole counterparts.
 Fig. 84  Fluocovir tested on the clinical hCMV Letermovir-resistant strain (top) and on the pathogenic poxvirux MYXV (bottom), both viruses being ANCHORTM tagged.212 
5.4 Antibacterial activities and photodynamic inactivation (PDI)
Numerous porphyrin derivatives have been tested as potential antimicrobial agents in photodynamic inactivation (PDI). Recent reviews highlighted the main advances in the field and illustrated the structures of the porphyrin compounds tested and their efficiencies.213–215 Some cationic gallium corroles bearing ortho or para-methylpyridinium moieties have been prepared (Fig. 85)216 and their antibacterial activities against the Gram-negative bacterium A. fischeri were evaluated and compared to TMPyP4, a well-known reference in biological studies. Corrole with the para-methylpyridinium was shown to display, at lower doses, notable efficiency when compared with TMPyP4. Total photoinactivation was achieved after 45 min of irradiation. It was concluded that positively charged metallocorroles were potentially more efficient than the neutral analogs to photo-inactivate the Gram-negative bacterium A. fischeri and without any dark toxicity. Anionic and cationic tin and phosphorus corroles were prepared and used as photosensitizers, in combination with low doses of white light, to inhibit the germination of mold fungi spores.217 Three different model organisms e.g. Aspergillus niger, Cladosporium cladosporoides, and Penicillium purpurgenum were studied since nowadays, mold fungi are responsible for many allergies or other health problems. Interestingly, the positively charged corrole complexes have been shown to induce complete damage of the conidia. They were able to attenuate germination upon light exposure without displaying dark toxicity.217 These preliminary results pave the way for further use of cationic corroles in antimicrobial photoinactivation applications.
 Fig. 85  Cationic gallium corroles bearing ortho- or para-methylpyridinium moieties.216 
Corrole-grafted-chitosan films were prepared (Fig. 86)218 by the direct reaction of TPFCorrH3 with chitosan, followed by solvent casting. Chitosan is an amino-polysaccharide usually extracted from the skeleton of shellfish and usually produced by the deacetylation of chitin. Therapeutic applications have been proposed because chitosan displays several interesting properties such as antioxidant activity, cholesterol and triglyceride trapping. Chitosan usually shows good antibacterial properties, good adsorption to mucous membranes and low toxicity.219 It can be seen as a promising material for drug encapsulation as it can lead to covalent or non-covalent interactions. It also possesses some hypoglycemic effects and can be further used for the prevention and treatment of chronic diseases. The transparent films obtained by the authors have been shown to display interesting fluorescence properties as well as bacteriostatic properties against S. aureus, suggesting possible future applications of such corrole-modified films as biosensors, bioimaging agents, or bioactive optical devices.218
 Fig. 86  Corrole-grafted-chitosan films.218 
5.5 Photodynamic therapy (PDT) applications
PDT (Photodynamic Therapy) is a treatment used via a photosensitizer and a light source to selectively kill cancer cells through the localized production of singlet oxygen.220,221 However, the depth of light penetration into the tissue remains an obstacle to this therapy.222
It was in the 1970s that derivatives of the hematoporphyrin HpD (Hematoporphyrin Derivative) were more widely studied.223 An active fraction of HpD was isolated and marketed in 1985 under the name Photofrin®. Other photosensitizers based on porphyrins or corroles have been developed to get closer to the ideal pigment, which must meet precise specifications: the photosensitizer must ideally have a high molar extinction coefficient in the near infrared or red, and a high quantum yield in singlet oxygen. It must also be selective to the tissue to be treated, slightly or non-toxic in the absence of light, and rapidly eliminated from the body after treatment. One key parameter to consider is the cellular uptake and subcellular localization of the photosensitizer (involving morphological cells changes but also cytotoxicity after PDT treatment). Several reviews have been reported with a quite exhaustive state-of-the-art utilization of free-base or metalated corroles as photosensitizers in cancer photodynamic therapy.13,213,223–234
Different A3- and trans-A2B-corroles were synthesized and their gallium complexes were prepared and studied as potential photosensitizers in PDT (Fig. 87).235–241 Corrole conjugates have been the subject of a recent review from Sessler and coworker.242 Main group corroles and their photophysical properties have been recently reviewed by Gross and Churchill.243 The correlation between the molecular structures of three free-base A3-corroles (e.g. TPCorrH3, TPFCorrH3 and TpMCPCorrH3) and their efficiencies for singlet oxygen generation was recently reported.244
 Fig. 87  Gallium A3- and trans-A2B-corrole complexes tested as potential photosensitizers in PDT.235–241 
Near-Infrared emitter tris-ethynyl gallium(III) corroles were recently reported (Fig. 88).245 Compared to the Ga(III) pyridine complex of 5,10,15-tris-pentafluorophenylcorrole, the ethynyl corroles displayed shifted bathochromic absorption to the near-infrared region, the trend being larger upon increasing the π-conjugation. The (pyridino)-5,10,15-tris-pyrenylethynyl-corrolato gallium(III) displayed an intense and broad Soret Band at 510 nm, an emission maximum at 740 nm and a fluorescence quantum yield of 0.27 in aerated toluene, whereas the A3- and trans-A2B-electron-poor-NO2 corroles exhibited quenched emission, due presumably to the EWG –NO2 groups.
 Fig. 88  Ethynyl gallium corroles.245 
Several phosphorus corrole complexes were reported in the literature (Fig. 89).246–250 A theoretical study was reported by De Simone, Russo and coworkers.246 They confirmed by DFT and TDDFT computational studies that phosphorus iodinated-corrole complexes possess all the requirements to be further used as photosensitizers.
 Fig. 89  Phosphorus and phosphorus-iodinated-corrole complexes.246–250 
Among the required properties, (i) they strongly absorb in a region close to the NIR region, (ii) their singlet–triplet energy gap was shown to be large enough to excite the molecular oxygen and to generate cytotoxic ROS.246 A TECorrP was reported, which was shown to be a potentially efficient and non-toxic photosensitizer for PDT.250 Interestingly, the chemical and physical properties of phosphorus corroles can be fine-tuned for diverse applications.248,251
Rhenium,252,253 iridium254,255 and osmium256 corrole complexes have been reported (Fig. 90). Rhenium(V)–oxo triaryl corroles bearing at the meso-positions some methyl ester or carboxylic acid functional groups at either the meta- or para-position of the three phenyl rings, have been described.252,253 Differences in the phosphorescence quantum yields and phosphorescence lifetimes were observed between the ester (around 1%) and the corresponding carboxylic acid analogs (around 0.01%). Interestingly, the quantum yields for singlet oxygen formation were found to be quite high for both the ester and the corresponding carboxylic acids, showing high potential for further applications in PDT. Iridium(III) corroles were reported,254,255 showing interesting phosphorescence properties and the ability to produce singlet oxygen with 10–15% efficiency (the phosphorescence quantum yield turned out to be low, about 0.02–0.04% at ambient temperature but two complexes were found to efficiently sensitize singlet oxygen formation with quantum yields Φ(1O2) equal to 0.71 and 0.38 for L = pyridine and 4-picolinic acid, respectively).254 Nitrido-osmium(VI) corroles256 were shown to display room temperature NIR phosphorescence with λmax in the range 779–795 nm. They are potentially good sensitizers of singlet oxygen with 1O2 quantum yields in the range 0.76–0.95. Interestingly, they represent a new class of NIR phosphorescent dyes with high photostability and relatively long decay times.
 Fig. 90  Rhenium,252,253 iridium254,255 and osmium256 corroles. 
Some tin complexes were reported (Fig. 91).257–259 By comparison with the free-base analogs, it was shown that the Sn(IV) tris-2-thienyl- and triarylcorroles possess higher ΦΔ quantum yields, likely due to the heavy atom effect associated with the tin metal ion, making them good candidates for PDT applications. Interestingly, if we compare them with the triphenylcorrole analog, the tris-2-thienylcorrole shows quite an important red-shift of the last Q band, enhancing its absorption close to the therapeutic window.
 Fig. 91  Tin corrole complexes.257–259 Adapted from ref. 257, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
(SO3−)2TPFCorrFe derivatives have been prepared (Fig. 92).260–263 They were studied as potential cytoprotective agents (e.g. evaluated for their neuroprotective/neurorescue activities) against oxidative nitrative stress, more particularly in cellular models of neurodegeneration induced by the Parkinson-related neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine or the peroxynitrite donor 3-morpholinosydnonimine. The iron(III) corroles were found to be more efficient than the manganese(III) analogs in further promoting neuronal survival (in the experimental conditions used by the authors). Thus, they can be considered for further applications in the treatment of degenerative disorders of the peripheral or central nervous systems (CNS).
 Fig. 92  Molecular structure of (SO3−)2TPFCorrFe.260–263 
After the report of the first gold complexes based on the corrole macrocycle,92,265,266 a water-soluble gold(III) corrole was reported and its cytotoxicity, as well as its cytostaticity, were evaluated (Fig. 93).264 Amphiphilic gold tris(carboxyphenyl)corroles were also reported by Gederaas, Vinogradov, Wanser, and Ghosh.92 More recently, gold complexes of a series of tetra-β-substituted TPFCorrH3 (Y = –Br, –I or –CF3) were reported,267 as well as their phosphorescence properties studied in different solvents. Interestingly, the tetra-iodinated gold corrole exhibited an important red shift absorption, whereas the tetra –CF3 Au corrole showed the most redshifted room temperature phosphorescence spectrum. Solvent dependence of the phosphorescence lifetimes (as well as the intensity) was also observed.267
 Fig. 93  Gold corrole complexes.264 
Two platinum-bipyridyl corrole isomers were prepared and fully characterized (Fig. 94).268 The para isomer, as a free-base, was first prepared via the Heck cross-coupling reaction between 10-(4-bromophenyl)-5,15-bis(pentafluorophenyl)corrole isomers and 4-vinylpyridine but some difficulties were encountered. A second pathway was used by the pre-functionalization of the aldehyde with the vinyl unit, followed by classical condensation with 5-(pentafluorophenyl)dipyrromethene. The platinum complexes were prepared in good yields (between 75–80%) using cis-dichloro(2,2′-bipyridine)platinum(II) at 50 °C in DMF. Binding studies with DNA and HSA were carried out by fluorescence studies and gel electrophoresis. Interesting interactions were observed268 with calf thymus DNA, HSA, and plasmid DNA, further showing that such platinum-bipyridyl corroles can be considered as interesting candidates for further DNA-interaction applications.
 Fig. 94  Platinum-bipyridyl corrole isomers.268 
To increase their water solubility, some TPFCorrH3 conjugates bearing either one or two β-cyclodextrins were prepared and their photocytoxicities towards HeLa cells were evaluated (Fig. 95).269 It was shown that such conjugates, as well as the non-conjugate corrole, were able to generate singlet oxygen and to be cytotoxic, depending upon light exposure level and dose concentration.270 Fluorescence microscopy revealed HeLa cells localization in dictyosomes and mitochondria.
 Fig. 95  TPFCorrH3 conjugates bearing one or two β-cyclodextrins.269 
The DNA-binding, photocleavage, and photodynamic anti-cancer activities of free-base and metalated corroles were reported.271 A3- and trans-A2B-pyridyl corroles bearing either one or two pentafluorophenyl substituents at the meso position were prepared and it was shown that these pyridyl-corroles display binding affinity to CT-DNA and can photocleave pBR322 DNA.271 The binding affinity toward CT-DNA was shown to decrease when the number of pentafluorophenyl aryl groups increased, whereas the photocleavage activity toward pBR322 DNA became more efficient.
A cationic iron corrole was isolated as a di-iron(IV) μ-oxo dimer, whereas the manganese complex of the same corrole was isolated as a manganese(III) monomer.205 Two different binding modes were observed, depending on the nature of the metal: the Mn(III) corrole complex interacts with CT-DNA through an outside groove binding mode, while the di-iron(IV) μ-oxo dimer may bind differently via an outside binding mode in low concentrations. At higher concentrations, the di-iron(IV) μ-oxo dimer was shown to stack in the major grooves of the duplex but could also partially intercalate into DNA. In the presence of H2O2 or even better with tert-butyl-hydroperoxide TBHP oxidant, both metal complexes were shown to catalyze the oxidative cleavage of pBR322 plasmid DNA.
Two methyl benzoate gallium(III) corrole complexes, 10-(4-methoxycarbonylphenyl)-5,15-bis(pentafluorophenyl)corrolatogallium(III) and 5,15-bis(4-methoxycarbonylphenyl)-10-(pentafluorophenyl)corrolatogallium(III), were synthesized and studied. Both gallium(III) corrole complexes interact with DNA via major groove binding. Under irradiation, they were able to cleave DNA quite efficiently (Fig. 96).272
 Fig. 96  Structures of the halogenated gallium corroles272 and the anionic disulfonic corrole gallium corrole.273 
The same year, a (trans-dihydroxo)phosphorus(V) complex of 10-(4-hydroxylphenyl)-5,15-bis(pentafluorophenyl)corrole was reported.274 This P(V) complex can bind DNA via an outside binding mode. Some photocleavage activity was also observed occurring via hydroxyl radical, singlet oxygen, and superoxide anion formations. More recently, an oxo(corrolato)chromium(V) complex was reported207 that selectivity damaged leukemia cancer cells.
A series of halogenated gallium corroles was reported, which could bind CT-DNA via an outside binding mode. Under illumination, they were able to efficiently produce singlet oxygen species, displaying good antitumor activities against HepG2 cells.275
An anionic disulfonic gallium corrole was previously reported and studied by femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy. It was shown that an ultrafast electron transfer ET between (SO3Na)2TPFCorrGa and the guanine bases of ct-DNA occurred within the pulse duration equal to 156 fs.273
Cobalt(III) mono-hydroxyl and phenothiazine corrole complexes were prepared and studied (Fig. 97).276 It was shown that both cobalt complexes displayed quite low levels of dark toxicity and interestingly, they showed high photocytotoxic activity against HeLa, H460, and A549 cell lines. Both cobalt complexes may thus have potential application in PDT as a photosensitizer.
 Fig. 97  Free-base and cobalt corroles with –OH or phenothiazine group.276 
Different manganese corrole complexes were synthesized and fully characterized (Fig. 98).205,206 The DNA-binding properties of cationic manganese(III) corroles were evaluated. It was shown that the Mn(III) complexes interact with circulating tumor deoxyribonucleic acid (CT-DNA) through an outside groove-binding mode and by comparison, the diiron(IV) m-oxo corrole complex (based on the same free-base corrole structure) was shown to interact in a difunctional binding mode. A similar interaction was observed only at low concentration, while at higher concentration the iron dimer complex mainly stacks in the major grooves of CT-DNA.205
 Fig. 98  Push–pull manganese corrole complexes.277 
Push–pull manganese(III) corroles bearing –NO2 EWG at the 5,15-meso-positions and different EDG at the 10-meso-position (e.g. –OCH3, –NMe2) were reported. In solution, it was shown that manganese complexes of such trans-A2B-corroles interact strongly with circulating tumor deoxyribonucleic acid (CT-DNA). Interestingly, the strength of the interaction can be increased when a stronger EDG group is introduced at the 10-meso-position.277
Very recently, the photocatalytic tetra-thiocyanation of free-base corroles using ammonium thiocyanate was reported (Fig. 99).278 The irradiation was carried out at room temperature in acetonitrile using a standard 20 W CFL (Compact Fluorescent Lamps) lamp. The tetra-thiocyanatocorrole was the main isolated compound after 5 hours of reaction. It is possible to monitor the reaction by ESI or MALDI mass spectrometry using the negative mode detection. Two reviews reported the best matrix and conditions to use when running MALDI/TOF279 or ESI280 mass spectra for small molecules or corrole derivatives. Very interestingly, the UV-visible spectra of the isolated tetra-thiocyanatocorroles show, in acetonitrile, the presence of four Q-bands, quite similar to the Q-type bands of chlorophyll-a. Thus, these β-substituted corroles can be considered as spectroscopic model systems of the latter. A mechanism was proposed, involving radical species, and the formation of radical anion species was further confirmed by EPR.278
 Fig. 99  Reported tetra-thiocyanatocorroles obtained after light irradiation (top) and UV–vis absorption spectra of TPFCorrH3 (green line), and 2,3,17,18-tetrathiocyanato-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole (blue line), in acetonitrile (bottom). Adapted from ref. 278, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
5.6 Fluorescent heme proteins
Very recently, Lemon and co-workers reported the synthesis of fluorescent heme proteins by the incorporation of a phosphorus corrole into two stable heme proteins: H-NOX from Caldanaerobacter subterraneus and heme acquisition system protein A HasA from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Fig. 100).281 The binding of the corrole in the heme pocket of the protein was confirmed by emission and absorption spectroscopy, demonstrating the proof-of-principle and the possibility to further develop new fluorescent proteins. Interestingly, these corrole-substituted heme proteins were shown to exhibit more intense fluorescence (in a narrower spectral profile) than traditional fluorescent proteins that emit in the same spectral window.281 It was shown also that the corrole emission was enhanced in the HasA conjugate but was quenched in the H-NOX.
 Fig. 100  Phosphorus corrole-substituted fluorescent proteins. Adapted from ref. 281, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
6. Synthetic advances
6.1 Scale-up and optimization of Gryko's method
To further develop corrole-based applications in different fields, such as sensors, catalysis, biology or medicine, one has to consider not only the use of smooth and easy synthetic methods with few steps to access A3- or trans-A2B-aryl-corroles (this is in fact the case in corrole chemistry) but also the possible scale-up from milligrams/centigrams to grams, from grams to decagrams or hectograms. In 2006, the gram synthesis of corrole at the 20 mmol scale was reported by Gryko and Koszarna via a very efficient synthesis involving the use of a water–methanol mixture.282 In 2010, Nocera and co-workers reported the gram-scale (1.34 g) synthesis of TPFCorrH3283 following a modified Lindsey porphyrin forming reaction.284 Recently, Bröring and co-workers reported the gram-scale synthesis (starting from 20 mmol of dipyrromethane) of 5,15-pentafluorophenyl-10-(4-(carboxy)phenyl)corrole using Gryko conditions.285 To further develop biological applications and to consider possible clinical applications, in vivo tests on small animals (rats, rabbits,…) may require quite a lot of corrole macrocycles, at least at the decagram scale. Recently, the synthesis of around 25 g of 5,15-bis(2′,3′,5′,6′-tetrafluorophenyl)-10-(pentafluoro-phenyl)corrole, administered to 25 rabbits during in vivo studies, was reported.212 At a first glance (Fig. 101), the synthesis of around 20–25 g of free-base corrole requires at least 75 g of dipyrromethene, prepared starting from 2.5 kg of pyrrole, 65 g of tetrafluorobenzaldehyde and 35 g of MgBr2. The amounts of solvents and reagents during the bilane synthesis steps was estimated as 13 liters of methanol, 13 liters of water and 650 mL of HCl, 37%. To secure the scale-up, the authors carried out eleven syntheses, one after the other, starting in each case from pentafluorobenzaldehyde (1 eq.) and varying the number of moles of HCl from 244 mM (yield 12.5%) to 608 mM (yield 30.4%). Around 65 liters of chloroform were required, as well as 80 g of DDQ. After optimization (Fig. 102), 24.6 g of pure corrole was isolated via eleven different synthesis batches that were, at the end, all combined in the same vial.
 Fig. 101  Scale-up synthesis of Fluocovir.212 
 Fig. 102  Pictures of the scale-up synthesis of Fluocovir carried out in 4 L three-neck flasks.212 
Interestingly, during the synthesis, the authors found that the isolated yield was clearly dependent upon the concentration of HCl, with the greater amount of HCl leading to the higher yield in 5,15-bis(2′,3′,5′,6′-tetrafluorophenyl)-10-(pentafluoro-phenyl)corrole. This free-base corrole was denoted as Fluocovir for further in vitro and in vivo studies.212
6.2 Recent discovery of corrole bearing meso directly linked COOH groups
Very recently, the corrole family was enlarged (Fig. 103) with the arrival of a newborn: a tris-meso-carboxylate corrole, potentially bringing new important applications in medicinal chemistry. Gross et al. reported, for the first time, the straightforward synthesis of a tris-meso-carboxylate corrole obtained by the hydrolysis of the meso-CF3-substituted metallocorroles (Fig. 103).286 Surprisingly, it was not synthesized by the hydrolysis of the ethyl ester analog (Fig. 104) as previously described287,288 but by the hydrolysis of the meso-CF3-substituted corrole metal complexes (Fig. 103). A mechanism was proposed, occurring via the nucleophilic attack of the hydroxide anion and followed by several intermediates. In medicinal chemistry, the pharmacokinetic properties of a potential drug candidate, such as absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion, have to be evaluated. Lipinski's rule of five of this new tris-meso-carboxylate corrole was discussed, showing that this new corrole macrocycle is close to having the chemical and physical properties for potential per os (oral) administration. The iron complex was tested, as a proof of concept, by evaluating its ability to interact with plasma proteins but also to be used as a catalyst for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. In the latter case, a very efficient formation of molecular oxygen was observed when hydrogen peroxide was added to an aqueous solution of human serum albumin (HSA) in the presence of the iron complex of corrole meso-triscarboxylate. Different triscarboxylate corroles are now available for further medicinal and drug applications (Fig. 103).
 Fig. 103  A newborn in the corrole family: a tris-meso-carboxylate corrole.286 
 Fig. 104  
meso-Ester corroles previously described.287,288 
6.3 Dipyrrin-bisphenol: corrole analogs
Recently, a ligand analogy was found between different metal complexes of dipyrrin-bisphenol and the corrole macrocycle (Fig. 105).289–291 Dipyrrin-bisphenol is a tetradentate ligand, like corrole and porphyrin, and interestingly, its chemical structure can be seen as the combination of half a salen unit and half of a porphyrin macrocycle (Fig. 105). What makes the dipyrrin-bisphenol ligand closer to a corrole (and not a porphyrin) is that it presents, like corrole, a formal −3 charge and this molecule is able to coordinate quite a large variety of non-metal or metal ions such as boron,292 manganese,291 cobalt,290 gold.289 Dipyrrin-bisphenol is a 12 π-conjugated system with only one meso-position and 4 beta-pyrrolic positions. As in the case of the corrole macrocycle,8,293–298 some innocent or non-innocent character of the ligand can be encountered, depending on the nature of the metal or non-metal ion. In the case of the cobalt complexes, it was shown that the changes in the aryl substituents on the single meso-position can also change the spectroscopic, electrochemical and ligand binding properties of the complex. The oxidation state of the cobalt dipyrrin can change in bonding and non-bonding solvents.
 Fig. 105  Ligand analogy between corrole and dipyrrin-bisphenol (top) free-bases and (bottom) bis-ammonia cobalt complexes. Adapted from ref. 290, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
The comparison of the X-ray structures of the cobalt bis-ammonia complexes of corrole and dipyrrin-bisphenol is of interest (Table 1). Despite structural differences between these two ligands, the bond angles and the principal distances in the two metal complexes are of the same order of magnitude, showing that dipyrrin-bisphenol can be considered as an excellent analog of corrole, worthy of further investigations or comparison studies.
Table 1 A comparison of selected geometric distances (Å) and angles (°) of bis-NH3 DPPCo and a previous bis-ammonia cobalt corrole complex




Structures








Bond distances (Å)
Bis-NH3 DPPCo
Bis-NH3 cobalt corrole




Co–Npyrrole
1.913(3)
1.909(3)
1.893(6)
1.908(6)


Co–O/Npyrrole
1.919(2)
1.905(2)
1.868(6)
1.881(6)


Average


Co–Npyrrole/O
1.912(6)
1.888(17)


Co–Nammonia
1.963(3)
1.938(3)
1.964(6)
1.974(6)


Average


Co–Nammonia
1.951(18)
1.969(7)






Bond angles (°)
Bis-NH3 DPPCo
Bis-NH3 cobalt corrole




O/Npyrrole–Co–Npyrrole
83.10(10)
91.82(11)
95.1(3)
91.5(2)


Npyrrole/O–Co–Npyrrole/O
93.35(12)
83.10(10)
81.5(2)
91.9(3)


Average


O/Npyrrole–Co–Npyrrole
88(6)
90(6)


Average


Npyrrole/O–Co–Nammonia
90(1)
90(2)




7. Summary and outlook
Corrole chemistry has had a long infancy period, starting from the first report in the early sixties. Until the new millennium, only a few studies on this macrocycle were reported in the literature, shedding light on the peculiar properties of corroles but not allowing a complete elucidation of the potential of this macrocycle for practical applications. This situation drastically changed in the new millennium, thanks to the report of practical routes for the preparation of triarylcorroles,3,4 which boosted the number of studies involving corrole derivatives. Due to the effort of different groups, the synthetic chemistry of corroles is now well developed,15 reaching the versatility of the parent porphyrins and probably being the most developed in the large family of porphyrin analogs. The rational functionalization of the corrole ring is also possible, thanks to the unexpected but advantageous regioselectivity showed by corrole,15 despite the low symmetry of the molecular skeleton. The coordination chemistry of corrole is also well developed.
These achievements can allow the fine-tuning of corroles and their metal complexes for particular applications, and have allowed the flourishing of corrole applications. In this review, we have summarized the most recent results obtained in different fields, ranging from catalysis to clinical applications. Initially, the first reports focused on the exploitation of metallocorroles as oxidation catalysts, due to the assumption that corrole stabilizes the higher oxidation states of coordinated metals as compared to porphyrin. However, the elucidation of the peculiar properties of this macrocycle has stimulated interest in the exploitation of corroles in different fields, making the portfolio of corrole applications much broader.
For some of these applications, a series of investigations already evidenced the potential of corrole derivatives. This is the case of the applications of corroles as catalysts: while the exploitation of metallocorroles as oxidation catalysts was the first studied, more recently, corrole complexes have demonstrated interesting performances as non-precious metal electrocatalysts for water splitting reactions, which are fundamental processes for conversion energy devices. In these reactions (HER, OER, ORR) Mn, Fe, and Co corroles have demonstrated important properties that make them potential substitutes for the expensive Pt catalysts.
Further studies are necessary to optimize the performances of the corrole catalysts; a breakthrough in these studies will provide a standard procedure for comparing the results reported in the literature. Without this rational approach, it is quite difficult to have a clear picture of all the different parameters that could be tuned (peripheral substituents, coordinated metals, solid supports, deposition techniques, etc.) to optimize catalyst performances.
For other fields, the application of corroles is far less explored; some promising examples of chemical sensors based on corrole derivatives as sensing materials have been reported, taking advantage of, for example, the optical features of corrole derivatives. In this area, corroles can provide a great contribution to the development of cross-sensitive sensor arrays together with porphyrin sensing materials. This approach can allow the development of reliable devices in the next few years, whose application can be fruitful in different fields, such as environmental monitoring and clinical analysis.
Another area where corroles can have important applications in the next few years is the clinical field. The peculiar optical properties of corrole derivatives make them obvious candidates as photosensitizers in PDT, while Mn- and even lanthanide-conjugated complexes have been exploited as contrast-enhancing agents for MRI. In this area, a promising application of corrole derivatives is their exploitation as antiviral drugs, where preliminary studies have demonstrated unique properties of this contracted macrocycle.
It is worth mentioning that all these applications cannot be possible without further synthetic progress, which should allow the gram-scale syntheses of target corroles. Also, on this scale, important novel protocols have been recently reported and the definition of novel corroles, such as corrole tris-carboxylates, and the improved characterization of their properties, will lead to tumultuous progress of the field in the next few years.
For this reason, we can affirm that corrole chemistry is now reaching maturity and corroles are ready to go to work in many different applied fields.
Author contributions
The authors contributed equally to this work.
Abbreviations

ANCHORANCH sequence cloned upstream of the OR-FP expressing gene
10-az-DFPCorrH35,15-bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-(4-azidophenyl)corrole
BHJSCBulk-heterojunction organic solar cells
BODIPYBOron-DIPYrromethene
BP2000Black Pearls 2000 (electrode)
Br2TPCorrH35,15-Bis-(2,6-dibromophenyl)-10-phenylcorrole
Br8TPFCorrH32,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-Octabromo-5,10,15-tris-pentafluorophenylcorrole
CDCycloDextrin
CNSCentral nervous system
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
COFsCovalent organic frameworks
CT-DNACirculating tumor deoxyribonucleic acid
DAFPCorrH35,15-Bis-(4-aminophenyl)-10-pentafluorophenylcorrole
DFT/TDDFTDensity functional theory/time-dependent density functional theory
DMFDimethylformamide
DMHECorrH37,13-Dimethyl-2,3,8,12,17,18-hexaethylcorrole
5,15-DN-10oMCorrH35,15-Bis-(4-nitrophenyl)-10-(2-methoxycarbonylphenyl)corrole
5,15-D(4-NH2Ph)10-FPCorrH35,15-Bis-(4-aminophenyl)-10-(pentafluorophenyl) corrole
5,15-dpM-10oMCorrH35,15-Bis-(4-methoxycarbonylphenyl)-10-(2-methoxycarbonylphenyl) corrole
DOTA1,4,7,10-TetraazacycloDOdecane-1,4,7,10-TetraAcetic acid
DSSCDye sensitized solar cell
DTPADiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EDGElectron-donating groups
EDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EPGEdge-plane graphite
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
ESIElectrospray ionization
EWGElectron-withdrawing groups
Fluocovir5,15-Bis(2′,3′,5′,6′-tetrafluorophenyl)-10-(pentafluorophenyl)corrole (anti-viral Hit)
FRET charge transferFörster resonance energy transfer charge transfer
FTOFluorine-doped tin oxide (electrode)
hCMVHuman CytoMegaloVirus
H4EDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acid
H5DTPADiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HpDHematoporphyrin derivative
HSAHuman serum albumin
HTMHole transporting material
10-HDPCorrH310-(4-Hydroxylphenyl)-5,15-diphenylcorrole
IE expressionImmediate early expression
LEDsLight emitted diodes
MALDI/TOFMatrix assisted laser desorption ionization/time of flight
MES buffer2-(N-Morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid buffer
MOFMetal organic framework
MPXVMonkeyPoX Virus (Class 3)
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
MWCNTsMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
NaTFPBSodium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate
NaTPBSodium tetraphenylborate
NIRNear-infrared

o-NPOE2-Nitrophenyl octyl ether
OATOxygen atom transfer
OEROxygen evolution reaction
OMCorrH32,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-Octamethylcorrole
ORROxygen reduction reaction
pAldDPFCorrH35,15-Bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-(4-formylphenyl)corrole
PC71BM[6,6]-Phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester
PCAPrincipal component analysis
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PDIPhotodynamic inactivation
PDTPhotodynamic therapy
PETPhotoinduced electron transfer
PETPositron emission tomography
pfuPlaque-forming units
10-PhDPFCorrH35,15-Bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-phenylcorrole
PhotofrinPorfimer sodium (photosensitizer used in PDT)
PK/PDPharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
PMMAPolymethylmetacrylate
PSAPolar surface area
PTB7Poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)-carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (polymer used in solar cells)
PVCPoly(vinyl chloride)
PVDFPolyvinylidene fluoride
10-pyrDFPCorr5,15-Bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-pyrenyl-corrole
QMBsQuartz crystal microbalances
ROSReactive oxygen species
SARStructure–activity relationship
SAWSurface acoustic wave (sensor)
SEMScanning electron microscope
SPECTSingle photon emission computed tomography
spyro-OMeTAD2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene
TACNMe31,4,7-Trimethyl-1,4,7-triazacyclononane
TBHP
tert-Butyl-hydroperoxide
TCF3PCorrH35,15-Diphenyl-10-(4-trifluoromethylphenyl)corrole
TDMAClTributylphosphate and tridodecyl methyl-l ammonium chloride
TECorrH35,10,15-Tris-(ethoxycarbonyl)corrole
TFATrifluoroacetic acid
TFMCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(trifluoromethyl)corrole
T(2,6-Cl2)PCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(2,6-dichlorophenyl)corrole
T(2,6-F2)PCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(2,6-difluorophenyl)corrole
TmCPCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(3-carboxyphenyl)corrole
TMesCorrH35,15-Bis-mesityl,10-(2,4,6-tris-methoxyphenyl)corrole
TMPyP4Free-base 5,10,15,20-tetrakis-(N-methyl-4-pyridyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin
T(4-NH2P)CorrH35,10,15-Tris-(4-aminophenyl)corrole
TNPCorrH35,10,15-tris-(4-nitrophenyl)corrole
TOFTurnover frequency
TPFCorrH35,10,15-Tris-pentafluorophenylcorrole
TPCorrH35,10,15-Triphenylcorrole
TpCPCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(4-carboxyphenyl)corrole
TpMCPCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(4-carboxymethylphenyl)corrole
TPPH25,10,15,20-Tetraphenylporphyrin

p-TsOH
para-Toluenesulfonic acid
TtBuPCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(4-tert-butylphenyl)corrole
TTCorrH35,10,15-Tris-(4-methylphenyl)corrole
VARVVARiola Virus (Class 4)
VOCsVolatile organic compounds

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
CDN gratefully acknowledges the support from Italian INAIL (project Bric2019-ID7), the EU (Horizon2020 Project IMPAQT). CG gratefully acknowledges support from the CNRS (UMR UB-CNRS 6302), the Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, UBFC, the Conseil Régional de Bourgogne through the Plan d'Actions Régional pour l'Innovation (PARI II CDEA), the European Union through the PO FEDERFSE Bourgogne 2014/2020 and the CoMICS (Chemistry of Molecular Interaction Catalysis and Sensors) program, the ISITE CO2DECIN (ANR-15-IDEX-0003, UBFC). The French Research Agency (ANR) is also greatly acknowledged for financial supports (AAPG 2015, ANR-15-CE04-0008, CO3SENS project) and (AAPG 2020, ANR-20-CE39-0016-01, MIPEnz-Decontam project). RP gratefully acknowledges support from the Italian MUR (SUNSET PRIN2017 project #2017EKCS35), the University of Rome Tor Vergata (SensAir project E81I18000180005), the EU (Horizon2020 FET-OPEN project INITIO).
References
A. W. Johnson and I. T. Kay, J. Chem. Soc., 1965, 1620,  10.1039/jr9650001620 .

The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, Amsterdam,  2003, pp. xxvii–xxxvi DOI:10.1016/B978-0-08-092390-1.50006-0 .
R. Paolesse, S. Mini, F. Sagone, T. Boschi, L. Jaquinod, D. J. Nurco and K. M. Smith, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1307–1308,  10.1039/a903247i .
Z. Gross, N. Galili and I. Saltsman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1427–1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Johnson and R. Price, J. Chem. Soc., 1960, 1649,  10.1039/jr9600001649 .
Z. Gross, N. Galili, L. Simkhovich, I. Saltsman, M. Botoshansky, D. Bläser, R. Boese and I. Goldberg, Org. Lett., 1999, 1, 599–602 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahammed, J. J. Weaver, H. B. Gray, M. Abdelas and Z. Gross, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 2077–2079 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ganguly and A. Ghosh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2003–2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Sessler, Z. Gross and H. Furuta, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 2201–2202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gross, L. Simkhovich and N. Galili, Chem. Commun., 1999, 599–600,  10.1039/a900571d .
B. Meunier, S. P. de Visser and S. Shaik, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3947–3980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Paolesse, S. Nardis, D. Monti, M. Stefanelli and C. Di Natale, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 2517–2583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Teo, J. Y. Hwang, J. Termini, Z. Gross and H. B. Gray, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 2711–2729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Orlowski, D. Gryko and D. T. Gryko, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3102–3137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Barata, M. G. Neves, M. A. Faustino, A. C. Tome and J. A. Cavaleiro, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3192–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Z. Ou and K. M. Kadish, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3377–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, W. Lai and R. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3717–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3798–3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nardis, F. Mandoj, M. Stefanelli and R. Paolesse, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 388, 360–405 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Biswas, P. Das, A. Agarwala, D. Bandyopadhyay and P. Bandyopadhyay, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 326, 94–98 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pariyar, S. Bose, A. N. Biswas, P. Das and P. Bandyopadhyay, Catal. Commun., 2013, 32, 23–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, A. Pariyar, A. N. Biswas, P. Das and P. Bandyopadhyay, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 1193–1197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, A. Pariyar, A. N. Biswas, P. Das and P. Bandyopadhyay, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 446–449 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Lansky and D. P. Goldberg, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5119–5125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Chen, K. W. Kwong, A. Carver, W. Luo and R. Zhang, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 497, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Chen, K. W. Kwong, N. F. Lee, D. Ranburger and R. Zhang, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2016, 451, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ranburger, B. Willis, B. Kash, H. Jeddi, C. Alcantar and R. Zhang, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2019, 487, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
A. Varshney, A. Kumar and S. Yadav, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2021, 514, 120013 CrossRef CAS .
N.-C. Ng, M. H. R. Mahmood, H.-Y. Liu, F. Yam, L.-L. Yeung and C.-K. Chang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2014, 25, 571–574 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Zhang, G.-P. Wu and D. J. Darensbourg, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 750–763 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakano, K. Kobayashi, T. Ohkawara, H. Imoto and K. Nozaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8456–8459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Robert, T. Ohkawara and K. Nozaki, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 4789–4795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tiffner, S. Gonglach, M. Haas, W. Schofberger and M. Waser, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1048–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li and Z. Cao, Organometallics, 2018, 37, 406–414 CrossRef CAS .
M. Malik and R. Kaur, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2018, 29, 1078–1085 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gonglach, S. Paul, M. Haas, F. Pillwein, S. S. Sreejith, S. Barman, R. De, S. Mullegger, P. Gerschel, U. P. Apfel, H. Coskun, A. Aljabour, P. Stadler, W. Schofberger and S. Roy, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3864 CrossRef PubMed .
R. De, S. Gonglach, S. Paul, M. Haas, S. S. Sreejith, P. Gerschel, U. P. Apfel, T. H. Vuong, J. Rabeah, S. Roy and W. Schofberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10527–10534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahammed and Z. Gross, Isr. J. Chem., 2016, 56, 756–762 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kadish, L. Fremond, Z. Ou, J. Shao, C. Shi, F. C. Anson, F. Burdet, C. P. Gros, J. M. Barbe and R. Guilard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5625–5631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kosa, N. Levy, L. Elbaz and D. T. Major, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17686–17694 CrossRef CAS .
N. Levy, A. Mahammed, A. Friedman, B. Gavriel, Z. Gross and L. Elbaz, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 2832–2837 CrossRef CAS .
A. Friedman, L. Landau, S. Gonen, Z. Gross and L. Elbaz, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5024–5031 CrossRef CAS .
A. Friedman, I. Saltsman, Z. Gross and L. Elbaz, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 310, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
N. Levy, J. S. Shpilman, H. C. Honig, D. T. Major and L. Elbaz, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12942–12945 RSC .
H. C. Honig, C. B. Krishnamurthy, I. Borge-Durán, M. Tasior, D. T. Gryko, I. Grinberg and L. Elbaz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 26351–26357 CrossRef CAS .
A. Friedman, N. Reddy Samala, H. C. Honig, M. Tasior, D. T. Gryko, L. Elbaz and I. Grinberg, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 1886–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Honig, A. Friedman, N. Zion and L. Elbaz, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8627–8630 RSC .
N. Levy, O. Lori, S. Gonen, M. Mizrahi, S. Ruthstein and L. Elbaz, Carbon, 2020, 158, 238–243 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lei, C. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, X. Chang, W. Zhang and R. Cao, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6429–6437 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, H. Lei, X. Li, J. Qi, W. Zhang and R. Cao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4551–4560 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, X. Li, B. Wang, J. Meng, H. Lei, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18883–18887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Meng, H. Lei, X. Li, W. Zhang and R. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 16324–16331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Raggio, B. Mecheri, S. Nardis, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia and R. Paolesse, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 4760–4765 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, T. Zheng, Y. Tang, X. Li, A. I. Rykov, X. Li, J. Wang, Q. He, J. Cheng and X. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 044506 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rana, Y.-M. Lee, X. Li, R. Cao, S. Fukuzumi and W. Nam, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 3073–3083 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, H. Lei, Z. Zhang, Z. Yao, J. Li, Z. Yu and R. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 9755–9761 RSC .
W. Sinha, A. Mizrahi, A. Mahammed, B. Tumanskii and Z. Gross, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 478–485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Han, H. Lei, M. Chen and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6195–6198 RSC .
X. Li, H. Lei, J. Liu, X. Zhao, S. Ding, Z. Zhang, X. Tao, W. Zhang, W. Wang, X. Zheng and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15070–15075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, S. Sujesh, P. Varshney, A. Paul and S. Jeyaraman, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 11345–11351 RSC .
N. I. Neuman, U. Albold, E. Ferretti, S. Chandra, S. Steinhauer, P. Rossner, F. Meyer, F. Doctorovich, S. E. Vaillard and B. Sarkar, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 16622–16634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mondal, S. Chattopadhyay, S. Dey, A. Mahammed, K. Mittra, A. Rana, Z. Gross and A. Dey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21040–21049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Schofberger, F. Faschinger, S. Chattopadhyay, S. Bhakta, B. Mondal, J. A. Elemans, S. Mullegger, S. Tebi, R. Koch, F. Klappenberger, M. Paszkiewicz, J. V. Barth, E. Rauls, H. Aldahhak, W. G. Schmidt and A. Dey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2350–2355 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sinha, A. Mahammed, N. Fridman and Z. Gross, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3764–3772 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Kwak, A. Mahammed, H. Kim, T. T. Nguyen, Z. Gross, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 214–222 RSC .
W. J. Kwak, H. Kim, Y. K. Petit, C. Leypold, T. T. Nguyen, N. Mahne, P. Redfern, L. A. Curtiss, H. G. Jung, S. M. Borisov, S. A. Freunberger and Y. K. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1380 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, H. Lei, X. Guo, X. Zhao, S. Ding, X. Gao, W. Zhang and R. Cao, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4632–4641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mondal, K. Sengupta, A. Rana, A. Mahammed, M. Botoshansky, S. G. Dey, Z. Gross and A. Dey, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 3381–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Niu, M. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Zhu, J. Mack, G. Fomo, T. Nyokong and X. Liang, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 142, 416–428 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, Y. Qiu, X. Zhang and W. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 3326–3332 RSC .
X. Zhang, W. Guo, W. Zhu and X. Liang, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2021, 25, 273–281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Niu, W. Zhu, J. Mack, N. Dubazana, T. Nyokong, B. Fu, H. Xu and X. Liang, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2021, 25, 289–297 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Yuan, H. H. Wang, J. Kandhadi, H. Wang, S. Z. Zhan and H. Y. Liu, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 31, e3773 CrossRef .
M. A. Morales Vásquez, M. Hamer, N. I. Neuman, A. Y. Tesio, A. Hunt, H. Bogo, E. J. Calvo and F. Doctorovich, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 3259–3268 CrossRef .
H. Chen, D.-L. Huang, M. S. Hossain, G.-T. Luo and H.-Y. Liu, J. Coord. Chem., 2019, 72, 2791–2803 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Q.-H. Fan, M. S. Hossain, S.-Z. Zhan, H.-Y. Liu and L.-P. Si, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2020, 491–498 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Fang, J. Lan, G. Yang, G.-Q. Yuan, H.-Y. Liu and L.-P. Si, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 5127–5136 RSC .
M. Li, Y. Niu, W. Zhu, J. Mack, G. Fomo, T. Nyokong and X. Liang, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 137, 523–531 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gu, J. Wen, W. Zhu and X. Liang, Macroheterocycles, 2019, 12, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sudhakar, A. Mahammed, Q.-C. Chen, N. Fridman, B. Tumanskii and Z. Gross, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2828–2836 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Osterloh, N. Desbois, V. Quesneau, S. Brandes, P. Fleurat-Lessard, Y. Fang, V. Blondeau-Patissier, R. Paolesse, C. P. Gros and K. M. Kadish, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 8562–8579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rodríguez-López, Y. Wu, Y. Ge and D. Villagrán, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 10265–10271 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lai, Z.-Y. Liu, X.-Y. Chen, H. Zhang and H.-Y. Liu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2020, 61, 152426 CrossRef CAS .
M. Goswami, P. Geuijen, J. N. H. Reek and B. de Bruin, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 617–626 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, S. Qi, Z. Niu, Y. Peng, C. Shan, G. Verma, L. Wojtas, Z. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Feng, Y. S. Chen and S. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14443–14450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Gilhula and A. T. Radosevich, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7177–7182 RSC .
X. Zhan, P. Teplitzky, Y. Diskin-Posner, M. Sundararajan, Z. Ullah, Q. C. Chen, L. J. W. Shimon, I. Saltsman, A. Mahammed, M. Kosa, M. H. Baik, D. G. Churchill and Z. Gross, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 6184–6198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, P. Yadav, Y. Diskin-Posner, N. Fridman, M. Sundararajan, Z. Ullah, Q. C. Chen, L. J. W. Shimon, A. Mahammed, D. G. Churchill, M. H. Baik and Z. Gross, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12279–12286 RSC .
D. Walker, S. Chappel, A. Mahammed, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler, H. B. Gray, A. Zaban and Z. Gross, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2012, 10, 1259–1262 CrossRef .
K. Sudhakar, L. Giribabu, P. Salvatori and F. D. Angelis, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2015, 212, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Brennan, Y. C. Lam, P. M. Kim, X. Zhang and G. W. Brudvig, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16124–16130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Alemayehu, N. U. Day, T. Mani, A. B. Rudine, K. E. Thomas, O. A. Gederaas, S. A. Vinogradov, C. C. Wamser and A. Ghosh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18935–18942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Higashino, Y. Kurumisawa, A. B. Alemayehu, R. F. Einrem, D. Sahu, D. Packwood, K. Kato, A. Yamakata, A. Ghosh and H. Imahori, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 12460–12467 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Lai, L. Wang, C. Yang, M.-Y. Chan, X. Guan, C.-C. Kwok and C.-M. Che, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4655–4665 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mishra, B. Basumatary, R. Singhal, G. D. Sharma and J. Sankar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31462–31471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Agresti, B. Berionni Berna, S. Pescetelli, A. Catini, F. Menchini, C. Di Natale, R. Paolesse and A. Di Carlo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003790 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hulanicki, S. Glab and F. Ingman, Pure Appl. Chem., 1991, 63, 1247–1250 Search PubMed .
W. L. Everitt, Proc. IRE, 1952, 40, 899 Search PubMed .

          J. Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors, 3rd edn, Springer US, New York, USA,  2004 Search PubMed .
A. D'Amico and C. Di Natale, IEEE Sens. J., 2001, 1, 183–190 Search PubMed .
D. Schild and D. Restrepo, Physiol. Rev., 1998, 78, 429–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bushdid, M. O. Magnasco, L. B. Vosshall and A. Keller, Science, 2014, 343, 1370–1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Malnic, J. Hirono, T. Sato and L. B. Buck, Cell, 1999, 96, 713–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Persaud and G. Dodd, Nature, 1982, 299, 352–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Vlasov, A. Legin, A. Rudnitskaya, C. Di Natale and A. D'Amico, Pure Appl. Chem., 2005, 77, 1965–1983 CAS .
J. W. Gardner and P. N. Bartlett, Sens. Actuators, B, 1994, 18, 210–211 CrossRef .
S. Marco and A. Gutierrez-Galvez, IEEE Sens. J., 2012, 12, 3189–3214 Search PubMed .
G. Lubes and M. Goodarzi, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6399–6422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Macka, T. Piasecki and P. K. Dasgupta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 7, 183–207 CAS .

          S. N. Sze and K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 3rd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. Rezazadeh, S. Seidi, M. Lid, S. Pedersen-Bjergaard and Y. Yamini, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 118, 548–555 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cantrell, M. M. Erenas, I. De Orbe-Payá and L. F. Capitán-Vallvey, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 531–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Czechowski, A. Nowak-Król, D. T. Gryko and S. Maćkowski, Phys. Scr., 2013, T157, 014009 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ruan, G. Song and G. Ouyang, J. Cell. Biochem., 2009, 107, 1053–1062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Lemon and D. G. Nocera, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 185, 249–266 RSC .
P. D. Beer and P. A. Gale, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 486–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. I. M. Santos, E. Oliveira, J. F. B. Barata, M. A. F. Faustino, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and C. Lodeiro, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2014, 417, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. M. Santos, E. Oliveira, J. F. B. Barata, M. A. F. Faustino, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and C. Lodeiro, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13811–13819 RSC .
C. I. M. Santos, E. Oliveira, J. C. J. M. D. S. Menezes, J. F. B. Barata, M. A. F. Faustino, V. F. Ferreira, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and C. Lodeiro, Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 3361–3370 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cai, F. Xia, Y. Guo, W. Zhu, B. Fu, X. Liang, S. Wang, Z. Cai and H. Xu, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 18012–18017 RSC .
R. H. Selwitz, A. I. Ismail and N. B. Pitts, Lancet, 2007, 369, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Ozsvath, Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol., 2009, 8, 59–79 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pomarico, D. Monti, M. Bischetti, A. Savoldelli, F. R. Fronczek, K. M. Smith, D. Genovese, L. Prodi and R. Paolesse, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 8438–8446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jaworska, F. Caroleo, C. Di Natale, K. Maksymiuk, R. Paolesse and A. Michalska, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2020, 24, 929–937 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yadav, A. Varshney, A. Kumar, R. K. Ratnesh and M. S. Mehata, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2018, 202, 207–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Adinarayana, A. P. Thomas, P. Yadav, A. Kumar and A. Srinivasan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lvova, G. Pomarico, F. Mandoj, F. Caroleo, C. Di Natale, K. M. Kadish and S. Nardis, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2020, 24, 964–972 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Cavalieri, Thyroid, 1997, 7, 177–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Basumatary, M. Ayoub Kaloo, V. Kumar Singh, R. Mishra, M. Murugavel and J. Sankar, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 28417–28420 RSC .
S.-Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
X. Feng, X. Ding and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6010–6022 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Chen, Y. Han, Y. Feng, Z. Zhang and B. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 2532–2540 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Boening, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 1335–1351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. He, F.-L. Ren, X.-B. Zhang and Z.-X. Han, Talanta, 2006, 70, 364–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pariyar, S. Bose, S. S. Chhetri, A. N. Biswas and P. Bandyopadhyay, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 3826–3831 RSC .
S. Fischer, D. Muratore, S. Weinreich, A. Pena-Perez, R. M. Walker, C. Gupta, R. T. Howe and B. Murmann, IEEE Solid-State Circuits Lett., 2019, 2, 41–44 Search PubMed .
X.-B. Zhang, Z.-X. Han, Z.-H. Fang, G.-L. Shen and R.-Q. Yu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 562, 210–215 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jaworska, M. L. Naitana, E. Stelmach, G. Pomarico, M. Wojciechowski, E. Bulska, K. Maksymiuk, R. Paolesse and A. Michalska, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 7107–7114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kassal, M. Sigurnjak and I. M. Steinberg, Talanta, 2019, 193, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jaworska, G. Pomarico, B. B. Berna, K. Maksymiuk, R. Paolesse and A. Michalska, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 306–311 CrossRef CAS .
J. Radecki, I. Stenka, E. Dolusic and W. Dehaen, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 2282–2288 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang and M. E. Meyerhoff, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 2579–2585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Gardner, P. Bartlett and K. Pratt, IEEE Proc. Circuits Devices Syst., 1995, 142, 321–333 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Z. Qin, D. Zeng and C. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 6313–6329 RSC .
J. W. Gardner, P. K. Gua, F. Udrea and J. A. Covington, IEEE Sens. J., 2010, 10, 1833–1848 CAS .
Z. Ma, P. Chen, W. Cheng, K. Yan, L. Pan, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4570–4575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. De La Torre, M. Nicolau and T. Torres, in Supramolecular photosensitive and electroactive materials, ed. H. S. Nalwa, Academic Press,  2001, p. 1 Search PubMed .
T.-M. Chen, J. Gokhale, S. Shofer and W. G. Kuschner, Am. J. Med. Sci., 2007, 333, 249–256 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ogen, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 726, 138605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Ryerson, E. J. Williams and F. C. Fehsenfeld, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2000, 105, 26447–26461 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, Q. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Kong, Q. Wang and C. He, Synth. Met., 2019, 252, 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, F. Zerbetto and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 871–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Akhigbe, Y. Ding, C. Brückner and Y. Lei, Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 1348–1355 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, B. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Lu, T. Zhang, Q. Guo and J. Zhang, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2019, 12, 1940001 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sivalingam, E. Martinelli, A. Catini, G. Magna, G. Pomarico, F. Basoli, R. Paolesse and C. Di Natale, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9151–9157 CrossRef CAS .
G. Magna, M. Muduganti, M. Stefanelli, Y. Sivalingam, F. Zurlo, E. Di Bartolomeo, A. Catini, E. Martinelli, R. Paolesse and C. Di Natale, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 414–424 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, E. A. Alemán, D. A. Modarelli and C. J. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 7411–7417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Oprea and U. Weimar, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2019, 411, 1761–1787 CAS .
S. Fanget, S. Hentz, P. Puget, J. Arcamone, M. Matheron, E. Colinet, P. Andreucci, L. Duraffourg, E. Meyers and M. L. Roukes, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 160, 804–821 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mohanty and M. Imboden, RSC Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 31, 411–447 CAS .

          D. Ballantine, R. White, S. Martin, A. Riccò, E. Zellers, G. Fryre and H. Wohltjen, Acoustic Wave Sensors, Academic Press, San Diego, USA,  1997 Search PubMed .
J. Grate, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2617–2648 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Paolesse, C. Di Natale, A. Macagnano, F. Sagone, M. A. Scarselli, P. Chiaradia, V. I. Troitsky, T. S. Berzina and A. D'Amico, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 1268–1274 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Barbe, G. Canard, S. Brandes, F. Jerome, G. Dubois and R. Guilard, Dalton Trans., 2004, 1208–1214,  10.1039/b316706b .
J.-M. Barbe, G. Canard, S. Brandès and R. Guilard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3103–3106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Barbe, G. Canard, S. Brandès and R. Guilard, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 2118–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Brandès, V. Quesneau, O. Fonquernie, N. Desbois, V. Blondeau-Patissier and C. P. Gros, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 11651–11662 RSC .
M. Vanotti, S. Poisson, V. Soumann, V. Quesneau, S. Brandès, N. Desbois, J. Yang, L. André, C. P. Gros and V. Blondeau-Patissier, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 332, 129507 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Jakubik, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 986–993 CrossRef CAS .
V. Quesneau, W. Shan, N. Desbois, S. Brandès, Y. Rousselin, M. Vanotti, V. Blondeau-Patissier, M. Naitana, P. Fleurat-Lessard, E. Van Caemelbecke, K. M. Kadish and C. P. Gros, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 4265–4277 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kadish, Z. Ou, J. Shao, C. P. Gros, J.-M. Barbe, F. Jérôme, F. Bolze, F. Burdet and R. Guilard, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 3990–4005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Suslick, P. Bhyrappa, J.-H. Chou, M. E. Kosal, S. Nakagaki, D. W. Smithenry and S. R. Wilson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 283–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tortora, G. Pomarico, S. Nardis, E. Martinelli, A. Catini, A. D'Amico, C. Di Natale and R. Paolesse, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 187, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
A. Savoldelli, G. Magna, C. Di Natale, A. Catini, S. Nardis, F. R. Fronczek, K. M. Smith and R. Paolesse, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 14819–14826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Capuano, G. Pomarico, R. Paolesse and C. Di Natale, Sensors, 2015, 15, 8121–8130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, J. Kim, D. H. Jung, T. B. Lee, S. B. Choi, J. H. Yoon, J. Kim, K. Choi and S.-H. Choi, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 317–323 CrossRef CAS .
H. Haick, Y. Y. Broza, P. Mochalski, V. Ruzsanyi and A. Amann, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1423–1449 RSC .
M. Serasanambati, Y. Y. Broza, A. Marmur and H. Haick, iScience, 2019, 11, 178–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dummer, M. Storer, M. Swanney, M. McEwan, A. Scott-Thomas, S. Bhandari, S. Chambers, R. Dweik and M. Epton, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2011, 30, 960–967 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Galizia and P. M. Lledo, in Neurosciences – From Molecule to Behavior, ed. C. G. Galizia and P. M. Lledo, Springer Verlag,  2013, pp. 253–284 Search PubMed .
C. Di Natale, A. Macagnano, E. Martinelli, R. Paolesse, G. D'Arcangelo, C. Roscioni, A. Finazzi-Agrò and A. D'Amico, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 18, 1209–1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Murdocca, R. Capuano, S. Pucci, R. Cicconi, C. Polidoro, A. Catini, E. Martinelli, R. Paolesse, A. Orlandi, R. Mango, G. Novelli, C. Di Natale and F. Sangiuolo, Front. Oncol., 2019, 9, 927 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Capuano, P. Spitalieri, R. V. Talarico, A. Catini, A. C. Domakoski, E. Martinelli, M. G. Scioli, A. Orlandi, R. Cicconi, R. Paolesse, G. Novelli, C. Di Natale and F. Sangiuolo, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 11056 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Capuano, A. C. Domakoski, F. Grasso, L. Picci, A. Catini, R. Paolesse, G. Sirugo, E. Martinelli, M. Ponzi and C. Di Natale, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 341–351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wahsner, E. M. Gale, A. Rodriguez-Rodriguez and P. Caravan, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 957–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. F. Calvete, S. M. A. Pinto, M. M. Pereira and C. F. G. C. Geraldes, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 333, 82–107 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Price and C. Orvig, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 260–290 RSC .
M. D. Phipps, V. A. Sanders and M. A. Deri, Bioconjugate Chem., 2021, 32, 1331–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Desbois, C. Michelin, Y. Chang, V. Stupar, M. Bonnaud, S. Pacquelet and C. P. Gros, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015, 56, 7128–7131 CrossRef CAS .
N. Desbois, S. Pacquelet, A. Dubois, C. Michelin and C. P. Gros, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2015, 11, 2202–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Sims, J. Y. Hwang, S. Wagner, F. Alonso-Valenteen, C. Hanson, J. M. Taguiam, R. Polo, I. Harutyunyan, G. Karapetyan, K. Sorasaenee, A. Ibrahim, E. Marban, R. Moats, H. B. Gray, Z. Gross and L. K. Medina-Kauwe, J. Controlled Release, 2015, 217, 92–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Buckley, M. R. Anstey, D. T. Gryko and J. Arnold, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3104–3106 RSC .
N. Semenishyn and Z. Gross, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 3775–3778 RSC .
P. Lejault, J. Mitteaux, F. R. Sperti and D. Monchaud, Cell Chem. Biol., 2021, 28, 436–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Murat, Y. Singh and E. Defrancq, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5293–5307 RSC .
Q. Cao, Y. Li, E. Freisinger, P. Z. Qin, R. K. O. Sigel and Z.-W. Mao, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 10–32 RSC .
D. Varshney, J. Spiegel, K. Zyner, D. Tannahill and S. Balasubramanian, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2020, 21, 459–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Spiegel, S. Adhikari and S. Balasubramanian, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 123–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fu, J. Huang, L. Ren, X. Weng, Y. Zhou, Y. Du, X. Wu, X. Zhou and G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3264–3266,  10.1039/b704599a .
H. Ma, M. Zhang, D. Zhang, R. Huang, Y. Zhao, H. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Weng, Y. Zhou, M. Deng, L. Xu and X. Zhou, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 114–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fu, D. Zhang, X. Weng, M. Zhang, H. Ma, Y. Ma and X. Zhou, Chemistry, 2008, 14, 9431–9441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J.-Y. Wen, B.-B. Lv, X. Li, X. Ying, Y.-J. Wang, H.-T. Zhang, H. Wang, H.-Y. Liu and C. K. Chang, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 30, 132–139 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J.-y. Wen, X.-l. Wang, M. H. R. Mahmood, Z.-Y. Liu, H. Wang, L.-n. Ji and H.-y. Liu, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2014, 28, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhai, L. Xu, Y. Ge, T. Tian, W. Wu, S. Yan, Y. Zhou, M. Deng, Y. Liu and X. Zhou, Chemistry, 2011, 17, 8890–8895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pradhan, A. Garai, B. Patra, S. Kar and P. K. Maiti, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4851–4854 RSC .
N. S. Lurain and S. Chou, Clin. Microbiol. Rev., 2010, 23, 689–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Gros, N. Desbois, C. Michelin, E. Demilly, A. F. Tilkin-Mariame, B. Mariame and F. Gallardo, ACS Infect. Dis., 2015, 1, 350–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kappler-Gratias, L. Bucher, N. Desbois, Y. Rousselin, K. Bystricky, C. P. Gros and F. Gallardo, RSC Med. Chem., 2020, 11, 783–801 RSC .
L. Bucher, S. Kappler-Gratias, N. Desbois, K. Bystricky, F. Gallardo and C. P. Gros, RSC Med. Chem., 2020, 11, 771–782 RSC .
S. Kappler-Gratias, L. Bucher, S. Top, C. Quentin-Froignant, N. Desbois, S. Bertagnoli, M. Louison, E. Monge, A. Bousquet-Melou, M. Lacroix, C. P. Gros and F. Gallardo, ACS Infect. Dis., 2021, 7, 2370–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Habermeyer and R. Guilard, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2018, 17, 1675–1690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Amos-Tautua, S. P. Songca and O. S. Oluwafemi, Molecules, 2019, 24, 2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bornhutter, N. Shamali, I. Saltsman, A. Mahammed, Z. Gross, G. Daschlein and B. Roder, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2018, 178, 606–613 CrossRef PubMed .
T. A. F. Cardote, J. F. B. Barata, C. Amador, E. Alves, M. Neves, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, A. Cunha, A. Almeida and M. A. F. Faustino, An. Acad. Bras. Cienc., 2018, 90, 1175–1185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Preuss, I. Saltsman, A. Mahammed, M. Pfitzner, I. Goldberg, Z. Gross and B. Roder, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2014, 133, 39–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Barata, R. J. Pinto, V. I. Vaz Serra, A. J. Silvestre, T. Trindade, M. G. Neves, J. A. Cavaleiro, S. Daina, P. Sadocco and C. S. Freire, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Castro, N. M. M. Moura, F. Figueira, R. I. Ferreira, M. M. Q. Simoes, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, M. A. F. Faustino, A. J. D. Silvestre, C. S. R. Freire, J. P. C. Tome, S. Nakagaki, A. Almeida and M. Neves, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2019, 20, 2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Escudero, C. Carrillo-Carrión, M. C. Castillejos, E. Romero-Ben, C. Rosales-Barrios and N. Khiar, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 3788–3812 RSC .
J. Tian, B. Huang, M. H. Nawaz and W. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 420, 213410 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, J. Song, J. Qu and Z. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4258–4278 RSC .
A. Gomes, M. Neves and J. A. S. Cavaleiro, An. Acad. Bras. Cienc., 2018, 90, 993–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Almeida-Marrero, E. van de Winckel, E. Anaya-Plaza, T. Torres and A. de la Escosura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7369–7400 RSC .
T. Goslinski and J. Piskorz, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 304–321 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haber and Z. Gross, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5812–5827 RSC .
X. Jiang, R. X. Liu, H. Y. Liu and C. K. Chang, J. Chin. Chem.
Soc., 2019, 66, 1090–1099 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kubota, S. Asayama and H. Kawakami, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 3165–3191 RSC .
C. M. Lemon, Pure Appl. Chem., 2020, 92, 1901–1919 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. M. Lopes, M. Pineiro and E. M. T. Pinho, Molecules, 2020, 25, 3450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahammed and Z. Gross, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 379, 121–132 CrossRef CAS .
D. Samaroo, E. Perez, A. Aggarwal, A. Wills and N. O'Connor, Ther. Delivery, 2014, 5, 859–872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Tsipis, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 32504–32529 RSC .
T. Zou, C. T. Lum, C. N. Lok, J. J. Zhang and C. M. Che, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8786–8801 RSC .
H. Agadjanian, J. Ma, A. Rentsendorj, V. Valluripalli, J. Y. Hwang, A. Mahammed, D. L. Farkas, H. B. Gray, Z. Gross and L. K. Medina-Kauwe, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6105–6110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. H. Wang, H. J. Yu, Y. Z. Xiong, H. T. Zhang, L. N. Ji and H. Y. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 9481–9490 RSC .
J. Y. Hwang, J. Lubow, D. Chu, J. Ma, H. Agadjanian, J. Sims, H. B. Gray, Z. Gross, D. L. Farkas and L. K. Medina-Kauwe, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2011, 8, 2233–2243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Soll, Q. C. Chen, B. Zhitomirsky, P. P. Lim, J. Termini, H. B. Gray, Y. G. Assaraf and Z. Gross, Cell Death Discovery, 2020, 6, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Sharma, A. Mahammed, M. Soll, B. Tumanskii and Z. Gross, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12789–12792 RSC .
Y. M. Sun, X. Jiang, Z. Y. Liu, L. G. Liu, Y. H. Liao, L. Zeng, Y. Ye and H. Y. Liu, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2020, 208, 112794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pribisko, J. Palmer, R. H. Grubbs, H. B. Gray, J. Termini and P. Lim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E2258–E2266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Arambula and J. L. Sessler, Chem, 2020, 6, 1634–1651 CAS .
W. Lee, X. Zhan, J. Palma, J. Vestfrid, Z. Gross and D. G. Churchill, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4605–4641 RSC .
J.-Y. Shin, S.-H. Kim, S. Lee, Y. S. Lee, W.-S. Han and K.-K. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2021, 763, 138165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haas, D. Krisch, S. Gonglach, M. Bechmann, M. C. Scharber, M. Ertl, U. Monkowius and W. Schöfberger, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2021, 1525–1537 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Alberto, B. C. De Simone, S. Liuzzi, T. Marino, N. Russo and M. Toscano, J. Comput. Chem., 2020, 41, 1395–1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, J. Mack, L. M. Zheng, Z. Shen and N. Kobayashi, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 2797–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahammed, K. Chen, J. Vestfrid, J. Zhao and Z. Gross, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7091–7103 RSC .
J. Pohl, I. Saltsman, A. Mahammed, Z. Gross and B. Roder, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2015, 118, 305–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. J. Yu, H. Huang, H. H. Wang, S. Wu, H. Y. Liu and H. T. Zhang, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2019, 163, 779–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. C. Chen, Z. Y. Xiao, S. Fite, A. Mizrahi, N. Fridman, X. Zhan, O. Keisar, Y. Cohen and Z. Gross, Chemistry, 2019, 25, 11383–11388 CAS .
R. F. Einrem, A. B. Alemayehu, S. M. Borisov, A. Ghosh and O. A. Gederaas, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 10596–10601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Alemayehu, L. J. McCormick-McPherson, J. Conradie and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 8315–8321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Thomassen, L. J. McCormick-McPherson, S. M. Borisov and A. Ghosh, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 7551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sinha, L. Ravotto, P. Ceroni and S. Kar, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 17767–17773 RSC .
S. M. Borisov, A. Alemayehu and A. Ghosh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5822–5828 RSC .
B. Babu, E. Prinsloo, J. Mack and T. Nyokong, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 18805–18812 RSC .
S.-H. Lai, L.-L. Wang, B. Wan, A.-W. Lu, H. Wang and H.-Y. Liu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 390, 112283 CrossRef CAS .
A.-N. Xie, Z. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, A. Ali, D.-X. Zhang, H. Wang, L.-N. Ji and H.-Y. Liu, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2018, 22, 739–750 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kupershmidt, Z. Okun, T. Amit, S. Mandel, I. Saltsman, A. Mahammed, O. Bar-Am, Z. Gross and M. B. Youdim, J. Neurochem., 2010, 113, 363–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Soll, O. Bar Am, A. Mahammed, I. Saltsman, S. Mandel, M. B. Youdim and Z. Gross, ACS Chem. Neurosci., 2016, 7, 1374–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Haber, M. Aviram and Z. Gross, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 295–302 RSC .
L. M. F. Gomes, A. Mahammed, K. E. Prosser, J. R. Smith, M. A. Silverman, C. J. Walsby, Z. Gross and T. Storr, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1634–1643 RSC .
R. D. Teo, H. B. Gray, P. Lim, J. Termini, E. Domeshek and Z. Gross, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13789–13792 RSC .
A. B. Alemayehu and A. Ghosh, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2012, 15, 106–110 CrossRef .
E. Rabinovich, I. Goldberg and Z. Gross, Chemistry, 2011, 17, 12294–12301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, W. Lee, K. Sudhakar, D. Kim, A. Mahammed, D. G. Churchill and Z. Gross, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 8442–8446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Iglesias, J. F. B. Barata, P. M. R. Pereira, H. Girao, R. Fernandes, J. P. C. Tome, M. Neves and J. A. S. Cavaleiro, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2015, 153, 32–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Barata, A. Zamarron, M. G. Neves, M. A. Faustino, A. C. Tome, J. A. Cavaleiro, B. Roder, A. Juarranz and F. Sanz-Rodriguez, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2015, 92, 135–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Mavridis and K. Yannakopoulou, J. Med. Chem., 2020, 63, 3391–3424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Liang, H. Y. Liu, R. Zhou, Z. Zhang, A. Ali, B. J. Han, Y. J. Liu and X. Y. Xiao, J. Membr. Biol., 2016, 249, 419–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Wang, Y. Li, H.-Q. Yuan, D.-H. Wu, X. Ying, L. Shi, H.-T. Zhang and H.-Y. Liu, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 31, e3571 CrossRef .
L. L. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. T. Huang, H. Zhu, X. Ying, L. N. Ji and H. Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 535–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, Z. Zhang, H. Wang and H. Y. Liu, Bioorg. Chem., 2016, 67, 57–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Liu, Y. M. Sun, Z. Y. Liu, Y. H. Liao, L. Zeng, Y. Ye and H. Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 2234–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, W. Yang, S. Zneg, T. Mo, Z. Zhang, M. Cao and H. Liu, Chem. J. Chinese Univ., 2016, 37, 1059–1068 CAS .
X. Liang, J. Fang, M. Li, Q. Chen, J. Mack, N. Molupe, T. Nyokong and W. Zhu, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2018, 21, 751–758 CrossRef .
K. Sahu, S. Mondal, S. M. Mobin and S. Kar, J. Org. Chem., 2021, 86, 3324–3333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qiao and F. Lissel, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 868–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Iglesias, J. F. B. Barata, C. I. V. Ramos, M. G. Santana-Marques, M. G. P. M. S. Neves and J. A. S. Cavaleiro, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16824–16838 RSC .
C. M. Lemon and M. A. Marletta, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 2716–2729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Koszarna and D. T. Gryko, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 3707–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Dogutan, S. A. Stoian, R. McGuire, Jr., M. Schwalbe, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 131–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lindsey and R. W. Wagner, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 54, 828–836 CrossRef .
J. Oelmann, R. G. Miller, D. Baabe, N. Metzler-Nolte and M. Bröring, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2020, 3059–3069 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yadav, S. Khoury, N. Fridman, V. K. Sharma, A. Kumar, M. Majdoub, A. Kumar, Y. Diskin-Posner, A. Mahammed and Z. Gross, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 12829–12834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Canard, D. Gao, A. D'Aleo, M. Giorgi, F. X. Dang and T. S. Balaban, Chemistry, 2015, 21, 7760–7771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, C. Azarias, A. D'Aléo, M. Giorgi, O. Siri, T. S. Balaban, D. Jacquemin and G. Canard, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 780–788 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Thomas, N. Desbois, J. Conradie, S. J. Teat, C. P. Gros and A. Ghosh, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 533–540 RSC .
W. Shan, N. Desbois, S. Pacquelet, S. Brandès, Y. Rousselin, J. Conradie, A. Ghosh, C. P. Gros and K. M. Kadish, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 7677–7689 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fang, W. R. Osterloh, N. Desbois, S. Pacquelet, P. Fleurat-Lessard, C. P. Gros and K. M. Kadish, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 15913–15927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deschamps, Y. Chang, A. Langlois, N. Desbois, C. P. Gros and P. D. Harvey, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 5835–5845 RSC .
S. Ganguly, L. J. Giles, K. E. Thomas, R. Sarangi and A. Ghosh, Chemistry, 2017, 23, 15098–15106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Thomas, H. Vazquez-Lima, Y. Fang, Y. Song, K. J. Gagnon, C. M. Beavers, K. M. Kadish and A. Ghosh, Chemistry, 2015, 21, 16839–16847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ganguly, L. J. McCormick, J. Conradie, K. J. Gagnon, R. Sarangi and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 9656–9669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Rahman, M. D. Ryan, H. Vazquez-Lima, A. Alemayehu and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 3232–3238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lim, K. E. Thomas, B. Hedman, K. O. Hodgson, A. Ghosh and E. I. Solomon, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 6722–6730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ganguly, D. Renz, L. J. Giles, K. J. Gagnon, L. J. McCormick, J. Conradie, R. Sarangi and A. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 14788–14800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Corrado Di Natale
	Prof. Corrado Di Natale. Received a Laurea in Physics from the University of Rome La Sapienza in 1987. Since 1991, he has been with the University of Rome Tor Vergata where he is full professor of Electronics. His studies have been carried out in the field of chemical sensors, most of his contributions were in the development of porphyrinoids based electronic noses and electronic tongues and their applications to different fields such as food analysis, environmental control, and medical diagnosis. Among the various applications, he pioneered in 2003 the diagnosis of lung cancer with gas sensors. He has published more than 340 papers in refereed journal and several book chapters. His papers have been cited more than 12500 times and his h-index is 61 (source Scopus). He is co-inventor of eight patents and contributed to fund two spin-off companies.

Claude P. Gros
	Prof. Claude P. Gros. Graduation in Chemistry from the Université de Bourgogne in 1995 under the supervision of Prof. R. Guilard. After a one-year post-doc position in California (UCDavis) in the lab of Prof. K. M. Smith working on chlorins and pyrroloporphyrins, he started his career as an Assistant Professor at the Université de Bourgogne, where he has been Full Professor of Organic Chemistry since 2009 (at the medicinal/pharmaceutical school). His research interests include the synthesis and reactivity of corroles, porphyrins, BODIPYs and dipyrrins and their metal complexes with applications in energy and electron transfers, gas sensors and medicinal chemistry. He is the co-author of 155 papers in international journals (H-index 40; >4350 citations), and he is the coinventor of four patents.

Roberto Paolesse
	Prof. Roberto Paolesse received a Laurea degree in Chemistry (Summa cum Laude) from the University of Rome La Sapienza in 1983. After a post-doc period at the same University, he has been at the University of Rome Tor Vergata since 1986, and he is now full professor in Chemistry at the Department of Chemical Science and Technologies. His research interests cover the synthesis and characterization of porphyrinoids and their applications in chemical sensors, sensors arrays and optoelectronic devices. He serves as Associated editor of the Journal of Porphyrins and Phthalocyanines since 2006. He is author and co-author of more than 430 research articles (H-index 57-June 2021), and edited two books.

 	Fig. 1  The molecular structure of corrole.	 

 	Fig. 2  Catalytic cycle for cyclooctene oxidation catalysed by CorrFe.25	 

 	Fig. 3  The catalytic cycle for sulfide oxidation catalysed by CorrFe.26	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structure of CorrFe catalysts employed for CO2 copolymerization.31	 

 	Fig. 5  The reaction mechanism and calculated DFT structures of CorrMn. Adapted with permission from ref. 33, which is an open-access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY), Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structure of a PEG-ylated corrole exploited for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.36	 

 	Fig. 7  Catalytic cycle for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 by CorrCo. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36, which is an open-access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular structure of corrole complexes exploited as electrocatalysts for the ORR in alkaline solutions.41	 

 	Fig. 9  Electropolymerization of T(4-NH2P)CorrCo(PPh3). Reproduced from ref. 42, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  Mechanism of the formation of pyrazine bridging units. Reproduced from ref. 42, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular structure of β-halogenated Co corroles employed as ORR catalysts.44	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular structures of Co corroles exploited as ORR catalysts.45–47	 

 	Fig. 13  Molecular structure of the 10-pyrenyl-substituted Co corrole employed as the ORR catalyst.49	 

 	Fig. 14  Structure of the corrole grafted onto CNT by click-chemistry.50	 

 	Fig. 15  Functionalization steps of Fe3O4 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 51, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 16  Molecular structures and deposition techniques for the grafting and dispersion of Co corroles on CNT.52	 

 	Fig. 17  Molecular structures of iron complexes tested as ORR electrocatalysts.54	 

 	Fig. 18  The catalytic cycle for the ORR catalysed by TPFCorrCo.55	 

 	Fig. 19  Axial Ligands of TPFCorrCo employed to study their influence on the OER catalytic activity.56	 

 	Fig. 20  The catalytic cycle for the ORR catalysed by TPFCorrCo.56	 

 	Fig. 21  CV spectra in water/acetonitrile solution with (continuous line) and without (dotted line) TPFCorrCo in different amounts of TBAOH. Reproduced from ref. 57, with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 22  Molecular structures of functionalized Co corroles exploited as OER catalysts.58	 

 	Fig. 23  Preparation pathways for the covalent grafting of Co corroles onto CNTs.59	 

 	Fig. 24  Dispersion of Co corroles onto CNTs.59	 

 	Fig. 25  Molecular structures of Co corrole complexes exploited as OER catalysts.61	 

 	Fig. 26  The molecular structure of Br8TPFCorrCo employed as an OER catalyst.62	 

 	Fig. 27  The molecular structure of the water-soluble Mn corrole studied as a catalyst for the OER.63	 

 	Fig. 28  Molecular structures of Co and Fe corroles tested as water oxidation electrocatalysts.64	 

 	Fig. 29  Molecular structures and CV spectra of metal corrole complexes. Adapted from ref. 65, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 30  The catalytic cycle of T(2,6-F2)PCorrCu in Li–O2 batteries. Adapted from ref. 65, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 31  Molecular structures of trans-A2B Co corroles employed as HER catalysts.69	 

 	Fig. 32  Molecular structures of meso-expanded Co corroles exploited as HER and ORR electrocatalysts.70	 

 	Fig. 33  Molecular structures of Co corroles.71	 

 	Fig. 34  Molecular structures of 10-substituted Co corroles studied as HER and ORR catalysts.72	 

 	Fig. 35  Molecular structures of the A3 corroles dispersed on MWCNTs.74	 

 		 
TP* + Et3N → TP˙− + Et3N˙+
[MI(Cor)]2− + Et3NH+ → H[MII(Cor)]− + Et3N
H[MII(Cor)]− + Et3NH+ → [MI(Cor)] +H2 + Et3N
Et3N˙+ + Et3N → Et3NH+ + Et2NCHCH3
Et2NCHCH3 + [MIII(Cor)] → Et2N+ + CHCH3 + [MII(Cor)]−
TP˙− + [MIII(Cor)] → TP + [MII(Cor)]−
TP˙− + [MII(Cor)]− → TP + [MI(Cor)]2−

 	Fig. 36  Molecular structures of functionalized TPFCorrCoPPh3 complexes.76	 

 	Fig. 37  Catalytic cycle for hydrogen production by Co corroles.76	 

 	Fig. 38  Molecular structures of functionalized CorrCo.77	 

 	Fig. 39  Multi-way catalytic cycle for the HER catalysed by CorrCo.77	 

 	Fig. 40  Molecular structures of 10-functionalized CorrCu.79	 

 	Fig. 41  β-CF3-functionalized CorrCu as HER catalysts.80	 

 	Fig. 42  The proposed catalytic cycle for the HER catalysed by free-base corroles.65	 
CorrH3 + HA → CorrH4+ + A−
CorrH4+ + e− → CorrH4
CorrH4 + e− → CorrH4−
CorrH4− → CorrH2− + H2
CorrH2− + HA → CorrH3 + A−,

 	Fig. 43  The formation of heterocycles catalysed by Co–corrole anions.84	 

 	Fig. 44  The catalytic cycle of heterocycle formation catalysed by porphyrin Co complexes.84	 

 	Fig. 45  Molecular structures of Co corrole catalysts tested for heterocycle formation.84	 

 	Fig. 46  Hetero Diels–Alder reactions between benzaldehydes and dienes.85	 

 	Fig. 47  Synthetic routes to P corroles.86	 

 	Fig. 48  Molecular structures of CF3-substituted P corroles.87	 

 	Fig. 49  Molecular structures of Al and Ga corrole photocatalysts.88	 

 	Fig. 50  Molecular structures of Ga and P corrole photosensitizers.91	 

 	Fig. 51  Molecular structures of TpCPCorrAu and TmCPCorrAu tested as photosensitizers in DSSC.92	 

 	Fig. 52  Structures of the solar cells developed by (a) vacuum deposition, (b) the solution process. Reproduced from ref. 94, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 53  Molecular structures of Au corroles.94	 

 	Fig. 54  The structure of the BODIPY-CorrGa-based BHJSC. Reproduced from ref. 95, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 55  The molecular structure of the BODIPY-CorrGa dyad.95	 

 	Fig. 56  The structure of the perovskite cell using TtBuPCorrCu as the HTM. Adapted from ref. 96, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 57  (A) A conceptual scheme of chemical sensors. Analytes interact with the sensitive material, changing some of its physical properties (e.g. the mass: Δm, the conductivity: Δσ, the surface potential: ΔΦ; or the absorbance spectrum (ΔAλ). The transducer is a physical sensor sensitive to one of the above-mentioned physical quantities, and, from the point of view of electronics, it is a circuit element. Thus, the interaction with analytes results in a change of resistance (ΔR), or capacitance (ΔC), or transconductance (Δgm) or the frequency of a resonator (Δf). In the interface circuit, the transducer response is converted into a measurable electric signal in the domains of time and frequency (Δv(t, f)). An example of the transforms chain is shown in panel B. A material made of corrole receptor molecules is applied to coat the surface of a mass transducer. The transducer is an electromechanical resonator that forces the signal of an oscillator circuit to its own resonance frequency. A frequency meter is then applied to measure, at a given temporal rate, the circuit output. A time-variable signal manifests the adsorption of molecules onto the film of corroles.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 58  Corrole-based quantum dots as oxygen sensors. Panel A shows the structures of the two corroles. Panel B shows the self-assembly of corroles onto the surface of a fluorescent nanoparticle and the direction of FRET charge transfer. Functionalized quantum dots are then encapsulated in micelles. Panel C shows the changes in the fluorescence decay. A Stern–Volmer plot of compound 1 calculated with intensity and lifetime decreases. Reproduced from ref. 115, with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 59  Scheme of the 3-substituted TPFCorrGa complex (panel A) and spectrofluorimetric titration of F− (panel B), CN− (panel C), and H2PO4− (panel C) in toluene. The insets of panels B, C and D show the response curves of emission intensity at 616 nm to the concentration of the three compounds in units of 10−5 M. Adapted from ref. 117, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 60  (A) 8-Hydroxyquinoline Ga(III)corrole. (B) Proposed mechanisms of photoinduced electron transfer (PET) from 8-hydroxyquinoline and corrole in the three states, consequent to the exposure to acid and basic conditions. (C) Emission spectra as a function of pH in acidic and basic solutions. Reproduced from ref. 120, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 61  (A) Fluoride-sensitive TTCorrSi. (B) Absorbance spectra at various concentrations of F− in DMSO. (C) Colorimetric comparison of the addition of different anions in DMSO. The cuvette labeled as L shows the pristine solution. (D) Colorimetric changes in Si(IV) corrole immobilized in a paper strip at different concentrations of F− in MES buffer at pH = 5.5: (a) = 10−2 M L−1; (b) = 10−3 M L−1; (c) = 10−4 M L−1; (d) = 10−5 M L−1; (e) = 10−6 M L−1; (f) = blank solution. Reproduced from ref. 123, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 62  (A) A schematic representation of a fluoride-sensitive corrole. (B) The spectrofluorometric titration of F− in toluene. The inset shows the emission intensities at 626 nm and 680 nm with respect to the concentration of F− in units of 10−5 M. (C) Spectrofluorometric titration of F− for the compound in scheme A immobilized in polyacrylamide. The insets show the dynamic response versus time for the emission at 624 and 680 nm. Adapted from ref. 118, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 63  (A) A schematic representation of the CN−-sensitive TTCorrCo(PPh3). (B) Images taken with a smartphone in ambient light, at a color temperature of 4780 K, of the TTCorrCo(PPh3) in scheme A spotted in filter paper and exposed to a 0.01 M concentration of anions in water. Adapted from ref. 127, with permission from World Scientific, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 64  (A) The molecular structure of the iodide-sensitive Br8TPFCorrCu. (B) The sensitivity to I− can be explained by considering the one-electron oxidation of iodide by the highly electron-deficient Cu(II) center; the bromine atoms facilitate strong electron-withdrawing effects, resulting in the color change of the Cu–corrole complex. (C) The above-described process is highly selective to iodide as compared to other anions, as shown by the absorbance at 441 nm. Reproduced from ref. 120, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 65  (A) Schematic representation of mercury-sensitive corrole. (B) Emission fluorescence at increasing concentrations of Hg2+ in toluene upon the addition of methanolic solutions of Hg(II)–acetate. Fluorescence excited at 450 nm. (C) A Stern–Volmer plot showing a limit of detection around 7 μM. (D) Comparison of the fluorescence quenching for various cations at 2 × 10−6 M in toluene. Reproduced from ref. 135, with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 66  (A) A schematic diagram of the solvothermal synthesis of a corrole-based covalent organic framework. (B) Vertical and lateral views of the stacking mode. (C) Absorbance and emission spectra. (D) A comparison of the emission intensity at 635 nm, excited at 425 nm, of 0.1 mg mL−1 solution of the compound in scheme A in THF. Ions were added at 2 × 10−4 M. The intensity was normalized in the blank solution. The emission was enhanced by Ga(III), Al(III), Cr(III), and Fe(III) and quenched by Cu(II). Reproduced from ref. 132, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 67  (A) A schematic representation of the construction of a paper-based ion-selective sensor incorporating valinomycin as a potassium chelating element, and a mixture of Co(II) and Co(III) complexes of porphyrin and corrole in multiwalled carbon nanotubes. (B) The potentiometric response of the sensor versus the activity of K+. Electrodes were prepared with a 1:1 porphyrin/corrole ratio and for different cation exchangers (KTFB: potassium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate and NaTFBP: sodium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate) and without multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT). Adapted from ref. 140, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 68  (A) A schematic representation of the Cu–corrole complexes sensitive to NO2. (B) Scanning electron microscopy image of the self-assembled nanostructures formed by compounds in scheme A. (C) The current–voltage curves of nanoneedles (1) and nanoribbons (2). (D) The sensor response curves fitted with a quadratic curve shows the greatest sensitivity of the nanoribbons (compound 2) as compared to the nanoneedles. Reproduced from ref. 151, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 69  (A) A schematic representation of the steps for the preparation of corrole-coated ZnO nanoparticles. Corroles were added to a solution of zinc acetate dihydrate and ethanol and kept at 120 °C for 12 h. The solution was centrifuged and dried and the powder dissolved in toluene and used as a coating by drop-casting on a glass substrate endowed with gold interdigitated electrodes. (B) Transmission electron microscopy image showing that the nanoparticles have a nonmetric size and a round shape; the surface organic layer is visible in the pictures. (C) The sensor's sensitivity pattern shows the ambipolar response: electron donor species decrease the resistance (negative sensitivity), while most of the other compounds increase the resistance (positive sensitivity). Reproduced from ref. 158, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 70  (A) Schematic structure of the SAW sensor; the sensitive portion of the device is the space between a couple of interdigitated electrodes. The gap between the electrodes (40 μm) determines the wavelength of the acoustic wave. (B) Top view of the SAW. Two devices are pictured, one is used as the sensor and the other as the reference. The Co–corrole film is visible in the magnified view on top of the metal electrodes in particular. (C) A comparison of the responses measured as changes in the wave phase velocity to form vapors and gases. The concentration is shown in the horizontal axis label. For H2O, the response to a change from 17% to 22% of relative humidity is plotted. (D) Changes in the response curve to CO in the presence of various interferents. The green line corresponds to the pure response to CO. In the case of interferents, the sensitivity (the slope of the response curve) increases or decreases. Adapted from ref. 170, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 71  (A) Acrolein-substituted Co–corrole complex. (B) SEM image of corrole-polyacrolein microspheres aggregated onto the quartz microbalance surface. (C) The dynamic response of hexane shows the increase of the frequency shift and the shorter response time of corrole-polyacrolein as compared to the sensors functionalized by the pure elements. (D) A comparison of sensitivity shows the improved response of corrole-polyacrolein in particular as compared to alcohols for which the contribution of corroles is larger. Reproduced from ref. 176, with permission from Wiley, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 72  (A) TPPH2 and TPCorrH3 were used to functionalize the quartz microbalance. (B) The ratio of the sensitivities of TPCorrH3 and TPPH2 correlates with the polar surface area of the analyte. Et3N: triethylamine; DMF: dimethylformamide; EtOH: ethanol; EtOAc: ethyl acetate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, which is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY), MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 73  Score plots of pure compounds as detected by an array of porphyrins and corroles-coated ZnO nanoparticles. Arrows show the progression of the process of spoilage in whole and ground beef. Reproduced from ref. 158, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 74  Principal elements used in medical imaging (MRI, PET, SPECT and Optical Imaging).187–190	 

 	Fig. 75  The folate-targeting (Cu)corrole–(Gd)DOTA complex (A). An example of T1-weighted MRI phantoms (4.7 T spin echo method at 25 °C). Tubes 1–4, at different Gd concentrations (1 mM, 50 mM, 100 mM, tubes 1–8) and water (tube 9). (B) Corresponding T1-maps. Tubes 1–4, at a Gd concentration of 1 mM (tubes 1 and 5), 100 mM (tubes 2 and 6), 50 mM (tubes 3 and 7), 1 mM (tubes 4 and 8) and water (tube 9). Colored scale in milliseconds. Adapted from ref. 191, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 76  “Click”-linked corrole/DOTA dyad.192	 

 	Fig. 77  The effects of Ga-, Fe-, and Mn–corroles on the T1 relaxation rate and contrast change. (A) The chemical structure of a metallated sulfonated corrole. (B and C) T1 relaxation times and contrast images of different corrole complex solutions in vitro. (D) The measurement of T1 changes and (E) MR image acquisition after the delivery of indicated doses of CAs. Reproduced from ref. 193, with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 78  Lanthanide (La, Tb, and Gd) corrole complexes.194	 

 	Fig. 79  Free-base corrole/DTPA dyads and Ln complexes.195	 

 	Fig. 80  Water-soluble corroles able to interact with the G-quadruplex.201	 

 	Fig. 81  Identification of the first hit.209	 

 	Fig. 82  Structure–activity relationship study.210,211	 

 	Fig. 83  Selected structures among the 43 corroles tested against the pox-virus.212	 

 	Fig. 84  Fluocovir tested on the clinical hCMV Letermovir-resistant strain (top) and on the pathogenic poxvirux MYXV (bottom), both viruses being ANCHORTM tagged.212	 

 	Fig. 85  Cationic gallium corroles bearing ortho- or para-methylpyridinium moieties.216	 

 	Fig. 86  Corrole-grafted-chitosan films.218	 

 	Fig. 87  Gallium A3- and trans-A2B-corrole complexes tested as potential photosensitizers in PDT.235–241	 

 	Fig. 88  Ethynyl gallium corroles.245	 

 	Fig. 89  Phosphorus and phosphorus-iodinated-corrole complexes.246–250	 

 	Fig. 90  Rhenium,252,253 iridium254,255 and osmium256 corroles.	 

 	Fig. 91  Tin corrole complexes.257–259 Adapted from ref. 257, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 92  Molecular structure of (SO3−)2TPFCorrFe.260–263	 

 	Fig. 93  Gold corrole complexes.264	 

 	Fig. 94  Platinum-bipyridyl corrole isomers.268	 

 	Fig. 95  TPFCorrH3 conjugates bearing one or two β-cyclodextrins.269	 

 	Fig. 96  Structures of the halogenated gallium corroles272 and the anionic disulfonic corrole gallium corrole.273	 

 	Fig. 97  Free-base and cobalt corroles with –OH or phenothiazine group.276	 

 	Fig. 98  Push–pull manganese corrole complexes.277	 

 	Fig. 99  Reported tetra-thiocyanatocorroles obtained after light irradiation (top) and UV–vis absorption spectra of TPFCorrH3 (green line), and 2,3,17,18-tetrathiocyanato-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole (blue line), in acetonitrile (bottom). Adapted from ref. 278, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 100  Phosphorus corrole-substituted fluorescent proteins. Adapted from ref. 281, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 101  Scale-up synthesis of Fluocovir.212	 

 	Fig. 102  Pictures of the scale-up synthesis of Fluocovir carried out in 4 L three-neck flasks.212	 

 	Fig. 103  A newborn in the corrole family: a tris-meso-carboxylate corrole.286	 

 	Fig. 104  
meso-Ester corroles previously described.287,288	 

 	Fig. 105  Ligand analogy between corrole and dipyrrin-bisphenol (top) free-bases and (bottom) bis-ammonia cobalt complexes. Adapted from ref. 290, with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 


Co–Npyrrole	1.913(3)	1.909(3)	1.893(6)	1.908(6)
Co–O/Npyrrole	1.919(2)	1.905(2)	1.868(6)	1.881(6)
Average
Co–Npyrrole/O	1.912(6)	1.888(17)
Co–Nammonia	1.963(3)	1.938(3)	1.964(6)	1.974(6)
Average
Co–Nammonia	1.951(18)	1.969(7)

O/Npyrrole–Co–Npyrrole	83.10(10)	91.82(11)	95.1(3)	91.5(2)
Npyrrole/O–Co–Npyrrole/O	93.35(12)	83.10(10)	81.5(2)	91.9(3)
Average
O/Npyrrole–Co–Npyrrole	88(6)	90(6)
Average
Npyrrole/O–Co–Nammonia	90(1)	90(2)
ANCHOR	ANCH sequence cloned upstream of the OR-FP expressing gene
10-az-DFPCorrH3	5,15-bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-(4-azidophenyl)corrole
BHJSC	Bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells
BODIPY	BOron-DIPYrromethene
BP2000	Black Pearls 2000 (electrode)
Br2TPCorrH3	5,15-Bis-(2,6-dibromophenyl)-10-phenylcorrole
Br8TPFCorrH3	2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-Octabromo-5,10,15-tris-pentafluorophenylcorrole
CD	CycloDextrin
CNS	Central nervous system
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
COFs	Covalent organic frameworks
CT-DNA	Circulating tumor deoxyribonucleic acid
DAFPCorrH3	5,15-Bis-(4-aminophenyl)-10-pentafluorophenylcorrole
DFT/TDDFT	Density functional theory/time-dependent density functional theory
DMF	Dimethylformamide
DMHECorrH3	7,13-Dimethyl-2,3,8,12,17,18-hexaethylcorrole
5,15-DN-10oMCorrH3	5,15-Bis-(4-nitrophenyl)-10-(2-methoxycarbonylphenyl)corrole
5,15-D(4-NH2Ph)10-FPCorrH3	5,15-Bis-(4-aminophenyl)-10-(pentafluorophenyl) corrole
5,15-dpM-10oMCorrH3	5,15-Bis-(4-methoxycarbonylphenyl)-10-(2-methoxycarbonylphenyl) corrole
DOTA	1,4,7,10-TetraazacycloDOdecane-1,4,7,10-TetraAcetic acid
DSSC	Dye sensitized solar cell
DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EDG	Electron-donating groups
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EPG	Edge-plane graphite
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
ESI	Electrospray ionization
EWG	Electron-withdrawing groups
Fluocovir	5,15-Bis(2′,3′,5′,6′-tetrafluorophenyl)-10-(pentafluorophenyl)corrole (anti-viral Hit)
FRET charge transfer	Förster resonance energy transfer charge transfer
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin oxide (electrode)
hCMV	Human CytoMegaloVirus
H4EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
H5DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HpD	Hematoporphyrin derivative
HSA	Human serum albumin
HTM	Hole transporting material
10-HDPCorrH3	10-(4-Hydroxylphenyl)-5,15-diphenylcorrole
IE expression	Immediate early expression
LEDs	Light emitted diodes
MALDI/TOF	Matrix assisted laser desorption ionization/time of flight
MES buffer	2-(N-Morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid buffer
MOF	Metal organic framework
MPXV	MonkeyPoX Virus (Class 3)
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
MWCNTs	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
NaTFPB	Sodium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate
NaTPB	Sodium tetraphenylborate
NIR	Near-infrared

o-NPOE	2-Nitrophenyl octyl ether
OAT	Oxygen atom transfer
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
OMCorrH3	2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-Octamethylcorrole
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
pAldDPFCorrH3	5,15-Bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-(4-formylphenyl)corrole
PC71BM	[6,6]-Phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester
PCA	Principal component analysis
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PDI	Photodynamic inactivation
PDT	Photodynamic therapy
PET	Photoinduced electron transfer
PET	Positron emission tomography
pfu	Plaque-forming units
10-PhDPFCorrH3	5,15-Bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-phenylcorrole
Photofrin	Porfimer sodium (photosensitizer used in PDT)
PK/PD	Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
PMMA	Polymethylmetacrylate
PSA	Polar surface area
PTB7	Poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)-carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (polymer used in solar cells)
PVC	Poly(vinyl chloride)
PVDF	Polyvinylidene fluoride
10-pyrDFPCorr	5,15-Bis-pentafluorophenyl-10-pyrenyl-corrole
QMBs	Quartz crystal microbalances
ROS	Reactive oxygen species
SAR	Structure–activity relationship
SAW	Surface acoustic wave (sensor)
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
SPECT	Single photon emission computed tomography
spyro-OMeTAD	2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene
TACNMe3	1,4,7-Trimethyl-1,4,7-triazacyclononane
TBHP	
tert-Butyl-hydroperoxide
TCF3PCorrH3	5,15-Diphenyl-10-(4-trifluoromethylphenyl)corrole
TDMACl	Tributylphosphate and tridodecyl methyl-l ammonium chloride
TECorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(ethoxycarbonyl)corrole
TFA	Trifluoroacetic acid
TFMCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(trifluoromethyl)corrole
T(2,6-Cl2)PCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(2,6-dichlorophenyl)corrole
T(2,6-F2)PCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(2,6-difluorophenyl)corrole
TmCPCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(3-carboxyphenyl)corrole
TMesCorrH3	5,15-Bis-mesityl,10-(2,4,6-tris-methoxyphenyl)corrole
TMPyP4	Free-base 5,10,15,20-tetrakis-(N-methyl-4-pyridyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin
T(4-NH2P)CorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(4-aminophenyl)corrole
TNPCorrH3	5,10,15-tris-(4-nitrophenyl)corrole
TOF	Turnover frequency
TPFCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-pentafluorophenylcorrole
TPCorrH3	5,10,15-Triphenylcorrole
TpCPCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(4-carboxyphenyl)corrole
TpMCPCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(4-carboxymethylphenyl)corrole
TPPH2	5,10,15,20-Tetraphenylporphyrin

p-TsOH	
para-Toluenesulfonic acid
TtBuPCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(4-tert-butylphenyl)corrole
TTCorrH3	5,10,15-Tris-(4-methylphenyl)corrole
VARV	VARiola Virus (Class 4)
VOCs	Volatile organic compounds

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
