Chemistry and applications of flavylium compounds: a handful of colours  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CS15126F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CS15126F
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 869-908Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsChemistry and applications of flavylium compounds: a handful of colours

        
          
            Fernando 
            Pina
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Maria J. 
            Melo
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            César A. T. 
            Laia
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. Jorge 
            Parola
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            João C. 
            Lima
          
          
        
      a
aREQUIMTE, Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal. E-mail: fjp@dq.fct.unl.pt;  Fax: +351 212948550;   Tel: +351 212948355
bREQUIMTE, Departamento de Conservação e Restauro, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal
Received 
      6th May 2011
    First published on 12th August 2011Abstract
        Flavylium compounds are versatile molecules that comprise anthocyanins, the ubiquitous colorants used by Nature to confer colour to most flowers and fruits. They have found a wide range of applications in human technology, from the millenary colour paints described by the Roman architect Vitruvius, to their use as food additives, combining colour and antioxidant effects, and even as light absorbers in solar cells aiming at a greener solar energy conversion. Their rich complexity derives in part from their ability to switch between a variety of species (flavylium cations, neutral quinoidal bases, hemiketals and chalcones, and negatively charged phenolates) by means of external stimuli, such as pH, temperature and light. This critical review describes (i) the historical advancements in the understanding of the equilibria of their chemical reaction networks; (ii) their thermodynamics and kinetics; (iii) the mechanisms underlying their colour development, such as co-pigmentation and host–guest interactions; (iv) the photophysics and photochemistry that lead to photochromism; and (v) applications in solar cells, models for optical memories, photochromic soft materials such as ionic liquids and gels, and their properties in solid state materials (274 references).
From left to right, Fernando Pina, Maria J. Melo, César A. T. Laia, A. Jorge Parola and João C. Lima
Fernando Pina got a PhD in Chemical Engineering in 1983 from the Technical University of Lisbon, IST, Post-Doc with Vincenzo Balzani, Bologna, and is full Professor of Chemistry at the New University of Lisbon. His research interests run from fluorescent chemical sensors of functionalized polyamines to models for optical memories based on flavylium derivatives and industry collaborations in the field of chromogenic materials. He is author of circa 170 scientific papers and 8 book chapters. He was general secretary of the Portuguese Chemical Society (2004–2006).Maria João Melo obtained her PhD in Physical Chemistry, in 1995, from the New University of Lisbon. In 1999, after a Post-Doc at ICVBC-CNR in Florence, she joined the Department of Conservation and Restoration at the New University of Lisbon, where she is responsible for the scientific laboratory. Since 1999 she has also been researcher at Requimte. Her research interests include the conservation of medieval illuminations and Modern Art, namely the study of the mechanisms of photodegradation in polymer systems and color paints. Other areas of interest are Color in Art and Nature and Semiochemistry.César António Tonicha Laia received his PhD in Chemistry from the Technical University of Lisbon, IST in 1999. After a Post-Doc at Imperial College in London and at IST, he was appointed assistant researcher at REQUIMTE in the New University of Lisbon in 2006, also teaching inorganic and physical chemistry at the Chemistry Department of the New University of Lisbon. His research interests cover the photochemistry of organic molecules (including flavylium salts) and chromogenic applications of sol–gel materials and other non-crystalline solids.António Jorge Parola received his PhD in chemistry from the New University of Lisbon in 1998, after which he made a post-doc at the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Fribourg, Switzerland. He was appointed assistant professor at the Department of Chemistry of the New University of Lisbon, teaching inorganic chemistry and physical chemistry. His research interests concern supramolecular photochemistry, from the design and synthesis of supramolecular species to the study of their photophysical properties, in particular, flavylium salts with different substitution patterns, development of chromogenic materials for applications, photoactive molecular cages and fluorescent chemosensors.João Carlos Lima received his PhD in Chemistry from the Technical University of Lisbon, IST in 1996. He was appointed assistant professor in the New University of Lisbon in 2000, teaching inorganic chemistry, photochemistry, chemical structure and bonding, and physical chemistry at the Department of Chemistry of the Universidade Nova de Lisboa. His research interests concern to “gold nanosystems for delivery of caged compounds”. He is also interested on fluorescence of proteins, flavylium salts, fluorescent chemosensors and photochemistry of organometallic systems.
1. Impact and relevance of anthocyanins and related compounds
Colour is ubiquitous and plays an important role in our lives. Of all the millenary colorants used by humankind, some are based on natural organic chromophores.1–4 For example, indigo and alizarin are natural colorants that had great economic value as textile dyes. It is also the case of anthocyanins, the ubiquitous molecules responsible for many of the red to blue colours in plants, and which are based on the flavylium chromophore, Scheme 1.5Anthocyanins, in spite of being less durable and therefore less used as textile dyes than indigo or alizarin, are nevertheless associated to an important scientific question: what is the origin of colour in plants, in particular in flowers and fruits? As pointed out by Robert Robinson, “it is in the course of attack of the most difficult problems, without consideration of eventual applications, that new fundamental knowledge is most certain garnered”.6
 Scheme 1  
Anthocyanin compounds and the flavylium chromophore (Gl = glycoside). 
That an apparently simple molecule could be one of the basis of colour in nature was already a surprise to Richard Willstätter, Nobel laureate in 1915,7 whose contribution caused a long-lived impact in this field of research, shaping our perception and interpretation of the phenomena of colour by anthocyanins in Nature.8–10 Research on anthocyanins and related compounds has matured enormously in the last 20 years, within the following lines: discovery and characterisation of new natural compounds5,11–18 (nearly one thousand reported); clarification of the mechanisms of colour19–24 and characterisation of the supramolecular structures responsible for the blue colour in nature;19,25,26 understanding and taking advantage of the system's complexity and its multistate/multifunctional nature for information processing at the molecular level;27–29 development of clinical surveys on the impact of these compounds to human health, namely by assessing their antioxidant properties;30–32 applications as food colorants, including the optimisation of extraction processes;33–35 molecular biological studies and genetic breeding to develop new colours in flowers, e.g. a true blue rose.36
Research on synthetic flavylium compounds also evolved into a mature field in the last 20 years, not being restricted to the importance of colour or anti-oxidant properties of these systems. As will be reviewed in this review, the understanding of the complexity of the flavylium network and its rationalisation proved extremely inspiring and opened the field to a diversity of applications that have not yet been extended to the natural analogues of these compounds.27–29,37,38
Having discussed the different research approaches that are currently followed for natural anthocyanins or synthetic flavylium salts, we must clarify, and stress, that this separation between natural and synthetic is rather recent, and that from the physical chemistry point of view the two groups are analogous, since the understanding of the systems is based on the substitution pattern of the benzopyrylium ring. Chemists who pioneered this field of research did not make such a distinction,4,6,7,39 on the contrary, the discovery of a common core was highlighted.
The main purpose of this review is to emphasize the multistate/multifunctional character of the chemistry of these compounds, and more generally, to show that the investigation of complex chemical systems may reveal very interesting aspects and may be useful to introduce new concepts in the field of chemical research. As Jean-Marie Lehn beautifully expressed: “…one may let one's imagination be carried by the magic of the word and pulled by the evocative and stimulating power of the concept”.40
2. 
        Anthocyanins and synthetic flavylium compounds. One century of research
The discovery of the structure and synthesis of anthocyanins took place during the first years of the 20th century. However, as early as 1664, Robert Boyle had already developed a curiosity for the properties of these compounds, which led him to report on the colour changes that take place when extracts of flowers are treated with acids and alkalis.41,42 The term anthocyan is credited to a German pharmacist Ludwig Clamor Marquart,7,43 who coined this name in 1835, by using the Greek words for flower and blue.
It is worthy to note that synthetic flavylium compounds were prepared by chemists before anthocyanins, having served as a guide to solve anthocyanins' structures and to achieve complete synthesis of anthocyanins. Moreover, the study of the kinetics and thermodynamics of the network of chemical reactions involving synthetic flavylium compounds has been very useful to the comprehension of the chemical behaviour of anthocyanins, since both groups follow an identical network of chemical reactions.
2.1. Current state of the art of the flavylium reaction network
In order to make the history of the flavylium chemistry more comprehensible, it is convenient to summarize the current state of the art by presenting the example of 4′-hydroxyflavylium.

Scheme 2 summarizes the network of chemical reactions involving flavylium compounds in acidic to neutral pH values. The flavylium cation, AH++, is the predominant species in the equilibrium under sufficiently acidic conditions. When the pH is raised the flavylium cation is involved in two parallel reactions: (i) deprotonation to form the quinoidal base A; (ii) hydration in position 2 followed by proton loss to give the hemiketal B. The proton transfer is faster than the hydration but in many cases the other species (B, Cc, Ct) at the equilibrium are more stable than A. This means that A can be formed as a kinetic product, and later totally or partially disappears to yield the thermodynamic equilibrium. The cis-chalcone (Cc) is formed from B by a tautomeric process and the trans-chalcone (Ct) forms via the isomerisation of the former. The coloured species are AH++ and A that may appear as red and purple/blue in common anthocyanins, respectively. Photochemistry arises from the trans to cisisomerisation, and depending on pH leads to AH++ and A. At equilibrium, the system behaves as a single acid–base equilibrium between the flavylium cation and a conjugate base, CB, defined as the sum of the concentrations of the other species in the network, [CB] = [A] + [B] + [Cc] + [Ct].44–46 (1)Where  are the equilibrium constants, see Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  
            Flavylium network of chemical reactions. 
2.2. From synthetic flavylium compounds to anthocyanins
Several decades of research were necessary before Scheme 2 could be established. As will be described, both research on anthocyanins and synthetic flavylium compounds contributed, not only to obtain the structure of anthocyanins, but also to characterise the common network of chemical reactions. The problem was rather complex. We now know that almost all flavylium compounds, independently of being natural or synthetic, follow the framework shown in Scheme 2. However, depending on the substituents, the pH dependent mole fraction distribution in the equilibrium (thermodynamic) and the rates of conversion between the different species (kinetics) in the network are different. For example, in the most common anthocyanins the major product of the CB is the hemiketal, and the cis and transchalcones are minor products. The same usually occurs in 3-substituted flavylium compounds, while for those lacking the 3 and 5 substituents trans-chalcone is the counter part of the flavylium cation. On the other hand, 4-substituted flavylium compounds generally equilibrate between the flavylium cation and the quinoidal base. The base is also the major species at the equilibrium in 5-substituted flavylium or deoxyanthocyanins. Depending on pH it is also possible to observe formation of trans-chalcones in anthocyanidins but the hydroxyl group in position 3 makes these unstable, decomposing into irreversible products.47 In other words, distinct behaviours were observed according to the family of flavylium substituents used by early researchers. This was an additional drawback to establish a common pattern as we have nowadays.

2.2.1. Discovery of anthocyanins. 
The early history of benzopyrylium derivatives is well documented in previous publications: the chemistry of the red and blue pigments of flowers and fruits by H. Huntress,41 and the synthesis and chemistry of benzopyrylium in general by D. W. Hill.48 It is noteworthy that the first description of a compound that could integrate the network shown in Scheme 2 was not the flavylium cation, but the compound 4-phenacylideneflavene, which could give a flavylium in acidic medium, Scheme 3.49
 Scheme 3  
              Flavylium species resulting from 4-phenacylideneflavene. 
The next step towards the discovery of anthocyanins, at the turn of the 20th century, was the synthesis of the 4-substituted flavylium compound 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium, prepared by Bülow and Wagner,50Scheme 4. The importance of flavylium compounds became evident when the first three basic structures of anthocyanins, 3,4′,5,7-tetrahydroxyflavylium (pelargonidin), 3,3′,4′,5,7-pentahydroxyflavylium (cyanidin) and 3,3′,4′,5,5′,7-hexahydroxyflavylium (delphinidin), Scheme 5, were deduced by Richard Willstätter.8–10 The discovery that these molecules bear sugars in their structure was emphasised by adding to the name originally given by Marquart, anthocyan, the suffix in, i.e.anthocyanins.42 Also, Willstätter introduced the term “anthocyanidins” to describe the sugar free anthocyanins, Scheme 5.7,8
 Scheme 4  Structure of 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium. 
 Scheme 5  Willstätter anthocyanidins. 
The syntheses of pelargonidin and cyanidin were published in 192451 but were reported, respectively, before (1914) and after (1920) the World War I.41 Independently, Robinson published the synthesis of pelargonidin (1924)52 as well as cyanidin and delphinidin (1925).53
The first researchers were aware that the red flavylium cations of anthocyanins became blue upon addition of base and after some time were transformed into colourless products. The blue product was identified as a base and the colourless product as a pseudo base.54 This nomenclature persisted up to the 1970s. Meanwhile, research on synthetic flavylium compounds progressed in parallel to that of anthocyanins. The analogy between natural and synthetic families was stressed for the natural product carajurin, see Scheme 6 and Section 6.6 for more details.55 Carajurin was extracted in the form of the quinoidal base. The analogy between carajurin and compound (I) in Scheme 6, synthesised previously by Bülow,56 was stressed many years ago in the book “The Natural Organic Colouring” by Perkin and Everest.4 In contrast to the 3-substituted flavylium derivatives which tend to form the colourless hemiketal, in compounds like carajurin, compound (I) and deoxyanthocyanins, the quinoidal base is quite stable.55
 Scheme 6  Natural compound carajurin and synthetic compound (I) present stable quinoidal bases. 
Some other examples of early synthetic flavylium compounds can also be found in the work of Robinson, before the synthesis of the first anthocyanins was achieved. He reported on pyrylium salts of the anthocyanin type, which include 7-hydroxyflavylium, 3-ethoxyflavylium, 3-phenoxyflavylium and 7-hydroxy-3-phenoxyflavylium, as well as derivatives of 3-methoxyflavylium and 3-hydroxyflavylium.57,58


2.2.2. Characterisation of the flavylium network: the 1960s. 
The first quantitative measurements of the pH dependent UV-Vis absorption of the flavylium cation (1.18 < pH < 4.01) were made by Sondheimer for pelargonidin 3-glucoside and interpreted as the result of an acid–base type equilibrium between the flavylium cation and the hemiketal, with acidity constant pKobs = 2.98, Scheme 7.59,60
 Scheme 7  
              Pelargonidin 3-glucoside acid–base type equilibrium between the flavylium cation and the hemiketal. 
The importance of studying the chemistry of flavylium compounds to the general understanding of the chemistry of anthocyanins also emerges in the work of Leonard Jurd.61 The question at the time (early 1960s) was the identification of the species obtained when solutions of anthocyanins were made more basic. The importance of this problem is related to the fact that the pH of the cell sap of most plants ranges between 2.5–6. Jurd followed the generally accepted idea that the flavylium cation immediately gave rise to the coloured quinoidal base, in moderately acidic conditions, which would then be hydrated to give the hemiketal and the chalcone, Scheme 8. Moreover, he observed the enhancement of hemiketal formation when the flavylium cation is substituted in position 3 by a methoxy or hydroxyl, and that flavylium compounds lacking the 3-substituents show no tendency to form the hemiketal. Jurd studied the compound 4′,7-dihydroxy-3′-methoxyflavylium and concluded that equilibrated solutions (after 2 hours) of the compound, in the pH range 0.63–4.36, were composed of the flavylium cation and chalcone (cis), with an apparent pKa = 3.17, Scheme 8.
 Scheme 8  Reaction sequence proposed by Jurd.61 
In addition, he obtained the ionised chalcone at pH = 12 and regenerated the flavylium cation by re-acidifying the solution back to pH = 1.0. Jurd also studied the compound 4′,8-dimethoxyflavylium (lacking the quinoidal base) and concluded that the conversion between the flavylium cation and the chalcone would take place through a colourless intermediate, presumably the hemiketal. This interpretation was a great advance in the chemistry of the flavylium network, in spite of the fact that the quinoidal base does not give the hemiketal directly, see Scheme 2. It is not clear from his work whether he considers the trans-chalcone as part of the equilibrium network at moderately acidic medium.62

2.3. The trans-chalcone
The possibility of trans-chalcone formation in anthocyanins was only considered much later. In an interesting work, Huang established that cyanidin 3-glucoside is decolorised by fungal enzymes.63,64 He proposed a mechanism in two steps: (i) the first one corresponding to the hydrolysis of the glucoside followed by (ii) the formation of colourless products. Regarding the nature of the colourless products Huang detected, upon re-acidification, two kinetic processes: (i) a small but instantaneous recovery of the flavylium cation that he attributed to be formed from the hemiketal, followed by (ii) a slower flavylium appearance that he ascribed to arise from a ketonic tautomer of the hemiketal or from a chalcone, see Scheme 9; however, he ruled out the chalcone.
 Scheme 9  Structures of the ketonic tautomer of the hemiketal (left) and of the chalcone (right) proposed by Huang.63 
To the best of our knowledge, the first description of a chalcone in anthocyanins was published in 1966 by Timberlake and Bridle, who investigated the behaviour of pelargonidin and cyanidin, in the pH range 5–8.65 The same type of equilibrium was reported by Harper and Chandler for the compound 5,7-dihydroxyflavylium, in 1967.66 In both cases, two different mechanisms were proposed for the formation of the chalcone species: (i) direct conversion of the flavylium cation to the cis-chalcone at more acidic pH values (pH = 1–4), and (ii) via quinoidal base at less acidic pH values (pH = 4–7), Scheme 10. This interpretation emphasizes the following important observation: at sufficiently low pH values, the flavylium cation disappearance is not preceded by the appearance of the characteristic colour of the quinoidal base, and only after a threshold pH is the base formed and contributes to the kinetic process. This observation somehow contradicts the mechanism AH++ ⇌ A ⇌ B ⇌ Cc, because formation of B or Cc can take place at sufficiently low pH values without formation of A. This was a very important piece of experimental evidence to solve the puzzle of the flavylium network.
 Scheme 10  Kinetic scheme proposed by Harper and Chandler66 and Timberlake and Bridle;65 R3 = R3′ = R4′ = H or OH. 
Another interesting experiment reported by Jurd was the isomerisation of 4′,5,7,8-tetrahydroxyflavylium in 4′,5,6,7-tetrahydroxyflavylium, see Scheme 11.61,67
 Scheme 11  
            Isomerisation of 4′,5,7,8-tetrahydroxyflavylium to 4′,5,6,7-tetrahydroxyflavylium. 
This isomerisation is easily explained by a free rotation of the cis-chalcone, Scheme 12, and this is the reason why, at that time, Jurd was unable to obtain experimental evidence to support the formation of the trans-chalcone.
 Scheme 12  Free rotation of the cis-chalcone explaining the isomerisation reaction of scheme 11. 
In a following work, regarding the compound 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium, Jurd and Geissman62 obtained evidence that the hydroxy substituent at position 7 is more acidic than the one in position 4′. A series of experiments with the compound 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium, while interpreted with a model that later was proven incorrect, were the basis for the subsequent characterisation studies of the chemical reaction network of flavylium compounds. In particular, those authors emphasize that the species obtained immediately after a pH change are not the same as in the equilibrated solutions. Jurd and co-workers were convinced (incorrectly) that the reaction of the quinoidal base was responsible for the sequence of chemical reactions leading to colour fading at moderately acidic to neutral medium. Formation of the trans-chalcone was suggested to explain the behaviour of the compound at pH = 9. Later, the stereochemistry of the chalcones that Jurd thought to be derived from the unstable intermediate quinoidal bases was investigated for the first time by this author.68 He was aware of the equilibrium between flavylium cations and chalcones, in particular for flavylium compounds derived from 7-hydroxyflavylium, as well as of the fact that light affected this equilibrium towards flavylium cations.65,66,69 The author concluded that 2-hydroxychalcones formed in the equilibrium are in their trans configuration and that photoisomerisation is the primary photochemical step. The existence of trans-chalcones was confirmed by the high coupling constant (16 Hz) between protons 3 and 4 in the 1H NMR spectra.
3. Thermodynamics and kinetics of the chemical network
As it can be concluded from the description above, while all the species of the flavylium network present at moderately acidic values (Scheme 2) had been reported to some extent and were known by the end of the 1970's, the reaction model proposed for the respective kinetics was unable to account for all the experimental data details. This was achieved by Brouillard and Dubois, who have made an extremely important breakthrough on the mechanistic model.70 In their first work, they used a simplified scheme without considering the formation of chalcones. Brouillard and Dubois questioned the mechanism accepted at the time, AH++ ⇌ A ⇌ B. They followed the relaxation kinetics of malvin chloride upon temperature and pH jumps, and through the temperature jumps observed that the conversion between the flavylium cation and the quinoidal base was by far, the fastest reaction of the network, occurring on a timescale of microseconds depending on pH, eqn (2). kproton transfer (s−1) = 1.8 × 104 + 1.4 × 108[H+](2)They also observed a second kinetic process with a pH dependence that followed two distinct regimes: one for [H+] ≫ Ka, eqn (3), k2 (s−1) = 4.7 × 10−2 + 2.6[H+](3)and another for [H+] ≪ Ka k2′ (s−1) = 4.5 × 102[H+](4)Three possible mechanisms were discussed: (i) a triangular scheme, like Scheme 10 but involving AH++, A, B, (ii) a scheme where B is formed only through A, like Scheme 8, but without Cc, and (iii) Scheme 13.
 Scheme 13  One of the early kinetic interpretations of Brouillard and Dubois for the flavylium reaction network.70 
This last mechanism responds to a peculiar behaviour of the flavylium system: after a pH jump from very acidic solutions to higher pH values, there is a complex dependence on pH expressed in two distinct limiting dependences, for lower and higher pH values. In order to facilitate the interpretation of this complex pH dependence, it is useful to draw an energy level diagram (as proposed later by Pina and co-workers)71 using the data reported by Brouillard and Dubois (pKa = 3.89 and pKh = 1.74, respectively, for the quinoidal base and hemiketal equilibrium constants), see Scheme 14. The two regimes reported by these authors can be clearly visualised in this scheme. For more acidic solutions the base is not formed because it is thermodynamically unfavourable. Thus, the reaction observed is the formation of hemiketal, which follows eqn (3). At higher pH values the base becomes thermodynamically available. In spite of being thermodynamically less favourable than B, its formation is much faster and as a consequence it appears before B. However, as discovered by Brouillard and Dubois, the system equilibrates towards the hemiketal exclusively from AH++. The base is thus a kinetic product that decreases the amount of flavylium cation and retards the process of B formation, and the system starts to follow another pH dependence, eqn (4).
 Scheme 14  Energy-level diagram for malvin using the data70 of Brouillard and Dubois. 
A few months later Brouillard and Delaporte published a similar study, this time with oenin (malvidin 3-glucoside).44 In that work, the cis-chalcone is already represented in the kinetic scheme and the authors claim to be presenting the first evidence for the existence of the cis-chalcone in anthocyanins. They also justify not having observed chalcone in the previous work with the fact that the study had been carried out at the lowest possible temperature (to avoid degradation), which is not favourable to the formation of the chalcones. The authors conclude that three processes can thus occur after pH jumps from very acidic solutions containing flavylium cations to higher pH values (pH = 5–6), Scheme 15. The first process taking place during the mixing time is due to the formation of the quinoidal base, as described in the previous paper. The second, occurring within few minutes, is attributed to the formation of the hemiketal, as reported also in that paper. Finally, the last process occurs on the timescale of hours and was attributed to the appearance of the cis-chalcone, due to the opening of the hemiketal. This interpretation is not correct and results from the fact that the authors did not consider the existence of the trans-chalcone (minor species in anthocyanins). It presumes the ring-opening-closure as the slowest process, an interpretation that was only corrected two decades later by Brouillard and Lang.72 It is now recognized that the slowest process described in the paper by Brouillard and Delaporte is the cis–transisomerisation.
 Scheme 15  Early Brouillard and Delaporte kinetic model.44 
In another publication from the same authors,45malvin and oenin were revisited, and the relaxation amplitudes in pH jump experiments were proposed as an straightforward way to calculate the equilibrium constants. No reference to the formation of trans-chalcone was made in that work. The conclusion that the flavylium cation is in equilibrium with an apparent conjugate base (CB), with an apparent constant, as described by eqn (1), was already very clearly reported in this paper.
Meanwhile, an important contribution to the understanding of the flavylium system came from the study by McClelland et al. on synthetic flavylium compounds. They explored with ingenuity the use of the stopped-flow technique.73 In a first paper regarding the parent flavylium cation (no substituents) and the 4′-methyl and 4′-methoxy derivatives (lacking hydroxyl substituents), McClelland and Gedge were able to obtain evidence for the existence of another hemiketal species, B4, that results from water attack in position 4. This species plays a kinetic role similar to the quinoidal base, because it is a kinetic product that does not evolve directly towards chalcone, Scheme 16.
 Scheme 16  Kinetic scheme for flavylium parent compound after McClelland.73 
Taking advantage from the slower cis–transisomerisation in these compounds, a direct pH jump was carried out, the system was left to reach a pseudo-equilibrium involving B2, B4 and Cc (but not Ct), and finally submitted to a reverse pH jump back to acid, with the raise of flavylium absorption being monitored by stopped flow. Depending on pH, it was possible to observe clear bi-exponential traces. The faster one is due to the conversion of B2 (and B4) into a flavylium cation and the slower to the conversion of Cc into a flavylium cation viaB2. A relevant result was the demonstration that the ring-opening-closure process takes place on the timescale of sub-seconds. In a subsequent work 4′-hydroxyflavylium was studied.74 In addition to the two traces mentioned previously, an identical experiment showed a third trace occurring during the mixing time of the stopped flow, which was attributed to the quinoidal base present at the pseudo-equilibrium. Also for this compound, the formation of cis-chalcone from hemiketal was seen to occur on the sub-second timescale.
The evidence that the ring-opening-closure is a fast process, not only in synthetic flavylium compounds but also in anthocyanins, took several years to be accepted. In the light of our present knowledge, evidence for the existence of the trans-chalcone75 in malvin and oenin was already present in the work of Preston and Timberlake.76 They took advantage of the increase in chalcone's mole fraction with increasing temperature, and were able to separate that compound by HPLC, in sufficient amounts to measure the UV-Vis absorption spectra directly and follow the conversion to the flavylium cation in ca. 1 hour. However, they were still convinced that the rate-determining step of the process was the hemiketal/cis-chalcone conversion. In fact, until 1989, authors dealing with anthocyanins considered the equilibrium between hemiketal and chalcone as being a slow prototropic change.77,78 In 1989, in a work regarding copigmentation, Brouillard and co-workers presented a complete scheme of malvin including the trans-chalcone, but considered this species as a very minor component and omitted it from the kinetic schemes.79 The network of flavylium compounds was finally corrected by Brouillard and Lang, in 1990.72 A complete elucidation of all the pH dependent components in the multiple equilibria of malvin (malvidin-3,5-diglucoside) in water was carried out by H. Santos and co-workers using one and two-dimensional NMR.80 In particular, from the NMR data these authors were able to distinguish the two R and S optical isomers of the hemiketal and calculate the mole fraction distribution of all the species at the equilibrium, including the cis and trans-chalcones.
3.1. Mathematical models
Following their interpretation that in acidic medium the hemiketal is formed exclusively through the hydration of flavylium cation, and that the quinoidal base is a kinetic product, Brouillard and Dubois deduced a mathematical expression considering the simplified Scheme 13.70 They resolved the more general triangular scheme for the species A/AH++/B which reduces to Scheme 13 when formation of the hemiketal from the quinoidal base is not considered. Their approach considers that the flavylium cation is restored by both reactions (re-protonation of the quinoidal base and dehydration of the hemiketal), following second order processes in non-buffered solutions. The first expression reported70 is slightly different from a later version,44 because it neglects the contribution of the quinoidal base at the equilibrium, see eqn (6). There is no doubt that these expressions considered both hydration and proton transfer as second order processes, as shown in Appendix 1. One of the roots is much higher than the other and corresponds to the proton transfer between the flavylium cation and the quinoidal base, while the second root accounts for the subsequent process. r1 = ka + k−a([H+] + Aeq)(5) (6)As noticed above, Scheme 13 was extended to Scheme 15 by including the formation of the chalcone, a few months after the publication of the first work.44 In this last paper, an extended kinetic scheme is also added. Because at that time the authors were interpreting the third process as the opening-closure of the ring (tautomerisation), an acid–base catalytic step was added. However, the third process does not correspond to the tautomerisation, but to the cis–transisomerisation (as discovered later by Brouillard and Lang), and thus these expressions are useless for the claimed purposes.
On the other research front, concerning the synthetic flavylium compounds, a general scheme was proposed by McClelland and Gedge, as follows, Scheme 17.73
 Scheme 17  McClelland kinetic scheme, including the terms (in purple) due to the catalytic effects in the hydration and tautomerisation reactions.73 
In this compound there is no quinoidal base, but another kinetic product, B4, that results from the hydration in position 4 followed by proton transfer to solvent, in competition with B2. The cis and transchalcones were clearly identified in this work. The kinetic and thermodynamic constants are identical to those reported by previous authors, except for the existence of catalysis in the hydration/dehydration and ring opening-closure reactions, the respective rate constants being represented in blue in Scheme 17. The catalysis in the hydration/dehydration was attributed to the hydroxide ion concentration. Catalysis does not change the equilibrium constant and thus, a catalytic term restoring the flavylium cation has to be introduced; the same applies to the hydration in position 4 and to the tautomerisation reactions. At equilibrium, in basic medium: kOHh[OH−][AH++] = kH−h[B2](7)leading to (8)where Kw is the water ionisation constant. Identically, for B4, with kOHh4[OH−][AH++] = kH−h4[B4](9) (10)Catalysis by acids and bases was observed for the tautomerisation reaction. Again, the following relation should be taken into account (11)For a more in-depth analysis and rationalisation of McClelland's results it is very useful to construct an energy level diagram71 of the compound 4′-methoxyflavylium, using the equilibrium constants reported in the same paper, Scheme 18.
 Scheme 18  Thermodynamic energy level diagram for the compound 4′-methoxyflavylium in aqueous solution. 
This compound possesses a high kinetic barrier between the cis and trans isomers. When equilibrated solutions of flavylium cations at acidic pH values are submitted to a pH jump, for example from 1 to 7, it is possible to define an intermediate state, later described as a pseudo-equilibrium,73 that corresponds to a (pseudo) equilibration between B2, B4, and Cc, before the formation of significant amounts of Ct. In this case, B4 is a minor product, Scheme 18, and the (pseudo) equilibrium is reached mainly between the two other compounds. McClelland observed a bi-exponential trace for the flavylium recovery (from this pseudo-equilibrium) after a pH jump back to acid, see Fig. 1. This behaviour is easily explained by considering that the hydration–dehydration, due to the direct dependence on [H+], can be made faster than the tautomerisation (ring opening/closure). On the other hand, the slower trace corresponds to the formation of more flavylium from the cis-chalcone, viahemiketal. Moreover, the ratio between the amplitudes of the traces allows the calculation of the equilibrium constant Kt = [C]/[B]. It is worth noting that in 4′-methoxyflavylium both processes are directly dependent on the proton concentration, as represented by eqn (12)81 and eqn (13). kfast = k−h[H+](12) kslow = kH−t[H+] + k−t(13)The pseudo-equilibrium shown in Scheme 19 is still an apparent acid–base equilibrium, with the respective (pseudo) equilibrium constant given by eqn (14), where Kh4 was neglected due to the very low mole fraction of B4 at the equilibrium. K^a = Kh + KhKt(14)Substitution of Kt in eqn (14) leads to Kh. From the equilibrium constant Kt and eqn (13), the rate constant kt is also obtained. Identically, kh is calculated from eqn (12). Moreover, eqn (11) and (13) yield kH−t and kHt.
 Fig. 1  Example of the stopped flow trace of a reverse pH jump monitored at a flavylium cation absorption wavelength. In the cases where quinoidal base is present, an absorption at zero time is observed due to the conversion of the base into flavylium which occurs during the mixing time of the stopped flow. 
 Scheme 19  Pseudo-equilibrium in 4-methoxyflavylium. 
More information was obtained through the study of the pseudo-equilibrium in more basic medium. Due to the expected lower acidity of the hemiketal when compared with cis-chalcone, see respective structures in Scheme 19, at more basic pH values the system is shifted towards Cc−−. The observed (pseudo) acidity constant should be given by eqn (15), from which the ionisation constant of the cis-chalcone can be calculated. (15)Another ingenious experiment was the use of the pseudo-equilibrium at basic medium to observe the kinetics of equilibration in neutral medium. After protonation, the Cc−− is immediately transformed into Cc, and its equilibration with B2 can be observed. A dependence upon the hydroxide concentration was observed and is accounted for by eqn (16)82 in McClelland's and Gedge's kinetic scheme. The authors also comment on the enormous values of these constants and report examples of similar reactions with such high constants. kobs(BB⇄CcCc) = (kOHt + kOH−t)[OH−](16)Eqn (11), together with eqn (16) allow the calculation of both constants, kOHt and kOH−t.
Formation of B4 as a kinetic product was described in detail, through direct pH jumps from equilibrated solutions of flavylium cations, at low pH, to higher values, in contrast with the reverse pH jumps back to flavylium, discussed above.
The kinetic process that occurs before formation of trans-chalcone involves two steps: (i) first B2 and B4 are formed in a competitive process occurring on a similar timescale, and (ii) later B4, which is a kinetic product, disappears to (pseudo) equilibrate to B2 and Cc.
The rate law for the formation of B2 and B4, eqn (17), can be written as kobs(direct pH jumps) = kh + kh4 + (kOHh + kOHh4)[OH−](17)kh4 is thus calculated using the experimental value of kh, and from eqn (10), also k−h4 can be calculated.
The rate law for the second step of the direct pH jumps has two contributions, one independent and other dependent on the hydroxyl ion concentration, eqn (18) and (19). (18) (19)From eqn (18), k−h4 and the equilibrium constant Kh4 are obtained. Finally, the remaining constants were calculated, producing B2 and B4 from flavylium cations at high pH values. The ratio [B4]/[B2] is proportional to  and thus eqn (17) can be used to calculate these rate constants, while k−h4 can be obtained from eqn (19).
In anthocyanins, B4 can be neglected because proton transfer is much faster than any other process and at these pH values the formation of the quinoidal base is privileged. Moreover, in anthocyanins the tautomerisation reaction is much faster than the other process, therefore, B2 and Cc can be considered in fast equilibrium. In addition, if the study is restricted to acidic medium, the hydroxyl catalysis can be neglected. Based on these considerations, the malvin network was revisited.46 The kinetics was separated into three processes taking place on three different timescales to facilitate their resolution. The first corresponds to the fast proton transfer equilibria as previously described by Brouillard and Dubois.70 The second concerns the pseudo-equilibrium between flavylium cation, quinoidal base, and hemiketal, analysed with the same mathematical procedure followed by the last authors but considering a constant pH by adding a minimum amount of buffer (leading to simpler expressions). This approach assumes the existence of a fast equilibrium between Cc and B2, and the relation [B2] + [Cc] = [B2](1 + Kt), as reported previously.44 Finally, the slowest process consists in the cis–transisomerisation.83 The following relations were reported, see Scheme 2:46,84 k1 = ka + k−a[H+](20) (21) (22)The system can be easily summarised by means of an energy level diagram, as represented in Scheme 20 for malvin.46
 Scheme 20  Energy level diagram of malvin.46 
More recently, Petrov and Pina reported the analytical solution for the reaction rates of the flavylium network by Laplace transform.85 This approach is general because it is a complete solution containing rate constants and amplitudes, but still does not consider the catalytic effects of the proton and hydroxide ions. Several examples of flavylium derivatives, with or without a cis–transisomerisation barrier, are presented to illustrate the applicability of the expressions.
3.2. Historical outlook
There is a surprising scarcity of studies dealing with quantitative measurements of the kinetics and thermodynamics of the flavylium network, in particular those involving anthocyanins, considering the importance of this family of compounds, see Tables 10 and 11. This is in part due to the fact that the description of the mechanism of the anthocyanins network was put together in several steps, which were complemented or corrected consecutively during the course of many decades. In reality, all data before 1990 should be analysed with caution because some of the constants could have different meanings to the ones reported.72 In particular, misinterpretation can occur between the cis–transisomerisation and tautomerisation constants. The same is valid for the mathematical models. Those reported before 1990 do not account for all the details of the network. For example, the process identified in the paper by Brouillard and Delaporte45 as τ−12, for [H+] ≫ Ka, should be given by eqn (23), the limit of eqn (21) in these conditions, instead of eqn (24) used by Brouillard. (23) k2 = kh + k−h[H+](24)Considering that Kt is actually ca. 0.1 for malvin80,86 the correction is small and the data previously reported is a good approximation of the actual value for the hydration rate constant. In contrast, the constants for the slowest process that should be assigned to eqn (22), the cis–transisomerisation where  is the mole fraction of Cc at the pseudo-equilibrium, would significantly affect the value of the isomerisation rate constant (wrongly assigned to the tautomerisation reaction in anthocyanins' papers before 1990).87
In regards to the thermodynamic equilibrium, the following relations should be taken into account when old data are compared with more recent data:. Regarding the rate constants, the comparison should be done as follows:  
3.3. The effect of substituents
The kinetics and thermodynamics of the (non-substituted) flavylium ion were studied in detail, see Tables 10 and 11, and Fig. 2A.73,88 The thermodynamic equilibrium takes place between the flavylium cation and trans-chalcone, and the pseudo-equilibrium involves the flavylium cation and the hemiketal (major product) plus cis-chalcone (minor product). As already stated in Section 2.2, introduction of substituents in the flavylium backbone may have a dramatic effect on the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of these compounds, as will be discussed in detail below.
 Fig. 2  Mole fraction distribution at the equilibrium of flavylium cation and 3-methyl derivatives. In A, ps. eq. = pseudo-equilibrium.73,88–90 

3.3.1. 
            Flavylium cations substituted in position 3. 
This family of compounds was synthesised early, in particular by Robinson.57,58 The thermal reactions of 3-methylflavylium were investigated by Devine and McClelland,89 who found that very acid solutions are required to maintain the 3-methylflavylium compound coloured in its cationic form AH++. This behaviour was explained on the basis of a steric interaction between the 3-methyl substituent and the ortho (2′) hydrogen atom of the phenyl ring. The X-ray structure of 3-methylflavylium obtained by Roque et al.,90 showing a torsion angle of 40.4° between the benzopyrylium moiety and the 2-phenyl ring, confirmed this explanation, Fig. 3 and Table 1.91–95
 Fig. 3  Single crystal structure of 3-methylflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2002, Wiley-VCH. 
Table 1 Torsion angles in flavylium derivatives




Compound
Torsion angle/°





                      [4′-N(CH3)2][PF6−]
                    
2.391



                      [4′,6,7-triOH][Cl−]
                    
5.992



                      [3,3′,4′,5,7-pentaOH][Br−]
                    
10.193



                      [7-N(CH2CH3)2-4′-OH][BF4−]
                    
5.994



                      [7,8-diOH][Cl−]
                    
0.695



                      [7,8-diOH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                    
8.195



                      [3-CH3][BF4−]
                    
40.790




The equilibrium  takes place between AH++ and B2 (98%), see Fig. 2B. Interesting information regarding the behaviour of this compound in basic medium was also reported. A direct pH jump from pH = 1 to 12 shows formation of Cc−− that slowly equilibrates with Ct−−. A reverse pH jump from equilibrated solutions at pH = 12 to 1 leads to the appearance of AH++, in two steps: (i) a faster one resulting from the conversion of Cc−−, and (ii) a slower one due to the conversion of Ct−−. The ratio of the amplitudes of the two exponentials allows the calculation of an equilibrium constant, .
The compound 4′-hydroxy-3-methylflavylium behaves similarly to the parent 3-methylflavylium. The thermodynamic equilibrium occurs between AH++ and B2, and the decrease in acidity can be explained by the donor effect of the hydroxyl substituent (Fig. 2C). Addition of one more hydroxyl substituent, as in the case of the compound 4′,7-dihydroxy-3-methylflavylium90 shifts the  to 3.6, suggesting the cooperative effect of the donor properties of both hydroxyls. In this case, the equilibrium is reached between AH++ and A (20%), and Ct (80%) (Fig. 2D). The compound 4′,7-dihydroxy-3-methoxyflavylium equilibrates between the flavylium cation and the hemiketal (80%), and trans-chalcone (20%). In this compound it was possible to see the formation of hemiketal from irradiation of the trans-chalcone, at pH = 4.0.96


3.3.2. 
            Flavylium cations substituted in position 4. 
As mentioned above, the first 4-substituted flavylium compounds were synthesised by Bülow et al.4,50,97–99 and those shown in Scheme 21 were already reported by Perkin and Everest in their book.4
 Scheme 21  4-Substituted flavylium compounds reported by Perkin and Everest in their book.4 
Iacobucci and Sweeny100 have also reported substitutions with R4 = CH3, COOH, p-anisyl; R5 = OH; R6 = H; R8 = H; R2′ = H; R3′ = H; R4′ = OCH3.
The fundamental characteristic of 4-substituted flavylium compounds is the stability of the quinoidal base. Amic and co-workers101 observed two sets of isosbestic points for 4-methyl-7,4′-dihydroxyflavylium, which are explained by the formation of the quinoidal base and its ionised form. The authors also attributed a small absorption band at 350 nm to the chalcone, but this was probably due to a second singlet absorption of the quinoidal base. Such an absorption band is also visible in the spectra of the analogue 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium, and in this compound only the flavylium cation and quinoidal base are observed by 1H NMR.102 For the analogue bearing a phenyl in position 4 the behaviour is very similar. In the case of the compound 7-hydroxy-4′-methoxy-4-phenylflavylium the formation of the base (and its stability) is very clear, and in alkaline solutions an absorption band is attributed to ionised chalcone (but not fully confirmed).101 A fourth compound, 7-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-phenylflavylium, also exhibits the formation of the quinoidal base, and an intense and red shifted absorption band attributed to the chalcone (ionised). No reference to the isomers cis and trans of chalcones was made in that work.101 Equilibrium involving the flavylium cation and the quinoidal base was also reported for 7-hydroxy-4′-methoxy-4-methylflavylium.24 In the case of 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium, a relatively intense fluorescence emission and an extremely efficient excited state proton transfer were observed.102 The proton is ejected from the excited flavylium cation with a rate of 1.4 × 1011 s−1.103


3.3.3. 
            Flavylium cations substituted in position 5. To be or not to be an anthocyanin. 
Considering that deoxyanthocyanins or desoxyanthocyanidins are defined as flavylium derivatives bearing, respectively, a glucoside or an hydroxyl in position 5, but lacking the substituent in position 3, the following question is raised: how should a compound like carajurin be classified, Scheme 6.55 The same question can also be posed for the flavylium derivatives responsible for the red colour in dragon's blood resin, see Fig. 4 and Section 6.6 for more details. At this point, even the frontier between natural and synthetic flavylium compounds becomes diffuse.104 One interesting observation regarding many of the contemporary works dealing with the compounds that give colour to dragon's blood is the lack of explicit connection between the structures proposed in Fig. 4 and the flavylium network. The interesting feature of these compounds is that they are (like carajurin) the quinoidal bases of a flavylium cation. As in other hydroxyflavylium compounds, the absorption by the base is red shifted in comparison with the flavylium cation and as a consequence, the quinoidal bases responsible for the red colour in dragon's blood become yellow in acidic medium due to the colour of the flavylium cation.
 Fig. 4  Quinoidal bases reported for the dyes responsible for the red colour in Dragon's blood (left); for more details, see ref. 104. Mole fraction distribution of dracoflavylium in acidic medium (right). 


3.3.4. Deoxyanthocyanins. 
Deoxyanthocyanins are present in ferns and mosses as well as hybrids of sorghum and purple corn.105 In particular, tricetinidin is a pigment found exclusively in black tea during the fermentation stage by the enzymatic oxidation of epigallocatechin.106
The relation between 5-substituted flavylium compounds, as those reported above, and deoxanthocyanins is evident. This family of compounds comprise the natural colorants apigeninidin, luteolinidin, and tricetinidin, Scheme 22.
 Scheme 22  Structure of deoxyanthocyanins. 
The effect of substitution on the stability of 3-deoxyanthocyanidins was studied by Sweeny and Iacobucci.105 Based on the data from fourteen synthetic 3-deoxyanthocyanins the authors did not observe any increase in stability at pH = 2.8, but at pH = 7.0 the 4-COOH substituted flavylium proved to have an unusually high stability.
The acidity constants of apigeninidin107 and luteolinidin108 were determined. In both cases, the mole fraction distribution of the base at pH = 5–6 is very high.


3.3.5. 
            Flavylium cations bearing amine substituents. 
The introduction of an amine substituent in position 4′ or 7 produces a significant red shift in the absorption spectra of the different species in the network and decreases the acidity of the flavylium cation by 2–4 pH units, due to the donor effect of the amine group.91

Fig. 5 represents the X-ray structure of a single crystal of the compound 4′-aminoflavylium hexafluorophosphate and clearly illustrates the effect of the amino substituent as follows:91 (i) short bond length between carbon C14 (4′) and nitrogen (1.354 Å) and (ii) small value (2.3°) of the torsion angle between the pyrylium and benzene ring. According to the X-ray results, the C4′–N bond of the 4′-aminoflavylium ion possesses a noticeable double bond character, so that its most realistic representation is structure II shown in Scheme 23.
 Fig. 5  X-Ray structure of a single crystal of 4′-aminoflavylium hexafluorophosphate. Front view with atom label numbers (left) and side view (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
 Scheme 23  Resonance structure for 4′-aminoflavylium. 
Another example regards the compound 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium tetrafluoroborate, Fig. 6.94 The torsion angle between the benzopyrylium system and the benzene ring is 5.9°, in accordance with the fact that there are no substituents in the positions 3 (C3), 2′ (C12) and 6′ (C16), which allows good coplanarity of both aromatic systems in the structure. This torsion angle compares with 0.6° in the case of 7,8-dihydroxyflavylium, showing that the catechol has also a donor character that contributes to the planarity of the flavylium cation.95 When a methyl group is present in position 4 (C4), the angle increases to 8.1°, as observed in 7,8-dihydroxy-4-methylflavylium chloride,95 and when a hydroxyl group or the bulkier methyl group is present in the position 3 (C3), the angle increases, respectively, to 10.1° and 40.4°, as observed in cyanidin bromide (3,3′,4′,5,7-pentahydroxyflavylium bromide)93 and 3-methylflavylium tetrafluoroborate, Table 1.90
 Fig. 6  ORTEP view of the molecular structure of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium tetrafluoroborate. Front view with atom label numbers (A) and side view (B). Ellipsoids are shown with 50% of probability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2004, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the structure of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium it is also worth noting: (i) the presence of an hydrogen bond between the hydrogen on O17 and the fluorine atom F2 of the BF4 counter ion, and (ii) the existence of π–π stacking interactions between the flavylium molecules in the crystal packing, as revealed by the distances between adjacent benzopyrylium rings, which are less than 4 Å.
Protonation of the amine in position 4′ or 7 of the flavylium is extremely difficult and takes place only at very acidic solutions, as shown in Fig. 7. The stability of the flavylium cation in such acid solutions is particularly remarkable. We noticed that after several months the colour of the solutions was not significantly altered.
 Fig. 7  Solutions of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium tetrafluoroborate in extremely acidic conditions (HCl concentration indicated in bottle labels). Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2004, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.6. 
            Case studies: 6-hydroxyflavylium and 4′-dimethylamino-6-hydroxyflavylium. 
The compound 6-hydroxyflavylium109 is especially interesting, due to the formation of a very reactive zwitterionic quinoidal base, Scheme 24. Its pKa is 6.2 and for pH values up to 5 the evolution of the system takes place only through the hydration reaction, and the rate constants of this process can be clearly measured (khydration (s−1) = 0.09 + 900[H+]). On the other hand, after a pH jump from 1 to 9.65, for example, the base is immediately formed and decays with a first order rate constant of 1.3 s−1. This value is much higher than the one predicted by a process controlled by the hydration, as in the case of anthocyanins and the majority of flavylium compounds. In other words, under acidic conditions, B is formed upon hydration of AH++ while at basic pH values, B is formed upon hydration of the zwitterionic base A, as shown in Scheme 24.
 Scheme 24  Kinetic scheme followed by 6-hydroxyflavylium.109 
Another interesting property of the system is the redox behaviour of the trans-chalcone that can be oxidised to the respective quinone (CtQ). Cyclic voltammograms show a reversible process which allows us to include a redox input into the flavylium reaction network, as shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  
Cyclic voltammetry of the chalcone of 6-hydroxyflavylium. For more details see ref. 109. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The other case study is the compound 4′-dimethylamino-6-hydroxyflavylium where its multistate equilibria have several features different from other flavylium compounds.110 Since the hydroxyl substituent is at position 6, the A form is not stabilised by a quinoidal-like resonance structure, and the pKa is rather high (pKa = 7.7), see Fig. 9. On the other hand, the dimethylamino substituent at position 4′ hinders the hydration reaction greatly. It was found that for this flavylium the release of OH− from B, without hydration, is competitive (kOH− = 0.48 s−1) and therefore the hydration constant is dependent on proton concentration, according to eqn (25). (25)The consequence is that Ct is formed before the formation of A, but AH++ species are still dominant until pH around 6 (the fraction of Ct is around 10%). Only then does the ionised chalcone species appears, becoming dominant for pH > 7.
 Fig. 9  Mole fraction distribution of the compound 4′-dimethylamino-6-hydroxyflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.7. 
            Naphthoflavylium and styrylflavylium derivatives: extending the colour palette. 
When deoxyanthocyanins are compared with anthocyanins it is clear that the latter are much more coloured. This is due to the effect of the introduction of a hydroxyl group in position 3, which is crucial for the red shift observed in anthocyanins (see Section 4.1 for more details). On the other hand, as observed by Jurd, the instability of natural pigments is primarily due to the substituents in position 3.111 One possible strategy to achieve colour and stability at the same time is the extension of the π conjugation of the flavylium by introducing a double bond between ring C and ring B as in 2-styryl-1-benzopyrylium (commonly referred as styrylflavylium) or increasing the ring Aconjugation (naphthoflavylium). Regarding the styrylflavylium species, Buck and Heilbron,112 and later Jurd111 prepared and patented a series of styrylflavylium compounds (see Scheme 25). Amic and co-workers reported a theoretical study concerning the fading of colour in these compounds at moderately acidic pH values, suggesting structures that could display high stability and whose solutions should be red coloured.113
 Scheme 25  Buck and Heilbron112styrylflavylium (left) and Jurd styryl derivatives111 (right); R3′ = H; R4′ = OH, OCH3; R3′ = OCH3; R4′ = OH. 
On the basis of the experimental results carried out with the compound 7-hydroxy-2-(4-methoxystyryl)-1-benzopyrylium it was concluded that these compounds follow an identical network of chemical reactions of anthocyanins (Scheme 2).113 These findings were confirmed for the compounds reported in Fig. 10, see Tables 2 and 3.114,115
 Fig. 10  Mole fraction distribution of styrylflavylium derivatives.114,115 
Table 2 Thermodynamic constants of styrylflavylium compounds




Compound



pKa1
pKa2

K

h

K

t

K

i
/M−1

pK
Ct1


pK
Ct2






                      [7-OH(styryl)][BF4−]
                      114
3.1
3.7
—
6.0 × 10−4
7.7
9.3



                      [4′,7-diOH(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114,115
3.4
4.1
8.1
3.2 × 10−4
7.9
9.4



                      [7-OH-4′-N(CH3)2(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114
4.0
5.1
—
9.0 × 10−5
8.6
10.4



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3(styryl)][Cl−]
                      113
3.6
—
—
—
—
—




Table 3 Rate constants of styrylflavylium compounds




Compound

K

t

k

i
/k−h/M

k
−i/s−1

k

h
/s−1

k
+−i/s−1

k

+

i
/k+−h/M





                      [7-OH(styryl)][BF4−]
                      114
1.5 × 10−5
4 × 10−4
0.04
—
—



                      [4′,7-diOH(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114,115
6 × 10−5
1.5 × 10−4
5 × 10−3
—
—



                      [7-OH-4′-N(CH3)2(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114
1 × 10−3
1 × 10−5
1 × 10−4
4 × 10−3
1




Studies on the naphthoflavylium network were reported in the literature regarding ground and excited state properties,116 as well as complexation with aluminium and gallium.117 Recently the compound 4′-hydroxynaphthoflavylium (Scheme 26) was studied in detail and the equilibrium and kinetic constants of the network determined, Table 4.118 The behaviour of the 4′-hydroxynaphthoflavylium (Scheme 26) is similar to the analogue 4′-hydroxyflavylium but it is less acidic due to the greater donating capacity of the naphthalene.118
 Scheme 26  Structure of 4′-hydroxynaphthoflavylium. 
Table 4 (a) Thermodynamic data for 4′-hydroxynaphthoflavylium.118 (b) Kinetic data for 4′-hydroxynaphthoflavylium118







pKa

K

h



K

t



K

i






(a)


2.9
5.1
1.3 × 10−6
0.89
3.5 × 103







k

h
/s−1

k

−h
/M−1 s−1

k

t
/s−1

k

−t
/s−1

k

i
/s−1

k

−i
/s−1




(b)


0.1
8.5 × 104
0.15
0.17
0.04
3.3 × 10−5





4. Intermolecular interactions and colour
4.1. Strategies for colour in nature
As mentioned in Section 1, colour by anthocyanins is one of the relevant features of these systems. By 1915, Richard Willstätter had collected enough experimental evidence to address the origin of colour in Nature. In the paper entitled, Über Variationen der Blütenfarben, he conclusively proposes: The wonderful diversity of colours that flowers create in nature depends on several factors, namely the existence in a same plant and flower of different anthocyanins and in different concentrations; it also depends on the big structural transformations that each anthocyanin displays, including the interactions with the intracellular medium as well as with yellow pigments that in turn may be present in a wide diversity of structures.10
Willstätter was suggesting that reds, violets and blues are based on anthocyanins, but the interactions with the components of the intracellular medium play a crucial role in the final colour. These interactions, or reactions, could take place with metal ions for the blues, organic acids for the reds, or with other yellow pigments (flavonoids) that are present in the cell. These last two types are now known as copigmentation and the term was introduced in the early works of Robinson119 to designate the phenomenon of colour intensification of an anthocyanin as the result of interaction with an colourless molecule called a copigment; it can involve other natural compounds, such as flavonoids and metals.
It is currently accepted that colour in Nature, as far as anthocyanins are concerned, depends on the substitution pattern of the benzopyrylium ring, namely on the number and position of the hydroxyl or methoxyl substituents in ring A or B. For example, comparing pelargonidin (four OH groups) with cyanidin (five OH groups) and delphinidin (six OH groups) a shift to the visible from 520, 535 and finally 545 nm, respectively, is observed. Position 3 is particularly important in which concerns colour: comparing pelargonidin with luteolinidin (same number of OH groups, but luteolinidin as no OH in position 3) a red shift of 25 nm is found in pelargonidin. When considering the flavylium network, at the pH expected in the vacuoles, the contributing species for colour are the flavylium cation, AH++, and the quinoidal base, A. For the most common anthocyanins, for example malvin, inspection of Scheme 20 shows that the appearance of the red colour occurs only at very acidic pH values, and that the blue colour is not thermodynamically stable. This is the dilemma that we have to face when projecting the use of anthocyanins as food colorants or for dyeing purposes: the red colour implies a very acidic medium, not easily available, and at moderately acidic and neutral pH values the blue fades over time. This is the same problem that Nature had to solve. For the formation of a blue colour to occur, some interaction between the quinoidal base and other compounds is required. Several examples of intermolecular, intramolecular copigmentation or self-association have been reported,11,19–21,24–26,120 in particular the fascinating structures described by Goto, Kondo and collaborators. The mechanisms of colour development by anthocyanins in blue flowers have been recently reviewed by Yoshida, Mori and Kondo.19 In many cases, copigmentation is also necessary for obtaining red colours, but an alternative was reported for the case of raspberry (Rubus idaeus).22 This fruit presents a very intense red colour, whose major anthocyanin is cyanidin-3-glucoside; 3-glucoside derivatives exhibit higher  (∼3) values compared to the 3,5-diglucosides (∼2). In this case, it was demonstrated that the red colour could be obtained without copigmentation and that the strategy was to make use of a large concentration of the colorant. In a certain way, Nature uses this variable to compensate for the fact of not using the total colouring power of the anthocyanins (only available at lower pH values).
4.2. Formation of ion-pairs and the copigmentation phenomenon
The flavylium cation of malvin in the equilibrium at pH = 2.7 (ca. 16.6% AH++) can increase its absorption almost 100% upon addition of ClO4− (4 M), essentially at expenses of the hemiketal. An identical behaviour, but in less extent, was reported for 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium at pH = 3.5. In this case the flavylium is formed with the concomitant decrease of the absorption of trans-chalcone.121 The ion-pair copigmentation constants (Kcp) calculated assuming the formation of a 1:1 adduct were reported together with the apparent pKa of malvin and 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium, in the presence of large excess of the anions (2 M), Cl−, Br−, ClO4−.122 The values of the association constants are small (Table 5) but when the salts are in large excess, large variations in the mole fraction distribution can be observed, as reported above. Another interesting behaviour observed for the ion-pair between 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium and the chloride anion was the lack of influence on the hydration rate of the copigmentation with anions.122
Table 5 Ion-pair association constants (Kcp) and apparent acidity constants (K′a) for malvin and 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium122




 
 

                    Cl
                    −

                    Br
                    −

                    ClO4−





K
cp (malvin)
—
1.1
1.7
1.1



 (malvin)
1.5
2.0
2.15
2.0



K
cp (4′,7-diOH)
—
1.7
2.0
2.4



 (4′,7-diOH)
3.05
3.6
3.75
3.8




As discussed above, the stabilisation of colour by ions is only one of the strategies found by Nature to stabilize the colour of anthocyanins at the pH values found in plant cell vacuoles;123 complexation of the flavylium cation by other polyphenols124 and metals25 also prevents the fading of anthocyanin colour. Many authors have shown that a great number of colourless natural compounds (such as hydroxylated benzoic and cinnamic acids, hydroxyflavones, etc.) are able to act as copigments.125 The driving force for copigmentation has usually been assumed to be due to an hydrophobic effect79,126–128 but more recently, evidence that charge transfer is also an important factor in the stabilisation of complexes of several polyphenol copigments with anthocyanins was provided.129–131
A subset of these interactions is the self-association of anthocyanins in relatively concentrated (>1 mM) solutions. Asen et al.124 reported that by self-association, cyanidin 3,5-diglucoside solutions at 5 mM displayed twice the expected colour at pH values between 3 and 5. This effect is comparable to the copigmentation effect in equimolar solutions of cyanidin 3,5-diglucoside and quercitrin, which gave three times the expected colour at the same pH values.
It was also shown, using 1H NMR chemical shifts, that in the case of malvidin 3-glucoside132 there is significant association between the flavylium cation and the trans-chalcone form. The flavylium self-association constant (3700 M−1) is similar to the flavylium–chalcone copigmentation constant (3080 M−1). The presence of these interactions affects the measured equilibrium constants related to both the hydration of the flavylium cation and the isomerisation of the chalcone forms. The apparent pKh values, in the case of malvidin 3-glucoside, range from 3.0 (at 0.14 mM) to 3.4 (at 0.68 mM), while the value found in diluted conditions is 2.6.44 In concentrated solutions, such as the ones where anthocyanins are often found (e.g., vacuoles of plants, red wine, etc.), these values would be even higher, causing much more of the flavylium cation to be present at pH > 3.22,125
4.3. 
          Host–guest complexes
Molecular clips are electron-rich concave hosts designed for the inclusion of electron-poor guests such as aromatics with –M substituents, or pyridinium cations, mainly bound by π–π, CH–π, and π–cation interactions inside their concave cavity.133,134Flavylium salts, with their positive 1-benzopyrylium moieties, were considered excellent candidates to be hosted by these molecular clips.135
The hydrogenphosphate-substituted molecular clip C1 forms highly stable host–guest complexes with the flavylium salts 1 and 2 in methanol, Scheme 27. The large binding constants (log K = 4.1 and 4.7 determined by fluorometric titration for the formation of 1@C1 and 2@C1, respectively) and the large complexation-induced 1H NMR shifts of the guest signals assigned to the protons 3- and 4-H of 1 or 2 allowed the conclusion that in each complex the positively charged pyrylium ring of 1 or 2 is bound inside the clip cavity and, hence, cation−π interactions provide an important contribution to the host–guest complex formation besides other noncovalent bonds, for example the coulombic ion–ion and the solvophobic interactions, Scheme 28. However, to explain the surprising result, that the neutral quinoidal base of 3 forms an even more stable complex with clip C1 in methanol (log K = 5.6), the authors assumed that the solvophobic interactions contribute substantially to the noncovalent host–guest binding.
 Scheme 27  Structure of the molecular clip receptors (C1 and C2) and of the flavylium guests 1–4. 
 Scheme 28  Complexation-induced maximum 1H NMR shifts, Δδmax = δcomplex − δ0 in ppm, determined by 1H NMR titrations for the protonsflavylium 2 (left) and proposed structure of host–guest complex 2@C1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
In water, the solvophobic (hydrophobic) effect should be even stronger than that in methanol. Indeed, clip C1 forms stable (1:1) complexes with the flavylium salts 1, 2, 3 and the quinoidal base of 3 but these complexes proved to be insoluble in water. In highly diluted aqueous solution, the association constants for the complex formation of clip C1 with the flavylium salt 3 at pH = 2 and with the respective quinoidal base at pH = 5.3 were determined by UV-Vis titration experiments and proved to be the same for both complexes (log K = 4.9), suggesting that here the hydrophobic interactions are dominant for the host–guest binding. The increase in the pKa of 3 in the presence of clip C1 from 4.0 to 4.8 reflects the stability of the flavylium cation inside the electron rich host cavity.

          Host–guest complexes of the sulfate-substituted clip C2 with the flavylium 4 and with the respective CB species, see eqn (1), were slightly more soluble in water than the corresponding complexes of the hydrogenphosphate clip C1, allowing the study of the effect of clip C2 on the thermodynamics and kinetics of the reaction network. The  increases from 3 to 4 in the presence of the receptor, extending the pH stability region of the flavylium cation in ca. one pH unit, Table 6.135,136 This means that the complexation of C2 with AH++ is stronger than with the other species comprised in CB, as corroborated by the values of log K(4@C2) = 4.3, log K(4A@C2) = 4.0 and log K(4Ct@C2) = 3.2 ± 0.3 (this last in methanol). This is like what was already described for the stabilisation of colour in nature, where anthocyanins often participate in supramolecular structures that also extend the colour of the flavylium cations to the pH region of the vacuoles where they accumulate in plant cells.
Table 6 Thermodynamic and kinetic constants for the reactions of free 4 and complexed 4@C2 at 21 ± 1 °C135




 

4


4@C2




pKa
4.1136
4.5 ± 0.2





3.1136
4.0 ± 0.2



k

i

K

t

K

h
/s−1 M−1
(2.1 ± 0.5) × 10−7
(6.2 ± 0.5) × 10−8



k

−i
/s−1
(1.0 ± 0.9) × 10−4
(7.9 ± 0.9) × 10−5





(1.8 ± 0.7) × 10−5
(1.6 ± 0.7) × 10−5



k

h
/s−1
(1.2 ± 0.9) × 10−2
(3.9 ± 0.9) × 10−3




The kinetic data in Table 6 show that the trans–cisisomerisation and the hydration of 4 are retarded in the presence of clip C2. The clip-induced deceleration of both reactions is presumably due to the steric constraints of the clip cavity, affecting the sterically demanding trans–cisisomerisation and the bimolecular H2O addition to 4. On the other hand, the low percentage of 4Ct@C2 at the concentration level used did not allow the observation, within the experimental error, of any difference in the photoisomerisation quantum yield of 4Ct in the absence and presence of C2.
5. Synthetic flavylium compounds as versatile chromic systems
The effect of light on the equilibrium of anthocyanins was noticed by Kuhn and Sperling.137 They proposed that, in acidic medium, the photochemistry leads to the formation of the flavylium cation from the hemiketal and suggested the existence of two intermediates that were not characterised. The same interpretation was advanced by Dewar and Sutherland138 on their observations of the photolysis of 2-hydroxychalcones. Harper and Chandler66 detected a shift towards formation of the flavylium cation (increasing the observed ) under diffuse day light of the compound 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium. The effect of light on the network of chemical reactions was also reported by Timberlake and Bridle.65 They observed that the system at the equilibrium may only be obtained in the dark. However, these last authors worked with anthocyanins, where the mole fraction distribution of the trans-chalcone at the equilibrium (room temperature) is small139 and the photochemical properties are difficult to ascertain. Once more, clarity came from the synthetic flavylium compounds, due to the works of Jurd, carried out with 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium and 4′,5,7-trimethoxyflavylium, Scheme 29.68
 Scheme 29  
          4′,7-Dihydroxyflavylium and 4′,5,7-trimethoxyflavylium. 
Jurd proposed the facile isomerisation of the trans-chalcone, to form the cis-analogue followed by cyclisation to give flavylium. He carried out his studies before the work of Dubois and Brouillard and used the (incorrect) sequence AH++ ⇌ A ⇌ B ⇌ Cc ⇌ Ct accepted at that time. While Jurd was able to touch upon the essential features, a full explanation of the photochemical process could not be given at the time.
5.1. 
          cis–transPhotoisomerisation
The photochemistry of 2-hydroxychalcones was only revisited in 1988 by Matsushima et al.,140 and in 1994 by Pina et al.,141 who realised the potential of these compounds as photochromic systems. The first author developed his research along the line of application of these compounds as chemical actinometers in water/ethanol mixtures142 and in non-aqueous media,143 while the second focused on the chemical network of the flavylium compounds in aqueous solution, which would lead to multistate/multifunctional applications.29 A rationale for the photoisomerisation mechanism of 2-hydroxychalcones in which the excited state isomerisation equilibrium favours the cis-isomer was proposed in 1994.141 This assumption implies that the isomerisation and back-isomerisation rate constants in the excited state are fast enough to compete with the decay to the ground state allowing an excited state equilibrium to be established. In the same year, Matsushima et al. proposed a mechanism involving the formation of an excited-state tautomer through proton transfer, with a low rotation barrier leading to the formation of the cis-isomer.142
In the following years, accumulated evidence suggested that the cis–transisomerisation in these systems occurs from the singlet excited state (e.g. molecular oxygen does not affect the isomerisation quantum yields).140,144 Recently, a more significant photophysical insight was provided showing that the photoisomerisation in chalcone systems occurs from the S1 state.115 The locally excited state of the trans isomer decays in picoseconds to yield the cis-chalcone in the ground state. Despite evidence found for the effect of hydrogen bonding with solvents on the photoisomerisation, proton transfer does not seem to be necessary for the photoisomerisation to occur, and the very fast decay of the S1 seems to rule out an excited state equilibrium between chalcone isomers. Moreover, flavylium derived chalcones belong to a wider class of chalcone compounds, which are known to undergo complex photophysical and photochemical pathways,145–149 where the photoisomerisation step has to compete with other processes taking place during the excited state lifetime. The deactivation pathways proposed for trans-chalcones are summarised in Scheme 30.150 Upon light excitation, a locally excited (LE) state of Ct is formed, Ct*. It can form a non-fluorescent biradical state (phantom state, P*), twisted around the CC bond, which decays either to ground state Cc or Ct. Alternatively, Ct* can undergo intersystem crossing, or, depending on the presence and position of electron-donating or electron-withdrawing substituents, undergo charge transfer, yielding low lying states, which can be emissive or non-emissive. In particular, the presence of strong electron-donating groups, such as amine substituents, which are conjugated to the resonant position with the electron-withdrawing chalcone carbonyl, may trigger charge transfer states that reduce the photochromic efficiency of the system.151 The later may be viewed as twisted intermolecular charge transfer (TICT) states, possessing large dipole moments, which are strongly stabilised by polar solvents. This is in agreement with the fact that the medium affects strongly the photoisomerisation efficiency. It would also clarify the fact that in solvents of low polarity, the formation of TICT states can be suppressed and the Ct* deactivation pathway leading to P* prevails, with a corresponding increase of the photoisomerisation quantum yield.115,151 This is observed when the flavylium compounds partition into the more apolar domains within micellar aggregates (see below). It is also predicted that the substitution pattern strongly affects the isomerisation quantum yields, as shown in the works of Czerney et al.151,152
 Scheme 30  Proposed model for excited-state trans-chalcone deactivation pathways. Twisted intermolecular charge transfer, TICT, and phantom, P*, states are discussed in the text. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
5.2. 
          Chromene photochemistry
In the flavylium chemical network, hemiketal species may be also described as chromene molecules,153 which have photoisomerisation reactions due to an electrocyclic ring-opening at the pyran C–O bond. Becker et al. studied these compounds, showing that under UV light open metastable photoproducts are obtained with the structure of o-quinone allides.154–156 This photoisomerisation is reversible, either thermally or photochemically, and coloration/decoloration cycles can be performed with high resistance to photodegradation since the photochemical yields are close to unity. Among chromenes, benzo- and naphthopyrans, spiropyrans and spirooxazines are well known photochromic molecules.
Until recently, in flavylium systems, such processes were not studied in detail, mainly because it was almost impossible to irradiate selectively the hemiketal species, since in UV all species exhibit light absorption. This was overcome with the synthesis of a new pyridine-chalcone compound in which the phenyl group has been substituted by a 4-pyridyl moiety.153 The reaction network of this compound excludes formation of the AH++ cation, even at very acidic pH values. Irradiation of Ct at pH = 6 (most stable species) in water:methanol (1:1), at 365 nm (Ct absorption maximum), produces B almost quantitatively by two consecutive photochemical processes, isomerisation followed by electrocyclic ring-closure. The thermal back reaction of B is relatively slow (lifetime higher than 1 hour) allowing the irradiation of B at 254 nm and formation of a photostationary state composed by 80% of Ct and 20% of B. The unusual slow tautomerisation, four orders of magnitude slower than common flavylium compounds, was explained by the lower nucleophilicity of the oxygen as well as a lower electrophilicity of the carbonyl carbon where the nucleophilic ring-closure reaction occurs, slowing down the latter reaction. On the other hand, the hemiketal is intrinsically stable as the lack of AH++ formation confirms.
The situation was further explored by studying trans-2-hydroxychalcones bearing a carboxylate group at position 2′.157 In aqueous solutions the system behaves as usual, but AH++ is formed only in very acidic conditions, otherwise Ct is the prevalent species. In methanol, a new chromene may be produced due to the formation of a lactone species; irradiation at 313 nm of the trans-chalcone leads successively to cis-chalcone, the hemiketal and finally to the lactone, Fig. 11. The lactone can be isolated as a powder, fully characterised and re-dissolved in an organic solvent such as straight-chain aliphatic alcohols.
 Fig. 11  Top: photochemical pathway for La formation upon irradiation of chalcone Ct−− in methanol; bottom: schematic representation of the crystalline structure of the lactone La; carbon and oxygen atoms are represented as thermal ellipsoids drawn at the 50% probability level and hydrogen atoms as spheres with arbitrary radii. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
Irradiation of solutions of the lactone at temperatures below the melting point of the solvent leads to the formation of a new red photoproduct attributed to the ortho-quinone allide, Scheme 31. This does not occur when the solvent is liquid, but as long as the solvent is frozen the photochromism appears and by appropriate choice of the solvent even at room temperature.
 Scheme 31  Formation of the ortho-quinone allide. 
5.3. Thermochromism in flavylium derivatives
Thermochromism in flavylium systems was achieved using the effect of temperature on the aggregation equilibria or on the ring opening reaction of lactones. Flavylium salts exhibiting a reversible thermochromism in aqueous sugar–gel matrices, such as agar, agarose, pectin, sodium alginate, and κ-carrageenan gels, were reported.158,159 For instance, by changing the temperature from −3 to 50 °C, the absorption band around 600 nm of 7-diethylamino-4′-dimethylaminoflavylium perchlorate in an agar–gel matrix increased by a factor of ca. 1.5, while the band around 520 nm substantially decreased.158 The same authors also extended the thermochromic studies to solid thin κ-carrageenan films.160 In all cases, the blue shifts observed upon lowering the temperature were tentatively rationalised on the basis of H-type aggregation of the flavylium cations, enhanced by the negatively charged colloid–gel surface.
The photochromism of lactone derivatives of flavylium compounds was described above.157 However, lactone dyes are best known for another chromic application in which a colour is developed with temperature inputs.161 In fact, thermochromism in lactone derivatives of triarylmethanes is widely reported in the literature and has been used in commercial applications.162 To afford thermochromism, a sharp transition at a given temperature is desired. Usually, the absorption spectrum changes with temperature but the resulting effect does not lead to a strong differentiation in appearance to the viewer. To achieve a sharp transition, a three component system is normally used and constituted by: (i) a solvent that undergoes a phase transition at a given temperature, (ii) a developer that will interact with the coloured form of the dye (iii) and finally a dye that can be either colourless (also called leucodye) and coloured when complexed with the developer.162–164 These systems can be referred as phase transition thermochromic systems. Crystal violet lactone is an example of a leucodye that, in the presence of a weak acid, is transformed into a species with a deep blue colour. This weak acid can be either an organic molecule (such as gallic acid derivatives) or a metal cation that can act as a Lewis acid (such as Fe(III)).165,166

          4-(2-Carboxyphenyl)-7-diethylamino-4′-dimethylaminophenyl-1-benzopyrylium, I in Scheme 32, was shown to have the same type of equilibrium.167 The carboxyl group can attack carbon 4, forming a lactone ring, II in Scheme 32, and the resulting molecule is similar to triarylmethane derivatives. Since it is a 4-substituted flavylium, the usual hemiketal/chalcone chemistry is absent for most of the pH ranges.
 Scheme 32  Chemical network of 4-(2-carboxyphenyl)-7-diethylamino-4′-dimethylaminophenyl-1-benzopyrylium.167 
In polar protic solvents the lactone is not formed and, therefore, the system is always coloured. However, when the flavylium salt is dissolved in a non-protic polar solvent such as acetonitrile, the lactone appears in the presence of a weak base such as ethyldiisopropylamine (EDIPA), leading to a colourless solution at room temperature. Upon cooling (liquid nitrogen) the resulting solid displays a blue colour characteristic of the flavylium cation. The same blue colour can be developed near room temperature by using n-pentadecanonitrile, which has a melting point of 18 °C, Fig. 12. When the solvent is in a liquid state it is able to solvate and stabilize the protonated form of the weak base (EDIPA). When reaching the solid state, the thermodynamic equilibrium favours the transfer of the proton from the weak base EDIPA to the lactone, yielding the blue open form. Simultaneously the lowering of the temperature decreases the weight of the entropic term in the Gibbs free energy, favouring the blue form, which has a lower enthalpy.
 Fig. 12  Schematic molecular representation of the thermochromic flavylium system based on phase transition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. 
This system also undergoes irreversible photochemistry. By irradiating at 254 nm, a decarboxylation reaction168–170 takes place and the lactone can no longer be formed. This essentially offers the potential to design a thermochromic system, the function of which can be interrupted by means of light input, see Scheme 33.
 Scheme 33  Thermochromic mechanism and photodecarboxylation of 4-(2-carboxyphenyl)-7-diethylamino-4′-dimethylamino-1-benzopyrylium.167 
6. Applications
6.1. Energy conversion: dye sensitised solar cells based on anthocyanins

Dye sensitised solar cells (DSSCs) are a promising approach toward cheap solar cells and have attracted much attention from researchers since in 1991 O'Regan and Grätzel fabricated a dye-sensitised electrochemical cell with a conversion efficiency of 10%, using nano-crystalline titanium dioxide films.171 The major breakthrough was the usage of nanoporous titanium dioxide films with a large photoactive area and the capability to adsorb a wide range of dyes to sensitise titanium dioxide.
The potential of anthocyanins as sensitisers was first put in use in DSSCs by Tennakone and Kumara172 and Grätzel et al.173 Besides their chromophoric part, responsible for light absorption, the dyes should have catechol or carboxylic groups, which help bonding to the semiconductor, Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Schematic of a DSSC with cyanidin-3-glucoside (kuromanine) as a dye sensitiser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010, Applied Science Innovation Private Limited. 
The quinoidal base form of cyanin-3-glucoside, used by Grätzel et al. to sensitise TiO2 with visible light, displayed very fast (<100 fs) electron injection into the semiconductor, indicating a strong charge transfer coupling between the anthocyanin and the Ti(IV) site. The injection of electrons into TiO2 is very efficient and recombination losses with the oxidised dye are one order of magnitude slower than injection, providing a cell efficiency of ∼20%.173
The success of the initial cells led to the investigation of anthocyanins174–177 as sensitisers in DSSCs. Good solar electric power conversion was obtained with several natural dyes of different origins.178–182
A derivative of delphinidin, which is the major component of the egg plant,174 as well as other plant extracts containing anthocyanins181 have been tested to produce solar cells. An investigation on the structure and properties of dye molecules of different natural extracts has shown that anthocyanins possess the best photosensitising effect when compared with other kinds of natural dyes (e.g.chlorophylls), due to a better interaction between the carbonyl and hydroxyl groups of anthocyanins and the TiO2 film on the cathode of DSSCs.183
Comparison of the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of a TiO2|dye|CuI cell sensitised with different sensitisers, Fig. 14, better illustrate the potential of anthocyanins in this field.184
 Fig. 14  
IPCE spectrum of TiO2|dye|CuI cell sensitised with different sensitisers: (a) cis-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)dithiocyanateruthenium(II), (b) mercurochrome, (2,7-dibromo-4-(hydroxymercuri)-fluorescein disodium salt), (c) cyanidin 3-glucoside, and (d) mercurochrome together with cyanidin-3-glucoside. Adapted from Hirshberg et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
While the sensitisers containing thiocyanate ligands (e.g., cis-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)dithiocyanateruthenium(II)) exhibit much better performance than those without thiocyanate ligands, a broader absorption is observed by coupling cyanidin 3-glucoside with mercurochrome in the TiO2|dye|CuI cells. The photocurrent generated by coupling cyanidin 3-glucoside with mercurochrome is higher than that of the cell sensitised with cis-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)dithiocyanateruthenium(II), due to a better coverage of the visible spectrum.
6.2. “One molecule show”: the metamorphosis concept
Supramolecular chemistry is based on the assembly of simple units capable of building more complex structures, and explores the fact that the supermolecule exhibits properties different from the sum of those of the individual components. It is a bottom-up approach to complexity.40 In the reaction networks of flavylium compounds, complexity is reached horizontally. As reported above, a single molecule gives rise to several species that can be reversibly interconverted by the action of external stimuli in a process where the complexity is built at the molecular level, see Scheme 34.38
 Scheme 34  Sketch of the bottom-up and metamorphosis approaches. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010, Applied Science Innovation Private Limited. 
Through the next section some examples of the metamorphosis concept are presented.
6.3. 
          Flavylium-based multistate systems: exploiting semiochemistry
The idea of using photochromic compounds as optical memories was firstly reported by Hirshberg in 1956185 and was recast some years after by J.-M. Lehn, who introduced the concept of semiochemistry, the chemistry of molecular signal generation, processing, transfer and detection, see Scheme 35.186,187
 Scheme 35  Hirshberg's bianthron (dianthraquinones) photochromic system (top) and Lehn's write–read–erase system (bottom). 
An optical memory should operate by the sequence of at least three events: (i) write the signal, (ii) read the signal, (iii) erase the memory for another application, Scheme 36.
 Scheme 36  
Write, read and erase steps of an optical memory based in a cis–transphotoisomerisation. 

6.3.1. 
            Write–read–erase systems. 
Photoinduced cis–transisomerisation is one possible model for an optical memory. One of the forms (generally the trans) is stable thermodynamically and light is used to produce the cis form. The existence of a thermal barrier between the two isomers is a necessary requirement of the system, otherwise the signal auto-erases. However, this is not easy to achieve because the photochemical reaction leads to the formation of a metastable state, which tends to revert back to the initial and thermodynamically stable trans isomer. Another problem is the fact that colour production should be monitored (read) through the use of light, and many cis–trans systems are photoreversible. The peculiarities of the flavylium network provide a solution for this drawback: the introduction of a lock/unlock step. Consider the example of compound 4′-methoxyflavylium71 that exhibits a large cis–transisomerisation barrier, and has Ct as practically the only conjugate base of AH++ at the equilibrium. The respective energy diagram is shown in Scheme 18.
At moderately acidic pH values, for example pH = 6, Ct is the thermodynamically stable species. Irradiation of pale yellow Ct (λmaxca. 350 nm) leads to the formation of Cc, which equilibrates with B with a lifetime of approximately 7.6 ms. The lock step corresponds to the addition of protons to the solution: for a final pH = 1.0, the rate of flavylium formation is very high, occurring with a lifetime of 0.7 ms. The great advantage of the lock step is that it allows the read step to occur without erasing the signal. Moreover, the flavylium cation is always the most coloured species in the network. This case is described in Scheme 37.
 Scheme 37  
Write–lock–read–unlock–erase cycle of an optical memory based on the flavylium reaction network. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010, Applied Science Innovation Private Limited. 

Table 7 summarizes the flavylium derivatives where the concept of write–read–erase was used, exactly as described in Scheme 37 or in some variants.71,88,90,91,108,188–198
Table 7 
              Flavylium systems with write–read–erase cycles




Compound
Type of cyclea

λ
exc
b/nm
Colour λmaxc/nm





a A—write–lock–read–unlock–erase, B—unlock–write–autolock–read–unlock–erase, C—write–lock–develop–unlock/erase.
b The excitation wavelength is usually the absorption maximum of the Ct species.
c This wavelength corresponds to the absorption maximum of AH++ and A, depending on pH.






                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      88
A, B
300
394



                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−]
                      71
A
350
435



                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      188
A
350
435



                      [4′-OH][Cl−] (micelles)189
A
355
435



                      [Luteolinidin][Cl−]
                      108
A
380
494



                      [4′-CH3][Cl−]
                      190
A, B
350
408


[Luteolinidin ][Cl−] (micelles)191
A
390
490



                      [4′-OH-3-CH3][Cl−]
                      90
C
300
430



                      [4′-N(CH3)2][BF4−]
                      91
A
350
535



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      192
A
372
457



                      [4′-OH-6-NO2][BF4−]
                      193
B
314
450



                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−] (ionic liquids)194
A
365
475



                      [4′-OH][ClO4−] (ionic liquids)195
A
440
510



                      [3′,4′-Methylenedioxy][BF4−]
                      196
A
365
450



                      [4′-NCOCH3][BF4−]
                      197
A, B
365
440



                      [4′-NH2][BF4−]
                      197
A, B
365
500



                      [2′-OCH3][BF4−]
                      198
A
365
435






6.3.2. Mimicking logic gates. 
A simple analogy with modern computer language is to consider light as an input and colour as the output signal. Such a simple idea can be used to conceive logic gates, as proposed by A. P. de Silva199–203 and other authors.204 The simplest memory unit can be obtained by exciting (input 1) or not (input 0) a photochromic compound that should respond as shown in the truth table in Scheme 38. In one case the action of the light is the appearance of a coloured product (positive answer) while in the other it is the bleaching of the colour (negative answer).
 Scheme 38  Truth table for the yes (+) and no (−) logic gate that can be operated in a photochromic compound. 
6.3.2.1. Mimicking a simple function of a neuron. 
The neurons are very complex structures but some of their functions are simple, such as the input accumulation that originates an output signal after a certain threshold. The simplest analogous behaviour in terms of logic gates is to consider that the sum of two inputs yields a result that is different from the individual ones; mathematically this can be expressed by a XOR (exclusive OR) logic gate, see Fig. 15.37
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the two input XOR gate and the neuron-like behaviour of the absorption upon irradiation (accumulation–discharge).37 
The system is prepared by mixing two photoactive compounds: a trans-chalcone and hexacyanocobaltate(III), both absorbing at the excitation wavelength, but Ct exhibiting a higher mole absorption coefficient. In spite of the light being absorbed by both components, the trans-chalcone picks up most part of the light during the first stages of the reaction, AH++ is formed, and the signal appears. As the reaction goes further and the concentration of Ct decreases, the compound hexacyanocobaltate(III) starts to absorb light, releasing the cyanide ligand and increasing the pH by several units. This causes the hydration of the flavylium cation formed during the first stages of the reaction. The final result is the disappearance of the coloured flavylium cation, only after a certain amount of light has been accumulated.

6.4. 
          Flavylium networks in heterogeneous media
The flavylium networks have been extensively described in homogeneous solutions and are still the subject of intensive work, as described above. Nevertheless, it was soon recognised that in nature the anthocyanins exist in heterogeneous environments, namely in the presence of membranes and biomacromolecules such as proteins. Also if one hopes for an application of the flavylium photochemistry, it is important to find matrices where the flavylium compounds can be embedded. Thus heterogeneous media appeared as a logical follow up, and several different systems have been explored, which can be divided into: biphasic water/ionic liquid mixtures, micelles and reversed micelles (microemulsions), polymers, gels and solids (namely, zeolites and clays). These systems favour flavylium photochromism when compared with homogeneous solutions, and indeed an enhancement of the photochromic effect is observed in a number of cases. This is mainly due to a balance of electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions: while AH++ is positively charged (and hydrophilic), Ct is neutral and hydrophobic. Heterogeneous media emphasize these characteristics, since each species is partitioned towards different environments, where local pH can be considerably different. As a result, Ct is often thermodynamically stabilised, while AH++ is kinetically locked after photochemical production.

6.4.1. Biphasic water/ionic liquid systems. 
Ionic liquids (ILs) show many interesting properties that make them particularly attractive media for the study of flavylium compounds. At the same time, a better understanding of the physical properties of ILs and their impact on the reactivity of organic molecules can be gained. In the case of flavylium compounds, ILs can alter the primary trans–cis photochemical reaction or the thermal back reaction. IL/water biphasic systems, possible when an IL such as [BMIM][PF6] is immiscible in water, are less known. Since partition plays a role in this case, the flavylium photochromic system, with charged (hydrophilic) and hydrophobic species, can exhibit different properties when compared to homogeneous aqueous solutions. Through pH, light, and thermal inputs, each species can be generated and their partition easily followed due to the production of coloured species.

            4′,7-Dihydroxyflavylium
            194 and 4′-hydroxyflavylium195 in the presence of a biphasic system water/[BMIM]PF6 were the first flavylium compounds reported, Fig. 16. In the second case, the chemical network has a significant barrier for the Cc to Ctisomerisation reaction, and therefore upon a pH jump the formation of trans-chalcone takes a long time before it is completed (more than one day). AH++ is transformed into Cc22−− upon a pH jump from pH = 1 to pH = 12 in water taking about 1 day to give Ct22−−, therefore the activation energy is also high for di-ionised chalcones. These effects combined explain the results in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  (a) [BMIM][PF6] (bottom phase) and 4′-hydroxyflavylium perchlorate in 0.01 M HCl (upper phase); (b) after strong shaking of both solutions; (c) after alkalinisation of the aqueous phase (pH ≈ 12) with minimum shaking; (d) after medium shaking; (e) after strong shaking; (f) after several minutes at room temperature or upon irradiation of the aqueous phase of (e); (g) after reacidification of the aqueous phase (pH ≈ 1) and strong shaking; (h) after irradiation of the ionic liquid phase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2004, Elsevier. 
At pH = 1.0, the diffusion across the water/IL interface is very slow, and therefore AH++ remains in the aqueous phase. However, vigorous shaking leads to the transfer of the cation to the bottom IL phase. Upon a pH jump from 1 to 12, carried out in the aqueous phase, several different species are observed, including A, Cc22−− and Ct22−−. The ionised anionic species are more stable in the aqueous solutions, and therefore the solute moves back to the upper phase. Afterwards, a pH jump in the aqueous phase, back to pH = 1.0, followed by vigorous shaking of the two phases, produces Ct species that is completely transferred into the IL. At this pH value AH++ is the thermodynamic stable species (in water and in IL), but again due to the isomerisation barrier the Ct species in the IL is relatively stable, with a lifetime of 9.7 days at room temperature in the dark. This value contrasts with the shorter lifetime of 0.3 days in aqueous solutions obtained under similar conditions.74
This system allows the conceptualisation of a write–read–erase cycle: (i) the write step consists in the irradiation of the Ct species dissolved in the ionic liquid, with formation of the flavylium cation, AH++, (ii) the information thus obtained can be read at a wavelength where the AH++ (or A) absorbs and the Ct species does not, e.g. 440 nm, (iii) to erase the system and prepare it for a new cycle, a sequence of operations should be carried out: a pH jump to 12 and vigorous shaking in order to extract the compound from the ionic liquid to water in its Ct22−− form, followed by a second pH jump back to 1.0 and vigorous shaking in order to dissolve the Ct species in the ionic liquid.
Many flavylium compounds do not have a significant activation barrier between Cc and Ct, and therefore B/Cc are transient species with short lifetimes, such as in the case of 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium and 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium. The compound 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium in the same biphasic system water/[BMIM][PF6] exhibits a similar behaviour, but the existence of one more hydroxyl substituent adds a new species in the chemical network, the pink ionised quinoidal base, A−−.194 This system is similar to the previous one and a write–read–erase cycle can be performed. This is only possible because, unlike in water, the Ct form is metastable in the IL phase at pH = 1 (after 1 hour at 40 °C, less than 2% of flavylium cation was formed).

            Amino flavylium compounds have the advantage of extending the absorption spectra into the red. This is the case of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium, which gives rise to red and blue colours.94 The presence of the amine also introduces some peculiarities to the system, due to the possibility of amine protonation giving CtH++ that spontaneously transforms into AH++ on a time scale of minutes, depending on pH. For this compound, no photochromic activity is detected in water. However, the most interesting feature of this system is the photochemistry observed in the IL phase, in contrast with its absence in water. When the ionic liquid phase containing Ct is irradiated, the photochemical product AH++ appears. The system reverts back to Ct after ca. 11 hours in the dark, at 22 °C, Fig. 17.205
 Fig. 17  Photochromic system of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium in the IL phase of water/ionic liquid [BMIM][PF6] biphasic systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The photochemical production of net AH++ in water/ionic liquid biphasic systems from chalcone can be explained by the existence of a microheterogeneous structure, where a small fraction of the flavylium cations is stabilised by hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions with the anions in the polar domains that contain water.206,207
In conclusion, the IL phase promotes photochromism in chalcones that are not photochromic in water, an effect that is not exclusive of these systems. Moreover, ILs can increase the kinetic barrier for trans–cisisomerisation of chalcones, allowing the use of their respective network as models for optical memories.


6.4.2. Micelles, pluronic gels and reversed micelles. 
The use of flavylium compounds and/or chalcones as probes of micelles was reported by several authors, who have studied some basic photophysical aspects (such as solvatochromism) in those systems. It was only once the flavylium chemical network was established that photochemical processes, such as photochromism and photoinduced proton transfer, began to be addressed in more complex media. One can thus separate the studies of flavylium (and anthocyanins) compounds in micellar media, in two different groups: those in which flavylium compounds have a methyl substituent in position 4 (and, therefore, formation of hemiketal and chalcones is blocked), and those in which the chemical network is fully established, whether the aim was to address proton-transfer or photochromism, respectively.
Negatively charged, neutral, and positively charged micelles, respectively, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), triton-X100 and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), have a great influence on the ground state equilibrium of the flavylium system. The first one makes the flavylium less acidic, while the last two render it more acidic. This was clearly reported for the compound 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium, Table 8.208–211 In 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium chloride,103 due to an extremely efficient ESPT the observed fluorescence spectrum in water at pH = 2.3 is one of the quinoidal bases, in spite of the excited species being the flavylium cation. In the presence of increasing concentrations of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) the emission from the flavylium cation increases, with concomitant disappearance of the emission from the quinoidal base, reaching a plateau after the formation of the micelles. As a general conclusion, we can say that the acid–base equilibrium of the excited state shows the same qualitative trends of the ground state.
Table 8 pKa of flavylium compounds in micelles




 

Water

SDS

                      CTAB
                    
Triton X-100





                      [7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      103,208
4.4
6.5
2.3
3.3


[Oenin (malvidin 3-glucoside)][Cl−]209,210
3.7
6.0
—
—



                      [6-C6H13-7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      211
—
6.7
2.3
—




The same conclusions were obtained later by Maçanita and Quinaet al., namely with malvidin 3-glucoside and 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium chloride in anionic, cationic, and neutral micelles.209,210 Through fluorescence lifetime measurements, the determination of ESPT rate constants was possible for many of those systems with different flavyliums and anthocyanins.129,212–215 An interesting recent observation is the role of geminate recombination in SDS micelles.216,217Flavylium and anthocyanin dyes act as photoacids, and upon light excitation the proton is released, but in the case of the compound 4-carboxy-7-hydroxy-4′-methoxyflavylium chloride, Scheme 39, in SDS micelles a large degree of geminate recombination is observed, since proton lateral diffusion is restricted and therefore the lifetime of the base/proton complex is rather long. This conclusion was extended to other related compounds.216
 Scheme 39  Acid–base equilibria of 4-carboxy-7-hydroxy-4′-methoxyflavylium.216 
Hydrophobic flavylium compounds substituted with alkyl chains in different positions were also studied.218 In SDS micelles the geminate recombination was shown to be a general phenomena, Fig. 18. Two different populations in the excited state were detected where the hydroxyl substituent can feel two different environments, inside the micelle or at the surface exposed to water.218
 Fig. 18  Representation of the two distinct populations of the excited acid form of a hydrophobic flavylium and the following transformations after ESPT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
The relevance of electrostatic interactions on the flavylium chemical network is not restricted to the AH++/A acid–base equilibrium. In 1999, Roque et al. reported similar effects on the write–lock–read–unlock–erase cycle of 4′-hydroxyflavylium, where SDS micelles were proposed as an additional input for this cycle, see Scheme 40.189AH++ is stabilised by the negatively charged SDS micelles, and therefore by adding this surfactant the equilibrium can be shifted in such a way that Cc can be converted to AH++. That work explored only this particular feature of micellar systems, but it was later recognised that micelles could have a broader impact on the flavylium chemical network. After the study of the ESPT mechanism of 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium chloride in SDS micelles, Melo et al. reported an extensive study of a natural deoxyanthocyanidin (luteolinidin) in homogeneous solutions and in micellar systems.191 The pH at the surface of the micelles, where proton concentration is 100-fold higher than the bulk, was suggested as the main reason for the equilibrium shift, when compared to homogenous solutions. In the case of 4′-methoxyflavylium in SDS micelles a 50-fold increase of the dehydration rate constant, k−h, was observed leading to a  around +2 when compared to aqueous solutions.219
 Scheme 40  
Write–lock–read–unlock–erase cycle of 4′-hydroxyflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 1999, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Not much attention was initially given to neutral and positively charged micelles. In 2007, two different flavylium compounds were reported in CTAB micelles, in which an important enhancement of the photochromic effect was observed.220,2214′,7-Dihydroxyflavylium in CTAB micelles led to a photochromism with a strong colour contrast at a pH below 2.220 This effect was explained by a mechanism in which AH++ is formed inside the micelle, followed by its ejection to the bulk solution due to the electrostatic repulsion from the micelle surface. Therefore, partition effects favour the presence of Ct on the CTAB micellar phase, while the photochemically produced AH++ is expelled to the bulk where it is stable, in water at this pH. However, the presence of the micellar phase forces Ct to partition back to the micelle until full recovery. This process is rather slow because the concentration of the neutral intermediary species is very low (in bulk water at this pH). The presence of AH++ and Ct on different phases, therefore, enhances the photochromism. A similar result is obtained with 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium, where most of the relevant equilibrium constants and rate constants were obtained.115 A very beautiful photochromic contrast is obtained, for a compound that does not exhibit photochromism in aqueous solutions, Fig. 19.
 Fig. 19  (A) Kinetics of the thermal transformation of AH++ into Ct in 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium in the presence of CTAB, at pH = 4.25. (B) Irradiation of the previous solution at 436 nm Φ = 0.001 (I0 = 2.3 × 10−7 einstein min−1); photos obtained upon sunlight irradiation (bright day) at 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 14, 24 min (left to right); [AH++] = 5 × 10−5 M; [CTAB] = 5 × 10−3 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
These two works highlight a new strategy to afford photochromism with 2-hydroxychalcones. However, the micellar effect has an even deeper impact on the photochemistry of the 7-hydroxy-2-(4-hydroxystyryl)-1-benzopyrylium cation.115 Again, while photochromism is not observed in aqueous solutions, a strong colour contrast is observed in CTAB micelles. The enhancement cannot, however, be explained solely with a partition mechanism, since it is first governed by the primary trans–cisphotoisomerisation reaction. The balance of hydrophilic/hydrophobic affects the solubility of the different species, but also the photophysics of Ct, namely the intersystem crossing process that competes with photoisomerisation.
These effects were highlighted on pluronic gel systems.222,223 The pluronicF-127 copolymer self-assembles in the form of micelles that are thermosensitive: at low temperatures the interaction between those particles is weak, but the hydrophobicity increases at higher temperatures leading to the formation of aqueous gels, see Fig. 20. These rather interesting colloidal systems can incorporate flavylium compounds, and many features observed on CTAB micelles are also present in this case.222
 Fig. 20  Highly transparent photochromic gels in the visible region can be prepared by the incorporation of flavylium compounds in Pluronic F-127 matrices. The chromophore 7-diethylamino-4-hydroxyflavylium switches from its yellow chalcone form to the red flavylium cation upon irradiation and reverts back to the chalcone form in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
In AOT (sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate) reversed micelles, the chemical network of 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium shows increased complexity.224 The interesting feature is that photochromism is observed until pH 9, but above that value the photoproduct is the quinoidal base, A. This renders a high photochromic contrast, since the absorption spectrum of A is shifted to the red. The photochromic mechanism is summarised in Fig. 21. While the flavylium cation is essentially present in the inner water pool, neutral species go to the interfacial region. The authors have recognised this effect as a promising tool to make photoresponsive materials in which a macroscopic property such as viscosity could be changed with an external input (in this case, light).
 Fig. 21  Sketch of the photochromic mechanism in an AOT reversed micelle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 

Table 9 summarizes the thermodynamic and kinetic data of flavylium compounds measured in micellar systems.
Table 9 Thermodynamic and kinetic constants of flavylium compounds in micellar systems




 






pK
a


K

h

K

t

K

I
/M

k

h
/s−1

k

−h
/M−1 s−1





4′,7-Dihydroxyflavylium



Aqueous solutions141,144
3.1
4.0
7.8 × 10−4
1.2 × 10−2
—



                      CTAB micelles220
0.16
4.0
7.8 × 10−4
1.2 × 10−2
—



Pluronic gels222
—
—
>0.1
—
—


AOT reversed micelles224
1.7
3.0
1.9 × 10−2
6.3 × 10−3
—



Luteolinidin
191




                      CH3OH/H2O
3.8
4.1
1.7 × 10−4
2.0 × 10−3
6.1 × 104


Triton X-100
2.7
3.8
2.8 × 10−3
7.2 × 10−3
2.1 × 104



                      CTAB
                    
2.3
3.1
2.4 × 10−3
1.3 × 10−3
4.7 × 102



7-Diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium




H2O
221
5.9
6.6
1.0 × 10−6
1.4 × 10−4
—



                      CTAB micelles221
1.9
—
—
—
970



Pluronic micelles222
4.0
—
—
—
—



Pluronic gel222
1.2
—
—
—
—



4′-Dimethylamino-7-hydroxyflavylium
223




H2O

4.4
5.4
—
—
—



Pluronic micelles
3.5
—
—
—
—



Pluronic gel
2.2
—
—
—
—




Table 10 Thermodynamic constants of flavylium compounds




Compound



pKa

K

h
/M

K

t



K

i







a In some papers before 1990 and also later , see text.
b 4 °C.
c 
1H NMR, 25 °C.
d The value reported is the same of Kt and should be a typographic error.
e Anion not reported.
f Compounds 1 to 4 according to Dangles, Saito and Brouillard.120
g 
Methanol/water (3:1).
h This is not coincident with the authors attribution, see text for the explanation.
i 
K
a
+ K
h/(1 + Kt) = 10−4.4 (25 °C).
j 60 °C.
k Structure of flavylium cations BX (R3 = H; 5,6-dihydrobenzo[c]xanthylium) and OCH3BX (R3 = OCH3; 3-methoxy-5,6-dihydrobenzo[c]xanthylium).89
l In ref. 197, pg. 4194, line 8, where it is written Ka it should be .






Anthocyanins



[Pelargonidin 3-glucoside][Cl−]59
2.98
—
—
—
—



                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      a,b70
—
3.9
1.4 × 10−2
—
—



                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      c80
2.1
3.3

d

0.21
0.54



                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      46
1.7
3.2
1.4 × 10−2
0.37
—



                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      a44
—
4.2
2.5 × 10−3
—
0.12



                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      a107
2.55
4.25
2.5 × 10−3
—
0.6



                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      132
—
—
1.6 × 10−3
0.26
—



                      Cyanidin 3,5-diglucoside
                      a,e78
2.08
3.38
5.85 × 10−3
—
0.16


Compound 1e,f120
—
4.21
5.0 × 10−3
—
—


Compound 2e,f120
—
4.12
2.1 × 10−3
—
—


Compound 3e,f120
—
4.05
8.3 × 10−4
—
—


Compound 4e,f120
—
4.14
2.8 × 10−4
—
—



Deoxyanthocyanins

 
 
 
 
 



                      [Apigeninidin][Cl−]
                      a107
4.0
4.20
7.0 × 10−6
—
4.4h



Apigeninidin
a,e78
3.96
4.17
8.07 × 10−6
—
4.89h



                      [Luteolinidin][Cl−]
                      g108
3.8
4.1
3.3 × 10−8
—
6.5 × 103



Natural 
flavylium
 salts




                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      a107
3.05
4.3
3.9 × 10−5
—
20.6h



                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      101
3.45
—
—
—
—



                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      272
3.05
4.0
1.4 × 10−6
—
1.4 × 103



                      [4′,7-diOH-5-OCH3][HSO4−] (dracoflavylium)104
3.8
4.0
—
—
—



Synthetic 
flavylium
 compounds




                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      73
—
—
9.8 × 10−4 (Kh4= 1.2 × 10−5)
0.06
—



                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      88
1.64
—
—
—
400



                      [7-OH][Cl−]
                      101
2.69
—
—
—
—



                      [7-OH][Cl−]
                      273
2.7
3.55
8 × 10−6
—
5 × 102



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      101
3.24
—
—
—
—



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      192
3.0
4.1
2.5 × 10−6
—
>4000



                      [7-OH-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101
4.27
—
—
—
—



                      [7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      a78
4.64
4.66
1.8 × 10−6
—
2h



                      [7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101
4.44
—
—
—
—



                      [7-OH-5-CH3-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101
3.32
—
—
—
—



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101
4.44
—
—
—
—



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      a107
4.80
4.85
8.4 × 10−7
—
0.8h



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101
4.80
—
—
—
—


[4-COOH -7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]a78
4.78
4.92
6.39 × 10−7
—
7.08h



                      [7-OH-3,4′-diOCH3][Cl−]
                      96
2.1
3.8
6.2 × 10−3
0.18
0.37



                      [4′,7-diOH-3′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      61
3.17
—
—
—
—



                      [4′,7-diOH-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101
4.49
—
—
—
—



                      [4′,7-diOH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101
4.84
—
—
—
—



                      [4′,7-diOH-3-OCH3][Cl−]
                      i102
2.1
3.8
6.2 × 10−3
—
—



                      [5,7-diOH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      a107
4.10
4.3
9 × 10−6
—
2.2h



                      [5,7-diOH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101
4.10
—
—
—
—



                      [4′-OH-6-NO2][BF4−]
                      193
3.98
5.5
0.14
—
—



                      [4′-OH][Cl−]
                      a78
4.2
4.61
3.6 × 10−6
—
0.61h



                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      74
—
5.5
3.6 × 10−6
0.9
—



                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      188
1.9j
5.5
—
—
—



                      [4′-CH3][ClO4−]
                      73
—
—
2.2 × 10−4 (Kh4= 2.9 × 10−6)
0.16
—



                      [4′-CH3][Cl−]
                      190
1.5
—
2.3 × 10−4
0.16
800



                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−]
                      73
—
—
3.4 × 10−5 (Kh4= 3.5 × 10−7)
0.5
—


[4′-OCH3] [ClO4−] (SDS micelles)219
4.9
—
5.1 × 10−7
0.54
44


[3-CH3 [ClO4−]89
—
—
5.9 × 10−2
∼0.02
—



                      [3-CH3][BF4−]
                      90
1.2
—
∼6.2 × 10−2
—
—



                      [4′,7-diOH-3-CH3][Cl−]
                      90
3.6
4.3
—
—
—



                      [4′-OH-3-CH3][Cl−]
                      90
2.1
—
—
—
—



                      [4′-OCH3-3-CH3][ClO4−]
                      89
—
—
4.4 × 10−3
0.2
—



                      [BX][ClO4−]
                      k89
—
—
1.1 × 10−5
0.09
—



                      [OCH3BX][ClO4−]
                      k89
—
—
2.9 × 10−7
0.56
—



                      [4′-N(CH3)2][BF4−]
                      91
6.85
—
—
—
—



                      [6-OH][ClO4−]
                      109
2.8
6.2
1.0 × 10−4
0.57
25



                      [6-OH-4′-N(CH3)2][PF6−]
                      110
6.4
7.7



0.47
25



                      [2′-OH][BF4−]
                      274
2.6
4.8
4.8 × 10−4
0.46
8.2



                      [2′OCH3][BF4−]
                      198
1.6
—
4.0 × 10−4
0.12
500



                      [3′,4′-methylenedioxy][BF4−]
                      196
2.75
—
1.2 × 10−4
0.49
30



                      [4′-NCOCH3][BF4−]
                      197
3.6
—
2.1 × 10−4
0.19
14



                      [4′-NH2][BF4−]
                      197
6.2l
—
2.8 × 10−8
22
130



Naphthoflavylium




                      [4-OH][BF4−]
                      118
2.9
5.1
1.3 × 10−6
0.89
3.5 × 103




Table 11 Kinetic constants of the flavylium compounds




Compound

k

h
/s−1

k
−h/M−1 s−1

k

t
/s−1

k

−t
/s−1

k

i
/s−1

k

−i
/s−1





a In some papers before 1990 and also later  and .
b 4 °C.
c This is not coincident with the authors attribution, see text for the explanation.
d 0.2 M KNO3, 25 °C.
e See footnote (f) in Table 10.
f Anion not reported.
g 
Methanol/water (3:1).
h 1 × 10−6; 5 × 10−7, respectively, for the isomerisation of Cc−− and Cc22−−.
i See footnote (k) in Table 10.






Anthocyanins




                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      a,d44
4.7 × 10−2
2.6
—
—
—
—



                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      a46
0.25
18
—
—
3.6 × 10−4c
6.6 × 10−4c



                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      a,b44
8.5 × 10−2
34
—
—
4.5 × 10−5c
3.8 × 10−4c


Compound 1e,f120
22.7
4.5
—
—
—
—


Compound 2e,f120
13.4
6.3
—
—
—
—


Compound 3e,f120
12.4
14.8
—
—
—
—


Compound 4e,f120
4.0
14.2
—
—
—
—



Deoxyanthocyanins




                      [Luteolinidin][Cl−]
                      g273
2 × 10−3
6.1 × 104
—
—
0.13
2 × 10−5



Natural 
flavylium
 salts




                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      272,273
1.8 × 10−2
1.3 × 104
—
—
0.26
1.8 × 10−4



Synthetic 
flavylium
 compounds




                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      73
4.59
4.7 × 103
0.11
1.78
4.1 × 10−4
—



                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      88
—
—
—
—
—
1.1 × 10−6



                      [7-OH][Cl−]
                      273
0.48
3 × 104
—
—
0.57
8.3 × 10−4



                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      74
0.089
2.5 × 104
0.23
0.26
3.7 × 10−5h
—



                      [4′-CH3][ClO4−]
                      73
1.88
8.4 × 103
0.15
0.96
—
—



                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−]
                      73
0.47
1.4 × 104
0.23
0.46
5.8 × 10−5
—



                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−] (SDS micelles)219
0.36
7.0 × 105
—
—
1.0 × 10−4
2.0 × 10−6



                      [3-CH3][ClO4−]
                      89
17.7
3 × 102
—
—
—
—



                      [4′-OCH3-3-CH3][ClO4−]
                      89
3.4
7.7 × 102
0.08
0.4
—
—


[BX] [ClO4−]i89
0.87
7.6 × 104
0.02
0.23
—
—



                      [OCH3BX][ClO4−]
                      i89
0.04
1.4 × 105
0.063
0.11
—
—



                      [4′-N(CH3)2][BF4−]
                      91
6.5 (kh4 = 1.3)
—
—
—
—
—



                      [6-OH][ClO4−]
                      109
0.09
900
—
—
1 × 10−4
—



                      [6-OH-4′-N(CH3)2][PF6−]
                      110
0.005
33.1
0.3
0.64
7.8 × 10−5
—



                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      192
0.02
8 × 103
—
—
0.4
<1 × 10−4


[2′-OCH3 ][BF4−]198
18
4.5 × 104
0.05
0.4
1.3 × 10−4
2.5 × 10−7



                      [3′,4′-Methylenedioxy][BF4−]
                      196
1.2
1.0 × 104
0.26
0.54
5.8 × 10−6
1.9 × 10−7



                      [4′-NCOCH3][BF4−]
                      197
1.4
6.6 × 103
0.29
1.5
7.8 × 10−5
1.4



                      [4′-NH2][BF4−]
                      197
2.8 × 10−5
1.0 × 103
80
3.7
4.8 × 10−6
2.8 × 10−5



Naphthoflavylium




                      [4-OH][ClO4−]
                      118
0.1
8.5 × 104
0.15
0.17
0.04
3.3 × 10−5




Indeed, a reversible photorheological system was made using solutions of CTAB micelles with salicylic acid.225 These systems form entangled wormlike micelles, depending on the concentration of the solutes. By adding trans-2,4,4′-trihydroxychalcone, the flavylium cation 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium is obtained after irradiation. This is used to change the mean length of the wormlike micelles, changing also the rheological properties of the fluid as shown by steady-state shear flow and dynamic rheological measurements, Fig. 22. This effect is completely reversible, and the change in rheological properties is compatible with the photochromic reversion rates measured with UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy.
 Fig. 22  Steady-state shear experiments at a shear rate of γ = 0.5/s, as a function of illumination. UV light drives the fluid to a lower viscosity state; the dark-state viscosity is recovered after the light is turned off, on time scales consistent with the observed spectral recovery rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 


6.4.3. 
            Flavylium salts in polymers. 
The incorporation of the flavylium/chalcone photochromic system into polymers was earlier recognised by Matsushima and Suzuki as potentially leading to new solid-state photochromic materials.226 While characterising the photochromic behaviour of 2-hydroxychalcones in organic solvents, the authors also tested the photochromism in PMMA (poly(methylmethacrylate)), PS (polystyrene), PAA (poly(acrylic acid)) and SMA (a copolymer of styrene and maleic anhydride), where they observed good contrast and reversibility, although lower and slower when compared to solution. Later on, the same group characterised the photochromism of three 2-hydroxychalcones in solid agar–gel and silica sol–gel matrices, where they reported good cyclability in some cases, with almost no degradation upon 50 cycles (ca. 350 hours).227
The chalcones used by these authors have large structural variety in the B ring but almost no substituents are used in the A ring. In particular, no hydroxyl group in position 4 or 6 (position 7 or 5 in the corresponding flavylium, respectively) is present, which contributes to the long thermal recovery of the photochromic cycles observed in the systems above described.226,227 Indeed, the presence of hydroxyl groups in these positions of the chalcone contributes to much lower kinetic barriers for the cis–transisomerisation which, on an opposing sense, renders the photochromism of such systems more difficult to explore when, for instance, optical memories are to be developed.27
However, trans-chalcones characterised by low kinetic barriers in aqueous solution show a significant increase in the cis–transisomerisation barrier upon encapsulation in polymer hydrogels, such as in cross-linked poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA).228 This turns such compounds useful for optical storage. Thin films (ca. 120 μm) of cross-linked PHEMA containing an encapsulated 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium cation can be easily synthesised by thermal copolymerisation of 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA), using AIBN as a free radical initiator. The films possess excellent transparency, which allows spectroscopic measurements with great reproducibility. Moreover, the amount of cross-linker introduced in the formulations imparted a sufficient mechanical strength to permit the realisation of several cycles of memory with the same sample without any loss of mechanical integrity. This polymer has the important property of being permeable to water, and as a consequence the network of reactions observed in water is also present in the case of the flavylium compound trapped in the polymeric matrix. Thus, for instance, the Ct species can be obtained upon a pH jump from equilibrated solutions in acidic media (AH++) to basic (Ct22−− formation) and back to acid (Ct formation).228
In Fig. 23, one sequence of steps for a cycle exhibiting the function of write–read–erase for the flavylium entrapped in PHEMA is presented: (i) the write step consists in the irradiation of the colourless Ct species, at acidic pH values (1 M HCl), with formation of the yellow flavylium cation, AH++; (ii) the information thus obtained can be read at a wavelength where the AH++ absorbs but the Ct species does not, e.g. 470 nm; (iii) to erase the system and to prepare it for a new cycle, a sequence of two operations should be carried out: immersion for ca. 10 minutes in a solution of NaOH 1 M (initial conversion into pink A−− in basic media and then transformation into orange Ct22−−), followed by immersion in a solution of HCl 1 M (conversion of Ct22−− into the Ct). The very good mechanical properties of the polymeric films allow them to be applied as reusable photographic films.
 Fig. 23  Cycle of write–read–erase in PHEMA entrapped 7,4′-dihydroxyflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2005, Elsevier. 
When the polymer containing the flavylium salt in the colourless Ct state is covered with a mask and irradiated with a light flash, the yellow AH++ species is formed, while the zones protected from light remain unchanged. This allowed imprinting (storage) of images on the film, contrasted between the yellow colour of the flavylium and the essentially colourless chalcone.228 A different contrast is achieved if the polymer is allowed to contact with NH3 vapour for a few minutes, which stabilizes the pink A−− form. In contrast to NaOH, the amount of OH− formed upon treatment with NH3 vapour results exclusively from the acid–base reaction of the gas with the small fraction of water trapped into the film, and as a consequence, the pink A−− species formed on the irradiated regions remains stable and does not revert, at an appreciable extent, to Ct22−− (the rate constant for this reaction depends linearly on [OH−]).228
The PHEMA encapsulated flavylium compounds have also shown a good performance in sensing applications. Natural anthocyanins and synthetic flavylium salts possessing hydroxyl substituents display fluorescence emission that is quenched upon dissolution in water. This is due to the presence of efficient intermolecular excited state proton transfer (ESPT) to water.102,103
The efficiency of ESPT in flavylium salts was shown to be related with the loss of charge density in the hydroxyl oxygens upon excitation214 and is particularly competitive with fluorescence in the case of compounds 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium and 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium, where a dramatic decrease in fluorescence intensity is observed in the presence of water.
These flavylium salts, when encapsulated in polymer hydrogels of cross-linked PHEMA were shown to perform well as solid phase fluorescent chemosensors for water/humidity (Fig. 24).229
 Fig. 24  
Fluorescence emission spectra of the polymer hydrogel film containing the compound 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium as a function of the relative humidity at 23 °C. Wet curve was obtained upon immersion in HCl 0.1 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The combination of both properties, flavylium emission sensitivity to water and ability of the polymer to concentrate water from the surrounding atmosphere, confers this material a high sensitivity as a humidity sensor. Humidity sensors based on flavylium salts were also reported by other authors,160 as well as sensors for organic solvents based on the solvatochromism of the flavylium chromophore.158,230 In both cases the observed changes were explained in terms of solvation of the flavylium molecules by permeated vapours, resulting in a shift of the aggregation equilibrium.


6.4.4. 
            Flavylium salts in solid porous materials. 
The variety of colours exhibited by natural anthocyanins and synthetic flavylium salts makes them attractive as colorants for the food and cosmetic industries. There are hundreds of patents on the use of flavylium derivatives for such purposes. However, the known reactivity of the flavylium cations under poorly acidic conditions to form the less coloured hemiketals and chalcones may hamper such applications. The encapsulation of the flavylium species (or the respective, strongly coloured, quinoidal bases) into solid porous materials may confer higher colour stability to these systems. On the other hand, photochemical reactions of encapsulated compounds are relatively well established231 and if solid porous supports are found to be able to encapsulate both the flavylium and the trans-chalcone, the development of photochromic solid materials may be pursued.

Zeolites are crystalline aluminosilicates whose rigid structure defines channels and cavities of strictly regular nanometric dimensions called micropores.232 These micropores contain the positively charged counterions of the aluminosilicates, allowing the encapsulation of other cations by ion exchange. The ability of zeolites to incorporate an organic or an inorganic guest resides on specific interactions that allow the change of the intrinsic molecular properties of the adsorbate.
Kohno et al.233 have chosen strongly acidic proton-exchanged zeolites, H–Y and H-mordenite, to incorporate four flavylium cations by ion exchange. Zeolite H–Y is characterised by the presence of large “supercages” with a diameter of 1.3 nm connected with each other by 0.74 nm pores, while zeolite H-mordenite has 1D linear pores with a diameter of 0.65–0.70 nm. By comparing the absorption maxima of each flavylium in acidic aqueous solution and when adsorbed into the zeolites, they concluded that the largest 4′,7-bis(dimethylamino)-4-phenylflavylium could not be incorporated by either zeolite, probably due to the bulky 4-phenyl group. The smaller 7-diethylamino-4′-dimethylaminoflavylium could be incorporated by H–Y but not by H-mordenite, while 4′-dimethylaminoflavylium and 4′-methoxyflavylium could be encapsulated by both zeolites.
The authors evaluated the thermal stability of the adsorbed dyes by dispersing the solids in water and following the spectral evolution at neutral pH and 353 K, and reached the general conclusion that the dyes are significantly more stable when adsorbed than in aqueous solution. Of particular relevance is the fact that under these conditions, 4′-methoxyflavylium keeps its colour when adsorbed into H-mordenite, while in the larger pores of H–Y it decreases its absorption by ca. 50%, and in water by ca. 90%. The authors also assessed the chemical stability of the solids upon a pH jump to ca. 9 at room temperature and observed the same trend as described above. These results led to the proposal of a model where the stability arises from a conjugation of the acidic environment of the zeolite with the tightness of the pores for the flavylium cation (H-mordenite is slightly more acidic and constrained than H–Y).
Although the authors proposed233 that the observed colour losses resulted from the usual mechanism that transforms AH++ into Ct, no experimental evidence of the encapsulation of the neutral species (such as Ct) was given. Recent work addressed the inclusion of 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium and the respective trans-chalcone into the 1D channels of K+-exchanged zeolite L, which has a pore diameter of 0.71 nm.234 The inclusion of the flavylium into the zeolite was proven by spectrofluorimetry through a red shift in the excitation spectrum and the absence of ESPT in the emission spectrum of aqueous suspensions of the zeolites when compared to water, as well as by fluorescence microscopy, where the emission from the inside of single crystals with ca. 1 μm of flavylium-loaded K+-exchanged zeolite L could be observed. The authors were able to encapsulate the neutral trans-chalcone by dissolving it in a toluene/triethylamine (80/20) mixture (the base retards the formation of flavylium, helping to stabilize Ct) and demonstrated its presence based on a different shape of the excitation spectra and much smaller Stokes shift. The trans-chalcone generates the flavylium ion (also encapsulated) in zeolite aqueous suspensions, which is only possible if isomerisation, tautomerisation and dehydration reactions take place inside zeolite L, corroborating Kohno's proposal.233
Kohno, Matsushima et al. were also able to incorporate synthetic flavylium salts into neutral mesoporous silicas,235–237 where they were shown to be thermally and photochemically more stable than in water, particularly when the silicas were modified to contain metal centres (Al,235Fe236) that confer higher solid acidity to these supports, stabilising the flavylium species. Similarly, adsorption of synthetic flavylium cations238,239 and anthocyanins240,241 into clays (montmorillonite, bentonite), by ion exchange, leads to an enhancement of the thermal and chemical stability of the flavylium.
The development of solid photochromic materials based on the chalcone/flavylium pair requires that both species are relatively stable in the material so that they can be reversibly converted into each other by the action of light and eventually heat. Shibata and Matsushima et al.242 attempted to develop such a system by adsorbing 2-hydroxy-4′-methoxychalcone dissolved in ethanol on the surface of silica particles (diameter 8.9 μm). However, during the adsorption process most of the chalcones were transformed into 4′-methoxyflavylium due to the acidity of the silica particles, hampering photochromism. Nonetheless, irradiation of the samples with UV-A light led to an increase in coloration as a result of the formation of flavylium from a certain percentage of adsorbed trans-chalcone. The authors were also able to verify that under high relative humidity conditions (75%), the samples lost colour during ca. one month, after which they recovered colour, upon irradiation.242
More recent work of Matsushima and Kohno et al.241 focused on the intercalation of two 2-hydroxychalcone derivatives (4′-dimethylamino-2-hydroxychalcone and 2-hydroxy-4′-methoxychalcone) between the layers of montmorillonite, a typical cation-exchange clay. To promote intercalation of the neutral chalcone and minimise the preferential adsorption of the flavylium cation, the clay interlayer was modified with a cationic surfactant, dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride. However, the percentage of surfactant had to be optimised, since for very high concentrations the strong hydrophobicity of the organo-clay prevented the stabilisation of the flavylium upon irradiation. With the help of an acidic compound (benzenesulfonic acid), added in optimised amounts to adjust the pH for formation of flavylium, it was possible to observe successful coloration upon UV irradiation. Interestingly, a delayed coloration has been observed after a short irradiation time of 2-hydroxy-4′-methoxychalcone included in the clay layer (Fig. 25), showing that the trans–cisphotoisomerisation and the tautomerisation occurred rapidly during the irradiation time, and the pH-dependent hydration reaction leading from B to AH++ was the rate-determining process for colouration.
 Fig. 25  Spectral changes of 2-hydroxy-4′-methoxychalcone encapsulated in montmorillonite modified with dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride. The system evolves from the blue initial spectrum to the red spectrum after 10 s irradiation and subsequent thermal evolution in the dark for 500 min (black lines). Adapted from Kohno et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 

6.5. 
          Flavylium compounds as antioxidants
Free radical processes trigger several human degenerative diseases, and reactive oxygen species have been implicated in various human conditions, including the processes of ageing, cancer, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, autoimmune diseases, senile dementia, arthritis and atherosclerosis. Lipid oxidation may be also related to coronary arterial disease.11,30
For human survival and preservation of good health, the free radicals generated in numerous vital processes in our organism must be neutralised. Such radicals, like superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, can be deactivated by specific enzymes (catalase and superoxide-dismutase). For other, more dangerous free radicals, for instance singlet oxygen and peroxyl, the organism does not possess specific enzymes, and the survival of the cell depends on the anti-oxidant properties of vitamins A, E and C. Neutralisation of peroxyl radicals is carried out by a series of coupled electron and proton transfer reactions involving vitamins E, C, glutathione and NADPH, as generally depicted in Scheme 41. Within this framework, several studies revealed that improving the dietary intake of nutrients with antioxidant properties could ameliorate, if not prevent, the abovementioned diseases. Our human ancestors already explored this antioxidant capacity in their search for “natural remedies against disease and cancer by trial and error over the millennia”.243 For example, ancient Egyptians prepared medicinal wines by adding terpenoid compounds (e.g., from pine resins) together with a mixture of herbs, possibly coriander, sage, and thyme, which were shown to possess anticancer activity in vitro.243
 Scheme 41  
Anthocyanins as anti-oxidants: possible role based on the redox potentials of the hemiketal species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons. 
It has been proved that some of these ancient Egyptian wines are red wines, by the indirect assessment of malvidin-3-OGl through the degradation product, syringic acid.244 Currently, with more accurate scientific testing, the role of nutrients with anti-oxidant properties, such as vitamin E, vitamin C, carotenoids and flavonoids has been described, and epidemiological evidence points to a reduced risk of certain degenerative diseases by the consumption of beverages rich in polyphenols, in particular green tea, red wines, or berries, like raspberry.11 It was also demonstrated that the hemiketal form of common anthocyanins as cyanidin-3-OGl and malvidin-3-OGl has the redox potential to reduce ascorbic acid, acting as an electron donor, eventually by a mechanism involving a simultaneous transfer of an electron and a proton.245 Consequently, these anthocyanins could participate in the antioxidant cycle,245Scheme 41, assisting the transformation of an oxidised lipid into a less reactive species such as a hydroperoxide, by regenerating ascorbic acid. Furthermore, these compounds have also been shown to inhibit oxidation of lipoproteins and platelet aggregationin vitro.246,247

Anthocyanins present in berries have been claimed to possess several biomedical functions: cardiovascular disorders, advancing age-induced oxidative stress, inflammatory responses, diverse degenerative diseases. They have also been claimed to improve neuronal and cognitive brain functions, ocular health as well as protect genomic DNA integrity.248 However, despite anthocyanins have shown several health-promoting benefits, as they can protect against a variety of oxidants through a number of mechanisms, they have received less attention than other flavonoids. A review of the biological functions and pre-clinical studies of anthocyanins was published in 2003.249
6.6. 
          Flavylium compounds in art
There are several references to the use of flavylium or anthocyanins to substitute for unavailable inorganic pigments, to be used as watercolours or as textile dyes. With anthocyanins the colour domain ranges from red to blue and with natural flavylium dyes it is limited to the yellow-red. Vitruvius, the famous Roman architect, describes blueberry purple to be used in mural paintings as a substitute for the true purple pigment; this was obtained by encapsulating the berry juice within a clay.250,251 The use of flavylium or anthocyanins as watercolours has been described in several treatises or recipe books on illumination painting, including the Strasbourg manuscript, De Arte Illuminandi, The book on how one makes colours of all shades.252–254 For example, a blue for missals was produced by capturing the juice of cornflowers into cloth, the result being a clothlet that should be kept in the dark and used to paint with the blue watercolour whenever necessary.252,255 The recipes to produce this “missal blue” are very detailed and were recently reproduced with success.250 The use of flavylium as textile dyes has been reported in several Indian communities in Central and South America.4,256–258 For example, as already mentioned, the leaves of Arrabidae chica were traditionally used in the Orinoco and Amazon for dyeing fibres black, red or yellow.259 They were also used as an anti-inflammatory agent and as a remedy for various diseases.259,260 Although the presence of a flavylium chromophore has not yet been reported in ancient mural paintings or medieval illuminations, the presence of dragon's blood resins has been recently described in other artworks.261 Ten years of research at the Doerner Institute, using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, has revealed that dragon's blood resin was used as a red colorant in translucent red lacquers and glazes. The use of dragon's blood resin permits colouring of artworks with luminous and saturated paints, and “accordingly, dragon's blood was often used as a red colorant for Hinterglasmalerei (reverse-glass painting) and in gold lacquers on metal foils (…) on picture frames or altar in churches”.261 Dragon's blood is a natural resin, with a deep, rich red colour, that is obtained from various trees, namely from Dracaena draco and Dracaena cinnabari, which belong to the Liliacae family. The resin appears in injured areas of the plant, and it has been used for centuries for diverse medical and artistic purposes.104 The molecules responsible for the red colour of the resin obtained from the palm tree Daemonorops draco (Calamus draco was used in the past) have been characterised by Brockmann et al. and named dracorubin and dracorhodin, see Fig. 4.262,263 More recently, other flavylium chromophores were identified in other dragon's blood resins and it was found that the flavylium chromophores, which contribute to the red colour of these resins, could be used as species markers, enabling the determination of the resin's tree source. It was possible to select 6,7-dihydroxy-5-methoxyflavylium (dracorhodin), 4′,7-dihydroxy-5-methoxyflavylium (dracoflavylium) and 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium as species markers for Daemonorops spp., Dracaena draco and Dracaena cinnabari, respectively (Fig. 4).264
The characterisation of natural anthocyanins in complex materials such as ancient artworks is still a challenge, but it is possible that in the near future, following the promising results obtained at the Doerner Institute, more will be discovered.
7. Synthesis of flavylium compounds
A comprehensive review on synthetic methods leading to flavylium salts was published in 1983.100 It is outside the scope of this work to update such synthetic methods; here we report only the most useful methods, easy to perform and that allow a variety of functional groups to be inserted. The first synthesis of flavylium, reported in the literature by Bülow and Wagner, is based on the condensation of β-diketones and resorcinols, Scheme 42.50,56 This synthesis is useful whenever 4-substituted (alkyl, aryl) flavylium salts are needed, as later exploited by Robinson and Walker.265
 Scheme 42  Generic synthesis of flavylium salts based on the condensation of β-diketones and resorcinols, where R4 = CH3, COOH, Ph and R4′ = H, OCH3. Rn, otherwise indicated, can represent OH or alkyl chains. In the case where R4 is a phenyl ring, R4′ must be H, otherwise a mixture of products will be obtained.265 
Later Robinson and co-workers developed an important route for the synthesis of flavylium salts57,266 mainly based on the condensation of 2-hydroxybenzaldehydes and acetophenones, and by far the most widely used synthesis to obtain 2-phenyl-1-benzopyrylium salts, Scheme 43.
 Scheme 43  Generic synthesis of flavylium salts based on the condensation of 2-hydroxybenzaldehydes and alkanophenones. Rn can represent OH, OCH3, tertiary amines, alkyl groups (saturated or not), halogens, COOH or NO2. 
From this pioneering work onwards, many flavylium syntheses have been published. However, most of them only report new substitution patterns in the usual reagents, or optimisation of solvents and/or acid used.267 A work that deserves attention was developed by Katritzky and his co-workers,268 in which aqueous HBF4 and acetic anhydride were used instead of the classical gaseous HCl. With the latter method it is particularly straightforward to obtain flavylium salts which do not contain any hydroxyl groups. However, when several OH groups must be present, such as in most deoxyanthocyanidins, alternative strategies have been developed,269 based on the initial works of Johnson.270,271
Appendix 1
Consider a system completely equilibrated. If a pH jump is carried out, a new equilibrium will be reached with AH+eq, Aeq and Beq (bracket symbol for concentration is omitted for clarity). Immediately after the pH jump, the system is no longer in equilibrium and will evolve in time to new concentrations of AH++, A and B, as described below. In this treatment, the reverse reaction for hydration and the reverse reaction for proton transfer are considered second order reactions, and a new equilibrium will be reached as well for the proton concentration. AH++ = AH+eq − x(A1) A = Aeq − y(A2) B = Beq − z(A3) H+ = H+eq − z − y = H+eq − x(A4) (A5) (A6) (A7) (A8)Identically, for z (A9) (A10) (A11) a11 = ka + kh + k−a(H+eq + Aeq) + k−hBeq(A12) a12 = (k−h − k−a)H+eq(A13) a21 = kh + k−hBeq(A14) a22 = k−hH+eq(A15)Considering that proton transfer is much faster than hydration a11 = ka + k−a(H+eq + Aeq)(A16) a12 = k−aH+eq(A17) a21 = kh + k−hB(A18) a22 = k−hH+eq(A19) r1 = a11 = ka + k−a(H+eq + Aeq)(A20) (A21)According to the previous nomenclature (A22) (A23) (A24)Where [H+] is according to the final pH.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia through projects PTDC/QUI/67786/2006, PTDC/QUI-QUI/104129/2008 and PTDC/QUI-QUI/099388/2008.
References
E. Ferreira, A. Hulme, H. McNab and A. Quye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 329–336 RSC .

          M. J. Melo, in Handbook of Natural Colorants, ed. T. Bechtold and R. Mussak, John Wiley & Sons,  2009, pp. 3–18 Search PubMed .

          P. Ball, Bright Earth: Art and the Invention of Color, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .

          A. G. Perkin and A. E. Everest, The Natural Organic Coloring Matters, Longmans, Green and Co.,  1918, fac simile 2011, Nabu, Public Domain Reprints Search PubMed .

Flavonoids. Chemistry, Biochemistry and Application, ed. Ø. M. Anderson and K. R. Markham, Taylor & Francis Group, CRC Press, NY,  2006 Search PubMed .

          R. Robinson, Nobel Lecture, 1947, available in http://www.nobelprize.org/.

          R. Willstätter, Nobel Lecture, 1915, available in http://www.nobelprize.org/.
R. Willstätter and A. E. Everest, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1913, 401, 189–232 .
R. Willstätter and H. Mallinson, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1915, 408, 15–41 Search PubMed .
R. Willstätter and H. Mallinson, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1915, 408, 147–162 CrossRef .

          E. Haslam, Practical Polyphenols. From Structure to Molecular Recognition and Physiological Action, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1998 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Harbone, The Flavonoids—Advances in Research since 1980, Chapman & Hall, London,  1988 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Harborne, Advances in Research since 1986, Chapman & Hall, London,  1994 Search PubMed .
J. B. Harbone and C. A. Williams, Nat. Prod. Rep., 1995, 12, 639–657 RSC .
J. B. Harbone and C. A. Williams, Nat. Prod. Rep., 1998, 15, 631–651 RSC .
J. B. Harbone and C. A. Williams, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2001, 18, 310–333 RSC .
C. A. Williams and R. J. Grayer, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2004, 21, 539–573 RSC .
C. V. Nigel and R. J. Grayer, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2008, 25, 555–611 RSC .
K. Yoshida, M. Mori and T. Kondo, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2009, 26, 884–915 RSC .
T. Goto and T. Kondo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1991, 30, 17–33 CrossRef .
K. Yoshida, T. Kondo, Y. Okazaki and K. Katou, Nature, 1995, 373, 291 CAS .
M. J. Melo, M. Moncada and F. Pina, Tetrahedron Lett., 2000, 41, 1987–1999 Search PubMed .
V. Freitas and N. Mateus, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011 DOI:10.1007/s00216-010-4479-9 .

          R. Brouilard, in Anthocyanins as Food Colors, ed. P. Markakis, Academic Press, New York,  1982, pp. 1–40 Search PubMed .
T. Kondo, K. Yoshida, A. Nakagawa, T. Kawai, H. Tamura and T. Goto, Nature, 1992, 358, 515–518 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, K.-i. Oyama and K. Yoshida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 894–897 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Chem. Commun., 1999, 107–114 RSC .

          F. Pina, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Supramolecular Chemistry, in Handbook of Photochemistry and Photobiology, ed. H. S. Nalwa, ASP,  2003, vol. 3, ch. 9 Search PubMed .

          F. Pina, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, in Molecular Switches, ed. B. L. Feringa, Wiley-VCH,  2001, ch. 10 Search PubMed .

Natural Antioxidants and Food Quality in Atherosclerosis and Cancer Prevention, ed. J. T. Kumpulainen and J. T. Salonen, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  1996 Search PubMed .

          M. A. Lila, in Anthocyanins: Biosynthesis, Functions and Applications, ed. K. Gould, K. M. Davies and C. Winefield, Springer,  2009, pp. 305–324 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Melo, F. Pina and C. Andary, in Handbook of Natural Colorants, ed. T. Bechtold and R. Mussak, John Wiley & Sons,  2009, pp. 135–150 Search PubMed .
P. Bridle and C. F. Timberlake, Food Chem., 1997, 58, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .

Les Polyphénols en Agroalimentaire, ed. P. Sarni-Manchado and V. Cheynier, TEC&DOC, London, Paris, New York,  2006 Search PubMed .

          N. Mateus and V. Freitas, Anthocyanins: Biosynthesis, Functions and Applications, ed. K. Gould, K. M. Davies and C. Winefield, Springer,  2009, pp. 283–304 Search PubMed .

          S. Deroles, in Anthocyanins: Biosynthesis, Functions and Applications, ed. K. Gould, K. M. Davies and C. Winefield, Springer,  2009, pp. 107–168 Search PubMed .
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, M. Maestri, P. Passaniti and V. Balzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 4496–4498 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Melo, A. J. Parola, J. C. Lima and F. Pina, in Chromic Materials and their Applications, ed. P. R. Somani, Applied Science Innovations Private Limited,  2010, ch. 14 Search PubMed .

          F. M. Dean, Naturally occurring oxygen ring compounds, Butterworths, London,  1963, ch. 13, pp. 388–484 Search PubMed .

          J.-M. Lehn, Supramolecular Photochemistry. Concepts and Perspectives, VCH, Weinheim,  1995 Search PubMed .
E. H. Huntress, J. Chem. Educ., 1928, 5, 1392–1398 Search PubMed .
E. H. Huntress, J. Chem. Educ., 1928, 5, 1615–1620 Search PubMed .

          F. Czapek, Biochemie der Pflanzen, Gustav Fischer, Jena, Germany,  1922, vol. I, p. 586 Search PubMed .
R. Brouillard and B. Delaporte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 8461–8468 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brouilard, B. Delaporte and J.-E. Dubois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6202–6205 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 2109–2116 RSC  ; correction in Scheme 1 see:   F. Pina, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 3781 Search PubMed .
P. Furtado, P. Figueiredo, H. C. das Neves and F. Pina, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 75, 113–118 Search PubMed .
D. W. Hill, Chem. Rev., 1936, 19, 27–54 Search PubMed .
W. Feuerstein and V. Kostanecki, Ber., 1898, 31, 710–719 Search PubMed .
C. Bülow and H. Wagner, Ber., 1901, 34, 1782–1806 .
R. Willstätter, L. Zechmeister and W. Kindler, Ber., 1924, 57, 1938–1944 Search PubMed .
D. D. Pratt and R. Robinson, J. Chem. Soc. Trans., 1924, 125, 188–199 RSC .
D. D. Pratt and R. Robinson, J. Chem. Soc. Trans., 1925, 127, 167–175 Search PubMed .
Pseudo base, carbinol and hemiketal have been used indiscriminately to refer the colourless species B.
E. Chapman, A. G. Perkin and R. Robinson, J. Chem. Soc., 1927, 3015–3040 RSC .
C. Bülow and W. Sicherer, Ber., 1901, 34, 2368–2385 Search PubMed .
D. D. Pratt and R. Robinson, J. Chem. Soc. Trans., 1922, 121, 1577–1585 RSC .
D. D. Pratt and R. Robinson, J. Chem. Soc. Trans., 1923, 123, 745–758 RSC .
E. Sondheimer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1953, 75, 1507–1508 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sondheimer and Z. I. Kertesz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1948, 70, 3476–3479 Search PubMed .
L. Jurd, J. Org. Chem., 1963, 28, 987–991 Search PubMed .
L. Jurd and T. A. Geissman, J. Org. Chem., 1963, 28, 2394–2397 Search PubMed .
H. T. Huang, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1955, 3, 141–146 Search PubMed .
H. T. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1956, 78, 2390–2393 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Timberlake and P. Bridle, Nature, 1966, 212, 158–159 Search PubMed .
K. A. Harper and B. V. Chandler, Aust. J. Chem., 1967, 20, 731–744 Search PubMed .
L. Jurd, Chem. Ind., 1962, 1197–1198 Search PubMed .
L. Jurd, Tetrahedron, 1969, 25, 2367–2380 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nilsson, Acta Chem. Scand., 1967, 21, 1942–1951 Search PubMed .
R. Brouillard and J.-E. Dubois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 1359–1364 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, M. Maestri, R. Ballardini and V. Balzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5556–5561 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brouillard and J. Lang, Can. J. Chem., 1990, 68, 755–761 CAS .
R. A. McClelland and S. Gedge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 5838–5848 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. McClelland and G. H. McGall, J. Org. Chem., 1982, 47, 3730–3736 CrossRef CAS .
The shape and position of the absorption spectrum of the chalcone is very similar to the one of the trans-chalcones in synthetic flavylium compounds.
N. W. Preston and C. F. Timberlake, J. Chromatogr., 1981, 214, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brouillard, Phytochemistry, 1981, 20, 143–145 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mazza and R. Brouillard, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1987, 35, 422–426 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brouillard, G. Mazza, Z. Saad, A. M. Albrecht-Gary and A. Cheminat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 2604–2610 CrossRef CAS .
H. Santos, D. Turner, J. C. Lima, P. Figueiredo, F. Pina and A. L. Maçanita, Phytochemistry, 1993, 33, 1227–1232 CrossRef CAS  . (Correction: the value of Kh is 5.9 × 10−3 M instead of 0.088).

k

h
 should be added to this term, but in acidic medium its contribution is within experimental error, in this compound.

k

t
 and k−t should be added, but their contribution is also small in this experiment.
This approach is not valid when buffer significantly interferes with the kinetics.
In ref. 46, eqn (AXXVII) should be corrected according to eqn (21).
V. Petrov and F. Pina, J. Math. Chem., 2010, 47, 1005–1026 Search PubMed .
This value was obtained in D2O and as a consequence is an approximation of the real value in water.
This observation is not applied to the work of McClelland.
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, M. Maestri, P. Passaniti, N. Camaioni and V. Balzani, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 1999, 3199–3207 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Devine and R. A. McClelland, J. Org. Chem., 1985, 50, 5656–5660 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roque, C. Lodeiro, F. Pina, M. Maestri, R. Ballardini and V. Balzani, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2002, 2669–2709 .
A. Roque, C. Lodeiro, F. Pina, M. Maestri, S. Dumas, P. Passaniti and V. Balzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno and N. Saito, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1977, 33, 111–113 Search PubMed .
K. Ueno and N. Saito, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1977, 33, 114–116 Search PubMed .
M. C. Moncada, D. Fernández, J. C. Lima, A. J. Parola, C. Lodeiro, F. Folgosa, M. J. Melo and F. Pina, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2004, 2, 2802–2808 RSC .
M. C. Moncada, S. Moura, M. J. Melo, A. Roque, C. Lodeiro and F. Pina, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2003, 356, 51–61 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, L. Benedito, M. J. Melo, A. J. Parola and A. Bernardo, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1966, 92, 1693–1699 Search PubMed .
C. Bülow and H. Wagner, Ber., 1903, 36, 1941–1953 Search PubMed .
C. Bülow and G. Riess, Ber., 1903, 36, 3607–3610 Search PubMed .
C. Bülow and G. Riess, Ber., 1903, 36, 2292–2230 Search PubMed .
G. A. Iacobucci and J. G. Sweeny, Tetrahedron, 1983, 39, 3003–3038 Search PubMed .
J. Baranac, D. Amic and V. Yukadinovic, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1990, 38, 932–936 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, H. Santos, J. C. Lima, I. Abreu, R. Ballardini and M. Maestri, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 1093–1098 RSC .
J. C. Lima, I. Abreu, R. Brouillard and A. L. Maçanita, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 298, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Melo, M. Sousa, A. J. Parola, J. S. Melo, F. Catarino, J. Marçalo and F. Pina, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 1417–1422 Search PubMed .
J. G. Sweeny and G. A. Iacobucci, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1983, 31, 531–533 CrossRef .
P. Coggon, G. A. Moss, H. N. Graham and G. W. Sanderson, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1973, 21, 727–733 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brouillard, G. A. Iacobucci and J. G. Sweeny, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 7585–7590 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Melo, S. Moura, A. Roque, M. Maestri and F. Pina, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 135, 33–39 Search PubMed .
A. Jimenez, C. Pinheiro, A. J. Parola, M. Maestri and F. Pina, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 372–380 RSC .
C. A. T. Laia, A. J. Parola, F. Folgosa and F. Pina, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2007, 5, 69–77 RSC .

          L. Jurd, US Patent, 3301683 Search PubMed .
J. S. Buck and I. M. Heilbron, J. Chem. Soc., 1923, 2521–2531 Search PubMed .
D. Amic, N. Trinajstic and D. D. Amic, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1992, 1933–1938 RSC .
R. Gomes, A. M. Diniz, A. Jesus, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, Dyes Pigm., 2009, 81, 69–79 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Diniz, R. Gomes, A. J. Parola, C. A. T. Laia and F. Pina, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 719–727 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elhabiri, P. Figueiredo, F. George, J.-P. Cornard, A. Fougerousse, J.-C. Martin and R. Brouillard, Can. J. Chem., 1996, 74, 697–706 CAS .
M. Elhabiri, P. Figueiredo, K. Toki, N. Saito and R. Brouillard, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1997, 355–362 RSC .
R. Gavara, V. Petrov and F. Pina, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 298–303 RSC .
G. M. Robinson and R. Robinson, Biochem. J., 1931, 25, 1687–1705 CAS .
O. Dangles, N. Saito and R. Brouillard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 3125–3132 CrossRef CAS .
P. Figueiredo and F. Pina, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1994, 775–778 RSC .
F. Pina and A. Roque, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1998, 114, 59–64 Search PubMed .
M. Maeshima, Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol., 2001, 52, 469–497 Search PubMed .
S. Asen, R. N. Stewart and K. H. Norris, Phytochemistry, 1972, 11, 1139–1144 CrossRef .
R. Boulton, Am. J. Enol. Vitic., 2001, 52, 67–87 Search PubMed .
J. M. Baranac, N. A. Petranovic and J. M. Dimitric-Markovic, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1996, 44, 1333–1336 Search PubMed .
J. M. Baranac, N. A. Petranovic and J. M. Dimitric-Markovic, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1997, 45, 1694–1697 Search PubMed .
R. Brouillard, M.-C. Wigand, O. Dangles and A. Cheminat, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1991, 1235–1241 RSC .
P. Ferreira da Silva, J. C. Lima, F. H. Quina and A. L. Maçanita, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 10133–10140 CrossRef .
P. Ferreira da Silva, J. C. Lima, A. A. Freitas, K. Shimizu, A. L. Maçanita and F. H. Quina, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 7329–7338 Search PubMed .
R. Gomes, A. J. Parola, J. C. Lima and F. Pina, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7906–7912 .
C. Houbiers, J. C. Lima, A. L. Maçanita and H. Santos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 3578–3585 Search PubMed .
F.-G. Klärner and B. Kahlert, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 919–932 CrossRef .

          F.-G. Klärner and M. C. Kuchenbrandt, in Strategies and Tactics in Organic Synthesis, ed. M. Harmata, Academic Press-Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2008, vol. 7, ch. 4, pp. 99–153 Search PubMed .
R. Gomes, A. J. Parola, F. Bastkowski, J. Polkowska and F.-G. Klärner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8922–8938 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, L. Benedito, M. J. Melo, A. J. Parola, J. C. Lima and A. L. Maçanita, An. Quim. Int. Ed., 1997, 93, 111–118 CAS .
H. Kuhn and W. Sperling, Experientia, 1960, 16, 237–244 Search PubMed .
D. Dewar and G. Sutherland, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1970, 272–273 RSC .
The mole fraction distribution of Ct is small at room temperature but increases with increasing temperature. However it reverts back to the flavylium cation in a few minutes making difficult to carry out the photochemical studies.
R. Matsushima, K. Miyakawa and M. Nishinata, Chem. Lett., 1988, 1915–1916 Search PubMed .
P. Figueiredo, J. C. Lima, H. Santos, M. C. Wigand, R. Brouillard, A. L. Maçanita and F. Pina, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 1249–1254 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsushima, H. Mizuno and A. Kajiura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1994, 67, 1762–1764 CAS .
R. Matsushima, N. Suzuki, T. Murakami and M. Morioka, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 109, 91–94 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, R. Ballardini, L. Flamigni and M. Maestri, New J. Chem., 1997, 21, 969–976 Search PubMed .
G. Haucke, P. Czerney, D. Steen, W. Rettig and H. Hartmann, Ber. Busen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 561–570 CAS .
Y.-B. Jiang, X.-J. Wang and L. Lin, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 12367–12372 Search PubMed .
K. Rurack, M. L. Dekhtyar, J. L. Bricks, U. Resch-Genger and W. Rettig, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 9626–9635 Search PubMed .
K. Rurack, J. L. Bricks, G. Reck, R. Radeglia and U. Resch-Genger, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 3087–3109 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Fayed and M. K. Awad, Chem. Phys., 2004, 303, 317–326 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, V. Petrov and C. A. T. Laia, Dyes Pigm. DOI:10.1016/j.dyepig.2011.03.033 .
H. Wünscher, G. Haucke, P. Czerney and U. Kurzer, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 151, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wünscher, G. Haucke and P. Czerney, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 152, 61–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Leydet, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 545–555 Search PubMed .
R. S. Becker and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1966, 88, 5931–5933 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kolc and R. S. Becker, J. Phys. Chem., 1967, 71, 4045–4048 CrossRef CAS .
A. Migani, P. L. Gentilli, F. Negri, M. Olivucci, A. Romani, G. Favaro and R. S. Becker, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 8684–8692 Search PubMed   and references therein.
Y. Leydet, R. Gavara, L. Cunha-Silva, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3663–3671 Search PubMed .
R. Matsushima, N. Nishimura, K. Goto and Y. Kohno, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2003, 76, 1279–1283 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsushima, A. Ogiue and S. Fugimoto, Chem. Lett., 2000, 590–591 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsushima, A. Ogiue and Y. Kohno, Chem. Lett., 2002, 436–437 CrossRef CAS .

Chemistry and Applications of Leuco Dyes, Topics in Applied Chemistry, ed. R. Muthyala, Plenum Press, New York,  1997 Search PubMed .
M. A. White and M. LeBlanc, J. Chem. Educ., 1999, 76, 1201–1204 CAS .
D. C. MacLaren and M. A. White, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1695–1700 RSC .
D. C. MacLaren and M. A. White, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1701–1704 RSC .
C. Pinheiro, A. J. Parola, F. Pina and C. A. T. Laia, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5593–5597 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pinheiro, A. J. Parola, C. A. T. Laia, A. Câmara and F. Pina, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 2144–2147 RSC .
R. Gavara, C. A. T. Laia, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 7760–7766 Search PubMed .
R. Marshall Wilson, K. A. Schnapp, M. Glos, C. Bohne and A. C. Dixon, Chem. Commun., 1997, 149–150 RSC .
R. S. Givens and W. F. Oettle, J. Org. Chem., 1972, 37, 4325–4334 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Givens and W. F. Oettle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93, 3301–3302 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tennakone, G. R. Kumara, A. Kumarasinghe, K. Wijayantha and P. Sirimanne, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1995, 10, 1689–1693 CrossRef .
N. J. Cherepy, G. P. Smestad, M. Grätzel and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9342–9351 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero and G. Di Marco, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1341–1346 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero, G. Di Marco, S. Cazzanti, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, A. Di Carlo and C. A. Bignozzi, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 1, 254–267 Search PubMed .
G. Calogero, G. Di Marco, S. Caramori, S. Cazzanti, R. Argazzi and C. A. Bignozzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1162–1172 RSC .
A. S. Polo, M. K. Itokazu and N. Y. M. Iha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1343–1361 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huber, J.-E. Moser, M. Grätzel and J. Wachtveitl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 6494–6499 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai and J. Rabani, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 421–426 RSC .
A. S. Polo and N. Y. M. Iha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1936–1944 CrossRef .
K. Wongcharee, V. Meeyoo and S. Chavadej, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 566–571 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yamazaki, M. Murayama, N. Nishikawa, N. Hashimoto, M. Shoyama and O. Kurita, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 512–516 Search PubMed .
S. Hao, J. Wo, Y. Huang and J. Lin, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 209–214 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Sirimanne and V. P. S. Perera, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 1828–1833 Search PubMed .
Y. Hirshberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1956, 78, 2304–2312 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kawai, S. L. Gilat and J.-M. Lehn, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 1011–1013 RSC .
J.-M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1990, 29, 1304–1319 CrossRef .
F. Pina, A. Roque, M. J. Melo, M. Maestri, L. Belladelli and V. Balzani, Chem.–Eur. J., 1998, 4, 1184–1191 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roque, F. Pina, S. Alves, R. Ballardini, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2265–2269 RSC .
M. Maestri, F. Pina, A. Roque and P. Passaniti, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 137, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Melo, S. Moura, M. Maestri and F. Pina, J. Mol. Struct., 2002, 612, 245–253 Search PubMed .
M. C. Moncada, F. Pina, A. Roque, A. J. Parola, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 4761 Search PubMed  —correction (original: Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2004, 2, 304–312).
M. C. Moncada, A. J. Parola, C. Lodeiro, F. Pina, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 1519–1526 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina, J. C. Lima, A. J. Parola and C. A. M. Afonso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1525–1527 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fernandez, A. J. Parola, L. C. Branco and C. A. M. Afonso, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 168, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fernandez, F. Folgosa, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, New J. Chem., 2004, 28, 1221–1226 RSC .
L. Giestas, F. Folgosa, J. C. Lima, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 4187–4200 CrossRef CAS .
V. Petrov, R. Gomes, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, Dyes Pigm., 2009, 80, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. de Silva and C. P. McCoy, Chem. Ind., 1994, 992–996 Search PubMed .
A. P. de Silva, H. Q. N. Gunaratne and C. P. McCoy, Nature, 1993, 364, 42–44 CrossRef .
A. P. de Silva and N. D. McClenaghan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3965–3966 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. de Silva, I. M. Dixon, H. Q. N. Gunaratne, T. Gunnlaugsson, R. Pamela, R. S. Maxwell and T. E. Rice, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1393–1394 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Bissel, A. P. de Silva, H. Q. N. Gunaratne, P. L. M. Lynch, G. E. M. Maguire, C. P. McCoy and K. R. A. S. Sandanayake, Top. Curr. Chem., 1993, 168, 223–264 .

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Molecular Devices and Machines, Wiley, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
F. Pina, A. J. Parola, M. J. Melo, C. A. T. Laia and C. M. Afonso, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1608–1610 RSC .
L. Cammarata, S. G. Kazarian, P. A. Salter and T. Welton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 5192–5200 RSC .
C. G. Hanke and R. M. Lynden-Bell, J. Phys. Chem., 2003, 107, 10873–10878 Search PubMed  . An alternative is that the observed photochemistry would be due to less vibrational de-excitation of the Ct excited state in the ionic liquid leading to the formation of Cc; in water, such vibrational de-excitation would be promoted by the O–H vibration, preventing the isomerisation.
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, S. Alves, R. Ballardini, M. Maestri and P. Passaniti, New J. Chem., 2001, 25, 747–752 RSC .
C. Vautier-Giongo, C. Yihwa, P. F. Moreira, J. C. Lima, A. A. Freitas, M. Alves, F. H. Quina and A. L. Maçanita, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 10109–10115 Search PubMed .
L. Giestas, C. Yihwa, J. C. Lima, C. Vautier-Giongo, A. Lopes, A. L. Maçanita and F. H. Quina, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 3263–3269 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Freitas, L. Paulo, A. L. Maçanita and F. H. Quina, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7986–7993 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Maçanita, P. F. Moreira, J. C. Lima, F. H. Quina, C. Yihwa and C. Vautier-Giongo, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 1248–1255 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Lima, C. Vautier-Giongo, A. Lopes, E. Melo, F. H. Quina and A. L. Maçanita, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 5851–5859 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Moreira, L. Giestas, C. Yihwa, C. Vautier-Giongo, F. H. Quina, A. L. Maçanita and J. C. Lima, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 4203–4210 CrossRef .
A. C. Fernandes, C. C. Romao, C. P. Rosa, V. P. Vieira, A. Lopes, P. F. Silva and A. L. Macanita, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2004, 4877–4883 Search PubMed .
L. Paulo, A. A. Freitas, P. F. da Silva, K. Shimizu, F. H. Quina and A. L Maçanita, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 2089–2096 Search PubMed .
R. Rodrigues, C. Vautier-Giongo, P. F. Silva, A. C. Fernandes, R. Cruz, A. L. Maçanita and F. H. Quina, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 933–940 Search PubMed .
A. A. Freitas, F. H. Quina, A. C. Fernandes and A. L Maçanita, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 4188–4196 Search PubMed .
A. J. Parola, P. Pereira, F. Pina and M. Maestri, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 185, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gomes, A. J. Parola, C. A. T. Laia and F. Pina, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 1003–1009 RSC .
R. Gomes, A. J. Parola, C. A. T. Laia and F. Pina, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 12059–12065 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pina and T. A. Hatton, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2356–2364 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gomes, C. A. T. Laia and F. Pina, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 11134–11146 CrossRef CAS .
V. Petrov, C. A. T. Laia and F. Pina, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 594–601 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pereira, C. R. Leal, A. J. Parola and U. M. Scheven, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 16715–16721 Search PubMed .
R. Matsushima and M. Suzuki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1992, 65, 39–45 CAS .
R. Matsushima, K. Kato and S. Ishigai, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 75, 2079–2080 CrossRef CAS .
F. Galindo, J. C. Lima, S. V. Luis, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 541–545 CrossRef CAS .
F. Galindo, J. C. Lima, S. V. Luis, M. J. Melo, A. J. Parola and F. Pina, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2840–2847 RSC .
R. Matsushima, H. Okuda, M. Aida and A. Ogiue, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2001, 74, 2295–2301 Search PubMed .

Photochemistry in Organised and Constrained Media, ed. V. Ramamurthy, VCH, New York,  1991 Search PubMed .

          D. W. Breck, Zeolite Molecular Sieves: Structure, Chemistry and Use, John Wiley and Sons, New York,  1974 Search PubMed .
Y. Kohno, Y. Shibata, N. Oyaizu, K. Yoda, M. Shibata and R. Matsushima, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 114, 373–379 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gomes, R. Q. Albuquerque, F. Pina, A. J. Parola and L. De Cola, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 991–995 RSC .
Y. Kohno, S. Tsubota, Y. Shibata, K. Nozawa, K. Yoda, M. Shibata and R. Matsushima, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 116, 70–76 Search PubMed .
Y. Kohno, M. Senga, M. Shibata, K. Yoda, R. Matsushima, Y. Tomita, Y. Maeda and K. Kobayashi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 141, 77–80 Search PubMed .
Y. Kohno, R. Hoshino, S. Ikoma, M. Shibata, R. Matsushima, Y. Tomita, Y. Maeda and K. Kobayashi, J. Jpn. Soc. Colour Mater., 2010, 83, 103–107 Search PubMed .
Y. Kohno, R. Hoshino, R. Matsushima, Y. Tomita and K. Kobayashi, J. Jpn. Soc. Colour Mater., 2007, 80, 6–12 Search PubMed .
E. Lima, M. J. Martinez-Ortiz, E. Fregoso and J. Mendez-Vivar, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2007, 170B, 2110–2115 Search PubMed .
Y. Kohno, R. Kinoshita, S. Ikoma, K. Yoda, M. Shibata, R. Matsushima, Y. Tomita, Y. Maeda and K. Kobayashi, Appl. Clay Sci., 2009, 42, 519–523 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kohno, M. Ito, M. Kurata, S. Ikoma, M. Shibata, R. Matsushima, Y. Tomita, Y. Maeda and K. Kobayashi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 218, 87–92 Search PubMed .
Y. Kawano, T. Takenouchi, Y. Kohno, R. Matsushima and M. Shibata, J. Jpn. Soc. Colour Mater., 2010, 83, 289–294 Search PubMed .
P. E. McGovern, M. Christofidou-Solomidou, W. Wang, F. Dukes, T. Davidson and W. S. El-Deiry, Int. J. Oncol., 2010, 37, 5–14 Search PubMed .
M. R. Guasch-Jané, M. Ibern-Gómez, C. Andrés-Lacueva, O. Jáuregui and R. M. Lamuela-Raventós, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 1672–1677 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Pina, M. C. Moncada, M. J. Melo, M. M. Correia dos Santos and M. Fernanda Mesquita, in Lipid Metabolism and Related Pathology, ed. M. J. Halpern, FCT,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. T. Satué-Garcia, M. Heinonen and E. N. Frankel, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1997, 45, 3362–3367 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghiselli, M. Nardini, A. Baldi and C. Scaccini, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1998, 46, 361–367 Search PubMed .
S. Zafra-Stone, T. Yasmin, M. Bagchi, A. Chatterjee, J. A. Vinson and D. Bagchi, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2007, 51, 675–683 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Kong, L.-S. Chia, N.-K. Goh, T.-F. Chia and R. Brouillard, Phytochemistry, 2003, 64, 923–933 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Melo, Missal blue: Anthocyanins in Nature and Art, 21st Meeting on Dyes in History and Archaeology, Avignon, France, 10–12 October, 2002; Forthcoming in Archetype.

          A. Picon, Les Dix Livres d'Architecture de Vitruve, Bibliothèque de l'Image, Livre VII, Cap. XIV, 1995.

          R. B. Viola, The Strasburg Manuscript-A Medieval Painters' Handbook, Transatlantic
Arts, New York,  1966 Search PubMed .
S. Blondheim, An Old Portuguese Work on Manuscript Illumination, J. Q. Rev., 1928, XIX, 97–135 Search PubMed .

          F. Brunello, De Arte Illuminandi e altri Trattati sulla Miniatura Medievale, Neri Pozza Editore, Vicenza,  1992 Search PubMed .
Clothlets, translated from the Italian “pezzuole”, small pieces of cloth imbibed with the dye, that would be applied as an water colour.

          D. Cardon, Le Monde des Teintures Naturelles, Éditions Belin, Paris,  2003 Search PubMed .

          D. Cardon, Natural Dyes. Sources, Tradition, Technology and Science, Archetype Publications,  2007 Search PubMed .

          A. Roquero, Tintes y Tintoreros de America, Ministerio de Cultura, Madrid,  2006 Search PubMed .
B. Devia, G. Llabres, J. Wouters, L. Dupont, M. T. Escribano-Bailon, S. Pascual-Teresa, L. Angenot and M. Tits, Phytochem. Anal., 2002, 13, 114–120 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zorn, A. J. Garcia-Piñeres, V. Castro, R. Murrillo, G. Mora and I. Merfort, Phytochemistry, 2001, 56, 831–835 CrossRef CAS .
U. Baumer and P. Dieteman, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 397, 1363–1376 Search PubMed .
H. Brockman and H. Junge, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. B, 1943, 76, 751–763 .
H. Brockman and R. Haase, Ber., 1936, 69, 1950–1954 Search PubMed .
M. M. Sousa, M. J. Melo, A. J. Parola, J. S. Seixas de Melo, F. Catarino, F. Pina, F. Cook, M. S. J. Simmonds and J. A. Lopes, J. Chromatogr., A, 2008, 1209, 153–161 Search PubMed .
R. Robinson and J. Walker, J. Chem. Soc., 1934, 1435–1440 RSC .
R. Robinson and A. Robertson, J. Chem. Soc., 1926, 1713–1720 RSC .
C. Michaelis and R. Wizinger, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1951, 34, 1761–1770 CAS .
A. R. Katritzky, P. Czerney, J. R. Levell and W. H. Du, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 1998, 2623–2629 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chassaing, M. Kueny-Stotz, G. Isorez and R. Brouillard, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2007, 2438–2448 Search PubMed .
A. W. Johnson and R. R. Melhuish, J. Chem. Soc., 1947, 346–349 RSC .
J. W. Gramshaw, A. W. Johnson and T. J. King, J. Chem. Soc., 1958, 4040–4049 RSC .
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, R. Balardini, L. Flamigni and M. Maestri, New J. Chem., 1997, 21, 969–976 Search PubMed   (error in eqn (7), see eqn (11) in Pina et al.Chem.–Eur. J., 1998, 2001–2007).
F. Pina, M. J. Melo, A. J. Parola, M. Maestri and V. Balzani, Chem.–Eur. J., 1998, 4, 2001–2007 CrossRef CAS .
V. Petrov, R. Gomes, A. J. Parola, A. Jesus, C. A. T. Laia and F. Pina, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 714–720 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

From left to right, Fernando Pina, Maria J. Melo, César A. T. Laia, A. Jorge Parola and João C. Lima
	Fernando Pina got a PhD in Chemical Engineering in 1983 from the Technical University of Lisbon, IST, Post-Doc with Vincenzo Balzani, Bologna, and is full Professor of Chemistry at the New University of Lisbon. His research interests run from fluorescent chemical sensors of functionalized polyamines to models for optical memories based on flavylium derivatives and industry collaborations in the field of chromogenic materials. He is author of circa 170 scientific papers and 8 book chapters. He was general secretary of the Portuguese Chemical Society (2004–2006).
	Maria João Melo obtained her PhD in Physical Chemistry, in 1995, from the New University of Lisbon. In 1999, after a Post-Doc at ICVBC-CNR in Florence, she joined the Department of Conservation and Restoration at the New University of Lisbon, where she is responsible for the scientific laboratory. Since 1999 she has also been researcher at Requimte. Her research interests include the conservation of medieval illuminations and Modern Art, namely the study of the mechanisms of photodegradation in polymer systems and color paints. Other areas of interest are Color in Art and Nature and Semiochemistry.
	César António Tonicha Laia received his PhD in Chemistry from the Technical University of Lisbon, IST in 1999. After a Post-Doc at Imperial College in London and at IST, he was appointed assistant researcher at REQUIMTE in the New University of Lisbon in 2006, also teaching inorganic and physical chemistry at the Chemistry Department of the New University of Lisbon. His research interests cover the photochemistry of organic molecules (including flavylium salts) and chromogenic applications of sol–gel materials and other non-crystalline solids.
	António Jorge Parola received his PhD in chemistry from the New University of Lisbon in 1998, after which he made a post-doc at the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Fribourg, Switzerland. He was appointed assistant professor at the Department of Chemistry of the New University of Lisbon, teaching inorganic chemistry and physical chemistry. His research interests concern supramolecular photochemistry, from the design and synthesis of supramolecular species to the study of their photophysical properties, in particular, flavylium salts with different substitution patterns, development of chromogenic materials for applications, photoactive molecular cages and fluorescent chemosensors.
	João Carlos Lima received his PhD in Chemistry from the Technical University of Lisbon, IST in 1996. He was appointed assistant professor in the New University of Lisbon in 2000, teaching inorganic chemistry, photochemistry, chemical structure and bonding, and physical chemistry at the Department of Chemistry of the Universidade Nova de Lisboa. His research interests concern to “gold nanosystems for delivery of caged compounds”. He is also interested on fluorescence of proteins, flavylium salts, fluorescent chemosensors and photochemistry of organometallic systems.

 	Scheme 1  
Anthocyanin compounds and the flavylium chromophore (Gl = glycoside).	 
	(1)

 	Scheme 2  
            Flavylium network of chemical reactions.	 

 	Scheme 3  
              Flavylium species resulting from 4-phenacylideneflavene.	 

 	Scheme 4  Structure of 7-hydroxy-4-methylflavylium.	 

 	Scheme 5  Willstätter anthocyanidins.	 

 	Scheme 6  Natural compound carajurin and synthetic compound (I) present stable quinoidal bases.	 

 	Scheme 7  
              Pelargonidin 3-glucoside acid–base type equilibrium between the flavylium cation and the hemiketal.	 

 	Scheme 8  Reaction sequence proposed by Jurd.61	 

 	Scheme 9  Structures of the ketonic tautomer of the hemiketal (left) and of the chalcone (right) proposed by Huang.63	 

 	Scheme 10  Kinetic scheme proposed by Harper and Chandler66 and Timberlake and Bridle;65 R3 = R3′ = R4′ = H or OH.	 

 	Scheme 11  
            Isomerisation of 4′,5,7,8-tetrahydroxyflavylium to 4′,5,6,7-tetrahydroxyflavylium.	 

 	Scheme 12  Free rotation of the cis-chalcone explaining the isomerisation reaction of scheme 11.	 
kproton transfer (s−1) = 1.8 × 104 + 1.4 × 108[H+]	(2)
k2 (s−1) = 4.7 × 10−2 + 2.6[H+]	(3)
k2′ (s−1) = 4.5 × 102[H+]	(4)

 	Scheme 13  One of the early kinetic interpretations of Brouillard and Dubois for the flavylium reaction network.70	 

 	Scheme 14  Energy-level diagram for malvin using the data70 of Brouillard and Dubois.	 

 	Scheme 15  Early Brouillard and Delaporte kinetic model.44	 

 	Scheme 16  Kinetic scheme for flavylium parent compound after McClelland.73	 
r1 = ka + k−a([H+] + Aeq)	(5)
	(6)

 	Scheme 17  McClelland kinetic scheme, including the terms (in purple) due to the catalytic effects in the hydration and tautomerisation reactions.73	 
kOHh[OH−][AH++] = kH−h[B2]	(7)
	(8)
kOHh4[OH−][AH++] = kH−h4[B4]	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Scheme 18  Thermodynamic energy level diagram for the compound 4′-methoxyflavylium in aqueous solution.	 
kfast = k−h[H+]	(12)
kslow = kH−t[H+] + k−t	(13)
K^a = Kh + KhKt	(14)

 	Fig. 1  Example of the stopped flow trace of a reverse pH jump monitored at a flavylium cation absorption wavelength. In the cases where quinoidal base is present, an absorption at zero time is observed due to the conversion of the base into flavylium which occurs during the mixing time of the stopped flow.	 

 	Scheme 19  Pseudo-equilibrium in 4-methoxyflavylium.	 
	(15)
kobs(BB⇄CcCc) = (kOHt + kOH−t)[OH−]	(16)
kobs(direct pH jumps) = kh + kh4 + (kOHh + kOHh4)[OH−]	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
k1 = ka + k−a[H+]	(20)
	(21)
	(22)

 	Scheme 20  Energy level diagram of malvin.46	 
	(23)
k2 = kh + k−h[H+]	(24)

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Mole fraction distribution at the equilibrium of flavylium cation and 3-methyl derivatives. In A, ps. eq. = pseudo-equilibrium.73,88–90	 

 	Fig. 3  Single crystal structure of 3-methylflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2002, Wiley-VCH.	 


                      [4′-N(CH3)2][PF6−]
                    	2.391

                      [4′,6,7-triOH][Cl−]
                    	5.992

                      [3,3′,4′,5,7-pentaOH][Br−]
                    	10.193

                      [7-N(CH2CH3)2-4′-OH][BF4−]
                    	5.994

                      [7,8-diOH][Cl−]
                    	0.695

                      [7,8-diOH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                    	8.195

                      [3-CH3][BF4−]
                    	40.790

 	Scheme 21  4-Substituted flavylium compounds reported by Perkin and Everest in their book.4	 

 	Fig. 4  Quinoidal bases reported for the dyes responsible for the red colour in Dragon's blood (left); for more details, see ref. 104. Mole fraction distribution of dracoflavylium in acidic medium (right).	 

 	Scheme 22  Structure of deoxyanthocyanins.	 

 	Fig. 5  X-Ray structure of a single crystal of 4′-aminoflavylium hexafluorophosphate. Front view with atom label numbers (left) and side view (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 23  Resonance structure for 4′-aminoflavylium.	 

 	Fig. 6  ORTEP view of the molecular structure of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium tetrafluoroborate. Front view with atom label numbers (A) and side view (B). Ellipsoids are shown with 50% of probability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2004, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Solutions of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium tetrafluoroborate in extremely acidic conditions (HCl concentration indicated in bottle labels). Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2004, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 24  Kinetic scheme followed by 6-hydroxyflavylium.109	 

 	Fig. 8  
Cyclic voltammetry of the chalcone of 6-hydroxyflavylium. For more details see ref. 109. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(25)

 	Fig. 9  Mole fraction distribution of the compound 4′-dimethylamino-6-hydroxyflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 25  Buck and Heilbron112styrylflavylium (left) and Jurd styryl derivatives111 (right); R3′ = H; R4′ = OH, OCH3; R3′ = OCH3; R4′ = OH.	 

 	Fig. 10  Mole fraction distribution of styrylflavylium derivatives.114,115	 


                      [7-OH(styryl)][BF4−]
                      114	3.1	3.7	—	6.0 × 10−4	7.7	9.3

                      [4′,7-diOH(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114,115	3.4	4.1	8.1	3.2 × 10−4	7.9	9.4

                      [7-OH-4′-N(CH3)2(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114	4.0	5.1	—	9.0 × 10−5	8.6	10.4

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3(styryl)][Cl−]
                      113	3.6	—	—	—	—	—


                      [7-OH(styryl)][BF4−]
                      114	1.5 × 10−5	4 × 10−4	0.04	—	—

                      [4′,7-diOH(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114,115	6 × 10−5	1.5 × 10−4	5 × 10−3	—	—

                      [7-OH-4′-N(CH3)2(styryl)][Cl−]
                      114	1 × 10−3	1 × 10−5	1 × 10−4	4 × 10−3	1

 	Scheme 26  Structure of 4′-hydroxynaphthoflavylium.	 

(a)
2.9	5.1	1.3 × 10−6	0.89	3.5 × 103

(b)
0.1	8.5 × 104	0.15	0.17	0.04	3.3 × 10−5


K
cp (malvin)	—	1.1	1.7	1.1

 (malvin)	1.5	2.0	2.15	2.0

K
cp (4′,7-diOH)	—	1.7	2.0	2.4

 (4′,7-diOH)	3.05	3.6	3.75	3.8

 	Scheme 27  Structure of the molecular clip receptors (C1 and C2) and of the flavylium guests 1–4.	 

 	Scheme 28  Complexation-induced maximum 1H NMR shifts, Δδmax = δcomplex − δ0 in ppm, determined by 1H NMR titrations for the protonsflavylium 2 (left) and proposed structure of host–guest complex 2@C1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

pKa	4.1136	4.5 ± 0.2


	3.1136	4.0 ± 0.2

k

i

K

t

K

h
/s−1 M−1	(2.1 ± 0.5) × 10−7	(6.2 ± 0.5) × 10−8

k

−i
/s−1	(1.0 ± 0.9) × 10−4	(7.9 ± 0.9) × 10−5


	(1.8 ± 0.7) × 10−5	(1.6 ± 0.7) × 10−5

k

h
/s−1	(1.2 ± 0.9) × 10−2	(3.9 ± 0.9) × 10−3

 	Scheme 29  
          4′,7-Dihydroxyflavylium and 4′,5,7-trimethoxyflavylium.	 

 	Scheme 30  Proposed model for excited-state trans-chalcone deactivation pathways. Twisted intermolecular charge transfer, TICT, and phantom, P*, states are discussed in the text. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Top: photochemical pathway for La formation upon irradiation of chalcone Ct−− in methanol; bottom: schematic representation of the crystalline structure of the lactone La; carbon and oxygen atoms are represented as thermal ellipsoids drawn at the 50% probability level and hydrogen atoms as spheres with arbitrary radii. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 31  Formation of the ortho-quinone allide.	 

 	Scheme 32  Chemical network of 4-(2-carboxyphenyl)-7-diethylamino-4′-dimethylaminophenyl-1-benzopyrylium.167	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic molecular representation of the thermochromic flavylium system based on phase transition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 33  Thermochromic mechanism and photodecarboxylation of 4-(2-carboxyphenyl)-7-diethylamino-4′-dimethylamino-1-benzopyrylium.167	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of a DSSC with cyanidin-3-glucoside (kuromanine) as a dye sensitiser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010, Applied Science Innovation Private Limited.	 

 	Fig. 14  
IPCE spectrum of TiO2|dye|CuI cell sensitised with different sensitisers: (a) cis-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)dithiocyanateruthenium(II), (b) mercurochrome, (2,7-dibromo-4-(hydroxymercuri)-fluorescein disodium salt), (c) cyanidin 3-glucoside, and (d) mercurochrome together with cyanidin-3-glucoside. Adapted from Hirshberg et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 34  Sketch of the bottom-up and metamorphosis approaches. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010, Applied Science Innovation Private Limited.	 

 	Scheme 35  Hirshberg's bianthron (dianthraquinones) photochromic system (top) and Lehn's write–read–erase system (bottom).	 

 	Scheme 36  
Write, read and erase steps of an optical memory based in a cis–transphotoisomerisation.	 

 	Scheme 37  
Write–lock–read–unlock–erase cycle of an optical memory based on the flavylium reaction network. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2010, Applied Science Innovation Private Limited.	 



                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      88	A, B	300	394

                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−]
                      71	A	350	435

                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      188	A	350	435

                      [4′-OH][Cl−] (micelles)189	A	355	435

                      [Luteolinidin][Cl−]
                      108	A	380	494

                      [4′-CH3][Cl−]
                      190	A, B	350	408
[Luteolinidin ][Cl−] (micelles)191	A	390	490

                      [4′-OH-3-CH3][Cl−]
                      90	C	300	430

                      [4′-N(CH3)2][BF4−]
                      91	A	350	535

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      192	A	372	457

                      [4′-OH-6-NO2][BF4−]
                      193	B	314	450

                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−] (ionic liquids)194	A	365	475

                      [4′-OH][ClO4−] (ionic liquids)195	A	440	510

                      [3′,4′-Methylenedioxy][BF4−]
                      196	A	365	450

                      [4′-NCOCH3][BF4−]
                      197	A, B	365	440

                      [4′-NH2][BF4−]
                      197	A, B	365	500

                      [2′-OCH3][BF4−]
                      198	A	365	435

 	Scheme 38  Truth table for the yes (+) and no (−) logic gate that can be operated in a photochromic compound.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the two input XOR gate and the neuron-like behaviour of the absorption upon irradiation (accumulation–discharge).37	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) [BMIM][PF6] (bottom phase) and 4′-hydroxyflavylium perchlorate in 0.01 M HCl (upper phase); (b) after strong shaking of both solutions; (c) after alkalinisation of the aqueous phase (pH ≈ 12) with minimum shaking; (d) after medium shaking; (e) after strong shaking; (f) after several minutes at room temperature or upon irradiation of the aqueous phase of (e); (g) after reacidification of the aqueous phase (pH ≈ 1) and strong shaking; (h) after irradiation of the ionic liquid phase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2004, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Photochromic system of 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium in the IL phase of water/ionic liquid [BMIM][PF6] biphasic systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


                      [7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      103,208	4.4	6.5	2.3	3.3
[Oenin (malvidin 3-glucoside)][Cl−]209,210	3.7	6.0	—	—

                      [6-C6H13-7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      211	—	6.7	2.3	—

 	Scheme 39  Acid–base equilibria of 4-carboxy-7-hydroxy-4′-methoxyflavylium.216	 

 	Fig. 18  Representation of the two distinct populations of the excited acid form of a hydrophobic flavylium and the following transformations after ESPT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 40  
Write–lock–read–unlock–erase cycle of 4′-hydroxyflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 1999, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Kinetics of the thermal transformation of AH++ into Ct in 7-diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium in the presence of CTAB, at pH = 4.25. (B) Irradiation of the previous solution at 436 nm Φ = 0.001 (I0 = 2.3 × 10−7 einstein min−1); photos obtained upon sunlight irradiation (bright day) at 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 14, 24 min (left to right); [AH++] = 5 × 10−5 M; [CTAB] = 5 × 10−3 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Highly transparent photochromic gels in the visible region can be prepared by the incorporation of flavylium compounds in Pluronic F-127 matrices. The chromophore 7-diethylamino-4-hydroxyflavylium switches from its yellow chalcone form to the red flavylium cation upon irradiation and reverts back to the chalcone form in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Sketch of the photochromic mechanism in an AOT reversed micelle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 


4′,7-Dihydroxyflavylium

Aqueous solutions141,144	3.1	4.0	7.8 × 10−4	1.2 × 10−2	—

                      CTAB micelles220	0.16	4.0	7.8 × 10−4	1.2 × 10−2	—

Pluronic gels222	—	—	>0.1	—	—
AOT reversed micelles224	1.7	3.0	1.9 × 10−2	6.3 × 10−3	—

Luteolinidin
191


                      CH3OH/H2O	3.8	4.1	1.7 × 10−4	2.0 × 10−3	6.1 × 104
Triton X-100	2.7	3.8	2.8 × 10−3	7.2 × 10−3	2.1 × 104

                      CTAB
                    	2.3	3.1	2.4 × 10−3	1.3 × 10−3	4.7 × 102

7-Diethylamino-4′-hydroxyflavylium


H2O
221	5.9	6.6	1.0 × 10−6	1.4 × 10−4	—

                      CTAB micelles221	1.9	—	—	—	970

Pluronic micelles222	4.0	—	—	—	—

Pluronic gel222	1.2	—	—	—	—

4′-Dimethylamino-7-hydroxyflavylium
223


H2O
	4.4	5.4	—	—	—

Pluronic micelles	3.5	—	—	—	—

Pluronic gel	2.2	—	—	—	—



Anthocyanins

[Pelargonidin 3-glucoside][Cl−]59	2.98	—	—	—	—

                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      a,b70	—	3.9	1.4 × 10−2	—	—

                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      c80	2.1	3.3	
d
	0.21	0.54

                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      46	1.7	3.2	1.4 × 10−2	0.37	—

                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      a44	—	4.2	2.5 × 10−3	—	0.12

                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      a107	2.55	4.25	2.5 × 10−3	—	0.6

                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      132	—	—	1.6 × 10−3	0.26	—

                      Cyanidin 3,5-diglucoside
                      a,e78	2.08	3.38	5.85 × 10−3	—	0.16
Compound 1e,f120	—	4.21	5.0 × 10−3	—	—
Compound 2e,f120	—	4.12	2.1 × 10−3	—	—
Compound 3e,f120	—	4.05	8.3 × 10−4	—	—
Compound 4e,f120	—	4.14	2.8 × 10−4	—	—

Deoxyanthocyanins
	 	 	 	 	 

                      [Apigeninidin][Cl−]
                      a107	4.0	4.20	7.0 × 10−6	—	4.4h

Apigeninidin
a,e78	3.96	4.17	8.07 × 10−6	—	4.89h

                      [Luteolinidin][Cl−]
                      g108	3.8	4.1	3.3 × 10−8	—	6.5 × 103

Natural 
flavylium
 salts


                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      a107	3.05	4.3	3.9 × 10−5	—	20.6h

                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      101	3.45	—	—	—	—

                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      272	3.05	4.0	1.4 × 10−6	—	1.4 × 103

                      [4′,7-diOH-5-OCH3][HSO4−] (dracoflavylium)104	3.8	4.0	—	—	—

Synthetic 
flavylium
 compounds


                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      73	—	—	9.8 × 10−4 (Kh4= 1.2 × 10−5)	0.06	—

                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      88	1.64	—	—	—	400

                      [7-OH][Cl−]
                      101	2.69	—	—	—	—

                      [7-OH][Cl−]
                      273	2.7	3.55	8 × 10−6	—	5 × 102

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      101	3.24	—	—	—	—

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      192	3.0	4.1	2.5 × 10−6	—	>4000

                      [7-OH-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101	4.27	—	—	—	—

                      [7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      a78	4.64	4.66	1.8 × 10−6	—	2h

                      [7-OH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101	4.44	—	—	—	—

                      [7-OH-5-CH3-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101	3.32	—	—	—	—

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101	4.44	—	—	—	—

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      a107	4.80	4.85	8.4 × 10−7	—	0.8h

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101	4.80	—	—	—	—
[4-COOH -7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]a78	4.78	4.92	6.39 × 10−7	—	7.08h

                      [7-OH-3,4′-diOCH3][Cl−]
                      96	2.1	3.8	6.2 × 10−3	0.18	0.37

                      [4′,7-diOH-3′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      61	3.17	—	—	—	—

                      [4′,7-diOH-4-Ph][Cl−]
                      101	4.49	—	—	—	—

                      [4′,7-diOH-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101	4.84	—	—	—	—

                      [4′,7-diOH-3-OCH3][Cl−]
                      i102	2.1	3.8	6.2 × 10−3	—	—

                      [5,7-diOH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      a107	4.10	4.3	9 × 10−6	—	2.2h

                      [5,7-diOH-4′-OCH3-4-CH3][Cl−]
                      101	4.10	—	—	—	—

                      [4′-OH-6-NO2][BF4−]
                      193	3.98	5.5	0.14	—	—

                      [4′-OH][Cl−]
                      a78	4.2	4.61	3.6 × 10−6	—	0.61h

                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      74	—	5.5	3.6 × 10−6	0.9	—

                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      188	1.9j	5.5	—	—	—

                      [4′-CH3][ClO4−]
                      73	—	—	2.2 × 10−4 (Kh4= 2.9 × 10−6)	0.16	—

                      [4′-CH3][Cl−]
                      190	1.5	—	2.3 × 10−4	0.16	800

                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−]
                      73	—	—	3.4 × 10−5 (Kh4= 3.5 × 10−7)	0.5	—
[4′-OCH3] [ClO4−] (SDS micelles)219	4.9	—	5.1 × 10−7	0.54	44
[3-CH3 [ClO4−]89	—	—	5.9 × 10−2	∼0.02	—

                      [3-CH3][BF4−]
                      90	1.2	—	∼6.2 × 10−2	—	—

                      [4′,7-diOH-3-CH3][Cl−]
                      90	3.6	4.3	—	—	—

                      [4′-OH-3-CH3][Cl−]
                      90	2.1	—	—	—	—

                      [4′-OCH3-3-CH3][ClO4−]
                      89	—	—	4.4 × 10−3	0.2	—

                      [BX][ClO4−]
                      k89	—	—	1.1 × 10−5	0.09	—

                      [OCH3BX][ClO4−]
                      k89	—	—	2.9 × 10−7	0.56	—

                      [4′-N(CH3)2][BF4−]
                      91	6.85	—	—	—	—

                      [6-OH][ClO4−]
                      109	2.8	6.2	1.0 × 10−4	0.57	25

                      [6-OH-4′-N(CH3)2][PF6−]
                      110	6.4	7.7	

	0.47	25

                      [2′-OH][BF4−]
                      274	2.6	4.8	4.8 × 10−4	0.46	8.2

                      [2′OCH3][BF4−]
                      198	1.6	—	4.0 × 10−4	0.12	500

                      [3′,4′-methylenedioxy][BF4−]
                      196	2.75	—	1.2 × 10−4	0.49	30

                      [4′-NCOCH3][BF4−]
                      197	3.6	—	2.1 × 10−4	0.19	14

                      [4′-NH2][BF4−]
                      197	6.2l	—	2.8 × 10−8	22	130

Naphthoflavylium


                      [4-OH][BF4−]
                      118	2.9	5.1	1.3 × 10−6	0.89	3.5 × 103



Anthocyanins


                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      a,d44	4.7 × 10−2	2.6	—	—	—	—

                      [Malvin][Cl−]
                      a46	0.25	18	—	—	3.6 × 10−4c	6.6 × 10−4c

                      [Oenin][Cl−]
                      a,b44	8.5 × 10−2	34	—	—	4.5 × 10−5c	3.8 × 10−4c
Compound 1e,f120	22.7	4.5	—	—	—	—
Compound 2e,f120	13.4	6.3	—	—	—	—
Compound 3e,f120	12.4	14.8	—	—	—	—
Compound 4e,f120	4.0	14.2	—	—	—	—

Deoxyanthocyanins


                      [Luteolinidin][Cl−]
                      g273	2 × 10−3	6.1 × 104	—	—	0.13	2 × 10−5

Natural 
flavylium
 salts


                      [4′,7-diOH][Cl−]
                      272,273	1.8 × 10−2	1.3 × 104	—	—	0.26	1.8 × 10−4

Synthetic 
flavylium
 compounds


                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      73	4.59	4.7 × 103	0.11	1.78	4.1 × 10−4	—

                      [Flavylium][ClO4−]
                      88	—	—	—	—	—	1.1 × 10−6

                      [7-OH][Cl−]
                      273	0.48	3 × 104	—	—	0.57	8.3 × 10−4

                      [4′-OH][ClO4−]
                      74	0.089	2.5 × 104	0.23	0.26	3.7 × 10−5h	—

                      [4′-CH3][ClO4−]
                      73	1.88	8.4 × 103	0.15	0.96	—	—

                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−]
                      73	0.47	1.4 × 104	0.23	0.46	5.8 × 10−5	—

                      [4′-OCH3][ClO4−] (SDS micelles)219	0.36	7.0 × 105	—	—	1.0 × 10−4	2.0 × 10−6

                      [3-CH3][ClO4−]
                      89	17.7	3 × 102	—	—	—	—

                      [4′-OCH3-3-CH3][ClO4−]
                      89	3.4	7.7 × 102	0.08	0.4	—	—
[BX] [ClO4−]i89	0.87	7.6 × 104	0.02	0.23	—	—

                      [OCH3BX][ClO4−]
                      i89	0.04	1.4 × 105	0.063	0.11	—	—

                      [4′-N(CH3)2][BF4−]
                      91	6.5 (kh4 = 1.3)	—	—	—	—	—

                      [6-OH][ClO4−]
                      109	0.09	900	—	—	1 × 10−4	—

                      [6-OH-4′-N(CH3)2][PF6−]
                      110	0.005	33.1	0.3	0.64	7.8 × 10−5	—

                      [7-OH-4′-OCH3][Cl−]
                      192	0.02	8 × 103	—	—	0.4	<1 × 10−4
[2′-OCH3 ][BF4−]198	18	4.5 × 104	0.05	0.4	1.3 × 10−4	2.5 × 10−7

                      [3′,4′-Methylenedioxy][BF4−]
                      196	1.2	1.0 × 104	0.26	0.54	5.8 × 10−6	1.9 × 10−7

                      [4′-NCOCH3][BF4−]
                      197	1.4	6.6 × 103	0.29	1.5	7.8 × 10−5	1.4

                      [4′-NH2][BF4−]
                      197	2.8 × 10−5	1.0 × 103	80	3.7	4.8 × 10−6	2.8 × 10−5

Naphthoflavylium


                      [4-OH][ClO4−]
                      118	0.1	8.5 × 104	0.15	0.17	0.04	3.3 × 10−5

 	Fig. 22  Steady-state shear experiments at a shear rate of γ = 0.5/s, as a function of illumination. UV light drives the fluid to a lower viscosity state; the dark-state viscosity is recovered after the light is turned off, on time scales consistent with the observed spectral recovery rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Cycle of write–read–erase in PHEMA entrapped 7,4′-dihydroxyflavylium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2005, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  
Fluorescence emission spectra of the polymer hydrogel film containing the compound 4′,7-dihydroxyflavylium as a function of the relative humidity at 23 °C. Wet curve was obtained upon immersion in HCl 0.1 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Spectral changes of 2-hydroxy-4′-methoxychalcone encapsulated in montmorillonite modified with dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride. The system evolves from the blue initial spectrum to the red spectrum after 10 s irradiation and subsequent thermal evolution in the dark for 500 min (black lines). Adapted from Kohno et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 41  
Anthocyanins as anti-oxidants: possible role based on the redox potentials of the hemiketal species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Scheme 42  Generic synthesis of flavylium salts based on the condensation of β-diketones and resorcinols, where R4 = CH3, COOH, Ph and R4′ = H, OCH3. Rn, otherwise indicated, can represent OH or alkyl chains. In the case where R4 is a phenyl ring, R4′ must be H, otherwise a mixture of products will be obtained.265	 

 	Scheme 43  Generic synthesis of flavylium salts based on the condensation of 2-hydroxybenzaldehydes and alkanophenones. Rn can represent OH, OCH3, tertiary amines, alkyl groups (saturated or not), halogens, COOH or NO2.	 
AH++ = AH+eq − x	(A1)
A = Aeq − y	(A2)
B = Beq − z	(A3)
H+ = H+eq − z − y = H+eq − x	(A4)
	(A5)
	(A6)
	(A7)
	(A8)
	(A9)
	(A10)
	(A11)
a11 = ka + kh + k−a(H+eq + Aeq) + k−hBeq	(A12)
a12 = (k−h − k−a)H+eq	(A13)
a21 = kh + k−hBeq	(A14)
a22 = k−hH+eq	(A15)
a11 = ka + k−a(H+eq + Aeq)	(A16)
a12 = k−aH+eq	(A17)
a21 = kh + k−hB	(A18)
a22 = k−hH+eq	(A19)
r1 = a11 = ka + k−a(H+eq + Aeq)	(A20)
	(A21)
	(A22)
	(A23)
	(A24)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
