Influence of permittivity and energetic disorder on the spatial charge carrier distribution and recombination in organic bulk-heterojunctions   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP03513F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP03513F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 20974-20983Influence of permittivity and energetic disorder on the spatial charge carrier distribution and recombination in organic bulk-heterojunctions†

        
          
            Tim 
            Albes
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Alessio 
            Gagliardi
          
        
      
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Karlstr. 45, 80333 Munich, Germany. E-mail: tim.albes@tum.de
Received 
      24th May 2017
    , Accepted 7th July 2017First published on 7th July 2017AbstractIn bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells the low permittivity in combination with the spatial and energetic disorder of the organic materials lead to a complex behavior of charge carriers within the active layer. Charges originate from exciton splitting at the heterojunction interface and the successive interplay between mutual Coulomb interactions and transport through the disordered organic can lead to insufficient separation from the interface, increased interface densities with respect to the bulk regions and, hence, affect recombination. To further understand the mechanisms of recombination, insight into the explicit spatial distribution of charge carriers within the blend is crucial. We performed kinetic Monte Carlo simulations on a bulk-heterojunction organic solar cell to assess the effect of Coulomb interactions and energetic disorder on the three-dimensional spatial distribution of charge carriers and highlight the correlation with both geminate and non-geminate recombination. We show that for materials with low permittivity and large energetic disorder the charge distribution is strongly inhomogeneous with accumulation along the heterojunction interface. In such cases recombination is not limited by recombination partners finding each other but rather an interface controlled process where geminate recombination dominates over nongeminate recombination.
I. Introduction
Solar cells based on organic semiconductors exhibit a wide range of favorable features such as a low weight, the compatibility to low-temperature manufacturing processes with high throughput, and chemical tuneability of their electrical and optical properties.1–3 Although the power conversion efficiency of pioneering organic solar cells (OSCs) reaches values of more than 11% nowadays,4 further optimization is needed in order to make them competitive to inorganic solar cells.
Two key differences in organic semiconductors in contrast to their inorganic counterparts are their substantially lower dielectric constant εr with values in the range of εr = 3–4 as well as a spatially varying energetic disorder σ of the molecular orbital (MO) energies as a result of the non-crystalline arrangement of organic polymers or small molecules. Due to the weak dielectric screening, light absorption does not immediately create free charges but generates a strongly localized electron–hole pair, an exciton with several hundred meV binding energy. To separate the exciton a two-component donor/acceptor configuration with a MO offset providing the necessary energy for exciton splitting was introduced5 and the so far most successful devices are based on a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) blend between polymer donor and fullerene acceptor materials.6 However, the blend configuration and the spatially varying energetic disorder lead to a complex internal charge behavior. After the exciton has been broken at a donor/acceptor heterojunction the electron resides in the acceptor material and the hole in the donor material.
In this intermediate charge transfer (CT) state3,7 the geminate charges can still experience their mutual Coulomb attraction (controlled by the εr), up to a separation distance of about the Coulomb radius rC = 14–19 nm for εr = 3–4, and see an energetically disordered landscape in their respective phase (controlled by σ). Understanding and gaining control over the properties of the bound electron–hole pairs, in particular their separation and recombination dynamics, is a key factor in the study of the photogeneration process occurring in OSC blends.7–10
The longer the opposite charges stick together in a CT state at the interface the more likely it is for them to undergo geminate recombination. If they have managed to overcome their mutual influence (by the support of thermal fluctuation or an electric field) they can, on their pathway towards the contacts, meet a charge originating from a different exciton and recombine, in which case the recombination is considered nongeminate.
Both Coulomb attraction and energetic disorder hinder the electron and hole from separating from each other and the interplay between εr and σ is expected to have a big impact on the spatial charge carrier distribution (CCD) and, in turn, recombination. A question arises is: are charges rather concentrated along the heterojunction interface or can they be considered free within their respective phase? In the former case the photogeneration process is controlled by the size and the properties of the heterojunction, in the latter case it might be sufficient to reduce the BHJ to effective bulk models.
Koster et al.11 have emphasized that the permittivity is the key difference to overcome the current drawbacks of OSCs by tackling a number of negative effects induced by strong Coulomb interactions at the same time: the high exciton binding energy, geminate and nongeminate recombination as well as all space-charge effects. There have since been an increasing number of studies demonstrating the positive effect of materials with high permittivity on device performance, e.g.ref. 10 and 12–16. Also energetic disorder was shown to have an impact on the charge separation17,18 and hence on the CCD and recombination.
Techniques like transmission electron microscopy can be used to determine the structural morphology of BHJs and estimate the grade of intermixing and typical cluster sizes.19 However, the spatial resolution of location-dependent physical quantities such as the CCD or recombination channels is challenging to obtain during device operation.20 Quantities extracted by experimental techniques such as photo-charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage21 or transistor methods22 are mostly bulk/average quantities because they assume a homogeneous distribution, reducing the BHJ to a single effective medium and hiding all blend/interface effects within them.
While there are OSC systems with a charge separation yield approaching unity,23 recombination remains a limiting factor in others24,25 and the question under which conditions charge separation or accumulation are dominating needs further investigation.
The CT state dynamics are often described by the Onsager–Braun (OB)26,27 model, in which kinetic rates are used to describe separation, re-formation, and (geminate) recombination of the bound state. These rates do not contain effects that are based on spatial variations and are therefore not appropriate to describe the influence of the blend morphology, local variation of energetic disorder, or different Coulomb energies for different e–h distances.7,28 As an additional drawback the OB model has never been validated experimentally.
The reason for efficient charge separation is an actively discussed topic, and especially the theory about hot CT states29 has gained popular interest. The theory describes a long-range charge transfer process using excess energy of the photon. However, there has been evidence that the separation probability does only weakly depend on excess energy of the incident photon.30–32 Forcing the charge pair to have an initial separation distance of up to several tens of nanometers willingly suppress geminate recombination. This method was used within kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) simulations to specifically study nongeminate recombination on its own.33 Suppressing nongeminate recombination is inappropriate to compare the relationship between geminate and nongeminate recombination. We do therefore not consider an initial long-ranged charge pair splitting in this study.
After separation has occurred, the Langevin model34 is most widely used to describe nongeminate recombination. The Langevin model is of the form R = (qμeμh)/εr·np, where n and p are the (mean) electron and hole charge densities and μe and μh their (mean) mobilities. It describes a bimolecular process where recombination is limited by the chance of charges finding each other within their Coulomb radius rC, after which the actual recombination process is inevitable and occurs instantaneously. All electron-hole pairs with a mutual distance of less than the Coulomb radius would therefore recombine inevitably which is not a valid general assumption. The Langevin model was derived for free charges in homogeneous, low mobility materials to describe nongeminate bimolecular recombination. In organic BHJs charges cannot generally be considered free due to their confinement to their respective phase. Even within the respective phase the CCD is not necessarily uniform due to the initial charge generation at the heterojunction, mutual Coulomb interaction and energetic disorder. Deviations from Langevin behavior due to spatial separation have been reported in polymer:fullerene blends.17,35 For charges accumulated at the interface the limitation of recombination being based on charges finding each other is not given anymore. They are already in the vicinity of each other and recombination is a monomolecular (instead of a bimolecular) process based on the CT state density and its actual (geminate) recombination rate.
To overcome the effective medium restriction, models with a representation of the 3D blend are needed which proves challenging considering the amount of complexity in a blend. Continuum models in combination with 1D effective medium descriptions for the BHJ are established to simulate OPVs,36,37 especially due to their low computational demand even for multilayer device geometries such as e.g. tandem cells.38 However, extending the blend geometry to 3D, continuum models often suffer from convergence issues and studies are scarce.39,40
The kMC method is the predominant simulation technique nowadays to model processes in disordered organic solar cells as it allows us to implement an approximation of the 3D blend morphology and treat charge transport in by a more accurate hopping mechanism. It has shown to be a useful tool to study processes in BHJ OSCs such as the effect of the blend morphology on exciton separation,41 mobility extractions37,42 and recombination processes33,43 to name a few.
In this study we set up a kMC model of a BHJ organic solar cell to show the effect of permittivity in combination with the energetic disorder on the 3D resolved charge density distribution within the cell and its correlation with recombination. The focus of our simulations is to model the solar cell under real operation conditions, with a particular emphasis on a sophisticated treatment of Coulomb interactions. For data evaluation, we explicitly distinguish between the interface and bulk charge densities as well as geminate and nongeminate recombination which allows us to quantify the absolute values and the ratio of the interface/bulk densities and geminate/nongeminate recombination.
II. Model and evaluation details
The basic setup of our model follows established implementations.37,44,45 The solar cell is represented by a Cartesian lattice with a node spacing of l = 1 nm and a volume of X × Y × Z = 50 × 50 × 50 nm3. The nodes of the upper and lower layer represent the anode and cathode contact, respectively. Each lattice site i in between the contacts stands for a localized state of either a donor or an acceptor material. To mimic the intertwined morphology of a BHJ we used a spin-exchange algorithm after Watkins et al.41 and adapted the grade of intermixing to typical features observed19 with a cluster size of 13.7 nm. Excitons, electrons or holes can reside on and move between the nodes. Excitons are generated after a generation profile generated by the transfer matrix method.46 They can diffuse by a random walk, decay, or be separated into electrons and holes as they reach a heterojunction. The cluster size in combination with the exciton diffusion rate used yields an exciton separation efficiency of 95% ± 0.5% throughout all simulations and can be considered constant. In this way, we make sure that the exciton separation efficiency does not influence the electrical part which is the focus of this study. Electrons and holes can move by a hopping process, recombine with an oppositely charged recombination partner, be injected from the contacts and be collected at the contacts. They move under the influence of a local potential distribution made up by the MO energy levels E0, the electric field EF, the energetic disorder Eσ, and the Coulomb interaction EC: Ei = E0i + EFi + Eσi + ECi.(1)
The MO energy levels E0i are constants of the material at site i. The electric field contribution is determined by the difference between the anode and cathode work function Δϕ = ϕA − ϕC and an externally applied bias Uext. It is assumed to drop linearly along the direction z perpendicular to the contact surfaces, i.e. (2)The energetic disorder Eσi is implemented as uncorrelated Gaussian disorder after Bässler.47,48 Within this model the disorder for each site i is independently picked after a normalized Gaussian distribution of the form (3)around the MO energy level E0i with the energetic disorder σ and a density of localized states of N = l−3 = 1021 cm−3. Since we want to place a special emphasis on an adequate treatment of electrostatic forces our model features the calculation of Coulomb interactions using an Ewald sum approach with no cutoff following the work of Casalegno et al.49 In this approach, the simulation cell including all charges is periodically replicated in x- and y-directions, while in the z-direction all charges are periodically mirrored at the electrode contacts. The Ewald sum then splits the infinite Coulomb sum between all charge carriers, replicas and mirror charges, into a short-ranged and a long-ranged term. The former sum quickly converges in real space, while the latter quickly converges in the reciprocal space. The Coulomb energy ECi is then the total electrostatic potential energy of the configuration of real, mirror and replica charges on site i. ECi is dynamically updated during runtime after each single charge motion and therefore the model includes all correlation effects originating from electrostatic interactions across the entire cell. Periodic boundary conditions are further implemented for the morphology as well as for particle transport.
The kMC method is a numerical algorithm that makes use of random numbers to sequentially propagate a system through different states within its phase space. A system state is classified by a corresponding set of events {μ} describing the possible transitions a system can make to propagate to another state. The transitions are physically described by a set of rates {aμ}, given in units of s−1. The rates are either based on underlying physical models or experimental measurements. In each state, the probability of a specific transition to be executed is proportional to the magnitude of the corresponding rate (4)where a = Σμaμ is the total rate of all transitions. By picking a uniform random number in the interval (0,1], one of the possible transitions μ is selected and executed. Additionally, a waiting time is assigned to each transition. The time interval of the transition in step k can be calculated by (5)where r ∈ (0,1] is another uniform random number. After a transition has been performed, the system state as well as the rates are updated. Repeated execution leads to a time-dependent evolution of the system by a sequence of waiting times and transitions. The algorithm used in this work is implemented in the direct (n-fold, non-queuing) way after Gillespie.50
Electron and hole hopping transport from site i to j is described by the Miller–Abrahams equation:51 (6)where a0 is the attempt-to-hop frequency for electrons and holes, respectively, γ is the inverse localization constant, Eth the thermal energy and Ei the potential landscape introduced with eqn (1). The kMC method allows us to explicitly track the time evolution of all charges. With this information, time-averaged quantities in the equilibrium state can be calculated. We evaluate the spatially resolved time-averaged electron (n) and hole (p) charge density of each single site i by (7)where O(i)k = {0,1} tracks whether the node i is occupied by a charge q during the time step τk, and T is the total simulation time.
Comparing the magnitude of the four contributions to charge transport in eqn (1), the MO offset between the donor and the acceptor is usually large (⪆600 meV) so that electrons and holes are confined to the acceptor and donor phase, respectively, at all times. The influence of EF is small on local scales with ≈10 meV nm−1 compared to the disorder, usually in the range of 70 meV, and the Coulomb interaction with EC up to more than 400 meV for two charges within a distance of 1 nm at εr = 3.5. Disorder and Coulomb interactions are therefore expected to have a dominating influence on charge dynamics on close scales.
Interface nodes are classified as all nodes within a distance of 1 nm to a heterojunction. Bulk regions are all regions further away from a heterojunction. We define the arithmetic mean of all interface nodes in the donor as the hole interface density pint, and vice versa nint as the electron interface density in the acceptor. The bulk densities pbulk and nbulk are defined in analogy for the nodes in the bulk regions. A typical result for the charge density distribution as obtained by the kMC simulations and an illustration of the definition of the interface and bulk densities for both electrons and holes are depicted in Fig. 1. The immediate regions near the contacts are not included in the density evaluation in order not to distort the results by space charge effects induced by charge injection from the contacts.
 Fig. 1  (top) Illustration of the 3D electron and hole charge density distributions in the BHJ. (bottom) Definition of interface densities (electron nint, hole pint) and bulk charge densities (electron nbulk, hole pbulk) as well as geminate (a) and nongeminate (b) recombination events. 
Each configuration in which two oppositely charged particles are on adjacent sites activates recombination by a recombination rate aehr. The information whether the charges originate from the same exciton or from different excitons determines whether the recombination event is counted as geminate or nongeminate, respectively. The ratio of the overall number of recombined charges and the number of charges that were generated by exciton separation determines the total recombination loss ratio Rtot which is the sum of all geminate Rgem and nongeminate Rngem recombination losses.
All simulations are performed under short-circuit condition (Uext = 0) and the overall simulation time was T = 10 ms where equilibrium was reached after approximately 1 ms, determined by a steady current extracted from the contacts. An overview of all parameters used in the simulations is listed in the ESI.†
III. Results and discussion
A. Charge accumulation and operation regimes
At first, we investigate the effect of energetic disorder σ and the strength of Coulomb interactions controlled by εr on the spatial distribution of charges within the active layer.

Fig. 2 pictures the CCD of electrons and holes across a slice though the center of the active layer for both lower and higher permittivity (3 and 5) and for different values of the energetic disorder ranging from 30 meV to 70 meV (Fig. 2a–c). Fig. 2d shows the corresponding charge density scale and an illustration on how the density relates to the Gaussian disorder centered around the MO level E0 of the acceptor or donor, respectively. While for small disorder the distribution is relatively smooth and almost uniform within the respective phases, spatial fluctuations in the CCD become much more evident with increasing energetic disorder. With rising disorder there are an increasing number of sites with either deep or high energy levels around the MO level. These tail states shape the potential landscape charges experience and directly influence the CCD. Deep levels act as local trapping sites, charges keep getting stuck in these levels and, thus, show drastically increased densities (red). High levels have elevated energy levels and appear as hills for charges that are unlikely to be occupied, therefore decreasing the density at those sites (blue). A disorder of 70 meV can make the CCD fluctuate locally by several orders of magnitude around the average charge density in the phases. In addition, also the permittivity leads to an inhomogeneity in CCDs: for low permittivity charges appear to be located rather at the interface than in the bulk regions. This effect is more evident for larger energetic disorder. Especially for higher values of disorder, the exact behavior of the CCD is rather unclear from the raw data. In order to decide if and under which conditions charges accumulate near the interface an analysis setting the interface and bulk densities into relation is needed.
 Fig. 2  Electron and hole charge density distributions along a slice through the morphology. All density maps are shown for two cases of low and high permittivity (εr = 3 and εr = 5), respectively, and the energetic disorder varies from 30 meV (a) via 50 meV (b) to 70 meV (c). In (d), the corresponding density scale and the relationship of energy levels within the Gaussian distribution and the charge density are shown. 
The ratio between interface charge densities and the bulk densities for holes, pint/pbulk, and for electrons, nint/nbulk, is illustrated in Fig. 3 for a parameter set of σ = 0, 30, 50, and 70 meV and εr = 3, 3.5, 4, 5 and the artificial case of ∞. After eqn (7) the interface and bulk densities are in direct correlation with the average time a charge spends at the interface or in the bulk regions, respectively. The recombination rate is fixed with a value of aehr = 5 × 104 s−1 for these simulations.
 Fig. 3  Ratio of interface to bulk charge densities of (a) holes and (b) electrons for different parameter sets of energetic disorder and permittivity (σ, εr). High values indicate an inhomogeneous charge distribution with accumulation of charges at the heterojunction interface while a value of 1 represents homogeneous charge distributions of electrons in the acceptor and holes in the donor, respectively. The artificial case of εr = ∞ (no Coulomb interaction) is added to be able to interpret the effect of disorder alone. 
It is clearly visible from Fig. 3 that the combination of disorder and permittivity controls where charges are located. For no disorder the interface density is almost identical to the bulk density, only a slight increase up to a factor of nint/nbulk ≈ pint/pbulk ≈ 2 can be observed, attributed to the fact that charges are initially generated in the interface regions. After generation they can quickly move away from the interface because they experience a flat energetic landscape due to the missing disorder. The disorder generally has a negative effect on charge transport because charges tend to get stuck in deep tails and are less likely to overcome hills of the distribution. In the no disorder regime, Coulomb interactions only play a minor role and affect accumulation only slightly. The larger the energetic disorder, the larger not only the overall magnitude of the accumulation but also the influence of permittivity grows. Since the permittivity controls the strength of the electrostatic interaction, it directly affects the efficiency of electron/hole pairs to overcome the mutual attraction and move from the interface region into the respective bulk regions. While at (σ = 0 meV, εr = 5) the ratio is around 2, it increases up to nint/nbulk ≈ 85 for electrons and up to pint/pbulk ≈ 41 for holes at (σ = 70 meV, εr = 3) indicating that most of the charges in the cell remain in the interface region for the largest part of their lifetime.
The operation principle can therefore roughly be classified into two different regimes: R1 (low σ, high εr) and R2 (high σ, low εr). In R1 charge transport is good and Coulomb interactions are weak, we can observe a homogeneous CCD without regions of accumulation. This regime can be attributed to highly organized, well screening materials. R2 applies to materials with substantial energetic disorder and weak screening of electrostatic interactions. In this regime, the CCD within the BHJ is inhomogeneous with a large accumulation of charges at the heterojunction interface. The interplay between σ and εr controls where charges are located and can shift the operation regime from the bulk to interface dominated.
The artificial case of no Coulomb interaction was added to the data to show the influence of increasing energetic disorder independently of the influence of electrostatic interactions. While accumulation is sensitive to increasing disorder, only the combination of bad charge transport and mutual interaction drastically increases interface accumulation.
It needs to be mentioned that in case the permittivity exceeds εr ⪆ 9 excitons have negligible binding energy and are thermally dissociated into free charges.52 This effect is not implemented in our simulations but needs to be considered in the interpretation. It would render the exciton separation efficiency to be 100%. Compared to the weakly fluctuating exciton separation efficiency of 95% ± 0.5% in all our simulations, one could expect a minor difference in the results as more charges should have been created than they actually were in our model.
Values for the energetic disorder are around 70 meV for established material combinations used in polymer:fullerene blends formed from poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM).53–55 Higher values of disorder lead to an extensively large computational demand of the kMC model. To maintain a feasible amount of simulation time we restricted our analysis to σ ≤ 70 meV. Interpolating the trend of charge accumulation strength, in the case of an energetic disorder larger than 70 meV the effect of accumulation will only be pronounced stronger. The permittivity of organic materials is mostly assumed to be around 3.5. For permittivity the choice of our parameter variation from 3 to 5 is meant to provide a sensitivity analysis to show how already slight changes can affect the charge location drastically.
The accumulation effect qualitatively holds true for both electron and hole distributions although the effect is more pronounced for electrons than for holes. To have a more detailed look at the absolute values of the charge densities, Fig. 4 illustrates the absolute interface and bulk densities face to face for a realistic value of energetic disorder of 70 meV. At εr = 3, the interface densities with nint = 1.07 × 1018 cm−3 and pint = 1.28 × 1018 cm−3 are by the previously mentioned factors, 85 and 41 respectively, larger than the bulk densities of nbulk = 1.26 × 1016 cm−3 and pbulk = 3.13 × 1016 cm−3. The total charge density in the active layer is therefore mainly made up by charges at the interface. With increasing permittivity, nint and pint drop while the bulk densities rise. By increasing the permittivity only slightly to εr = 5, the interface densities drop to nint = 2.00 × 1017 cm−3 and pint = 3.42 × 1017 cm−3 and the bulk densities increase to nbulk = 2.30 × 1016 cm−3 and pbulk = 4.56 × 1016 cm−3. Charges are not drawn to the interface as strong, they are moving away from the interface into the bulk regions more quickly, and the distribution inclines towards a more homogeneous distribution. But even in the case of no Coulomb interactions they are not fully equally induced by the bad transport due to the disorder. The generally higher hole densities are a result of the lower hole hopping mobility compared to the electrons we assumed. This means holes are slower and need more time to move both away from the interface and also spend more time in the bulk regions resulting in higher average densities. These results show that the permittivity has a strong effect on the charge location and that even slight modifications can drastically change the distribution.
 Fig. 4  Absolute values of interface and bulk charge densities of electrons and holes at energetic disorder σ = 70 meV for different values of permittivity εr. For each εr, the inner two bars show the interface densities and the outer two bars the bulk densities. 
B. Influence on recombination
Independently of whether opposite charges in a pair stem from the same or from a different origin, the longer they spend time in the vicinity of each other the higher the chance for them to undergo recombination. Therefore, and because opposite charges can only meet at the interface, a correlation between the interface charge accumulation and recombination is expected. Recombination occurs with the rate aehr and is dependent on many factors, e.g. the molecular species of the donor and acceptor materials and their arrangement along the heterojunction. The kMC model cannot make predictions of such properties, and therefore about aehr, and its value is still under debate. Fitting current density–voltage characteristics to measurements yielded values in the range of 104 s−1 to 106 s−1,52,56 while other studies show that the recombination rate can be in the range of aehr = 107 s−1.57,58 In previous kMC models the most commonly used values are around 5 × 105 s−1 as in ref. 59. Due to the uncertainty in the recombination rate and the sensitivity of the accumulation effect with respect to small changes in permittivity shown above, we analyzed the amount of recombination with respect to a variation of aehr several orders of magnitude from 104 s−1 to 107 s−1 and εr ranging between 3 and 5, inducing different accumulation strengths. For these parameters and a realistic energetic disorder of σ = 70 meV, Fig. 5 shows the total recombination Rtot and the ratio of geminate recombination with respect to the total recombination Rgem/Rtot.
 Fig. 5  Amount of total recombination Rtot (a) and the corresponding relative part of geminate recombination Rgem/Rtot (b), both shown vs. recombination constant aehr at different values of εr. A value of Rtot = 100% means that all charges generated by exciton splitting undergo recombination. A value of Rgem/Rtot = 100% means that from all recombination events, every single one is geminate and none are nongeminate. All recombination that is not geminate is nongeminate recombination. 
From Fig. 5a it can clearly be observed that both a lower permittivity as well as a higher recombination constant increase the total recombination. The influence of only small changes in εr is drastic: for a slow recombination process with aehr = 104 s−1, the total recombination increases from 1.12% at εr = 5 to 21.5% at εr = 3. Here, the biggest change occurs when changing εr from 3 to only 3.5, where Rtot changes from 6.05% to 21.5% and highlights the sensitivity of recombination to the dielectric screening strength. With a higher recombination rate the relative influence of εr drops, however the absolute number of photogenerated charge carriers recombining is very high. At aehr = 107 s−1, the recombination varies between 81.87% and 32.05% for permittivity changing from 3 to 5.
When the average time two charges spend next to each other approaches the range of the average recombination time trec = (aehr)−1, recombination starts to occur. The interface charge density is a measure for the time charges spent in the interface regions. In Langevin theory, the actual recombination process is independent of the rate of the actual recombination process and is considered instant. However, if charges are mostly confined to the interface regions due to bad transport and mutual Coulomb interactions, the influence of the bimolecular part (i.e. the recombination partners finding each other) is reduced, as they have already found each other or have never been separated, and the actual recombination rate cannot be neglected. For the case of interface accumulation, the strong dependency of the recombination rate is obvious from the results and it increases with higher accumulation, for instance induced by lower permittivity. This is in accordance with theoretical and experimental studies of increasing permittivity to reduce recombination.11,12,14,16
A particularly interesting result is observed for no Coulomb interaction (εr = ∞) as well as for no disorder, independently of one another: here, no recombination at all is observed (data not shown). In these cases the average time a charge pair stays at the heterojunction is small and does not interfere with the average recombination time trec, i.e. separation is much faster than recombination. Therefore no recombination occurs in this regime and interface accumulation can seem to be a requirement for recombination to occur.
Large recombination ratios for large aehr are obviously in discrepancy with the observed very efficient charge separation in specific OSC systems. We therefore identify recombination rates of aehr = 104 s−1 to 105 s−1 to obtain realistic recombination ratios of less than 25% at commonly assumed values for permittivity εr = 3.5. However, the overall recombination is very sensitive to both permittivity and disorder. If it were possible tuning the permittivity and disorder, recombination could be strongly suppressed even for larger recombination rates.

Fig. 5b shows the amount of geminate recombination with respect to the total recombination Rgem/Rtot (dotted lines). The general trend is similar to the overall recombination, i.e. geminate recombination increases with higher aehr as well as with lower εr. At aehr = 107 s−1, between 86.4% and 98.1% of recombination is geminate and only a marginal part of recombination is nongeminate. Slower recombination reduces the ratio of geminate recombination to as low as 47% at low aehr = 104 s−1 and high εr = 5, because it is easier for charge pairs to separate from each other before they reach the critical recombination time. The interplay between the recombination rate and permittivity therefore also has a major influence on the relationship between the amount of geminate and nongeminate recombination. Without an additional mechanism to support charge separation and only based on the Coulomb interactions and Gaussian disorder geminate recombination cannot be neglected as a major loss pathway in BHJs as stated in e.g.ref. 60.
Finally, to link the effect of σ and εr to the performance of the cell, Table 1 shows the short-circuit current density at aehr = 5 × 104 s−1. In accordance with the discussion about recombination there is an anti-correlation of interface accumulation strength (cf.Fig. 2) and jsc. Larger accumulation leads to more recombination and, in turn, recombination reduces the current reaching the contacts, i.e. jsc. While disorder and permittivity separately have an influence on jsc, only the combination of both dramatically influences the current. No disorder and perfect screening lead to perfect charge collection efficiency without recombination and jsc = 8.36 mA cm−2. The influence of εr is particularly evident for σ = 70 meV and the increased recombination due to low Coulomb screening lowers the short-circuit current down to 4.62 mA cm−2 at εr = 3.
Table 1 Effect of permittivity and disorder on short-circuit current density jsc in (mA cm−2)





σ (meV)

ε
r



3
3.5
4
5
∞




70
4.62
5.92
6.77
7.62
8.21


50
7.24
7.59
7.33
7.65
8.11


30
7.31
7.44
7.52
7.71
8.24


0
7.53
7.58
7.65
7.75
8.36




IV. Conclusion
The kMC method allows us to investigate the 3D CCD and recombination events in complex morphologies such as BHJs, otherwise challenging to assess using experiments and scarcely modeled using drift–diffusion models. We set up a kMC model with a particular focus on Coulomb interactions and showed that the two key differences in disordered organic with respect to inorganic semiconductors, energetic disorder and permittivity, strongly affect the charge carrier distribution and in BHJs which, in turn, have a direct influence on the losses by recombination.
The CCD can be classified into two regimes: a low permittivity in combination with a high disorder leads to a strongly inhomogeneous CCD with accumulation of charges along the interface. In this case charge pair separation is inefficient due to strong mutual Coulomb interactions and bad transport through the disordered landscape. As a result, recombination is an interface-controlled process with a strong dependence on the interface recombination rate aehr. Geminate recombination clearly dominates over nongeminate recombination and cannot be neglected as a major loss mechanism. In contrast, a weak Coulomb screening and a low disorder yield a homogeneous distribution of charges within their phases. In this case the overall recombination ratio is lower because charge pairs can separate faster than the average recombination time. Furthermore, the ratio of geminate recombination reduces and slightly shifts towards nongeminate recombination.
The accumulation effect and its influence on recombination are very sensitive on both permittivity as well as energetic disorder. Even slight changes can shift the operation away from the accumulation regime with high recombination losses towards a more homogeneous CCD regime with lower recombination and therefore support other studies where increasing the permittivity was stated as the route towards high-efficiency BHJ OSCs.
Conflict of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the excellence cluster “Nanosystems Initiative Munich” of the German Research Foundation for funding.
References
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096401 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
F. Gao and O. Inganäs, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20291 RSC .
P. Deotare, W. Chang, E. Hontz, D. Congreve, L. Shi, P. Reusswig, B. Modtland, M. Bahlke, C. Lee, A. Willard, V. Bulović, T. Van Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Burke, S. Sweetnam, K. Vandewal and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500123 CrossRef .
L. J. Koster, S. E. Shaheen and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1246 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cho, C. W. Schlenker, K. M. Knesting, P. Koelsch, H.-L. Yip, D. S. Ginger and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301857 CrossRef .
S. Y. Leblebici, T. L. Chen, P. Olalde-Velasco, W. Yang and B. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10105 CAS .
G. Zhang, T. M. Clarke and A. J. Mozer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7033 CAS .
S. Chen, S.-W. Tsang, T.-H. Lai, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Torabi, F. Jahani, I. Van Severen, C. Kanimozhi, S. Patil, R. W. Havenith, R. C. Chiechi, L. Lutsen, D. J. Vanderzande, T. J. Cleij, J. C. Hummelen and J. A. Koster, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 150 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deibel, A. Baumann and V. Dyakonov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 386 CrossRef .
C. Groves, J. C. Blakesley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 230 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Foertig, A. Wagenpfahl, T. Gerbich, D. Cheyns, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1483 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juška and R. Österbacka, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 677 CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. Brown, R. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. Langeveld-Voss, A. Spiering, R. A. Janssen, E. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Chow, S. Gelinas, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, J. M. Hodgkiss, K. R. Kirov, H. A. Bronstein, C. K. Williams, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Onsager, Phys. Rev., 1938, 54, 554 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Braun, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4157 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Jones, B. Chakrabarti and C. Groves, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 85 CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking, G. F. Burkhard, A. Sellinger, J. M. J. Fréchet, A. Amassian, M. K. Riede, M. D. McGehee, D. Neher and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zusan, K. Vandewal, B. Allendorf, N. H. Hansen, J. Pflaum, A. Salleo, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400922 CrossRef .
J. Lee, K. Vandewal, S. R. Yost, M. E. Bahlke, L. Goris, M. A. Baldo, J. V. Manca and T. V. Voorhis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Heiber, C. Baumbach, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 136602 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Langevin, Ann. Chim. Phys., 1903, 28, 433 Search PubMed .
G. Juška, K. Arlauskas, J. Stuchlik and R. Österbacka, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 1167 CrossRef .
A. Fallahpour, A. Gagliardi, F. Santoni, D. Gentilini, A. Zampetti, M. Auf der Maur and A. Di Carlo, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 184502 CrossRef .
T. Albes, P. Lugli and A. Gagliardi, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2016, 15, 281 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Fallahpour, D. Gentilini, A. Gagliardi, M. A. der Maur, P. Lugli and A. Di Carlo, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2016, 6, 202 CrossRef .
H. K. Kodali and B. Ganapathysubramanian, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., 2012, 247, 113 CrossRef .
H. K. Kodali and B. Ganapathysubramanian, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2012, 20, 035015 CrossRef .
P. K. Watkins, A. B. Walker and G. L. Verschoor, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Groves, L. Koster and N. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 094510 CrossRef .
A. Marsh, C. Groves and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 083509 CrossRef .
L. Meng, Y. Shang, Q. Li, Y. Li, X. Zhan, Z. Shuai, R. G. Kimber and A. B. Walker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 114, 36 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Casalegno, G. Raos and R. Po, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 094705 CrossRef PubMed .
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bässler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1993, 175, 15 CrossRef .
S. Baranovskii, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2014, 251, 487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Casalegno, G. Raos and R. Po, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 094705 CrossRef PubMed .
D. T. Gillespie, J. Comput. Phys., 1976, 22, 403 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miller and E. Abrahams, Phys. Rev., 1960, 120, 745 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Koster, E. C. Smits, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 085205 CrossRef .
A. M. Ballantyne, L. Chen, J. Dane, T. Hammant, F. M. Braun, M. Heeney, W. Duffy, I. McCulloch, D. D. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2373 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Tummala, Z. Zheng, S. G. Aziz, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Bredas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mozer, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Pivrikas, R. Österbacka, G. Juška, L. Brassat and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 035214 CrossRef .
L. Koster, V. Mihailetchi and P. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052104 CrossRef .
I. A. Howard and F. Laquai, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 2063 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deibel, T. Strobel and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 036402 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Groves, R. G. Kimber and A. B. Walker, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 144110 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Clarke, A. Ballantyne, S. Shoaee, Y. W. Soon, W. Duffy, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp03513fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:
Ei = E0i + EFi + Eσi + ECi.	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 1  (top) Illustration of the 3D electron and hole charge density distributions in the BHJ. (bottom) Definition of interface densities (electron nint, hole pint) and bulk charge densities (electron nbulk, hole pbulk) as well as geminate (a) and nongeminate (b) recombination events.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electron and hole charge density distributions along a slice through the morphology. All density maps are shown for two cases of low and high permittivity (εr = 3 and εr = 5), respectively, and the energetic disorder varies from 30 meV (a) via 50 meV (b) to 70 meV (c). In (d), the corresponding density scale and the relationship of energy levels within the Gaussian distribution and the charge density are shown.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ratio of interface to bulk charge densities of (a) holes and (b) electrons for different parameter sets of energetic disorder and permittivity (σ, εr). High values indicate an inhomogeneous charge distribution with accumulation of charges at the heterojunction interface while a value of 1 represents homogeneous charge distributions of electrons in the acceptor and holes in the donor, respectively. The artificial case of εr = ∞ (no Coulomb interaction) is added to be able to interpret the effect of disorder alone.	 

 	Fig. 4  Absolute values of interface and bulk charge densities of electrons and holes at energetic disorder σ = 70 meV for different values of permittivity εr. For each εr, the inner two bars show the interface densities and the outer two bars the bulk densities.	 

 	Fig. 5  Amount of total recombination Rtot (a) and the corresponding relative part of geminate recombination Rgem/Rtot (b), both shown vs. recombination constant aehr at different values of εr. A value of Rtot = 100% means that all charges generated by exciton splitting undergo recombination. A value of Rgem/Rtot = 100% means that from all recombination events, every single one is geminate and none are nongeminate. All recombination that is not geminate is nongeminate recombination.	 


70	4.62	5.92	6.77	7.62	8.21
50	7.24	7.59	7.33	7.65	8.11
30	7.31	7.44	7.52	7.71	8.24
0	7.53	7.58	7.65	7.75	8.36
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp03513f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
