Solvothermal phase change induced morphology transformation in CdS/CoFe 2 O 4 @Fe 2 O 3 hierarchical nanosphere arrays as ternary heterojunction photo ...  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NJ00864A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NJ00864A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 12721-12737Solvothermal phase change induced morphology transformation in CdS/CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 hierarchical nanosphere arrays as ternary heterojunction photoanodes for solar water splitting†

        
          
            Soumyajit 
            Maitra
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Arundhati 
            Sarkar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Toulik 
            Maitra
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Somoprova 
            Halder
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kajari 
            Kargupta
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Subhasis 
            Roy
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Calcutta, 92, APC Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700009, India. E-mail: subhasis1093@gmail.com; srchemengg@caluniv.ac.in
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Jadavpur University, 88, Raja Subodh Chandra Mallick Rd, Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal 700032, India
Received 
      20th February 2021
    , Accepted 9th June 2021First published on 9th June 2021AbstractThe design of efficient heterojunction photoanodes with appropriate band alignment and ease of charge separation has been one of the most highly focused research areas in photoelectrodes. This work demonstrates the fabrication of a photoanode comprised of CdS sensitized CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 hierarchical nanosphere arrays on a FTO glass substrate and its application in photoelectrochemical water splitting. The hierarchical hematite nanosphere arrays were grown on FTO substrates by a solvothermal approach. Impregnation of Co2+ was achieved by surfactant-assisted low-temperature solvothermal phase transformation and a dipping process followed by annealing to form a CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 heterojunction. The effect of pre-annealing of substrates before the second hydrothermal step on Co2+ impregnation was studied along with the choice of the solvent. The fabricated electrodes were further sensitized with CdS nanoplate-like structures by a hydrothermal method to form a Z-scheme-Type II ternary heterojunction. The photoelectrochemical properties of the electrodes were analysed by potential linear sweep voltammetry under simulated solar irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) with a 0.5 M Na2S and 0.5 M Na2SO3 electrolyte. The highest ABPE% observed at 0.59 V (vs Ag/AgCl) was 0.86% for the photoanode comprised of CdS sensitized porous nanosphere arrays formed by solvothermal Co2+ impregnation along with pre-annealing. The fabricated electrodes showed low sheet and charge transfer resistance as observed from the EIS plot. The nanostructure morphology, crystal structure, and phase analysis were carried out using XRD, TEM, SEM and FESEM with EDAX. DFT calculations were carried out to unravel the underlying electronic structure and electron transport processes at the heterostructure interfaces. We hope to inspire more research on ordered heterostructures with superior charge transport properties, proper band alignment, enhanced light absorbance, and charge separation with this work. We also aim to focus on the effect of pre-annealing and solvent–surfactant pair selection on ion impregnation induced phase transformation in nanostructures.
1. Introduction
The rise in global temperature and the increase in air pollution caused due to decades of uncontrolled fossil fuel combustion have been poised as a severe environmental threat in recent years, resulting in a desperate need for new renewable energy sources to meet humanity's need for power.1 Since the demonstration of the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical performance of TiO2 by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,2 research on semiconductor nanostructures for efficient solar energy utilization to split water into H2 and O2 has received tremendous attention.3–8 Hematite has so far emerged as one of the most promising contenders in this field due to its highly desirable properties like low cost, high abundance, small bandgap (1.9–2.2 eV), high light absorbance in the visible region, easily tunable properties, low toxicity, high stability in alkaline media and a high theoretical STH of 14–17%.9–12 However, as good as it may seem, hematite suffers from a range of drawbacks that have severely restrained its application in photoelectrodes. Experimentally hematite has reported efficiency values drastically lower than the calculated theoretical values primarily because of intrinsic defects acting as electron traps, low charge carrier density, poor conductivity, sluggish SEI kinetics, high rates of recombination, small electron diffusion length, and increased penetration depth.13,14 As a result of these drawbacks, hematite exhibits a large overpotential, thus requiring a significant external bias to drive a photocurrent.15 Over the years, a large number of synthetic strategies like surface treatment, application of electrocatalysts, doping, designing efficient heterojunctions, etc., have been employed to overcome these hurdles.16–19 Out of these, morphology control and crystal facet tailoring have emerged as one of the most important research topics currently being focused on due to the unique anisotropic electronic conduction properties of hematite.20–22 In hematite, conduction along the basal planes in the [110] direction has been reported to be fourfold higher than that in the perpendicular [001] direction. This anisotropic conduction of electrons is attributed primarily to the reason that electron transfer in the [001] direction causes ferromagnetic coupling, whereas conduction in the [110] direction causes anti-ferromagnetic coupling, thus, favouring electron transport. Also, higher electron conductivity has been observed along the [110] facets as they terminate in bridging oxygen atoms compared to the [001] facets terminating in Fe atoms with a shorter Fe–Fe distance, primarily attributed to the fact that electron transport in the [110] direction is heavily influenced by a phenomenon called super-exchange and d-electron spin coupling occurring between Fe atoms and bridging oxygen atoms.10,23–26 A lot of emphasis has been put on developing crystal facet tailored unique nanostructures with efficient charge transport properties arising due to desirable morphology and selective exposure and orientation of crystal facets,27 The growth of ordered hierarchical nanostructures on specified substrates has proven to be a relatively better choice as compared to the fabrication of films prepared from slurries comprised of nanoparticle aggregates. Films formed by deposition of prepared nanoparticle slurries present a wide range of problems like high rates of recombination at interparticle boundaries, shielding of catalytically active facets due to disordered aggregate formation, and the increased electron transport path, resulting in an increase in charge transfer resistance, structural instability, and a decrease in quantum yield.28,29 Warwick et al.30 demonstrated the impact of annealing temperature in vapor phase processing on selectively increasing the ratio of (110) facets and (001) facets to improve photoelectrochemical performance. Marelli et al.31 showed the superior performance of (110) exposed hierarchical nanoplatelets grown by PE-CVD, achieving an impressive current density of 1.39 mA cm−2 at 1.55 V vs. RHE. Kwon et al.32 developed silver nanoparticle-coated hierarchical hematite nanorods for application in photoanodes. The Grätzel group developed highly [110] oriented hematite nanotree arrays, which have exhibited the highest photoelectrochemical performance so far.33 Unique single-crystal hematite nanowire arrays were synthesized by Xie et al.,34 exhibiting a current density of 0.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. Similar high photoelectrochemical performance was shown by ultrafine hematite nanowires developed by Wang et al.35 All these results validate the reason for the development of unique and efficient novel nanostructures. Inspired by decades of research that have preceded our work, we have developed a photoanode comprised of highly ordered Fe2O3 hierarchical nanosphere arrays with the branched substructures protruding outwards in the [110] direction. Ferrites have received quite a lot of attention due to their small bandgaps, high charge carrier density, high photoactivity in the visible region, and structural stability.36,37 Yin et al.38 showed the effect of transition metal doping in hematite nanoparticles and found enhancement in charge carrier density and photoelectrochemical performance by Co2+ doping. Hussain et al. made some crucial contributions in this field by developing CuFe2O4/Fe2O3 and NiFe2O4/Fe2O3 core–shell nanospike heterojunction photoanodes and demonstrating their superior ABPE%, which was 4.7 times higher than that of bare Fe2O3.39,40 Hou et al.37 fabricated a photoanode comprised of Co-doped Fe2O3/MgFe2O4 core–shell nanorod arrays, which demonstrated an astounding ABPE% of 0.72%. McDonald et al.41 fabricated a ZnFe2O4/Fe2O3 photoanode formed by diffusion of Zn2+ ions into the Fe2O3 lattice from ZnO deposited on top. This resulted in the development of excess ZnO on top that remained unreacted and was later removed by etching. ZnO can be removed relatively easily; however, the case is not the same for other metal oxides like NiO or CoO, thus restricting the development of CoFe2O4 or NiFe2O4 by using the same method. Also, such high-temperature diffusion causes significant distortion in morphology and agglomeration of nanostructures. Thus, we have explored ways to impregnate transition metal ions inside the hematite lattice by a low-temperature surfactant-assisted solvothermal approach causing direct phase change at a low temperature without the formation of undesirable metal oxides on top, also resulting in an enhancement of porosity at the same time. A large number of nanocomposites and nanostructures of CoFe2O4 have been explored, showing much promise in the field of photoelectrochemistry.42–44 Also, Co has not been studied like its Zn, Cu, and Ni counterparts in the formation of AFe2O4/Fe2O3 nanostructures. This has inspired us to develop a low-temperature solvothermal process for the impregnation of Co2+ ions into the hematite lattice to form an efficient p–n junction for enhanced performance. Ternary heterojunctions have aroused much interest in recent years due to their impressive ability to act in a synchronized harmony and compensate for the drawbacks of individual components. Ternary heterojunctions drastically improve photoactivity due to enhanced light absorbance, produce a new pathway for enhanced charge separation by cascade type electron transfer, and increase charge carrier density. CdS is ideal for enhancing the photoelectrochemical performance of existing heterojunctions due to its small bandgap and high photoactivity in the visible region.45,46 Mahadik et al.47 fabricated CdS sensitized Zr:α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays that exhibited a current density 1.9 times more than that of the pristine hematite electrodes. Natarajan et al.48 demonstrated the performance-enhancing characteristics of CdS deposited on electrodeposited Fe2O3 films. Shi et al.49 synthesized a novel corn-like CdS coated Fe2O3 nanostructure for photocatalytic applications. A similar impressive photocatalytic performance of the CdS/Fe2O3 heterojunction was shown by Zhang et al.50 In this work, we have developed a highly [110] ordered
CdS sensitized hierarchical CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 nanosphere array-based photoanode for photoelectrochemical water splitting. We have developed a low-temperature surfactant-assisted solvothermal approach to accelerate phase change to ferrite from hematite to form a core–shell p–n junction followed by further sensitization by CdS nanoplate-like structures to facilitate a Z-scheme followed by a Type II series electron transfer process. We believe that this work would encourage more research towards the development of ordered hierarchical heterostructures for water splitting applications.
2. Experimental procedure
2.1 Fabrication of CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 photoelectrodes
The hierarchical hematite nanosphere arrays were synthesized by a facile solvothermal method. At first, 2 cm × 1 cm FTO glass substrates (Sigma Aldrich, 10 Ω sq−1) were thoroughly cleaned with soap solution and sonicated in DI water, followed by further sonication in isopropanol for 30 minutes each. The conductive sides were checked. In a 100 ml beaker, 30 ml of ethanol was taken, followed by the addition of FeCl3 (Merck, 99%) to make a 0.1 M solution. The solution was kept on stirring for 30 minutes until it became clear. To the solution, stearic acid (Fischer, 99%) was added, followed by the addition of urea (Fischer, 99%) to set the concentration of the reagents at 0.2 M and 0.1 M, respectively. The solution was stirred for 1 h followed by drop by drop addition of acetic acid till a transparent orange clear solution was obtained. The FTO glass substrates were placed inside a 25 ml Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave at an angle of 45° with the inner walls of the container, with the conductive side facing down. 20 ml of the prepared solution was carefully poured inside the container. The autoclave was sealed and placed inside a furnace at 105 °C for 18 hours. After completion of the reaction, the FTO pieces were taken out and gently rinsed with ethanol and DI water. Semi-transparent bright orange films were observed. One electrode was annealed at 500 °C and was labelled as Spa, where S stands for solvothermal and Pa stands for pre-annealing. Another electrode was dipped in an ethanolic 0.01 M Co(NO3)2 solution overnight and was labelled as Dip. The final electrode was not annealed and was kept aside for the next step and was labelled as SwPa.
In the next step, the CoFe2O4 shell was developed on the Fe2O3 nanostructures grown on the FTO pieces. In a 100 ml beaker, 30 ml of ethanol was added followed by the addition of Co(NO3)2 (0.001 M) (Fischer, 99%), oleic acid (0.001 M) (Merck, 99%) and oleyl amine (0.001 M) (Merck, 99%) and then 0.5 ml of acetic acid (Merck, 99%) was added till a clear pink solution was obtained. The SPa electrode was taken and placed inside a 25 ml Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave with the conductive side facing down. 20 ml of the prepared solution was poured inside the container. The autoclave was sealed and placed inside a furnace at 150 °C for 8 hours. After completion of the reaction, the electrode was taken out and rinsed with ethanol and water. A purple glossy film was observed. A similar process was repeated with the SwPa electrode. In this case, a poor damaged film was observed, which had little change of colour. All the electrodes, including the Dip, were rinsed with ethanol, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 2 hours. An extra electrode labelled as HPa (H stands for hydrothermal) was fabricated through the same process except for the fact that in the Co(NO3)2 solution, ethanol was replaced by water to study the importance of the mineralization pathway and solvent polarity in the impregnation process. A pink distorted film was observed after the reaction was completed, which turned into a poor brittle black layer after annealing. The reddish colour, characteristic of hematite, had disappeared.
2.2 Deposition of CdS on the fabricated photoelectrodes
In the final step, CdS was deposited by a hydrothermal approach. In a 150 ml beaker, 100 ml of DI water was taken, followed by the addition of 120 mg of cadmium acetate (Merck, 99%), 150 mg of thiourea (Merck, 99%), and 180 mg of sodium dodecyl sulphate (Fischer, 99%). The solution was kept on stirring until it became clear. The annealed electrodes were placed inside the autoclave like before, and 20 ml of the solution was added. The autoclave was placed inside a furnace at 180 °C for 24 hours. After completing the reaction, the electrodes were taken out and rinsed gently with DI water and annealed at 200 °C for 30 min. A light-yellow uniform film was observed. A detailed description of the synthesis process is provided in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication process. 
3. Characterization
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the as-synthesized samples were measured using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker AXS D8, Germany) with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.54178 Å) from 2θ value ranging from 10° to 90° at a scanning rate of 0.02° s−1. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, Zeiss Bio-SEM, Germany) was used to characterize the morphology of samples. The SEM imaging was coupled with the EDAX spectrum (Oxford Inca System). The UV-vis spectra were measured using a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, 2250, Japan) with a clean bare FTO glass substrate as the reference. PL spectra were tested using a micro-Raman spectrometer (LabRAM HR, Jobin Yvon) furnished with an argon-ion laser of wavelength 488 nm (excitation source) and a Peltier-cooled CCD detector. XPS spectra was recorded for surface composition analysis (XPS Physical Electronics 5400 ESCA).
4. Photoelectrochemical measurements
Photoelectrochemical experiments were conducted using a potentiostat (CHI760D Electrochemical Analyser, CHI Instruments Inc.) under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination provided by a solar simulator (100 mW cm−2 Xe with optical filter), using a 0.5 M Na2S and 0.5 M Na2SO3 aqueous solution as the electrolyte. A three-electrode system was used, with the fabricated hematite electrodes set as the working electrode, a saturated Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode, and a platinum foil as the counter electrode. J–V characteristics were measured by LSV scan under illumination and under darkness from −0.2 to 1.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl with a potential amplitude of 10 mV under light illumination with an applied AC perturbation between 1 MHz and 1 mHz. Mott–Schottky data were measured at a frequency of 1 kHz at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1.
5. Results and discussion
The X-ray diffraction pattern in Fig. 2(a) shows the presence of α-Fe2O3 (JCPDS 33-0664) in all the samples. Cobalt ferrite was observed to be in its cubic phase (JCPDS 22-1086) in all the samples except the pristine hematite photoanode. CdS was also observed to be in its cubic phase (JCPDS 80-0019). In the sample HPa, another additional phase was observed which was identified to be CoO present in its rock salt phase (JCPDS 78-0431). No traces of the wurtzite phase were identified in the case of CdS. This can be attributed to the fact that lattice parameters and lattice symmetry are a controlling factor during nucleation and crystal growth. The presence of CoFe2O4 in its cubic phase in all the samples and the presence of CoO in its cubic phase in the sample HPa can be held accountable for the cubic phase growth of CdS. From the XRD pattern of the pristine sample in Fig. 2a, it can be observed that the relative peak intensity for the (110) planes is higher than that of the (012) planes. The shortening and broadening of the (012) peaks and the increase in the relative intensity of the (110) peaks can provide insight into the degree of facet orientation of the hematite nanostructures as suggested by Warwick et al.30 As described earlier, an increase in exposure of the (110) planes in hematite plays a key role in increasing electronic conductivity and hence, improving photoelectrochemical performance. The XRD pattern for the pristine sample supports the fact that the hierarchical nanospheres have a (110) facet-oriented growth, which can be attributed to the presence of nanoplate-like protrusions. This is further strengthened by the fact that in the case of the sample Dip, the relative intensity between (311) and (012) decreased as the plate-like protrusions coalesced together to form almost smooth spheres. In both cobalt ferrite and hematite, the (110) and (311) peaks are almost at the same position (35.34°), therefore overlapping each other and reinforcing the total intensity of the peak. Compared to the sample SPa or pristine hematite, the intensity ratio of the (012) peak vs. (110)/(311) peak is significantly higher in the case of the sample Dip where, from the notable observation from Fig. S2a (ESI†), there was a drastic decrease in nanostructure texture due to coalescence of its protrusions, thereby leading to the conclusion that the protrusions are (110) oriented. Similarly, the ratio between (012) and (110)/(311) peak intensities was highest for the sample SPa where the protrusions increased due to the surfactant-assisted exfoliation process that took place during the solvothermal process. Another important observation was the expansion in the crystal lattice due to the shift in the peak position. The (110) peak shifted to a lower angle of 35.45° than 35.67°, as mentioned in the JCPDS database. A deviation in the d-spacing was observed from the ideal spacing of 2.517 Å in the JCPDS database and the calculated one to being 2.529 Å. The (012) peak also shifted to a lower angle of 24.11° from the ideal 24.19°, as mentioned in the JCPDS database. The d-spacing was measured to be 3.687 Å instead of 3.820 Å, as mentioned in the database. Lattice expansion may be presumed to have originated from the anhydrous alcoholic precursor solution in the solvothermal synthesis whereby nucleation to oxides occurs by irreversible alcohol oxidation to aldehydes and acids, creating an environment for nucleation starved of oxygen, leading to vacancies as explained later based on the PL measurements. The relative shift for the (110) peak was higher, possibly because the (110) facets are rich in terminating O atoms, which might have caused vacancies due to the [110] oriented growth of the hierarchical nanospheres resulting in alcohol oxidation surface reactions on those facets. The cobalt ferrite also exhibited a lattice expansion where the d-spacing increased from 2.512 Å for the ideal lattice to 2.529 Å. The sample SwPa showed feeble peaks for cobalt ferrite and hematite, indicating that material stripping took place from the electrode surface due to the lack of annealing. The sample HPa showed the characteristic peaks of CoO and feeble reflections for hematite, indicating that over-conversion of the phase to cobalt ferrite occurred during the annealing process. Williamson–Hall plots51 were used to calculate crystallite size, strain, and dislocation density, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The hematite sample showed an average crystallite size of 46.2 for pristine, which was found to decrease to 44.2 nm for Dip and 41.3 nm for the samples Dip and Spa. The increase in crystallite size for Dip could be attributed to the fact that the dipping process affected the outermost layer of the parent hematite nanospheres while the solvothermal phase change penetrated the nanostructure, causing an increase in dislocation density induced by the vigorous phase change. The corresponding lattice strain values were similarly observed to increase from 3.850 × 10−4 for pristine hematite to 3.910 × 10−4 for the sample Dip and 7.610 × 10−4 for SPa. In the case of the samples SwPa and HPa, the smallest crystallite size was observed for the sample SwPa along with, the highest strain of 0.0013 due to vigorous stripping away of hematite forming disordered particle aggregates. In the case of HPa, the percentage of hematite was so drastically reduced that it was not possible to calculate any meaningful FWHM from the peaks. The RMS strain obtained for the (110) peak was approximately 0.007, and for the (012) peak, the strain caused due to a smaller shift in angle was approximately 0.0012. Further details about crystallite size and lattice strain have been discussed in depth in the ESI† (Fig. S1).
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the fabricated electrodes. (b) XPS spectra of Fe 2p. (c) XPS spectra Co 2p. (d) XPS spectra of O 1s. 
XPS analysis was carried out to determine the chemical composition and successful heterojunction formation in the ternary heterostructure. Fig. S7(d) (ESI†) shows the full XPS surface scan for the sample SPa. In Fig. 2(b), the core-level spectra for Fe 2p can be observed. The characteristic peaks at 710.06 eV and 723.46 eV correspond to the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 levels of Fe3+ at the octahedral sites of cobalt ferrite. The peaks corresponding to a binding energy value of 712.8 eV and 725.82 eV correspond to the presence of Fe3+ at the tetrahedral sites due to the change in the degree of spinel inversion as observed commonly in ferrites. The spinel structure has the formula AB2O4, where A is the tetrahedral site and B is the octahedral site. Ferrites are present in the form [FeIIIδCoII1−δ][FeIII2−δCoIIδ]O4, where δ is the degree of spinel inversion, causing multiple peak fits to be present in the core level spectra of Fe and Co due to the different coordination environment of the atoms in the two different sites.52–55 The peaks at 712.1 eV and 725.3 eV can be attributed to the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 levels of Fe3+ present in the hematite underlayer.56Fig. 2c shows the core level XPS spectra of Co 2p. The characteristic peaks at 779.13 eV and 795.09 eV correspond to the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 levels of Co2+ present at the octahedral sites. The peaks at 782.28 eV and 792.3 eV depict the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 levels of Co2+ atoms at the tetrahedral sites.52,53 The characteristic satellite peaks for Co 2p were obtained at energy values of 789.01 eV and 804.2 eV, respectively. Hematite is n-type in nature and cobalt ferrite is p-type. Hence a CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 core–shell p–n junction will result in charge transfer from the hematite layer to the cobalt ferrite layer for equilibration of the Fermi level, hence facilitating charge transport.57 Thus the binding energy values for Fe3+ fitted for the hematite layer are higher compared to Fe3+ fitted for the cobalt ferrite layer as charge transfer from n-type Fe2O3 to p-type CoFe2O4 has caused electron density depletion from the Fe atoms in the hematite layer causing an increase in binding energy and a simultaneous enrichment in electron density on Fe atoms in the cobalt ferrite layer causing a reduction in the binding energy value compared to previous reports of pristine CoFe2O4.56 The O 1s core-level spectra are shown in Fig. 2d. The peaks at 530.4 eV, 531.2 eV and 535.6 eV correspond to the presence of metal oxygen bonds, surface OH groups and surface adsorbed H2O respectively.58 The peak at 532.1 eV corresponds to the presence of defects caused by oxygen vacancies, as later observed from the PL spectra.55,59 The core-level spectra for Cd 3d are shown in Fig. S1(e) (ESI†), where the characteristic peaks of Cd2+ 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 are observed at 402.6 eV and 409.7 eV.60–62 Fig. S1(f) (ESI†) shows the core level spectra of S 2p with the characteristic peaks of S 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 levels at 161.7 eV and 162.9 eV, respectively.63 The binding energy values for Cd 3d and S 2p are higher compared to that of pristine CdS due to the fact that Fermi level equilibration of CdS with the CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 heterostructure results in charge transfer from the CdS layer to the CoFe2O4 layer resulting in the formation of a ternary heterojunction as explained later using DFT calcuations.64,65 Thus XPS analysis confirms the successful formation of a CdS sensitized core–shell CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 Z-scheme–Type II series ternary heterojunction.
SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) was carried out to analyse the morphology of the nanostructures and gain a deeper insight into the effects of synthesis parameters and nanostructure morphology on crystal structure and photoelectrochemical performance. From Fig. 3a, the quality of the overall film can be observed. The nanosphere arrays are tightly packed together in a highly ordered fashion with a minimal number of fissures in the film, discontinuities or disordered aggregates. The grain size between individual clusters of nanosphere arrays was measured to be approximately 2.033 μm. From Fig. 3b, a highly magnified image of the film can be observed. The nanospheres were observed to have protrusions directed outwards from the spherical core. Hence, the nomenclature of hierarchical nanospheres has been adopted. The individual nanospheres were approximately 398.8 nm in diameter. The average 2D projected area obtained from image analysis was approximately 0.5123 μm2 (Fig. S2a, ESI†). The individual protrusions were observed to be 87.66 nm in length inclined at an angle of approximately 77.93° with the central spherical core. The mean area for the nanoplate-like protrusions was calculated to be 1863.92 nm2 (Fig. S4b, ESI†). Fig. 3c shows the overall film quality at low magnification for sample SPa. The key observations noted were the increase in porosity and compact distribution of nanospheres that were retained from the parent structure after the solvothermal Co2+ impregnation and annealing process. A highly magnified image in Fig. 3d reveals that the average diameter of the nanospheres decreased slightly to approximately 291 nm. Fig. 3d also reveals that the pores originated from exfoliation of the nanoplate-like protrusions present in the hierarchical nanospheres, thereby increasing the inter-plate gaps from 38.67 nm in the case of the parent structure to 67.9 nm, resulting in the formation of a nanoflower like structure with protrusions extending up to 173 nm approximately. An opposite process occurred in sample Dip in Fig. S2a (ESI†) where the diameter of the nanospheres increased to 421 nm, and the effective surface area was decreased due to coalescence of the nanoplate-like protrusions to form almost smooth spheres without prominent secondary structures. Fig. 3f shows the morphology of films at low magnification for the sample SwPa where no pre-annealing was conducted before the solvothermal process. It shows a poor film with disordered nanoparticle aggregates, fissures, and craters. An equally poor morphology was observed in sample HPa in Fig. S2b (ESI†) where water was used as the solvent for the solvothermal synthesis. A significant amount of damage was observed in the films as in both the cases, the highly ordered and packed nanosphere arrays were destroyed. Variation of synthesis parameters can explain the observed phenomenon. Solvothermal impregnation of cobalt ions using surfactants, namely, oleic acid and oleyl amine, was done in an ethanolic medium. During the solvothermal process, it was observed that solvent polarity plays a key role in controlling impure phases and nanostructure morphology. The presence of water in the reaction medium resulted in the development of cobalt hydroxides on the hematite, which after annealing resulted in cobalt oxide, which diffused into the hematite lattice to form excess CoFe2O4. Also, large chunks of the non-diffused cobalt oxide residue were left on top resulting in significant damage to the photoelectrochemical performance. Thus, the surfactant-assisted solvothermal method is superior as it leads to phase change at low temperatures, keeping the parent morphology almost intact. In this method, the cobalt ions were capped by oleic acid (the anionic capping agent) molecules. Solvent selection plays a key role as alcoholic solvents form oxides during solvothermal synthesis through reversible intermediate aldehyde to acid oxidation reactions, unlike water or alkaline media, where rapid deposition of hydroxides occurs. During the phase change, these surfactants burrow into the parent nanostructure, resulting in surface etching, increased porosity, and exfoliation of the nanoplate-like protrusions into nanoflower-like structures with a higher surface area. The sample Dip prepared by the dipping process increased the diameter of the nanospheres, presumably arising from the formation of the cobalt ferrite shell and lattice expansion. However, this process results in the coalescence of the nanoplate-like protrusions, thereby significantly hampering the crystal facet tailoring process. An interesting observation was made on the pre-treatment of hematite electrodes before the solvothermal process. The sample SwPa showed a poor morphology due to stripping away of hematite from the electrode surface during the solvothermal process. Thus, the pre-annealing step plays a very important role in maintaining structural rigidity. A detailed illustration of the reaction mechanism can be obtained from Fig. 1. The morphology of the deposited CdS can be observed from Fig. 3e and g–i. Smooth round spheres were observed in the case of CdS deposited on substrates fabricated by the dipping process as observed from Fig. 3e and h. The average diameter of the CdS deposited nanospheres for the sample Dip was 547 nm, while that for the sample SPa was 381 nm. An interesting observation was that the CdS deposited nanospheres in the case of SPa were not smooth like those of Dip, and from Fig. 3(i), tooth-like protrusions can be observed at higher magnification upon these nanospheres. These tooth-like protrusions could have originated from the nucleation process on the rough, uneven porous surface of the CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 nanospheres in sample SPa. The average dimensions of these small protrusions were 71 nm in length and 33 nm in width. CdS deposited on SwPa and HPa showed a very poor morphology with disordered particle aggregates without any structural symmetry and orientation, as observed from Fig. S2c (ESI†). A histogram plot for the area distribution of the nanostructures obtained from image analysis is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†).
 Fig. 3  SEM images of (a) pristine hematite hierarchical nanospheres at a low magnification, (b) pristine hematite hierarchical nanospheres at a high magnification, (c) SPa without CdS at a low magnification, (d) SPa without CdS at a high magnification, (e) Dip at a low magnification, (f) SwPa without CdS at a low magnification, (g) Spa at a low magnification, (h) Dip at a high magnification, (i) SPa magnified single nanosphere. 
The TEM images provided in Fig. S3(a) (ESI†) suggest the presence of both (110) and (001) facets whereby the (110) facets run perpendicular to the (001) facets as expected. The d spacing for the (110) facets was found to be 0.259 nm, and that for the (001) facet was found to be 0.251 nm. From Fig. S3(b) (ESI†), the lattice fringes for the (311) facet of CoFe2O4 and for the (111) facet of CdS can be observed. A significantly appreciable crystallinity was observed from the prominently visible fringes. There are a large number of kinks and distortions observed at the interface of Fe2O3 and CoFe2O4 due to encroachment of the CoFe2O4 lattice into the hematite lattice after the formation of the heterojunction. Although these kinks and defects may alleviate catalytic properties, they may act as a barrier for efficient electron transfer by acting as trap states, causing pinning of charge carriers as observed from the transient photocurrent experiment.
The surface area of the fabricated electrodes has been determined from BET analysis. Fig. S7(c) (ESI†) shows the BET isotherms of the fabricated photoanodes. The isotherms were observed to be of Type IV.66 The calculated surface area of sample SPa was found to be the highest, with an area of 44.6 m2 g−1. The surface area decreased to a lower value of 37.6 m2 g−1 in the case of Dip due to coalescence of the nanoplate-like protrusions observed from the SEM images, and it was even lower than that of the pristine hematite where a surface area of 40.3 m2 g−1 was observed. The lowest surface area of 28.7 m2 g−1 was observed for the sample SwPa as expected due to stripping away of the hematite layer. The surface area of HPa was not a meaningful measurement and hence skipped as the presence of large amounts of cobalt oxide impurities results in a relatively large photo-electrochemically inactive surface area.
The UV-vis spectra (Fig. 4a) showed a characteristic nature of hematite and cobalt ferrite. Tauc plots provided in the ESI† (Fig. S6a) have been used to calculate the bandgaps. Pristine hematite showed an indirect bandgap of 2.08 eV, which slightly increased to 2.11 eV and 2.14 eV for the samples Dip and SPa. In the region less than 400 nm, an absorption spike occurs due to the presence of hematite. Ligand to Metal Charge Transfer (LMCT) between O-2p orbitals and partially filled Fe-3d orbitals occurs in this region. Absorption between 400 and 500 nm is caused due to three processes that occur in hematite. They are d–d transitions, “double exciton” coupling excitation between Fe3+–Fe3+ nuclei (6A1 + 6A1 → 4T1 (4G) + 4T1 (4G))67 and ligand field transition of Fe3+ (6A1 → 4E1 + 4A1 (4G)). Cobalt ferrite is known to have a majority channel for transition, primarily responsible for the direct bandgap, and a minority channel, responsible for the indirect bandgap, as explained from DFT calculations (Fig. S7b and e, ESI†). The majority channel comprises the transition Co d → Fe (Td) and O p → Fe (Td). The minority channel comprises the transition Co d → Fe (Oh) + Co d and O p → Fe (Oh) + Co d.55 The direct bandgap for cobalt ferrite decreased from 2.64 eV for Dip to 2.51 eV for SPa, presumably due to quantum confinement as CoFe2O4 formed a very thin outer crust on the parent hematite nanostructure for Dip. CdS was observed to have a direct bandgap as expected. The highest bandgap of CdS was observed to be 2.76 eV for the sample Dip followed by a decrease to 2.66 eV for SPa, probably caused due to size effects resulting from the formation of large toothlike protrusions for sample SPa. The sample SPa showed the highest absorbance at a region less than 500 nm compared to Dip, which could be attributed to the higher percentage of cobalt ferrite conversion and the higher porosity of the nanospheres aiding light trapping due to internal reflections caused by the nanotexture. Compared to pristine hematite, the overall light absorption increased in the heterojunction samples indicating the importance of heterostructure designing for maximum solar energy utilization. The bulge around 600 nm for sample HPa may be attributed to the large amounts of CoO impurities active in that region. The lowest absorbance was observed for sample SwPa, possibly caused due to stripping away of the film due to the lack of pre-annealing. Pristine hematite showed a poor penetration depth of 127 nm at 470 nm (Fig. S6c, ESI†). In contrast, in the sample SPa, a drastic decrease in penetration depth to 71.8 nm was observed, indicating the efficiency of the fabricated ternary heterojunction in solar energy utilization. The sample SwPa showed the highest penetration depth, probably attributed to the low absorbance caused by severe morphological damage due to stripping away of hematite due to the lack of pre-annealing. The penetration depth of HPa was lower than that of pristine hematite from 450 nm onwards due to the presence of large amounts of impurity phases like CoO and excessive amounts of defect states. Urbach energy plots68 for the fabricated electrodes (Fig. S6b, ESI†) showed the lowest slope and the highest Urbach energy (Eu = 1.25 eV) for HPa followed by SwPa (Eu = 1.12 eV), which is in agreement with the dislocation density obtained from the XRD analysis, which is also the highest for SwPa. Urbach energy for Dip (Eu = 0.189 eV) is slightly greater than that of pristine hematite (Eu = 0.185 eV) but lower when compared to that of sample SPa (Eu = 0.363 eV).
 Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorbance spectra of the fabricated photoanodes. (b) PL spectra of the fabricated photoanodes. (c) PL peak fitting for sample Spa. (d) PL peak fitting for the sample pristine. 
Photoluminescence spectra can provide an insight into the charge separation efficiency of the heterojunctions and the presence of crystal defects. Attenuation in PL intensity is an indication that efficient charge separation is taking place. As observed from Fig. 4b, the PL intensity gradually decreases from pristine hematite to sample Dip and further decreases for sample SPa. This indicates that efficient charge separation and low recombination are taking place in the heterojunction compared to the pristine samples. Sample SwPa showed higher intensity than the pristine sample, which indicates that the formation of a poor morphology due to the lack of pre-annealing resulted in particle aggregates that act as recombination centers increasing the PL intensity. The highest intensity was observed for HPa as residual cobalt oxide was formed in between the CoFe2O4 and CdS layers. This resulted in the formation of band misalignment, thus, trapping electrons and holes at the bilayer interface, causing severe recombination, thereby drastically increasing PL intensity. The PL peak of pristine hematite is centered around its bandgap at 590 nm. The blue shift caused in Dip and SPa peaks was due to larger bandgap CdS and CoFe2O4. This proves the importance of band alignment and efficient charge separation and its impact on PL spectra. PL broadening plays a key role in the development of an understanding of crystal defects. An increase in the FWHM of the PL peak indicates the formation of intermediate electron trapping states arising from crystal defects. The FWHM obtained for Dip is slightly less than that of SPa, while the FWHM is maximum for HPa followed by SwPa. Pristine hematite has an FWHM marginally less than that for Dip. This defect analysis trend is the same as that observed from the dislocation density analysis and Urbach energy. The origin of this phenomenon can be traced back to the synthesis process and has been discussed earlier. In Fig. 4(b) peak fitting done for the sample SPa can be observed. The peaks centered around 584.7 nm, 476.8 nm, and 498.3 nm are due to the band gaps of Fe2O3, CdS, and CoFe2O4. In Fig. 4(c), a similar peak centred around the bandgap energy of hematite at around 584 nm is observed. Three other peaks centered around 563.07 nm, 642.2 nm, and 538.6 nm were found. The peak at 538.6 indicates oxygen vacancies produced in hematite and occurs due to the recombination of electrons caused by LMCT charge transfer from O-2p to Fe-3d orbitals. This observation is supported by the fact that a shift in peaks in the XRD pattern and an increase in d-spacing were observed, indicating a lattice expansion primarily caused due to the presence of vacancies. From Fig. 4(d) the deconvolution of the PL peak for the sample Pristine shows the presence of a small peak around 540 nm. Thus, we can conclude that the peak at 540 nm originates from hematite and may be attributed to oxygen vacancies as described in the previous works.59,69,70 Zhang et al.59 showed oxygen vacancies by using a non-aqueous solvothermal route using DMF. A similar non-aqueous alcoholic solvothermal route has been applied in this work, but further research is still required. The peak at 563.07 nm may be attributed to hole–electron recombination taking place at the interface between the photocatalysts in the heterostructure where the interfacial resistance caused by trap states may result in recombination. The broad peak at 642 nm indicates a low energy intermediate defect state and low-lying inter-band electron trap state mediated electron recombination in the crystal.
Photoelectrochemical measurements were made on a potentiostat with a 3-electrode setup with Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, the fabricated electrodes as the working electrode, and Pt foil as the counter electrode. A solar simulator (A.M 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) was used as the light source. Potentials have been reported vs Ag/AgCl reference electrode as shown in the Fig. 5(a) and (b). Fig. 5(a) shows the linear sweep voltammetry carried out from 0 V to 1.5 V. Sample SPa showed the highest photocurrent density of 4.17 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V. with an ABPE% value of 0.86% at 0.59 V (Fig. 5(b)) and an onset potential of 0.219 V. The sample Dip performed the second best with a photocurrent density of 3.18 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V. and an ABPE% of 0.56% at 0.629 V. The onset potential for the sample Dip was slightly shifted to 0.44 V. The sample SwPa performed poorly with an APBE% of 0.11% at 0.94 V with an onset potential of 0.78 V. The poorest performance was shown by the sample HPa (Fig. 5(a) inset), where the current density obtained was 0.16 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V. with a feeble ABPE% of 0.02% (Fig. 5(b) inset) and an onset potential of 1.21 V. Pristine hematite showed a better performance compared to HPa with a current density of 0.95 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V. and an ABPE% of 0.05% at 1.02 V. IPCE analysis has been carried out to determine the photoelectrochemical performance of the fabricated photoanodes under monochromatic light. The sample SPa showed the highest IPCE% of 56.57% at 508 nm. The IPCE% decreased to 50.42% for Dip, and the peak shifted to a lower wavelength of 492 nm. A drastic decrease in IPCE% was observed for the sample SwPa as the peak value decreased to 32.9% at 471 nm. The poorest performance was exhibited by HPa where an IPCE% of 4.36% was observed. The pristine sample showed an IPCE% value of 13.8% at 400 nm. The results indicate that the formation of the ternary heterojunction drastically improves the photoelectrochemical performance compared to pristine hematite photoanodes.
 Fig. 5  (a) LSV curves of the fabricated electrodes along with pristine hematite and HPa (inset). (b) ABPE% plots of the fabricated electrodes along with pristine hematite and HPa (inset). 
Transient photocurrent measurements were made at 1.5 V with the frequency of switching kept at 50 seconds as shown in Fig. 6. The sample SPa showed the highest photocurrent density as expected of 6.5 mA cm−2, followed by Dip, which showed a photocurrent density of 4.2 mA cm−2, and SwPa, which exhibited a photocurrent density of 1.3 mA cm−2 (Fig. 6a). The nature of growth of the peak currents provides an insight into surface recombination and charge transfer rates. The sluggish electron kinetics, high rates of recombination caused due to crystal defects and dislocations acting as electron traps will result in a gradually increasing current like in the cases of HPa and SwPa, which performed similarly to pristine hematite thereby showing how the effects of annealing and solvent polarity can have a negative impact on photoelectrode performance. High-quality photoelectrodes show a characteristic overshoot when light is switched on, and the current sharply decays when light is switched off. This decay depends on the ratio between ktr and krec, which are the rate constants for charge transfer across the electrode surface and surface recombination, respectively.
 Fig. 6  (a) Transient photocurrent plots of the fabricated photoelectrodes with pristine hematite and HPa (inset). (b) Transient photocurrent intensity fitting part by part for pristine hematite. (c) Transient photocurrent intensity fitting part by part for pristine hematite. 
The following equations can be used:71,72 (1) (2)J(0) is the photocurrent density when the light is switched on at t = 0, and J(∞) is the photocurrent density at steady state. And J(t) is the photocurrent density at time t seconds. τ is the time constant. A larger time constant for decay after overshoot like in samples SPa and Dip indicates lower surface recombination, higher hole flux on the electrode surface, and enhanced charge separation. The top inset and the bottom inset in Fig. 6(b) and (c) show the current density profile when light is switched on for pristine hematite and the sample SPa, respectively. From the inset, it can be observed that a number of trapping processes are taking place during the photoexcitation process. At first, for the sample SPa, there is an overshoot of the current density value at the onset of illumination at t = 0. From there, the current density falls according to an exponential decay process, followed by a logarithmic growth followed by another exponential decay. The peak profile for the pristine sample indicates a slow logarithmic growth followed by an exponential decay followed by another logarithmic growth. Growth and decay of transient photocurrent are heavily influenced by the presence of trap states and, most importantly, trap depth and cross-section of capture. In the case of the pristine sample, instead of a rapid overshoot, there was a slower logarithmic growth of current till a maximum is reached, followed by a local decay. This indicates that krec here is the dominant parameter due to the presence of deep trap states, which get gradually filled up, resulting in slow current growth. On the other hand, upon formation of the heterojunction, rapid charge injection and an increase in charge carrier density result in a higher concentration of free charge carriers compared to trapped ones, thereby compensating for the recombination loss resulting in a rapid overshoot of photocurrent density on the onset of illumination indicating that ktr is the dominating factor. The gradual logarithmic increase after an exponential decay suggests that the trap states are filled up resulting in an increase in photocurrent density till another exponential decay occurs. The sample SPa shows a time constant of 29.35 s while the sample Dip shows a time constant of 21.33 s. Thus, charge separation occurring in SPa is greater than that in Dip resulting in a low rate of decay and increasing the rate of photoelectrode surface reactions. Both the electrodes show a characteristic current overshoot followed by decay indicative of the fact that ktr is the controlling parameter and exceeds krec. In the case of the other samples, growth in current was observed where the current gradually grew to a higher value when the light was switched on. The time constant calculations for the growth process show that SwPa had a time constant of 109.35 seconds, pristine hematite had a time constant value of 142.2 seconds, while HPa had a value of 186.86 seconds. This indicates that both SPa and Dip have enhanced charge separation and low recombination properties compared to the other samples, in accordance with our previous analysis from the XRD and PL spectrum. The sluggish kinetics in SwPa and HPa, when compared to pristine hematite, arises from the fact that a poor morphology and an increase in crystal defects result in the formation of electron trapping sites increasing recombinational losses resulting in krec being the dominating rate constant, thereby resulting in a low hole flux at the semiconductor surface.
EIS measurements were carried out to understand the interfacial charge transport properties of the fabricated photoelectrodes, as shown in Fig. 7. An EIS spectrum is a plot between imaginary resistance and real resistance consisting of two hemispheres, with the first hemisphere indicating the high-frequency region followed by the low-frequency region. The point where the hemisphere cuts the real axis is termed as Rs, which is the photoelectrode sheet resistance. The first hemisphere diameter gives the value of Rct or charge transfer resistance in the space charge region. In contrast, the diameter of the larger hemisphere in the low-frequency region provides the charge transfer resistance between the electrolyte and the electrode. The Randles circuit is shown in Fig. 7 (inset) which was designed according to a two-component ceramic system designed by Shen et al.73,74 CPE denotes the typical phase element, an indicator of capacitance and surface roughness. These parameters were calculated by fitting the EIS data using Z-View Software. Rs for pristine hematite indicated that sheet resistance slightly increased due to the presence of CdS and CoFe2O4 layers as samples Dip and SPa showed Rs values of 22.3 Ω and 24.17 Ω, respectively. HPa showed the highest Rs value of 44.11 Ω, even higher than that of SPa in the absence of illumination, indicating that morphology and band alignment play a vital role in influencing the surface conductivity of a photoelectrode. Rct1 obtained for SPa was the lowest (42.4 Ω) and it was the highest in HPa (273.4 Ω). Dip showed a Rct1 value of 57.6 Ω, indicating that charge transfer resistance in the space charge region for Dip is more excellent than for SPa, according to the previous observations. From the given values of Rct, the hole flux on the electrode surface can be measured from the current growth and decay measurements done from the transient photocurrent plots. For electrodes with a very high degree of hole flux, the electrode surface reactions are dominated by ktr, which can be calculated from eqn (9)71,72 (3)
 Fig. 7  EIS spectra of the fabricated electrodes. 
Hole flux Jh, ktr and krec can be found from the following equations:71,72,75,76 (4) (5) (6)kB is Boltzmann's constant with a value of 1.385 × 10−23 J K−1, q is the charge of an electron with value 1.602 × 10−19 C and Rct is the charge transfer resistance of the high-frequency region obtained from the EIS plot. From the given calculations, Jh for SPa and Dip was obtained to be 7.44 × 1010 and 5.22 × 1010, respectively. The hole flux for the pristine sample was calculated to be 5.76 × 1019. The lowest two-hole flux values were observed for the samples SwPa and HPa where values of 3.77 × 109 and 1.02 × 108 were observed. From eqn (5) and (6), the values for ktr and krec were calculated. The highest ktr was observed for the sample SPa to be 24.68 s−1, and for the pristine sample, it was observed to be 6.76 s−1. For samples Dip, SwPa, and HPa, the values for ktr were calculated to be 19.71 s−1, 4.26 s−1, and 2.73 s−1, respectively. The values of krec for the samples SPa, Dip, and pristine were calculated to be 4.33 s−1, 6.15 s−1, and 3.46 s−1, respectively. For the samples SwPa and HPa, the krec values were calculated to be 2.83 s−1 and 2.31 s−1, respectively. The ratio between ktr and krec gives the nature of electron transport. A high value of this ratio indicates a low rate of recombination, whereby the overall rate is dominated by the rate of charge transport at the electrode–electrolyte interface. In contrast, a low value indicates a transport process dominated by recombination. For the samples SPa, Dip, SwPa, HPa, and pristine, this ratio was 5.69, 3.17, 1.46, 1.18, and 1.95, respectively. These results indicate that the formation of the ternary heterojunction drastically reduces recombination by increasing charge separation resulting in an electron transport pathway with the least recombination, leading to rapid electrode/electrolyte kinetics dominated by the rate of charge transfer across the interface. This explains the large overshoot of current, which was observed in the transient photocurrent plots. This value gradually decreases in the case of the pristine sample indicating the superior performance of the heterojunction in reducing recombination. The lowest ratio was observed in sample HPa indicating that the presence of impurities and a poor morphology and band misalignment at the interface drastically hamper electron transport by increasing recombination due to the formation of trap states. These results are in accordance with the PL results as well.
Mott–Schottky plots were acquired to investigate the flat-band potential charge carrier density of the fabricated photoelectrodes. From Fig. 8, the lowest value of the flat-band potential was observed for SPa at 0.37 V, followed by Dip, where a flat band potential of −0.3 V was observed. Pristine hematite had a flat-band potential of 0.51 V (inset top), while SwPa had a flat-band potential of 0.13 V. A shift of the flat band potential after composite heterostructure formation from 0.51 V in pristine hematite to −0.66 V in SPa took place due to materials like CdS and cobalt ferrite, which have much negative band edge values. The formation of a heterojunction has resulted in band alignment resulting in a shift in the flat-band potential. The slope of MS plots provides insight into the charge carrier density or doping density of semiconductors denoted by ND. A small slope is indicative of a high doping density and hence a high concentration of free charge carriers. ND is calculated from the following equation:71,75 (7)where εr is the relative permittivity and d(1/C2)/dV is the M–S plot slope. Here εr was taken to be 80 for hematite. The ND values of SPa were highest at 5.21 × 1019, followed by Dip with an ND value of 2.7 × 1019. An order of 102 difference was observed for pristine hematite as the doping density values fell to 2.1 × 1017. HPa showed the lowest value of the doping density of 4.51 × 1014. Morphology and synthesis process played a significant role in determining the flat-band potential and doping density of the fabricated electrodes. Electrodes with poor morphology and a large number of crystal defects and impurities resulting in band misalignment causing stunted charge transport and high recombination, like SwPa and HPa, showed the lowest values for free charge carrier density, which is in accordance with our previous observations. The sign of the slope also indicates the p-type and n-type nature of the semiconductor. A negative slope in Fig. 8 inset indicates a p-type nature while a positive slope indicates an n-type character. The sample HPa showed a negative slope indicating that the presence of CoO on the surface has resulted in an increased p-type character causing a downward shift of the Fermi level and band misalignment. A slight curve flattening was observed at a higher negative potential, indicating an increase in ND, suggesting the presence of deep traps that require high negative potentials to overcome. The origin of these tarps can be attributed to the poor morphology and band misalignment resulting in stunted electron transport. An important parameter that is crucial for the performance of semiconductors is the thickness of the space charge region. A reduction in charge carrier density and a decrease in band bending result from a large space charge region. However, the space charge region is a region where recombination is considered negligible, and hence maximum light absorption in this region is preferred. Thus, it is essential for the penetration depth obtained from UV-vis absorption and Wsc, the width of the space charge region, to be comparable. Correspondingly, the space charge region width can be found from the equation71,72 (8)where Δφ is the degree of band bending and is equal to U − Uf, where Uf is the flat-band potential and U is the applied potential. Here, the width of the space charge region is calculated for the potential where the maximum ABPE% was obtained to account for the value under the conditions where maximum efficiency has been achieved. The value of Wsc was found to be 13.34 nm for the sample SPa. The Wsc value for pristine hematite was much larger and was calculated to be 162.94 nm due to the 102 decrease in doping density and causing a reduction band bending. The value of the penetration depth for sample SPa was 108 nm at 500 nm wavelength, which is 94.66 nm larger than the Wsc value of 13.34 nm, while the penetration depth of pristine hematite was 241.7 nm, with the difference from Wsc being 79.7 nm. This indicates that pristine hematite hierarchical nanospheres are slightly more efficient at the utilization of absorbed light due to a greater extent of absorption in the space charge region. This is a limitation of the heterostructure, and more research is required to solve this limitation. Table 1 provides a brief summary of the fabrication techniques and their effect on the photoelectrochemical performance of the photoanodes.
 Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots of the fabricated photoanode samples SPa and Dip with pristine, and SwPa in the top inset and HPa in the bottom inset. 
Table 1 A summary of the synthesis methods and their effect on the photoelectrochemical performance of the fabricated photoanodes




Sample
Fabrication process modification
Morphology
Current density at 1.23 V (mA cm−2)

R
ct (Ω)

N
D


J
h (ccm s−1)

k
tr (s−1)
IPCE%
ABPE%




SPa
Solvothermal growth of porous CoFe2O4 from a pre-deposited and pre-annealed hematite layer by ion impregnation
Porous hierarchical nanosphere arrays
4.17
42.4
5.21 × 1019
7.44 × 1010
24.68
56.57
0.86


Dip
Thermal conversion to CoFe2O4 from hematite by dipping followed by annealing
Smooth nanosphere arrays
3.18
57.6
2.7 × 1019
5.22 × 1010
19.71
50.42
0.56


SwPa
Solvothermal conversion to CoFe2O4 without pre-annealing hematite
Random disordered aggregates
1.54
128.7
1.1 × 1016
3.77 × 109
4.26
32.9
0.11


Pristine
Solvothermally grown hematite using surfactants to develop a uniform hierarchical nanosphere array
Hierarchical nanospheres with distinct nanoplate-like protrusions
0.95
64.7
2.1 × 1017
5.76 × 1019
6.76
13.8
0.05


HPa
Use of water as a solvent (hydrothermal) instead of ethanol during solvothermal conversion to CoFe2O4
Bulk impure agglomerates
0.16
273.4
4.51 × 1014
1.02 × 108
2.73
4.36
0.02




Chronoamperometry has been carried out to analyze photoanode stability. Chronoamperometry (Fig. S7b, ESI†) was conducted at 0.5 V under A.M 1.5G solar illumination. The samples SPa, Dip and pristine showed a considerable degree of stability as initial photocurrent decay was slow and stable photocurrent was retained after 24 hours. SwPa and HPa were highly unstable as the current decay rate was rapid, resulting in a tremendous loss of photocurrent density over the first 12 hours. Band misalignment causing poor charge transfer in HPa could lead to photo corrosion caused due to localized holes causing tremendous electrode degradation. A defect-loaded poor morphology with weak structural rigidity is the prime cause of degradation in SwPa. In order to further assess the stability of the photoanodes, LSV measurements were made in 5 cycles (C1 to C5) of 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 hours during chronoamperometry for the best performing sample SPa and compared with that of pristine and the change in ABPE percentage was recorded (Fig. S7f, ESI†). In the case of sample SPa (Fig. S7d, ESI†), the photocurrent density gradually decreased along with a simultaneous increase in the photo-oxidation onset potential, indicating that the photo corrosion occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interface is responsible for hampering charge transfer kinetics. A gradual decrease in ABPE% was observed from 0.86% initially to 0.78% after the 5th cycle, the duration of which was 11 hours, indicating an ABPE% change of 9.3%. A similar phenomenon was observed in pristine hematite (Fig. S7e, ESI†) where a gradual attenuation of photocurrent density with cycle number was observed alongside an increase in the onset potential. The ABPE% decreased from 0.05% to 0.042% after the 5th cycle resulting in a change of 16%, indicating that the ternary heterojunction has higher stability than the pristine sample.
DFT calculations were carried out to understand the intricate underlying electronic charge transfer processes occurring at the semiconductor heterojunction interface. All DFT calculations were carried out using the PBE functional with GGA+U exchange–correlation and ultrasoft type pseudopotentials.77–80 The band structure and DOS of bulk cubic CdS and CoFe2O4 are provided in the ESI.† CdS was observed to have a direct bandgap of 1.9 eV. In comparison, CoFe2O4 was observed to have both direct and indirect bandgap as expected of values 1.6 eV and 1.2 eV respectively for a U value of 5.4 eV for Co and 4.4 eV for Fe (Fig. S7b and d, ESI†). CoFe2O4 has been modelled to be a completely pure inverse spinel, and no change in spinel inversion was taken into account. Fe2O3 resulted in a bandgap of 2.7 eV, which is slightly higher than the obtained bandgap of 2.14 eV (Fig. 9a). The overestimation of the bandgap in Fe2O3 is a common problem arising from the GGA+U correction and can be resolved by sX-LDA or HSE06 functionals. However to save time and computational cost, this was avoided.63 The Fe2O3(110) facet showed a reduced bandgap of 1.62 eV. There is a very high degree of increase in the overlap between the O atom and Fe atoms in the minority spin region, where there is a noticeable increase in DOS. This indicates enhanced hybridization between Fe 3d and O 2p orbitals suggesting that conductivity is increased due to the super-exchange effect with O atoms along the basal plane of Fe2O3 as suggested by Sivula et al.10,81 The DOS and band structure for bulk cubic CdS are shown in Fig. S7(c) and (a), respectively (ESI†). A significant contribution of the surface terminating O and Fe atoms on the (110) facet to the overall DOS from Fig. 9(c) and (d) indicates the significance of crystal facet tailoring in tuning electronic conductivity. Fig. 9(e) and (f) show the CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 heterostructure band and DOS, the model of which has been provided in Fig. 10(a) along with an electron difference density (EDD) slice colour plot. A drastic decrease in bandgap was observed from 2.7 eV in the case of pristine hematite to 0.87 eV in the case of the heterostructure. The strong overlap between the 3d orbitals of octahedral sites of inverse spinel CoFe2O4 and Fe 3d orbitals in the hematite layer indicates the presence of a strong d–d interaction acting as a charge transfer pathway between the two layers. From Fig. 10(a), a significant amount of charge transfer can be observed between the two layers from EDD plots. Mulliken population analysis was carried out to quantitatively understand the charge transfer magnitude between the heterostructure layers whereby it was observed that −0.39 |e| charge was transferred from the hematite layer to cobalt ferrite via a d–d exchange. From Fig. 10(a), a strong electron density enrichment around the terminating O atoms in the CoFe2O4 layer is observed, indicating the presence of a Co–O–Fe bridge-like charge transfer pathway between the two layers. Fig. 9(g) and (h) indicate the band structure and DOS of the CdS/CoFe2O4 heterostructure, the model of which, along with the EDD colour map, is provided in Fig. 10(b). A reduction in bandgap to 0.73 eV was observed. The strong overlap between the Cd 4d orbitals and the O 2p orbitals suggests a charge transfer pathway between the two layers facilitated by a 4d–2p hybridization between Cd and O. Also, a notable overlap between the S 3p in the CdS layer and Oh site 3d in the CoFe2O4 layer indicates charge transfer resulting from hybridization induced as a result of the polarization of ‘soft’ S atoms by the terminating Co and Fe atoms in the CoFe2O4 layer. Mulliken population analysis showed a transfer of −0.13 |e| from the CdS layer to the CoFe2O4 layer. The EDD plots in Fig. 10(b) show a significant degree of charge transfer from the Cd and S atoms in the CdS layer to the Co, Fe, and O atoms in the CoFe2O4 layer as a significant enrichment of electron density over the terminating O atoms and Oh sites and depletion of electron density around the Cd atoms can be observed.
 Fig. 9  (a) Band structure of bulk hematite. (b) DOS of bulk hematite. (c) Band structure of Fe2O3(110). (d) DOS of Fe2O3(110). (e) Band structure of CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 (f) DOS of CoFe2O4/Fe2O3. (g) Band structure of CdS/CoFe2O4. (h) DOS of CdS/CoFe2O4. 
 Fig. 10  (a) EDD slice of the CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 heterostructure. (b) EDD slice of the CdS/CoFe2O4 heterostructure. 
The effective mass me* of electrons was calculated by standard paraboloid fitting at the band edges. The effective mass me* is related to the effective thermal velocity veff by the following relations:79,82 (9) (10)A high value of veff and a low value of me* indicate higher charge mobility, low recombination rates, higher probability of escaping from trap states, and higher electronic conductivity. The effective mass and effective velocity values were calculated for bulk Fe2O3 (A → X) to be 1.74m0, bulk CdS (K → R) to be 1.64m0, and bulk CoFe2O4 (L → X) to be 1.67m0, and the values were compared with those of the Fe2O3(110) facet (Γ → L), the CdS/CoFe2O4 layered junction (F → Q) and the CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 layered junction (F → Q) which were calculated to be 1.13m0, 1.08m0 and 0.93m0 respectively. It was observed that the effective mass of electrons in the conduction band for the Fe2O3(110) facet was much lower compared to bulk Fe2O3 and the layered junctions showed much lower values of me* compared to the individual bulk materials indicating the increase in charge transfer efficiency in the layered heterojunctions compared to the individual materials. The veff values were calculated for bulk Fe2O3, CdS and CoFe2O4 to be 0.582 × 102 (J kg−1)1/2, 0.608 × 102 (J kg−1)1/2, and 0.646 × 102 (J kg−1)1/2 respectively. The veff values for the Fe2O3(110) facet, the CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 layered junction and the CdS/CoFe2O4 layered junction were calculated to be 0.73 × 102 (J kg−1)1/2, 0.913 × 102 (J kg−1)1/2 and 0.886 × 102 (J kg−1)1/2 respectively. It was observed that the effective mass of electrons decreased and the effective velocity increased in the layered heterostructures compared to bulk samples, indicating enhanced charge transport and low resistance in the heterojunction. An important observation was the lower effective mass and higher effective velocity for the CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 layer compared to the CdS/CoFe2O4 layered junction, indicating better heterojunction formation in the former. According to the DOS plots, a higher overall density of states for the CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 layer and a higher magnitude of charge transfer between the two layers were found, as observed from the Mulliken population analysis.
Ray tracing simulations were carried out to elucidate the importance of nanotexture in photoelectrochemical performance. A textured morphology will have a superior light-absorbing capability due to innumerable internal reflections arising from light trapping by the nanotexture.83–85Fig. 11(a) and (b) show the modeled ternary heterojunction photoelectrodes with a nanosphere array-like texture, subjected to simulation under blue light. The ray-tracing simulation for the textured surface is provided in Fig. 11(c), while that of the planar electrode model in Fig. 11(d) is provided in Fig. 11(e). A drastic difference in overall reflected light ray density can be observed between the two simulations. The textured surface shows a very high extent of internal light ray reflections indicating its superior light-absorbing capability as observed from the UV-vis experiments as absorbance of the fabricated photoanodes decreased with damage caused to the morphology under different synthesis conditions. The probability of the escape plot provided in Fig. 12(b) indicates that the high possibility of light escape is only possible near an angle of incidence of 80° and sharply decreases in all other angles indicating efficient photon trapping. Fig. 12(a) describes the colour map of light absorbance in the textured heterostructure. It can be observed that there is very high light absorbance till 600 nm, after which the absorbance drops, causing a hotspot to persist throughout the film thickness. This is in accordance with the UV-vis experimental results.
 Fig. 11  (a) Model of the photoelectrode textured with nanospheres (diagonal view). (b) Model of the photoelectrode textured with nanospheres (top view). (c) Ray tracing simulation of light in the textured photoelectrode. (d) Model of the planar photoelectrode. (e) Ray tracing simulation of light in the planar photoelectrode. 
 Fig. 12  (a) Colour map of the intensity of photon absorption for the heterostructure. (b) Probability of escape of photon mapping in the heterostructure under illumination. (c) Simulated band diagram of the ternary heterojunction under illumination. (d) Exciton generation rate in the heterostructure. (e) Overall electron transfer pathway illustration. 
Band diagrams and electron transfer pathways were simulated using AFORS-HET software.86 Most previous works have described the electron transfer pathway as an oversimplified model where there is a cascade type electron transfer similar to two Type II junctions working together.87–89 Such a model is an oversimplification of the electron transfer process at the interface of ternary heterojunctions as the position of the Fermi level after equilibration, Fermi level splitting upon illumination, band bending caused by charge transport, and formation of the space charge region across the semiconductor interface all influence the charge transport process. After band diagram simulation, the modelled cell was simulated under illumination to split the Fermi level into quasi levels Fp and Fn to get the band diagram and the requisite band bending caused by charge transfer due to photoexcitation. It can be seen from Fig. 12(c) that there is downward band bending for the cobalt ferrite conduction band and valence band while there is upward band bending for the hematite valence and conduction band indicating a superior heterojunction whereby electrons move from the CB of cobalt ferrite to the CB of hematite and holes move from the VB of hematite to the VB of cobalt ferrite. The situation is a bit more interesting for the CdS layer. Unlike a classical Type II transfer, there is an upward band bending of valence and conduction bands indicating a Z-scheme junction whereby electrons from the CB of CdS annihilate with the holes in the VB of cobalt ferrite, and the holes in the VB of CdS participate in the photo-oxidative OER occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interface as illustrated in Fig. 12(e). Thus, it can be concluded that this ternary heterojunction is formed by a series of Type II–Z scheme junctions together to facilitate a superior charge transfer. In the PL analysis data in Fig. 5(b), additional peaks are observed near the band edge transmission level whose origin is unknown. Band edge hole–electron annihilation caused by the Z-scheme junction can be linked to the origin of the additional peaks. Fig. 12(d) shows the simulated exciton generation rates in the different layers in the heterojunction upon illumination. Compared to CdS–CoFe2O4, the exciton generation rate at the CoFe2O4–Fe2O3 interface is much higher than that of the hematite bulk portion indicating superior light absorption by the junction. Table 2 provides a summary of the comparative performance of hematite-based photoanodes.
Table 2 A summary of performance comparison of hematite based heterostructures for photoelectrochemical water splitting




Photoelectrode material
Electrolyte

J
ph (mA cm−2)
IPCE%
ABPE%
Ref.




Fe2O3/SnO2–TiO2 nanohybrids
1 M NaOH
2.0 at 1.23 V (RHE)
N/A
N/A
Ho Kimura90


CdS/1D Zr:A-Fe2O3/FTO nanorods
0.1 M Na2S + 0.02 M Na2SO3
2.2 at −0.3 V (RHE)
N/A
N/A
Mahadik47


FeFx/F-Fe2O3 nanorods
1 M KOH
2.41 at 1.23 V (RHE)
41.5
N/A
Wang91


WO3@Fe2O3/FeOOH core–shell nanorods
0.2 M Na2SO4
1.12 at 1.23 V (RHE)
N/A
0.32
Zhang92


SrTiO3@TiO2@Fe2O3 nanorods
1 M KOH
0.63 at 1 V (Ag/AgCl)
N/A
0.69
Bashiri93


H treated Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures
0.1 M NaOH
0.215 at 1.23 V (RHE)
65
N/A
Singh94


ZnO/Fe2O3 core–shell nanowires
1 M NaOH
1.5 at 0.6 V (Ag/AgCl)
25
N/A
Hsu95


Cobalt–phosphate–Co3O4/Fe2O3
1 M KOH
2.7 at 1.23 V (RHE)
68
0.43
Yi96


Co(OH)x nanolayer integrated planar WO3/Fe2O3
1 M NaOH
0.32 at 1.23 V (RHE)
20
N/A
Ma21


TiO2/Fe2O3 hierarchical nanostructures
1 M NaOH
1.79 at 1.23 V (RHE)
N/A
N/A
Deng97


G-C3N4/Fe2O3 nanosheets
1 M NaOH
0.8 at 0.23 V (Ag/AgCl)
N/A
N/A
Liu98


N–Si/ITO/α-Fe2O3 Z-scheme heterostructure
1 M NaOH + 0.5 M H2O2
1.98 at 1.23 (RHE)
2.48
0.21
Feng99


α-Fe2O3/NiFe2O4 nanotextured spikes
1 M NaOH
2.1 at 1.23 V (RHE)
N/A
0.206
Hussain40


Mn–Fe2O3 nanorods
1 M NaOH
2.4 at 1.23 V (Ag/AgCl)
25
0.9
Gurudayal100


α-Fe2O3 nanorod/graphene/BiV1−xMoxO4 core/shell heterojunction array
0.01 M Na2SO4
1.97 at 1 V (Ag/AgCl)
N/A
0.17
Hou101


Ti–Fe2O3 mesocystals/Co–Pi
1 M NaOH
3.5 at 1.23 V (RHE)
31
N/A
Zhang59


Tantalum-doped hematite homojunction
1 M KOH
3.22 at 1.23 V (RHE)
32
0.55
Zhang102


α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 heterojunction
1 M KOH
∼1.5 at 1 V (RHE)
20
0.11
Farhoosh103


FTO/Sn–Fe2O3/NiFe2O4 nanorods
1 M NaOH
1.5 at 1.23 V (RHE)
N/A
0.38
Selvaraj104


Cobalt-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorod/MgFe2O4 heterojunction array
1 M NaOH
3.3 at 0.8 V (Ag/AgCl)
N/A
0.72
Hou37


Single-crystalline, wormlike Pt–Fe2O3/Co–Pi
1 M NaOH
4.32 at 1.23 V (RHE)
90
N/A
Kim105


CdS/CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 hierarchical nanosphere arrays
0.5 M Na2S + 0.5 M Na2SO3
4.17 at 1.23 V (Ag/AgCl)
56.57
0.86
This work




6. Conclusions
A low-temperature solvothermal approach has been proposed to enable a facile phase change to generate a morphology modified cobalt ferrite@hematite core–shell heterojunction. (110) oriented hierarchical nanosphere arrays of hematite have been grown on FTO glass substrates by a solvothermal approach followed by partial phase change into cobalt ferrite by a surfactant-assisted impregnation of Co2+ ions into the hematite lattice to generate nanoflower like ordered arrays of the core–shell CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 heterostructure. The effect of annealing and solvent selection on morphology and photoelectrochemical performance has been studied, implying the vital role of reaction conditions. CdS sensitization has been done in order to generate a ternary heterojunction for enhanced charge injection, increased light absorbance, charge separation, and charge carrier density. DFT analysis has been carried out to understand the density of states' contributions of orbital hybridization between different atoms in different sites influencing the charge transfer mechanism between the heterojunction layers. Photovoltaic and ray-tracing simulations provided an insight into the impact of morphology on light absorbance and band alignment in the heterostructure leading to the conclusion that the designed heterojunction is a Z scheme–Type II serial heterojunction. This work demonstrates the importance of a unified experimental process of developing a ternary heterojunction photoanode by a low-temperature solvothermal phase change-induced morphology transformation followed by detailed DFT and other photovoltaic simulation methods for a deeper understanding of the underlying charge transport process influencing its overall band structure, which could be extended to other systems as well like titanates, stannates, vanadates, tungstates, molybdates and a plethora of other photocatalysts in future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India funded project under the MI IC#5 ‘Conversion of Sunlight to Storable fuels’ issued by DBT-DST Joint Funding Opportunity, Central Government of India through Mission Innovation Programme DST(DST/TMD(EWO)/IC5-2018/06(G)) (Subhasis Roy).
References
A. Sartbaeva, V. L. Kuznetsov, S. A. Wells and P. P. Edwards, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 79–85 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maitra, S. Pal, S. Datta, T. Maitra, B. Dutta and S. Roy, Mater. Today, 2021, 39, 1856–1861 CAS .
S. Maitra, A. Sarkar, T. Maitra, S. Halder, S. Roy and K. Kargupta, MRS Adv., 2020, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. Ros, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10625–10669 RSC .
M. Li, X. Tu, Y. Wang, Y. Su, J. Hu, B. Cai, J. Lu, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ghosh, K. Roy, K. Sarkar, P. Devi and P. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28792–28800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Roy, D. Ghosh, K. Sarkar, P. Devi and P. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37218–37226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Tamirat, J. Rick, A. A. Dubale, W. N. Su and B. J. Hwang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 243–267 RSC .
K. Sivula, F. le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sharma, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 157–179 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Wheeler, G. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682–6702 RSC .
A. Tofanello, S. Shen, F. L. de Souza and L. Vayssieres, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 040905 CrossRef CAS .
B. Iandolo, B. Wickman, I. Zorić and A. Hellman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16896–16912 RSC .
L. Wang, C. Y. Lee and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 30, 21–25 CrossRef .
H. Han, S. Kment, F. Karlicky, L. Wang, A. Naldoni, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Small, 2018, 14, 1703860 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Makimizu, N. T. Nguyen, J. Tucek, H. J. Ahn, J. E. Yoo, M. Poornajar, I. Hwang, S. Kment and P. Schmuki, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 2685–2692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Schrebler, L. Ballesteros, A. Burgos, E. C. Muñoz, P. Grez, D. Leinen, F. Martín, J. Ramón Ramos-Barrado and E. A. Dalchiele, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, D500–D505 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Tamirat, W. N. Su, A. A. Dubale, H. M. Chen and B. J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5949–5961 RSC .
X. Mou, X. Wei, Y. Li and W. Shen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5107–5120 RSC .
W. Ma, X. Wu, K. Huang, M. Wang, R. Fu, H. Chen and S. Feng, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2135–2141 RSC .
P. Y. Tang and J. Arbiol, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 1256–1276 RSC .
D. M. Sherman, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1985, 12, 161–175 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Rosso, D. M. A. Smith and M. Dupuis, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 6455–6466 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iordanova, M. Dupuis and K. M. Rosso, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 144305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wickman, A. Bastos Fanta, A. Burrows, A. Hellman, J. B. Wagner and B. Iandolo, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Wang, L. Xiao, X. Chen, X. Ren, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37701–37704 RSC .
M. Fang, G. Dong, R. Wei and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–25 CAS .
H. Chen and S. Yang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 96–108 RSC .
M. E. A. Warwick, K. Kaunisto, D. Barreca, G. Carraro, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, E. Bontempi, C. Sada, T. P. Ruoko, S. Turner and G. van Tendeloo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8667–8676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Marelli, A. Naldoni, A. Minguzzi, M. Allieta, T. Virgili, G. Scavia, S. Recchia, R. Psaro and V. Dal Santo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11997–12004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, J. Yeo, S. Hong, Y. D. Suh, H. Lee, J. H. Choi, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Ju, Y. Toku and Y. Morita, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 0–9 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, M. Wang, T. Zhang, Z. Wang, P. Guo, J. Su and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12594–12602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, H. E. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9447–9482 RSC .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1248–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, X. Zhang and C. Sun, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2018, 28, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hussain, S. Hussain, A. Waleed, M. M. Tavakoli, Z. Wang, S. Yang, Z. Fan and M. A. Nadeem, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35315–35322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hussain, M. M. Tavakoli, A. Waleed, U. S. Virk, S. Yang, A. Waseem, Z. Fan and M. A. Nadeem, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 3555–3564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. McDonald and K. S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4863–4869 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Dutta, S. Sharma, P. Raizada, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei, V. Kumar Gupta and P. Singh, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2019, 23, 1119–1136 CrossRef .

          S. Jauhar, J. Kaur, A. Goyal and S. Singhal, Tuning the properties of cobalt ferrite: A road towards diverse applications,  2016, vol. 6 Search PubMed .
L. Liardet, J. E. Katz, J. Luo, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6012–6020 RSC .
J. A. Nasir, Z. ur Rehman, S. N. A. Shah, A. Khan, I. S. Butler and C. R. A. Catlow, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20752–20780 RSC .
Y. J. Yuan, D. Chen, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11606–11630 RSC .
M. A. Mahadik, A. Subramanian, J. Ryu, M. Cho and J. S. Jang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 2377–2386 RSC .
K. Natarajan, M. Saraf and S. M. Mobin, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 3447–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Li, L. Wang, W. Shen and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4800–4806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Kuang, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Enhanced charge transfer kinetics of Fe2O3/CdS composite nanorod arrays using cobalt-phosphate as cocatalyst, Elsevier B.V.,  2017, vol. 218 Search PubMed .
P. Bindu and S. Thomas, J. Theor. Appl. Phys., 2014, 8, 123–134 CrossRef .
M. Fantauzzi, F. Secci, M. SannaAngotzi, C. Passiu, C. Cannas and A. Rossi, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 19171–19179 RSC .
M. C. Biesinger, B. P. Payne, A. P. Grosvenor, L. W. M. Lau, A. R. Gerson and R. S. C. Smart, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2717–2730 CrossRef CAS .
B. Debnath, S. Parvin, H. Dixit and S. Bhattacharyya, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3875–3886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Holinsworth, D. Mazumdar, H. Sims, Q. C. Sun, M. K. Yurtisigi, S. K. Sarker, A. Gupta, W. H. Butler and J. L. Musfeldt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 2–5 CrossRef .
A. P. Grosvenor, B. A. Kobe, M. C. Biesinger and N. S. McIntyre, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36, 1564–1574 CrossRef CAS .
N. Onojima, M. Higashiwaki, T. Matsui, T. Mimura, J. Suda and T. Kimoto, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2007, 4, 2354–2357 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bharti, S. Kumar, H. Lee and R. Kumar, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, I. Karimata, H. Nagashima, S. Muto, K. Ohara, K. Sugimoto and T. Tachikawa, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Barreca, A. Gasparotto, C. Maragno and E. Tondello, Surf. Sci. Spectra, 2002, 9, 46–53 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mahala, M. D. Sharma and M. Basu, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 7001–7010 RSC .
S. Maitra, S. Halder, T. Maitra and S. Roy, New J. Chem., 2021, 7353–7367 RSC .
B. Pandit, S. S. Karade and B. R. Sankapal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(51), 44880–44891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, Y. Meng, J. Sha, C. Zhong, W. Hu and N. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 34–68 RSC .
K. H. Cho and Y. M. Sung, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 176–185 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ambroz, T. J. Macdonald, V. Martis and I. P. Parkin, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800173 CrossRef .
N. M. Abdul Rashid, C. Haw, W. Chiu, N. H. Khanis, A. Rohaizad, P. Khiew and S. Abdul Rahman, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4720–4732 RSC .
V. R. Akshay, B. Arun, G. Mandal and M. Vasundhara, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 12991–13004 RSC .
T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, 1–11 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. Liu, T. Chen, Z. Li and J. Hao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7370–7373 RSC .

          L. M. Peter, Semiconductor Electrochemistry,  1984, vol. 9 Search PubMed .
Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, ed. H. Frei and L. Berkeley, RSC Energy and Environment Series, 2013.
W.-M. Shen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 107 CrossRef CAS .
H. Han, S. Kment, F. Karlicky, L. Wang, A. Naldoni, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Small, 2018, 14, 1703860 CrossRef .

          S. Gim, J. Bisquert, F. B. Principles and A. Devices, Photoelectrochemical Solar Fuel Production,  2016 Search PubMed .

          D. Dionysiou, G. L. Puma, J. Ye, J. Schneider and D. Bahnemann, Photocatalysis: Applications,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28417–28423 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bandaru, G. Saranya, W. W. Liu and N. J. English, Catal.: Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 1376–1384 RSC .

          F. Opoku, K. Kuben Govender, C. G. C. E. van Sittert and P. Poomani Govender, Charge transport, interfacial interactions and synergistic mechanisms in BiNbO4/MWO4 (M = Zn and Cd) heterostructures for hydrogen production: Insights from a DFT+U study,  2017, vol. 19 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Hou, Y. L. Huang, S. J. Hou, S. C. Ma, Z. W. Liu and Y. F. Ouyang, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2017, 421, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cornuz, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2010, 16, 291–295 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. F. M. Nasir, H. Ullah, M. Ebadi, A. A. Tahir, J. S. Sagu and M. A. M. Teridi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(11), 6218–6228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Z. Yu, N. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Wang, J. Li and Y. Zhang, J. Semicond., 2019, 40, 032301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aeschlimann, T. Brixner, D. Differt, U. Heinzmann, M. Hensen, C. Kramer, F. Lükermann, P. Melchior, W. Pfeiffer, M. Piecuch, C. Schneider, H. Stiebig, C. Strüber and P. Thielen, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 663–668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, P. Chen, Q. H. Fan and G. Hou, Coatings, 2017, 7(12), 236 CrossRef .

          A. Froitzheim, R. Stangl, L. Elstner, M. Kriegel and W. Fuhs, Proceedings of the 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, 2003, vol A, pp. 279–282.
M. A. Mahadik, P. S. Shinde, M. Cho and J. S. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23597–23606 RSC .
J. Fang, L. Xu, Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, S. Cao, Z. Wang, L. Yin, Y. Liao and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8088–8092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Fang, S. Sun and Z. Yu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 684, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ho-Kimura, B. A. D. Williamson, S. Sathasivam, S. J. A. Moniz, G. He, W. Luo, D. O. Scanlon, J. Tang and I. P. Parkin, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 1449–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, S. Wei, F. Li, X. Long, T. Wang, P. Wang, S. Li, J. Ma and J. Jin, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3259–3266 RSC .
J. Zhang, G. Zhu, W. Liu, Y. Xi, D. A. Golosov, S. Zavadski and S. N. Melnikov, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 834, 154992 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bashiri, M. S. Irfan, N. M. Mohamed, S. Sufian, L. Y. Ling, N. A. Suhaimi and M. F. R. Samsudin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 8 Search PubMed .
A. P. Singh, R. B. Wang, C. Tossi, I. Tittonen, B. Wickman and A. Hellman, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 4297–4307 RSC .
Y. K. Hsu, Y. C. Chen and Y. G. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14157–14162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Yi, B. R. Wulan, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Deng, Q. Zhuo and X. Lv, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 835, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. X. Yu and W. de Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 9105–9113 CrossRef CAS .
D. Feng, J. Qu, R. Zhang, X. Sun, L. Zheng, H. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Lu, F. Lu, W. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Cheng and R. Zheng, J. Catal., 2020, 381, 501–507 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gurudayal, S. Y. Chiam, M. H. Kumar, P. S. Bassi, H. L. Seng, J. Barber and L. H. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5852–5859 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, ACS Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, D. Li, W. J. Byun, X. Wang, T. J. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, H. Han, C. Li and J. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Farhoosh, B. Eftekharinia, M. Tayebi, B. K. Lee and N. Naseri, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 550, 149374 CrossRef CAS .
S. Selvaraj, H. Moon and D. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 429, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J. W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nj00864aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication process.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the fabricated electrodes. (b) XPS spectra of Fe 2p. (c) XPS spectra Co 2p. (d) XPS spectra of O 1s.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of (a) pristine hematite hierarchical nanospheres at a low magnification, (b) pristine hematite hierarchical nanospheres at a high magnification, (c) SPa without CdS at a low magnification, (d) SPa without CdS at a high magnification, (e) Dip at a low magnification, (f) SwPa without CdS at a low magnification, (g) Spa at a low magnification, (h) Dip at a high magnification, (i) SPa magnified single nanosphere.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorbance spectra of the fabricated photoanodes. (b) PL spectra of the fabricated photoanodes. (c) PL peak fitting for sample Spa. (d) PL peak fitting for the sample pristine.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) LSV curves of the fabricated electrodes along with pristine hematite and HPa (inset). (b) ABPE% plots of the fabricated electrodes along with pristine hematite and HPa (inset).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Transient photocurrent plots of the fabricated photoelectrodes with pristine hematite and HPa (inset). (b) Transient photocurrent intensity fitting part by part for pristine hematite. (c) Transient photocurrent intensity fitting part by part for pristine hematite.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  EIS spectra of the fabricated electrodes.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots of the fabricated photoanode samples SPa and Dip with pristine, and SwPa in the top inset and HPa in the bottom inset.	 

SPa	Solvothermal growth of porous CoFe2O4 from a pre-deposited and pre-annealed hematite layer by ion impregnation	Porous hierarchical nanosphere arrays	4.17	42.4	5.21 × 1019	7.44 × 1010	24.68	56.57	0.86
Dip	Thermal conversion to CoFe2O4 from hematite by dipping followed by annealing	Smooth nanosphere arrays	3.18	57.6	2.7 × 1019	5.22 × 1010	19.71	50.42	0.56
SwPa	Solvothermal conversion to CoFe2O4 without pre-annealing hematite	Random disordered aggregates	1.54	128.7	1.1 × 1016	3.77 × 109	4.26	32.9	0.11
Pristine	Solvothermally grown hematite using surfactants to develop a uniform hierarchical nanosphere array	Hierarchical nanospheres with distinct nanoplate-like protrusions	0.95	64.7	2.1 × 1017	5.76 × 1019	6.76	13.8	0.05
HPa	Use of water as a solvent (hydrothermal) instead of ethanol during solvothermal conversion to CoFe2O4	Bulk impure agglomerates	0.16	273.4	4.51 × 1014	1.02 × 108	2.73	4.36	0.02

 	Fig. 9  (a) Band structure of bulk hematite. (b) DOS of bulk hematite. (c) Band structure of Fe2O3(110). (d) DOS of Fe2O3(110). (e) Band structure of CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 (f) DOS of CoFe2O4/Fe2O3. (g) Band structure of CdS/CoFe2O4. (h) DOS of CdS/CoFe2O4.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) EDD slice of the CoFe2O4/Fe2O3 heterostructure. (b) EDD slice of the CdS/CoFe2O4 heterostructure.	 
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Model of the photoelectrode textured with nanospheres (diagonal view). (b) Model of the photoelectrode textured with nanospheres (top view). (c) Ray tracing simulation of light in the textured photoelectrode. (d) Model of the planar photoelectrode. (e) Ray tracing simulation of light in the planar photoelectrode.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Colour map of the intensity of photon absorption for the heterostructure. (b) Probability of escape of photon mapping in the heterostructure under illumination. (c) Simulated band diagram of the ternary heterojunction under illumination. (d) Exciton generation rate in the heterostructure. (e) Overall electron transfer pathway illustration.	 

Fe2O3/SnO2–TiO2 nanohybrids	1 M NaOH	2.0 at 1.23 V (RHE)	N/A	N/A	Ho Kimura90
CdS/1D Zr:A-Fe2O3/FTO nanorods	0.1 M Na2S + 0.02 M Na2SO3	2.2 at −0.3 V (RHE)	N/A	N/A	Mahadik47
FeFx/F-Fe2O3 nanorods	1 M KOH	2.41 at 1.23 V (RHE)	41.5	N/A	Wang91
WO3@Fe2O3/FeOOH core–shell nanorods	0.2 M Na2SO4	1.12 at 1.23 V (RHE)	N/A	0.32	Zhang92
SrTiO3@TiO2@Fe2O3 nanorods	1 M KOH	0.63 at 1 V (Ag/AgCl)	N/A	0.69	Bashiri93
H treated Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures	0.1 M NaOH	0.215 at 1.23 V (RHE)	65	N/A	Singh94
ZnO/Fe2O3 core–shell nanowires	1 M NaOH	1.5 at 0.6 V (Ag/AgCl)	25	N/A	Hsu95
Cobalt–phosphate–Co3O4/Fe2O3	1 M KOH	2.7 at 1.23 V (RHE)	68	0.43	Yi96
Co(OH)x nanolayer integrated planar WO3/Fe2O3	1 M NaOH	0.32 at 1.23 V (RHE)	20	N/A	Ma21
TiO2/Fe2O3 hierarchical nanostructures	1 M NaOH	1.79 at 1.23 V (RHE)	N/A	N/A	Deng97
G-C3N4/Fe2O3 nanosheets	1 M NaOH	0.8 at 0.23 V (Ag/AgCl)	N/A	N/A	Liu98
N–Si/ITO/α-Fe2O3 Z-scheme heterostructure	1 M NaOH + 0.5 M H2O2	1.98 at 1.23 (RHE)	2.48	0.21	Feng99
α-Fe2O3/NiFe2O4 nanotextured spikes	1 M NaOH	2.1 at 1.23 V (RHE)	N/A	0.206	Hussain40
Mn–Fe2O3 nanorods	1 M NaOH	2.4 at 1.23 V (Ag/AgCl)	25	0.9	Gurudayal100
α-Fe2O3 nanorod/graphene/BiV1−xMoxO4 core/shell heterojunction array	0.01 M Na2SO4	1.97 at 1 V (Ag/AgCl)	N/A	0.17	Hou101
Ti–Fe2O3 mesocystals/Co–Pi	1 M NaOH	3.5 at 1.23 V (RHE)	31	N/A	Zhang59
Tantalum-doped hematite homojunction	1 M KOH	3.22 at 1.23 V (RHE)	32	0.55	Zhang102
α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 heterojunction	1 M KOH	∼1.5 at 1 V (RHE)	20	0.11	Farhoosh103
FTO/Sn–Fe2O3/NiFe2O4 nanorods	1 M NaOH	1.5 at 1.23 V (RHE)	N/A	0.38	Selvaraj104
Cobalt-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorod/MgFe2O4 heterojunction array	1 M NaOH	3.3 at 0.8 V (Ag/AgCl)	N/A	0.72	Hou37
Single-crystalline, wormlike Pt–Fe2O3/Co–Pi	1 M NaOH	4.32 at 1.23 V (RHE)	90	N/A	Kim105
CdS/CoFe2O4@Fe2O3 hierarchical nanosphere arrays	0.5 M Na2S + 0.5 M Na2SO3	4.17 at 1.23 V (Ag/AgCl)	56.57	0.86	This work
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nj00864a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
