Printing approaches to inorganic semiconductor photocatalyst fabrication  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA00888H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA00888H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10858-10878Printing approaches to inorganic semiconductor photocatalyst fabrication

        
          
            Donia 
            Friedmann
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Adam F. 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Karen 
            Wilson
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rouhollah 
            Jalili
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Rachel A. 
            Caruso
          
          
        
      a
aSchool of Science, College of Science, Engineering and Health, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia. E-mail: donia.friedmann@rmit.edu.au; adam.lee2@rmit.edu.au
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, UNSW 2031, Australia
Received 
      24th January 2019
    , Accepted 10th April 2019First published on 11th April 2019AbstractPrinting approaches to inorganic semiconductor photocatalyst fabrication potentially offer a simplified path to realising designer photocatalytic systems tailored to applications including water and air remediation, chemical synthesis, and renewable energy. Monoliths with controlled geometries, self-supporting foams, and microreactors, optimised for mass and photon transfer, unlock opportunities for improved photocatalytic efficiencies with better utilisation of low-abundance elements and energy resources. From a materials perspective, minimising material wastage through simplified single (or few) step fabrication processes is attractive for commercial exploitation. This review discusses conventional and emerging printing technologies and their application to photocatalytic materials and systems, highlighting key achievements and remaining knowledge gaps and challenges. Inkjet and extrusion printing are promising candidates for the fabrication of 3D patterned photocatalytic systems, although formulation aspects require further development. Printed photocatalytic foams are particularly interesting for the one-step fabrication of self-supporting photocatalysts. Further work is necessary to better understand and measure mass and photon transfer in complex 3D printed structures, wherein computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modelling may play an important role.Donia FriedmannDr Donia Friedmann is a Chemical Engineer (PhD) having completed her undergraduate and postgraduate studies at School of Chemical Engineering at UNSW in Sydney, Australia in 1996 and 2000 respectively. She is currently working as a researcher at the School of Chemistry at RMIT in Melbourne, Australia. Her research focus has predominately been on photocatalysis for the removal of organic and inorganic pollutants from contaminated water, as well as photocatalyst synthesis and characterisation. Her research encompasses nanoparticle synthesis, materials science, photochemistry and environmental chemistry and aims to better understand the role of material properties in photocatalytic activity.Adam F. LeeAdam Lee is Professor of Sustainable Chemistry in the School of Science at RMIT University, having previously held Chair appointments at Cardiff, Warwick, Monash, and Aston universities in parallel with an EPSRC Leadership Fellowship. His research addresses the rational design of nanoengineered materials for clean catalytic technologies, focusing on the production of sustainable chemicals and fuels, and the development and application of in situ methods to provide molecular insight into surface reactions, for which he was awarded the 2011 McBain Prize of the Society of Chemical Industry and 2012 Beilby Medal and Prize by the Royal Society of Chemistry.Karen WilsonKaren Wilson is Professor of Catalysis at RMIT University, and was previously a Chair in Catalysis and Research Director in the European Bioenergy Research Institute at Aston University, where she also held a Royal Society Industry Fellowship. Her research interests lie in the design of heterogeneous catalysts for clean chemical synthesis, particularly the design of tunable porous materials for sustainable biofuels and chemicals production from renewable resources. She was educated at the Universities of Cambridge and Liverpool, and following postdoctoral research at Cambridge and the University of York, held academic appointments at York and Cardiff universities.Rouhollah JaliliDr. Rouhollah Jalili is an ARC DECRA Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering at UNSW, Sydney. He was the recipient of Vice Chancellor's Postdoctoral Fellow from RMIT University in 2017 and graphene development fellowship from ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science in 2015. His earlier research was the development of liquid crystalline-based scaffold electrode using industrially scalable techniques such as wet-spinning and 3D printing for energy storage & conversion, electrocatalysis, and bionic applications. Currently, he is utilizing biomimetic systems for tailor-making and self-oriented structures for environmental electrochemical conversion of nitrogen to ammonia.Rachel CarusoProf. Rachel Caruso, Director of the Enabling Capability Platform for Advanced Materials and Professor of Physical Chemistry at RMIT University, studied at The University of Melbourne, Australia, and has worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany, and The University of Melbourne. Her research has focused on controlling the structure of inorganic materials during their synthesis. By careful control of the porosity and ensuring high surface area, the materials have been applied in dye-sensitised and perovskite based solar cells, lithium ion batteries, photocatalysis and as heavy metal adsorbents.
1. Introduction
Global concerns regarding energy availability and security and anthropogenic climate change (highlighted at the recent COP24 summit) are driving intensive research of renewable energy sources. However, the current contribution of renewables to total energy consumption is only 18.3%.1 Accelerated implementation of more efficient and sustainable energy sources, such as natural gas, wind, hydro, wave, biomass, and solar energy, could dramatically improve the environmental footprint of transport, manufacturing, and residential sectors,2,3 and mitigate anthropogenic pollution of planetary ecosystems to the detriment on human health. It is estimated that 5 million people per annum die from air pollution,4 with water, air, soil remediation industries valued around $US1000 billion.5 Alternative solutions to low cost and distributed environmental remediation are therefore sought, that minimise energy and chemical consumption, and sludge production.
Automotive catalytic pollution abatement systems alone represent a $20 billion per annum industry that has dramatically improved human health.4 Photocatalysis offers new and timely opportunities for renewable energy generation, environmental remediation, and ‘green’ chemical synthesis. As a technology for environmental remediation, photocatalysis has been the subject of intensive academic and industrial research for over 30 years. As an approach to organic synthesis, photocatalysis continues to see a surge of activity. The current state of the art is a demonstrated proof of concept for several organic transformations, whereby the versatility and flexibility of this approach have been shown,6 although further selectivity improvements are required (given the non-selective nature of the radical driven reactions). Niche applications include photoinduced radical polymerisation reactions7 and the selective oxidation of alcohols and hydrocarbons,8 significant for pharmaceutical and fine chemical industries. The development of heterogeneous photocatalytic environmental remediation routes, as well as chemical synthesis routes which utilise solar irradiation as an energy source, are examples of atom and energy efficient green chemistry.
While much progress has been made in terms of fundamental understanding of photocatalyst activation and the mechanisms of molecular degradation, a reliance on artificial UV irradiation has meant that this technology remains too expensive to implement.9 Photocatalysis has proven most effective for treating low concentrations of toxic organic pollutants in wastewater streams.10 A few niche commercial applications include photocatalytic air purification using e.g. PRO-Cell™ PCO Technology,11 or large-scale water treatment by Panasonic's photocatalytic water purification technology.12 Panasonic's depollution system can utilise visible light and achieves a high photocatalytic surface area by binding TiO2 electrostatically onto a zeolite framework, however, in common with all solar driven technologies it remains limited by the intermittent nature of sunlight, and the reliance on electrostatic adhesion could compromise the photocatalyst mechanical integrity.
Research on photocatalysis as an environmental remediation alternative technology remains strong, with a focus on: (i) developing visible light activated photocatalysts; (ii) improvements in reactor design to address the inherently slow reaction kinetics and scale-up; and (iii) improvements to the morphology and distribution of photocatalysts to improve light scattering and/or water permeation. Advances in these areas will enable solar driven photocatalytic air/water remediation to compete with advanced oxidation processes such as direct UV (UV/H2O2) irradiation and ozonolysis, and direct trapping over e.g. activated carbons.13
Commercial application of photocatalytic processes to environmental remediation or organic synthesis has stimulated research into microfluidic reactors which can offer rapid evaluation of reaction kinetics and operating conditions pertinent to subsequent scale-up. Microfluidic reactors can also offer excellent control over chemical reactions due to their excellent heat transfer, high surface area:volume ratios, and reduced amounts of hazardous chemicals relative to conventional reactors. For catalytic systems, scale-up to a 2 L microreactor, sufficient to cater for the lower end of fine chemicals production, has been demonstrated.14 Even at such modest scales, microreactors find relevance for photocatalytic organic synthesis and photocatalytic air purification. Microfluidic systems have the added advantage of excellent light penetration throughout most of the (typically few hundred microns deep) reactor channels.15
In summary, heterogeneous photocatalytic processes can be utilised for a range of applications that may be potentially driven by renewable energy. Photocatalytic processes for water and air purification16–18 and photocatalytic organic synthesis6,8 are the subject of recent reviews, while the design of photocatalytic nanomaterials19 and development of visible light photocatalysts20 have also been extensively reviewed. Nakata and Fujishima21 have discussed at length the structural design of TiO2 photocatalysts with regards to the influence of dimensionality on application, noting the high surface area of spheres, high energy facets of 1-D fibres, excellent adhesion properties of 2D structures and utility as self-cleaning surfaces, and the interconnectedness of 3D structures and their advantages for purification applications.
Scalable photocatalytic 3D structures are of interest, with additive manufacturing (AM) having tremendous potential to bring photocatalytic driven processes to commercial reality. AM has been reviewed for thermal catalytic systems,22 however the requirements of photocatalytic systems are different since in addition to chemical mass transport to active sites, the photon flux must also be maximised (e.g. through increasing the absorbing surface area and the use of transparent supports). Photocatalytic reactions are usually performed at ambient conditions, and hence do not require materials that can withstand high temperature and/or pressure, although they should exhibit excellent UV and chemical stability. Das et al.23 and Heggo et al.24 reviewed microreactors for photocatalytic applications, while Yusuf et al.25 presented an overview on the use of graphene derivatives in photocatalytic microfluidic reactors. Zhakeyev et al.26 reviewed AM for energy materials, however photocatalysis was not their focus.
This review focuses on the use of 3D fabrication techniques for producing 3D photocatalyst structures and for photoreactor design as these approaches offer great potential as scalable fabrication techniques. We focus on technologies relevant to photocatalytic materials in particular 3D printing technologies which include both inkjet and extrusion printing. Extrusion printing offers specific advantages for photocatalytic systems in terms of extending the range of supports that can be utilised (flexible and transparent supports), contributing to the development of self-supporting photocatalyst microchannel reactors (through a single-step fabrication process), and contributing to the development of self-supporting monolithic photocatalysts (especially foams). TiO2 continues to be the most widely utilised photocatalyst and has so far received the most attention for 3D printing studies, however, especially for foam type reactors, graphitic materials may prove to be significant in providing a solution to achieving visible light driven photocatalysis while contributing to improved mechanical strength. The use of LED lights and optical fibre irradiation will also be touched upon as cheaper, efficient alternative irradiation sources whose miniaturisation is necessary for microfluidic reactors.
The review is structured in two main sections. In the first section, typical photocatalytic materials and their supports are reviewed to give a background on the material properties and configurations that need to be achieved with printing, and the type of materials that need to be handled. Photoreactor design and common photoreactor configurations are also discussed. In the second section 3D printing techniques that are relevant to photocatalytic systems are reviewed. This is followed by concluding remarks.
2. Photocatalytic materials and photoreactor design
There are various options available to 3D print photocatalytic materials. When considering which technology to apply, one must first consider reaction engineering requirements for a versatile photocatalytic system in terms of material (photophysical) and catalytic (chemical) efficiencies, and operational requirements, which are all influenced by photoreactor design. A printing technology can be used to alter the material properties (composition, phase, surface area, porosity etc.) as well as the overall structure of the photocatalyst (e.g. self-supporting monolithic, photocatalytic film, and microchannel photoreactors). The potential for scale-up, which determines achievable reaction volumes and reactant throughput/productivity, is also important. As mentioned earlier, a scaled-up catalytic microreactor has been demonstrated for a 2 L reaction volume.14 Based on this reaction volume, the use of microreactors for photocatalytic applications may be most suited for photocatalytic organic synthesis and air purification applications. For water treatment applications, considering the larger volumes of water that need to be treated, photocatalytic films (for example, falling film reactors containing thin films or thin films deposited on scaffolds) would be most suitable for a scaled-up continuous flow process. The following sections consider different printing technologies and their suitability for photocatalytic applications. A brief description of typical photocatalytic materials and their morphology, and photoreactor designs, is first provided.
2.1 Photocatalytic materials
Photocatalysts are semiconductor materials. A simplified sequence of a photocatalytic reaction is shown in Fig. 1. Activation of a photocatalyst involves irradiation of the semiconductor with photons whose energies can excite an electron from the valence band to the conduction band, creating an electron/hole pair (e−/h+), whereby the h+ is oxidising, and the e− reducing. Both photogenerated charge carriers (e− and h+) can participate in reactions leading to e.g. the degradation of recalcitrant organic compounds, synthesis of organic molecules, or the reduction of heavy metal ion contaminants. Photocatalytic reactions are generally driven by radical species and are dominated by hydroxyl (OH˙) and superoxide radicals (O2−˙) arising from the reaction of h+ and e− respectively with water. Pollutants strongly adsorbed to the photocatalyst can also react directly with photogenerated h+ or e− at the semiconductor interface. A good understanding of photocatalytic systems with regards to materials requirements, and reaction kinetics and mechanisms has emerged for small molecule chemistry in recent years.27 From a materials perspective, TiO2 photocatalysts exhibit low quantum efficiencies and limited visible light absorption. From a chemical reaction perspective, the kinetics of heterogeneous photocatalysis are slow, especially for multi-electron processes such as CO2 reduction to hydrocarbons.28,29 The rate-limiting step is system dependent, for example oxidation of organic pollutants is typically controlled by O2−˙ formation, while CO2 reduction is rate-limited by formation of the CO2˙− radical anion. Transport of charge carriers to the catalyst surface and then to/from adsorbates may also be rate limiting, competing with bulk and surface recombination.
 Fig. 1  Activation on an intrinsic semiconductor photocatalyst (depicted as blue circle) for water splitting. VB = valence band, CB = conduction band, h+ = hole, e− = electron, hν = energy of a single photon of frequency ν. The bandgap is the energy difference between VB and CB that needs to be overcome for activation. Lightning bolt indicates photocatalyst irradiation. If the photon energy exceeds the bandgap then photoexcitation of an e− from the VB to CB occurs, leaving a h+ in the VB. The e− and h+ may both participate in redox reaction with molecules in close proximity to the semiconductor surface. 
Several reviews discuss the properties and state-of-the-art of photocatalytic materials.19,30–34 From a materials perspective, general requirements of a photocatalyst are chemical inertness, mechanical stability, and cost. Electronic properties of the semiconductor are critical to their photocatalytic performance, notably the bandgap (energy difference between the valence and conduction bands), valence and conduction band edge energies, the presence of impurities, ion dopants, metal dopants, and other defects which affect electron and hole separation, charge carrier trapping and recombination following photoexcitation. Here, ion doped semiconductors and composite (hetero-structured) systems are of interest,35,36 as are metal doped semiconductors with Pt, Au, and Ag as co-catalysts. Metal deposits can enhance light absorption (due to plasmonic effects under visible light irradiation) and improve charge carrier lifetime (acting as electron traps to separate electrons from an activated photocatalyst due to the existence of a Schottky barrier at the metal–semiconductor junction). Hybrid photocatalysts (specifically graphene-based hybrids) are receiving increased attention.37 Hetero-structured photocatalysts are designed to absorb and be activated by lower energy photons with the aim of extending photocatalyst response into the visible region and improving charge carrier separation and charge lifetime.25 A schematic of charge carrier transfer between two semiconductors at a hetero-junction is presented in Fig. 2. This schematic shows a staggered gap (type II) heterojunction. Type (II) heterojunctions are useful for photocatalytic reactions for two reasons: (i) they permit charge carrier separation with the h+ being on one side of the junction and the e− on the other side; and (ii) they can be used to sensitise a wide band gap semiconductor (semiconductor 1) with a narrow band gap semiconductor (semiconductor 2) to allow for photocatalytic system activation by lower energy photons (compare bandgap 2 with bandgap 1).
 Fig. 2  Charge transfer at a heterojunction of two semiconductors with visible light activation of sensitiser (semiconductor 2) in a type (II) semiconductor heterojunction and charge transfer to semiconductor 1. 
For hetero-structured systems, Dai et al.38 distinguished between two heterojunction configurations, planar and bulk as shown in Fig. 3. Planar heterojunction structures (Fig. 3a) are rarely reported in photocatalysis, providing better charge carrier conduction for photoelectrochemical systems, while bulk heterojunctions (Fig. 3b) offer superior e− and h+ separation. Su et al.39 reported on a nanostructured WO3/BiVO4 hetero-junction for photoelectrochemical water splitting. The WO3 film comprised nanorod arrays, with the BiVO4 subsequently deposited by spin coating (Fig. 3c). This nanorod array film exhibited significant improvements for photoelectrochemical water splitting over planar film heterojunctions.
 Fig. 3  Hetero-junction geometries: (a) planar, (b) bulk and (c) planar nanorod array ((a) and (b) were adapted from Dai et al.,38 while (c) was adapted from Su et al.39). 
TiO2 is the most widely used semiconductor photocatalyst. Other potentially useful materials include ZnO, WO3, pervoksites (SrTiO3 is the most promising31), Ag-based oxides (especially Ag3PO4 (ref. 31)) and metal sulfides such as CdS, Bi2S3, ZnS and MoS2.19 Graphitic carbon nitride, g-C3N4 (ref. 40 and 41) and ternary oxides such as InTaO3, InNbO4, and InVO4 (ref. 42) have been identified as potential sensitisers for TiO2 due to favourable positioning of the respective valence and conduction bands of sensitiser and photocatalyst. Graphene oxide as a metal-free, 2D material, with a high surface area, small bandgap (2.7 eV) and high electron mobility has received considerable recent attention from the photocatalytic community.37 For all these materials, it is vital to consider their (photo)chemical stability as well as potential leaching and toxicity, especially important for water treatment applications.31
Photocatalyst surface properties, such as the degree of hydroxylation, are also important since they affect hydroxyl radical formation, and adsorption/desorption of reactants and products. Particle size and morphology determine the available surface area over which reactions can occur and are interlinked with porosity (of photocatalyst particles or films) which influences light and chemical transport to the photocatalyst surface. It is important to note that reaction conditions, in particular pH which affects surface properties by affecting the degree of hydroxylation and particle agglomeration, the latter being a function of particle surface charge (zeta potential). This in turn affects light scattering and the extent of light penetration and attenuation. Particle and film porosities also influence photon behaviour in a photocatalytic system. Finally, the crystalline phase and exposed facets of a semiconductor are important as these affect electronic properties and surface energies, and hence the energies of the photocatalyst.34
2.2 Photocatalytic support materials
Various substrates have been used as photocatalytic supports. For strength and rigidity, ceramic supports are advantageous compared to polymeric supports, while metallic supports for monolithic and microchannel photoreactors are difficult to coat with photocatalytically active material. The perfect support for a heterogeneous photocatalytic system would offer UV-vis transparency, chemical stability, and structural strength, while allowing for efficient mass transport of reactants and products (in gas and liquid phases) to and from the photocatalyst; the latter aspect is especially important, and oft-neglected, for bulky organic pollutants. In the case of non-transparent supports in microchannel photoreactors, it is not possible to produce reactor modules by stacking, as is done using metallic supports for catalytic microfluidic reactor systems. As such, there is a gap in photocatalytic reactor scale-up. Innovative approaches are required for solar illumination (including the use of optical fibres) of different photoreactor geometries, and in the use of porous and high aspect ratio materials. For artificial illumination, cheaper LED light sources and reliance on optical fibres may offer solutions. The use of optical fibres may provide a solution as applied in internally illuminated monolith reactors24,43–45 as it enhances the uniformity and distribution of the UV light within a given reaction volume and allows for the remote delivery of light. The use of optical fibres to alleviate photon transfer limitations in photocatalytic reactors is an active area of research. Exceptional quantum yields have been reported when using optical fibres, however these decrease with increased light intensities.46 Optical fibres can be used in their pristine forms or coated with a photocatalytic layer. In general, optical fibre usage is limited by the length over which light can be transmitted (for pristine fibres) or light can propagate to (for coated fibres), which is a function of both optical fibre material (coating type and thickness) and light wavelength.45,47 This restricts possible reactor geometries which rely on optical fibre irradiation. For instance, for TiO2 coated fibres, a value of 99% refraction after 10 cm was reported by Van Gerven et al.,47 and Lin and Valsaraj et al.45 reported light extinction after 5 cm. For pristine uncoated layers, reactor design is limited by the degree of transmittance (due to light propagation). Van Gerven et al.47 reported a value of 40% after 20 cm.
For films and photocatalyst supported monoliths, adhesion and control over porosity and accessible surface area are challenging photocatalyst synthesis parameters. Light transport through such systems is also an important design parameter. UV absorption in polymers mainly arises from electronic excitation and depends on the chemical structure of the monomer.48 Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) is the most transparent of polymers in the visible region,48 while poly-dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is also transparent. Polystyrene (PS) suffers from chromophore formation and yellowing under UV illumination. For polyvinylchloride (PVC)–TiO2 films, UV radiation is 90% attenuated after 20 μm, whereas visible light penetration can be an order of magnitude deeper (200 μm), depending on the TiO2 content;49 Sauer and Ollis50 report 99% light absorption by a 4.5 μm thick TiO2 coating. Light transport is also dependent on the type of photocatalyst, for example, rutile scatters 40% more light than anatase.49 Quantifying light transport in miro-fabricated reactors is also a challenging task hampering the use of light sensors, however, actinometry methods (such as 2-nitrobenzaldehyde actinometry) may provide requisite information on radiant power within photocatalyst structures, as demonstrated by Marinho et al.51 for a monolithic tubular reactor.
A wide variety of polymeric materials have been used as supports for photocatalytic applications, including polyethylene,52 PS,53 polyethylene terephthalate (PET)54 and PVC.55 Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) was used by Skorski et al.56 Castedo et al.57 fabricated PDMS microreactors. PDMS is optically clear but absorbs UV light and is often used as a photocatalytic support due to its chemical inertness, although it does swell on contact with non-polar solvents (e.g. hydrocarbons, toluene, and dichloromethane).58 Applications which require such solvents, for example some photocatalytic organic syntheses cannot therefore employ PDMS in either photocatalyst or photoreactor construction. The optically transparent polymer allyhydridopolycarbosilane (AHPCS) was used by Yoon et al.59 to fabricate microreactors, while Ramos et al.60 investigated the application of UV transparent perfluoroalkoxy alkane (PFA) microtubes as supports for TiO2 photocatalysts. Colmenares et al.61 used copolymer tubing of tetrafluoroethlene and hexafluoropropylene (FEP) in their photoreactor. Although fluoropolymers are chemically inert and UV transparent, they suffer from poor adhesion, rendering traditional coating processes, such as sol–gel, ineffective without prior surface modification.60 As mentioned earlier, the enhanced degradation of polymers in contact with photocatalysts is an issue in such systems; poly(butylene succinate) (PBS) degradation by TiO2 photocatalysts was observed by Miyauchi et al.62
2.3 Photocatalyst and photoreactor design
In common with thermocatalytic reactions, mass transport considerations are also important in photoreactor design, and a strong function of the catalyst morphology and flow rate. Specific to photocatalysis there is the need to consider light penetration to enable the highest photon utilisation for photocatalyst activation. Photocatalytic reactors are generally classified based on how the photocatalyst is situated with the reactor, either as a slurry or immobilised type. For batch operated water purification, slurry photoreactors are most relevant, although such systems require a post-reaction separation step, which can be cumbersome and hinders scale-up. For flow operated photoreactors (continuous, semi-continuous, or recirculating), efficiency improvements can be achieved through high area thin film photocatalysts. Batch photoreactors may be better suited to wastewater treatment while modular flow systems may be superior for photocatalytic organic synthesis. Immobilised photocatalysts circumvent the need for a separation step, but at the expense of poorer mass transport than for slurry reactors. Packed bed reactors (utilising pellets or beads) may suffer significant pressure drops and limited light access across the catalytic zone. Photocatalytic films and monoliths have received the most attention for commercial applications.
Thermal and photocatalytic microreactors offer ‘on demand’ production, smaller reactor footprints, and scale-up of kinetic parameters, and improvements in process control (temperature, pressure, and flow) and the opportunity to adopt a modular design.14,23,63 Conversely microreactors may incur fast O2 depletion for high activity photocatalysts, energy intensive product removal (for solid phase organic synthesis), and issues surrounding structural robustness, ease of maintenance, and challenging low cost and facile fabrication.63 Microreactors include packed beds, microchannel (microchip), and micro-monolithic types. Packed bed reactors are common, but as noted above provide poor mass transport and low photon efficiencies, although narrow packed bed reactors can overcome irradiation issues.64 Micro-monolithic reactors are usually formed inside pipes, columns, or channels, and different monolith geometries are available including cylindrical, disc-like, rectangular, and spiral-like.25 Porous or multichannel materials such as honeycomb shaped monoliths have gained interest where good contact is required between gases and the photocatalyst with minimal pressure drops.65
Microchannel reactors provide for the catalyst component and fine control over reactant flow.66 They have high surface to volume ratios, superior mass and heat transfer rates to conventional packed bed reactors, good laminar flow, small molecular diffusion distances, more homogeneous spatial illumination, and good light penetration throughout the catalyst bed.25,67 Das et al.'s review on photomicroreactors23 examined various fabrication methods for microchannel reactors. Lithographic fabrication techniques are most common, with fewer reactors created by extrusion printing (Table 1). Yusuf et al.25 reviewed graphene-based materials in microfluidic photoreactors, which are potential efficient visible light photocatalysts, but which have yet to be exploited.
Table 1 Summary of microchannel type photocatalytic reactors and their fabrication methods (adapted from Das et al.23)




Fabrication technique
Materials
Photocatalyst used




Soft lithography
PDMS
ZnO, TiO2


Casting and replicating
PDMS
TiO2


CO2 laser technique
PMMA, flat stainless steel plate
TiO2


Molding technology
PDMS
TiO2


Microcapillary
Silica
TiO2


Stereolithography
Epoxy resin
TiO2


UV lithography
Glass
TiO2


Self assembly technique
Slica glass
TiO2/SiO2


Direct write laser lithography
Soda-lime glass
TiO2


UV imprinting lithography
Glass
TiO2


Micromilling
Quartz
TiO2


High-precision milling
Metal-titanium foil, ceramic
TiO2




3. Printing approaches for photocatalyst and photoreactor fabrication
3.1 Introduction
AM enables the production of structured catalytic materials and has the potential to close the gap between discoveries and manufacturing by providing an effective path to favourable device cost and performance.22,66,68 AM enables the fabrication of strong, self-supporting architectures that can be designed from digital models66 with several degrees of freedom, including type of printed materials, type of supports and structural dimensions to achieve on demand patterned shapes.68 Hence, AM offers great advantages compared to conventional technologies for the preparation of nanostructured and miniaturised materials, in particular process flexibility, speed of production, cost and ease of scale-up. Conventional AM fabrication methods include self-assembly, chemical vapour deposition and templating approaches.66 For microreactor fabrication, AM technologies are competing with well-developed batch and mass-production inscription techniques such as hot embossing, laser ablation, micromachining or chemical etching.68 AM techniques for microreactor fabrication allow a level of design freedom that is not currently available with existing fabrication methods.68 Additionally, when comparing advanced AM technologies to subtractive manufacturing and conventional AM technologies, a significant reduction in material wastage is achievable. For example, while spin coating methods use 1–2% of the material to be deposited, ink-jet printing uses 98%, with minor waste originating from the print head during purge cycles.69
AM covers a wide range of technologies in which parts are built layer-by-layer by extrusion, ink jetting, powder sintering or photo-polymerisation.68,70,71 The printing techniques best suited for catalyst applications include fused deposition modelling (FDM), photolithography, soft lithography, stereolithography (SLA), selective laser sintering (SLS) and direct ink writing (DIW) where DIW includes inkjet printing, extrusion printing and laminated object manufacturing.66 Lithographie Garbanoforming Abforming, a process that combines lithography, electrochemical technology and moulding, is also used for microreactor fabrication.72 These methods can produce monolithic catalysts and microchannel reactors. They differ in terms of permitted geometries, accuracy, and spatial resolution.68 For catalytic applications, given the typical requirements for high pressure and temperature, stainless steel microreactors are often fabricated, whereas for enzymic microreactors, polymer-based materials and glass reactors are more useful, albeit difficult to produce.72 For photocatalysis, AM techniques that have been used include lithography with growing interest in extrusion printing. For photocatalytic applications, catalyst and reactor design slightly differ to those of thermal catalytic applications due to the former's requirement for UV stable and transparent materials. Here, advances in the use of transparent glass supports (monolithic and microchannel), which are challenging for conventional AM technologies, are discussed. Fig. 4a shows a series of different monolithic type catalysts while Fig. 4b shows a microchannel (chip) reactor with entrained catalyst. Fig. 5 shows the fabrication steps for a porous photocatalytic membrane microreactor studied by Aran et al.73 in which conventional computer numerical control (CNC) milling was used to constructing the microreactor channels.
 Fig. 4  Different photocatalyst constructions: (a) monoliths fabricated from epoxy resin using Nd-YAG laser stereolithography and impregnated with a uniform layer of TiO2 for methanol degradation74 and (b) microchannel (chip) photoreactor fabricated by CO2 laser technique from PMMA and coated with a TiO2 layer 4-nitrophenol (4 NP) degradation75 (reprinted with permission). 
 Fig. 5  Steps involved in the fabrication of a porous photocatalytic microreactor built by Aran et al.73 for phenol and methylene blue degradation as model organic pollutants. FOTS = perfluorinated octyltrichlorosilane. CNC milling = computer numerical control milling (reprinted with permission). 
3.2 Fused deposition modelling
FDM, also known as fused filament fabrication or molten polymer deposition, is a common, relatively inexpensive, extrusion-based 3D printing process. A schematic is shown in Fig. 6. It uses a wire feed system whereby during the printing process, a supply thermoplastic filament (typically 2.85 or 1.7 mm in diameter76) is pushed into a heating chamber where the target material is melted, or semi-molten, and extruded through a nozzle in the print head. The molten material forms layers and then immediately hardens after extrusion from the nozzle, forming layer-by-layer structures based on a computer-aided design (CAD) model.76 There are many FDM printers available on the market at a low price. This technique can be used to fabricate microfluidic or millifluidic devices, as well as moulds for casting PDMS microfluidic devices.76 FDM does not require photopolymers, with the most common materials being inert thermoplastic polymers that include ABS, polycarbonate (PC), polylactic acid (PLA), PC-ABS, polyetherimides such as ULTEM™ and high impact polystyrene (HIPS).66,68 For commercial 3D printers, layer thickness can be controlled to approximately 100 μm and accuracies in the x and y axes within a few hundred μm.66
 Fig. 6  Simplified schematic of FDM fabrication equipment. A thermoplastic filament is fed through the FDM head through rollers and enters a heated liquifying chamber to be extruded in a molten state. The needle tip moves in X–Y directions according to a CAD program to achieve printing on a scaffold on a platform surface which can move in Z-direction. 
FDM-based 3D printed devices may be translucent,76 a property that is useful for photocatalytic applications. The photocatalytic material must be either coated on the FDM printed thermoplastic support material, or alternatively, photocatalytic particles can be incorporated into the polymer matrix. Viskadourakis et al.77 recently reported the first fabrication of nanocomposite polystyrene filaments enriched with ZnO and TiO2 nanoparticles with loadings up to 20 wt%, and the production of 3D photocatalytic structures using a typical FDM-type 3D printer. Printed structures were either flat or rectangular with cylindrical pillars (to provide a larger surface area) as shown in Fig. 7. These structures showed promising photocatalytic performance for methylene blue degradation, achieving 70% dye removal after 5 cycles using TiO2. Photocatalytic efficiency of the cylindrical pillar structures was 32% higher than the flat arrangement. Such structures provide a novel, low-cost route to fabricating large-scale photocatalysts, suitable for practical applications. Disadvantages to this approach include wastage of inaccessible active material encapsulated within the printed polymer. Challenges remain to incorporate photocatalysts into the exterior of a printed polymeric structure. This may be achieved by bringing the polymer to the lower range of its melting temperature, as was demonstrated for TiO2 incorporation into the walls of a PFA tube photoreactor,60 although obtaining a uniform wall coating may prove problematic.
 Fig. 7  CAD designs and corresponding optical micrographs of FDM fabricated photocatalytic nanocomposite polystyrene/ZnO (or TiO2) nanoparticle systems:77 (a) simple rectangular shaped (10 mm × 10 mm × 1 mm) structure, and (b) rectangular structure with cylindrical pillars. Note cylindrical pillars are not uniformly shaped (reprinted with permission). 
3.3 Lithography techniques
Lithography refers to the transfer of a pattern to a substrate. Several lithography techniques are used for AM. Those relevant to photocatalysis, particularly the fabrication of microfluidic reactors, include photo-lithography (UV electron-beam, X-ray lithography), soft lithography, and stereolithography (SLA).23

3.3.1 Photolithography. 
Photolithography is the most common lithography technique, used as a mass production one-step light exposure process, notably in the electronic industry. It involves the patterning of a thin layer of positive or negative photoresist (previously deposited on a substrate by spin coating for example) under irradiation. Patterning is achieved by the passage of light through a patterned optical mask.
Photolithography can achieve nanometre scale fabrication, defined by resolution and depth of focus. Both resolution and depth of focus depend on the wavelength of irradiating light; shorter wavelengths offer improved resolution, with the interplay between resolution and depth of focus determining minimum achievable feature size which is limited by optical diffraction.78 There are three modes for UV photolithography: contact, proximity, and projection, where each refers to the distance between the optical mask and photoresist. In contact configuration, the optical mask is in direct contact with the surface of the photoresist. In proximity configuration the optical mask and photoresist are close but not touching. In projection configuration there is an additional lens to better focus the radiation onto the photoresist, as shown schematically in Fig. 8. The resolution for contact UV photolithography can be <500 nm, for proximity photolithography <1 μm, while projection achieves the best resolution <200 nm. Projection photolithography is the best for mass production but also the most expensive.
 Fig. 8  Simplified schematic depicting photolithography processes with three different configurations: contact; proximity; and projection. In step 1: photolithography involves irradiation of a photoresist through an optical system and a patterned mask to transfer a geometrical pattern onto a substrate. In step 2: patterning of the substrate takes place with post-irradiation chemical treatment to achieve the desired pattern on the substrate with the required chemical composition. Chemical treatment can be (i) etching when the photoresist is positive or (ii) deposition of the new material when the photoresist is negative. 
The resolution of photolithography can be pushed further to create features as small as 100 nm by using deep UV light and improved photoresists.79 Fabricating features <100 nm requires extreme UV (EUV), soft X-ray and electron-beam irradiation. Drawbacks include limited feature size due to optical diffraction, the requirement for high energy radiation for small features (EUV, electron-beam, or X-rays), and the high cost of specialised equipment (due to the optical mask and lithographic system). Importantly, photolithography can only be applied to planar (non-curved) surfaces and offers no control over the chemistry of patterned surfaces.78


3.3.2 Soft lithography. 
Soft lithography is a micro/nanolithography patterning technique used on polymers. It employs a patterned elastomer as a mask, stamp, or mould to generate microstructures and micropatterns at ambient temperatures.79 It is an alternate technology to photolithography and can achieve patterns on both curved and planar surfaces. It also offers good control over a broad range of structures and chemistries, whereby the dimensions can be defined from nanoscale to mesoscale (30 nm to 100 μm). Soft lithography can also achieve rapid prototype development (24 h from design to implementation), and rapidly pattern large areas.79,80 Under the soft lithography umbrella is replica moulding (REM), microcontact printing (μcp), solvent assisted micromoulding (SAMIM), near field phase shifting photolithography, micromoulding in capillaries (MIMIC) and microtransfer moulding (μTM). Fig. 9 depicts some of these soft lithography techniques. Challenges include distortion of elastomeric materials, defects due to dust particles, poor adhesion to substrate, poor release from stamp and bubbles in the pre-polymers.78,79
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of soft lithography procedures (A) replica moulding (REM), (B) microcontact printing μcp, (C) solvent-assisted micromoulding (SAMIM), (D) near field phase shifting photolithography, (E) micromoulding in capillaries (MIMIC) and (F) microtransfer moulding (μTM) (source Xia and Whitesides,80 reprinted with permission). 


3.3.3 Stereo-lithography. 
Stereo-lithography (SLA) is one of the first and most widely used 3D printing technologies. This process does not involve the transfer of a pattern onto a surface but rather the layer-by-layer photo-polymerisation of a liquid resin to create a 3D structure68 pre-designed using CAD software. Successive horizontal cross sections are computed by CAD with a resolution of typically 100 μm74 and converted into physical layers by focusing a UV laser on a vat of photopolymer resin which solidifies upon exposure, and the design then built layer-by-layer.66,74 A schematic is shown in Fig. 10. Typical materials include epoxy resins.23 Smaller SLA machines can achieve layers 0.05 mm thick with an accuracy of ±0.1 mm (for samples that are less than 100 mm in size).68 SLA is typically operated at 0.10–0.15 mm layers for economic reasons. However associated materials are restricted to UV-curable photopolymers based on acrylates, epoxides and urethanes. For photocatalytic applications, since SLA printing can only produce materials from a limited range of photosensitive materials, the photocatalytic component must be coated on the surface of the printed structure. Coating is typically performed using a sol–gel semiconductor suspension; the most studied systems utilise sol–gel derived TiO2 suspensions. TiO2/SiO2 nanocomposites bound using the surfactant polyethyleneimine (PEI) have been coated on microreactor walls,81 although such composite photocatalysts may present long-term stability issues due to changes in the PEI structure under photocatalytic conditions.63
 Fig. 10  Schematic of a stereolithography process which involves the layer-by-layer photo-polymerisation of a liquid resin to create a 3D structure. 


3.3.4 Photocatalytic systems fabricated using lithography techniques. 
Photocatalytic systems fabricated using lithography techniques are well-studied, with select examples described here. Yoon et al.59 used UV imprinting lithography to fabricate optically transparent inorganic polymeric AHPCS microreactors (100 μm high channels by 1000 μm wide). These AHPCS microreactors were demonstrated as packed bed or slurry photoreactors for Escherichia coli sterilisation and 4-chlorophenol degradation respectively. Lindstrom et al.63 prepared a microfluidic device using direct write laser lithography, a process similar to photolithography that uses a laser for the photon source, as one of the fabrication steps to micropattern soda-lime glass blank wafers. This was followed by wet etching to produce serpentine microchannels that were subsequently coated with a layer of TiO2 nanoparticles. These were then tested for methylene blue dye degradation. Distinct to this device was the high surface area and porosity of the TiO2 layers that were deposited on the microreactor walls.
Padoin et al.82 compared the performance of two microfluidic devices; one based on commercial TiO2 photocatalyst and the other on a composite TiO2/reduced graphene oxide (1%) (TiO2/GR) photocatalyst. In both cases the photocatalysts were immobilised on the inner walls of commercially available microfluidic chips (133.5 μm internal hydraulic diameter, MicronitV R Microfluidics BV, Enschede, The Netherlands, model R150.676). This company utilises simple lithographic, ion beam, and wet etching to fabricate microchip reactors.83 For both reactors, a dispersion of the photocatalysts was injected in a port of the micro-device to fill the channels. The device was then submitted to a thermal treatment which differed depending on the type of photocatalyst. The resulting microfluidic devices were tested for methylene blue photocatalytic degradation under UV-A irradiation (365 nm). Both TiO2 and TiO2/GR systems achieved similar reaction rates, with the TiO2/GR system having higher initial rates. The TiO2 system was more mechanically stable than the TiO2/GR system. For the former, the photocatalyst was deposited at a high-temperature (450 °C) to sinter the material on the walls of the microfluidic chip. For the TiO2/GR system, the lower thermal treatment of the microreactor (150 °C) likely did not promote tight adhesion of the photocatalyst film to the microchannel walls. Li et al.84 presented as a proof-of-concept, the photocatalytic performance of a TiO2 decorated graphene oxide (GO) microreactor fabricated using a soft lithography technique for methylene blue degradation under visible-light, integrated with a monochromatic measuring system to achieve real-time spectroscopic monitoring (Fig. 11). Corbel et al.85 fabricated a rectangular microchannel reactor in an expoxy resin by SLA, and coated their microchannel reactor using sol–gel derived TiO2 for salicylic acid photodegradation, observing increased activity with increasing channel length.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of microchannel reactor fabricated by soft lithography developed by Li et al.84 The micro-photocatalytic reactor is integrated with a monochromatic measuring system for real-time spectroscopic monitoring. The photocatalyst membrane (∼20 μm) was integrated into a transparent microchannel (reprinted with permission). 
Another approach to microreactor fabrication is to first create channels on one substrate, to ensure stable flow and sufficient delivery of products, for subsequent fusion to another substrate onto which the photocatalytic material was previously loaded. Han et al.86 used soft lithography to fabricate a microfluidic photoreactor by coating a ZnO seed layer to prepare ZnO nanowires on a glass substrate (50 × 15 × 0.1 mm3) using a hydrothermal process. Channels were created using a SU-8 3050 photoresist patterned mask replicated on PDMS by a casting method. The PDMS and ZnO/glass substrate were bonded by plasma oxidation. For organic synthesis, Takei et al.87 fabricated a titania-modified microchannel chip reactor to carry out the photocatalytic synthesis of L-pipecolinic acid from L-lysine. The microreactor was composed of two pyrex glass substrates (0.7 mm thick). Branched microchannels were fabricated on one side by photolithographic wet etching of a Pyrex glass substrate (770 μm width and 3.5 μm depth). The TiO2 thin film was prepared on another Pyrex glass substrate by a sol–gel method, and the two Pyrex glass substrates then thermally bonded to obtain the microreactor. Compared to a bulk reaction using a suspension of commercial TiO2 (doped with Pt), 87% L-Lys% conversion was obtained in the titania-modified microchannel reactor in only 0.86 min versus 60 min for the bulk reaction. Rasponi et al.88 prepared a PDMS micro-photocatalytic cell using soft lithography. The channel was bonded with a pre-treated quartz slice on which a thin film of TiO2 was deposited by reactive radio-frequency sputtering and screened for dye degradation. Lei et al.89 fabricated glass microreactors using UV lithography to create PDMS moulded microchannels using a template of Norland Optical Adhesive (NOA81), which was subsequently used as a spacer and sealant between two porous sol–gel TiO2 coated glass slides. Meng et al.90 fabricated a microfluidic photoreactor by sealing nano-fibrous TiO2 (30 μm synthesised by electro-spinning and calcination) between a PDMS substrate and a glass slide. The PDMS substrate was fabricated by soft lithography using a SU-8 template to give channels 100 μm deep and 500 μm wide. This microfluidic reactor was tested for methylene blue degradation and exhibited higher activity than a film reactor.
Stereo-lithography has been used to fabricate monolithic photocatalysts.74,91 Monoliths containing for instance honeycomb geometries are designed to process high flow rates at low pressure drops and to increase the surface area to reactor volume ratio and hence exposed photoactive surface.65 Furman et al.74,92 investigated the influence of monolith geometry on photoreactor efficiency. They used stereo-lithography to fabricate static mixer, crossed channels, double spiral, quadruple spiral, and star geometries in epoxy resins. These shapes were then coated with TiO2 by an impregnation step in which an aqueous TiO2 suspension was poured over the supports as they rotated, and involved intermittent heating using 50 °C. The catalyst loading was at least 1 mg cm−2 (determined gravimetrically). Geometry only affected external mass transport at the lowest gas velocities investigated, but greatly influenced the kinetics of methanol degradation. Photon absorption only depended on the support geometry; static mixer and double spiral geometries offered the greatest surface areas for photon absorption and also delivered the highest degradation rate per unit area. Crossed channel supports were advantageous in terms of activity per unit volume and the best geometry for a compact photoreactor. In general, issues remain with miniaturisation of light sources. Optical fibres in monolithic structures could provide a solution to inadequate irradiation inside such structures.
Vyatskikh et al.91 used stereo-lithographic 3D printing to prepare patterned TiO2 monoliths as photocatalysts for solar disinfection of drinking water, using a Ti-rich photoresist from acrylic acid and titanium(IV) ethoxide, and an open source Autodesk PR48 formulation. Printed structures were developed in propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PGMEA), followed by washing in isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and a final pyrolysis step in a tube furnace. Using layer-by-layer synthesis, they built structures with different geometries in which the layers were 25 μm thick. Fig. 12 illustrates the photocatalytic systems envisaged and fabricated structures. Vyatskikh et al.91 also performed mechanical strength testing to assess attrition which can be problematic water treatment applications. However, the photocatalytic activity of these monoliths was not investigated.
 Fig. 12  (a) Concept monolithic photocatalysts91 for a household solar water disinfection device. (b) (i) Top view of a titania octet lattice (optical image), (ii) corresponding SEM image, (iii) representative node in the unit cell of an octet lattice, and (iv) nanocrystallites on the surface of the structure. Scale bars 2 mm for (e), 100 μm for (f), 5 μm for (g), and 500 nm for (h) (reprinted with permission). 

3.4 Laser fabrication techniques
Laser fabrication of 3D structures allows for microfeature precision with nanometre tolerances. Laser techniques are more efficient than alternative printing techniques, but due to the thermal nature of the patterning, are limited to certain substrates and conditions. Lasers can be used for micromachining and for sintering and melting. Laser beam fabrication is widely used in the manufacturing of micro-electronics, micro-optics, and for direct micro-chemistry. The wavelength of the laser is usually the determining factor controlling the achievable precision and speed of fabrication. Laser sintering (LS) and selective laser melting (SLM) are the two AM techniques most relevant for photocatalytic material fabrication.
LS and SLM utilise powders (polymer for LS, and ceramic or metal for SLM) as starting materials. A high-powered laser (stronger for SLM than LS) scans and consolidates the powder into a solid free-form object. LS has a resolution of 50–100 μm, being determined by laser spot size and particle size. Issues may arise with incomplete particle sintering (especially for metals) within structures. LS can typically achieve layer thicknesses of 0.15 mm, whereas SLM can achieve 20–100 μm. LS fabricated parts are dimensionally stable but are subject to distortion over time. Metal 3D printers are expensive; however, their operating cost is low.66 The dispersion of active components on metal supports is not simple.
Lee et al.93 3D-printed Ti based electrodes (for enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting) with a tunable and printable microstructure of conical arrays using SLM technology (Fig. 13). Self-organised TiO2 nanotubes were formed directly on array structures through electrochemical anodisation to enhance their functionality. Choi et al.94 reported on a similar catalytic system of SiO2/ITO/TiO2 nanocone arrays. The combination of soft lithography with unbalanced radiofrequency (RF) magnetron sputtering enabled new morphologies offering increased surface area, and potentially improved photocatalytic properties. Soft lithography was used to obtain SiO2 nanoparticle monolayer patterned arrays on ITO. Preparation of the TiO2 films in these SiO2/ITO arrays used RF sputtering in the presence of external magnetic fields applied by a solenoid. The resulting photocurrent response for water splitting increased by 400% compared to a flat surface.
 Fig. 13  Ti-based electrodes with a microstructure of conical arrays 3D printed using SLM. (a1) Side view – optical images of printed conical arrays of Ti-based electrode comprising 216 cones (over 1 cm2) separated by ≈700 μm (a2) and (a3) corresponding SEM images of anodized Ti-based electrode from top and 30° angled views, respectively. (b1) Side view–optical images of printed conical arrays of Ti-based electrode consisting of 407 cones (over 1 cm2) separated by ≈430 μm (b2) and (b3) corresponding SEM images of anodized Ti-based electrode from top and angled views, respectively. SEM images of (c) top view of a cone, (d) nanotubular structures, and (e) cross-sectional thickness image of the formed nanotubes (reprinted with permission). 
In summary, lithographic techniques have been used to fabricate photocatalytic systems. For microfluidic reactors, challenges remain with regards to anchoring of the catalyst to the microreactor walls, minimising reactor plugging, and retaining photocatalyst activity. Microchannels are easier to create on metallic substrates, however these are ill-suited for photocatalytic reactors. In contrast, polymeric substrates may be UV and chemically unstable, and of brittle nature. There are few examples of monolithic photocatalytic systems. Issues arise in sol–gel deposition coatings associated with a loss of surface areas and the deposition of large particles and thick layers.63 There are limited studies on the direct fabrication of self-supporting photocatalysts by lithography. Lithographic methods are time consuming, and structural retention post-fabrication is problematic. Reproducibility of microreactor fabrication has not been investigated, nor has the interface between deposited TiO2 and the substrate.67 While laser-based techniques are efficient, the associated printing instrumentation is relatively expensive.
3.5 Printing techniques – inkjet and extrusion (direct writing) techniques
Traditional printing methods include screen printing, spin coating, doctor blading, and casting. These methods are best suited to flat and thin coatings. Disadvantages include material waste, and limits on the thickness of printed patterns; difficulties arise in controlling the final material thickness and morphology. The use of a mask is also problematic due to premature drying of the ink on the mask.95 As such, there is great interest in the direct writing of micro and meso-scale solution-based functional materials.95 This is a relatively new area for photocatalysis, with most work performed by inkjet printing (Fig. 14a), although extrusion printing (Fig. 14b) may offer greater potential due to the ability to produce self-supporting structures.
 Fig. 14  Direct writing: (a) inkjet 3D-printing wherein the ink is jetted onto a support in droplet form and (b) extrusion 3D-printing wherein the ink has a paste-like consistency for printing self-supporting structures. 
Advantages of direct writing are ease of operation, the wider range of amenable printable materials and supports, and relatively low costs. A disadvantage is the need for a drying or sintering step post-printing to remove solvent.66 Akin to other AM techniques, the active material typically needs to be coated onto a pre-printed material. This may be achieved by wash-coating or hydrothermal coating methods to introduce an active layer to the support. These techniques suffer from poor anchoring and uniformity of coatings, and a limited amount of deposited photocatalyst, often necessitating multiple coating cycles. Self-supporting structured catalysts may offer a solution, if the active material is accessible for reaction.96 Such systems can also be extrusion printed, for which inks need to be formulated to include active components and binders (which can be organic or inorganic).
Printing offers a low-cost approach for photocatalytic applications with flexibility in the substrate selection (printing can be undertaken on rigid or flexible supports) and photocatalyst structure (e.g. heterojunctions). Photocatalyst structures can also be choice printed as microchannels, monoliths (aerogels and patterned structures), or films. Microchannel reactors offer many advantages over packed bed reactors, however preparing stable and homogeneously distributed wall coatings can be difficult.64 It is envisaged that packed bed and monolithic microreactors will both prove important in scaled-up photocatalytic units for commercial applications. In this section we review printed photocatalysts and photocatalytic systems.

3.5.1 Inkjet printing. 
Inkjet printing is a promising technique for material deposition wherein semiconductor films are deposited onto a substrate from a colloidal (ink) dispersion, with photovoltaics being the major application.97 This technology competes directly with methods that are typically sol–gel based, such as spin coating, spray coating, dip and roller coating, doctor blade, screen printing, chemical vapour deposition, and physical vapour deposition.98–100
Inkjet printing is a one-step process, requiring inexpensive and compact equipment, and enabling printing on diverse substrates, but which requires careful control over ink stability and film properties. Ink stability can be predicted by zeta potential and solvodynamic particle size distributions.98 Inks may take the form of stable colloidal suspensions or be based on sol–gel chemistry, containing sols of an organometallic precursor. The sol–gel ink approach requires a post-printing calcination step and colloidal inks require a heat treatment to ensure adhesion to the substrate (both at 300–500 °C).101 Bourgeois et al.69 discussed the use of PulseForge® xenon flash lamp technology to phase transform amorphous into crystalline TiO2 (anatase) without a heat treatment step. This approach offers new opportunities for ink-jet printing TiO2 films onto flexible substrates. UV lasers and white light from continuous Xe lamps can also crystallise amorphous TiO2. Film properties are affected by (i) ink formulation including colloidal particle size, zeta potential, and isoelectric point, that in turn affect viscosity and surface tension and hence wetting and adhesion on substrates, and (ii) printing parameters.97,98 An example of ink-jet printed layers is shown in Fig. 15. The process is described in detail by Arin et al.,102 and is similar to that of commercial inkjet printers, with some variations such as the choice of electromagnetic nozzle or a piezoelectric-driven system to control droplet size and jetting frequency. Printing simply involves placing the ink in the black ink cartridge and setting printing ‘grayscale’ using commercial printers. Epson and HP printers both use piezoelectric printing technologies. Bubble jet printers involve an ink heating step and are unsuitable for TiO2 colloid containing inks.103
 Fig. 15  SEM image of inkjet printed TiO2 layers fabricated by Cherrington et al.97 at (a) low, and (b) high magnification (reprinted with permission). 
The energy for the acceleration of the droplets is affected by viscous flow and the surface tension of the sols.102 Too high a viscosity dampens the propagating pressure wave for piezoelectric printing, while for electromagnetic printing it increases the required ink pressure for jetting. Too low a viscosity presents issues such as ink leakage from the nozzle. The relatively low viscosities needed for the ink (between 2 and 20 mPa s) may result in inhomogeneous film morphology and structure due to uneven distribution of the dried solute, referred to as the ‘coffee ring’ effect.95
Inkjet printing can still be used to produce a pre-determined pattern, and in a layer-by-layer methodology to increase thickness,97 albeit with structural issues. The smaller the drop volume, the smaller the minimum achievable linewidth. The diameter of the drop on a surface depends on the interaction of ink and substrate. Commercial printheads for printing electronics have a drop volume as small as 1 pL, able to produce lines with trace-widths as small as 20 μm.104 Suntivich et al.105 reported lateral dimensions of 35–130 μm. This limits the ability to print 3D patterns, nonetheless the technique continues to be investigated for thin film deposition of photocatalytically active films as described below. Inkjet printing has also found use for the production of photocatalyst libraries in co-operative assisted assembly synthesis. Here, formulations may include a non-aqueous solvent (e.g. acetic acid or an alcohol), the metal species, block co-polymers, and complexing agents (acids) to control kinetics and condensation.106 Such photocatalysts have been tested for photocatalytic H2 evolution by the liquid phase reforming of an aqueous formaldehyde solution.
There are several studies on the use of inkjet printing for photocatalytically active TiO2 films. Padrón-Hernández et al.98 used inkjet printing to deposit TiO2 films of anatase, rutile, and brookite of 70, 140, and 130 nm thicknesses respectively onto fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates. The average diameter of the anatase, rutile, and brookite crystals were 25, 32, and 28 nm respectively. Successful printing required a stable suspension related to zeta potential (which is dependent on pH). Lawrie et al.107 used this technique to print 63 nm TiO2 films as photocatalytic oxygen sensors. Cherrington et al.97 deposited crack-free 2.57 μm TiO2 films on FTO using Aeroxide P25 TiO2 (25 nm primary particle size). The ink developed was binder-free and used polyethylene glycol (PEG 400) as a humecant to enable printing. The resulting inkjet-printed TiO2 layers were assembled into dye-sensitized solar cells. Bernacka-Wojcik et al.108,109 used a modified commercial inkjet printer to fabricate TiO2 layers up to 12.5 μm thick for dye-sensitized solar cells. Viscosity and surface tension of the aqueous TiO2 ink were controlled by varying the amount of TiO2 (25 nm) and a surfactant. These systems were tested as photodetectors for DNA biosensors, although their performance was lower than sensors prepared by the doctor blading technique.
Černá et al.100 printed transparent photocatalytically active TiO2 thin films using a sol–gel based approach. The use of PEG was key to preventing cracks forming during high temperature annealing. They also inkjet printed TiO2 single and double layer films using hydrothermally prepared particles.110 These films were tested for the photocatalytic degradation of 2,6-dichloroindophenol but did not outperform commercial Aeroxide P25 TiO2. Arin et al.102,111–113 also produced inkjet printed photocatalytically active transparent TiO2 coatings for the degradation of methylene blue102,112 and as bactericides.113 Good catalytic performance was obtained even for heat treatments as low as 150 °C, opening the possibility of inkjet printing on heat-sensitive substrates.102 Aqueous inks offer cost and environmental benefits, but drying issues require mitigation.101
Skorski et al.56 fabricated inkjet-printed TiO2-ABS monoliths for the photodegradation of rhodamine 6G in solution. TiO2 was dispersed into ABS and extruded into filaments with 1.75 mm diameters and dog-bone and cylindrical shapes, with compositions of 1, 5, and 10 wt% TiO2. ABS underwent slight degradation in the presence of TiO2 due to OH˙ radicals generated under UV irradiation. Mechanical properties such as strain and Young's modulus were similar the pure polymer. 1 wt% TiO2 had a detrimental effect on stress at breaking point and flexural stress. From a 3D printer operational perspective, lower printing speeds were needed to avoid clogging. This study reported particle aggregation issues (within the filament), especially at 5 and 10 wt% TiO2, albeit the systems were not optimised, but rather a proof of concept.
Given the potential for improved reproducibility and uniformity of layers deposited, and comparatively low cost, optimisation of inkjet printing processes is warranted. Inkjet ink formulations offer environmental gains compared to screen printing for example, the latter requiring larger amounts of binders and thickeners for reproducible and reliable film production. Knowledge gaps include the effect of ink formulations on film properties and the development of greener formulations targeted for lower temperature annealing.97 Gebauer et al.99 addressed high temperature annealing, demonstrating the successful stabilisation of different oxide nanoparticles to form inks suitable for printing electronics based on PEG over a wider range of temperatures. They also suggested UV irradiation as a means to induce high local temperatures through band gap excitation and sinter entrained metal oxide particles within a printed film.


3.5.2 Extrusion 3D printing. 
Extrusion 3D printing is a rapid prototyping AM technology for fabricating 3D structures designated by computer software such as a CAD file. Compared to inkjet printing, which is most useful for film deposition, extrusion printing can fabricate patterned self-supporting photocatalytic structures. A typical set-up is shown in Fig. 14b. Extrusion printing can achieve direct writing of 2D and 3D patterns on planar and arbitrary shaped surfaces with lateral dimensions up to two orders smaller than those achieved by inkjet printing.114 Xing et al.115 reported on printed lateral resolutions <10 μm using a micronozzle with dimensions of a few μm using a thixotropic ink. Extrusion printing also allows optimisation of the architecture of structured catalysts by varying the binder material, diameter of the printed fibres, and porosity of printed structures.96
The material is robotically controlled to be extruded directly without melting or solidification. During extrusion, the viscosity of the ink needs to be sufficiently low to maintain fluidity, while allowing the formation of self-supporting structures by direct patterning in a layer-by-layer fashion. Therefore, most directly printed inks are pseudoplastic fluids, such as ceramic slurries, polymers, and sol–gel inks, with the printed materials being in the form of rigid ceramic, polymeric or carbon-based structures. More recently, extrusion printing has been used to print aerogels. For inorganic systems, a range of metal and metal oxide inks have been printed on different types of substrates, including Ag and ITO,116,117 and TiO2.114,118 Torres Arango et al.119 also studied Al-doped ZnO crystalline microstructures and the ability to tune these systems during DIW. An example of a printed polymeric structure on which the photocatalyst was immobilised post-printing is that reported by Castedo et al.57 In this study, a silicone microchannel reactor was coated with Au/TiO2 for the photocatalytic generation of hydrogen from water-ethanol vapour. The silicone microreactor was fabricated by casting PDMS prepolymer over a PLA mould manufactured with a 3D printer. The microchannel width was 500 μm. The Au/TiO2 photocatalyst was immobilised on the inner walls of the silicone microreactor from a sonicated ethanol suspension, and then sealed with a thin silicone cover. For better adhesion on the silicone microreactor walls, a corona discharge plasma treatment was first applied to the microchannels to produce silanol-terminated surfaces. This achieved a hydrogen production rate of 5.4 N m L W−1 h−1 with an apparent photon efficiency of 9.2% (% light reaching reactor converted to H2). This microreactor was stable for >2 days operation and is shown in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  Silicone microchannel reactor printed by Castedo et al.57 (i) Fabrication steps and (ii) (A) photograph of the silicone microreactor loaded with photocatalyst, and (B) optical micrograph of the catalytic layer deposited within a microchannel (reprinted with permission). 
The direct 3D extrusion printing of self-supporting photocatalytic structures (without the need to coat with active component post-printing) can be achieved by (i) emulsion gel casting, and (ii) the use of precursor sol–gel inks. Inks may comprise flowable, particle based colloidal formulations, or particle-free sol–gel systems.95 Emulsion gel casting can also produce foams and allows the preparation of moulded structures with near-finished shapes akin to that achievable by polymer manufacturing.120 The choice of technique determines the morphological properties of the resulting material, including pore size, interconnectivity, tortuosity, permeability, and mechanical strength.120 The final printed features depend on applied pressure, amount of solids (particle loading in ink), tip diameter, printing speed, extrusion rate, amount of added additives, reaction time before printing (gelation time), and curing conditions (including choice of curing method which can be heat, UV or plasma).
3.5.2.1 Emulsion casting. 
This is a proven technique in terms of its versatility to achieve various types of structures. A typical procedure involves creating an emulsion in a continuous phase of the ceramic powder material in a suspension, and a dispersed phase being a pore-forming substance. Additives can influence porosity and emulsion stability. Nayak et al.120 highlighted that there are few studies aimed at understanding the formation of porous networks, such as on (non-photocatalytic) alumina monoliths by emulsion-gel casting, or predicting the final structure of monoliths from emulsion-gels which may form customised cellular structures with varying porosity and pore size. Nayak et al. studied the combined effects of droplet coalescence, flocculation and Ostwald ripening effects on the design of alumina monoliths, and the operation of these during the emulsion storage time on viscoelastic and morphological properties. These effects influenced monolithic structure after sintering (such as average pore sizes and porosity). Scale-up of such systems is possible provided that mixing systems with appropriate dimensions are used.
Emulsion gel casting is a promising route to monolithic photocatalysts with long and narrow channels for fluid flow. The choice of binder is important to achieve desired mechanical and physicochemical properties. For photocatalytic applications, inorganic binders such as SiO2 are interesting since SiO2/TiO2 systems have been thoroughly studied when developing photocatalytic materials with enhanced adsorption properties.121 Organic binder choice is restricted to materials that are UV and chemically stable.
There are very few studies on 3D printing for preparing self-supporting structures for photocatalytic applications. Torres Arango95,122 married sacrificial templating with direct foaming to synthesise multiscale porous TiO2 foams that can be 3D printed into planar, free-standing, and hierarchical structures. Hierarchical photocatalysts offer high surface areas and enhanced chemical mass transport to active sites,123 and superior charge carrier lifetimes.124 For these structures, multi-phase emulsion systems of hybrid TiO2/Ti-organic aqueous suspensions and bio-compatible oil stabilisers were used to trap air bubbles to form the cells of the wet foams. This method addressed many of the 12 principles of green chemistry.122 A green chemical approach to 3D printing was also demonstrated by Sanches et al.125 who used ecofriendly, low cost sunflower oil as the dispersed phase in emulsion gel-casting.
The rheological properties and foam configurations (i.e. open or closed-cell) can be manipulated by varying the foam-ink composition and frothing conditions. In open cell structures more than half of the cells are open, with the remaining closed cell completely self-contained. The photocatalytic performance of foams for methylene blue decomposition correlated with their microstructure, improving for open-cell architectures. Recent work96 on the use of 3D printing for the development of ZSM-5 zeolites for photoelectrochemical applications hints at the possibility of designing complex structures in which catalyst gradients exist (at the wall, and vertically) across the reactor bed to minimise catalyst wastage. To ascertain the advantages of AM of foams, the properties of prepared materials, and procedure and materials employed in conventional foam making, must be compared. Open cell titania foams can be obtained by calcining polyacrylamide gel containing titanyl and urea.126 Foam systems have been thoroughly investigated for biomedical applications. Tiainen et al.127 produced highly porous and well interconnected TiO2 scaffolds with improved compressive strength (2.5 MPa) using polyurethane (PU) foam templates. Ceramic scaffolds typically have inadequate mechanical strength. Hajiesmaili et al.65 reported on a 3D solid carbon foam-based photocatalytic material for structured, vapour phase flow photoreactors. This foam was prepared by conventional shape memory synthesis using PU foam as pre-shaped alveolar precursor, in a 3-step process. The final structure was superior to ceramic monolithic and metal foam materials. Carbons have inherent advantages such as high surface areas, diverse structures,66 and relevant to photocatalysis, may be activated by visible light. Emulsion casting to produce photocatalytic foams (of TiO2, carbon or other photoactive material based) should be investigated.
3.5.2.2 Precursor sol–gel inks. 
In this approach, the printed ink is based on sol–gel chemistry and uses an organometallic precursor in the form of a stable sol. The ink dries to form a xerogel layer that is further processed into oxide layers, usually by calcination.101 For precursor (sol–gel) inks, sol–gel chemistry parameters such as precursor concentrations, type (e.g. organometallic such as titanium isopropoxide), and solvent must be considered. These parameters, and the gelation period, allow the viscosity of sol–gel inks to be tuned. Sol–gel chemistry also allows tuning of the final microstructure (e.g. crystal phase or porosity). Printing parameters such as speed, nozzle size, and geometry, as defined in the CAD are also important. Note that these systems differ from the inkjet printed sol-gels described earlier in that they contain photocatalyst precursors rather than preformed semiconductor nanoparticles.
In terms of synthesising transparent monolithic structures, Putz et al.128 reported the 3D printing of hierarchical porous silica and α-quartz using silica ink; this represented the first crystallisation of synthetic hierarchical silica monoliths. The prepared ink (silica gel) was printed using a commercial 3D printer. Success depended on the careful development of an organic solvent-free silica ink, enabling the printing and crystallisation of structures with multilevel porosity. Fig. 17 shows that these systems were not transparent, but nevertheless are a promising step towards the fabrication of transparent ceramic photoreactors.
 Fig. 17  Hierarchical porous silica and α-quartz 3D printed using silica ink prepared by Putz et al.128 (a) Macroscopic shape of the printed object (photograph), (b) SEM micrograph of the macroporous silica framework and (c) powder XRD confirming successful framework crystallisation into α-quartz (quartz low). 
In summary, 3D printing (DIW) including inkjet printing, emulsion casting, and sol–gel ink-based printing, enable the incorporation of photocatalysts (and their precursors) into matrices during printing, which is advantageous compared to other AM technologies. However, differences between the mechanical properties and chemical stability of various 3D printed materials and their counterparts prepared by conventional methods are not been fully established. Improved ink formulations should offer higher 3D precision, and better control over structural properties and photocatalyst distribution throughout photoreactors. Little is known regarding the durability of such fabricated photocatalytic structures. A summary of AM techniques discussed in previous sections, describing each process, listing distinguishing disadvantages, speed and spatial resolution is provided in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of AM techniques relevant to photocatalytic materials




Fabrication technique
Description/applications
Disadvantages
Relative speed
Spatial resolution




Fused deposition modelling (Fig. 6)
Extruded layers of thermoplastics fed as continuous filaments. Method useful for rapid prototyping and for producing advanced composite parts.70 It is technologically simple and inexpensive
FDM suffers from a rough finish and weak mechanical parts. It is limited to thermoplastics
Medium
60–500 μm26


Photolithography (Fig. 8)
A pattern is achieved onto a substrate as light passes through a patterned optical mask. High reproducibility can be achieved. medium cost
Optical mask is required. Cannot modify surface chemistry
Long set up time. Medium print speed
0.5–1 μm, dependent on light source wavelength79


Soft lithography (Fig. 8)
Techniques include microcapillary, molding technology, casting and replicating. Materials that can be fabricated include polymers, colloids, sol–gels, salts and metals. Low/medium cost
Low productivity and difficult to reproduce
Long curing times
0.03–100 μm79


Stereolithography (Fig. 10)
UV laser scanning vat polymerisation. It involves the layer-by-layer photo-polymerisation of a liquid resin to create a 3D structure. It can achieve a smooth surface finish, fine resolution and high quality
Limited range of materials restricted to UV-curable photopolymers based on acrylates, epoxides and urethanes. Medium/high cost
Medium/slow printing speed
60–150 μm68,74


Selective laser sintering and selective laser melting
Laser fusion in a powder bed. Compacted fine powder, metals, alloys and limited polymers.70 Useful for manufacture of high quality, durable, complex parts with fine resolution
Grainy surface finish. High cost
Slow
80–250 μm70


Ink printing (Fig. 14a)
Printed materials jetted as liquid droplets. Can produce multi-component systems. Low ink viscosity is needed to prevent clogging. Medium cost
Low viscosity makes building of 3D structures difficult. 3D structures suffer from low strength and lack of adhesion between layers. Therefore most useful for printing of thin films
Medium
35–130 μm105


DIW, extrusion type printing (Fig. 14b)
Polymers and multiple materials can be printed directly onto a substrate by extrusion of phase through a nozzle. Formulations can be varied to allow printing of multi-component systems. Low cost
Relatively new technique. Improved formulation are needed to enable complex structure fabrication
Medium
1–10 μm26





4. Conclusions
In this review, we have described conventional printing technologies and their application to printed photocatalytic materials and reactors, highlighting key achievements and remaining knowledge gaps and challenges. We have focussed on emerging printing technologies, notably 3D extrusion printing, and their potential in photocatalytic applications. Extrusion printing appears to be the most promising methodology for micro-photoreactors and monolithic photocatalysts, however, much work is still needed for formulation development (e.g. the creation of well-dispersed suspensions without agglomeration, and extension to heterojunction photocatalysts). Printed photocatalytic foams are particularly interesting for one-step fabrication of self-supporting photocatalysts, although one-step fabrication methods can waste active material through entrainment within inaccessible components of printed structures. Attention needs to be given to coating of active materials rather than their embedding in support structures.
Target applications and distinguishing functionalities that are application specific will determine the choice of printing technology. Factors for consideration include the desired resolution, need to control features at different length scales, type of substrates, and target geometries e.g. free-standing, planar, or multilayer. Printing costs, reproducibility, and suitability for scale-up are also important factors. Larger area processing may dictate the necessary technology, such as inkjet printing of films versus lithography or refined emulsion casting of monoliths. The final product value is another determining factor, whereby photocatalytic transformations to deliver high value pharmaceutical products (possibly through sequential microreactors) may warrant more expensive photoreactor fabrication. Greater insight into the reaction engineering aspects of photoreactors and micro-photoreactors will facilitate optimal mass and photon transport to active sites through tuning of the catalyst and reactor geometry and dimensions. This in turn requires improved computational modelling of light penetration/distribution through complex architectures, and e.g. CFD modelling of microreactor transport processes. Green chemistry considerations will also influence the choice of e.g. ink stabiliser and formulation (e.g. aqueous versus organic) and polymer/resin use.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
R. J. thanks the ARC for financial support through a DECRA (DE180100215). RAC and DF acknowledge support from the ARC (DP180103815).
References
D. S. Kourkoumpas, G. Benekos, N. Nikolopoulos, S. Karellas, P. Grammelis and E. Kakaras, Appl. Energy, 2018, 231, 380–398 CrossRef .
G. Wernet, C. Mutel, S. Hellweg and K. Hungerbühler, J. Ind. Ecol., 2011, 15, 96–107 CrossRef CAS .

Science for Environment Policy, Poor Energy Use is Chemical Industry's Top Environmental Issue, European Commission DG Environment News Alert Service, edited by SCU, The University of the West of England, Bristol, News Alert Issue 242 – 9th June 2011, http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/pdf/243na2_en.pdf, accessed  21/12/18 Search PubMed.

          L. Brownell, Butterfly wings inspire air-purification improvements, https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2018/03/butterfly-wings-inspire-air-purification-improvements/, accessed  21/12/2018 Search PubMed.
B. Sinclair-Desgagné, Int. Rev. Environ. Res. Econom., 2008, 2, 69–99 CrossRef .
D. Friedmann, A. Hakki, H. Kim, W. Choi and D. Bahnemann, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5391–5411 RSC .
X. Ni, J. Ye and C. Dong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Tang, L.-N. Song, P. Chen, J. He, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 379–388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Durán, J. M. Monteagudo and I. San Martín, Chemosphere, 2018, 211, 482–488 CrossRef PubMed .
I. J. Ani, U. G. Akpan, M. A. Olutoye and B. H. Hameed, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 205, 930–954 CrossRef CAS .

          Field Controls LLC, PRO-Cell™-Photocatalytic Oxidation to a Higher Power, https://www.fieldcontrols.com/pro-cell-technology, accessed  21/12/2018 Search PubMed.

          Panasonic Corporation, Creating Drinkable Water with Sunlight and Photocatalysts, https://news.panasonic.com/global/stories/2014/30520.html, accessed  21/12/2018 Search PubMed.
A. M. Deegan, B. Shaik, K. Nolan, K. Urell, M. Oelgemöller, J. Tobin and A. Morrissey, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 8, 649–666 CrossRef CAS .
U. Krtschil, C. Hofmann, P. Löb, C. Schütt, P. Schorcht and M. Streuber, Green Process. Synth., 2013, 2, 451–463 CAS .
H. Lu, M. A. Schmidt and K. F. Jensen, Lab Chip, 2001, 1, 22–28 RSC .
S. N. Ahmed and W. Haider, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 342001–342030 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Boyjoo, H. Sun, J. Liu, V. K. Pareek and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 310, 537–559 CrossRef CAS .
C. Byrne, G. Subramanian and S. C. Pillai, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 3531–3555 CrossRef CAS .
A. Di Paola, E. García-López, G. Marcì and L. Palmisano, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211–212, 3–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 169–189 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hurt, M. Brandt, S. S. Priya, T. Bhatelia, J. Patel, P. R. Selvakannan and S. Bhargava, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 3421–3439 RSC .
S. Das and V. C. Srivastava, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 714–730 RSC .
D. Heggo and S. Ookawara, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2017, 169, 67–77 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yusuf, C. Garlisi and G. Palmisano, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 79–92 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhakeyev, P. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Shu, H. Wang and J. Xuan, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700187 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Friedmann, C. Mendive and D. Bahnemann, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 398–406 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Hakki, J. Schneider and D. Bahnemann, in Photocatalysis: Fundamentals and Perspectives, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2016, pp. 29–50, DOI:  DOI: .
D. Chen, X. Zhang and A. F. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14487–14516 RSC .
K. Nakata, T. Ochiai, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 84, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, P. Koshy, W.-F. Chen, S. Qi and C. C. Sorrell, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 325, 340–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, C. Kronawitter and G. Kiriakidis, J. Materiomics, 2017, 3, 1–2 CrossRef .
T. S. Natarajan, K. R. Thampi and R. J. Tayade, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 296–311 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. D. Khaki, M. S. Shafeeyan, A. A. A. Raman and W. M. A. W. Daud, J. Environ. Manage., 2017, 198, 78–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yu, W. Zhou, J. C. Yu, H. Liu and L. Wei, Chin. J. Catal., 2014, 35, 1609–1618 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, M. B. Ahmed, J. L. Zhou, A. Altaee, G. Xu and M. Wu, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 633, 546–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dai, L. Lu, C. Liang, Q. Liu and G. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 331–340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, L. Guo, N. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, W. A. McMaster, J. Z. Y. Tan, D. Chen and R. A. Caruso, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7236–7245 RSC .
H. Wei, W. A. McMaster, J. Z. Y. Tan, L. Cao, D. Chen and R. A. Caruso, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 22114–22122 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abrutis, L. Parafianovic, V. Kazlauskiene, V. Kubilius, G. Sauthier and A. Figueras, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 3864–3870 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, J. T. Carneiro, J. A. Moulijn and G. Mul, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 334, 119–128 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ola and M. M. Maroto-Valer, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 24, 16–42 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin and K. T. Valsaraj, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2005, 35, 699–708 CrossRef CAS .
F. Denny, J. Scott, G.-D. Peng and R. Amal, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 882–889 CrossRef CAS .
T. Van Gerven, G. Mul, J. Moulijn and A. Stankiewicz, Chem. Eng. Process., 2007, 46, 781–789 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Kaino, in Encyclopedia of Polymeric Nanomaterials, ed. S. Kobayashi and K. Müllen, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2014, pp. 1–14, DOI:  DOI: .
A. X. Gao, J. D. Bolt and A. A. Feng, Plast., Rubber Compos., 2008, 37, 397–402 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Sauer and D. F. Ollis, J. Catal., 1994, 149, 81–91 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Marinho, R. O. Cristóvão, R. Djellabi, A. Caseiro, S. M. Miranda, J. M. Loureiro, R. A. R. Boaventura, M. M. Dias, J. C. B. Lopes and V. J. P. Vilar, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 217, 555–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tennakone, C. T. K. Tilakaratne and I. R. M. Kottegoda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1995, 87, 177–179 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Fabiyi and R. L. Skelton, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 132, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Fostier, M. d. S. S. Pereira, S. Rath and J. R. Guimarães, Chemosphere, 2008, 72, 319–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Damodar and T. Swaminathan, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 144, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Skorski, J. M. Esenther, Z. Ahmed, A. E. Miller and M. R. Hartings, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2016, 17, 89–97 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Castedo, E. Mendoza, I. Angurell and J. Llorca, Catal. Today, 2016, 273, 106–111 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Lee, C. Park and G. M. Whitesides, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 6544–6554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Yoon, L. Y. Hong and D. P. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 666–670 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ramos, S. Ookawara, Y. Matsushita and S. Yoshikawa, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1487–1494 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, V. Nair, E. Kuna and D. Łomot, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 41, 297–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miyauchi, Y. Li and H. Shimizu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4551–4554 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lindstrom, R. Wootton and A. Iles, AIChE J., 2007, 53, 695–702 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pieber, M. Shalom, M. Antonietti, P. H. Seeberger and K. Gilmore, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9976–9979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hajiesmaili, S. Josset, D. Bégin, C. Pham-Huu, N. Keller and V. Keller, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 382, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou and C.-j. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701134 CrossRef .
M. Krivec, K. Žagar, L. Suhadolnik, M. Čeh and G. Dražić, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9088–9094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Capel, S. Edmondson, S. D. R. Christie, R. D. Goodridge, R. J. Bibb and M. Thurstans, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 4583–4590 RSC .
B. Bourgeois, S. Luo, B. Riggs, Y. Ji, S. Adireddy, K. Schroder, S. Farnsworth, D. Chrisey and M. Escarra, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 315401–315410 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Jiang, Z. Zhou, J. Gou and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2017, 110, 442–458 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Ngo, A. Kashani, G. Imbalzano, K. T. Q. Nguyen and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2018, 143, 172–196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, Y. Zhang, L. Du, J. Liu and J. Yao, Composites, Part B, 2015, 47, 519–539 CAS .
H. C. Aran, D. Salamon, T. Rijnaarts, G. Mul, M. Wessling and R. G. H. Lammertink, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 225, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. Furman, S. Corbel, H. Le Gall, O. Zahraa and M. Bouchy, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2007, 62, 5312–5316 CrossRef CAS .
H. Eskandarloo and A. Badiei, Environ. Technol., 2015, 36, 1063–1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Yuen, Biomicrofluidics, 2016, 10, 044104 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Viskadourakis, M. Sevastaki and G. Kenanakis, Appl. Phys. A, 2018, 124, 585 CrossRef .

          S. Lakshminarayanan, in Micro Nanolithography a Heuristic Aspect on the Enduring Technology, ed. I. Intechopen, http://www.intechopen.com/embed/micro-nanolithography-a-heuristic-aspect-on-the-enduring-technology/micro-nano-patterning-on-polymers-using-soft-lithography-technique,  2018, DOI:  DOI:.
Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1998, 28, 153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, J. A. Rogers, K. E. Paul and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1823–1848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nakamura, X. Li, H. Wang, M. Uehara, M. Miyazaki, H. Shimizu and H. Maeda, Chem. Eng. J., 2004, 101, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
N. Padoin and C. Soares, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 310, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wensink, F. Benito-Lopez, D. C. Hermes, W. Verboom, J. G. E. Gardeniers, D. Reinhoudt and A. van den Berg, Lab Chip, 2005, 5, 280–284 RSC .
Y. Li, B. Lin, L. Ge, H. Guo, X. Chen and M. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Corbel, G. Charles, N. Becheikh, T. Roques-Carmes and O. Zahraa, Virtual and Physical Prototyping, 2012, 7, 203–209 CrossRef .
Z. Han, J. Li, W. He, S. Li, Z. Li, J. Chu and Y. Chen, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 111, 199–203 CrossRef CAS .
G. Takei, T. Kitamori and H.-B. Kim, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 357–360 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rasponi, T. Ullah, R. J. Gilbert, G. B. Fiore and T. A. Thorsen, Med. Eng. Phys., 2011, 33, 887–892 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lei, N. Wang, X. M. Zhang, Q. Tai, D. P. Tsai and H. L. W. Chan, Biomicrofluidics, 2010, 4, 043004 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Meng, X. Zhang and J. Qin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4687–4690 RSC .
A. Vyatskikh, A. Kudo, S. Delalande and J. R. Greer, Mater. Today Commun., 2018, 15, 288–293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Furman, S. Corbel, G. Wild and O. Zahraa, Chem. Eng. Process., 2010, 49, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lee, A. C. Taylor, S. Beirne and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701060 CrossRef .
G. J. Choi, H. Jung, D. H. Kim, Y. Sohn and J. S. Gwag, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 898–906 RSC .
M. A. Torres Arango, D. Kwakye-Ackah, S. Agarwal, R. K. Gupta and K. A. Sierros, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10421–10429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lefevere, S. Mullens and V. Meynen, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 260–268 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cherrington, D. J. Hughes, S. Senthilarasu and V. Goodship, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 866–870 CrossRef CAS .
W. Padrón-Hernández, M. Ceballos-Chuc, D. Pourjafari, G. Oskam, J. Tinoco, A. Martínez-López and G. Rodríguez-Gattorno, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2018, 81, 75–81 CrossRef .
J. S. Gebauer, V. Mackert, S. Ognjanović and M. Winterer, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 526, 400–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Černá, M. Veselý and P. Dzik, Catal. Today, 2011, 161, 97–104 CrossRef .
M. Cerná, M. Veselý, P. Dzik, C. Guillard, E. Puzenat and M. Lepičová, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138–139, 84–94 CrossRef .
M. Arin, P. Lommens, S. C. Hopkins, G. Pollefeyt, J. Van Der Eycken, S. Ricart, X. Granados, B. A. Glowacki and I. Van Driessche, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 165603–165613 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, L. Li, S. Zhang, G. Li and H. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 147, 622–628 CrossRef CAS .

          A. C. Fischer, M. Mäntysalo and F. Niklaus, in Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS Materials and Technologies, ed. M. Tilli, T. Motooka, V.-M. Airaksinen, S. Franssila, M. Paulasto-Kröckel and V. Lindroos, William Andrew Publishing, Boston, 2nd edn,  2015, pp. 550–564, DOI:  DOI: .
R. Suntivich, O. Shchepelina, I. Choi and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3102–3110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Shen, R. Yang, S. Zou, X. Ji, L. Shi, Y. Zhang, D. Liu, L. Xiao, X. Zheng, S. Li, J. Fan and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5733–5739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lawrie, A. Mills and D. Hazafy, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 176, 1154–1159 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bernacka-Wojcik, R. Senadeera, P. J. Wojcik, L. B. Silva, G. Doria, P. Baptista, H. Aguas, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1229–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bernacka-Wojcik, P. J. Wojcik, H. Aguas, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 465, 208–214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Černá, M. Veselý, P. Dzik, C. Guillard, E. Puzenat and M. Lepičová, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138–139, 84–94 CrossRef .
M. Arin, P. Lommens, N. Avci, S. C. Hopkins, K. De Buysser, I. M. Arabatzis, I. Fasaki, D. Poelman and I. Van Driessche, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 31, 1067–1074 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arin, J. Watté, G. Pollefeyt, K. De Buysser, I. Van Driessche and P. Lommens, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2013, 66, 100–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arin, P. Lommens, D. Vandeput, J. Van Acker and I. Van Driessche, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 556, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Torres Arango, A. S. Valença de Andrade, D. T. Cipollone, L. O. Grant, D. Korakakis and K. A. Sierros, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24659–24670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, W. Rong, D. Sun, L. Wang and L. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 248, 613–621 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, M. J. Motala, X. Guo, S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong, J. Yoon, R. G. Nuzzo, J. A. Rogers and J. A. Lewis, Science, 2009, 323, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Ahn, D. J. Lorang, E. B. Duoss and J. A. Lewis, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7118–7120 RSC .
E. B. Duoss, M. Twardowski and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3485–3489 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. T. Arango, O. A. Abidakun, D. Korakakis and K. A. Sierros, Flexible Printed Electron., 2017, 2, 035006 CrossRef .
N. Nayak, N. Vitorino, J. R. Frade, A. V. Kovalevsky, V. D. Alves, J. G. Crespo and C. A. M. Portugal, Mater. Des., 2018, 157, 119–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. MiarAlipour, D. Friedmann, J. Scott and R. Amal, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 341, 404–423 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Torres Arango, N. J. Morris and K. A. Sierros, J. Minerals, 2018, 70, 1823–1829 CAS .
C. M. A. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3876–3893 RSC .
S. Kumar, C. M. A. Parlett, M. A. Isaacs, D. V. Jowett, R. E. Douthwaite, M. C. R. Cockett and A. F. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Sanches, N. Vitorino, C. Freitas, J. C. C. Abrantes, J. R. Frade, J. B. Rodrigues Neto and D. Hotza, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 2577–2585 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamamoto and H. Imai, J. Catal., 2004, 226, 462–465 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tiainen, S. P. Lyngstadaas, J. E. Ellingsen and H. J. Haugen, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2010, 21, 2783–2792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Putz, S. Scherer, M. Ober, R. Morak, O. Paris and N. Hüsing, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800060 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Donia Friedmann	Dr Donia Friedmann is a Chemical Engineer (PhD) having completed her undergraduate and postgraduate studies at School of Chemical Engineering at UNSW in Sydney, Australia in 1996 and 2000 respectively. She is currently working as a researcher at the School of Chemistry at RMIT in Melbourne, Australia. Her research focus has predominately been on photocatalysis for the removal of organic and inorganic pollutants from contaminated water, as well as photocatalyst synthesis and characterisation. Her research encompasses nanoparticle synthesis, materials science, photochemistry and environmental chemistry and aims to better understand the role of material properties in photocatalytic activity.
Adam F. Lee	Adam Lee is Professor of Sustainable Chemistry in the School of Science at RMIT University, having previously held Chair appointments at Cardiff, Warwick, Monash, and Aston universities in parallel with an EPSRC Leadership Fellowship. His research addresses the rational design of nanoengineered materials for clean catalytic technologies, focusing on the production of sustainable chemicals and fuels, and the development and application of in situ methods to provide molecular insight into surface reactions, for which he was awarded the 2011 McBain Prize of the Society of Chemical Industry and 2012 Beilby Medal and Prize by the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Karen Wilson	Karen Wilson is Professor of Catalysis at RMIT University, and was previously a Chair in Catalysis and Research Director in the European Bioenergy Research Institute at Aston University, where she also held a Royal Society Industry Fellowship. Her research interests lie in the design of heterogeneous catalysts for clean chemical synthesis, particularly the design of tunable porous materials for sustainable biofuels and chemicals production from renewable resources. She was educated at the Universities of Cambridge and Liverpool, and following postdoctoral research at Cambridge and the University of York, held academic appointments at York and Cardiff universities.
Rouhollah Jalili	Dr. Rouhollah Jalili is an ARC DECRA Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering at UNSW, Sydney. He was the recipient of Vice Chancellor's Postdoctoral Fellow from RMIT University in 2017 and graphene development fellowship from ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science in 2015. His earlier research was the development of liquid crystalline-based scaffold electrode using industrially scalable techniques such as wet-spinning and 3D printing for energy storage & conversion, electrocatalysis, and bionic applications. Currently, he is utilizing biomimetic systems for tailor-making and self-oriented structures for environmental electrochemical conversion of nitrogen to ammonia.
Rachel Caruso	Prof. Rachel Caruso, Director of the Enabling Capability Platform for Advanced Materials and Professor of Physical Chemistry at RMIT University, studied at The University of Melbourne, Australia, and has worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany, and The University of Melbourne. Her research has focused on controlling the structure of inorganic materials during their synthesis. By careful control of the porosity and ensuring high surface area, the materials have been applied in dye-sensitised and perovskite based solar cells, lithium ion batteries, photocatalysis and as heavy metal adsorbents.

 	Fig. 1  Activation on an intrinsic semiconductor photocatalyst (depicted as blue circle) for water splitting. VB = valence band, CB = conduction band, h+ = hole, e− = electron, hν = energy of a single photon of frequency ν. The bandgap is the energy difference between VB and CB that needs to be overcome for activation. Lightning bolt indicates photocatalyst irradiation. If the photon energy exceeds the bandgap then photoexcitation of an e− from the VB to CB occurs, leaving a h+ in the VB. The e− and h+ may both participate in redox reaction with molecules in close proximity to the semiconductor surface.	 

 	Fig. 2  Charge transfer at a heterojunction of two semiconductors with visible light activation of sensitiser (semiconductor 2) in a type (II) semiconductor heterojunction and charge transfer to semiconductor 1.	 

 	Fig. 3  Hetero-junction geometries: (a) planar, (b) bulk and (c) planar nanorod array ((a) and (b) were adapted from Dai et al.,38 while (c) was adapted from Su et al.39).	 

Soft lithography	PDMS	ZnO, TiO2
Casting and replicating	PDMS	TiO2
CO2 laser technique	PMMA, flat stainless steel plate	TiO2
Molding technology	PDMS	TiO2
Microcapillary	Silica	TiO2
Stereolithography	Epoxy resin	TiO2
UV lithography	Glass	TiO2
Self assembly technique	Slica glass	TiO2/SiO2
Direct write laser lithography	Soda-lime glass	TiO2
UV imprinting lithography	Glass	TiO2
Micromilling	Quartz	TiO2
High-precision milling	Metal-titanium foil, ceramic	TiO2

 	Fig. 4  Different photocatalyst constructions: (a) monoliths fabricated from epoxy resin using Nd-YAG laser stereolithography and impregnated with a uniform layer of TiO2 for methanol degradation74 and (b) microchannel (chip) photoreactor fabricated by CO2 laser technique from PMMA and coated with a TiO2 layer 4-nitrophenol (4 NP) degradation75 (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 5  Steps involved in the fabrication of a porous photocatalytic microreactor built by Aran et al.73 for phenol and methylene blue degradation as model organic pollutants. FOTS = perfluorinated octyltrichlorosilane. CNC milling = computer numerical control milling (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 6  Simplified schematic of FDM fabrication equipment. A thermoplastic filament is fed through the FDM head through rollers and enters a heated liquifying chamber to be extruded in a molten state. The needle tip moves in X–Y directions according to a CAD program to achieve printing on a scaffold on a platform surface which can move in Z-direction.	 

 	Fig. 7  CAD designs and corresponding optical micrographs of FDM fabricated photocatalytic nanocomposite polystyrene/ZnO (or TiO2) nanoparticle systems:77 (a) simple rectangular shaped (10 mm × 10 mm × 1 mm) structure, and (b) rectangular structure with cylindrical pillars. Note cylindrical pillars are not uniformly shaped (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 8  Simplified schematic depicting photolithography processes with three different configurations: contact; proximity; and projection. In step 1: photolithography involves irradiation of a photoresist through an optical system and a patterned mask to transfer a geometrical pattern onto a substrate. In step 2: patterning of the substrate takes place with post-irradiation chemical treatment to achieve the desired pattern on the substrate with the required chemical composition. Chemical treatment can be (i) etching when the photoresist is positive or (ii) deposition of the new material when the photoresist is negative.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of soft lithography procedures (A) replica moulding (REM), (B) microcontact printing μcp, (C) solvent-assisted micromoulding (SAMIM), (D) near field phase shifting photolithography, (E) micromoulding in capillaries (MIMIC) and (F) microtransfer moulding (μTM) (source Xia and Whitesides,80 reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of a stereolithography process which involves the layer-by-layer photo-polymerisation of a liquid resin to create a 3D structure.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of microchannel reactor fabricated by soft lithography developed by Li et al.84 The micro-photocatalytic reactor is integrated with a monochromatic measuring system for real-time spectroscopic monitoring. The photocatalyst membrane (∼20 μm) was integrated into a transparent microchannel (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Concept monolithic photocatalysts91 for a household solar water disinfection device. (b) (i) Top view of a titania octet lattice (optical image), (ii) corresponding SEM image, (iii) representative node in the unit cell of an octet lattice, and (iv) nanocrystallites on the surface of the structure. Scale bars 2 mm for (e), 100 μm for (f), 5 μm for (g), and 500 nm for (h) (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 13  Ti-based electrodes with a microstructure of conical arrays 3D printed using SLM. (a1) Side view – optical images of printed conical arrays of Ti-based electrode comprising 216 cones (over 1 cm2) separated by ≈700 μm (a2) and (a3) corresponding SEM images of anodized Ti-based electrode from top and 30° angled views, respectively. (b1) Side view–optical images of printed conical arrays of Ti-based electrode consisting of 407 cones (over 1 cm2) separated by ≈430 μm (b2) and (b3) corresponding SEM images of anodized Ti-based electrode from top and angled views, respectively. SEM images of (c) top view of a cone, (d) nanotubular structures, and (e) cross-sectional thickness image of the formed nanotubes (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 14  Direct writing: (a) inkjet 3D-printing wherein the ink is jetted onto a support in droplet form and (b) extrusion 3D-printing wherein the ink has a paste-like consistency for printing self-supporting structures.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM image of inkjet printed TiO2 layers fabricated by Cherrington et al.97 at (a) low, and (b) high magnification (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 16  Silicone microchannel reactor printed by Castedo et al.57 (i) Fabrication steps and (ii) (A) photograph of the silicone microreactor loaded with photocatalyst, and (B) optical micrograph of the catalytic layer deposited within a microchannel (reprinted with permission).	 

 	Fig. 17  Hierarchical porous silica and α-quartz 3D printed using silica ink prepared by Putz et al.128 (a) Macroscopic shape of the printed object (photograph), (b) SEM micrograph of the macroporous silica framework and (c) powder XRD confirming successful framework crystallisation into α-quartz (quartz low).	 

Fused deposition modelling (Fig. 6)	Extruded layers of thermoplastics fed as continuous filaments. Method useful for rapid prototyping and for producing advanced composite parts.70 It is technologically simple and inexpensive	FDM suffers from a rough finish and weak mechanical parts. It is limited to thermoplastics	Medium	60–500 μm26
Photolithography (Fig. 8)	A pattern is achieved onto a substrate as light passes through a patterned optical mask. High reproducibility can be achieved. medium cost	Optical mask is required. Cannot modify surface chemistry	Long set up time. Medium print speed	0.5–1 μm, dependent on light source wavelength79
Soft lithography (Fig. 8)	Techniques include microcapillary, molding technology, casting and replicating. Materials that can be fabricated include polymers, colloids, sol–gels, salts and metals. Low/medium cost	Low productivity and difficult to reproduce	Long curing times	0.03–100 μm79
Stereolithography (Fig. 10)	UV laser scanning vat polymerisation. It involves the layer-by-layer photo-polymerisation of a liquid resin to create a 3D structure. It can achieve a smooth surface finish, fine resolution and high quality	Limited range of materials restricted to UV-curable photopolymers based on acrylates, epoxides and urethanes. Medium/high cost	Medium/slow printing speed	60–150 μm68,74
Selective laser sintering and selective laser melting	Laser fusion in a powder bed. Compacted fine powder, metals, alloys and limited polymers.70 Useful for manufacture of high quality, durable, complex parts with fine resolution	Grainy surface finish. High cost	Slow	80–250 μm70
Ink printing (Fig. 14a)	Printed materials jetted as liquid droplets. Can produce multi-component systems. Low ink viscosity is needed to prevent clogging. Medium cost	Low viscosity makes building of 3D structures difficult. 3D structures suffer from low strength and lack of adhesion between layers. Therefore most useful for printing of thin films	Medium	35–130 μm105
DIW, extrusion type printing (Fig. 14b)	Polymers and multiple materials can be printed directly onto a substrate by extrusion of phase through a nozzle. Formulations can be varied to allow printing of multi-component systems. Low cost	Relatively new technique. Improved formulation are needed to enable complex structure fabrication	Medium	1–10 μm26

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
