A trap-assisted ultrasensitive near-infrared organic photomultiple photodetector based on Y-type titanylphthalocyanine nanoparticles   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC00854B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC00854B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5584-5592A trap-assisted ultrasensitive near-infrared organic photomultiple photodetector based on Y-type titanylphthalocyanine nanoparticles†

        
          
            Xiaolong 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shirong 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yin 
            Xiao
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Xianggao 
            Li
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. E-mail: lixianggao@tju.edu.cn
bInnovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin, China
Received 
      29th February 2016
    , Accepted 5th May 2016First published on 20th May 2016AbstractBased on Y-type titanylphthalocyanine nanoparticles (Y-TiOPc NPs) with an average diameter of 2.5 ± 0.6 nm, a trap-assisted ultrasensitive near-infrared organic photodetector (NIR OPD) has been successfully fabricated using the dip-coating process. The prepared OPD exhibited an obvious photomultiplication phenomenon with the highest external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 354200%, an excellent photosensitivity with the maximum photoresponsivity (R) of 2227 A W−1, and an outstanding low-light detection with the highest normalized detectivity (D*) of 3.1 × 1014 Jones under 780 nm illumination with a low intensity of 0.1 μW cm−2 at +15 V μm−1. Such performances were attributed to the ultrasmall Y-YiOPc NPs with remarkable photosensitivity and a high surface-to-volume ratio which can enhance external hole tunneling injection assisted by trapped-electrons at the photoactive layer/ITO interface. The high EQE and R properties of the device, as well as the prompt, steady and reproducible photocurrent response during repeated on/off cycles of illumination, suggested that the prepared OPD was desired for ultrasensitive NIR detection. Therefore, the ultrasmall Y-TiOPc NPs proposed in this study showed great promising application in the large-area and low-cost solution process of ultrasensitive NIR OPDs.
Introduction
Near-infrared organic photodetectors (NIR OPDs) have attracted considerable attention due to their effective applications in the fields of environmental monitoring and remote sensing,1,2 fibre-optic communication,3 night vision surveillance,4 and emerging medical imaging modalities.5,6 So far various device configurations of NIR photodetectors have been invented including Schottky barrier photodiodes and photoconductors.7–10 Owing to the high photoresponsivity from photoconductive gain, large-area detection, a broad selection of materials, and low-cost fabrication, the prototype structure of photoconductive photodetectors offers an attractive alternative for low-light detection without any preamplifier, achieving wide commercial applications.11–13 Lately, Wang et al. reported a NIR OPD with the highest external quantum efficiency of 36500%,10 which adopted a single layered prototype configuration of a photoconductor. However, considerable evidence has been accumulated to indicate that the multilayered structure of organic photoconductors can also effectively enhance the photosensitivity by increasing the exciton dissociation and reducing the recombination of photo-induced charge carriers because excitons are generated and transferred in two discrete layers.14–16
Recently, the main challenges of further exploration of OPDs are to improve the efficiency and photosensitivity, which could be respectively evaluated by the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and photoresponsivity (R).10,17 Photomultiplication, which was firstly discovered in a perylene pigment film for organic materials in 1994 is desirable for highly efficient OPDs.18 The mechanism for this was that the trapped photoinduced holes (electrons) near the organic film/electrode interface could improve the tunnelling injection of electrons (holes), and hence result in EQEs >100%. Therefore, the key step for obtaining the photomultiplication type of organic or hybrid photodetectors is to realize good charge-transport in the active layer while keeping the opposite charges trapped in the active layer and large external charge injection from the external circuit under illumination.19 Recently, Zhang et al. reported interfacial trap-assisted photomultiplication polymer photodetectors based on P3HT and PC71BM as the photoactive layer, which showed a maximum EQE of 16700%.20 Later, the EQE values of photomultiplication polymer photodetectors have been further increased by removing the ultrathin LiF layer and adjusting the self-assembly process of active layers.21,22 The photoresponse range of photomultiplication polymer photodetectors has been extended to the NIR range by doping a narrow band gap material, while maintaining a rather low dark current.23
As organic semiconductors with high photosensitivity can generate a massive amount of free electrons and holes under illumination and electric field, they provide another effective method to enhance the photosensitivity of NIR OPDs. Titanylphthalocyanine (TiOPc) has been widely used in diverse photoelectronic conversion devices,24–26 in virtue of its high photosensitivity as well as outstanding thermal, chemical, and optoelectronic properties.27,28 The photosensitivity of TiOPc depends on both the particle size and crystal form.29,30 The photosensitive materials with a smaller particle size could afford a larger number of nanoparticles and a higher surface-to-volume ratio (3/r for spherical particles) when the same mass is added into the photoactive layer. Only excitons generated near the surface of nanoparticles can diffuse efficiently to the CGM/CTM (charge-generation material/charge-transportation material) interface and hence participate in the charge separation, whereas it is difficult for photoinduced excitons in the interior of the particles to reach the particle surface due to deactivation. Therefore, the smaller diameter of photosensitive nanoparticles favors the efficiency of photoinduced charge generation and separation.30,31 Wang et al. reported that the E0.5 value of the photoreceptors (E0.5 represents the illumination energy required to photodischarge half of the initial potential) based on TiOPc decreased from 5.33 to 1.35 μJ cm−2 as the average diameter of TiOPc particles decreased from 281 to 20 nm, which indicated that a smaller particle size results in higher photosensitivity.29,32,33 Among various polymorphs of TiOPc nanoparticles, Y-TiOPc shows the best photo-induced charge generation property in the near-infrared region, with the photogeneration quantum yield of e–h pairs larger than 90% under a high electric field.29,34 However, the insolubility and poor dispersity of Y-TiOPc nanoparticles in almost all kinds of common solvents and polymer matrices limit their solution-processed applications. Ultrasmall Y-TiOPc nanoparticles offer an alternative approach to counteract their insolubility and hard dispersibility. Recently, we have successfully prepared Y-TiOPc nanoparticles (Y-TiOPc NPs) with an average diameter of 2.3 ± 0.8 nm using the microemulsion phase transfer method.35 The photoreceptors containing ultrasmall Y-TiOPc NPs afforded an ultra-photosensitivity with E1/2 = 0.064 μJ cm−2. Thus, a solution-processed high performance NIR OPD based on the ultrasmall Y-TiOPc NPs was expected to be realized with both high efficiency and photosensitivity.
Motivated by the above-mentioned results and predictions, here we reported a study on the performance of a solution-processed NIR OPD with a multilayered photoconductor structure. The Y-TiOPc NPs with an average diameter of 2.5 ± 0.6 nm acted as photoactive materials for generating e–h pairs, and m-TPD acted as the hole transport material for transporting the holes. The prepared NIR OPD exhibited excellent photoelectric performances for low-light detection, such as the maximum EQE of 354200%, the highest R of 2227 A W−1, and the highest normalized detectivity (D*) of 3.1 × 1014 Jones under 780 nm illumination with a low-intensity of 0.1 μW cm−2 at +15 V μm−1 (the exposure radius is 0.9 mm, corresponding to an illumination power of 2.5 × 10−9 W). Such performances are much better than those of ever reported NIR OPDs, or even comparable to those observed for inorganic counterparts. The influences of illumination intensity and electric field intensity on the R and EQE values of the OPD were comprehensively investigated. The ratio of external charge injection efficiency to internal photogeneration charge efficiency (ηinj/e–h) was firstly calculated, which demonstrated that the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs is of the electron trap-assisted photomultiplication type. The photocurrent response of the prepared OPD was prompt, steady and reproducible during repeated on/off cycles of different illumination intensities.
Experimental
Materials
The Y-TiOPc NPs with an average diameter of 2.5 ± 0.6 nm were prepared using the microemulsion phase transfer method as reported previously.35 Other starting materials were all commercially available and used as received without further purification if not specially mentioned. PVB (polyvinyl butyral, MW = 90000–120000) and PC (polycarbonate, MW = 45000) were purchased from Aladdin Industrial Corporation (Beijing, China) and Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, Missouri, USA), respectively. m-TPD (N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-di(3-tolyl)-4-benzidine) was purchased from Aladdin Industrial Corporation. Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), cyclohexanone (CYC) and other reagents were supplied by Jiangtian Chemical Technology Co., Ltd (Tianjin, China) and redistilled before use. Water was purified using an Ultra-pure Water System (Beijing Epoch Company).
Fabrication of NIR OPDs
0.2 g of Y-TiOPc was mixed with 0.2 g of PVB dissolved in 21 mL of MEK/CYC solution (v/v = 6:1) to afford a stable suspension. After ball-milling for 2 h, the photosensitive dispersion was dip-coated onto the ITO glass (3.6 cm × 3.6 cm) and dried at 60 °C for 30 min to afford a photoactive film with a thickness of 1.0 μm. The hole-transport solution was composed of PC (1.5 g), m-TPD (1.5 g) and 1,2-dichloroethane (25 mL). The hole-transport layer (12.2 μm) was deposited on top of the photoactive layer by the dip-coating process, and then dried at 80 °C for 60 min. Aluminium electrodes (100 nm) were thermally evaporated using a shadow mask.
Characterization
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of TiOPc were recorded using a Rigaku MinFlex600 diffractometer (Rigaku Corporation, Japan). The TEM photos of Y-TiOPc NPs were collected using a JEM2100F with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV (Japan Electronics Co., Ltd, Japan). The thicknesses of functional layers were measured using a surface roughness tester (DEKTAK-6M, Vecco, USA). The I–E (current–electric field) curves were recorded using a Keithley 2400 source meter (Keithley Instruments Inc. USA) and an optically shielded box. For illumination of the photodetector at 780 nm, a 150 W halogen lamp in combination with a narrow-band filter of 780 nm was used. The illumination intensity was adjusted using a Gigahertz-Optik X 11 optometer (Gigahertz-Optik GmbH, Germany). Photo-induced discharging curves were measured on a QEA PDT-2000LTM photoconducting printer test system (Quality Engineering Associates, Inc. USA).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a is the TEM picture of Y-TiOPc NPs in the PVB film, which verifies that the prepared Y-TiOPc NPs with an ultrasmall particle size present excellent dispersibility without large congeries in the PVB film. Furthermore, the high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of Y-TiOPc NPs (Fig. 1b) shows an interplanar distance of 0.32 nm, which is in accordance with the lattice spacing between the neighboring planes of Y-TiOPc at the 27.3° diffraction peak (calculated by Bragg's law).36Fig. 1c presents the diameter distribution of the prepared Y-TiOPc NPs selected from Fig. 1a and the average diameter is 2.5 ± 0.6 nm. It is well known that Y-TiOPc is prone to transform into the most stable β-TiOPc under mechanical force. The crystal stability of the prepared Y-TiOPc NPs is investigated. As shown in Fig. 1d, the XRD patterns exhibit a typical Y-type crystal form featuring diffraction peaks at 9.6°, 24.1°, and 27.3° and show no obvious change after ball-milling for 2 h. These results reveal that the prepared Y-TiOPc NPs could present high polymorph stability and dispersibility in PVB resin.
 Fig. 1  (a) TEM photograph of the Y-TiOPc NPs embedded in the PVB film, the mass ratio of Y-TiOPc to PVB is 1:1; (b) HRTEM photograph of the crystal lattice of a Y-TiOPc nanoparticle in (a); (c) size distribution of the Y-TiOPc NPs embedded in the PVB film, the inset shows the 3D model of a TiOPc molecule; (d) XRD patterns of Y-TiOPc NPs before (black curve) and after 2 h ball milling (red curve) in PVB/MEK/CYC. 

Fig. 2 illustrates the configuration of the multilayered OPD: ITO/photoactive layer (1 μm)/hole transport layer (12.2 μm)/Al (100 nm). The functional layers mainly consist of the photoactive layer and the hole transport layer. The photoactive layer of the OPD can be considered as an assembly of many quantum heterojunctions of Y-TiOPc NPs (Fig. 1a).10 The multilayered prototype configuration can compartmentalize the process of photocurrent generation into two discrete parts, the photoactive layer for generating e–h pairs and the hole transport layer for transporting the charges.29 Therefore, this device configuration could be expected to improve the photodetection performance by increasing the exciton dissociation and reducing the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers.14–16
 Fig. 2  The configuration of an OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs as a photoactive material. 

Fig. 3a shows the I–E curves of the OPD in the dark and under different light intensities, which shows a good unilateral conductivity property. It is well known that the photocurrents are codetermined by charge carrier transport and charge carrier injection barriers in OPDs. The energy levels of the used materials can be well explained by this phenomenon. Fig. 3b and c depict the energy level diagrams and photogenerated charge-transport routes of the OPD under forward electric field and reverse electric field, respectively. Under the forward electric field, holes generated by Y-TiOPc NPs can easily transport from the HOMO level of Y-TiOPc (−5.7 eV) onto the HOMO level of m-TPD (−5.5 eV) because the 0.2 eV offset is propitious to help the hole transport process,37,38 and electrons can also effectively transport from the LUMO of Y-TiOPc (−4.0 eV) onto the Fermi level of ITO (−4.7 eV) due to the same reason. However, under the reverse electric field, electrons can very hardly transport from the LUMO of Y-TiOPc (−4.0 eV) onto the LUMO level of m-TPD (−2.4 eV) due to a large energy barrier of 1.6 eV. Therefore, the charge transport ability under the forward electric field is much stronger than that under the reverse electric field, which makes the OPD present an excellent unilateral conductivity phenomenon.
 Fig. 3  (a) I–E curves of the prepared Y-TiOPc NPs as a photoactive material in the dark and under different light intensities (λ = 780 nm); (b and c) the energy level diagrams and photogenerated charge transport routes under the forward electric field and reverse electric field, respectively. 

Fig. 3a also shows that the dark current of the device under the forward electric field is larger than that under the reverse electric field. The dark current of the OPD is influenced by both charge transportation in the functional layer and charge injection barriers from electrodes to the photoactive layer.20 The dark current variation under reverse and forward electric fields can be easily understood from the energy level diagrams, as shown in Fig. 4. Although the barrier for electron injection from ITO onto the LUMO of TiOPc is only 0.7 eV, the injected-electrons could be hardly transported through the hole transport layer as a result of a relatively large LUMO barrier of 1.6 eV from TiOPc to m-TPD under the reverse electric field (Fig. 4a), whereas, under the forward electric field (Fig. 4b), the hole injection barrier between ITO and TiOPc is 1.0 eV. The injected-holes could effectively transport from TiOPc to m-TPD due to a small offset of 0.2 eV, resulting in a relatively large dark current.
 Fig. 4  The energy level diagrams and charge carrier injection routes under reverse (a) and forward (b) electric fields in the dark. 
With the increasing electric field (0 to +15 V μm−1) and light intensity (0.1–10 μW cm−2), the photocurrents significantly increase compared to the dark currents. Even under a low-intensity NIR light irradiation of 0.1 μW cm−2 (corresponding to an incident power of 2.5 × 10−9 W), the photodetector also shows a remarkable photocurrent enhancement phenomenon. As we all know, the good matching degree of energy levels between two different materials is energetically favorable for hole/electron transport at the interface.10,39 As shown in Fig. 3b, the hole transport is more efficient than electron transport because the HOMO offset (0.2 eV) between Y-TiOPc and m-TPD is smaller than the offset (0.7 eV) between the LUMO level of Y-TiOPc and the Fermi level of ITO. Therefore, the imbalanced transport of holes and electrons in the functional layers can evidently give rise to the formation of trapped electrons and enhance the tunneling injection of external holes, resulting in the electron trap-assisted photomultiplication type of NIR OPDs.18,40
For a better comparison of the influence of the diameter of Y-TiOPc particles on the photoelectric performance of the OPD, the OPD based on Y-TiOPc macroparticles (Y-TiOPc MPs) with an average diameter of 35.6 ± 10.6 nm was also fabricated (Fig. S1, ESI†). The related photosensitive characteristics (I–E curves, R and EQE) of the OPD containing Y-TiOPc MPs in the dark and under different light intensities are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Obviously, the photocurrents of the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs are much larger than that of the OPD with Y-TiOPc MPs under the same conditions. As the only difference between the two devices is the particle size of Y-TiOPc, both the particle number and surface-to-volume ratio must be responsible for this phenomenon.

Fig. 5 illustrates the EQE values as a function of electric field intensity and light intensity. The EQE can be defined as the ratio of the number of photogenerated carries to incident photons, using the following equation:12 (1)where Iph the photocurrent, Ilight the current under illumination, Idark the current in the dark, h is the Planck constant, c the velocity of light, e the elementary charge, Pinc the incident illumination intensity, A the illumination area, and λpeak the peak wavelength of the incident light.
 Fig. 5  EQE of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs as a function of electric field under different light intensities (λ = 780 nm). 
As shown in Fig. 5, EQE is positively correlated with the electric field intensity and negatively related to the illumination intensity. This phenomenon can be well explained by the following equation:41 (2)where, χ is the fraction of excitons that dissociate into charge carriers, τ is the lifetime of the trapped-electrons, μ is the field-dependent hole carrier mobility, E is the electric field intensity, L is the device thickness. It is apparent that all χ, τ and μ are increased with the increment of electric field,10,42 resulting in the EQE values positively correlated with the electric field intensity. The EQE values decreased with the increasing illumination intensity under the same electric field, which can be explained by the following reasons: (1) there are two kinds of electron trap states under illumination, long lifetime electron trap states for high photoconductive gain and short lifetime electron trap states for low photoconductive gain.17 Increasing the illumination intensity decreases the density of long-lived trap states and the short-lived trap states account for a significant component of the carrier lifetime,17 resulting in a shorter charge carrier lifetime and a lower EQE value; (2) excess excitons generated by increasing the illumination intensity can result in less effective trapping due to the saturation of the electron trap states and reducing the hole mobility, which will also decrease the EQE values.43–45 Therefore, as shown in Fig. 5, the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs has high photosensitivity under low-level illumination intensity, and exhibits intrinsic dynamic-range-enhancing gain compression under increasing illumination intensity. The EQE of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs is as high as 354200% for an illumination intensity of 0.1 μW cm−2 and an electric field intensity of +15 V μm−1, which is much better than that of ever reported NIR OPDs. The EQE higher than 100% suggests that the OPD with the Y-TiOPc NPs exhibits the photomultiplication phenomenon.18,46,47 The possibility of multiple excitons generated by one photon can be excluded in virtue of not enough high photon energy for this process.48,49 Extra charges injected from the external circuit must exist.
For studying the existence of extra charge injection from the external circuit, OPDs without an aluminum electrode on the surface of the hole transport layer (the other layers have the same composition with Fig. 2) are designed to investigate the internal photogeneration charge efficiency (ηe–h) as shown in Fig. 6. The photoconductive properties of OPDs fabricated using Y-TiOPc NPs and Y-TiOPc MPs are investigated by photoinduced discharging measurements on the advanced photoconducting printer test system (PDT-2000LTM of QEA Inc., USA). The typical measurement processes can be described as (1) suitable negative corona charging voltages adjust the electric field intensities of OPDs to be 15 ± 0.1 V μm−1 and 9 ± 0.1 V μm−1, respectively, and (2) then an electrostatic voltmeter and LED erase light source (λ = 780 nm) scan at a speed of 200 mm s−1. The illumination time for one scanning process is 0.115 s.
 Fig. 6  Schematics of the configuration and the photodischarge process of a multilayer OPD. 
The illumination energy increased from 0–11.5 μJ cm−2. Therefore, the illumination intensity increased from 0–10 μW cm−2 with the increase of the scanning time; (3) the photo-induced discharging curve can be obtained with x-axis representing the exposure intensity and y-axis the electric field intensity. Normally, an OPD is a large-area thin film device that converts photons into charges. Illumination of the OPD results in the formation of e–h pairs in the photoactive layer. Then, the photogenerated holes subsequently inject into the CTL wherein the injected holes migrate across the CTL under the influence of the applied electric field to discharge the device. Therefore, using this configuration and the photoinduced discharging method to measure ηe–h can completely avoid injection of extra charges from the external circuit. The calculated quantum efficiency of the OPD (Fig. 6) is the internal photogeneration charge efficiency (ηe–h) which is responsible for the internal current absolutely generated by the functional layer. So, the external charge injection efficiency (ηinj = EQE − ηe–h) can be obtained, which is responsible for the external injection current from the external circuit.
The physics of an OPD can be considered as a parallel plate capacitor. After illumination, the number of surface charge variations which is equal to the number of photogenerated carriers (Ne–h) can be calculated using the following equation: (3)where, εr is the relative permittivity of functional layers (3.0 measured by AC impedance spectroscopy measurement), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, S the exposure area, and ΔE the variation of electric field intensity.
The number of incident photons (Np) can be calculated as: (4)where, t is the illumination time. Therefore, the internal photogeneration charge efficiency can be described as: (5) As shown in Fig. 7a and b, the electric field intensity of OPDs decreases with the increment of illumination intensity. The electric field variation of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs under the same illumination intensity is obviously higher than that of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc MPs, which indirectly proves that Y-TiOPc NPs can not only generate more e–h pairs than Y-TiOPc MPs, but also show better photosensitivity than Y-TiOPc MPs under the same conditions.
 Fig. 7  Electric field intensity of OPDs as a function of illumination intensity, with the initial electric field intensity fixed at (a) 9 V μm−1, (b) 15 V μm−1 before each illumination; internal photogeneration charge efficiency (ηe–h) as a function of illumination intensity under an electric field intensity of (c) 9 V μm−1, (d) 15 V μm−1. 

Fig. 7c, d and Table S1 (ESI†) show that ηe–h of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs is larger than that of the OPD containing Y-TiOPc MPs under the same conditions. The ηe–h is positively correlated with the electric field intensity and negatively related with the illumination intensity. This is because the increasing electric field intensity can enhance the efficiency of e–h pairs separated into free carriers and prevent the recombination of free carriers. The maximum ηe–h obtained under the lowest illumination intensity suggests that Y-TiOPc NPs have excellent photosensitivity and could harvest photons effectively even under low-level near-infrared detection.

Fig. 8 shows the ratio of the external charge injection efficiency to internal photogeneration charge efficiency (ηinj/e–h) as a function of illumination intensity under different electric field intensities. As shown in Fig. 8, the ηinj/e–h of the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs is much larger than that of the OPD with Y-TiOPc MPs, which indicates that the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs has a much better external injection current effect than the OPD containing Y-TiOPc MPs. ηinj/e–h increasing with the electric field intensity implies that increasing the electric field intensity is propitious for the effect of external charge injection. It is noteworthy that the ηinj/e–h values of the two OPDs are all much larger than 1, especially for the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs. This phenomenon further demonstrates that the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs exhibits the dominant type of external hole injection from the external circuit. Trapped electrons at the interface of the ITO/photoactive layer must promote this process.
 Fig. 8  The ratio of ηinj to ηe–h (ηinj/e–h) as a function of illumination intensity under an electric field intensity of (a) 9 V μm−1, (b) 15 V μm−1. 
Based on the EQE–E curves (Fig. 5), the key forward electric fields (corresponding to an EQE = 100%) of OPDs based on Y-TiOPc NPs and Y-TiOPc MPs under different illumination intensities are depicted in Fig. 9a. The key forward electric field intensity of the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs as the photoactive material is obviously smaller than that containing Y-TiOPc MPs under the same illumination intensity, which indicates that the hole injection barrier of the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs is smaller than that of the OPD containing Y-TiOPc MPs. Huang et al. have reported that the degree of interfacial band bending is dependent on the density of nanoparticles at the photoactive film/electrode interface. Only charges trapped near the injecting interface can result in the interfacial band bending, which can trigger on the opposite charge tunneling injection and bring about photocurrent multiplication.50–52 Both the particle number and the surface-to-volume ratio of Y-TiOPc NPs are much larger than that of Y-TiOPc MPs when the same mass of Y-TiOPc is added into the photoactive layer, which enhances the trapped-electron efficiency of the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs under illumination. The photogenerated trapped-electrons near the photoactive layer/ITO interface can create a Coulomb field to induce interfacial band bending which can narrow the interfacial barrier for better hole tunneling injection from ITO onto the HOMO of Y-TiOPc (Fig. 9b). Therefore, many electron trapping sites formed at the interfaces result in a measured EQE much greater than 100%. Compared with the EQE values of the two OPDs, both the particle size and the surface-to-volume ratio of Y-TiOPc are significant for this high photoconductive gain. The small particle size and nearly monodisperse Y-TiOPc particles are beneficial to enhance the photoconductive gain.
 Fig. 9  (a) Key forward electric fields (corresponding to an EQE = 100%) of OPDs based on Y-TiOPc NPs and Y-TiOPc MPs under different illumination intensities; (b) hole injection routes during the interfacial trap-assisted charge injection process. 
As illustrated in Fig. 10, the number of Y-TiOPc MPs is evidently less than that of Y-TiOPc NPs at the interface of the photoactive layer and ITO because the average diameter of Y-TiOPc MPs is almost 14 times larger than that of Y-TiOPc NPs. The number of electrons trapped at the latter interface is much larger than that at the former interface, resulting in a stronger Coulomb field and a narrower hole injection barrier in the OPD containing Y-TiOPc NPs. Therefore, the degree of the energy level bending of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs is obviously higher than that of the OPD with Y-TiOPc MPs, which could be beneficial to enhance the probability of the hole tunneling injection and obtain relatively higher EQE values under the same conditions.
 Fig. 10  Energy level bending comparison between the Y-TiOPc MPs and Y-TiOPc NPs in the photoactive films. 
The signal component of the sensitivity of an OPD is evaluated from the photoresponsivity (R), which is typically defined by the following equations:53 (6)Fig. 11 illustrates the R values as a function of illumination intensity and electric field intensity. As excepted, R and EQE have the same light intensity dependence. R is negatively related to the illumination intensity and positively correlated with the electric field intensity. This phenomenon is a typical feature of gain-generating photodetectors because excess excitons generated by increasing the illumination intensity result in electron trap filling and thus a less effective trapping mechanism.54,55 The maximum R (2227 A W−1) is obtained in the state of 0.1 μW cm−2 and +15 V μm−1. The highest photoresponsivity is observed under the lowest illumination intensity condition relevant to ultrasensitive detection. The R of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs is much larger than that of Y-TiOPc MPs under the same conditions (Fig. S2, ESI†). This phenomenon further proves that the ultrasmall Y-TiOPc NPs can endow the OPD with excellent photosensitivity even under low illumination intensity.
 Fig. 11  
R as a function of illumination intensity under different electric field intensities (λ = 780 nm). 
Besides EQE and R, the third figure of merit (FOM) used for evaluating the performance of an OPD is the normalized detectivity (D*, in units of Jones to characterize the sensitivity). A higher D* indicates the ability to detect a lower level of illumination power. The D*, expressed by eqn (7), is also used to estimate the signal-to-noise ratio of OPDs.14 (7) The calculated D* as a function of electric field intensity is shown in Fig. 12. Evidently, the large photoresponsibility and small dark current of an OPD are propitious for distinguishing from very weak NIR light signals. Under an electric field intensity of 10 V μm−1 (the incident illumination intensity: 0.1 μW cm−2), the calculated D* for the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs (2.6 × 1014 Jones) is approximately 24 times larger than that for the OPD containing Y-TiOPc MPs (1.1 × 1013 Jones). Such performance is comparable to that observed for inorganic counterparts.
 Fig. 12  Calculated D* for OPDs based on Y-TiOPc NPs (square symbol) and Y-TiOPc MPs (circle symbol) as a function of electric field intensity under 780 nm light illumination (0.1 μW cm−2). 
As shown in Fig. 13, the photocurrent responses of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs are characterized under 780 nm illumination with incident intensities of 0.1 and 1 μW cm−2. The NIR light is periodically turned on and off, and the operating electric field intensity is fixed at +7.7 V μm−1. It could be very clearly found that the photocurrent responds sensitively to the illumination intensity. Both the photocurrent responses are prompt, steady and reproducible during the repeated on/off cycles of illumination, indicating the OPD can act as a high-quality photosensitive switch. The transient photocurrents coming into the saturation state after illumination indicate that the electron trapping and releasing processes can rapidly achieve a dynamic balance for a stable hole tunneling injection. The device exhibits a fast photoresponse process before reaching saturation photocurrent when the illumination is turned on. As shown in the above analysis, this behavior can be attributed to the excellent photosensitivity of the ultrasmall Y-TiOPc NPs which can harvest light energy effectively and generate enough trapped-electrons at the photoactive layer/ITO interface to increase hole tunneling injection from ITO to the photoactive layer during the illumination. However, the transient photocurrent curves show a relatively slow decay process before reaching the initial state (dark current) when the illumination is turned off. The residual trapped-electrons could be responsible for the phenomenon. It should take time to release the residual trapped-electrons, which causes the relatively slow response of current under dark circumstance.
 Fig. 13  The photoresponse characteristics of the prepared NIR OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs at +7.7 V μm−1 with incident illumination intensities of 0.1 and 1 μW cm−2 (λ = 780 nm). 
To summarise, such notable performance of the NIR OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs, particularly in terms of R, EQE and D*, can be attributed to the large particle number, surface-to-volume ratio, high photosensitivity, multilayered device configuration and high crystallinity of Y-TiOPc NPs. The first three are due to the nanoparticle geometry (only 2.5 nm) and the intrinsic photoelectric nature of Y-TiOPc NPs, and the last two are propitious for reducing the recombination probability of e–h pairs and generate more trapped-electrons at the ITO/photoactive layer interface to increase the probability of hole injection from the external circuit.42
Conclusions
In this paper, a trap-assisted ultrasensitive NIR OPD containing Y-TiOPc NPs with an average diameter of 2.5 ± 0.6 nm was successfully fabricated by dip-coating in solution. The prepared OPD exhibited excellent photosensitive performances for low-light detection, such as the maximum EQE of 354200%, the highest R of 2227 A W−1, and the largest D* of 3.1 × 1014 Jones under 780 nm with a low-intensity of 0.1 μW cm−2 at + 15 V μm−1 (corresponding to an illumination power of 2.5 × 10−9 W). Such performances are much better than those of ever reported NIR OPDs, or even comparable to those observed for inorganic counterparts. The ultrasmall Y-YiOPc NPs with remarkable photosensitivity and a high surface-to-volume ratio were beneficial for excellent performances, which can enhance external hole tunneling injection assisted by trapped-electrons at the photoactive layer/ITO interface. The calculated ηinj/e–h demonstrated that the OPD with Y-TiOPc NPs was of the electron trap-assisted photomultiplication type. The photoresponse characteristic of the prepared NIR OPD is prompt, steady and reproducible during repeated on/off cycles of different illumination intensities. Therefore, the ultrasmall Y-TiOPc NPs proposed in this study provide ease of processing, low cost, a large device area coverage, physical flexibility and convenient material integration compared to conventional epitaxially grown, lattice-matched, crystalline semiconductor devices, which can not only be used in ultrasensitive NIR OPDs for low-light detection, but also have promising applications in the other solution-processed electronic and photoelectronic fields, such as photoactive media for organic photodiodes, organic phototransistors, organic solar cell, etc.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (No. 2015AA033402), National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 21206110) and Tianjin Science and Technology Support Plan Key Projects (No. 13ZCZDGX00900).
References
R. Schödel, T. Ott, R. Genzel, R. Hofmann, M. Lehnert, A. Eckart, N. Mouawad, T. Alexander, M. J. Reid, R. Lenzen, M. Hartung, F. Lacombe, D. Rouan, E. Gendron, G. Rousset, A. M. Lagrange, W. Brandner, N. Ageorges, C. Lidman, A. F. M. Moorwood, J. Spyromilio, N. Hubin and K. M. Menten, Nature, 2002, 419, 694–696 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ettl, I. Chao, F. Diederich and R. L. Whetten, Nature, 1991, 353, 149–153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Zhu, M. B. Yu, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 081103 CrossRef .
M. Ettenberg, Adv. Imaging, 2005, 20, 29–33 Search PubMed .
E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 515–524 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, Y. T. Lim, E. G. Soltesz, A. M. D. Grand, J. Lee, A. Nakayama, J. A. Parker, T. Mihaljevic, R. G. Laurence, D. M. Dor, L. H. Cohn, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 93–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Casalino, L. Sirleto, M. Iodice, N. Saffioti, M. Gioffrè, I. Rendina and G. Coppola, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 241112 CrossRef .
L. B. Luo, H. Hu, X. H. Wang, R. Liu, Y. F. Zou, Y. Q. Yu and F. X. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4723–4728 RSC .
S. Kazaoui, N. Minami, B. Nalini and Y. Kim, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 084314 CrossRef .
W. L. Peng, Y. C. Liu, C. X. Wang, R. Hu, J. P. Zhang, D. S. Xu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5073–5077 RSC .
J. Qi, L. Ni, D. Z. Yang, X. K. Zhou, W. Q. Qiao, M. Li, D. G. Ma and Z. Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2431–2438 RSC .
K. J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4267–4295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Jin and J. Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7996–8002 RSC .
X. Gong, M. Tong, Y. Xia, W. Cai, J. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Zimmermana, E. K. Yu, V. V. Diev, K. Hanson, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 869–873 CrossRef .
I. H. Campbell and B. K. Crone, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 263302 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hiramoto, T. Imahigashi and M. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 187–189 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Melancon and S. R. Živanovic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 163301 CrossRef .
L. L. Li, F. J. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. S. An, Q. Q. Sun, W. B. Wang, J. Zhang and F. Teng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li, F. J. Zhang, W. B. Wang, Q. S. An, J. Wang, Q. Q. Sun and M. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5890 CAS .
W. B. Wang, F. J. Zhang, L. L. Li, M. Gao and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22660 CAS .
W. B. Wang, F. J. Zhang, L. L. Li, M. Zhang, Q. S. An, J. Wang and Q. Q. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7386 RSC .
S. H. Wu, W. L. Li, B. Chu, Z. S. Su, F. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 023305 CrossRef .
K. Vasseur, K. Broch, A. L. Ayzner, B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, C. Frank, F. Schreiber, M. F. Toney, L. Froyen and P. Heremans, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8505–8515 CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. B. McKeown, Phthalocyanine Materials: Synthesis, Structure, and Function, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1998 Search PubMed .
G. De la Torre, P. Vázquez, F. Agulló-López and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3723–3750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Law, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 449–486 CrossRef CAS .
T. Niimi and M. Umeda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3657–3661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and D. J. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1521–1525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Chen, K. J. Jiang, M. Wang and S. L. Yang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1998, 117, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Chen, C. Pan and M. Wang, Nanostruct. Mater., 1999, 11, 523–530 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Weiss and M. Abkowitz, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 479–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, Y. Xiao, S. R. Wang and X. G. Li, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 125, 44–53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oda, T. Homma and Y. Fujimaki, Electrophotography, 1990, 29, 250–258 CAS .
X. H. Kong, M. Wang, S. B. Lei, Y. L. Yang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4265–5269 RSC .
M. B. Khalifa, D. Vaufrey and J. Tardy, Org. Electron., 2004, 5, 187–198 CrossRef .
Y. K. Song, S. T. Lv, X. C. Liu, X. G. Li, S. R. Wang, H. Y. Wei, D. M. Li, Y. Xiao and Q. B. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15239–15242 RSC .
H. Y. Chen, M. K. F. Lo, G. W. Yang, H. G. Monbouquette and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 543–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.
H. Campbell and B. K. Crone, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 024502 CrossRef .
K. Watanabe, A. Kinoshita, N. Hirose and A. Itami, Konica Tech. Rep., 1990, 3, 108 Search PubMed .
M. Sofos, J. Goldberger, D. A. Stone, J. E. Allen, Q. Ma, D. J. Herman, W. W. Tsai, L. J. Lauhon and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 68–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Z. Bao and J. H. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 629–639 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3745–3749 CrossRef CAS .
J. Reynaert, V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and J. Poortmans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 784–790 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Decoster and J. Harari, Optoelectronic Sensors, Wiley-ISTE, London,  2009 Search PubMed .
R. D. Schaller, V. M. Agranovich and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, M. Fischbein, M. Drndic and S. Selmic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 093103 CrossRef .
L. Shen, Y. J. Fang, Q. F. Dong, Z. G. Xiao and J. S. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 023301 CrossRef .
F. W. Guo, B. Yang, Y. B. Yuan, Z. G. Xiao, Q. F. Dong, Y. Bi and J. S. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 798–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, C. Bi, Q. F. Dong, F. W. Guo, Y. B. Yuan, Y. J. Fang, Z. G. Xiao and J. S. Huang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 549–554 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Hou, Z. X. Mei and X. L. Du, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 283001 CrossRef .
B. T. Lim, I. Kang, C. M. Kim, S. Y. Kim, S. K. Kwon, Y. H. Kim and D. S. Chung, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, B. T. Lim, B. S. Kim, H. J. Son and D. S. Chung, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5482 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc00854bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) TEM photograph of the Y-TiOPc NPs embedded in the PVB film, the mass ratio of Y-TiOPc to PVB is 1:1; (b) HRTEM photograph of the crystal lattice of a Y-TiOPc nanoparticle in (a); (c) size distribution of the Y-TiOPc NPs embedded in the PVB film, the inset shows the 3D model of a TiOPc molecule; (d) XRD patterns of Y-TiOPc NPs before (black curve) and after 2 h ball milling (red curve) in PVB/MEK/CYC.	 

 	Fig. 2  The configuration of an OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs as a photoactive material.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) I–E curves of the prepared Y-TiOPc NPs as a photoactive material in the dark and under different light intensities (λ = 780 nm); (b and c) the energy level diagrams and photogenerated charge transport routes under the forward electric field and reverse electric field, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  The energy level diagrams and charge carrier injection routes under reverse (a) and forward (b) electric fields in the dark.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  EQE of the OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs as a function of electric field under different light intensities (λ = 780 nm).	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  Schematics of the configuration and the photodischarge process of a multilayer OPD.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 7  Electric field intensity of OPDs as a function of illumination intensity, with the initial electric field intensity fixed at (a) 9 V μm−1, (b) 15 V μm−1 before each illumination; internal photogeneration charge efficiency (ηe–h) as a function of illumination intensity under an electric field intensity of (c) 9 V μm−1, (d) 15 V μm−1.	 

 	Fig. 8  The ratio of ηinj to ηe–h (ηinj/e–h) as a function of illumination intensity under an electric field intensity of (a) 9 V μm−1, (b) 15 V μm−1.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Key forward electric fields (corresponding to an EQE = 100%) of OPDs based on Y-TiOPc NPs and Y-TiOPc MPs under different illumination intensities; (b) hole injection routes during the interfacial trap-assisted charge injection process.	 

 	Fig. 10  Energy level bending comparison between the Y-TiOPc MPs and Y-TiOPc NPs in the photoactive films.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 11  
R as a function of illumination intensity under different electric field intensities (λ = 780 nm).	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 12  Calculated D* for OPDs based on Y-TiOPc NPs (square symbol) and Y-TiOPc MPs (circle symbol) as a function of electric field intensity under 780 nm light illumination (0.1 μW cm−2).	 

 	Fig. 13  The photoresponse characteristics of the prepared NIR OPD based on Y-TiOPc NPs at +7.7 V μm−1 with incident illumination intensities of 0.1 and 1 μW cm−2 (λ = 780 nm).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc00854b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
