The use of process simulation in supercritical fluids applications  - Reaction Chemistry & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9RE00465C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9RE00465C
(Review Article)
React. Chem. Eng., 2020, 5, 424-451The use of process simulation in supercritical fluids applications

        
          
            Francisco Javier 
            Gutiérrez Ortiz
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Andrea 
            Kruse
          
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería, University of Seville, Camino de los Descubrimientos s/n, 41092 Sevilla, Spain. E-mail: frajagutor@us.es
bDepartment of Conversion Technologies and of Biobased Products, Institute of Agricultural Engineering, University of Hohenheim, Garbenstrasse 9, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany
Received 
      5th December 2019
    , Accepted 16th January 2020First published on 16th January 2020AbstractThe use of supercritical fluids is spreading more and more throughout the world. The interest in them and their applications is clear from the increasing number of papers and patents in the last few years, as well as by the number of new research groups and facilities. When applied to process engineering, mathematical modelling is a powerful tool to gain insight into the impact of the process parameters under a large variety of conditions, which reduces the required experimentation and, hence, the economic and time resources. This review deals with modelling at molecule scale (molecular dynamics) and, more specifically, at macroscale (thermodynamic methods) in order to estimate thermodynamic and transport properties as well as the kinetic parameters needed for the subsequent process simulation. This latter is usually performed for chemical and energy processes, such as supercritical water gasification, supercritical water oxidation, biodiesel production using supercritical methanol and different applications of supercritical carbon dioxide, among others. As a further step, this type of simulation can be refined using computational fluid dynamics, thus optimizing the design of process units involved in specific processes in a rigorous way. Many recent papers are discussed in the context of simulation and modelling related to supercritical fluids applications, taking into account the software used to perform this type of study.Francisco Javier Gutiérrez OrtizDoctor Industrial Engineer (2002), Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering at the Engineering School of the University of Seville (2009). Academic references regarding research: Orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0967-9788, ResearcherID: https://publons.com/researcher/1349246/francisco-javier-gutierrez-ortiz/ (h-index 19), Scopus Author ID: https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=8642524300 (h-index 17) ResearchGate: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Francisco_Javier_Gutierrez_Ortiz, Google Scholar: https://scholar.google.es/citations?user=ItVeZ8EAAAAJ&hl=es&oi=ao (h-index 22) He has supervised six theses and published 48 articles in journals with a high JCR impact factor. Among them he has carried out several studies on modelling and simulation. The research line on supercritical water gasification (SCWG) has been developed since 2009 focused mainly on the valorization of oxygenated hydrocarbons.Andrea KruseShe has studied chemistry at the University of Heidelberg. Her PhD (University of Heidelberg and Research Center Karlsruhe) deals with reactions in supercritical water. Since 1994 she was junior and later principal investigator in the KIT. In 2006 she gained the title “habilitus” and the “venia legend” in Chemical Engineering of the technical university of Darmstadt, based on her work about biomass conversion in supercritical water. Since 2012 she has been chair holder in the institute of agricultural engineering of the University of Hohenheim. She has more than 160 publications listed in Scopus (h-Index: 42) and 6 patents or patent applications.
1. Introduction
Supercritical fluids are applied to industry due to their suitable density, solvent and transport properties. In fact, supercritical fluids have been used in very dissimilar applications, such as the decaffeination of coffee and tea, the defatting of cacao, and the production of extracts from hops, fruits, spices, nuts, and other natural materials. Others are more recent regarding waste treatment, biotechnology, propulsion systems, high-pressure gas turbines, and internal combustion engines, as well as the biofuels production, nanoparticles synthesis or processes integrated in biorefineries. Since supercritical fluids are increasingly applied to mass-transfer processes, phase-transition processes and reactive systems, a further fundamental understanding of supercritical fluids properties is required to apply the supercritical fluids more and more to industry. This involves improving experimental methods, but also modelling and simulation are needed to attain a broader commercialization of supercritical technologies. In this way, many advancements have been achieved in the last two decades, although there are still important questions related to the properties of supercritical fluids and their subsequent behaviour that are still open. When applied to process engineering, mathematical modelling is a powerful tool to get insight into the impact of process parameters under a great variety of conditions, which reduces the required experimentation and, hence, the economic and time resources.
Generally, the thermodynamic properties limit the viability of a process (e.g., maximum product yields, thermal and exergy efficiencies, heat and power required), while the transport properties and chemical kinetics parameters influence the sizing and scale-up of equipment (e.g., reactors, heat exchangers, separation units). All these properties are needed for process design and assessment. The reliability of estimates provided by process simulation depends on the modelling of thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport phenomena involved in the process units, which in turn change with the composition of mixtures and the operating conditions. The use of process simulation, generally with the aid of commercial software, is very useful for process design as well as for material and energy optimization. Likewise, process simulation makes it possible new proposals to improve the operation mode, the way in which the separation operations may be performed and many other aspects of a process.
Kinetic and transport properties could be considered as a part of kinetic modelling according to the molecular and macroscopic approaches mentioned by Coniglio et al.1 At molecular scale, reactions are considered as reversible involving a detailed reaction mechanism with reaction rates for each basic step. In addition, surrogate molecules of the feed resource are needed, which usually is performed by mimicking one or few representative molecules. This may offset the advantage of using the size of the molecules to describe the kinetic behaviour. Along with the thermodynamic model, the molecular approach may describe phase equilibria and transport phenomena at molecular scale. On the other hand, the experimental conversion of feed resource and its relationship with the reaction rate of feed disappearance provide the reactor design equations for the macroscopic approach. As a consequence, at reactor scale, modelling depends on the feed and conversion. The resulting macroscopic models are thus specific to both the conversion process and resources. In fact, the reaction rate determined via macroscopic modelling can be used for estimating the parameters of a postulated rate law according to molecular modelling, thus combining both approaches.
Similarly, a thermodynamic model describes the phase equilibria behaviour of the reaction medium, and again molecular and macroscopic approaches are possible.1 The latter approach is fully predictive and is based on the concept of group contributions,2–4 where mixtures are modelled by functional groups (methyl, allyl, ethyl ester, carboxylic, etc.) of their compounds. While the molecular model can get particular structural aspects, thus providing more accurate results, the group contributions approach can be applied to a multicomponent mixture with many constituents.
For all the new applications to succeed, the properties of supercritical fluids in combination with the processed materials must be clearly determined and fundamental knowledge of the complex behaviour must be made readily available.5 In this sense, for any industrial application, process simulation (e.g. by Aspen Plus) is of special importance. Here for the whole process, consisting of several unit operations taking place in a number of equipment, the mass and energy flows can be calculated. These flows are important for economics, but today they are also the basis for the evaluation of sustainability (e.g. by a life cycle analysis, LCA) where only the incoming and outgoing flows are important, not the intermediate unit operations. Therefore, the management of flows has to be optimized not only in view of economics but also in view of sustainability.
The overview of this paper is shown in Fig. 1, where all the essential points are mentioned and interconnected. Thus, among other considerations: (1) molecular dynamics may be a basis for process simulation; (2) process simulation is still based on empirical or semi-empirical approaches; (3) a clear chain links some aspects, so thermodynamic properties and equilibria → process simulation → LCA. Reaction engineering is related to the macroscopic kinetic approach and allows obtaining more accurate simulation results than just considering chemical equilibria or approaches to this.
 Fig. 1  Overview of the paper contents. 
Regarding thermodynamics, in this paper “supercritical fluid” means that the operating conditions are above the critical temperature and pressure of the solvent, which may be also a reactant in the process. This implies that the mixture is not necessarily supercritical and that there may be more than one phase.
2. Molecular dynamics
The molecular-scale research allows a better understanding of the behaviour of mixtures at supercritical state and obtaining physical insight into experimentally inaccessible phenomena.
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of fluids near the critical point have gained a large momentum in the last decade, and focuses on challenges related to hurdles such as the temperature control over MD runs near the critical temperature,6 the large relaxation time of the systems7 and finite-size effects,8 affecting the main properties of fluids and, hence, their behaviour. With the aid of appropriate simulation and statistical mechanics-based scaling methods, these challenges may be overcome and a number of static and transport properties of supercritical fluids, such as the phase diagram, critical point, susceptibility, structure factor, interdiffusion constant, shear viscosity, and others, can be quantified successfully.9
Thermodynamic methods, such as equations of state (EoS), deal with macro properties and use empirical formulas. However, when micro interaction of molecules is needed, molecular dynamics (MD) must be applied. Thus, for instance, polar and associated mixtures and electrolyte solutions are hard to describe by cubic EoS, especially at supercritical state, so MD calculations are used to study the micro structure and interaction in aqueous mixtures.10 Similarly, relevant phenomena, such as the increase in local density and how dynamics of the solute reorients regarding the solvation properties of the supercritical medium, need to be described by MD simulations. Most of these have been focused on the reaction mechanisms and kinetics of chemical reactions involving supercritical CO2 with the aim of getting insight into the phase equilibria in CO2-expanded systems and predicting their physicochemical properties to apply to engineering processes.11 This numerical research has also allowed interpreting many experimental findings or the development of other substances, such as the solubilizers† to be used in supercritical CO2 instead of co-solvents. By MD simulation, the first supramolecular complex in supercritical CO2 was first predicted and then experimentally synthesized.12

Fig. 2 shows an example of molecular dynamics taken from.11Fig. 2a corresponds to a n–π* interaction, and CO2 plays the role of the electron donor, i.e., it acts as a Lewis base, contrasting with its expected Lewis acid behaviour. Fig. 2b shows the formation of a stable hydrogen bond between peracetylated β-cyclodextrin and a host molecule of benzoic acid within the cavity.
 Fig. 2  Example of molecular dynamics (a) n–π* interaction, and (b) formation of a stable hydrogen bond between peracetylated β-cyclodextrin and a host molecule of benzoic acid within the cavity, with two possible orientations for the guest.11 
Molecular dynamics has been broadly used in the determination of many thermodynamic and transport properties. The use of molecular simulations makes the reduction of costs possible by decreasing the number of experiments that may be expensive for safety reasons, especially when dealing with flammable or toxic vapours. In addition, MD provides insight into molecular structure and orientation that are experimentally inaccessible on many occasions. On the other hand, molecular-scale simulation output largely depends on the used force field, especially when computing the free energy needed for attaining properties at phase equilibrium, thus limiting the use of MD. In this way, more efficient and faster algorithms and simulation methodologies are looked for, particularly applied to phase equilibria. As a result, currently there are a number of techniques such as Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo, Gibbs–Duhem integration, Wang Landau simulations, grand canonical transition matrix Monte Carlo, and the activity fraction expanded ensemble procedures.13
In the case of supercritical water (SCW), the hydrogen bonding between water molecules influences its structure and dynamics, and these, in turn, characterize the SCW properties. The repulsion between neighbouring molecules at short distances and the dispersion and dipole interactions control the molecular structure. Likewise, the orientation relaxation times of water molecules and the life-times of the hydrogen bonds determine the molecular dynamics. Although there are powerful experimental methods to obtain data of the structure, such as diffraction of X-rays and neutrons, and of the dynamics, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), dielectric relaxation, and vibrational spectroscopies, molecular dynamics simulations make it possible obtaining additional information.14
MD simulations may also contribute to the understanding of ion equilibria and provide insight into the molecular cause of several phenomena regarding some special solvents, such as SCW. Once again, the molecular structure of water and the hydrogen bonds play a key role. In most supercritical solutions of nonpolar solutes, van der Waals interactions can describe the phase behaviour since only fluid phase equilibria come about and solid–fluid equilibria do not play a decisive role. However, Coulomb interactions that take place in ionic systems are much stronger and of longer range than van der Waals interactions, so there are substantial changes in the phase behaviour at the high critical temperatures and pressures, which also affects the behaviour of salts. In fact, solid–fluid equilibria play a decisive role in supercritical electrolyte solutions and salt precipitation in reactors is much more difficult to handle than fluid coexistence,15 which must be considered for industrial applications.
Different studies can be mentioned to show some achievements of MD. Thus, Svishchev and Plugatyr16 carried out molecular dynamics simulations of hydroxyl radical and phenol in water to estimate the diffusion-controlled limit of the reaction between aromatic species and OH radical in aqueous solution during the supercritical water oxidation of o-dichlorobenzene. Likewise, Ved' et al.17 used the Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics method18 to determine the structure formed by single water dipole moments under normal conditions, at the critical point, and in six thermodynamic states in sub- and supercritical phase diagram regions. The dipole moments and their interaction play a decisive role in determining the dielectric properties and chemical behaviour of fluids and their ability to dissolve certain compounds. Here a certain aspect comes in: Usually the ability of a fluid as a solvent is characterized by the relative static dielectric constant. This is a macroscopic property and does not reflect the dipole of a molecule but the structure which is formed by dipoles. This is clear, because a single water molecule is polar in supercritical water like in ambient water, but the dielectric constant is like that in a nonpolar solvent. The chemistry is influenced by both: the reactions of a polar molecule and the nonpolar solvent properties. On the other hand, a dissolved molecule or ion can influence the structure of the water. This solvent shell, or a local dielectric constant, may affect the chemistry.19,20
Information about the dependence of the dipole structure of supercritical water on state parameters is very important for technological processes, including those in which water acts not only as a solvent but also as a reaction partner. Here the water–gas shift (WGS) reaction is of special importance, e.g., in oxidation of waste or biomass conversion.21,22 The interaction of dipole moments obtained with the use of MD shifts toward lower values as the temperature increases; that is, the dielectric constant decreases. The strength of interaction at high densities is broader, which is evidence of strong mutual influence of dissolved molecules (induced dipole moment) and the presence of various H-bonded configurations. In other words, in supercritical water, especially at higher densities, the water molecules have a high tendency to form clusters around other molecule or with themselves, including local and labile hydrogen bonds.
With the aim of getting insight into the intermolecular interaction between methanol and water mixture regarding the transition region of excess molar volume at constant temperature and pressure, measurements of mixture density at 350 °C and high pressure were performed, and further simulated by molecular dynamics.23 In doing so, changes in the solution structure was evaluated through deviations in the radial distribution function, the internal energy, and self-diffusion coefficient. In addition, MD simulations have allowed studying the structure of hydrogen bonding for supercritical fluids, which is, in turn, needed to further develop a comprehensive theoretical model. These simulations along with experimental data, which may be hard to obtain because of thermal instability and dissociation–association reactions that appear in fluids such as methanol at high temperatures,24 complement with each other to provide reliable physical understanding at a molecular level.
3. The Widom line
It is widely accepted that there is no physical observable that can distinguish a liquid from a gas beyond the critical point and, hence, only a homogeneous, single fluid phase is defined. Thus, above the critical point, the difference between liquids and gases would no longer exist. However, Widom25 noticed that near the critical point of a real fluid, the densities of the coexisting phases, the shape of the critical isotherm, the rate of divergence of the compressibility, and the nature of the singularity in the constant-volume specific heat, are all nonclassical and deviate from the van der Waals theory. Later, Widom26 showed that lines coming from the critical point represent the critical anomalies in the pressure–temperature space. In this way, as latent heat of vaporization and surface tension vanish, a phase transition no longer occurs,27 and the maxima values of some thermophysical quantities define a line originating from the critical point, named ‘the Widom line’ when the property is the constant-pressure specific heat. This behaviour also occurs with other thermodynamic response functions that are derivatives of the state functions with respect to temperature and pressure, such as isothermal compressibility and thermal expansion coefficient, thus arising different lines for each one of these properties similar to the Widom line. All these lines define loci of maxima extending from the critical point into the single-phase region, although when entering this region, the maxima are smeared out progressively and their values decrease;28 despite the fact that being in the one-phase region (supercritical region), the specific heat peak is very well defined also for pressures that are quite far from the liquid–gas critical point.
Therefore, the supercritical state cannot be considered as an indistinguishable fluid phase. In the vicinity the critical point, the Widom line and other similar lines merge and the anomalous behaviour (maxima of the response functions) progressively vanishes by creating a deltoid coexistence region.29
Most of studies related to this topic are supported by molecular dynamic (MD) simulation. At first, simple model systems based on a van der Waals or a Lennard-Jones fluid were used to study the Widom line. Lately, this has been computed, using cubic equations of state for a single-component fluid, specifically the Soave–Redlich–Kwong (SRK)30 and the Peng–Robinson (PR),31,32 equations that provide almost the same predictions. Furthermore, the characteristic isobaric inflection curve at constant temperature was also obtained.33
Direct evidence of molecular-scale inhomogeneity that prevails at the supercritical region has been provided during the last decade. Thus, by inelastic X-ray scattering and MD simulations, Simeoni et al.34 found that the amount of positive dispersion beyond the critical point experiences a transition with a sharp slope crossover on crossing the Widom line, thus marking the borderline between a liquid-like and a gas-like P–T region, reminiscent of the subcritical domains. In addition, it has been shown that a supercritical phase change, called pseudo-boiling, does exist when crossing the Widom line. Thus, while subcritical vaporization requires energy to overcome intermolecular attraction, supercritical state transitions additionally require energy to increase the kinetic energy of molecules, i.e., the fluid temperature.27Fig. 3 illustrates this phase transition between supercritical liquid-like and gas-like states, in such a way that, at supercritical pressures, the temperature of transition rises with the pressure, and the transition temperature of process (3) is higher than in process (2), so the critical temperature no longer has its meaning as a transition point and may be replaced by the pseudo-boiling temperature. Then, the supercritical state transition occurs over a finite temperature interval instead of in a phase equilibrium, and this decreases when the pressure is higher than three times the critical pressure:27 the Widom line is the pseudo-boiling-line, which starts at subcritical temperature and ends at both supercritical temperature and pressure. Recently, using neutron imaging techniques, Maxim et al.35 monitored density fluctuations of supercritical water while the system evolved rapidly from liquid-like to gas-like as the Widom line was crossed during isobaric heating, which is in agreement with the theory of supercritical fluid pseudo-boiling:27 their observations showed that the Widom line for water can be experimentally identified, so liquid-like and gas-like are two distinguishable supercritical water states at millimetre scale. The sharp transition on crossing the Widom line that divides the supercritical region into two regions where two dynamic regimes may be identified as evocative of the subcritical domains (gas-like and liquid-like) makes the Widom line a feasible thermodynamic indicator of the liquid-like to gas-like dynamic crossover.28
 Fig. 3  Structure of the supercritical state space and comparison of subcritical (1) with supercritical isobaric processes (2) and (3).27 
Xu et al.36 found a correlation between the dynamic crossover and the Widom line. They argued that this connection between the maximum of specific heat capacity and the dynamic crossover was not applicable only to water but is a more general feature of crossing the Widom line. Using MD simulations, they studied the Jagla potential‡ thereby two liquid structures compete with each other by repulsive and attractive ramp interactions; likewise, they provided evidence that a dynamic crossover takes place when the Widom line is crossed. In the same way, Lukšič et al.37 used grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations (constant chemical potential, volume and temperature) along with the Franzese potential§ to examine the phase behaviour of a system in which particles interact through the fluctuations values of the number of particles along various isotherms.
Lately, some physical properties of supercritical water have been determined by classical MD simulations using a variety of polarized and polarizable interatomic potentials,38 and the results matched well with experimental data. Interatomic potentials included in the MD model captured the anomalous behaviour and predicted accurately the water properties in both liquid-like and gas-like regions. Likewise, Samanta et al.39 combined MD simulations with quantum mechanical calculations to obtain vibrational line-shape of the O–H stretch in supercritical water across the Widom line.
In addition, by molecular dynamics simulations performed using LAMMPS simulation package, evidence for the existence of multiple Widom lines in immiscible binary mixtures from has been shown,40 as they undertake a phase separation where the clusters make transition separately at different temperatures. In contrast, miscible binary mixtures seem to have a single liquid–gas transition to the supercritical state space.
Summarising, supercritical fluid state is not homogeneously distributed and can be divided into two different regions with gas-like and liquid-like behaviours, and the dynamic crossover takes place at the Widom line. Around this line, small changes in temperature may result in large variation of thermodynamics and transport properties, which in turn influence the process performance. Thus, singular methods should be applied to estimate thermodynamics and transport properties for the proper design of supercritical processes.
4. Kinetic modelling
In kinetic modelling systems, ordinary equations are used to describe chemical reactions based on a microscopic view, usually without considering transport phenomena. In the case of free radical reactions, such as oxidation, the following important results have been achieved:
– The reaction rates of small molecules reactions, such as in oxidation, are fast because of the high pressure. In most cases, it can be described similarly to gas phase reactions with a higher reaction constant (high pressure limit).41
– For reactions of larger radicals, the kinetic constant could be lower than that in the gas phase, due to a kind of diffusion limitation by high pressure.42,43
– The water–gas shift reaction is not a typical gas-phase-like reaction. Formic acid is of special importance as an intermediate,44 and there is a catalysis of salts.21
Also, for gasification, several approaches have been published,45,46 which mainly improve the chemical understanding of the reactions.
Although these findings are implicitly used in process simulation, a further development of kinetic modelling is out of the scope of this review.
5. Thermodynamic methods
This section links with the selection of the appropriate thermodynamic model and the supply of the correct parameters as a key step to solve a simulation problem. In fact, thermodynamic methods allow dealing with very complex mixtures, including sub- and supercritical components, but keeping in mind that a good understanding of theoretical basis is needed to guarantee reliable results. Such calculations are impossible to perform by hand or even with spreadsheets. Since the Henry law is not valid at high solute concentrations, and gas absorption is favoured at high pressure, the effect of the pressure must be considered.
Two types of thermodynamic methods can be considered. The first one is based on activity coefficients, which however cannot be used to compute the phase equilibrium with supercritical fluids because each phase is dealt with in a different way, and hence the changes taking place through the critical region cannot be addressed suitably.47 The second method applies equations of state (EoS) to handling sub- and supercritical components of the mixture simultaneously; in addition, EoS are also suitable to compute the phase equilibrium of gas–liquid systems, particularly for polar species that modify the van der Waals equations.
The approach based on EoS permits a well-designed and efficient simulation of processes that occur at high pressure. Here the choice of proper mixing rules and the binary interaction parameters are very important to resolve the problem because they determine the prediction reliability of thermodynamic properties and phase equilibria. Cubic EoS can be extended to mixtures via the van der Waals one-fluid mixing rules (quadratic composition dependency for both the energy parameter and the co-volume one) and the classical combining rules, i.e. the geometric mean rule for the cross-energy and the arithmetic mean rule for the cross co-volume parameter.48 However, the performance of cubic EoS is drastically improved with advanced mixing rules, such as the so-called EoS/GE mixing rules,49–52 which are essentially mixing rules for, typically, the energy parameter of cubic EoS where an expression for the excess Gibbs energy is added to the EoS, thus allowing the application of a cubic EoS to polar compounds at high pressures. Therefore, mixing rules must be stated to obtain the global phase diagram, generally, involving critical parameters of pure components. Since many interaction parameters for supercritical water–organic systems are experimentally inaccessible, Artemenko et al.53 proposed some correlations for predicting phase equilibria for non-studied compounds by an approach based only on the molecular structure of a constituent. They provided some results of phase equilibria calculations and critical curves for main biomass components in supercritical water.
As aforementioned, reliable and accurate physical and thermodynamic properties of pure component are essential in process simulation. On many occasions, these properties are unknown, since no measurement of them is available, so they must be predicted using a thermodynamic method, which has a relevant impact on the results provided by simulation. In this way, there are also a few predictive methods, such as the PSRK EoS,52,54–56 below commented, or predictive PR EoS.57–59
The approach based on EoS may be used and is recommended by the most common commercial simulation software, such as Aspen Plus, Aspen Hysys, Chemcad, Prosim Plus, ProII, SuperPro Designer, gPROM and so on, to compute vapour-liquid (VL) phase equilibria at high-pressure.60
Although most of available commercial software for chemical processes can be applied to transient-state simulations, it is habitually used for steady state analysis, and it requires making a process layout with the different process units (object-oriented design) properly specified and connected by streams, in which thermodynamic methods must be suitably chosen.
Numerical studies have been mainly focused on thermodynamics modelling, which is a very powerful tool to examine several aspects of a process. There are two approaches to modelling the equilibrium depending on how the chemical system is defined.61
The non-stoichiometric approach is based on the minimization of Gibbs energy, and the equilibrium composition of the system can be calculated from a list of possible species expected at equilibrium and the initial system composition. No knowledge of the involved reactions is needed, which is a great advantage. The stoichiometric approach requires defining particular reaction mechanisms, without considering instable chemical species and reaction intermediates. In either case, the two approaches predict exactly the same equilibrium composition if all the independent chemical reactions can be identified. This has been verified in the supercritical water reforming of four model compounds of bio-oil aqueous phase (acetic acid, acetol, butanol and glucose).62 The stoichiometric approach may be coded and solved by Matlab or EES (Engineering Equation Solver). As the non-stoichiometric approach is available in commercial software (e.g. Aspen Plus), they are easier to use and more widely applied to process simulation.
When the operating temperature is above the critical point, Aspen Plus, which is the simulation tool mostly used, considers gas-like behaviour for the fluid stream, while identifies liquid-like behaviour at lower temperatures to calculate the properties. As a result, in the supercritical region, deviations in thermodynamic properties, such as enthalpy and entropy, appear depending on their reference to the liquid or vapour state considered by Aspen Plus. By comparing the results provided by different thermodynamic methods applicable to supercritical fluids, the most suitable one is that providing minima deviations in properties between liquid-like and vapour/gas-like state. The selection of a suitable thermodynamic method is key to study any chemical process with confidence, thus providing correct energy analysis when using a heat exchangers network for process heat recovery.
In doing so, Gutiérrez Ortiz et al.47 chose the predictive Soave–Redlich–Kwong (PSRK) equation of state for fugacity calculation, which extends the SRK EoS. PSRK EoS applies the Holderbaum–Gmehling mixing rules52 to predict the binary interactions at any pressure through the generalized Mathias–Copeman α-function.63 The PSRK method can predict any interaction by UNIFAC64 (UNIQUAC functional-group activity coefficients65) at low pressure with a higher accuracy, particularly for mixtures of non-polar and polar components, which is the main advantage of this method. This choice was assessed against other EoS, such as the original Soave–Redlich–Kwong (SRK), Peng–Robinson (PR) and Peng–Robinson with the Boston–Mathias α-function66 (PR–BM). The authors showed that the PSRK, PR and PR–BM represented quite accurately the supercritical state for the glycerol and the CO2 (taken as a reference), although the SRK EoS showed larger deviations. It should be noted that the pressure selected in their study (240 atm) was much higher than critical pressure of glycerol (74.02 atm) and CO2 (72.86 atm). On the other hand, the PSRK EoS showed the minimum deviation between the liquid and vapor curves for water at the supercritical state of all the tested thermodynamic methods. The authors showed that the deviation between liquid and vapour curves for specific enthalpy was ranged from 3 and 6 kJ mol−1 in the supercritical region; the maximum deviation took place around 565 °C at 240 atm (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Evolution of the water trend in liquid and vapor state at 240 atm (PSRK EoS) each enthalpy interval is 2 kJ mol−1.47 
Later, the same research group revisited the topic when studied the supercritical water reforming of acetic acid, acetol, butanol and glucose.62 Apart from the PSRK EoS, other four methods were assessed: (1) SR-Polar based on the modification of SRK EoS proposed by Schwarzentruber and Renon;67 (2) SRK–BM that uses the SRK EoS with the Boston and Mathias α-function; (3) the PR-MHV2 based on the Peng–Robinson EoS with the modified second-order Huron and Vidal mixing rule,51,68 and (4) PR–BM that uses the Peng–Robinson EoS with the Boston and Mathias α-function. Although all the EoS showed a good fit to supercritical curves, the best two ones were the PSRK and the SR-Polar since they showed minima deviations in properties and thermodynamic functions between the behaviour of liquid-like and gas-like states. While SR-Polar exhibited minima deviations for the model compounds, PSRK provided the lowest deviations for water at supercritical state.
Recently, some researchers have stated that the α-function of cubic EoS has to be consistent (i.e., α-function must be positive, decreasing, convex and with a negative third derivative), which is necessary when the EoS is used to describe the supercritical region.69–71
Regarding the biodiesel production using supercritical methanol (MeOH), Glišić and Skala72 used the Redlich–Kwong (RK) thermodynamic model for triolein and methanol mixture near the critical condition for methanol. Likewise, they followed the Constantinou–Gani group-contribution method3 to estimate physical and thermodynamic properties of pure compounds.¶ The method is fast since and no significant computational resources are required. In addition, the normal boiling point for many inaccessible organic compounds may be also calculated, which is crucial to estimate the critical temperature and in separation processes.
A more recent study of transesterification by Silva et al.,73 SAFT (statistical associating fluid theory) EoS74 was used to model the phase behaviour of a biodiesel reactor. This EoS considers the molecules as freely-jointed spherical segments. The authors estimated the pure species and binary-interaction parameters necessary for PC-SAFT75 in Aspen Plus (by the Britt–Luecke method) and SAFT-g Mie76 in gPROMS (by the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm).
Gutiérrez Ortiz and de Santa-Ana77 also discussed about the EoS to use and concluded that, although the RK EoS had been pointed out as the most recommendable equation to achieve good predictions of liquid-vapour equilibrium for a number of components including triglycerides, RK EoS needs to make a regression of experimental data that is not available and define properties values that are unknown at the operating conditions. For this reason, the authors proposed the predictive method based on PSRK EoS since the nonpolar triglycerides can be solvated in supercritical methanol to form a single phase of oil and methanol mixture. In addition, the authors mentioned that the UNIQUAC (universal quasi-chemical) model could not be applied to high pressure process units because it is constrained to low pressures (up to 5 bar). However, the method based on activity coefficients describes the non-ideal solutions in a better way due to the presence of highly polar compounds, such as methanol and glycerol, and the widely different size of some molecules in the mixture. The authors applied the NRTL (non-random two liquid) model78 to obtain the activity of the compounds in the liquid phase.
More recently, with the aim of achieving more accurate predictions of the fluid phase behaviour for systems containing solvents and components present in the synthesis of biodiesel at supercritical conditions, the Peng–Robinson (PR), the volume-translated|| Peng–Robinson (VT-PR),79,80 and the perturbed chain statistical associating fluid theory (PC-SAFT) equations of state have been compared with the thermodynamic simulation using artificial neural networks (ANN) and molecular descriptors** using different architectures.81 The authors used Dragon 7.0 software to generate molecular descriptors.
Similarly, purification of aqueous mixtures of isopropanol by supercritical CO2 has been studied in a packed column by process simulation using Prosim Plus software. Thermodynamic behaviour of the CO2–isopropanol–water system was obtained for all the tested operating conditions using the PSRK EoS.82
Delving further, thermodynamic studies have been also performed by programming instead of using commercial software. Thus, the Crank–Nicolson implicit finite difference method has been applied to highly nonlinear coupled partial differential equations related to the flow of supercritical fluid over a vertical flat plate in order to obtain numerical solutions. Based on different EoS (RK, PR, Van der Waals and virial equations), the authors derived equations to calculate the thermal expansion coefficient values.83 The authors also derived the flow equations in the supercritical region assuming incompressible flow and the Boussinesq approximation. These equations were numerically solved to provide the unsteady velocity, temperature, average heat and momentum transport coefficients.
Apart from dealing with mixtures under supercritical conditions, thermodynamic studies provide relevant information of conditions that are advantageous for the production processes of interest. This is very useful although a practical situation involving reactive systems may diverge, because the thermodynamic analysis assumes equilibrium, thus ignoring and not providing kinetics effects of reactions. Thus, a thermodynamic study makes it possible to know the effect of the main operating parameters on reaction yield, so as to achieve optimal conditions for a supercritical process.84 In fact, thermodynamic modelling is a starting point for viability and optimization studies, especially in the engineering field.85 Thermodynamics predicts the actual composition of the reacting system and allows carrying out the energy balance involved in the reactions without taking into account kinetic constraints, thus providing useful practical limits.
6. Chemical and energy process simulation
When a new concept of process design is proposed or an existing process needs to be analysed and optimized, or a techno-economic evaluation and life cycle assessment are required to look into the feasibility/viability of a process involving a complete plant, process simulation must be used. By simulation, mass and energy balance can be obtained, which are especially focused on chemical and energy process engineering.
As aforementioned, the mostly used software to perform process simulation is Aspen Plus and Aspen Hysys, as well as Chemcad, Prosim Plus, ProII, SuperPro Designer, gPROM.
The most studied processes by simulation are related to the use of three fluids under supercritical conditions: water (SCW), CO2 (scCO2) and methanol (scMeOH). These fluids are present in processes such as SCW gasification or reforming, SCW oxidation, different uses of scCO2, and biodiesel production using scMeOH, respectively. Because of the high number of papers dealing with thermodynamic studies carried out using simple schemes of simulation, this review only considers a few complete processes regarding the aforementioned supercritical fluids as examples of the use of process simulation. In addition, different feedstock, methods of production and process design are also taken into account, considering the degree of the process development.
6.1. Supercritical water gasification/reforming
Kruse86 reviewed the supercritical water gasification (SCWG) of biomass focused on hydrogen production, mentioning that biomass degradation is endorsed by the special properties of near-critical and supercritical water and by the high hydrogen yield predicted by thermodynamic calculations, although this latter can only be achieved in the presence of a catalyst (potassium salts, in most cases). The author mentioned that these reasons had boosted the research on supercritical water gasification. A key aspect is that biomass, with a natural water content of 80 wt% or more, can be converted without a prior drying. In addition, part of the energy used in the heating up of the large amount of water can be recovered by heat exchangers, thus improving the process performance from the energy point of view.
Next, a number of research papers representing the effort in process simulation of SCWG is discussed.
Gutiérrez Ortiz et al.87 proposed a conceptual design of supercritical water reforming (SCWR) of glycerol to maximize the electrical power production with no use of external fuels. The simulation was made with the aid of Aspen Plus, using the predictive Soave–Redlich–Kwong equation of state in the supercritical region. One remarkable advantage is the enormous pressure energy of the fluid flow just at the outlet of the reforming process. Once expanded, the product gas was used as a fuel to provide the thermal energy required by the reforming process. The thermodynamic performance of the process was assessed by an energy and exergy analysis, to determine the maximum thermodynamic efficiency of the system and identify the sites of exergy destruction, quantifying thus the degree of process irreversibility. In identifying the main sites of exergy destruction, as well as the causes and magnitude of such destruction, potential improvements of the system and process units can be carried out. In the exergy analysis, the thermodynamic efficiencies were computed for the overall process (e.g., the exergy efficiency was 28.25% for pure glycerol at 800 °C and 240 atm). Later, these authors prolonged the work to autothermal SWCR of glycerol,88 and also extended the research including PEM fuel cell to increase both electrical power and efficiency.89 In the process, after the expansion to produce electrical energy, the product gas was conditioned by two water gas shift (WGS) reactors and a pressure swing adsorption (PSA) system. In this way, the final purified hydrogen-rich gas could be used in a fuel cell. The PSA off-gas combustion provided the thermal energy required by the process, thus achieving an energy self-sufficient system that does not need an external fuel to perform the process. The authors developed an optimization procedure to maximize the electrical power and the exergy efficiency. Fig. 5 shows the heat-integrated flow-sheet of the process designed to produce hydrogen and electrical power via supercritical water reforming of glycerol implemented in Aspen Plus. Similarly to previous stage of the research, the study was also applied to autothermal SCWR.90
 Fig. 5  Heat-integrated flow-sheet to produce hydrogen and electrical power via supercritical water reforming of glycerol.89 
Gutiérrez Ortiz et al. also developed overall processes to produce methanol91 and synthetic natural gas (SNG)92 (by Serrera et al.) from SCWR of glycerol by Aspen Plus. In the first process, the syngas coming from the SCW reforming was upgraded by a PSA system, and then fed into a methanol synthesis loop, where unreacted synthesis gas from methanol reactor was separated from crude methanol, compressed and recycled. The study was focused on attaining the optimal operating conditions leading to maxima methanol production, power generation and exergy efficiency. Again, an expander and a fuel cell, fed with the surplus of the H2-rich stream leaving the PSA, were used. Residual gases with chemical energy were burn in a furnace to get an energy self-sufficient process, which is always a self-imposed constraint in all the simulation work developed by this research group. Three independent variables were considered for the optimization: the reforming temperature (RT), the water-to-glycerol mass ratio in the feed (W/G), and the purge ratio in the methanol synthesis loop (PR). For a W/G mass ratio of 1.68 and a PR of 0.2, the following outputs were obtained at RT of 1000 °C: 0.270 kg MeOH/kg glycerol, 0.265 kW kg−1 glycerol and an overall energy efficiency of 38.0%. In addition, 0.38 kg separated CO2 per kg glycerol (for sequestration) gave added value to the proposed process. In the second process, SNG production by syngas methanation was proposed using three adiabatic fixed-bed reactors in series operating at 30 bars and with intermediate gas cooling, thus limiting their outlet temperatures between 600 °C (first reactor) to 300 °C (third reactor). Syngas fed into the first reactor was previously conditioned by a PSA system to achieve a stoichiometric number of 3. The authors found that CO-methanation reaction was favoured and, hence, it should be hindered in order to limit the heat released inside the first reactor and, thus, the exit temperature. Similarly, the CO and CH4 molar flow-rates rose while the H2 content decreased at a given reforming temperature and when increasing the glycerol concentration; as a consequence, more heat was absorbed and the CO methanation was limited, so the recycle ratio diminished. However, if this latter was not between 30% and 80%, the loop was unstable as the specifications could not be met. The results of this process were compared with those of the methanol synthesis (previously published) resulting in a better performance, with a higher carbon proportion converted into methane and a higher specific overall value for the SNG production, which took into account the price of the product and the electricity jointly.
Likewise, Galera and Gutiérrez Ortiz performed first a techno-economic assessment93 and then a life cycle assessment (LCA) of the SWG reforming94 previously developed.89 A plant size of 1000 kg h−1 glycerol was designed on an energy self-sufficient process flow-sheet simulated by Aspen Plus. The minimum selling price of hydrogen (achieved when net present value is zero) was obtained by a discounted cash flow analysis with an internal rate of return of 10% and 100% equity financing, resulting in 5.36 $ per kg. While this price was somewhat higher than in a conventional technology, such as steam methane reforming, it was lower than in other renewable processes, such as wood gasification. In the LCA, mass and energy balances were performed using Aspen Plus to provide the life cycle inventory, and the environmental assessment was carried out by SimaPro software and using the Ecoinvent database. A distinction between biogenic and fossil CO2 emissions was stated to quantify a more realistic GHG (greenhouse gases) inventory of 3.77 kg CO2-eq. per kg H2 produced, and the achieved environmental performance was good.

Fig. 6 shows a clear chain related to simulation (as pointed out in Fig. 1): thermodynamic properties and equilibria → process simulation → LCA.
 Fig. 6  Chain related to simulation: thermodynamic properties and equilibria → process simulation → LCA (elaborated from ref. 94). 
Salemme et al.95 analysed the energy efficiency of solar aided biomass gasification to produce pure hydrogen by simulation. A maximum temperature of 250 °C was assumed to be provided by the Sun in three gasification processes depending on what followed to the gasification reactor: (1) two WGS reactors and a PSA unit (CG), (2) an integrated membrane water gas shift reactor (MWGS), and (3) two flash separators and a PSA unit (SCG). Aspen Plus was used for simulations and the system variables were the biomass moisture content and the amount of solar heat. The thermodynamic method was RKS–BM for the subcritical gasification processes (CG and MWGS) and PR-MHV2 (Peng–Robinson EoS with the modified Huron–Vidal mixing rule) for the supercritical gasification (SCG). When the biomass moisture content was higher than 70%, the results showed that the supercritical gasification was energetically more convenient than the subcritical processes without solar heat integration, but this was not possible in the third process.
Fiori et al.96 proposed and simulated by Aspen Plus a conceptual design of a plant considering different substances (glycerol, microalgae, sewage sludge, grape marc, phenol) to feed a SCWG process. The recovery of the mechanical energy of syngas at high pressure was performed through expansion in turbines, which was then burned to provide the thermal energy required in the SCWG reaction. The authors obtained that a minimum biomass concentration of 15–25% was needed to achieve a self-sufficient SCWG reaction, and a net power of about 150 kW per 1000 kg feed per h. Likewise, H2 was fed into a fuel cell, thus producing about 8.5 kg H2 per 1000 kg feed. This process was further improved by Hantoko et al.97 who performed some modifications, such as the addition of a reformer unit downstream from the SCWG reactor and a CO2-absorber. The former increased the H2 yield by converting the high methane present in the syngas into H2. In this way, the productivity of syngas increased from 120.6 kg per 100 kg feed (in the previous SCWG system) to 151.1 kg per 100 kg feed.
Molino et al.98 compared three process layouts implemented in Aspen Hysys to produce biomethane and power from humid biomasses: anaerobic digestion (AD), SCWG integrated in a supercritical steam turbine (SCWG + scST), and a combination of these two, so the digestate from AD outflow fed into the SCWG + scST process. Livestock sludge was used as feedstock. The second process allowed an increase of about 50% in both biomethane production and power compared with AD process, which a production of 25 Nm3 pure biomethane per day and tonne feed. Moreover, this process permitted a large reduction of the plant volume, because the fermentation step was not required. Combining both technologies, power generation increased 50% and biomethane production reached a value of 36 Nm3 biomethane per day and tonne feed. The authors concluded that AD process was a simpler and consolidated process, but required a long period for the biomass and did not allow the total recovery of the organic compounds.
Safari et al.99 developed a process based on supercritical water gasification for the co-production of hydrogen and electrical power from sugarcane bagasse. The process was simulated using Aspen Plus for a mass flow-rate of 1000 kg h−1, at 300 bar and 700 °C. As outputs, 8.55 kg h−1 H2 and 56 kW were obtained using a 20 wt% mixture of bagasse.
Ajiwibowo et al.100 proposed and evaluated an integrated system to harvest efficiently the energy from black liquor†† to produce hydrogen. Apart from the supercritical water gasification section, the proposed system also consisted of syngas chemical looping and power generation; this latter was produced by utilizing the heat generated throughout the process. The process was designed using heat integration with the aim of optimizing the energy efficiency and minimizing the exergy loss in the overall system by considering exergy recovery.
Campanario and Gutiérrez Ortiz developed and simulated by Aspen Plus a process to produce low-temperature Fischer–Tropsch (FT) products from the syngas obtained by supercritical water reforming of the bio-oil aqueous phase,101 which was afterwards techno-economically assessed.102 The process consisted of the syngas production from SCWR and further upgrading by WGS and dry reforming reactors as well as PSA systems. Then, there was a section of FT synthesis followed by another one to refine and upgrade the FT products through a series of distillation columns and by a hydrocracking reactor. Fig. 7 shows the complex heat-integrated flow-sheet of the process, which was designed to be energy self-sufficient and to maximize the biofuels production and the electrical power generation. In addition, the process had two other main aspects: cogeneration (hot water for district heating) and removal of CO2 for sequestration, which are relevant from the energy and environmental points of view. The plant was sized for 60 t h−1 feed, and the authors found that with a total organic concentration of 35 wt%, 5.3 MW was generated and 4.6 t h−1 biofuel was produced, which implied a carbon efficiency 38.5% (including the refining stage). The separated CO2 that could be sent to sequestration was 0.50 kg kg−1 organic feed. The variables used for optimization were the total organic concentration in the aqueous phase of bio-oil present in the feed and the operating conditions of the Fischer–Tropsch reactor. In the techno-economic study, the authors chose a feed concentration of 25 wt%, resulting in 2.7 t h−1 biofuel and 5.7 MW. Minimum selling prices for the refined FT-gasoline, FT-diesel and FT-jet fuel were 1.20, 0.93 and 0.26 € per kg (0.84, 0.75 and 0.20 € per L), respectively, by a discounted cash flow analysis using 10% rate of return and 100% equity financing. In addition, the authors quantified the decrease in the selling prices as the plant capacity increased from 60 to 200 t h−1 bio-oil aqueous phase fed into the process.
 Fig. 7  Heat-integrated flow-sheet to produce Fischer–Tropsch biofuels by supercritical reforming of the aqueous phase of bio-oil.101 
More recently, Gutiérrez Ortiz et al.103 developed another conceptual design of a process aimed at valorising the municipal solid waste reject fraction, including material and energy integration. In the process, municipal solid waste was converted into bio-oil by means of a fast pyrolysis section, and then the bio-oil aqueous phase underwent supercritical water reforming to produce hydrogen which was needed in the third section, where the organic phase of the bio-oil was upgraded by hydrodeoxygenation. Process simulation was carried out using Aspen Plus, focusing on maximizing biofuel production (liquefied fuel gas or LPG, gasoline and diesel) and net electrical power while minimizing the utilities requirement. The plant was techno-economically assessed for a capacity of 50 t h−1 municipal solid waste reject fraction. The main outputs were 10.65 MW, 5.2 t h−1 biofuels (corresponding to 21.1% of carbon present in the municipal solid waste), and a gate fee‡‡ of €16.7 t−1, which is a low value. The thermodynamic methods were the Peng–Robinson EoS for the drying, pyrolysis and char combustion as well as for those units where gaseous hydrocarbons were present, the UNIQUAC method for the quench and the L–V separation, and the PSRK EoS for the supercritical section.
6.2. Supercritical water oxidation
Supercritical water (SCW) can dissolve oxygen completely, so a homogeneous reaction medium is created where the oxidation of organics may be suitably performed. This process is called supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) or hydrothermal oxidation (HTO). Apart from oxygen, hydrogen peroxide can be also used as the oxidizing agent. When the organic material is a solid or a heterogeneous catalyst is involved, the reaction of SCWO is heterogeneous. The main application of the SCWO is the destruction of wastewater and sludge, which gives the process added value from an environmental perspective.104
There are not many studies regarding SCWO process simulation, probably because the SCWO technology has been commercialized by many companies worldwide, some of them in USA, such as General Atoms, HydroProcessing Company, SRI International or Foster Wheeler, and others in Europe, such as Supercritical Fluids International (Ireland), Chematur Engineering AB (Sweden), Innoveox (France), and the company Hanwha located in South Korea.105 Therefore, the optimization of specific process units, such as the reactor or ancillary devices, are more usual, typically by other type of simulation such as computational fluid dynamics (CFD) described in the next section. Two representative papers related to SCWO are commented below.
Donatini et al.106 simulated the use of coal SCWO using Aspen Plus performed by direct combustion at low temperature and high pressure of fine coal particles using pure oxygen through an ASU (air separation unit), aimed to power generation. The process included capture and storage of CO2 as liquid by a steam cooled membraned supercritical reactor. A 100 MWth coal-fired SWCO power plant was developed. The computed gross and net thermodynamic efficiencies were 44% and 28%, respectively. The ASU led to the main energy consumption, so the plant efficiency decreased 7%. CO2 emission was of 15–17 g CO2 per kW h which is almost two orders of magnitude lower than that in a conventional coal-fired power plant.
García-Rodríguez et al.107 proposed the coupling between the SCWO cooled wall reactor and a commercial gas turbine (GT) with steam injection to increase the energy recovery. This can be applied to feed preheating and compression thanks to the flue gas temperature of about 500 °C and the direct shaft work of the GT, respectively. The authors examined several case-studies to maximize energy recovery with the aid of Aspen Plus.
6.3. Applications of supercritical CO2
Supercritical CO2 is widely known and used in industry, so only few recent studies can be found involving chemical and energy process simulation, such as the following ones.
Lalam et al.82 carried out a purification of aqueous mixtures of isopropanol by supercritical CO2 in the continuous mode using a packed column using ProSim Plus software and the PSRK EoS, as aforementioned. HETS (height of a theoretical stage) values were found to be above 1 m, if the feed contained 5 wt% isopropanol, but decreased as this concentration increased to 60 wt%. The authors concluded that simulation could be used to propose strategies to improve the separation operations.
Khallaghi et al.108 performed a techno-economic assessment of a natural gas-fired oxy-combustion combined cycle with cryogenic ASU and compared it with a natural gas-fired one based on CLC (chemical looping combustion) with supercritical CO2 cycle. Process simulation was performed by Aspen Plus so as to evaluate the thermodynamic performance of the two systems. The results showed that the net efficiency of the second cycle was 51% higher than that in a conventional natural gas combined cycle with CO2 capture and 2.7% than that in the reference cycle (first cycle). Likewise, the levelized cost of electricity decreased about 5.7% by replacing the ASU-based oxy-fuel system with CLC. Hence, gas-fired CLC with a supercritical CO2 cycle seems to have a high potential for commercialisation.
Rodrigues et al.109 designed and simulated by Aspen Plus a process of supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) of Eucalyptus globulus bark at industrial scale, applying a broken plus intact cells (BIC) model and using a cosolvent. The lowest cost of manufacturing was €28.1 kgextract−1 that along with the good productivity and process energy suggested to the authors that integration of SFE technology was feasible to biorefine the bark of E. globulus in pulp mills.
Currently, most studies about the applications of supercritical CO2 are based on CFD, which is dealt with in the next section.
6.4. Biodiesel production by supercritical transesterification
In the biodiesel production, supercritical process allows handling a wide range of feedstocks, such as used cooking oil, waste animal fat and grease. This type of feedstock is cheap compared with virgin oil and can be efficiently converted into biodiesel by supercritical transesterification, without costly pre-treatment steps as conventional transesterification needs. In fact, there are a few companies that produce supercritical biodiesel in commercial facilities with capacities ranging from 4000 to 19000 m3 per year, which shows that this technology is scalable and that there is a real willingness to implement it.110
In addition, there are a number of studies regarding process simulation focused on new conceptual design proposed to assess productivity, raw material requirements, environmental impacts and economic viability under a variety of operating conditions and design configurations. The biodiesel production by supercritical transesterification requires a very short reaction time, so a continuous mode of operation is feasible. Consequently, productivity is improved with respect to conventional catalysed processes. Some simulation works on this topic showing important achievements in the last twelve years are chronologically commented below.
Van Kasteren and Nisworo111 simulated and analysed plants with capacities of 125000; 80000 and 8000 t per year to compare the cost of industrial scale biodiesel production from waste cooking oil by supercritical transesterification using Aspen Plus. Propane was selected as a co-solvent. Using the mixture instead of pure methanol was proven to decrease the supercritical temperature from 320 °C to 280 °C, the supercritical pressure from 400 to 128 bar, and the methanol-to-oil molar ratio from 42 to 24, respectively.112 The effect of the plant size was economically assessed resulting in selling prices of $0.17 L−1 (125000 t per year), $0.24 L−1 (80000 t per year) and $0.52 L−1 (8000 t per year), so the feasibility increases with capacity.
Morais et al.113 simulated by Aspen Plus three different processes to produce biodiesel from waste vegetable oils to compare them. The first two ones were conventional processes including a free fatty acids (FFAs) pre-treatment, one alkali-catalysed and another one acid-catalysed. The third process was based on the use of supercritical methanol and propane as co-solvent. Results showed that this latter process was the most environmentally favourable alternative from an additional LCA study, especially because of the smaller steam consumption in comparison with the other process design alternatives. In contrast, the acid-catalysed process showed the highest potential environmental impacts due to the higher energy demand required by methanol recovery operations.
Marulanda114 carried out a simulation of a biodiesel production process by supercritical transesterification by Aspen Plus for a production plant capacity of 10000 t per year. He used the RK EoS for the process sections with high pressure and temperature and UNIQUAC for the distillation columns, and took into account the experimental results obtained at a continuous lab-scale reactor. The operating conditions were a methanol-to-triglycerides molar ratio of 9:1 and 400 °C. The total energy consumption of the process decreased from 2407 kW, when operating at a 42:1 molar ratio and 300 °C (previously reported in a reference used by the author), to 573 kW. Similarly, the author compared this output with a plant with the same capacity but based on the conventional base-catalysed process, where the required power was 2326 kW, which is also considerably higher than the process proposed by the author.
Philip et al.115 assessed the performance of different separation units for methanol recovery (distillation-, stripping-, and flash-based) within a plant of biodiesel production by Aspen Plus. As performance parameters, the authors considered the energy requirement and the purity of the recovered methanol. The physical properties of triolein were predicted by using the method of Gani,116 and the Dortmund modified UNIFAC predictive model54,55 was chosen as the thermodynamic model. As a simulation output, the required specific heat (per mass of recovered methanol) was qualitatively always the same for all the separation units, thus increasing with the methanol recovery, operating pressure and reflux ratio (for distillation) and decreasing with the methanol-to-oil ratio. The distillation units were the least energy efficient, followed by stripping and flash units. However, as expected, these latter could not achieve a methanol recovery target as high as the stripping and distillation units (98%).
Manuale et al.117 studied an energy-integrated biodiesel production process using supercritical methanol and a low-cost feedstock (chicken oil). The whole process was simulated using Unisim Design software. The NRTL (non-random two liquid) and UNIQUAC (universal quasi-chemical) models were used to describe the activity of the compounds, while a combination of the NRTL and SRK (or Peng–Robinson) models were applied to describe equilibrium. The process was focused on maximizing the heat recovery, and an energy duty of 262 W kg−1 h−1 of biodiesel product was obtained.
Gutiérrez Ortiz and de Santa-Ana77 presented a conceptual design, simulation (by Aspen Plus) and techno-economic assessment of a process to produce 10000 t biodiesel per year using supercritical methanol and propane as cosolvent. The process was designed with heat integration and required the use of a part of the produced biodiesel (7.4 wt%) to achieve the energy self-sufficiency for the plant. Relevant details of the process are the continuous multitubular reactor, designed using a macroscopic kinetic modelling approach, as well as the operating conditions (280 °C, 128 bar, a methanol-to-oil molar ratio of 24, a propane-to-methanol molar ratio of 0.05, and a residence time in the reactor of 9.7 min). The main products resulted in high purity, both methyl esters (99.8%) and glycerol (96.4%). The authors used two flash separators instead of distillation columns for methanol and propane separation which allowed reducing the energy requirement with respect to other studies. The economic assessment provided a break-even point of €0.479 kg−1 (at 10% rate of return) for the biodiesel selling price, so the authors concluded that the process could compete with the existing alkali- and acid-catalysed processes.
Martinovic et al.118 designed and simulated (by Aspen Plus) two processes for biodiesel production from waste cooking oil, one based on the single-step supercritical transesterification and the other one based on the two-step process. This latter involves first an oil hydrolysis and a subsequent supercritical methyl esterification. The two-step process showed lower investment and overall production costs per unit of biodiesel produced since it requires milder operating conditions. However, it presented a higher process energy requirement.
Sakdasri et al.119 performed a techno-economic analysis of biodiesel production with supercritical methanol with a methanol-to-oil molar ratio (MeOH/oil) of 12:1 (at 400 °C, 15 MPa), which is quite lower than that in a conventional supercritical methanol process using a MeOH/oil of 42:1 (at 300 °C, 20 MPa). None of the processes use catalyst. The plant capacity had a capacity of 40000 t biodiesel per year, and process simulation was performed using Aspen Plus. The results showed that the process with a MeOH/oil value of 12:1 provided the lowest manufacturing cost ($37.28 million) and the highest net present value ($45.4 million). In addition, the authors concluded that the process using a MeOH/oil value of 42:1 was not viable due to the large amount of methanol employed in the recycling loop that raised the costs a lot.
Lately, Ziyai et al.120 simulated (by Aspen Hysys) and compared techno-economically three biodiesel production scenarios, which were integrated with a process of supercritical water reforming (SCWR) of glycerol to produce electricity. The first two scenarios were based on conventional catalysed processes of biodiesel production: (1) from acid-pretreated waste cooking oil (WCO) in the presence of alkali catalyst, and (2) from WCO by acid catalyst. The third scenario was the second one followed by hexane extraction of the produced methyl esters. In all these processes, glycerol was sub-produced and sent to a SCWR process to produce hydrogen. This latter was burned to provide the thermal energy required by biodiesel production and purification processes as well as to generate electricity. While the biodiesel production rate of all the developed scenarios was close to each other, the first scenario showed the highest net electrical power generation and the highest net present value ($15.70 million).
7. Computational fluid dynamics
When hydrodynamics and transport properties have to be considered in the process, the analysis should be carried out taking into account the available empirical correlations for the transport property coefficients along with a process modelling to be implemented into computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code. To solve the set of partial differential equations with initial and boundary conditions, software such as Ansys Fluent or OpenFoam, or even direct programming, may be used. CFD allows a better understanding of the complex physical phenomena that occur, simplifying the scale-up and optimizing the process. Specifically, CFD is applied to individual process units.
There are a number of cases that justify the use of CFD studies in the study of supercritical fluids regarding specific applications. In this review, the analysis of heat transfer, the behaviour of specific type of reactors, the synthesis of nanoparticles, the supercritical/transcritical fuel injection, and others such as the supercritical water hydrolysis, supercritical chromatography, supercritical CO2 jet fracturing, and design of separators are discussed.
7.1. Analysis of heat transfer
The poor comprehension and prediction of phenomena related to the heat transfer involving supercritical fluids might limit the development of relevant engineering applications such as the supercritical water-cooled nuclear reactor, the oxygen–methane rocket engine, the supercritical carbon dioxide cycle, the transcritical carbon-dioxide heat pump and the supercritical water oxidation.121 This is also the case of supercritical water gasification, biodiesel production by supercritical transesterification, regenerative cooling, heat recovery, and so on. In all these cases, the complex mechanisms of turbulent§§ heat transfer of supercritical fluid should be better known and CFD provides an efficient way to get insight into it. In fact, heat transfer is one of the utmost issues regarding the application of supercritical fluids because affects directly the process and equipment design and optimization. Thus, this first sub-section is intrinsically related to all the others described below, but it is convenient to deal with it in a general way.
The significant variation of thermo-physical properties of fluids in the region near the critical point is largely influenced by turbulent convective heat transfer. Thus, properties such as density, speed of sound, viscosity and thermal conductivity decrease significantly within a very narrow temperature range around this region, at a given supercritical pressure, while other properties, such as enthalpy and entropy, undertake a sharp increase. Moreover, thermal expansion and specific heat have a peak near the so-called “pseudo-critical” temperature, which is defined as the temperature at which specific heat at constant pressure has a maximum at a specified pressure, leading to the aforementioned Widom line. The magnitude of these maxima and minima decreases when increasing pressure, so the effect on the heat transfer around the near-critical region diminishes.121
The CFD code solves the Navier–Stokes equations, with the standard k–ε model (as the most common model used in CFD) or another one to simulate mean flow characteristics for turbulent flow conditions, and the standard wall functions (most widely used for industrial flows) to connect the solution variables at the near-wall cells and the corresponding quantities on the wall. The output allows predicting, especially, supercritical fluid heat transfer in applications under a large range of conditions. However, the aforementioned drastic change of thermophysical properties with a slight change of temperature near the critical point makes the existing heat transfer correlations (such as that by Dittus–Boelter) invalid to calculate the heat transfer coefficients in supercritical fluids.122
Heat transfer deterioration or enhancement in heated upward pipe flows through the reactor core depends mainly on the buoyancy effect or thermal-induced flow acceleration, which are promoted by the huge fluid density variation near the critical region. This change leads to complex flow and heat transfer processes like in other properties, so the turbulence model may have a large effect on the output. Mohseni and Bazargan123 developed a two-dimensional CFD code to examine different k–ε turbulence models at low Reynolds (Re) number. The authors pointed out that the main reason of discrepancies between the numerical results for heat transfer coefficients might be due to the difference in damping functions of k–ε turbulence models that resulted in different turbulent eddy viscosity values. Recently, Liu et al.124 performed a direct numerical simulation (DNS), which requires no turbulence model¶¶, to explore the turbulent heat transfer of supercritical water in an upward pipe with and without buoyancy. The authors used an inlet Reynolds number equal to 5400, run simulations with different Grashof numbers, and the output was an overestimation of the heat transfer coefficient if the Dittus–Boelter correlation based on bulk fluid properties was used. This implied that wall temperatures could be much lower for supercritical water heat transfer. The deviation increased if there was forced convection. In this situation, the velocity profiles were deformed by the flow acceleration, and hence turbulence was attenuated. Previously, in a similar study using supercritical CO2, a very non-uniform radial distribution of the buoyancy force had been suggested as the reason of the decrease in turbulence just in the core but with a big increase near the wall, which enhanced the heat transfer.125 All this points to the necessity of new heat transfer correlations.
On the other hand, Brayton cycle works between 450 and 750 °C, so supercritical carbon dioxide may be a suitable fluid to use in. However, since the typical shell-and-tube heat exchanger would have a very large size in this system, Matsuo et al.126 studied the geometrical effect of a compact heat exchanger on the local heat transfer and pressure drop of supercritical CO2 by Fluent, considering the turbulence k–ε model with enhanced wall treatment and thermal effects, and also the shear-stress transport k–ω model. The result was a little difference (about 1.5%) in the computation of the heat transfer coefficient using the two models.
Other new application related to heat transfer is the regenerative cooling required because of the high heat load in the combustion chamber of scramjet engines for hypersonic propulsion (at Mach numbers higher than 5), using catalytic steam reforming of hydrocarbons, which can produce high levels of hydrogen and effectively reduce coke formation.127,128 The authors applied a two-dimensional numerical model to supercritical wall catalytic steam reforming of aviation kerosene (RP-3), taking into account chemical mechanisms of wall catalytic steam reforming reactions and coke formation. The simulation output provided insight into the operation and design of regenerative cooling systems for this application. In addition, the effect of key operation parameters, including water addition and inlet flow velocity, on coking and heat transfer was analysed in mini-channels. Thus, chemical heat absorption of RP-3 increased and heat transfer improved in case of water addition. Likewise, the authors pointed out that a trade-off between convective heat transfer and chemical heat absorption was needed when increasing inlet flow velocity, thus hindering the simultaneous optimization for both performance parameters.
Likewise, Schuler et al.129 performed a CFD study based on the Favre-averaged conservation equations applied to the supercritical water jets discharged in a subcritical water bath at near critical pressures. They verified that the simulation output tended to overestimate the values of the turbulent thermal conductivity near the pseudo-critical point of water, which was attributed to the effect of large variation of properties in this region, thus showing that CFD methods are required to deal with transition over the near critical region.
7.2. Behaviour of specific type of reactors
A major parameter in any reactive process where supercritical fluids are involved is the temperature profile inside the reactor, so heat transfer in the reactor is key in the design and analysis of reactors. More specifically, heat transfer mechanisms must be studied to correctly design reactors such as stirred reactors and transpiring wall reactors for supercritical water oxidation, as well as fluidized bed reactors for supercritical water gasification, which are further described below.
Moussiere et al.130 simulated the reactive flow in a stirred double shell reactor to get insight into the reasons that lead to an oxidation yield of up to 99.99%. By CFD simulation, the authors verified plug flow type inside the reactor. They found that heat transfer was improved by the stirrer rotation. Their 2D calculations provided good predictions of the reactor temperature fields, so the authors concluded that a more complex and time-consuming 3D model was not necessary to achieve a phenomenological description. Likewise, Leybros et al.131 developed a 2D simulation of the fluid dynamics and heat transfer during the oxidation process for the supercritical oxidation stirred reactor by Fluent, with the aim of designing and defining its appropriate dimensions. The k–ω model was used as turbulent model, imposing a swirl to the fluid. The discrete random walk particle model was applied to compute the particle trajectories. Similarly, the eddy dissipation concept approach was used to deal with the solubilization of the particles in supercritical water. The stirrer head geometry implied the change of particles residence time in the reactor as a potential way to improve the degradation efficiency and heat transfer that allows avoiding hot spots.
Transpiring wall reactor is a double shell reactor whose reaction chamber is built with a porous material, so clean cold-water flows through the pores to cool the wall down, thus preventing the deposition of salts on it. This type of reactor can overcome corrosion and plugging problems found in other supercritical water oxidation reactors. Bermejo et al.132 developed a CFD model using Fluent to examine the radial temperature profiles and fluid dynamics near the transpiring wall. They verified that one of main limitations of the model was the calculation of the fluid mixture heat capacity. Xu et al.133 built a CFD model of a transpiring wall reactor to explore the characteristics of water film by numerical simulation. The results showed that the water film coverage rate increased when transpiration intensity and transpiration water temperature rose or if feedstock flow-rate and feedstock preheating temperature were reduced. Likewise, an increase in the transpiration intensity and transpiration length led to a reduction of the inorganic salt concentration in water film. Based on their simulation output, the authors proposed two equations to use as a guide for the optimization of reactor operating parameters.
A hydrothermal flame is a combustion flame produced in aqueous mixtures at conditions above the critical point of water that involves an extremely fast oxidation process occurring in high-density. Thus, the implementation of the hydrothermal flame as internal heat source in a transpiring wall reactor can avoid plugging in the preheating section of this reactor. Furthermore, it reduces the residence time and, hence, the reactor volume.134 Zhang and Ma135 developed a two-dimensional axisymmetric CFD model of a transpiring wall reactor for SCWO with hydrothermal flame using Fluent, and found that the effect of the transpiring water temperature on the reaction zone was larger than the one of the transpiration intensity. The simulation output predicted lower reaction temperatures than the real ones, especially at high feed concentrations, which was attributed to the simplification in calculating the heat capacity of water and to having neglected the two-phase flow, i.e., to a too simplified modelling.
With the aim of optimizing the supercritical water oxidation process, the addition of auxiliary fuel, such as such as methanol, ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, has been studied because it might improve the complete destruction of pollutants by co-oxidation and provide the required energy for heating the reaction streams by hydrothermal combustion. In this regard, Narayanan et al.136 developed a CFD model using the standard k–ε model of Ansys CFX, which uses a finite volume method, to simulate supercritical single-phase combustion in a SCWO reactor for two methanol inlet mass fractions in injection of the methanol–water mixture. The authors pointed out that the rate of mixing between the fuel and oxygen streams controlled the reaction. Lately, Zhang et al.137 reviewed the supercritical water oxidation systems with optimized auxiliary fuel by the mechanism-based kinetics and CFD simulation. Likewise, Reddy et al.138 have recently explored the impacts of oxidant characteristics on the ignition of n-propanol–air hydrothermal flames in a supercritical reactor. The authors modelled by Ansys Fluent the hydrothermal flame generated during the supercritical water oxidation of organic compounds, mainly focused on evaluating the temperature profiles inside the reactor. Thus, different thermal events taking place in a real process carried out in a supercritical reactor designed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at Glenn Research Center (USA) were interpreted by 2D simulation, thus obtaining the ignition mechanism and impact of the oxidant characteristics during supercritical water oxidation. Likewise, the authors used the non-dimensional Reynolds and Froude numbers to explain qualitatively the effect of inertial and buoyant forces on hydrothermal flames. Similarly, Ren et al.139 studied the methanol counterflow flame at hydrothermal conditions, illustrating how the thermodynamics and transport properties affect the flame structure. In this case, the facility was the hydrothermal burner of ETH (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology). Their model was implemented into the 1D flame solver CHEM1D. The dependence of the flame stability on methanol concentration and inlet temperature was suitably predicted. Likewise, the effect of turbulence on the basis of comparison of Kolmogorov length scales was obtained so as to examine how much sensitive was the flame to the mass diffusion coefficients (that depend on the mass diffusion model), concluding that the sensitivity of the flame to the mass diffusion model was damped by the presence of the turbulent transport.
On the other hand, a fluidized bed reactor allows a good heat and mass transfer performance that improves the mixing and provides high feedstock heating rates. A better understanding of fluidization regime, particle distribution, residence time and temperature distribution may be also achieved by CFD. Some examples are shown focused on the glucose conversion. Thus, the fluid flow inside the reactor where a supercritical water gasification process takes place at 25 MPa and 650 °C was simulated by the Ansys CFX code, finding out that the temperature was not uniform inside the reactor and the wall temperature was never reached in any section of the reactor. In this way, the simulation provided insight into how to optimize the reactor configuration and attain a good process performance, i.e. a higher glucose conversion.140 In this CFD simulation, the unsteady Navier–Stokes equations were modified by introducing average and fluctuating quantities leading to the Reynolds averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations, which are far less computationally expensive than DNS, although turbulence needs to be modelled. Fig. 8 shows the temperature profile of the reactor, as a typical output of CFD simulation regarding the field distribution of a variable, which is scalar in this figure. Later, the glucose gasification in a supercritical water fluidized bed reactor was modelled and simulated by a 3D numerical model of hydrodynamics in Ansys Fluent, considering heat transfer and chemical reactions kinetics, so the gasification reaction rates were determined using the Arrhenius equation.141 The kinetic theory of granular flow was used to describe the particle collision, and the particles showed a homogeneous fluidization in supercritical water fluidized bed. The output related to the behaviour of supercritical water-particle flow, temperature and reaction rates distribution, provided insight into how to reduce the side reactions that take place at low temperature and, hence, a suitable way to design and optimize the reactor. Similarly, Yao and Lu142 studied further the supercritical water gasification of glucose by CFD using the Eulerian two-fluid method along with the kinetic theory of granular flow to obtain the residence time and the gas yield, as well as the fields of temperature, velocity and distribution of products. The simulation output resulted in that the mixing of preheated water and cold glucose solution at the bottom in the bed led to a region with low solid volume fraction and local swirl flow, while most of reactants flowed near the wall and with a velocity much higher than the superficial velocity in the freeboard. More recently, Zhao and Lu143 presented a CFD modelling to examine the glucose gasification in a SCW fluidized bed reactor, where the motion and heat transfer of particles were modelled by discrete element method (DEM). Simulation results showed that a high wall temperature, a low flow rate and a high initial bed height favoured gasification, and allowed explaining why the fluid-particle structure was non-uniform and the interaction between bubbles and particles.
 Fig. 8  Temperature profile along the supercritical reactor vertical axis.140 
Very recently, heat and mass transfer in a supercritical transesterification packed bed reactor has been characterised by CFD,144 using a 3D model where the Navier–Stokes equations were solved by means of a Finite Volume code. The velocity, concentration and temperature profiles were obtained on radial, axial planes and central axis line of a packed bed. Heat transfer coefficients were correlated under supercritical conditions, and the authors obtained heat transfer rates higher than the predicted values by some empirical correlations, which matches well with the results previously reported. Fig. 9 illustrates the computational mesh generated for a packed-bed reactor based on hybrid tetrahedral/hexahedral elements,144 as an example of discretization in CFD.
 Fig. 9  (a) Reactor and catalyst particles used in experiments along with geometrical model used for simulations, and (b) mesh detail for the packed bed mode.144 
7.3. Synthesis of nanoparticles
Nanotechnology concerns materials with size of few nm (10−9 m). By changing their size, morphology and crystallinity, the properties of nanoparticles can be tuned. In particular, supercritical fluid synthesis allows continuous synthesis of metal nanomaterials and can be adapted into an industrial-level production process because the environment speeds up the process while keeping a high controllability and reproducibility.145
CFD simulation helps predict particle size distribution and assists in the design of continuous processes to synthesize very well crystallized nanoparticles under supercritical water conditions.146 Continuous hydrothermal flow synthesis process is favourable to control the particle size and morphology by optimizing the operating conditions, and a key factor is micromixing since it controls the nucleation mechanism. In this way, determining nanoparticle size requires CFD models with a population balance approach.147 Two specific works on this are briefly described below.
Ma et al.148 simulated the behaviour of hydrothermal fluid flow, mixing and heat transfer in reactors at different volumetric scale-up ratios by Fluent with the goal of scaling-up the reactor of confined jet mixers used for continuous hydrothermal flow synthesis of nanomaterials. The authors found that the reactor scale-up could slow down the reactor mixing further, thus affecting its performance, especially at lower inlet temperatures.
Sugioka et al.149 calculated numerically by Fluent the flow and thermal fields in the tubular reactor where CeO2 nanoparticles were synthesized hydrothermally with supercritical water. The resultant flow patterns and temperature distributions in the reactor obtained explained well the size distributions of the synthesized nanoparticles.
7.4. Supercritical/transcritical fuel injection in combustion chambers
Currently, there are combustion units where thermodynamic properties of fluids experience a transition from subcritical to supercritical state because of the high pressure and temperature. Thus, the pressure and temperature in the combustion chamber of modern internal combustion engines are usually above the critical point of the fuel, so the injection may be transcritical or supercritical, depending on if the fuel injection temperature is subcritical or supercritical.150 Since modern liquid rocket motors, direct-injection engines and gas turbines involve a high-pressure combustion process, the preparation of the combustible fuel-oxidizer mixture may then occur under near- or supercritical operating conditions.151
Therefore, for supercritical fuel injection technology, a fuel injection modelling is key to get insight into supercritical injection characteristics. Zheng and Yang152 developed a numerical model of supercritical fuel injection based on the analysis of supercritical aviation fuel injection. The output revealed that when increasing the pressure, the supercritical fuel jet length and expansion angle varied less, and that when increasing the jet temperature, the supercritical jet length increased but the jet expansion angle barely changed. Very recently, Rodríguez et al.153 simulated the supercritical diesel injection and subsequent multi-component fuel-air mixing where the compressible Navier–Stokes equations were solved with a diffused interface density-based. The PC-SAFT EoS was used to predict the thermodynamic properties. In addition, the authors verified the capability of the methodology to predict supercritical diesel fuel mixing into air by 2D simulations of planar jets of n-dodecane and a four component Diesel surrogate. Fig. 10 shows how the Kelvin–Helmholtz instability is developing in the shear layer for supercritical dodecane jet. Similarly, Zhang et al.154 explored the supercritical injection and mixing under different conditions using LES (large eddy simulation)|||| method along with the Peng–Robinson EoS. Simulations were performed by OpenFOAM, solving unsteady problems due to thermodynamic nonidealities using the PISO (pressure implicit split operator) algorithm. As an output, the resultant jet mixing was facilitated using high values of injection temperature and pressure. The shrinkage of the radial boundary of the potential core was delayed by the pseudo-boiling process (related to the Widom line), which led to small spreading angles of jets and damped radial turbulent velocity fluctuations at the surface of jets.
 Fig. 10  Results of the simulation of the supercritical dodecane jet at t = 3.4 × 10−5 s: (a) density, (b) temperature, (c) pressure.153 
7.5. Other applications
Apart from the applications above described, there are also some others as shown below.
Ultrafast hydrolysis of biomass by supercritical water is performed under SCW conditions with very short reaction times (<1 s), making it possible to obtain chemicals from biomass effectively.155 As the severe operating conditions could lead to an uncontrolled increase in the hydrolysis time that would likely result in the degradation of the final product, CFD simulations were performed by Ansys Fluent to analyse and provide insight into the fluid flow patterns and the mixing performance related to the process units.156 Likewise, the optimum geometry to accomplish the mixture between the biomass suspension stream and the SCW stream was a relevant simulation output so as to minimize the occurrence of degradation products at the inlet of the hydrolysis reactor. Fig. 11 shows one of the mixing geometries analysed in this work156 as well as the supercritical water velocity streamlines in the cross-mixer configuration.
 Fig. 11  Mixing geometry and supercritical water velocity streamlines.156 
Supercritical fluid chromatography, in which liquid solvents are replaced with supercritical fluids, has recently caught the interest of the researchers mainly because of the high solute diffusion coefficients and low viscosity of supercritical fluids that make high flow-rates with low pressure drops possible with respect to the HPLC case. Subraveti et al.157 modelled and simulated the dynamics of pulse propagation in supercritical fluid chromatographic columns by Ansys Fluent. The study was focused on systems where the modifier barely was adsorbed with respect to the solute. The main simulation results were associated to the delay in elution times (due to the increase in the inlet pressure), peak fronting and peak distortions, since they cannot be described by classical equilibrium-dispersive models.
Supercritical CO2 jet fracturing may be an efficient fracturing fluid for the exploitation of oil and gas reservoirs, such as shale gas, coal bed methane, and tight sand stone gas. This is because of the low viscosity, the high diffusion coefficient, and the lack of surface tension of supercritical CO2. In addition, it may be a more friendly procedure to perform fracturing because the use of aqueous fluid involves the consumption of a huge amount of water. Even so, the use of scCO2 makes proppant transport difficult, increases the friction loss and requires high pump displacement. These issues may be visualized and addressed by CFD simulation to promote the industrialization process of supercritical CO2 fracturing. In this way, Wang et al.158 verified by simulating in Ansys Fluent a very poor sand carrying performance of scCO2 that leads to frequent sand plugging. This problem remains unsolved, despite its importance due to the rapid development of shale gas exploitation. The authors pointed out that the effect of polymer tackifiers (typically used to improve the carrying performance) in CO2 was very small, and the viscosity enhancement would be very low. Supercritical CO2 jet fracturing can replace the adsorbed CH4 in the shale or coal, can be permanently stored in the reservoir and is easier to break rock than water jet fracturing. Yi et al.159 developed a numerical model to examine the effect of the cement sheath and the tubing injection rate on the jet point CO2 temperature and pressure for the supercritical CO2 jet fracturing, assuming that heat transfer in the wellbore was unsteady. The simulation output pointed to the ineffectiveness of increasing the injection temperature and the annulus injection rate to make the CO2 temperature at the jet point higher than its critical value because of the high tubing injection rate that leads to pressure drop and temperature drop at the nozzle. This implies to optimize the tubing injection rate. In contrast, the CO2 pressure at the jet point resulted always higher than its critical value during the jet fracturing process with supercritical carbon dioxide. Likewise, Yan et al.160 have also simulated the whole process of supercritical CO2 jet fracturing to get insight into the fracturing mechanism. The authors performed the numerical simulation using the extended finite element method by ABAQUS, considering both the supercritical CO2 fracturing stage and the CO2 phase transition induced fracturing to examine the crack propagation during these two parts of the phase transitions of CO2. Relevant simulation results were that the fracturing could be enhanced by increasing the injection rate of scCO2 in practical applications and that the coal seam cracks were initiated and propagated at the scCO2 fracture stage, broadening and generating new cracks during the CO2 phase-transition induced fracturing stage.
Other potential application of supercritical fluids is the exhaustive solvent separation of heavy oil.161 Granulation of asphalt may be performed by mixing it with supercritical pentane and injecting the mixture through a nozzle into the granulation tower at atmospheric pressure. However, the high pentane vaporization rate clogs the nozzle due to asphalt particles agglomeration. Thus, Nie et al.162 built a mathematical model for flash boiling in jet flow of the pentane/asphalt mixture so as to improve the nozzle design, using the standard k–ε model for turbulent flow, the standard wall functions and the PISO algorithm to calculate the pressure–velocity coupling. The simulation output showed that a nozzle with a conical section avoided clogging by asphalt, and that the presence of asphalt phase increased the pentane vaporization rate and the fraction of vapor phase.
CFD has been also applied to the design of a novel hydrocyclone to separate the water produced from geothermal reservoirs and scCO2, so high purity scCO2 can feed into and be expanded through a turbine for power generation.163 Numerical simulations applied the Reynolds stress model (RSM) and discrete particle model (DPM) and were solved by Fluent to study the flow behaviour and the droplet separation process inside a double-inlet conical hydrocyclone. In addition, the separator performance was analysed under different operating and structural parameters. Although the impact of operating parameters was obtained, the effect of geometrical parameters on separation efficiency was more interesting, since the inlet equivalent diameter, the diameter of the cylinder chamber and the overflow outlet showed a significant influence on the separation efficiency. In addition, the pressure drop in the equipment could be reduced by changing the inlet equivalent diameter and overflow outlet through their relationship with drag forces and tangential velocities.
8. Conclusions
In most cases, the microscopic view on a reaction in a supercritical fluid is important to understand the specific impact of the solvent. This is typical in natural science, where the solvent structuring (e.g., due to a solute), and depending on density and temperature, is a very complex challenge, especially if the supercritical fluid also reacts with the other compounds. This is in the range of molecular dynamics (MD), which allows determining many thermodynamic and transport properties, and kinetic modelling, which leads to parameters needed for the subsequent process simulation. In this way, molecular dynamics and kinetic modelling provide understanding of physical and chemical phenomena.
In view of application, the question arises of what is important for the process development. Here the view on reactions and unit operations of chemical engineering becomes more macroscopic, and the flow characteristic is a key aspect. Flow along with mass and heat transfer make the difference between kinetic modelling and reaction engineering, so the view changes from natural science to engineering, from a microscopic approach to a macroscopic one. A model can provide insight into the behaviour of the supercritical fluid application, but it does not always mean that this insight is phenomenological. Modelling and simulation are here tools applied to solve specific problems, e.g., to find the best design for a reactor or to obtain the most suitable integrated process flow-sheet. In this way, a conceptual design may be developed more and more, so a number of configurations can be carried out looking for the best option and optimization can be performed under a variety of operating conditions. At the end, the process can be techno-economically and environmentally assessed. In this regard, thermodynamic calculations are macroscopic per se. For the studies of supercritical fluid processes, significant improvements have been reached regarding the equation of states, which are very important for the separation processes.
Process simulations are macroscopic and based on flows entering and leaving different interconnected equipment where reactions and unit operations of chemical engineering take place. This review is focused on the importance that the use of process simulation has and its contribution to the progress of supercritical fluid applications, especially in the twenty first century.
Although experimentation is essential to obtain thermodynamics and kinetics parameters, as well as possible heat transfer limitations, so far, most of experimental set-ups have a lab-scale or a bench-scale and only very few installations can be considered as pilot plants. No full-scale reaction units exist yet but the development and research in this field of knowledge should allow this achievement in the next decade. The scaling and viability studies are not easy tasks, so some other tools must be applied to support the use and development of supercritical fluids process, aimed at manufacturing new products and performing applications at full scale. Process simulation will aid in this regard.
Specifically, chemical and energy process simulation (CEP) and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) are the two main categories of simulation that can be used to analyse, design and optimise an overall process or specific process units. In this way, an overall system can be CEP-simulated using suitable software to achieve the highest process performance and the lowest utilities requirement, as well as to provide a complete mass, energy and exergy analysis along with techno-economic and life-cycle assessments. Likewise, for the study of fluid flow and heat transfer in the supercritical state, CFD has become increasingly important to gain insight into that cannot be obtained experimentally. Both types of simulations (CEP and CFD) require the use of appropriate software and largely depend on suitable thermodynamic methods, which may be also complemented by molecular dynamics. Indeed, the approaches at different scales make the determination of thermodynamic and transport properties possible in the predictive way needed to perform CEP or CFD simulations.
9. Acronyms

ADAnaerobic digestion
ASUAir separation unit
BMBoston–Mathias α-function
CFDComputational fluid dynamics
CLCChemical looping combustion
DEMDiscrete element method
DNSDirect numerical simulation
DPMDiscrete particle model
EoSEquation of state
FFAFree fatty acids
FTFischer–Tropsch
GHGGreenhouse gases
LCALife cycle assessment
LESLarge Eddy simulation
MDMolecular dynamics
NPVNet present value
NRTLNon-random two liquid
PISOPressure implicit split operator
PRPeng–Robinson
PSAPressure swing adsorption
PSRKPredictive Soave–Redlich–Kwong
RANSReynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes
RKRedlich–Kwong
RSMReynolds stress model
SAFTStatistical associating fluid theory
scCO2Supercritical CO2
scMeOHSupercritical methanol
SCWSupercritical water
SCWGSupercritical water gasification
SCWOSupercritical water oxidation
SCWRSupercritical water reforming
SFESupercritical fluid extraction
SNGSynthetic natural gas
SRKSoave–Redlich–Kwong
UNIFACUNIquac functional-group activity coefficients
UNIQUACUniversal quasi-chemical
WCOWaste cooking oil
WGSWater gas shift

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
L. Coniglio, 
            et al., Biodiesel via supercritical ethanolysis within a global analysis ‘feedstocks-conversion-engine’ for a sustainable fuel alternative, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2014, 43, 1–35 CrossRef .

          K. G. Joback, A unified approach to physical property estimation using multivariate statistical techniques,  1984 Search PubMed.
L. Constantinou and R. Gani, New group contribution method for estimating properties of pure compounds, AIChE J., 1994, 40(10), 1697–1710 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Jaubert and L. Coniglio, The group contribution concept: A useful tool to correlate binary systems and to predict the phase behavior of multicomponent systems involving supercritical CO2 and fatty acids, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1999, 38(12), 5011–5018 CrossRef CAS .
G. Brunner, Applications of Supercritical Fluids, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2010, 1(1), 321–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding molecular simulation: From algorithms to applications, Academic Press,  2002 Search PubMed .
K. A. Gillis, I. I. Shinder and M. R. Moldover, Bulk viscosity, thermoacoustic boundary layers, and adsorption near the critical point of xenon, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97(10), 1–4 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Das, M. E. Fisher, J. V. Sengers, J. Horbach and K. Binder, Critical dynamics in a binary fluid: Simulations and finite-size scaling, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97(2), 2–5 CrossRef .
S. Roy, S. Dietrich and F. Höfling, Structure and dynamics of binary liquid mixtures near their continuous demixing transitions, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 145(13), 134505 CrossRef PubMed .

          Y. Wu, Y. Chen and K. Wu, Role of Co-solvents in Biomass Conversion Reactions Using Sub/Supercritical Water, Near-critical Supercrit. Water Their Appl. Biorefineries, Biofuels Biorefinerie, ed. Z. Fang and C. Xu,  2014, pp. 69–98 Search PubMed .
F. Ingrosso and M. F. Ruiz-l, Modeling Solvation in Supercritical CO2, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 2560–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ingrosso, 
            et al., Driving Forces Controlling Host-Guest Recognition in Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Solvent, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22(9), 2972–2979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chakraborti and J. Adhikari, Vapor-Liquid Equilibria of Mixtures of Molecular Fluids Using the Activity Fraction Expanded Ensemble Simulation Method, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57(36), 12235–12248 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Marcus, Near-critical and Supercritical Water and Their Applications for Biorefineries,  2014, vol. 2 Search PubMed .
H. Weingärtner and E. U. Franck, Supercritical Water as a Solvent Angewandte, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2672–2692 CrossRef PubMed .
I. M. Svishchev and A. Plugatyr, Supercritical water oxidation of o-dichlorobenzene : degradation studies and simulation insights, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2006, 37, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Ved, D. L. Gurina, M. L. Antipova and V. E. Petrenko, Hydrogen bond and dipole moment in sub- and supercritical water close to the saturation curve, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 84(8), 1359–1363 CrossRef CAS .
R. Car and M. Parrinello, Unified Approach for Molecular Dynamics and Density-Functional Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55(22), 2471–2474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kruse and N. Dahmen, Water - A magic solvent for biomass conversion, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2015, 96, 36–45 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kruse and E. Dinjus, Hot compressed water as reaction medium and reactant, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2007, 39(3), 362–380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kruse and E. Dinjus, Influence of salts during hydrothermal biomass gasification: The role of the catalysed water-gas shift reaction, Z. Phys. Chem., 2005, 219(3), 341–366 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kruse and E. Dinjus, Hot compressed water as reaction medium and reactant. 2. Degradation reactions, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2007, 41(3), 361–379 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ono, S. Kobayashi, T. Aki Hoshina, Y. Sato and H. Inomata, Volumetric behavior and solution microstructure of methanol-water mixture in sub- and supercritical state via density measurement and MD simulation, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2011, 302(1–2), 55–59 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Abdulagatov, N. G. Polikhronidi, A. Abdurashidova, S. B. Kiselev and J. F. Ely, Thermodynamic Properties of Methanol in the Critical and Supercritical Regions, Int. J. Thermophys., 2005, 26(5), 1327–1368 CrossRef CAS .
B. Widom, Equation of State in the Neighborhood of the Critical Point, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 43(11), 3898–3905 CrossRef .

          B. Widom, Surface Tension of Fluidsin Phase transitions and critical phenomena, Academic Press,  1972, vol. 2 Search PubMed .
D. T. Banuti, Crossing the Widom-line - Supercritical pseudo-boiling, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2015, 98, 12–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gallo, D. Corradini and M. Rovere, Widom line and dynamical crossovers as routes to understand supercritical water, Nat. Commun., 2014, 3–8 Search PubMed .
M. Y. Ha, T. J. Yoon, T. Tlusty, Y. Jho and W. B. Lee, Widom Delta of Supercritical Gas-Liquid Coexistence, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(7), 1734–1738 CrossRef CAS .
G. Soave, Equilibrium constants from a modified Redlich-Kwong equation of state, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1972, 27(6), 1197–1203 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Peng and D. B. Robinson, A New Two-Constant Equation of State, Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam., 1976, 15(1), 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pina-Martinez, R. Privat, J. N. Jaubert and D. Y. Peng, Updated versions of the generalized Soave α-function suitable for the Redlich-Kwong and Peng-Robinson equations of state, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2019, 485, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lamorgese, W. Ambrosini and R. Mauri, Widom line prediction by the Soave – Redlich – Kwong and Peng – Robinson equations of state, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2018, 133, 367–371 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Simeoni, 
            et al., The Widom line as the crossover between liquid-like and gas-like behaviour in supercritical fluids, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 503–507 Search PubMed .
F. Maxim, 
            et al., Visualization of supercritical water pseudo-boiling at Widom line crossover, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–11 Search PubMed .
L. Xu, 
            et al., Relation between the Widom line and the dynamic crossover in systems with a liquid – liquid phase transition, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 102(46), 16558–16562 CrossRef .
M. Lukšič, B. Hribar-Lee and O. Pizio, Phase behaviour of a continuous shouldered well model fluid. A grand canonical Monte Carlo study, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 228, 4–10 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Karalis, C. Ludwig and B. Niceno, Supercritical water anomalies in the vicinity of the Widom line, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 1–10 CrossRef .
T. Samanta, R. Dutta, R. Biswas and B. Bagchi, Infrared spectroscopic study of super-critical water across the Widom line, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 702, 96–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Raju, D. T. Banuti, P. C. Ma and M. Ihme, Widom Lines in Binary Mixtures of Supercritical Fluids, Sci. Rep., 2017, 1–10 Search PubMed .
E. Watanabe, M. Sato, T. Inomata, H. Smith Jr., R. L. Arai, K. Kruse and A. Dinjus, Chemical Reactions of C1 Compounds in Near-Critical and Supercritical Water, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(8), 5803–5821 CrossRef PubMed .
In Progress in Thermochemical Biomass Conversion, ed. A. V. Bridgwater, John Wiley & Sons,  2008 Search PubMed .
H. J. Ederer, A. Kruse, C. Mas and K. H. Ebert, Modelling of the pyrolysis of tert-butylbenzene in supercritical water, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 1999, 15(3), 191–204 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Yu and J. Savage, Decomposition of Formic Acid under Hydrothermal Conditions, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1998, 37, 2–10 CrossRef .
W. Bühler, E. Dinjus, H. J. Ederer, A. Kruse and C. Mas, Ionic reactions and pyrolysis of glycerol as competing reaction pathways in near- and supercritical water, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2002, 22(1), 37–53 CrossRef .
E. E. Brock and P. E. Savage, Detailed chemical kinetics model for supercritical water oxidation of C1 compounds and H2, AIChE J., 1995, 41(8), 1874–1888 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, P. Ollero, A. Serrera and A. Sanz, Thermodynamic study of the supercritical water reforming of glycerol, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 8994–9013 CrossRef .

          G. M. Kontogeorgis and G. K. Folas, Thermodynamic Models for Industrial Applications: From Classical and Advanced Mixing Rules to Association Theories,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. J. Huron and J. Vidal, New mixing rules in simple equations of state for repre- senting vapour–liquid equilibria of strongly non-ideal mixtures, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1979, 3, 255–271 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. H. Wong and S. I. Sandler, A theoretically correct mixing rule for cubic equations of state, AIChE J., 1992, 38(5), 671–680 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Michelsen, A modified Huron-Vidal mixing rule for cubic equations of state, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1990, 60(1–2), 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
T. Holderbaum and J. Gmehling, PSRK: A Group Contribution Equation of State Based on UNIFAC, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1991, 70(2–3), 251–265 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Artemenko, P. Krijgsman and V. A. Mazur, Phase behavior of organic pollutants in supercritical water, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 4(7), 1114–1124 CrossRef .
R. Wittig, J. Lohmann and J. Gmehling, Vapor-liquid equilibria by UNIFAC group contribution. 6. Revision and extension, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42(1), 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hector and J. Gmehling, Present status of the modified UNIFAC model for the prediction of phase equilibria and excess enthalpies for systems with ionic liquids, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2014, 371, 82–92 CrossRef CAS .
D. Constantinescu and J. Gmehling, Further development of modified UNIFAC (Dortmund): Revision and extension 6, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2016, 61(8), 2738–2748 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Jaubert and F. Mutelet, VLE predictions with the Peng-Robinson equation of state and temperature dependent kij calculated through a group contribution method, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2004, 224(2), 285–304 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vitu, R. Privat, J. N. Jaubert and F. Mutelet, Predicting the phase equilibria of CO2 + hydrocarbon systems with the PPR78 model (PR EOS and kij calculated through a group contribution method), J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2008, 45(1), 1–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Qian, J. N. Jaubert and R. Privat, Phase equilibria in hydrogen-containing binary systems modeled with the Peng-Robinson equation of state and temperature-dependent binary interaction parameters calculated through a group-contribution method, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2013, 75, 58–71 CrossRef CAS .
A. Valverde, L. Osmieri and F. Recasens, Binary interaction parameters from reacting mixture data. Supercritical biodiesel process with CO2 as cosolvent, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2019, 143, 107–119 CrossRef CAS .
D. Castello and L. Fiori, Supercritical water gasification of biomass: A stoichiometric thermodynamic model, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40(21), 6771–6781 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, F. J. Campanario and P. Ollero, Supercritical water reforming of model compounds of bio-oil aqueous phase: Acetic acid, acetol, butanol and glucose, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 298, 243–258 CrossRef .
P. M. Mathias and T. W. Copeman, Extension of the Peng-Robinson equation of state to complex mixtures: Evaluation of the various forms of the local composition concept, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1983, 13(C), 91–108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fredenslund, R. L. Jones and J. M. Prausnitz, Group-contribution estimation of activity coefficients in nonideal liquid mixtures, AIChE J., 1975, 21(6), 1086–1099 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Abrams and J. M. Prausnitz, Statistical thermodynamics of liquid mixtures: A new expression for the excess Gibbs energy of partly or completely miscible systems, AIChE J., 1975, 21(1), 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Boston and P. M. Mathias, Phase Equilibria in a Third-Generation Process Simulator, EFCE Publ. Ser., 1980, 11, 823–849 CAS .
J. Sterpenich, 
            et al., Experimental study of CO 2 injection in a simulated injection well : the MIRAGES experiment, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2014, 224, 210–224 CrossRef .
S. Dahl, A. Fredenslund and P. Rasmussen, The MHV2 Model: A UNIFAC-Based Equation of State Model for Prediction of Gas Solubility and Vapor-Liquid Equilibria at Low and High Pressures, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1991, 30(8), 1936–1945 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Le Guennec, S. Lasala, R. Privat and J. N. Jaubert, A consistency test for α-functions of cubic equations of state, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2016, 427, 513–538 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Le Guennec, R. Privat and J. N. Jaubert, Development of the translated-consistent tc-PR and tc-RK cubic equations of state for a safe and accurate prediction of volumetric, energetic and saturation properties of pure compounds in the sub- and super-critical domains, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2016, 429, 301–312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Le Guennec, R. Privat, S. Lasala and J.-N. Jaubert, On the imperative need to use a consistent a-function for the prediction of pure-compound supercritical properties with a cubic equation of state, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2017, 445, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Glišić and D. U. Skala, Phase transition at subcritical and supercritical conditions of triglycerides methanolysis, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2010, 54(1), 71–80 CrossRef .
C. Silva, L. Soh, A. Barberio, J. Zimmerman and W. D. Seider, Phase equilibria of triolein to biodiesel reactor systems, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2015, 409, 171–192 CrossRef .
W. G. Chapman, K. E. Gubbins, G. Jackson and M. Radosz, SAFT: Equation-of-state solution model for associating fluids, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1989, 52(C), 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gross and G. Sadowski, Perturbed-chain SAFT: An equation of state based on a perturbation theory for chain molecules, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2001, 40(4), 1244–1260 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lafitte, 
            et al., Accurate statistical associating fluid theory for chain molecules formed from Mie segments, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139(15), 154504 CrossRef .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz and P. de Santa-Ana, Techno-economic assessment of an energy self-sufficient process to produce biodiesel under supercritical conditions, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2017, 128, 349–358 CrossRef .
H. Renon and J. M. Prausnitz, Local Compositions in Thermodynamic Excess Functions for Liquid Mixtures, AIChE J., 1968, 14(1), 135–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Martin, Cubic equations of state - Which?, Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam., 1979, 18(2), 81–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahlers and J. Gmehling, Development of an universal group contribution equation of stateI. Prediction of liquid densities for pure compounds with a volume translated Peng-Robinson equation of state, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2001, 191(1–2), 177–188 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Arce, N. F. Vieira and E. M. S. Igarashi, Thermodynamic Modeling and Simulation of Biodiesel Systems at Supercritical Conditions, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57(2), 751–767 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lalam, S. Chamali, S. Camy, D. Rouzineau, R. Kessas and J. Condoret, Fractionation of aqueous isopropanol mixtures in a countercurrent packed column using supercritical CO2, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2015, 101, 24–35 CrossRef CAS .
H. Basha, G. Janardhana Reddy and N. S. Venkata Narayanan, A numerical study of natural convection properties of supercritical water (H2O) using Redlich–Kwong equation of state, Sadhana, 2019, 44(2), 37 CrossRef .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, P. Ollero and A. Serrera, Thermodynamic analysis of the autothermal reforming of glycerol using supercritical water, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36(19), 12186–12199 CrossRef .

          L. Fiori and D. Castello, Thermodynamic Analysis of the Supercritical Water Gasification of Biomass, in Near-critical Supercrit. Water Their Appl. Biorefineries, Biofuels Biorefineries 2, ed. Z. Fang and C. Xu,  2014, vol. 2, pp. 99–129 Search PubMed .
A. Kruse, Supercritical water gasification, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2008, 415–437 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, P. Ollero, A. Serrera and S. Galera, An energy and exergy analysis of the supercritical water reforming of glycerol for power production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(1), 209–226 CrossRef .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, P. Ollero, A. Serrera and S. Galera, Process integration and exergy analysis of the autothermal reforming of glycerol using supercritical water, Energy, 2012, 42(1), 192–203 CrossRef .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, P. Ollero, A. Serrera and S. Galera, Optimization of power and hydrogen production from glycerol by supercritical water reforming, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 218, 309–318 CrossRef .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, P. Ollero, A. Serrera and S. Galera, Autothermal reforming of glycerol with supercritical water for maximum power through a turbine plus a fuel cell, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27(1), 576–587 CrossRef .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, A. Serrera, S. Galera and P. Ollero, Methanol synthesis from syngas obtained by supercritical water reforming of glycerol, Fuel, 2013, 105, 739–751 CrossRef .
A. Serrera, F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz and P. Ollero, Syngas methanation from the supercritical water reforming of glycerol, Energy, 2014, 76, 584–592 CrossRef CAS .
S. Galera and F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, Techno-economic assessment of hydrogen and power production from supercritical water reforming of glycerol, Fuel, 2015, 96, 637–645 CAS .
S. Galera and F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, Life cycle assessment of hydrogen and power production by supercritical water reforming of glycerol, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 96, 637–645 CrossRef CAS .
L. Salemme, M. Simeone, R. Chirone and P. Salatino, Analysis of the energy efficiency of solar aided biomass gasification for pure hydrogen production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 9, 14622–14632 CrossRef .
L. Fiori, M. Valbusa and D. Castello, Supercritical water gasification of biomass for H2 production: Process design, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 121, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hantoko, 
            et al., Thermodynamic study on the integrated supercritical water gasification with reforming process for hydrogen production: Effects of operating parameters, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(37), 17620–17632 CrossRef CAS .
A. Molino, 
            et al., Process Innovation Via Supercritical Water Gasification to Improve the Conventional Plants Performance in Treating Highly Humid Biomass, Waste Biomass Valoriz., 2016, 7(5), 1289–1295 CrossRef CAS .
F. Safari, A. Tavasoli and A. Ataei, Gasification of sugarcane bagasse in supercritical water media for combined hydrogen and power production: a novel approach, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 13(10), 2393–2400 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Ajiwibowo, A. Darmawan and M. Aziz, Co-production of hydrogen and power from black liquor via of hydrogen and power from black liquor via supercritical water gasification, chemical looping and power supercritical water gasification, chemical looping and power generation, Energy Procedia, 2019, 158, 2299–2304 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Campanario and F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, Fischer-Tropsch biofuels production from syngas obtained by supercritical water reforming of the bio-oil aqueous phase, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 150, 599–613 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Campanario and F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, Techno-economic assessment of bio-oil aqueous phase-to-liquids via Fischer-Tropsch synthesis and based on supercritical water reforming, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 154, 591–602 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, A. Kruse, F. Ramos and P. Ollero, Integral energy valorization of municipal solid waste reject fraction to biofuels, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 180, 1167–1184 CrossRef .
M. D. Bermejo and M. J. Cocero, Supercritical Water Oxidation : A Technical Review, AIChE J., 2006, 52(11), 3933–3951 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang and D. Xu, Novel design concept for a commercial-scale plant for supercritical water oxidation of industrial and sewage sludge, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 233, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
F. Donatini, G. Gigliucci, J. Riccardi, M. Schiavetti, R. Gabbrielli and S. Briola, Supercritical water
oxidation of coal in power plants with low CO2 emissions, Energy, 2009, 34, 2144–2150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. García-Rodríguez, F. A. Mato, A. Martín, M. D. Bermejo and M. J. Cocero, Energy recovery from effluents of supercritical water oxidation reactors, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2015, 104, 1–9 CrossRef .
N. Khallaghi, D. P. Hanak and V. Manovic, Gas-fired chemical looping combustion with supercritical CO2 cycle, Appl. Energy, 2019, 249, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Rodrigues, M. M. R. De Melo and C. M. Silva, Simulation and techno-economic optimization of the supercritical CO2 extraction of Eucalyptus globulus bark at industrial scale, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2019, 145, 169–180 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Deshpande, A. K. Sunol and G. Philippidis, Status and prospects of supercritical alcohol transesterification for biodiesel production, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2017, 6, 1–15 Search PubMed .
J. M. N. van Kasteren and A. P. Nisworo, A process model to estimate the cost of industrial scale biodiesel production from waste cooking oil by supercritical transesterification, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2007, 50(4), 442–458 CrossRef .
W. Cao, H. Han and J. Zhang, Preparation of biodiesel from soybean oil using supercritical methanol and co-solvent, Fuel, 2005, 84, 347–351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Morais, T. M. Mata, A. A. Martins, G. A. Pinto and C. A. V. Costa, Simulation and life cycle assessment of process design alternatives for biodiesel production from waste vegetable oils, J. Cleaner Prod., 2010, 18(13), 1251–1259 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Marulanda, Biodiesel production by supercritical methanol transesterification: Process simulation and potential environmental impact assessment, J. Cleaner Prod., 2012, 33, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Philip, A. Veawab and A. Aroonwilas, Simulation analysis of energy performance of distillation-, stripping-, and flash-based methanol recovery units for biodiesel production, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53(32), 12770–12782 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Poling, J. M. Prausnitz and J. P. O'Connell, The Properties of Gases and Liquids, 5th edn, McGraw-Hill, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
D. L. Manuale, G. C. Torres, C. R. Vera and J. C. Yori, Study of an energy-integrated biodiesel production process using supercritical methanol and a low-cost feedstock, Fuel Process. Technol., 2015, 140, 252–261 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Martinovic, F. E. Kiss, R. D. Micic, M. Simikić and M. D. Tomić, Comparative techno-economic analysis of single-step and two-step biodiesel production with supercritical methanol based on process simulation, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2018, 132, 751–765 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sakdasri, R. Sawangkeaw and S. Ngamprasertsith, Techno-economic analysis of biodiesel production from palm oil with supercritical methanol at a low molar ratio, Energy, 2018, 152, 144–153 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ziyai, M. Mehrpooya, M. Aghbashlo, M. Omid, A. S. Alsagri and M. Tabatabaei, Techno-economic comparison of three biodiesel production scenarios enhanced by glycerol supercritical water reforming process, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(33), 17845–17862 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pizzarelli, The status of the research on the heat transfer deterioration in supercritical fluids : A review, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2018, 95, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Seo, M. H. Kim, M. H. Anderson and M. L. Corradini, Heat Transfer in a Supercritical Fluid: Classification of Heat Transfer Regimes, Nucl. Technol., 2017, 154(3), 335–349 CrossRef .
M. Mohseni and M. Bazargan, The effect of the low Reynolds number k-e turbulence models on simulation of the enhanced and deteriorated convective heat transfer to the supercritical fluid flows, Heat Mass Transfer, 2011, 47(5), 609–619 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Jin, P. Zhao, Z. Ge, Y. Li and Y. Wan, Analysis of heat transfer of supercritical water by direct numerical simulation of heated upward pipe flows, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2019, 138, 206–218 CrossRef .
S. He, W. S. Kim and J. D. Jackson, A computational study of convective heat transfer to carbon dioxide at a pressure just above the critical value, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2008, 28(13), 1662–1675 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Y. Matsuo, M. Anderson, D. Ranjan, B. K. Y. Matsuo, M. Anderson and D. R. Numerical, Numerical Study of Compact Heat Exchanger Designs for Generation IV Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Power Conversion Cycles Numerical Study of Compact Heat Exchanger Designs for, Nucl. Sci. Eng., 2014, 176, 138–153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Feng, Y. Chu, K. Gong and Y. Cao, Numerical study of catalytic steam reforming of aviation kerosene at supercritical pressures, Fuel, 2018, 212, 375–386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Feng, Y. Cao, K. Gong, W. Zhou and W. Bao, Numerical simulation of supercritical catalytic steam reforming of aviation kerosene coupling with coking and heat transfer in mini-channel, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2019, 137, 199–214 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Schuler, T. Rothenfluh and P. Rudolf Von Rohr, Simulation of the thermal field of submerged supercritical water jets at near-critical pressures, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2013, 75, 128–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moussiere, A. Roubaud, O. Boutin, P. Guichardon, B. Fournel and C. Joussot-Dubien, 2D and 3D CFD modelling of a reactive turbulent flow in a double shell supercritical water oxidation reactor, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2012, 65, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
A. Leybros, A. Roubaud, P. Guichardon and O. Boutin, Supercritical water oxidation of Ion Exchange Resins in a stirred reactor : Numerical modelling, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 69, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Bermejo, Á. Martín, J. P. S. Queiroz, I. Bielsa, V. Ríos and M. J. Cocero, Computational fluid dynamics simulation of a transpiring wall reactor for supercritical water oxidation, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 158(3), 431–440 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, S. Guo, Z. He, C. Huang, Z. Jing and S. Wang, Simulation of a Transpiring Wall Reactor for Supercritical Water Oxidation : Characteristics of Water Film, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 1307–1318 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Cabeza, et al., Reactors for Supercritical Water Oxidation Processes, Near-critical Supercrit. Water Their Appl. Biorefineries, Biofuels Biorefineries 2, ed. Z. Fang and C. Xu,  2014, pp. 179–205 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang and C. Ma, CFD Simulation of a Transpiring-Wall SCWO Reactor: Formation and Optimization of the Water Film, AIChE J., 2015, 61(3), 857–866 CrossRef .
C. Narayanan, C. Frouzakis, K. Boulouchos, K. Príkopský, B. Wellig and P. Rudolf von Rohr, Numerical modelling of a supercritical water oxidation reactor containing a hydrothermal flame, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2008, 46(2), 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Ren, J. Lu, S. Chen and H. Zhang, Effect Mechanism of Auxiliary Fuel in Supercritical Water : A Review, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 1480–1494 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Reddy, S. Nanda, P. Kumar, M. C. Hicks, U. G. Hegde and J. A. Kozinski, Impacts of oxidant characteristics on the ignition of n-propanol-air hydrothermal flames in supercritical water, Combust. Flame, 2019, 203, 46–55 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ren, S. Wang and D. Roekaerts, Numerical study of the counterflow diffusion flames of methanol hydrothermal combustion: The real-fluid effects and flamelet analysis, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2019, 152, 104552 CrossRef CAS .
G. Caputo, P. Rubio, F. Scargiali, G. Marotta and A. Brucato, Experimental and fluid dynamic study of continuous supercritical water gasification of glucose, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2016, 107, 450–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, H. Jin, S. Guo and L. Guo, Numerical study on biomass model compound gasification in a supercritical water fluidized bed reactor, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 134, 737–745 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yao and Y. Lu, Supercritical water gasification of glucose in fluidized bed reactor: A numerical study, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(12), 7857–7865 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao and Y. Lu, Hydrogen production by biomass gasification in a supercritical water fluidized bed reactor: A CFD-DEM study, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2018, 131, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mekala, A. Fontanals and A. Guardo, CFD study of the supercritical transesterification of triolein: Wall-to-fluid/particle-to fluid transport effects, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2019, 143, 42–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, V. Musumeci and C. Aymonier, Chemistry in supercritical fluids for the synthesis of metal nanomaterials, React. Chem. Eng., 2019, 4(12), 2030–2054 RSC .
F. Demoisson, M. Ariane, A. Leybros, H. Muhr and F. Bernard, Design of a reactor operating in supercritical water conditions using CFD simulations. Examples of synthesized nanomaterials, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2011, 58(3), 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
A. Leybros, R. Piolet, M. Ariane, H. Muhr, F. Bernard and F. Demoisson, CFD simulation of ZnO nanoparticle precipitation in a supercritical water synthesis reactor, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2012, 70, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Ma, J. J. Liu, Y. Zhang and X. Z. Wang, Simulation for scale-up of a confined jet mixer for continuous hydrothermal flow synthesis of nanomaterials, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2015, 98, 211–221 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sugioka, K. Ozawa, M. Kubo, T. Tsukada and S. Takami, Relationship between size distribution of synthesized nanoparticles and flow and thermal fields in a flow-type reactor for supercritical hydrothermal synthesis, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2016, 109, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, M. Xie and M. Jia, Numerical Heat Transfer, Part A : Applications Large eddy simulation of fluid injection under transcritical and supercritical conditions, Numer. Heat Transfer, Part A, 2016, 7782(8), 870–886 CrossRef .
S. Baab, C. Steinhausen, G. Lamanna, B. Weigand and F. J. Förster, A quantitative speed of sound database for multi-component jet mixing at high pressure, Fuel, 2018, 233, 918–925 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng and Z. Yang, Numerical simulation of the influence of environmental and jet parameters on supercritical injection, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 127, 925–932 CrossRef .
C. Rodríguez, P. Koukouvinis and M. Gavaises, Simulation of supercritical diesel jets using the PC-SAFT EoS, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2019, 145, 48–65 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Wang and X. Hou, A numerical study on jet characteristics under di ff erent supercritical conditions for engine applications, Appl. Energy, 2019, 252, 113428 CrossRef .
J. Q. Albarelli, 
            et al., Thermo-economic and environmental comparison of supercritical water and enzymatic hydrolysis of sugarcane bagasse in a biorefinery concept, Energy, 2017, 141, 139e148 CrossRef .
L. Vaquerizo and M. J. Cocero, Ultrafast heating by high efficient biomass direct mixing with supercritical water, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122199 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Subraveti, P. Nikrityuk and A. Rajendran, Computational fluid dynamics study of viscous fingering in supercritical fluid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A, 2018, 1534, 150–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, 
            et al., Key problems and solutions in supercritical CO2 fracturing technology, Front. Energy, 2019, 667–672 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yi, M. Jia, X. Li and Z. Yang, Environmental Effects Transient wellbore temperature and pressure calculation model for supercritical CO2 jet fracturing, Energy Sources, Part A, 2019 DOI:10.1080/15567036.2019.1637972 .
H. Yan, J. Zhang, N. Zhou and M. Li, Staged numerical simulations of supercritical CO2 fracturing of coal seams based on the extended fi nite element method, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2019, 65, 275–283 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Zhao, C. Xu, R. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Sun and K. H. Chung, US 7,597,794 B2 Deep separation method and processing system for the separation of heavy oil through granulation of coupled post-extraction asphalt residue,  2009 Search PubMed.
Y. Nie, Y. Mao, J. Wang and J. Wang, CFD simulation of flash boiling of supercritical pentane during asphalt granulation, Chem. Technol. Fuels Oils, 2014, 49(6), 482–488 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiao, 
            et al., Geothermics Design and performance analysis of a supercritical CO2 (sCO2) -water separator for power generation systems using hot sCO2 from geothermal reservoirs, Geothermics, 2019, 81, 123–132 CrossRef .
A. Péneloux, E. Rauzy and R. Fréze, A consistent correction for Redlich-Kwong-Soave volumes, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1982, 8(1), 7–23 CrossRef .
J. N. Jaubert, R. Privat, Y. Le Guennec and L. Coniglio, Note on the properties altered by application of a Péneloux-type volume translation to an equation of state, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2016, 419, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Solubilizers have emulsifying or dispersion properties that allow transporting insoluble substances into the solvent.‡ The Jagla potential is a spherically symmetric two-scale potential that a liquid–liquid critical point has.§ This potential exhibits the density anomaly besides phase transitions and consists of a steep repulsive part, a repulsive shoulder and an attractive Gaussian-type part.¶ This is carried out by adding the contributions of first- and second-order groups once they have been defined by the structure of molecules.|| A volume translation (all the calculated molar volumes are translated by a constant amount) is introduced in EoS because such a volume shift improves the accuracy of liquid densities without modifying the results of a VLE calculation.164,165** Molecular descriptors convert some molecular properties into numbers to facilitate a mathematical treatment of such a chemical information. Previously, this must be coded by symbolic representation. The codes of the molecules are transformed into numbers by logic and mathematical functions.†† Black liquor is the lignin-rich waste of pulp and paper industry.‡‡ This revenue comes from the authorities for taking charge of the waste (MSW reject fraction) and its treatment.§§ In this sense, it should be noted that many experimental studies (especially those regarding SCW) are carried out in reactors where the fluid-dynamic regime is laminar, which is a drawback for a fast heating up during the process.¶¶ When using the DNS approach, the whole range of spatial and temporal scales of the turbulence must be resolved, so the computational cost is very high, even at low Reynolds numbers.|||| The characteristics of the LES approach require turbulence modelling (like RANS), but only for the smallest flow scales, thus allowing the analysis of more practical problems than using DNS, which requires large computing resources. In this way, LES is in between of DNS and RANS.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Francisco Javier Gutiérrez Ortiz	Doctor Industrial Engineer (2002), Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering at the Engineering School of the University of Seville (2009). Academic references regarding research: Orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0967-9788, ResearcherID: https://publons.com/researcher/1349246/francisco-javier-gutierrez-ortiz/ (h-index 19), Scopus Author ID: https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=8642524300 (h-index 17) ResearchGate: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Francisco_Javier_Gutierrez_Ortiz, Google Scholar: https://scholar.google.es/citations?user=ItVeZ8EAAAAJ&hl=es&oi=ao (h-index 22) He has supervised six theses and published 48 articles in journals with a high JCR impact factor. Among them he has carried out several studies on modelling and simulation. The research line on supercritical water gasification (SCWG) has been developed since 2009 focused mainly on the valorization of oxygenated hydrocarbons.
Andrea Kruse	She has studied chemistry at the University of Heidelberg. Her PhD (University of Heidelberg and Research Center Karlsruhe) deals with reactions in supercritical water. Since 1994 she was junior and later principal investigator in the KIT. In 2006 she gained the title “habilitus” and the “venia legend” in Chemical Engineering of the technical university of Darmstadt, based on her work about biomass conversion in supercritical water. Since 2012 she has been chair holder in the institute of agricultural engineering of the University of Hohenheim. She has more than 160 publications listed in Scopus (h-Index: 42) and 6 patents or patent applications.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the paper contents.	 

 	Fig. 2  Example of molecular dynamics (a) n–π* interaction, and (b) formation of a stable hydrogen bond between peracetylated β-cyclodextrin and a host molecule of benzoic acid within the cavity, with two possible orientations for the guest.11	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure of the supercritical state space and comparison of subcritical (1) with supercritical isobaric processes (2) and (3).27	 

 	Fig. 4  Evolution of the water trend in liquid and vapor state at 240 atm (PSRK EoS) each enthalpy interval is 2 kJ mol−1.47	 

 	Fig. 5  Heat-integrated flow-sheet to produce hydrogen and electrical power via supercritical water reforming of glycerol.89	 

 	Fig. 6  Chain related to simulation: thermodynamic properties and equilibria → process simulation → LCA (elaborated from ref. 94).	 

 	Fig. 7  Heat-integrated flow-sheet to produce Fischer–Tropsch biofuels by supercritical reforming of the aqueous phase of bio-oil.101	 

 	Fig. 8  Temperature profile along the supercritical reactor vertical axis.140	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Reactor and catalyst particles used in experiments along with geometrical model used for simulations, and (b) mesh detail for the packed bed mode.144	 

 	Fig. 10  Results of the simulation of the supercritical dodecane jet at t = 3.4 × 10−5 s: (a) density, (b) temperature, (c) pressure.153	 

 	Fig. 11  Mixing geometry and supercritical water velocity streamlines.156	 
AD	Anaerobic digestion
ASU	Air separation unit
BM	Boston–Mathias α-function
CFD	Computational fluid dynamics
CLC	Chemical looping combustion
DEM	Discrete element method
DNS	Direct numerical simulation
DPM	Discrete particle model
EoS	Equation of state
FFA	Free fatty acids
FT	Fischer–Tropsch
GHG	Greenhouse gases
LCA	Life cycle assessment
LES	Large Eddy simulation
MD	Molecular dynamics
NPV	Net present value
NRTL	Non-random two liquid
PISO	Pressure implicit split operator
PR	Peng–Robinson
PSA	Pressure swing adsorption
PSRK	Predictive Soave–Redlich–Kwong
RANS	Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes
RK	Redlich–Kwong
RSM	Reynolds stress model
SAFT	Statistical associating fluid theory
scCO2	Supercritical CO2
scMeOH	Supercritical methanol
SCW	Supercritical water
SCWG	Supercritical water gasification
SCWO	Supercritical water oxidation
SCWR	Supercritical water reforming
SFE	Supercritical fluid extraction
SNG	Synthetic natural gas
SRK	Soave–Redlich–Kwong
UNIFAC	UNIquac functional-group activity coefficients
UNIQUAC	Universal quasi-chemical
WCO	Waste cooking oil
WGS	Water gas shift
Footnotes
† Solubilizers have emulsifying or dispersion properties that allow transporting insoluble substances into the solvent.
‡ The Jagla potential is a spherically symmetric two-scale potential that a liquid–liquid critical point has.
§ This potential exhibits the density anomaly besides phase transitions and consists of a steep repulsive part, a repulsive shoulder and an attractive Gaussian-type part.
¶ This is carried out by adding the contributions of first- and second-order groups once they have been defined by the structure of molecules.
|| A volume translation (all the calculated molar volumes are translated by a constant amount) is introduced in EoS because such a volume shift improves the accuracy of liquid densities without modifying the results of a VLE calculation.164,165
** Molecular descriptors convert some molecular properties into numbers to facilitate a mathematical treatment of such a chemical information. Previously, this must be coded by symbolic representation. The codes of the molecules are transformed into numbers by logic and mathematical functions.
†† Black liquor is the lignin-rich waste of pulp and paper industry.
‡‡ This revenue comes from the authorities for taking charge of the waste (MSW reject fraction) and its treatment.
§§ In this sense, it should be noted that many experimental studies (especially those regarding SCW) are carried out in reactors where the fluid-dynamic regime is laminar, which is a drawback for a fast heating up during the process.
¶¶ When using the DNS approach, the whole range of spatial and temporal scales of the turbulence must be resolved, so the computational cost is very high, even at low Reynolds numbers.
|||| The characteristics of the LES approach require turbulence modelling (like RANS), but only for the smallest flow scales, thus allowing the analysis of more practical problems than using DNS, which requires large computing resources. In this way, LES is in between of DNS and RANS.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
