Evolution of molecular aggregation in bar-coated non-fullerene organic solar cells   - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9QM00078J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9QM00078J
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1062-1070Evolution of molecular aggregation in bar-coated non-fullerene organic solar cells†

        
          
            Yuchao 
            Mao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mengxue 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolong 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Robert S. 
            Gurney
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Liu
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Tao 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China. E-mail: twang@whut.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China
Received 
      5th February 2019
    , Accepted 29th March 2019First published on 1st April 2019AbstractAn in situ measurement technique combining spectroscopic ellipsometry and a bar coating method is introduced to monitor the film drying process of a PBDB-T:ITIC non-fullerene photovoltaic blend to illustrate the nanoscale morphology development during solution casting. Four distinct stages can be defined in the evolution of the extinction coefficient (k) according to the aggregation behavior of the polymer donor and the non-fullerene acceptor (NFA). Stage I (total volume fraction of the blend below 20%) exhibits rapid and free evaporation of the solvent while the polymer and NFA molecules move closer to each other without any self-organization. Stage II (total volume fraction between 20 and 40%) reveals the onset of slow aggregation of PBDB-T and ITIC. Stage III (total volume fraction between 40 and 75%) appears to be the rapid ordering of PBDB-T and ITIC, and Stage IV (total volume fraction higher than 75%) shows further densification of the PBDB-T:ITIC film during the slow evaporation of the residual solvent. The bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC inverted device shows superior efficiency of over 10%, and comparable stability with the spin-coated counterpart. These findings provide a fundamental understanding of the molecular aggregation during the solution casting of non-fullerene organic solar cells.
1. Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) employing non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have drawn significant research attention in recent years. Due to the advantages of strong light absorption, tunable energy levels, low synthetic cost and stable morphology of NFAs,1–3 the maximum achievable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of NFA-based OSCs has reached over 16% in single-junction binary devices and surpassed that of their fullerene-based rivals.4
During the operation of an OSC device, excitons are created in the photoactive layer after the absorption of solar photons, then undergoing diffusion and dissociation processes resulting in free charge carriers, which transport to the electrodes where they are collected to form a current.5 The nanoscale morphology within the photoactive layer has been found to be critical in determining the PCE of OSCs.6 Throughout the drying processes of the photoactive layer, the development of the nanomorphology can be complex. Donors and acceptors may undergo molecular ordering (π–π stacking or crystallization), aggregation (into isolated or interconnected networks), and phase separation (either caused by immiscibility or ordering), which can all have a great impact on the quality of the final film and the performance of NFA-based OSCs.7 Therefore, a technique that can probe and monitor the whole process of photovoltaic film formation is capable of providing a wealth of information to unravel the characteristics of morphology development, which consequently can be applied to further regulate and optimize the microstructure to maximize the device PCE.
Previous work on fullerene-based OSCs has provided details of the nanoscale morphology development of [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) in its photovoltaic blends with various types of semiconducting polymers like poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT), poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-quinquethiophene) (PDPP5T) and poly[(5,6-difluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazol-4,7-diyl)-alt-(3,3′′′-di(2-octyldodecyl)-2,2′;5′,2′′;5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen-5,5′′′-diyl)] (PffBT4T-2OD) with the assistance of in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE), optical spectroscopy, monochromatic reflectometry or grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD).8–19 These in situ characterizations feed the OSC community with both optimization strategies to maximize PCE,12,15 as well as additions to fundamental understanding, for example the finding that the formation of a bulk heterojunction is not via simultaneous spinodal decomposition.20,21 However, the structural evolution of NFA-based photovoltaic blends has rarely been explored and is absent in the literature, and it is of great importance to reveal the film formation and morphology evolution processes of state-of-the-art non-fullerene OSCs.
In this work, we have utilized SE in conjunction with a bar coating film casting method to probe the evolution of molecular organization behavior during the film formation process of a PBDB-T:ITIC photovoltaic blend. The processes of film drying and growth of the extinction coefficient are obtained and correlated with the molecular ordering process of PBDB-T:ITIC. A rapid progression of ITIC ordering was identified by the red-shift of its extinction coefficient occurring within one second. Furthermore, the film evolution can be divided into four stages: fast and free evaporation of solvent molecules (stage I), slow aggregation of PBDB-T and ITIC (stage II), rapid ordering of PBDB-T and ITIC (stage III), and densification of the PBDB-T:ITIC film with a slow rate of solvent evaporation (stage IV). PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs based on the bar coated photoactive films were also fabricated and exhibited a maximum PCE of over 10% without any post-treatments, showing bright prospects for bar coating techniques. The results presented in this work provide deep insight into the molecular development of non-fullerene photovoltaic blends, which shed a light on the regulation of the solution casting process to optimize NFA-based OSCs.
2. Materials and methods
Materials
PBDB-T and ITIC were purchased from Solarmer Materials (Beijing) Inc. ZnO precursor solution was synthesized according to a previous report.22 Unless otherwise stated, all chemicals and solvents were of reagent grade and used as received.

In situ measurement
PBDB-T and ITIC (weight ratio of PBDB-T:ITIC fixed at 1:1) were dissolved in chlorobenzene (CB) to form a solution with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1. Silicon wafers were cut to appropriate size (ca. 15 mm × 30 mm) and cleaned by sequential sonication in deionized water, ethanol and isopropanol for 10 min each before drying on a hotplate. The cleaned silicon substrates were further treated with plasma of adequate power (ca. 60 W) for 30 s to improve the surface hydrophilicity for casting. After a silicon substrate was carefully attached to the center of the ellipsometer sample plate using tape, approximately 10 μL PBDB-T:ITIC solution was delivered onto the substrate. A Mayer bar rod wrapped with a metal wire of 0.1 mm diameter was dragged across the substrate to cast a film at a speed of ca. 30 mm s−1. The acquisition of SE data was immediately conducted at the same time using a spectroscopic ellipsometer (M2000D, J.A. Woollam Co., USA) with a fixed incidence angle of 70°. The SE was used to monitor the whole film drying process and the raw data were collected every 50 ms. The neat PBDB-T and ITIC films were dissolved in CB with the concentration of 20 mg mL−1 and 50 mg mL−1 respectively and bar-coated following the procedure mentioned above. All operations were operated under ambient conditions at room temperature of 25 °C.
Device fabrication
Inverted non-fullerene organic photovoltaic devices were fabricated as described herein. The pre-patterned ITO glass substrates (resistance of ca. 15 Ω per square) were cleaned as per the silicon wafer above. The ITO substrates were further treated with UV/ozone for 15 min. Then the ZnO precursor solution was spin-coated onto the precleaned ITO glass at a speed of 4000 rpm and annealed at 200 °C for 30 min (a final thickness of ca. 30 nm). The PBDB-T:ITIC solution (5 μL) was then delivered onto the top edge of the ZnO layer, followed by the bar coating procedure with a speed of ∼30 mm s−1, under ambient conditions. After drying the photoactive layer, the device substrates were transferred to an N2-filled glove box and heated on a hot plate at a moderate temperature of 80 °C for 30 min. Spin-coated devices were fabricated at a spin speed of 1000 rpm with a PBDB-T:ITIC concentration of 14 mg mL−1 to receive a final thickness of ca. 100 nm. Solvent vapor annealing was conducted inside a glove box using a sealed chamber with a saturated CB solvent-vapor atmosphere for 4 min. Next, 10 nm of MoO3 and 100 nm of Ag were thermally evaporated onto the photoactive layer under high vacuum using the shadow mask as a hole transport layer and an anode, respectively. Each device consists of 8 pixels of photoactive area, and the size, determined using the anode and cathode, is 4 mm2. Finally, all devices were encapsulated with glass slides using UV-curable epoxy before moving out of the glove box for J–V and stability measurements.
Characterization
Device current density–voltage (J–V) measurements were performed under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a Newport 3A solar simulator (Newport, USA) after the light intensity was calibrated using an NREL-certified silicon reference cell. J–V characteristics were measured with a programmed software developed by Ossila Ltd (UK) and a source meter unit (2612B, Keithley, USA). An aperture mask was placed over the device to define an accurate measurement area of 2.2 mm2 for each pixel. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was conducted using an EQE system (Zolix, China) equipped with a standard silicon diode. The absorption spectra of the films were collected using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi, Japan). The surface morphology was characterized by AFM (Solver Next, NT-MDT, Russia).
3. Results and discussion
Without relying on the large-scale synchrotron facilities required for GIXD measurements, SE is a lab-based technique that can provide time-resolved spectroscopic characterization of photovoltaic thin films, with the advantages of high speed and precision, and is nondestructive to samples.8,13,23 Furthermore, to cooperate with the dynamic monitoring process of SE, an appropriate film coating method is essential. Since the spin coating method has limitations in mass production, the bar coating (or doctor blading) technique, which acts as a prototype of the slot-die coating, has been introduced to simulate large-scale manufacture of OSCs on both hard and flexible substrates.24–26 During the operation of these casting methods, a sharp blade or a wire-wrapped bar fixed at a certain distance from the substrate moves at a certain speed to cast a wet film onto the substrate surface, which then dries to form the desired film. The final film thickness can easily be controlled by the bar/blade gap,27 moving speed, solution concentration and the materials themselves. Recent work on the doctor-bladed PBTA-TF:IT-M non-fullerene OSCs has reached over 11% PCE using environmentally friendly solvents.28 Large-area OSCs of 1 cm−2 were also fabricated and an outstanding PCE of 13.2% was achieved.29 These works pave the way for large-scale industrialization of NFA-based OSCs. Hence, a combination of SE and bar-coating has been used in this work (see Fig. 1a) to evaluate the dynamic morphology development of a PBDB-T:ITIC non-fullerene blend (see the chemical structures in Fig. 1c), as well as the fabrication of PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry measurement of photovoltaic films cast via bar coating. (b) Device structure of bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs in this work. (c) Chemical structures of PBDB-T and ITIC. 
A typical SE setup contains the light source and the detector, which emits and receives elliptically polarized light, and the data are collected as parameters Ψ (ratios of the amplitudes before and after the reflection from the sample surface) and Δ (the relative phase difference before and after reflection). The film thinning/drying process is obtained through data fitting using a Cauchy model as described in the ESI.† The raw Ψ and Δ data vs. time during the PBDB-T:ITIC film drying process (after bar coating on a substrate held at 25 °C) are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Since the Cauchy model applies to non-absorbing materials or the transparent region of light-absorbing materials, the PBDB-T:ITIC film thickness was fitted in its transparent range from 850 to 1000 nm according to the UV-Vis absorption spectrum.
The film thinning process of PBDB-T:ITIC, together with the changes in the total volume fraction of PBDB-T:ITIC, are shown in Fig. 2a. Selected Ψ and Δ data at two time intervals, i.e. 9.6 and 45.5 s corresponding to a thick and wet film, and a thin and dry film respectively, are shown in Fig. 2b and c. It should be noted that the data starting point as shown in Fig. 2a is around 7 s, since the period from 0–7 s was cut off due to the noisy and unstable signals generated by the bar-moving process of film casting along the substrate. The photoactive blend evolves from a thick and wet film (ca. 5500 nm) into a thin and dry one (ca. 120 nm) after the evaporation of solvent molecules, i.e. chlorobenzene (CB), over a time period of less than one minute. A distinct reduction in the film thinning rate occurs at around 35 s, corresponding to the total volume fraction of the blend being at 50%. Assuming that the thinning rate for each stage is linear in time, it is fitted to be 170 nm s−1 in the fast solvent loss period (7–34 s) and 3 nm s−1 in the slow solvent evaporation period (after 36 s). The total volume fraction of PBDB-T:ITIC in the wet film increases slowly before ca. 34 s, and again after 40 s as the solvent evaporates, with an intermediate period of rapid increase arising at around 35 s (a time that the solvent loss rate comes to an abrupt decrease). We envisage that the molecular ordering and aggregation of the polymer donor or the NFA during the film drying process may provide more insightful explanation for these distinct changes in thickness and the total volume fraction.
 Fig. 2  (a) Evolutions of the film thickness and the total volume fraction of PBDB-T:ITIC during drying after bar-coating on a substrate held at 25 °C. (b) An example of the raw SE data of Ψ and Δ as a function of wavelength of a thick and wet film at 9.6 s and (c) a thin and dry film at 45.5 s. The dashed lines in panels (b and c) represent the fitted results using the Cauchy model in the transparent range of 850–1000 nm. 
Thus to further probe details in the evolution of molecular ordering behavior during the drying process of the PBDB-T:ITIC blend, the analysis of the extinction coefficient was carried out. A Kramers–Kronig consistent B-spline model30 was applied to fit the optical constants of the extinction coefficient (k) and the refractive index (n). The raw and B-spline fitted data for Ψ and Δ at a selected time of 40 s, together with the resulting optical constants obtained from model fitting, are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). The evolution of the extinction coefficient can be roughly divided into three parts according to the relative positions of various vibronic peaks of PBDB-T and ITIC (see Fig. 3). UV-Vis absorption spectra of the polymer and NFA are also plotted to determine the assignment of each peak. The directions of the arrows in Fig. 3 show the evolution of the extinction coefficient over the time intervals, which are 0.1, 0.05 and 0.3 s respectively in panels a, b and c.
 Fig. 3  Evolution of the extinction coefficients of PBDB-T:ITIC blend films in (a) stage I & II, (b) stage III and (c) stage IV. The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the (d) PBDB-T:ITIC blend, (e) neat PBDB-T and (f) neat ITIC, in solution and thin film states. 
As shown in stages I and II (Fig. 3a), the extinction coefficient of the PBDB-T:ITIC blend maintains two peaks at 610 and 680 nm, which is close to the absorption spectrum of the blend solution as observed via UV-Vis spectroscopy measurements (see Fig. 3d). Although the film-thinning rate is fast in this period, the k value undergoes a relatively slow increment due to the increased density of photovoltaic materials in the still-wet film, which marks the primary characteristic of these stages. There is no obvious shift of the vibronic peaks, indicating no interactions or ordering processes of PBDB-T and ITIC components, which denotes that fast and free solvent evaporation dominates this stage. The intensity of the k spectrum at 610 nm rises from below k = 0.05 to 0.2, an increase that is substantially more than what was found in a fullerene-based P3HT:PCBM blend (from 0.01 to 0.08).8 We consider this to be due to contributions from both PBDB-T and ITIC, with both components showing strong absorption in the visible wavelength range, and hence both will improve their absorption abilities upon solvent evaporation. Conversely, in the fullerene system only the polymer donor enhances its absorption, with negligible contribution from PCBM due to its weak light absorption in the visible wavelength range.
During stage III (Fig. 3b), a distinct red-shift arises as time elapses. The vibronic peaks shift from 610 and 680 nm to 630 and 705 nm, respectively. Fig. 3e and f shows that the vibronic peaks of PBDB-T remain at a fixed location in both the solution and the thin film, whilst those of ITIC red-shift after drying. We therefore assign these red-shifts to ITIC as a result of fast molecular ordering of the ITIC component. This red-shift of the ITIC spectrum finishes within one second, indicating that the ITIC molecules undergo a rapid self-organization process in this stage. We note that the PBDB-T component will also undergo a rapid aggregation process simultaneously with ITIC, although this cannot be observed through a spectroscopic shift as the spectrum of the PBDB-T component remains unchanged after drying from a solution state. This is however supported by comparing the increase rates of k spectra of pure PBDB-T and ITIC components as shown in Fig. 4 and will be discussed later.
 Fig. 4  Evolution of the extinction coefficient of the PBDB-T:ITIC film after bar-coating (a) as a function of time, and (b) as a function of the total volume fraction. The evolution of thickness and the volume fraction of neat (c) PBDB-T and (d) ITIC films during the drying process after bar-coating. (e) Evolution of the extinction coefficient of PBDB-T and (f) ITIC films. The dashed lines in panels e and f mark the onset points of abrupt k increase for PBDB-T and ITIC, respectively. (g) Schematic of microstructure evolution in the PBDB-T:ITIC blend during film drying after bar-coating. 
In stage IV (Fig. 3c), the vibronic peaks are fixed at wavelengths of 630 and 705 nm, and the red-shift stops. However, the intensity of the k spectrum exhibits a notable increase (e.g. k630 evolves from ca. 0.7 to 0.9), indicating an increase in the density of the solid content within the film. We have normalized the k spectra in the last stage based on the peak of ITIC at 705 nm to highlight the evolution of PBDB-T vibronic peaks at 585 and 625 nm (see Fig. S3, ESI†). Vibronic peaks of PBDB-T as a function of time were also extracted from the normalized spectra to distinguish this change, and no distinct increase can be identified. We therefore conclude that both PBDB-T and ITIC show no obvious aggregation behaviour but undergo an increase in density as the residual solvent molecules continue to leave the film, a physical change that will contribute to the increase of the k spectrum in the last stage. This slow evaporation rate of the residual solvent is restricted by the fact that the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the photovoltaic blend surpasses the film drying temperature. In a wet film, the CB molecules act as the plasticizer to lower the Tg value,31 resulting in a Tg value of the wet film far below the experimental temperature of 25 °C. As the solvent evaporates to a certain threshold when Tg of the blend reaches the film casting temperature, the molecular chains of PBDB-T:ITIC are frozen and transformed to a glassy state, making it hard for residual solvent molecules to escape from the network-like structure of the glassy blend film, leading to the abrupt decrease in the thinning rate, and the slowest solvent evaporation rate in the last stage.
To better illustrate how we define the stages I to IV labeled in Fig. 3, we plot the evolution of vibronic peaks in the k spectrum of the PBDB-T:ITIC blend as a function of time and total volume fraction as shown in Fig. 4a and b. In addition, neat PBDB-T and ITIC films were also bar-coated and the film drying processes were monitored via in situ SE to further verify the aggregation of PBDB-T and ITIC. The evolutions of film thickness, volume fraction and k spectra of neat PBDB-T and ITIC films (corresponding to the wavelengths of 585 and 625 nm for PBDB-T, 650 and 705 nm for ITIC) were extracted from the k spectra (see Fig. S4, ESI†), and summarized in Fig. 4c–f. Here, the drying process of PBDB-T:ITIC can be divided into four stages according to the molecular ordering behavior of the polymer and NFA molecules. In stage I, the extinction coefficient of the components undergoes a slow increase (below k = 0.05) before the total volume fraction of PBDB-T:ITIC in the still-wet film reaches 20%. We expect the absence of any distinct self-interactions between the polymers and NFA molecules at such low solid concentrations.32
As solvent continues to evaporate, a moderate increase of k of the blend occurs around 33.6 s when the total volume fraction of the blend reaches 20% (i.e. when the content of the PBDB-T and ITIC components reaches 10% each, as PBDB-T:ITIC = 1:1), which is consistent with the threshold of the volume fraction in neat PBDB-T and ITIC films at 10% when a noticeable increase in the rate of the k evolution process occurs. This marks the onset of PBDB-T and ITIC aggregation (stage II, see Fig. 4g) when the total volume fraction of the blend reaches 20%.
In stage III, a rapid red-shift occurs at 34.6 s when the solid concentration threshold exceeds 40% (i.e. when the ITIC content reaches 20%), which is the level for rapid ordering of ITIC (see stage III of Fig. 4g).33 This is also consistent with the threshold value at 20% in the ITIC neat film when a rapid increase occurs, along with the onset of the red-shift in the neat ITIC film (see Fig. S4b, ESI†). These non-fullerene molecules organize rapidly during stage III as the extinction coefficient undergoes a dramatic rate increase (see Fig. 4a and b). The aggregation process of ITIC terminates when the total volume fraction of the blend reaches around 75%, i.e. the end of the red-shift of the extinction coefficient at 35.5 s. We note that the rapid ordering process of PBDB-T is not associated with any red-shift of its vibronic peaks, however the rapid increase of its spectrum intensity justifies the ordering process. During stage IV, the slow increase in the density of the PBDB-T:ITIC film as a result of residual solvent evaporation further increases the extinction coefficient at a reduced rate.

In situ studies of morphology development on polymer:fullerene mixtures have revealed that morphology evolution depends on material systems as well as the solution casting conditions. In the literature, the electron donors have been reported to aggregate either before or after the aggregation of fullerene acceptors.8,32–34 In this work, PBDB-T and ITIC show a simultaneous aggregation behavior, which we believe can be altered by changing the pre-aggregation state of the component in the solution as well as by varying the film casting conditions.
Next, non-fullerene photovoltaic devices with an inverted structure were fabricated based on the bar-coated photoactive layer of PBDB-T:ITIC. It should be noted that all devices were fabricated without any additives (e.g. DIO). Spin-cast devices and those subjected to further solvent vapor annealing (SVA) were also fabricated to evaluate the effect of bar coating on device performance. The surface morphology of PBDB-T:ITIC films fabricated via different methods was characterized by AFM as shown in Fig. 5. We emphasize that the bar-coated film presents rather similar surface roughness compared with the spin-coated films. All these films display a well-organized network structure and a suitable degree of phase separation, which is favorable for an intimate mixing of PBDB-T and ITIC for efficient exciton dissociation as well as suitable charge transport properties to reduce charge recombination.
 Fig. 5  AFM height images of the PBDB-T:ITIC film fabricated via (a) bar coating, (b) spin coating with further SVA, and (c) spin coating. Image sizes are 2 μm × 2 μm. 
The device performances and EQE data are presented in Table 1 and Fig. 6. Compared to the spin-coated device, the bar-coated device reaches a distinctly higher average short-circuit current (JSC) of 16.3 mA cm−2, which contributes to the higher PCEave of 9.6%, and the PCE of the best performing device even reaches 10.1%. The calculated JSC values integrated using the EQE spectra of spin- and bar-coated devices are 14.1 and 15.6 mA cm−2, respectively, which align quite well with values obtained from the J–V measurements. The characteristic peaks of PBDB-T (ca. 585 nm) and ITIC (ca. 705 nm) for the bar-coated device in the EQE spectra are all improved compared to the spin-coated device, having been increased to levels similar to that of the SVA-treated spin-coated device as shown in Fig. 5b.
Table 1 Summary of photovoltaic parameters of spin and bar coated PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs measured at an illumination of AM 1.5G at 100 mW cm−2




Coating method
PCEmax (PCEave) (%)
FF (%)

V
OC (V)

J
SCmax (JSCave) (mA cm−2)




Bar coating
10.1 (9.6 ± 0.4)
68.7 ± 2.4
0.87 ± 0.01
−16.5 (−16.3 ± 0.2)


Spin coating
9.1 (8.6 ± 0.3)
69.9 ± 1.8
0.87 ± 0.01
−14.8 (−14.3 ± 0.3)


Spin coating and SVA
10.1 (9.8 ± 0.2)
67.6 ± 1.0
0.88 ± 0.01
−16.7 (−16.4 ± 0.4)




 Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves of spin and bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC OPVs based on the best performing devices. (b) EQE spectra and the calculated JSC curves. 
Based on the analysis of in situ characterization described above, the bar-coated film undergoes distinct aggregations of PBDB-T and ITIC components during the film drying process. The dried film shows enhanced vibronic peaks of both donors and acceptors, indicating enhanced structural ordering compared to that in the spin-coated film.35–37 While the spin-coated device might present less ordered molecules due to the rapid film drying during spin coating, the further SVA treatment will promote the diffusion of ITIC molecules through polymer chains to self-organize and crystallize.38,39 In this aspect, the bar-coated device and the SVA-treated spin-coated device both show enhanced molecular order, contributing to the better performance compared to the spin-coated device without SVA.
In addition, storage lifetime measurements presented in Fig. 7 were conducted to track the stability of the bar-coated device, with the reference devices fabricated by spin-coating also shown. All devices were encapsulated with epoxy glue and glass slides, and have been stored in air with a humidity of around 40% and measured after different storage times. The bar-coated device maintains above 90% of the original PCE after 1000 h of storage under ambient conditions, which indicates good stability comparable to that of its spin-coated counterparts, demonstrating the relatively high and stable performance of this bar-coating technique.
 Fig. 7  Stability of bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC solar cells compared with the spin-coated devices. 
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have gained a deep insight into the nanoscale morphology development during the film drying process of the non-fullerene photovoltaic blend PBDB-T:ITIC. With the assistance of in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry and bar coating techniques, four stages can be distinguished during the drying process according to the evolution of the volume fraction and the extinction coefficient of the photovoltaic blend. Stage I (total volume fraction of the blend below 20%) exhibits rapid and free evaporation of the solvent while the polymer and NFA molecules move closer to each other without any self-organization. Stage II (total volume fraction between 20 and 40%) reveals the onset of the slow aggregation of PBDB-T and ITIC. Stage III (total volume fraction between 40 and 75%) evidences the rapid ordering of PBDB-T and ITIC. Stage IV (total volume fraction higher than 75%) shows further densification of the PBDB-T:ITIC film during the slow evaporation of the residual solvent. Inverted devices based on the bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC photoactive layer were also fabricated. Compared to traditional spin-coated devices, the bar-coated device demonstrates enhanced PCE and comparable stability due to the encouragement of molecular ordering during film drying. The in situ ellipsometry combined with the printable bar-coating technique may provide a new approach for monitoring, regulating and optimizing the solution casting process of the NFA-based OSCs through this low-cost and large-scale manufacturing process.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 21774097) and the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (Grant No. 2018CFA055).
References
C. B. Nielsen, S. Holliday, H. Y. Chen, S. J. Cryer and I. Mcculloch, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2803–2812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Zhao, Y. K. Li, G. F. Yang, K. Jiang, H. R. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fan, D. Zhang, M. Li, W. Zhong, Z. Zeng, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Z. Lin, Y. F. Li and X. W. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC .
R. S. Gurney, D. G. Lidzey and T. Wang, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2019, 82, 036601 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Richter, D. M. DeLongchamp and A. Amassian, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6332–6366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, A. D. F. Dunbar, P. A. Staniec, A. J. Pearson, P. E. Hopkinson, J. E. Macdonald, S. Lilliu, C. Pizzey, N. J. Terrill, A. M. Donald, A. J. Ryan, R. A. L. Jones and D. G. Lidzey, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 4128–4134 RSC .
M. Abdelsamie, K. Zhao, M. R. Niazi, K. W. Chou and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3373–3381 RSC .
N. Shin, L. J. Richter, A. A. Herzing, R. J. Kline and D. M. Delongchamp, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 938–948 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Richter, D. M. Delongchamp, F. A. Bokel, S. Engmann, K. W. Chou and A. Amassian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400975 CrossRef .
J. J. van Franeker, M. Turbiez, W. W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, A. J. Pearson, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1383–1390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, M. Schmidt, D. Nassyrov, O. Peña, A. R. Goni, M. I. Alonso and M. Garriga, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 2678–2681 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Bi, H. B. Naveed, Y. M. Mao, H. P. Yan and W. Ma, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6682–6691 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reichenberger, D. Kroh, G. M. M. Matrone, K. Schötz, S. Pröller, O. Filonik, M. E. Thordardottir, E. M. Herzig, H. Bässler, N. Stingelin and A. Köhler, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2017, 56, 532–542 CrossRef .
M. Reichenberger, S. Baderschneider, D. Kroh, S. Grauf, J. Köhler, R. Hildner and A. Köhler, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 6420–6430 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, K. Peters, F. Buss, J. Pfeifer, S. Walheim, A. Colsmann, U. Lemmer, P. Scharfer and W. Schabel, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 124501 CrossRef .
M. Sanyal, B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. F. G. Klein, A. Colsmann, C. Munuera, A. Vorobiev, U. Lemmer, W. Schabel, H. Dosch and E. Barrena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 363–367 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Y. Gu, J. W. Jung, W. H. Jo and T. P. Russell, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1018–1044 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Hilfiker, N. Singh, T. Tiwald, D. Convey, S. M. Smith, J. H. Baker and H. G. Tompkins, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 7979–7989 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, H. T. Bai, N. K. Zawacka, T. R. Andersen, W. Q. Liu, E. Bundgaard, M. Jørgensen, H. Z. Chen, F. C. Krebs and X. W. Zhan, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500096 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Zhou, D. B. Buchholz, G. Zhu, X. G. Yu, H. Lin, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and R. P. H. Chang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Ro, J. M. Downing, S. Engmann, A. A. Herzing, D. M. Delongchamp, L. J. Richter, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade, M. Abdelsamie, L. K. Jagadamma, A. Amassian, Y. H. Liu and H. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2835–2846 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Zhao, S. Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. S. Li, X. Y. Liu, C. He, Z. Zheng and J. H. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 30, 1704837 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Kang, L. Ye, B. W. Xu, C. B. An, S. J. Stuard, S. Q. Zhang, H. F. Yao, H. Ade and J. H. Hou, Joule, 2019, 3, 227–239 CrossRef CAS .
B. Johs and J. S. Hale, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2008, 205, 715–719 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Gu, H. P. Yan, T. Kurosawa, B. C. Schroeder, K. L. Gu, Y. Zhou, J. W. F. To, S. D. Oosterhout, V. Savikhin, F. Molina-Lopez, C. J. Tassone, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. Wang, M. F. Toney and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601225 CrossRef .
A. J. Pearson, T. Wang, A. D. F. Dunbar, H. N. Yi, D. C. Watters, D. M. Coles, P. A. Staniec, A. Iraqi, R. A. L. Jones and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 659–667 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Pearson, T. Wang and D. G. Lidzey, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 022501 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. Sanyal, M. F. G. Klein, M. Pfaff, N. Schnabel, S. Jaiser, A. Vorobiev, E. Müller, A. Colsmann, P. Scharfer, D. Gerthsen, U. Lemmer, E. Barrena and W. Schabel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8579–8590 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. J. Lin, B. Hu, X. B. Xu and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800343 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Liu, J. B. Zhao, Z. K. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. W. Hu, K. Jiang, H. R. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. J. Lin, Z. F. Ke, J. Y. Chen, W. B. Li, M. J. Zhang and W. Ma, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 609–617 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. L. Zhan and J. N. Yao, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 166–173 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Liang, J. Han, C. P. Song, X. H. Yu, D. M. Smilgies, K. Zhao, J. G. Liu and Y. C. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15610–15620 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00078jThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry measurement of photovoltaic films cast via bar coating. (b) Device structure of bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC OSCs in this work. (c) Chemical structures of PBDB-T and ITIC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Evolutions of the film thickness and the total volume fraction of PBDB-T:ITIC during drying after bar-coating on a substrate held at 25 °C. (b) An example of the raw SE data of Ψ and Δ as a function of wavelength of a thick and wet film at 9.6 s and (c) a thin and dry film at 45.5 s. The dashed lines in panels (b and c) represent the fitted results using the Cauchy model in the transparent range of 850–1000 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Evolution of the extinction coefficients of PBDB-T:ITIC blend films in (a) stage I & II, (b) stage III and (c) stage IV. The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the (d) PBDB-T:ITIC blend, (e) neat PBDB-T and (f) neat ITIC, in solution and thin film states.	 

 	Fig. 4  Evolution of the extinction coefficient of the PBDB-T:ITIC film after bar-coating (a) as a function of time, and (b) as a function of the total volume fraction. The evolution of thickness and the volume fraction of neat (c) PBDB-T and (d) ITIC films during the drying process after bar-coating. (e) Evolution of the extinction coefficient of PBDB-T and (f) ITIC films. The dashed lines in panels e and f mark the onset points of abrupt k increase for PBDB-T and ITIC, respectively. (g) Schematic of microstructure evolution in the PBDB-T:ITIC blend during film drying after bar-coating.	 

 	Fig. 5  AFM height images of the PBDB-T:ITIC film fabricated via (a) bar coating, (b) spin coating with further SVA, and (c) spin coating. Image sizes are 2 μm × 2 μm.	 

Bar coating	10.1 (9.6 ± 0.4)	68.7 ± 2.4	0.87 ± 0.01	−16.5 (−16.3 ± 0.2)
Spin coating	9.1 (8.6 ± 0.3)	69.9 ± 1.8	0.87 ± 0.01	−14.8 (−14.3 ± 0.3)
Spin coating and SVA	10.1 (9.8 ± 0.2)	67.6 ± 1.0	0.88 ± 0.01	−16.7 (−16.4 ± 0.4)

 	Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves of spin and bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC OPVs based on the best performing devices. (b) EQE spectra and the calculated JSC curves.	 

 	Fig. 7  Stability of bar-coated PBDB-T:ITIC solar cells compared with the spin-coated devices.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9qm00078j

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2019
