Investigating morphology and electronic properties of self-assembled hybrid systems for solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM10928F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM10928F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7765-7770Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInvestigating morphology and electronic properties of self-assembled hybrid systems for solar cells

        
          
            Maria C. 
            Lechmann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Stefan A. L. 
            Weber
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jasmin 
            Geserick
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nicola 
            Hüsing
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rüdiger 
            Berger
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jochen S. 
            Gutmann†
*ac
aMax Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128, Mainz, Germany
bUlm University, Institute of Inorganic Chemistry I, Albert Einstein Allee 11, 89081, Ulm, Germany
cUniversity Duisburg-Essen, Physical Chemistry, Universitätsstraße 2, 45141, Essen, Germany. E-mail: jochen.gutmann@uni-due.de;  Fax: +49 201/183-4934;   Tel: +49 201/183-2566
Received 
      3rd March 2011
    , Accepted 22nd March 2011First published on 20th April 2011AbstractWe investigate self-assembled network morphologies of hybrid materials and their application in solar cells. We show the use of a semiconducting functional block copolymer as a structure directing agent. The application of a functional block copolymer circumvents an additional filling step of the templated inorganic part with a hole conductor. Within a one-pot synthesis various morphologies adequate for active materials in photovoltaic devices are prepared. The solar cell performance was found to depend on the morphological design of the hybrid material since the formation of percolating networks is of general importance. Using conductive scanning force microscopy on a cross-section of a functional solar cell device, we proved that the titania in our system forms a percolating network. Measurements showed that percolation is not a limiting factor for the device performance. In combination with a functionalized titania-precursor, we were able to double the power conversion efficiency of our hybrid bulk heterojunction cells in comparison to our previous results.
Introduction

Self-assembly of block copolymers is an appropriate tool to organize matter on the nanometre scale over large areas.1,2 Self-assembled systems have found their way into all fields of organic photovoltaics, from hybrid-, polymer–polymer-, fullerene–polymer- to dye-sensitized solar cell devices. Their structures are based on organic, inorganic or hybrid materials. We can roughly distinguish between blend systems and copolymer structures. In a blend system the phase separating components form non-covalently bound morphologies, whereas in copolymer structures the amphiphilic polymers themselves phase separate. Both systems can be used in bulk heterojunction solar cells, where donor and acceptor materials are mixed to form a heterojunction.3 In both cases self-assembly leads to the formation of an active layer that facilitates creation, diffusion and separation of the exciton as well as charge percolation. Therefore, this layer is one of the key parts of the whole device. To design an efficient photovoltaic device, the heterojunction morphology as well as its optoelectronic properties are essential for a successful result. As a first step the material has to absorb the light and create an excited state that leads to a hole/electron pair—an exciton. When the exciton is created, it has to diffuse towards the interface of the electron and the hole transporting material. Since the diffusion length of excitons in polymeric materials typically ranges from 10 to 20 nm,4 the active material has to display a nanostructure in these dimensions. Thus, a very high interfacial area is required for an efficient charge separation. At the same time the nanostructure has to have a percolation pathway for the photogenerated charges to move towards the electrodes. Therefore, structures, such as pillars and networks, have been proposed to be most favorable.5 In hybrid systems, these structures can be achieved by amphiphilic polymers that act as a surfactant, template or functional template.6,7

Dye sensitized solar cells using a liquid electrolyte as a hole conductor and a semiconducting metal oxide as an electron conductor are reaching the highest efficiencies among organic solar cells so far, but they also have some disadvantages. The corrosive liquid electrolyte for example still is a challenge for the device engineering concerning leak-proofness. Promising replacements for the liquid electrolytes are p-type semiconducting polymers. Thus the use of polymers gives rise to the development of flexible and printable devices.

Block copolymers are used as structure directing agents or as active materials in optoelectronic devices.8 Mesoporous TiO2 nanostructures can be obtained viaself-assembly of e.g. poly(isoprene-b-ethylene oxide) (PI-b-PEO).9 Thelakkat et al. used donor–acceptor block copolymers as active materials in solar cell devices.10 In the system reported here a functional block copolymer is used as the active material and the structure directing agent at the same time. We use an amphiphilic, hole conducting copolymer in a sol–gel system to obtain functional nanostructured hybrid materials. The block copolymer templates the heterojunction of the hybrid material and acts as the hole conducting part at the same time. The desired morphological features in these hybrid materials can be deliberately adjusted not just by the variation of the block length of the copolymer but also by the variation of the concentration of the sol–gel mixture.11
Recently, we reported the formation of percolating networks with a functional polymer and an inorganic precursor for solar cell applications.12 A one-pot preparation route was applied to template a TiO2 matrix with poly(ethylene oxide)-b-polytriphenylamine (PEO-b-PTPA), where PTPA was the hole conducting component (see Fig. 1).13
 Fig. 1  Scheme of the one-pot preparation to obtain morphologies of the active, hybrid material. An amphiphilic block copolymer PEO-b-PTPA is mixed with the TiO2 precursor EGMT and heated to 90 °C. The PEO part penetrates into the TiO2 phase while upon drop coating a hybrid heterojunction is formed, templated by the block copolymer. 
Since the PEO part of the block copolymer coordinates into the TiO2 network a heterojunction is formed between the TiO2 phase and the hole conducting block PTPA. For that purpose, a sol containing the dye, titanium tetraisopropoxide as the titania precursor and PEO-b-PTPA as the functional template, was mixed to generate an active layer for hybrid solar cells. Comparing different network structures it became apparent that the dimension of the phase-separated domains as well as the density of the percolating pathways plays a decisive role. However very thin layers were created that do not efficiently harvest light by the light-absorbing material in order to convert the solar energy into excitons. Unfortunately, the increase of film thickness of those systems leads to a decrease in power conversion efficiency. We attributed this decrease in the intensity to imperfections in the titania network. Therefore a change in the used titania precursor may be helpful to establish a thicker percolating titania network and may also enhance crystallinity.
In the work presented here we were using a new type of titania precursor whose crystallinity allows an increase of film thickness. Thus, it was possible to double the power conversion efficiency from 0.2% to 0.4% (best pixel). As previously reported, the morphological design is of importance. Therefore, a careful investigation of the self-assembled structures created by this new titania precursor and PEO-b-PTPA was performed and morphologies useful for solar cell applications were identified. With conductive SFM technique we could demonstrate the successful creation of a percolated network. The SFM measurements were accomplished at a cross-section of a fully functional hybrid solar cell device.
Results and discussion
In the following, an investigation of the morphologies, obtained by the one-pot approach, is presented. Morphologies that seem to offer an adequate percolating network are further tested in hybrid solar cell devices.
Self-assembled hybrid morphologies
By varying the sol mixing ratio of the ethylene glycol-modified titanate (EGMT) precursor, PEO-b-PTPA (5000–5000 g mol−1, pd = 1.9), DMF and HCl, different morphologies were obtained (see Table 1). After heating the sol to 90 °C for 15 min, films were drop coated and investigated by SEM measurements.
Table 1 Morphologies obtained from sols of different concentrations. The amount of DMF (1 g) and PEO-b-PTPA (0.01 g) was fixed




Morphology

                    HCl/g

                    EGMT/g
Shape




[M1]
0.3
0.01

                    Platelet
                  


[M2]
0.1
0.005
Dense foam


[M3]
0.3
0.02
Micelles


[M4]
0.4
0.01
Foam


[M5]
0.4
0.02
Small spheres




The precursor EGMT is already crystalline and has been processed in combination with amphiphiles.14 With a 1:1 ratio of precursor and polymer a platelet structure [M1] was obtained (Fig. 2). The formation of platelet structures is common for PEO block copolymers in organic solvents. Lin and Gast characterized these morphologies obtained from PEO-b-PS polymers with X-ray techniques.15 They found the PEO block to crystallize in the middle of the plates with hairy PS rods surrounding the outside.
 Fig. 2  
SEM picture displaying the morphology obtained with 1 g DMF, 0.3 g HCl, 0.01 g polymer and 0.01 g EGMT [M1] (left). The same sample after calcination of the organic part at 450 °C for 2 h (right). 
In order to investigate the titania structures without polymer, the samples were calcinated (450 °C, 2 h). The structures show agglomerated TiO2 platelets (Fig. 2, right). Through the variation of the precursor, solvent and acid ratio, a transition towards spherical micellar systems takes place, which eventually results in a foam like hybrid nanostructure of TiO2 and polymer (as seen in Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  
SEM picture of different morphologies of the active material as prepared (left side) and the remaining TiO2 structures after calcination of the polymer (right side). All films were prepared from a 1 g DMF solution with a fixed amount of polymer (0.01 g), but with different amounts of acid and precursor. (a and b) 0.1 g acid and 0.005 g EGMT [M2]; (c and d) 0.3 g acid and 0.02 g EGMT [M3]; (e and f) 0.4 g acid and 0.01 g EGMT [M4]. 
For better identification of the obtained morphologies the samples have been investigated by SEM before (Fig. 3a, c and e) and after calcination (Fig. 3b, d and f). With small amounts of precursor and acid, a very filigree TiO2 structure was formed which consisted of densely packed particles with diameters of about 10 to 20 nm, surrounded by a polymer film [M2] (Fig. 3a and b). At higher acid concentration, the EGMT-precursor phase was swelling and became less dense to finally turn into a foam [M4] (Fig. 3e and f). Increasing the amount of titanium, polymer micelles decorated with a TiO2 phase were created [M3] (Fig. 3c and d). The calcinated sample revealed a perforated TiO2 matrix that was left after removing the embedded polymer micelles (Fig. 3d). With a higher amount of acid and precursor a transition between the globular structure [M3] and the foam like structure [M4] was observed as seen in Fig. 4. The morphology [M5] consisted of polymer spheres that were embedded in a TiO2 foam.
 Fig. 4  (Left) SEM picture of a film prepared from a mixture of 0.4 g of acid, 0.02 g of EGMT and 0.01 g of polymer in 1 g DMF [M5]. (Right) SEM picture of a cross-section of a solar cell device with an active layer of the previously described mixture. 
Among the here reported self-assembled structures, the foam and sphere-like morphologies were the most promising ones for the application in a solar cell. Thus, we prepared devices with these morphologies and tested their performance.
Solar cell application of hybrid nanostructures
It is possible to improve the efficiency of hybrid solar cells using the same convenient one-pot approach reported earlier12 by increasing the film thickness in combination with an alternative precursor for TiO2. We used PEO-b-PTPA as an amphiphile to structure the hybrid material in a sol–gel process and to work as a hole conductor in a solar cell device. For the templating, functional block copolymer, solvent, acid, dye and the TiO2 precursor were mixed under ambient condition and heated to 90 °C. The resulting sol–gel was drop coated to obtain films of about 2 µm thickness ready to use as an active material in solar cells. Depending on the concentration of the individual components different morphologies of the hybrid material were obtained. As the photoactive material a standard Ru-dye (Z907) is used to sensitize the hybrid material. Since the dye was added in the very first step of the one-pot process, the dye was homogeneously distributed in the sol. We can assume that the dye mainly adsorbs at the TiO2 interface due to the preference of the acid functionalities of the Ru–dye–ligands to attach to a TiO2 surface.
Those self-assembled morphologies that form a percolated network were tested in solar cell devices. An inverse setup was used with FTO coated glass as an electrode and gold as a counter electrode. In Fig. 5 a schematic sketch illustrates the layout of a solar cell device. The active layer is sandwiched between an electron conducting TiO2 barrier layer and a hole conducting PEDOT:PSS layer (also seen in the SEM picture in Fig. 4, right). The barrier layer (about 100 nm thickness) prevents short currents between the hole conducting material and the FTO electrode as presented in this work later on. The same applies for the PEDOT:PSS (about 150 to 200 nm) that acts as a protecting layer when the gold electrodes are evaporated. All cells were measured and prepared under ambient conditions, since PTPA shows an enhanced efficiency when measured in air as reported elsewhere.16
 Fig. 5  Scheme of the conductive SFM measurement setup. Yellow: gold electrode, green: PEDOT:PSS layer, purple: TiO2 matrix, blue: PTPA (hole conducting part), red: barrier layer and light blue: FTO electrode. 
Functional hybrid materials of the morphologies [M2], [M3], [M4] and [M5] were tested in solar cell devices by drop coating films onto the crystalline TiO2 barrier layer (layer thicknesses 1–2 µm Fig. 4, right). Comparing these morphologies by measuring the devices under 1 sun (1000 W m−2, 1.5 AM) a clear difference was found in the overall power conversion efficiencies (η), open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Isc) and fill factor (FF) as seen in Table 2. The densely packed morphology [M2] showed the lowest efficiencies. Most probably, the percolation way of the polymer phase was too long through the densely packed TiO2 particles. Composites made of [M3] and [M4] showed an increased Isc indicating the reduction of charge recombination due to fewer grain boundaries.
Table 2 All data shown here are average values of devices, measured at 1 sun with 1.5 AM. Film thicknesses of the active layers are between 1 and 2 µm




Device
FF (%)

V
oc/V

I
sc/A cm−2

η (%)




[M2]
29
−0.4
5.0 × 10−5
0.006


[M3]
27
−0.29
2.3 × 10−4
0.023


[M4]
27
−0.54
2.4 × 10−4
0.034


[M5]
29
−0.39
0.5 × 10−3
0.11




Power conversion efficiencies doubled for the less dense structures of compositions [M3] and [M4] compared to devices prepared from [M2]. As seen in Table 2 the open circuit voltage for [M3] was lower compared to the other morphologies.
While the fill factor is roughly the same for all devices with different morphologies, a much higher overall power conversion efficiency was found for the morphology [M5] shown in Fig. 4 (left). Devices with an average power conversion efficiency of about 0.1% and a maximum value of 0.4% (FF: 0.51; Voc: −0.69 V; Isc: 1.0 mA cm−2) could be prepared.
It is reasonable to expect increased efficiencies for thicker active layers in comparison to our previously published results.12 Since the light absorbing dye is distributed throughout the active layer, a thicker film should lead to a higher absorption and therefore to a higher photocurrent. However, in thicker films the postulated percolation path needs to be longer and thus the probability of charge recombination increases. Therefore it is questionable whether the active layer of 1 to 2 µm thickness (as seen in Fig. 4, right) constitutes an optimal percolating network. In this context, scanning electron microscopy, e.g. on fractures of the sample, can give first hints towards appropriate morphologies. However, it cannot visualize the electrical contact of parts of the sample with the respective electrodes.
Here, conductive scanning force microscopy (C-SFM) is the method of choice. In C-SFM a metal-coated tip is scanned over the surface. While the sample is set on a constant bias voltage, the current through the grounded tip is recorded with a current amplifier. Thus, C-SFM allows us to map the sample conductance with a resolution in the order of 10 nm.17–19 In order to identify possible non-percolating islands inside the film, we prepared a cross-cut of a device prepared from the morphology [M5] at a fracture along one of the gold electrodes. To prepare a defined surface on the section, a focused ion beam (FIB, FEI Nova 600, dual beam setup) was used to polish a 30 µm wide area at an ion energy of 30 keV. In several steps, the ion beam (perpendicular to the surface) was directed along the fracture. To minimize the effects of sample heating and implantation of scattered ions, we decreased the ion current towards the end of the process.20 The section was imaged by scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Zeiss LEO 1530). Finally, the sample was mounted vertically for the C-SFM studies (Fig. 5, MFP3D with ORCA current amplifier, Asylum Research).
The proposed energy diagram for the solar cell is shown in Fig. 6a. Additionally, the work function of a platinum/iridium coated silicon tip is indicated by a vertical line. The work function was determined by calibrating the tip on a freshly cleaved HOPG reference surface. We found a value of 4.2 ± 0.1 eV, which is within the error margin of values reported in the literature.11
 Fig. 6  (a) Energy diagram for the hybrid solar cell. Upon illumination, excitons are generated by photo-absorption in the ruthenium dye (Ru). The electrons are transferred to the TiO2, whereas the holes are transferred to the triphenylamine (TPA) polymer (1). The energies of the electrodes (FTO and PEDOT:PSS/gold) are sketched without bias (US = 0 V) and at the bias voltages used in the C-SFM experiments. The work function of a platinum/iridium coated tip (4.2 eV) is indicated as a gray line. On the TiO2 side, electrons can easily be injected at negative bias voltage (2), whereas on the TPA side, the injection of holes should be favored (3). (b) SEM of the polished section with C-SFM current maps at US = −2 V and +1 V. For an easier comparison between the two current maps, the current for the negative sample bias has been inverted. 
The electron microscopy image of the resulting section is shown in the background of Fig. 6b. On the left hand side the active layer containing the nano-composite of TiO2 (brighter parts) and the PTPA conjugated polymer (dark) can be seen. From left to right the TiO2 blocking layer, the FTO electrode and the glass substrate follow.
The C-SFM current maps for negative (upper inset, sample bias −2 V) and positive sample bias (lower inset, sample bias +1 V) are displayed in Fig. 6b. On top of the metallic FTO electrode, a similar conductance was observed for both polarities (10 pA at −2 V and 6 pA at +1 V). The horizontal lines of higher currents can be attributed to inhomogeneous polishing during the FIB procedure. They can be observed in all other layers, as well.
On top of the blocking layer structure, a high current of 330 pA was recorded at negative sample bias. At positive bias, the blocking layer was almost insulating: a current of 200 fA was recorded, more than a factor of 1000 less. This rectifying behavior can be understood in terms of a Schottky barrier that forms between the metallic FTO and the n-type semiconducting TiO2.12
On the active layer, a similar behavior would be expected. The TiO2 should yield a higher current at negative sample bias ((2) in Fig. 6a), whereas on top of the TPA polymer higher currents at positive bias would be expected ((3) in Fig. 6a). However, we observed the same contrast for both polarities. The TPA polymer rich domains carried 3–10 times higher currents compared to 1 pA recorded on the TiO2 rich domains.
The bipolar transport in the active layer could be caused by gallium ions implanted during the polishing procedure. However, this would only affect a small surface layer of the cut and cannot account for the experimental findings alone. On the other hand, the one pot preparation procedure might not lead to completely pure phases. The residual TiO2 in the TPA polymer rich phase and vice versa might enhance bipolar transport. The higher conductance and unipolar transport observed on the blocking layer compared to the TiO2 in the active layer are thus most probably caused by the higher purity and crystallinity in the blocking layer. Moreover, the drop-casting might not lead to a perfect electrical contact between the active layer and the substrate. This imperfect contact generates additional injection barriers that limit the device performance.
Finally, with C-SFM no completely insulating spots could be found on the active layer, neither on the TPA polymer rich nor on the TiO2 rich domains. This observation proves that the TPA polymer formed a well percolating network through the TiO2 network and vice versa. It also confirms that percolation is currently not a limiting factor for the device performance based on our synthetic approach.
Experimental

        DMF (HPLC grade) and ethanol (absolute) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. HCl was purchased from Riedel-de-Haen (37%). PEDOT:PSS was purchased from Starck.

        Cis-Ru(SCN)2(4,4′-dicarboxylic acid-2,2′-bipyridine)(4,4′-dinonyl-2,2′-bipyridine) (Z907) was synthesized according to literature.21

        PEO-b-PTPA was prepared according to the literature.12

Ethylene glycol-modified titanate (EGMT) was prepared according to the literature.14
Solar cell device fabrication
The barrier layer was prepared according to literature22 and spin coated (1000 rpm) on commercially available FTO glasses. For the active material the block copolymer PEO-b-PTPA (0.01 g) and a standard ruthenium dye (Z907) (0.005 g) were dissolved in DMF (1 mL). After addition of HCl (e.g. 0.4 mL) and EGMT (e.g. 0.02 g) the mixture was heated to 90 °C and drop coated onto the barrier layer. On top of the active material a PEDOT:PSS layer was spin coated (2000 rpm) and finally electrodes with 100 nm thickness were evaporated. Solar cells were measured at 1 sun and 1.4 AM under ambient condition.
Hybrid materials for morphologies investigation were prepared by dissolving the block copolymer PEO-b-PTPA (0.01 g) and a standard ruthenium dye (Z907) (0.005 g) in DMF (1 mL). After addition of HCl (e.g. 0.4 mL) and EGMT (e.g. 0.02 g) the mixture was heated to 90 °C and drop coated onto silicon wafers. SEM measurements were taken on a field emission SEM (LEO 1530 “Gemini”).

SFM measurements were taken on a Molecular Force Probe 3D Stand Alone (MFP3D-SA) with ORCA current amplifier, Asylum Research. A nanosensors PPP-EFM cantilever was used with a nominal resonance frequency 70 kHz, a spring constant of 5 N m−1 and a Pt–Ir coating on the tip and the detector side.
Summary
Self-assembled hybrid nanostructures were obtained in a controlled way and investigated for solar cell application. Many intrinsic and extrinsic factors can be used to control the morphology. The morphology was proven to play a decisive role to form an efficient heterojunction. With advanced measurement methods like TEM tomography,23 conductive-24 and Kelvin probe force microscopy25 the investigation of the morphologies targeting percolating networks is possible. Here it was successfully shown with C-SFM that with the precursor system morphologies of even 2 mm thick layers form percolating networks.
With the discussed improvements the system introduced here offers a fast and convenient method to prepare photovoltaic devices since they do not require any sealing due to their air stability. In addition post-processing treatments are not required for our approach presented in this article.
Acknowledgements
Financial supports from the Max Planck Society, Korean-German IRTG Program (DFG Graduiertenkolleg 1404) and the German Science Foundation priority program SPP1181 (GU771/2 and HU1427/1-2) and the BMBF project OPV-Stabilität (FKZ 03SF0334C) are gratefully acknowledged. We thank Maren Müller for support in SEM measurements.
Notes and references
J. N. L. Albert and T. E. Epps, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 24 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz and S. B. Darling, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 42 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Benanti and D. Venkataraman, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 87, 73 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. L. Weber, N. Haberkorn, P. Theato and R. Berger, Nano Letters, 2010, 10, 1194 CrossRef CAS .
N. Haberkorn, M. C. Lechmann, B.-H. Sohn, K. Char, J. S. Gutmann and P. Theato, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1146 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Segalman, B. McCulloch, S. Kirmayer and J. J. Urban, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9205 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1266 RSC .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, M. Stefik, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, S. Hüttner, H. Sai, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1787 CAS .
M. Sommer, S. Huettner and M. Thelakkat, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 228, 123 .
Y. J. Cheng and J. S. Gutmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4658 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Lechmann, D. Kessler and J. S. Gutmann, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10202 CrossRef CAS .
K. Peter, H. Wietasch, B. Peng and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 65 CrossRef .
P. Kubiak, J. Geserick, N. Hüsing and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 510 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Lin and A. P. Gast, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 4432 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Lechmann, D. Koll, D. Kessler, P. Theato, W. Tremel and J. S. Gutmann, Energies, 2010, 3, 301 Search PubMed .
C. Groves, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 612 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dante, J. Peet and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7241 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berger, H.-J. Butt, M. Retschke and S. Weber, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, M. J. Park, N. P. Balsara, G. Liu and A. M. Minor, Ultramicroscopy, 2011, 111, 191 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Grant, A. M. Schwartzberg, G. P. Smestad, J. Kowalik, L. M. Tolbert and J. Z. Zhang, Synth. Met., 2003, 132, 197 CrossRef CAS .
S. S.v. Bavel, E. Sourty, G.d. With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Memesa, S. Weber, S. Lenz, J. Perlich, R. Berger, P. Muller-Buschbaum and J. S. Gutmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 783 RSC .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, A. Hinsch, M. C. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 269 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Current address: University Duisburg-Essen.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the one-pot preparation to obtain morphologies of the active, hybrid material. An amphiphilic block copolymer PEO-b-PTPA is mixed with the TiO2 precursor EGMT and heated to 90 °C. The PEO part penetrates into the TiO2 phase while upon drop coating a hybrid heterojunction is formed, templated by the block copolymer.	 

[M1]	0.3	0.01	
                    Platelet
                  
[M2]	0.1	0.005	Dense foam
[M3]	0.3	0.02	Micelles
[M4]	0.4	0.01	Foam
[M5]	0.4	0.02	Small spheres

 	Fig. 2  
SEM picture displaying the morphology obtained with 1 g DMF, 0.3 g HCl, 0.01 g polymer and 0.01 g EGMT [M1] (left). The same sample after calcination of the organic part at 450 °C for 2 h (right).	 

 	Fig. 3  
SEM picture of different morphologies of the active material as prepared (left side) and the remaining TiO2 structures after calcination of the polymer (right side). All films were prepared from a 1 g DMF solution with a fixed amount of polymer (0.01 g), but with different amounts of acid and precursor. (a and b) 0.1 g acid and 0.005 g EGMT [M2]; (c and d) 0.3 g acid and 0.02 g EGMT [M3]; (e and f) 0.4 g acid and 0.01 g EGMT [M4].	 

 	Fig. 4  (Left) SEM picture of a film prepared from a mixture of 0.4 g of acid, 0.02 g of EGMT and 0.01 g of polymer in 1 g DMF [M5]. (Right) SEM picture of a cross-section of a solar cell device with an active layer of the previously described mixture.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme of the conductive SFM measurement setup. Yellow: gold electrode, green: PEDOT:PSS layer, purple: TiO2 matrix, blue: PTPA (hole conducting part), red: barrier layer and light blue: FTO electrode.	 

[M2]	29	−0.4	5.0 × 10−5	0.006
[M3]	27	−0.29	2.3 × 10−4	0.023
[M4]	27	−0.54	2.4 × 10−4	0.034
[M5]	29	−0.39	0.5 × 10−3	0.11

 	Fig. 6  (a) Energy diagram for the hybrid solar cell. Upon illumination, excitons are generated by photo-absorption in the ruthenium dye (Ru). The electrons are transferred to the TiO2, whereas the holes are transferred to the triphenylamine (TPA) polymer (1). The energies of the electrodes (FTO and PEDOT:PSS/gold) are sketched without bias (US = 0 V) and at the bias voltages used in the C-SFM experiments. The work function of a platinum/iridium coated tip (4.2 eV) is indicated as a gray line. On the TiO2 side, electrons can easily be injected at negative bias voltage (2), whereas on the TPA side, the injection of holes should be favored (3). (b) SEM of the polished section with C-SFM current maps at US = −2 V and +1 V. For an easier comparison between the two current maps, the current for the negative sample bias has been inverted.	 
Footnote
† Current address: University Duisburg-Essen.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
