Nanophotonic devices and circuits based on colloidal quantum dots  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM01118E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM01118E
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4502-4537Nanophotonic devices and circuits based on colloidal quantum dots

        
          
            Jianjun 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *abcde and 

        
          
            Kexiu 
            Rong
          
          
        
      *bf
aDepartment of Physics and Applied Optics, Beijing Area Major Laboratory, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
bState Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China. E-mail: jjchern@pku.edu.cn; kexiurong@pku.edu.cn
cPeking University, Yangtze Delta Institute of Optoelectronics, Nantong 226010, Jiangsu, China
dFrontiers Science Center for Nano-optoelectronics & Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
eCollaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, China
fMicro and Nanooptics Laboratory, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel
Received 
      29th December 2020
    , Accepted 18th March 2021First published on 18th March 2021AbstractColloidal quantum dots (CQDs), semiconductor nanocrystals capped with surfactant ligands and dispersed in solution, have provided a powerful platform for the achievement of numerous classes of solution-processed photonic and optoelectronic devices over recent years. They exhibit a plethora of outstanding properties, such as cost-effective synthesis, wide size-tunable emission (or absorption), large-scale solution-processable fabrication, and impressive photostability. Based on these properties achieved by novel material and structure engineering, these CQD-based photonic and optoelectronic devices are appealing alternatives to costly semiconductor products. Furthermore, a combination of these devices enables the construction of CQD-based nanophotonic circuits, which are generally composed of various components for light generation, guiding, manipulation, and detection in a single chip. In this review, we firstly summarize optical properties of CQDs, and then CQD-based passive and active nanophotonic devices, and nanophotonic circuits are also introduced and discussed. Lastly, further developments and challenges of CQD-based nanophotonic devices and circuits are outlined.
Jianjun Chen
Jianjun Chen is a professor in the Department of Physics at Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China. From 2013 to 2020, he worked in the School of Physics at Peking University as a 100-Talent professor. He received his BS degree in Optics from Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2006. He received his PhD degree in Optics under the guidance of Prof. Qihuang Gong from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2011. His research interests mainly focus on nanophotonic devices and integrated nanophotonics in both theory and experiments. He has published more than 80 journal papers in Advanced Materials, Advanced Functional Materials, Nano Letters, Laser & Photonics Reviews, and so on. His papers have been cited over 2000 times, and his h-index is 23.
Kexiu Rong
Kexiu Rong is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Israel Institute of Technology (Technion), Israel. He earned his PhD from the Department of Physics, Peking University in 2018. His current research interests in nanophotonics mainly focus on micro/nanoscale lasers, spinoptics, and geometric phase metasurfaces.
1. Introduction
Over recent decades, the growth and synthesis of semiconductor materials have greatly facilitated the development of information and energy sciences.1 High-purity semiconductor crystals play a significant role in high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices. Specifically, when the size of semiconductor crystals reaches the regime of several nanometers, the quantum size effect emerges due to a strong spatial confinement of charge carriers,2 providing new possibilities to build novel and powerful optoelectronic devices.3–8 Colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) are one type of these semiconductor nanocrystals, and they can be synthesized by cost-effective and scalable wet-chemical synthetic procedures.9,10 They are commonly made of II–VI (e.g., CdSe9,10), III–V (e.g., InP11,12), and IV–VI (e.g., PbS13) semiconductors, and a widely adopted architecture for them includes a highly crystalline core, a wide band-gap shell, and surface ligands, in order to achieve a stable dispersion in solution.14 A typical diameter for these nanoparticles ranges from 2 nm to 20 nm, which generally contains hundreds to thousands of atoms. This strong spatial confinement of charge carriers results in discrete electronic band structures for these “artificial atoms”, which differ significantly from their bulky counterparts possessing continuous ones.3 In particular, the energy gap between the conduction band and the valence band depends on size, shape, and composition of CQDs, which give rise to size-tunable optical and electrical properties that are favorable for photonic and optoelectronic applications.3–8
The optical and electrical properties of CQDs can be controlled via synthesis conditions, and high-performance CQDs are accessible by material and structure engineering.15,16 Hence, CQDs outperform traditional light-emitting materials such as organic dyes, in many aspects.17,18 Firstly, the reported highest quantum yields of CQDs, defined as the ratio of the number of photons emitted to the number of photons absorbed, are close to 100%,19,20 indicating an unprecedented conversion efficiency that has long been sought after in light-emitting devices. Meanwhile, beyond the classical emission achieved by an ensemble of CQDs, photons emitted by single CQDs feature an antibunching character, which enables them to be an appropriate candidate for single-photon sources.21,22 Secondly, by virtue of the quantum size effect, emission and absorption spectra of CQDs can be tuned across wide spectral ranges from ultraviolet (<400 nm) to long-wave infrared (∼10 μm).23–26 For instance, by changing sizes and compositions, absorption spectra of CdSe and PbS CQDs can cover the visible and near infrared ranges, respectively.27,28 Thirdly, CQDs possess an outstanding photostability. CQDs are nearly free of self-quenching and gain quenching effects observed in dyes.29,30 Besides, CQD solids exhibit a good immunity to aqueous, oxygen, and thermal environments.31,32 Under these harsh conditions, other materials such as perovskites and organic single crystals no longer work.33,34 Fourthly, CQDs are capable of solution processability, which enables large-scale device fabrication on various substrates free of lattice-matching requirements, such as noble metals,29,35 semiconductors,36–38 and dielectrics.39,40 At last, CQD solids simultaneously possess high optical gains and large refractive indices, which can be used to construct both passive and active nanophotonic devices on commonly used substrates.31,40,41
Based on these outstanding properties of high quantum yield, wide wavelength tunability, easy solution processability, impressive photostability, and large refractive index, various nanophotonic devices based on CQDs have been demonstrated by exploiting novel fabrication approaches in recent decades.7,37,40,42,43 To be incorporated in these devices, a CQD solution is used to prepare solid-state CQD films by means of solution-processable methods, such as drop-casting, spin-coating, dip-coating, and Langmuir–Blodgett deposition,5,7 in the form of a nanocomposite,7,44,45 close-packed glassy solid, or ordered superlattice.46–48 Moreover, these CQD films are delicately patterned for specific functionalities using micro/nanofabrication techniques such as photolithography, e-beam lithography (EBL), reactive ion etching (RIE), nanoimprinting, and ink-jet printing.7,49 Due to high refractive indices, a direct usage of these patterned CQD structures is to construct passive light-guiding devices, that is, waveguides,31,40,41,50–52 which can not only connect light sources and other devices but also serve as basic elements to construct more complicated components, like grating, Y-splitter, Mach–Zehnder (MZ) interferometer, directional coupler, and ring resonator.40,41 In addition, these CQD waveguides are of particular interest in terms of signal amplification owing to optical gains of the incorporated CQDs.29,40 Based on their widely tunable emission and absorption properties, other active components can also be constructed out of CQDs. One of these examples is the coherent light sources, i.e., on-chip microlasers.29,36,37,40,43,53,54 In these cases, CQDs serving as gain materials conquer a stringent requirement on epitaxially grown semiconductors that are generally related to high cost, limited spectral tunability, and rigid substrate-mediated growth.55 Another important example is photodetectors that convert absorbed photons into electrical signals.27,42,56–59 Generally speaking, in the infrared spectral range, the Pb-based CQD photodetectors already outperform the commercial ones using compound semiconductors, in terms of the normalized detectivity.57 In the visible spectral range, CQD-based photodetectors are considered as an important supplement to mature silicon-based photodetectors.5,56,58
Nanophotonic circuits (or photonic integrated circuits, PICs) are optical analogies of electric circuits but possess a higher transport speed, broader operation bandwidth, and lower energy consumption. As compared to bulk optics, PICs show great advantages in miniaturization, scalability, reliability, and robustness.43,60 In a fully functional PIC, on-chip light sources, waveguides, light-processing components (e.g., splitter, optical amplifier, and modulator), and photodetectors are required to be integrated in a single chip.61 Nowadays, the majority of PICs are constructed from material platforms like silicon, silicon nitride, or noble metals.37,62–65 Due to an absence of light-emitting capabilities in these materials, other materials (e.g., CQDs, quantum wells, and perovskites)37,62,65 with sufficient optical gains are usually integrated into these platforms to build active components. The complexity and compatibility brought in by various nanostructures and materials in a single chip considerably increase the fabrication and integration difficulties of PICs. As a result, most of the reported CQD-based PICs up to now only demonstrated the integration between CQD microlasers and waveguides. Hence, it remains an urgent task to seek out feasible fabrication methods and novel integration strategies to achieve more functional CQD-based PICs.
This review will first summarize the synthesis and properties of CQDs in Section 2. Optical properties of both CQD nanoparticles and solids, including emission, absorption, refractive index, and optical gain, will be discussed. Next, CQD-based passive (e.g., waveguides, gratings, Y-splitters, MZ interferometers, directional couplers, and ring resonators) and active (e.g., microlasers, optical amplifiers, and photodetectors) nanophotonic devices will be introduced in Section 3. Subsequently, CQD-based nanophotonic circuits will be introduced in Section 4. In these nanophotonic circuits, the passive and active nanophotonic devices based on CQDs are integrated in a single chip. In the last section, further developments and challenges for CQD nanophotonic devices and circuits are discussed.
2. Properties of CQDs
2.1 Synthesis of CQDs
Ever since their inception around thirty years ago,2,66–70 the synthetic methods for CQDs have been refined in many aspects, in the pursuit of monodisperse size or shape, bright luminescence, large-scale production, green synthesis and so on. These methods include both physical and chemical ones, the latter of which can be further divided into categories like hot-injection organometallic synthesis, noninjection organometallic synthesis, and aqueous synthesis. Numerous reviews about the synthetic chemistry of CQDs have been published in recent years,7,12,15,16,71 and a thorough review on this topic is out of the scope of our current review. Here, we only briefly introduce one of the most popular approaches, that is, the hot-injection method, to synthesize high-quality CQDs.
Pioneered by M. G. Bawendi's group in 1993,9 the hot-injection method is based on the pyrolysis of organometallic reagents by injecting them into a hot coordinating solvent (Fig. 1a), which plays a crucial role in controlling the growth process, stabilizing the colloidal suspension, and passivating the semiconductor surfaces.10 A schematic graph of the CQD growth by the hot-injection method is depicted in Fig. 1b. Taking CdE (E = S, Se, and Te) CQDs as a typical material system,9 dimethyl cadmium is chosen as the Cd precursor ([A] in Fig. 1b), and phosphine selenide, phosphine telluride, or bistrimethylsilyl sulfide is selected as the chalcogen precursor ([B] in Fig. 1b). A mixture of phosphine/phosphine oxide is employed as the high boiling point coordinating solvent. After the rapid injection of precursors into the hot coordinating solvent, a sudden supersaturation of monomers occurs due to chemical reactions between the precursors (stage I). This also leads to a short burst of nucleation due to the self-assembly of monomers (stage II). Subsequently, due to the abrupt reduction of monomer concentration and reaction temperature, further nucleation is suppressed and CQD growth is boosted by aggregating monomers on pre-existing nuclei (stage III). Finally, the size distribution of the generated CQDs undergoes Ostwald ripening (stage IV), in which small CQDs dissolve due to a high surface energy and redeposit on large CQDs.12
 Fig. 1  Synthesis of CQDs. (a) Schematic diagram of the hot-injection method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (b) Schematic graph of CQD growth by hot-injection method (top panel) and the corresponding LaMer plot for the change of monomer concentration as a function of the reaction time (bottom panel). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH.) (c) Typical PL and absorption spectra of CQDs. Left inset shows the schematic of the CQD structure with core, shell, and surface ligands. Right inset shows the TEM image of the CQDs (scale bar: 10 nm). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, copyright 2019, the authors.) (d) Size-tunable emission colors of CdSe/ZnS CQDs. The leftmost (rightmost) color corresponds to a CdSe core diameter of about 1.8 nm (6.9 nm). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, copyright 2020, the authors.) 
This synthesis process can be mainly divided into two temporally discrete events of nucleation (trigged by the precursor injection) and controlled growth on the initially formed nuclei for desired nanoparticles, i.e., CQDs.72,73 Due to the separation of nucleation and growth, it is possible to obtain monodisperse CQDs with a size distribution smaller than 5% (see the right inset of Fig. 1c), which leads to well-controlled absorption and emission characteristics with narrow spectral widths for CQDs (Fig. 1c). Furthermore, by using a size sorting9 or size focusing74 approach, monodisperse CQDs with various sizes can be obtained. For example, CdSe CQDs with a size ranging from 1.8 nm to 6.9 nm are achieved,28 and their emission wavelengths cover the whole visible spectral range (Fig. 1d). Besides, the high temperature (∼300 °C) during the synthesis anneals out defects in CQDs for a better crystallinity, which allows for a high quantum yield and a low photo-intermittency (“blinking” effect) for CQDs. Note that a further increment of the quantum yield can be achieved by engineering surface ligands19 or adopting the famous core/shell architecture,14 for which the core surfaces of CQDs are passivated with an inorganic semiconductor possessing a wider energy bandgap (see the left inset of Fig. 1c). Moreover, this method has been extended to prepare CQDs beyond II–VI material systems (e.g., CdSe CQDs9), such as IV–VI (e.g., PbS13), III–V (e.g., InP11), and perovskite (e.g., all-inorganic perovskite CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, or I75) CQDs in recent days. This generality further boosts the performance of CQDs for a wider application prospect.
2.2 Size-dependent band gaps of CQDs
Since CQDs are only several nanometers in size, the quantum size effect emerges due to a strong spatial confinement of generated charge carriers.2 The reason is that the strong spatial confinement results in discrete electronic band structures for CQDs, and the band gaps between the conduction band and the valence band are dependent on the size of CQDs. The quantum size effect (or phenomenon) in CQDs was first revealed by Ekimov and Onushchenko when they were studying the absorption spectra of microscopic CuCl crystals grown in a transparent dielectric matrix.2 By doping compounds of copper and chlorine (concentration of 1%) into silicate glass, nearly spherical CuCl crystals were formed when the glass was heated at a high temperature. Besides, the average radius of the crystals was controlled to be tens to hundreds of angstroms by the heating temperature and time. To validate the quantum size effect, they measured the absorption spectra of the crystal-doped glasses. The positions of the absorption lines shifted with the changes of the crystal sizes, agreeing with a model of spherically symmetric potential well with an infinite depth. Together with other discoveries of size-dependent band gaps in aqueous semiconductor suspensions,66–69 these experiments kicked off the curtain of CQDs.
Physically, the quantum size effect can be understood by referring to the notation of exciton Bohr radius, which is originally proposed in bulk semiconductors to describe the strength of electron–hole Coulomb interactions upon excitation.1 For nanometer CQDs, their sizes are comparable with or even smaller than the exciton Bohn radius, and thus excitons, that is, electron–hole pairs, can be generated in CQDs. These excitons are stable even at room temperature due to high binding energies, which are much greater than the thermal energy (kBT ≈ 25 meV) that breaks the pairs. Meanwhile, the spatial extents of the wave functions for these electrons and holes are now defined by the nanoparticle sizes, instead of the electron–hole Coulomb interaction length characterized by the Bohr radius.79 This is known as the quantum size effect. Due to the existence of this quantum effect, electronic band structures for CQDs become discrete energy levels, in contrast to continuous ones for their bulky counterparts (Fig. 2a).3,6 Moreover, based on the quantum uncertainty principle, the smaller the CQDs, the wider the energy gaps. The emission and absorption wavelengths of CQDs are determined by the energy gaps. Under the assumption of a spherically symmetric potential well with an infinite depth and neglecting the size dispersion of CQDs, the energy gap Eg for CQDs can be expressed as Eg = Eg(bulk) + π2ℏ2/(2mrR2).2,79 Here, Eg(bulk) refers to the energy gap for their bulky counterparts; ℏ is the reduced plank constant; R is the radius of CQDs; and mr = (me−1 + mh−1)−1 with me and mh being the effective masses for electrons and holes. Consequently, CQDs with different energy gaps can be synthesized by changing either material compositions [Eg(bulk) and mr] or sizes (R) of CQDs, and thus the emission and absorption wavelengths of CQDs can be easily tuned.
 Fig. 2  Size-dependent band gaps of CQDs. (a) Illustration of electronic band structures for bulky material and CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited.) (b) Size-dependent band gaps for CQDs of different material systems. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, copyright 2005 American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (c) Calculated size-dependent band gaps for colloidal CdSe quantum dots, wires, and platelets under different lengths of the confined dimension. dB indicates the Bohr radius. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2018, the authors.) 

Fig. 2b summarizes the dependence of emission wavelengths on the sizes of several types of CQDs, which include typical II–VI (CdE, E = S, Se, and Te), III–V (InP and InAs), and IV–VI (PbSe) CQDs.77 Due to different bulky gap energies for these material systems, a seamless spectral coverage from visible to infrared becomes possible by changing the CQD sizes. Note that an increase in the number of confinement dimensions indicates a stronger spatial confinement of electronic states, and thus CQDs (3D confinement) generally show the widest band gap tunabilities as compared to other colloidal materials, such as quantum wires (2D confinement) and quantum platelets (1D confinement) shown in Fig. 2c.80 This is another competitive advantage of CQDs for applications in photonic and optoelectronic devices.3–8
2.3 Optical properties of CQDs
Absorption and emission are two fundamental properties of CQDs, which have been widely exploited in the design of nanophotonic devices, such as photodetectors, light-emitting diodes, and microlasers.26,27,37,43,57 Owing to the well-known effect of Stokes shift, emission peaks of CQDs are red-shifted with respect to their own absorption peaks (Fig. 1c). Note that CQDs exhibit considerable absorption at their own emission wavelengths, which must be taken into account when designing CQD-based nanophotonic devices.31,40,41 Moreover, the emission spectrum of CQD ensemble is originated from many CQD nanoparticles with various sizes, and thus it is determined by the convolution of the average emission spectrum of individual CQDs (homogeneous broadening) and the emission wavelength distribution for different CQDs (inhomogeneous broadening),81 as shown in Fig. 3a. Hence, the optimization for a narrow spectral linewidth should focus on not only eliminating the polydispersity of the synthesized CQDs but also decreasing the spectral linewidths of individual CQDs. The latter generally comes from the lifetime-limited “natural” spectrum of exciton, which is further broadened by factors like spectral dynamics and fine-structure states.
 Fig. 3  Optical properties of CQDs. (a) Illustration of emission spectrum from an ensemble of CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (b) SEM images for close-packed (top panel) CQD superlattice with a long-range order and (bottom panel) glassy CQD solid with a short-range order. Scale bars are 50 nm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (c) Absorption (or gain) spectra of CQD solids with different radii. The shaded areas indicate gain regions. Inset shows the schematic of absorbing and emitting transitions in CdSe CQDs. The intraband relaxation times are provided. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2000, the authors.) (d) Calculated gain threshold as a function of temperature for CQDs with radii from 1 nm to 20 nm. The threshold is nearly temperature-independent if the temperature remains below a critical value, which is defined at 〈Ngain〉 = 2 (inset). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited.) (e) Schematic of a typical setup for ASE characterization. The slit width can be tuned for different stripe lengths in the VSL measurement. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (f) Typical ASE spectra of a CQD solid under different pump fluences (top panel) and the corresponding superlinear intensity dependence of the ASE (bottom panel). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.) 
To enable applications of CQDs in nanophotonic devices, the first step is to incorporate CQD nanoparticles (dispersed in solution) into photonic structures in the form of solids, such as CQD-doped nanocomposites, close-packed CQD glassy solids, or ordered CQD superlattices.7,40,43,44,47,48 The CQD nanocomposites involve the inclusion of CQDs into host matrices like polymers and sol–gels, which allow the CQDs to be employed in a more exploitable form by combining exotic properties of matrices, resulting in impressive improvements in the thermal, mechanical, electrical, and stability properties of the CQDs.7 However, the CQD nanocomposites are usually prepared with a low CQD-doping density in order to acquire a uniform dispersion of CQDs in the matrices and retain the original properties of the host matrices.51,85–87 Unfortunately, this low volume fraction is detrimental to the achievement of optical gains from CQDs. Instead, optical gains are generally achieved by close-packed CQD solids in either the glassy or crystalline state.82 These two kinds of CQD solids are generally obtained by a controllable evaporation of CQD solution, during which the CQD nanoparticles assemble together to form solids. This process is dependent on many factors, such as size or shape dispersity of CQD nanoparticles, CQD concentration, surface ligands, and evaporation rate of the solvent.47,48 For example, for monodisperse CQDs (both in size and shape) under a slow evaporation rate of the solvent, CQD nanoparticles are inclined to form superlattices with a long-range order. Otherwise, the glassy CQD solids with a short-range order are usually obtained when CQDs with a large size or shape dispersity undergo a fast evaporation rate of the solvent (Fig. 3b).
There are many ways to obtain the aforementioned CQD solids by means of solution-processable methods, such as drop-casting, spin-coating, dip-coating, Langmuir–Blodgett deposition, and doctor blading.5,7 As compared to the as-synthesized CQDs in solution, quantum yields of CQD solids usually become lower,88 and characteristics of their emission spectra, such as peak wavelengths and spectral linewidths, also experience considerable changes due to CQD nanoparticle aggregation or self-absorption.51 Since this review mainly focuses on the applications of CQDs in nanophotonic devices and circuits, there are some requirements on CQD solids. Firstly, in order to eliminate scattering losses of the devices, the CQD solids must have a smooth surface and an intact interior structure. Secondly, for CQD nanocomposites, high refractive indices resulting from a sufficient CQD-doping density should be fulfilled in order to achieve an effective light confinement on common substrates, such as silica (refractive index n ∼ 1.5).
Among various applications of CQDs, one of the most intriguing nanophotonic devices is on-chip coherent light sources (lasers), which are built upon gain properties of CQDs. The optical gains of CQDs were first revealed by V. I. Klimov and coworkers in 2000 at both room temperature and low temperature (80 K).82 This seminal work not only observed the stimulated emission from CQD solids but, more importantly, unveiled the underlying mechanism and condition to achieve it, providing important guidelines for future developments of CQD lasers. Generally speaking, upon relatively strong excitation, more than one exciton can be populated in each CQD nanoparticle. Although the radiative recombination of an electron–hole pair (exciton) is favored by most of the cases, multiple excitons excited in individual CQDs undergo a fast nonradiative recombination, which is referred to as the Auger recombination.89 During this process, the energy generated from the recombination of an electron–hole pair is transferred to a third carrier and dissipated by a nonradiative relaxation without emitting a photon.90 The Auger process rate is ultimately related to CQD sizes: the smaller the radius, the stronger the Auger process rate (or the shorter the Auger process time).91 For example, when the radius of CdSe CQDs changes from 4.1 nm to 1.2 nm, the Auger process time alters from τA = 360 ps to τA = 6 ps.82 This rapid Auger process is the main obstacle that hinders the population inversion in CQDs, and thus it must be overcome by material synthesis in order to achieve optical gains from CQDs.
Taking the electronic band structure of CdSe CQDs as an example, they are four-level gain materials (inset of Fig. 3c).82 After absorbing a pump photon, the relaxation time for the excited electron to reach the lowest electronic state [1S(e)] is less than 0.5 ps, and the time for the excited hole to relax from the absorbing state [solid line of 1S3/2(h)] to the emitting state [dashed line of 1S3/2(h)] is less than 1 ps. These two dynamic processes indicate that, despite the fast Auger process (several hundreds of picoseconds), the population inversions and optical gains can still be built up in CQDs due to the ultrafast relaxation times for electrons and holes. By using a femtosecond transient absorption method, V. I. Klimov and coworkers measured the absorption spectra for three CQD solids with different radii (1.3 nm, 1.7 nm, and 2.1 nm), where the gain regions with negative absorption could be identified (Fig. 3c). An important feature revealed here is that wavelengths of the gain regions can be tuned across wide spectral ranges by CQD sizes, offering the potential to bridge the “green gap” in conventional semiconductors with a low-cost scheme.92 This wide tunability is considered as the most intriguing feature of CQD gain materials, which is also attributed to the quantum size effect determined by compositions, shapes, and sizes of CQDs. Moreover, the nanoscale CQDs possess a sparse density of electronic states; for example, a typical energy spacing between the first and second excited states is revealed to be 190–250 meV. This value is approximately an order of magnitude greater than the thermal energy at room temperature (kBT ≈ 25 meV), avoiding the possible thermal depopulation of the lowest electronic state.93 Hence, the environment temperature nearly has no influence on the population inversion in CQDs; that is to say, pump thresholds of optical gains from CQDs are almost independent of surrounding temperatures (Fig. 3d),3 and a nearly constant threshold is reported over a temperature range of 5–325 K.93 This feature is unique to CQDs as a gain material, which is appealing for lasing applications with additional temperature requirements.
It is important to understand that the existence of optical gains, however, cannot guarantee the development of stimulated emission. The latter further requires that the buildup time of stimulated emission is faster than the gain relaxation.82 Based on basic laser principles,94 the buildup time of stimulated emission can be expressed as τs = nr/(Gc), in which nr is the refractive index of the gain material, G is the gain coefficient of the gain material, and c is the speed of light in free space. Consequently, to shorten the buildup time of stimulated emission, it is of key importance to increase the gain coefficients of CQD solids that are determined by G = n0σg; here, n0 is the volume density of CQDs achieving the population inversion, and σg denotes the gain cross-section of CQD solids. Assuming that CQD solids are composed of close-packed spheres with a radius of R and each of the CQD nanoparticles achieves the population inversion, the volume fraction ξ of the semiconductor material (i.e., CQD) in CQD solids can be derived to be ξ = 4πn0R3/3. Therefore, the buildup time of stimulated emission can be written in terms of the volume fraction as τs = 4πnrR3/(3ξcσg). On the other hand, the gain relaxation time of CQD solids is mainly determined by the Auger process time satisfying τA = βR3, in which β is a constant coefficient. Taking these two factors together, an important conclusion revealed by V. I. Klimov and coworkers is that the volume fraction of CQDs should satisfy ξ > 4πnr/(3cβσg) in order to achieve the stimulated emission.82 Under specific conditions in this work, in which β ∼ 5 ps nm−3, and σg ∼ 2 × 10−17 cm2, the required volume fraction of CQDs should be greater than 0.002.
To achieve such a high volume fraction, one of the most popular methods is to closely stack CQD nanoparticles for CQD solids (ξ ∼ 0.2),82 which can be obtained by a simple drop-casting method.31,40,41 In contrast, volume fractions of CQDs grown in glasses (ξ < 0.00182) or CQD-doped polymers usually cannot reach such a requirement,51,95 and thus the stimulated emission is seldom observed. By using special material engineering methods, CQD nanocomposites with high CQD loading densities also exist, like the CQD–PMMA composites (∼50 wt%44) and CQD-incorporated sol–gel titania matrices (ξ ∼ 0.196). Note that, according to the “volume scaling” relationship (τA = βR3), the Auger recombination can be considerably suppressed in large-volume nanoparticles, such as giant-shell CQDs,97,98 nanorods,93,99–101 tetrapods,102 and nanoplatelets.30,103–105 However, large-volume CQD nanoparticles cannot offer benefits of wide spectral tunability and weak temperature sensitivity due to a weak quantum size effect.38 By the way, CQD solids with high volume fractions are also of high refractive indices (1.7 < n < 2.1 measured by ellipsometry106),31,37,53,88,98,107–113 which thus are appropriate candidates for light-guiding media on commonly used substrates (n ∼ 1.5).
Owing to the rapid gain relaxation induced by the Auger recombination (several hundreds of picoseconds), pulsed lasers (typical pulse widths of 100 fs) are usually employed to pump CQD solids to observe the stimulated emission. These intense pulses can achieve the population inversion in an extremely short period of time. Besides, a low repetition rate (typical value of 1 kHz) of the pulsed lasers is also required to avoid the parasitic thermal effect and thus protect CQDs from damages. The commonly used setup to observe the stimulated emission from CQDs is based on a stripe pumping configuration (Fig. 3e).83 Briefly, a stripe pump beam achieved by a cylindrical lens is used to excite the sample. The generated photoluminescence (PL) propagating along the stripe is amplified by the stimulated emission and then collected by a detector (camera or spectrometer). Due to the absence of an optical resonator for feedback and mode selection, the relatively broadband stimulated emission (∼10 nm) is referred to as the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE). The ASE provides a convenient way to evaluate gain properties of CQDs, such as pump thresholds and wavelength ranges (Fig. 3f). Under many circumstances, ASE is easy to be confused with lasing since they share a similar nonlinear intensity evolution (Fig. 3f). Hence, additional discrimination criteria, like clear linewidth narrowing, deterministic polarization state, and well-defined radiation pattern, should be considered.114
This pumping configuration also provides a convenient way to measure the net gain coefficient g of CQDs; that is, g = G − α with α being the loss coefficient. The net gain coefficient is dependent on both gain material (e.g., volume fraction of CQDs and film thickness) and pump beam (e.g., pump fluence). If these conditions are maintained, the intensity of the collected ASE light satisfies I(l) = A1 + A2[exp(gl) − 1]/g; here, A1 denotes a background intensity, A2 denotes a constant coefficient, and l denotes a stripe length that can be controlled by a slit (Fig. 3e). By fitting the measured intensities under different stripe lengths, net gain coefficients of CQDs can be obtained. This way of gain measurement is referred to as the variable stripe length (VSL) method.115 Note that another accurate yet complicated way to measure gain coefficients of materials is the transient absorption method, which has also been widely used to characterize the gain properties of CQDs.55,82,89,116,117 Up to now, thanks to the improvement of material synthesis, the maximum reported gain coefficients of CQDs are greater than 2000 cm−1.3,55,117 This gain value is sufficient to achieve lasing from most of the dielectric resonators and even plasmonic resonators with intrinsic Ohmic losses.29,109,118,119
Optical gains of CQDs are mainly limited by the nonradiative Auger recombination originating from multiple excitons. In the absence of such a process, tremendous performance improvements of CQDs can be achieved, such as high quantum yields, low photo-intermittencies, and small gain thresholds,120–122 all of which are desirable in photonic and optoelectronic devices. Consequently, synthesizing CQDs with a suppressed Auger recombination remains a very hot topic in recent days. To achieve this goal, various material engineering schemes have been implemented, and many high-performance CQDs, such as type-II (or quasi-type-II123–125) CQDs,6,126 compositionally graded shell CQDs,38,90,122,127,128 charged CQDs,76,128,129 and biaxial strain CQDs,39,130 are reported. Based on the outstanding gain performances of these specially engineered CQDs, low pump threshold CQD lasers,126,128,129 continuous-wave pumping CQD lasers,39 and electrical pumping optical gains from CQDs have been demonstrated,38 which make CQD lasers a step closer to practical applications. Beyond these core/shell structure engineering approaches, the ligand engineering is also reported to improve the gain performances of CQDs due to increased packing densities of CQDs.32,107 For example, the replacement of long-chained ligands by short inorganic halides changes the interparticle distance from 10.5 nm to 8.0 nm.107 At the same time, the refractive index, thermal stability, mechanical robustness, and stability of CQDs also undergo considerable improvements.
3. CQD nanophotonic devices
Owing to outstanding properties introduced in (but not limited to) the last section, CQDs have been widely integrated as thin-film solids in photonic and optoelectronic devices. These devices either modulate (and transmit) charges or transduce light and electricity, such as field-effect transistors, light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, and solar cells.4 Importantly, CQDs with distinct gain properties are widely used as gain materials for on-chip lasers,37,40,43,53 which are competitive candidates to traditional semiconductor lasers in specific applications due to a wide wavelength tunability, low cost, and large-scale fabrication on various substrates (even flexible or stretchable ones). Given the rapid development of CQD lasers in recent years, including continuous-wave pumping, electrical pumping, and on-chip integrated operation,37–40,43,53 CQD lasers are envisioned with a bright future, and their commercially viable applications are expected to come true in the years to come.55 Last but not least, intrinsic high refractive indices make CQD solids proper candidates for passive nanophotonic devices on chips, such as basic waveguides and waveguide-based on-chip devices.40,41,51,52 In this review, for the passive nanophotonic devices, we will introduce waveguides, gratings, Y-splitters, MZ interferometers, directional couplers, and ring resonators. For the active ones, on-chip microlasers, optical amplifiers, and photodetectors will be introduced. The applications of CQDs in different fields can be found in other review works.4–6,27,71,131
To achieve a reliable application of these CQD nanophotonic devices in PICs, it is of key importance to fabricate them in a controllable manner. This includes a precise control over the sizes, shapes, and locations of these nanostructures. As a result, advanced fabrication techniques with high-resolution, homogeneous, and large-scale patterning capabilities are desired. The commonly used techniques include lithography (via laser beam or electron beam), RIE, template stripping, molding (e.g., nanoimprint), printing (e.g., ink-jet printing or electrohydrodynamic printing)5–7,131 and so on. These patterning techniques can be differentiated into two categories, which are indirect patterning and direct patterning methods. The former involves the fabrication of well-defined nanostructures of different materials at first, and then CQDs are incorporated into them. This method is also called a bottom-up fabrication. The latter is based on the preparation of large-size CQD films at first, and then nanostructures are directly fabricated from them. This method is also called the top-down fabrication. Although both methods work well for the majority of CQD nanostructures, special attention should be paid when light-emitting devices (e.g., lasers) are involved, because the top-down fabrication has a high chance of causing damage to CQDs, and their quantum yields will be largely decreased.37,132,133 Hence, in many cases, a combination of both methods is employed in the fabrication of high-performance CQD nanophotonic devices.43,53
3.1 CQD passive nanophotonic devices
Passive devices are components for which no external energy sources are required for their normal operation. In this section, we will discuss recent achievements on CQD-based passive nanophotonic devices. Starting from basic elements of waveguides, which include planar ones, straight ones, and bending ones, we will continue with waveguide-based on-chip nanophotonic devices.

3.1.1 Waveguides. 
Waveguides are basic elements to construct nanophotonic devices and circuits. There are several different mechanisms to achieve an optical waveguide, and the most widely used one is based on total internal reflection (others are Bragg reflection or coupled resonators in periodic structures).134 A simple requirement of total internal reflection is that the light-guiding layer should possess a larger refractive index as compared to the surrounding environment. The higher the index contrast, the better the achievable mode confinement. As for CQDs, they are intrinsically of high refractive index since they are composed of high-index semiconductor materials. For example, the refractive index for the bulk counterpart of widely used CdSe CQDs is greater than 2.4 in the visible spectral regime, which is much greater than those of common substrates like silica (n ∼ 1.5). Consequently, CQDs are an appropriate candidate for light-guiding media, provided that the following two requirements are fulfilled.
The first requirement is a sufficiently high packing density of CQDs in the light-guiding layer. This condition is readily satisfied if the light-guiding layer is composed of CQD solids, where CQD nanoparticles are closely packed by an interparticle spacing mainly determined by surface ligands. Consequently, a high refractive index greater than 1.7 can always be obtained for CQD solids in the previous reports.31,37,53,88,98,107–113 Note that a further increase of the refractive index for CQD solids can be achieved by replacing long ligands of CQDs with short ones. For instance, the refractive index is increased from 1.72 to 1.88 when long oleic acid ligands are replaced with short butylamine ones.135 However, this situation changes when CQDs are doped in low-index matrices (e.g., PMMA, n = 1.5) to work as light-guiding layers, in which waveguide modes are poorly confined due to a low packing density of CQDs.45,51,95 The second requirement is a low mode propagation loss, which mainly consists of three parts: scattering loss, bending loss, and absorption loss. Correspondingly, the light-guiding layer should have good qualities, such as a smooth surface and an intact interior structure (absence of defects), to reduce the scattering loss;31 bending radii of waveguides cannot be too small in order to reduce the bending losses;40,41 and operation wavelength of waveguides should be properly selected to get rid of the intrinsic CQD absorption loss.41 Based on these considerations, we will discuss waveguides based on CQD-doped polymers, CQD-embedded semiconductors, and CQD solids.
Known to have only 1D confinement in the vertical dimension and a lack of lateral confinement, planar (or slab) waveguides are the simplest case of waveguides employed in the integrated photonics. A planar waveguide consists of three layers with different materials, one for the substrate (refractive index of ns), one for the light-guiding layer (refractive index of ngl), and the third for the superstrate (refractive index of nc).136 Here, ngl should be greater than both ns and nc. In planar waveguides (assuming ns ≥ nc), the analytical cut-off condition for the fundamental transverse electric (TE) waveguide mode (electric field parallel to the substrate) can be deduced to be50,136 (1)Here, d is the thickness of the light-guiding layer, and λ is a vacuum wavelength. For the majority of CQD waveguides, the superstrates are air (nc = 1).31,51Eqn (1) implies that a large refractive index difference between the light-guiding layer and the substrate will reduce the minimum value of d/λ to achieve an effective mode propagation; that is, the planar waveguide can be thinner and operated at a longer wavelength.
The early triumph to construct planar CQD waveguides was based on CQD nanocomposites (Fig. 4a). In the work demonstrated by Isaac Suárez and coworkers,51 CdSe CQDs are doped in PMMA to obtain nanocomposites. The PMMA polymers (n ∼ 1.5) are frequently chosen as the matrices because they are transparent in visible and near infrared spectral ranges (400–1500 nm), with a transmittance almost the same as glasses.45 Besides, they possess advantages like low cost, easy film preparation, and high-resolution patterning. To reduce scattering losses originated from the aggregation of CQDs, a good solubility of CQDs in PMMA solution should be considered at the first step. For this purpose, both CQDs and PMMA are dissolved in toluene as a common solvent, and uniform CQDs–PMMA nanocomposite films are prepared by spin-coating, forming the three-layer planar waveguides. To evaluate the equivalent refractive index (neq) of the nanocomposite, the authors developed a model based on the bulky refractive indices of PMMA (nPMMA) and CdSe CQDs (nCQD) as well as the filling factor (ff) defined as the weight ratio between them, and the equivalent refractive index can be expressed as:51 (2)Here, the refractive index (including both real and imaginary parts) of CQDs is assumed to be wavelength-dependent, and it is usually measured by ellipsometry.106 It is clear from eqn (2) that neq varies between nPMMA and nCQD when the filling factor changes from 0 to 1. In the experiment, CQD nanocomposites with several filling factors from 4.5 × 10−4 to 0.15 are fabricated, and the measured neq changes from 1.5 to 1.65, which guarantees a sufficiently large index difference to the silica sol–gel substrate (ns = 1.38). Considering the intrinsic absorption of CQDs, an appropriate operation wavelength of the CQD waveguides should be chosen to obtain a negligible absorption loss, as can be seen from the measured transmittance of the waveguides (Fig. 4b). A lossless mode propagation can be achieved above the long-wavelength absorption tail of CQDs (preferable operation range), and a considerable attenuation arises when the operation wavelength decreases.
 Fig. 4  CQD waveguides made of CQD nanocomposites. (a) Schematic of a CQD planar waveguide made of a CQDs–PMMA nanocomposite. (b) Transmission and absorption spectra of a CQD planar waveguide with various CQD filling factors. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, copyright 2011 IOP Publishing Ltd.) (c) Schematic of a CQD microfiber made of a CQDs–PMMA/PS nanocomposite. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2018 Optical Society of America.) (d) Schematic of a CQD stripe waveguide made of a CQDs-UV curable polymer nanocomposite. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.) (e) Schematic of a bilayer CQD waveguide made of a CQDs–SU8 nanocomposite and SU8. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, copyright 2016 IEEE.) 
Benefitting from good film-forming properties of the host matrices, CQD nanocomposites can be easily prepared into high-quality films free of residual strains, which are reported in CQD solids due to a fast evaporation of CQD solvents.31 Besides, the CQDs are fully encapsulated in the host matrices, and thus their properties are stable due to isolation from the external environment. However, due to the requirement of a uniform dispersion of CQDs in the matrices, the loading density of CQDs is usually low, and it is difficult to achieve a very high equivalent refractive index of the nanocomposite (e.g., neq ≤ 1.6551). Based on eqn (1), the thickness of the nanocomposite film cannot be too thin (>1 μm) in order to achieve an effective mode propagation, largely hindering the realization of compact nanophotonic devices. To further increase the loading density of CQDs, a better choice is to incorporate CQDs into sol–gels of metal oxide materials such as TiO2 (n = 2.5) and ZrO2 (n = 2.2),50,137,138 and an equivalent refractive index that is greater than two can be obtained.50 Planar CQD waveguides are seldom used to propagate optical signals owing to the lack of lateral confinement. Instead, they are widely used to demonstrate ASE from CQDs, and they are also inevitable parts of CQD lasers that require large-volume gain materials, such as distributed feedback (DFB) lasers,107,108,128,139,140 photonic crystal (PhC) lasers,111,141 and microplate lasers.31
For the on-chip propagation of optical signals, planar waveguides are usually patterned to possess a lateral confinement (Fig. 4c–e). The latter is more desirable for integrated photonics due to improved performances, such as high compactness and low signal cross-talk.51,85–87,95 In this sense, nanocomposites by doping CQDs into photoresist or e-beam resist, such as SU-8,45,87,142 PMMA,95,142,143 and HSQ,144 are of great advantage as compared to CQD solids, which, up to now, still lack high-quality fabrication methods without material damage.145 Note that, due to the employment of special solvents and additives, commercially available resists maybe a poor solvent for CQDs, and one of the possibilities is to use the ligand exchange method to enhance their solubility.45 However, to keep the intrinsic properties of the resists, the loading density of CQDs must be maintained at a low level, which inevitably leads to low equivalent refractive indexes for the nanocomposite stripe waveguides (e.g., neq = 1.51 by doping CQDs in SU-845 and neq = 1.49 by doping CQDs in PMMA95). As a result, low-index substrates are needed, and the lateral sizes of the stripe waveguides are usually designed to be big enough (e.g., 4 × 2.5 μm2 for CQD-doped SU-8 waveguides45 and 2.5 × 3.5 μm2 for CQD-doped PMMA waveguides142) in order to achieve an effective mode confinement. Besides, due to the large cross-sections of the stripe waveguides, higher-order waveguide modes, such as the fundamental transverse magnetic mode (TM, electric field perpendicular to the substrate), can also be supported. Hence, a selective exciton of single waveguide mode should be considered in practical applications.
To solve the dilemma of a high loading density of CQDs and a reliable fabrication of stripe waveguides with a low absorption loss, a bilayer waveguide configuration is also proposed (Fig. 4e).87,146 Here, the lower CQD-doped PMMA layer and the upper SU-8 strip compose the waveguide as a whole. Due to the separation of CQDs and photoresist (SU-8), CQDs have little influences on the patterning capability of the photoresist. Meanwhile, the waveguide mode mainly distributes in the lossless SU-8 stripe, and thus the absorption loss stemming from CQDs can also be alleviated.
Besides polymer matrices, embedding CQDs into transparent dielectric films (e.g., SiO2132 or SiN52) that are compatible with semiconductor platforms is more suitable for integrated photonics, due to the material's long-term stabilities and mature fabrication techniques. To achieve such a goal, a possible solution is to embed a close-packed CQD layer between two dielectric films to form a sandwich structure, which can be further processed by various semiconductor techniques. Important progress employing this configuration was achieved by Dries Van Thourhout's group using SiN.37,52,147,148 Several impressive properties of SiN films include high refractive index (n ≈ 2), broadband transparency (visible to mid-infrared), and CMOS compatibility, and thus they are widely used in integrated optics. However, the SiN platform is limited to fabricate passive nanophotonic devices, and its integration with active nanophotonic devices (e.g., microlasers) remains an urgent task.
To construct the SiN/CQDs/SiN sandwich structure (Fig. 5a), a 100 nm-thick SiN is firstly deposited on a thick thermal oxide layer by an optimized plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD, 270 °C), and a large-area CQD monolayer (thickness about 7 nm) is subsequently transferred above it by a Langmuir–Blodgett method.149 Following this transfer, a second 100 nm-thick SiN layer is deposited above the CQD monolayer using PECVD (120 °C), forming the sandwich structure. During this process, the optical properties of CQDs (including PL intensity and lifetime) are strongly influenced by the temperature of the second SiN deposition, and a high temperature as the first one may cause severe damage to CQDs (∼80% PL and ∼70% lifetime reduction37). Consequently, a low temperature is chosen for the second SiN deposition to protect CQDs, but the quality of the SiN film is compromised due to a reduction in the material density. Lastly, the sandwich structure is patterned to be stripe waveguides (typical cross-section of 2 × 0.2 μm2, Fig. 5b) by an optimized RIE, with the etching mask achieved by photolithography. Due to the monolayer thickness of the CQD layer, the absorption loss of the constructed waveguide is largely suppressed, and a high refractive index contrast can still be guaranteed owing to the high refractive index of SiN. For these waveguides, the primary loss channel comes from light scattering at rough waveguide sidewalls and CQDs–SiN interfaces, and a propagation loss as low as 2.69 dB cm−1 is measured at a long wavelength with negligible CQD absorption (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  CQD waveguides made of CQD-embedded semiconductors. (a) Schematic of fabrication processes for a SiN/CQDs/SiN strip waveguide. (b) SEM images of the (left panel) cross-section and (right panel) sidewall for a SiN/CQDs/SiN strip waveguide. (c) Propagation losses of a SiN/CQDs/SiN strip waveguide under various waveguide widths. The inset shows the measured transmission values of a 2 μm wide waveguide with different lengths. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2015 Optical Society of America.) 
Although the successful incorporation of CQDs into promising semiconductor platforms has been achieved, the complicated fabrication procedures and compromised material performances (either CQDs or semiconductors) still need further optimization. Under this circumstance, the pattern-assisted stacking approach was recently proposed by Chen's group to fabricate CQD waveguides made of close-packed CQD stripes (Fig. 6a).41 Kexiu et al. firstly use a single-step EBL to fabricate high-resolution waveguide trench patterns (cross-section of 0.3 × 0.3 μm2) on a PMMA film, which is spin-coated on a low-index MgF2 (n = 1.38) substrate. Subsequently, a CdSe/ZnS CQD solution with an appropriate concentration is drop-casted on the patterned PMMA film. This leads to a uniform and compact stack of CQD building blocks in the trenches due to the interfacial capillary force during the evaporation of the solvent,150 creating waveguides out of close-packed CQD stripes (see the inset of Fig. 6a). Here, the authors intentionally disperse CQD nanoparticles in a mixture solvent of hexane and octane (volume ratio 5:1), which not only serves as a poor solvent to the PMMA trench patterns but also enables a uniform spread of the CQD solution for flat CQD films (surface roughness about 10 nm31). Interestingly, due to a high refractive index of the close-packed CQD stripe (n = 1.95), a good confinement of the waveguide mode in the CQD stripe can be achieved even without the removal of the PMMA template and the thin CQD layer (∼60 nm) above the PMMA film (Fig. 6b). As compared to reports requiring additional lift-off procedures,36,53 the fabrication processes of CQD waveguides are tremendously simplified, and no material damage is imposed on the CQDs. It should be pointed out that the thickness of the thin CQD layer can be further decreased by reducing the volume of the drop-casted CQD solution.
 Fig. 6  CQD waveguides made of CQD solids. (a) Illustration of the pattern-assisted stacking approach. Inset shows the SEM image of the cross-section for a fabricated CQD waveguide (scale bar: 300 nm). The CQD solids are highlighted by a red color, and a thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (b) Simulated field (|E|2) and electric field vector distributions for the fundamental TE mode in the CQD waveguide. (c) Absorption and PL spectra of the constituting CQDs. Inset shows the zoomed-in absorption spectrum around the central PL wavelength (λPL = 650 nm). (d) (top panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD waveguide. CQD gratings are fabricated at the two ends of the CQD waveguide. The scale bar is 10 μm. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding CQD waveguide when an s-polarized beam (λ = 630 nm) illuminates the left CQD grating. (e) Extracted PL intensity distribution along the CQD waveguide shown in (d). (f) (left panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD bending waveguide. (right panel) Optical image of the corresponding CQD bending waveguide when an s-polarized beam (λ = 630 nm) illuminates the lower CQD grating. Inset shows the intensities of the scattered light from the upper CQD grating as a function of the bending radius. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
For these CQD waveguides, their operation wavelengths (λ = 630 nm) are selected within the gain region of the constituting CQDs, because they are intentionally designed for on-chip routing of lasing emission from on-chip microlasers composed of the same CQDs. Due to a considerable absorption of the CQDs at this wavelength (Fig. 6c), the CQD waveguides show a limited propagation distance of approximately Lp = 25 μm, which is measured from the attenuated PL intensity along the CQD waveguide (Fig. 6d and e). This absorption loss, on the one hand, can be partially or even completely compensated by pumping the CQD waveguide with a sufficiently high fluence. In this sense, the CQD waveguide becomes an optical amplifier,40 which will be further introduced at the active nanophotonic device section. On the other hand, the absorption loss can be circumvented by operating the CQD waveguide at wavelengths longer than the central PL wavelength of the CQDs (λPL = 650 nm), where the CQDs exhibit negligible absorption. Based on this mechanism, the same group also reports a low-loss propagation of the CQD waveguide in a later work (Lp ≈ 1.2 mm at λ = 800 nm).41 This propagation length is approximately 50 times that at the short wavelength (Lp = 25 μm at λ = 630 nm), indicating a very low scattering loss of the CQD waveguide as well.
Utilizing the built-in pattern-generating capabilities of the EBL system, the pattern-assisted stacking approach can be generalized to fabricate various CQD nanostructures beyond the CQD straight waveguides, such as CQD bending waveguides (Fig. 6f) and others that we will introduce in a later section.40,41 Different from the straight waveguide, waveguide modes in the bending waveguide also experience radiation losses, and thus their transmission is mainly determined by the trade-off between absorption losses and radiation losses, provided that the scattering losses are negligible.151 For a small bending radius, the radiation loss plays a dominant role due to the mode leakage at the sharp bending. Accompanying the increase of the bending radius, the radiation loss is gradually relieved, while the absorption loss is accumulated due to the length increase of the bending section. Consequently, there exists an optimal bending radius for the bending waveguide, and it is measured to be approximately 30 μm for the fabricated CQD bending waveguides (inset of Fig. 6f). When there is only a weak absorption loss for the CQD bending waveguide, the measured transmission as a function of the bending radius will reach a plateau.41
Waveguides (including both straight and bending ones) are basic elements to construct more complicated functional nanophotonic devices, such as gratings, Y-splitters, MZ interferometers, directional couplers, and ring resonators,40,41 which will be introduced in the next section. Note that, due to the requirement of a subtle fabrication method, CQD functional devices up to now are only demonstrated by the aforementioned pattern-assisted stacking approach.40,41 As compared to conventional waveguides made of passive materials, such as silicon, SiN, and noble metals, CQD waveguides bear the appealing advantages of being active ones under proper pumping, offering the potential to build optical amplifiers and microlasers.40 Besides, properties of CQD waveguides, such as effective refractive indices, absorption spectra, and gain regions, can be easily changed using different CQDs, while the fabrication procedures remain nearly the same.45


3.1.2 Waveguide-based on-chip nanophotonic devices. 
Based on CQD waveguides, on-chip functional nanophotonic devices can be realized by directly fabricating nanostructures, such as periodic ones (period of Λ), on them (Fig. 6a).40,41 Under the condition of momentum matching, that is, k0neff = k0sinθ + 2π/Λ, a waveguide mode with effective refractive index neff can be excited by a free-space plane wave (wavevector of k0) with an incident angle θ. Consequently, these grating structures (see ends of the CQD waveguides in Fig. 6d) can act as a coupler to excite waveguide modes by free-space beams, or vice versa (i.e., free-space measurement of waveguide modes).40,41 Compared to another mode excitation method based on end-fire coupling, it is of great convenience since the facet cleaving of waveguides is avoided and the sensitive position-dependent coupling is also alleviated. Note that a polarization matching between the desired waveguide mode (TE or TM polarization) and the excitation beam (s or p polarization) should also be considered. Moreover, under the Bragg reflection condition, that is, k0neff = mπ/Λ with m being an integer, the periodic nanostructures on waveguides can be used as on-chip filters or reflectors.152 By designing other nanostructures on waveguides, more functional nanophotonic devices, such as beam splitter, mode converter, and DFB resonator, can also be achieved.116,153,154
On-chip functional nanophotonic devices can also be achieved by combining several CQD waveguides using the pattern-assisted stacking approach.40,41Fig. 7a shows a Y-splitter that is composed of two identical S-bend waveguides sharing a common straight waveguide. The Y-splitters are designed for an equal power splitting ratio in PICs with the lowest radiation losses.41,155,156 Measurements show that the energy splitting ratio between the two output ports of a CQD Y-splitter can always maintain a satisfactory value of 0.94 ± 0.08 under various longitudinal and lateral offsets (Fig. 7b). This mean splitting ratio (η = 0.94) is much closer to the ideal value (η = 1) than that (η = 43:57 = 0.75) for a silicon Y-splitter,157 indicating a good uniformity of the CQD waveguides. Furthermore, by combining two consecutive Y-splitters with two straight waveguides, a CQD MZ interferometer can also be fabricated (Fig. 7c), and a bright spot originating from the constructive interference between its two arms can be observed due to their equal optical lengths. Based on the successful demonstration of these CQD MZ interferometers, more functional CQD MZ modulators158 become possible if one can incorporate CQDs into functional host matrices with modulating capacities (e.g., nonlinearity). Besides, the CQD MZ interferometers can also be used in other applications, such as sensors (temperature, pressure, etc.) in lab-on-a-chip platforms.159,160 In addition, other functional nanophotonic devices, such as directional couplers (Fig. 7d) and ring resonators (Fig. 18d), are also demonstrated by using the CQD waveguides.41
 Fig. 7  CQD waveguide-based on-chip nanophotonic devices. (a) (top panel) Schematic of a Y-splitter. (middle panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD Y-splitter (Wys = 20 μm, and Hys = 6 μm). (bottom panel) SEM image of the cross-section for a CQD Y-splitter. A thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (b) Energy splitting ratios for CQD Y-splitters with various longitudinal Wys and lateral Hys offsets. (c) (top panel) Schematic of an MZ interferometer. (bottom panel) Optical image of a CQD MZ interferometer when an s-polarized beam illuminates the left CQD grating (Wmz = 20 μm, and Hmz = 2 μm). (d) (top panel) Schematic of a directional coupler. (bottom panel) Optical image of a CQD directional coupler when an s-polarized beam illuminates the bottom-left CQD grating (Wdc1 = 12 μm, Hdc = 2 μm, Gdc = 150 nm, Ldc2 = 23 μm). A bright spot is observed at the top-right CQD grating due to a controlled energy transfer from the lower CQD waveguide to the upper CQD waveguide in the straight interaction region. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2020 Optical Society of America.) 

3.2 CQD active nanophotonic devices
As shown in the last section, CQD waveguides can be used to propagate optical signals and construct more complicated functional nanophotonic devices. However, light sources that are used to provide the optical signals are still limited to out-of-plane laser beams. In this section, we will discuss CQD active nanophotonic devices that are capable of providing or delivering energies to nanophotonic circuits. We will first introduce the on-chip CQD microlasers that are capable of emanating in-plane lasing. Then, we will discuss the CQD optical amplifiers. As demonstrated in the last section, one limitation of the CQD waveguides is their absorption losses below the central PL wavelength of the constituting CQDs. Although this weakness can be circumvented by choosing long working wavelengths,41 it largely hinders their operation bandwidths, especially when they are integrated with microlasers made of the same CQDs. This drawback can be well tackled in an active way by applying a pump beam to the CQD waveguide, which then becomes a CQD optical amplifier. Lastly, another important component, that is, the CQD photodetector, to construct a fully functional PIC will be briefly introduced.

3.2.1 On-chip CQD microlasers. 
Recent years have witnessed a rapid development of CQD lasers ever since the successful demonstration of optical gains from CQDs about twenty years ago.82 This is partially attributed to advances in synthesis techniques of high-quality CQDs, which exhibit a tremendously suppressed Auger nonradiative recombination for outstanding optical gains.38,39,126,129 Accompanied by the material improvement, pump methods of CQD lasers also undergo revolutionary changes. Instead of short pulses, CQD lasing has already been demonstrated under continuous-wave pumping,39 and electrical pumping optical gains from CQDs were also demonstrated very recently,38 indicating that CQD lasers are getting close to practical applications. Besides, resonators of CQD lasers have also experienced exciting progress. Up to now, various resonators, including Fabry–Pérot (FP) resonators,88,161–164 whispering-gallery mode (WGM) resonators,36,37,40,43,44,53,99–101,125,132,165–173 DFB resonators,39,107,108,116,128,139,140,174 PhC resonators,111,141 random resonators,97,98,109,121,124,175,176 and plasmonic lattice resonators,118,119,177 incorporated with CQDs have been used to demonstrate lasing. Among these resonators, the bulky volume (e.g., capillary WGM resonators,101,169–171 hollow fiber WGM resonators,172 and cuvette FP resonators161) or uncontrollable (e.g., nonuniformity-induced random resonators,97,98,109,121,124,175,176 coffer-ring WGM resonators,99,100,173 microdrop WGM resonators,168 and microbubble WGM resonators44) resonators at the early stage of CQD lasers have been replaced by micro/nanoscale and controllable resonators in recent days. Specifically, resonators capable of delivering in-plane lasing emission have drawn special attention due to their potential applications in PICs. These resonators are also the focus of this section to demonstrate the on-chip CQD microlasers.
Based on the timeline of on-chip CQD microlasers, it is clear to see their development in three stages. For the first stage, CQDs serving as gain materials are integrated with high-Q resonators (e.g., WGM resonators) made of different materials to demonstrate the integrated lasers.165,178,179 For the second stage, external-cavity-free CQD microlasers with CQDs serving as both gain materials and resonators are explored,31,44,166,173,180 while these microlasers are generally uncontrollable in positions, sizes or shapes (e.g., coffee-rings,180 microplates,31 and microbubbles44). For the last stage, the high-resolution micro/nanofabrication techniques are introduced to fabricate the CQD microlasers,29,36,37,40,43,53,116 which thus undergo a tremendous improvement in controllability, compactness, and functionality. Considering further advances in continuous-wave pumping CQD lasing and electrical pumping optical gains from CQDs, these on-chip CQD microlasers are promising for practical applications in upcoming years. This section will be organized according to this timeline.
Although many CQD lasers have been reported following the first demonstration of optical gains from CQDs in 2000,82 only little attention in the community is paid to the achievement of on-chip CQD microlasers. For these early works, due to the lack of high-gain CQDs, they are limited to coating CQDs on surfaces of high-Q resonators, whereby evanescent fields of the resonant modes interact with the CQDs. This scheme decreases the required optical gains to achieve lasing, and a representative work is demonstrated by Bumki Min and coworkers by coating CQDs on an ultrahigh-Q (>108) toroidal microcavity (Fig. 8a).178 The toroidal microcavity (minor/principal diameter of 5/60.6 μm) and CQDs are fabricated separately, and then the CQDs dispersed in toluene are spin-coated on the microcavity, with a thickness of only about a few densely packed layers. Due to the introduction of the CQDs, the intrinsic Q factor of the microcavity is substantially reduced by one or two orders at lasing wavelengths because of absorption and scattering losses. In this configuration, a pulsed (<100 fs) laser beam is conveniently coupled to the microcavity with a high pump efficiency via a tapered fiber, which also provides an easy way to measure the in-plane lasing. As compared to the free-space excitation configuration, the threshold energy is reduced by a factor of about 2600, due to the circulation of the pump beam inside the microcavity for a long interaction time with the CQDs. By combining high-Q microcavities and an efficient pump scheme, these on-chip CQD microlasers exhibit a record low threshold energy (9.9 fJ) even without the additional optimization of the gain materials (i.e., CQDs).
 Fig. 8  On-chip CQD microlasers using external resonators. (a) Schematic of a taper-fiber-coupled toroidal microcavity coated with CQDs. Inset shows the SEM image of the microcavity covered with CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2006 American Institute of Physics.) (b) (top panel) Lasing spectra of a hemisphere microcavity coated with CQDs under different pump energies. The left and right insets show the pump energy-dependent peak intensities and the schematic of the hemisphere laser, respectively. (middle panels) Optical microscope images of a hemisphere microcavity before and after CQD coverage. (bottom panels) Optical images of a CQD hemisphere microcavity below and above the pump threshold. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH.) (c) (left panel) Fluorescent optical images of silica microspheres uniformly coated with a CQDs/titania film. The upper and lower insets show the optical and fluorescent images of a CQD-coated microsphere, respectively. The scale bars in the insets are 15 μm. (right panel) SEM image of a CQDs-microsphere composite structure. Inset shows the top-view SEM image of the same composite structure. The scale bar in the inset is 10 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 165, copyright 2005 WILEY-VCH.) 
Although the above scheme successfully demonstrates on-chip CQD microlasers, these microcavities are usually supported by a pedestal, and thus they have to be coupled with a tapered fiber for lasing output. This brings in complications when they are applied in integrated photonics.181 In this sense, it is more favored by resonators located directly above substrates because the supported resonant modes are easier to be coupled by other on-chip components. One such example was demonstrated by Handong Sun's group by depositing CQDs above hemisphere WGM microcavities (Fig. 8b).179,182,183 To enable 3D light confinement, the substrate for the hemispheres is a high-reflective DBR mirror (reflectance ∼99.5%) composed of multiple alternative layers of SiO2 and TiO2, thus preventing light leakage from the bottom of the hemispheres. These hemispheres are fabricated by a very simple way of gently contacting microscale droplets of epoxy resin and hardener on the surface of the DBR mirror, which is covered by a hydrophobic layer. This leads to the formation of solid-state hemispheres with radii ranging from 5 μm to 120 μm after drying, and CQDs serving as gain materials are coated on the hemisphere surfaces by immersing them into a CQD solution. Under the excitation of nanosecond pulses, lasing is also demonstrated (pump threshold Pth = 10.4 mJ cm−2 and linewidth Δλ = 0.15 nm). For these hemisphere microcavities, the well-confined WGMs locating at the circumferences of the hemispheres are in a direct contact with the substrate (Fig. 8b), and hence they can be conveniently coupled by other on-chip components for further processing.
Note that CQDs incorporated in the aforementioned microcavities exhibit a bad uniformity (see optical images in Fig. 8a and b), which will lead to considerable scattering losses and degrade Q factors. Besides, the low CQD coating densities also limit the achievable optical gains and lasing intensities from these systems. One of the solutions is to use high loading CQDs/titania sols to uniformly cover the resonator surfaces via a physical “wetting”, as demonstrated by silica microsphere resonators (Fig. 8c).165 However, due to the tight confinement of the resonant modes in these resonators, modal gains achieved by the overlap between gain materials and modal fields are always compromised. Consequently, later on-chip CQD microlasers mainly employ configurations in which CQDs serve as both gain materials and resonators. In these cases, the complex and costly fabrication of external resonators is avoided, and easier fabrication procedures of on-chip CQD microlasers become possible.
The early trial to achieve external-cavity-free on-chip CQD microlasers is based on a “coffee-ring” effect.99,100,173,180 It describes a common phenomenon when drops containing dispersed solids evaporate on a surface, where a dense and ring-like deposit along the drop perimeter will be formed.184 This phenomenon is attributed to a capillary flow, which ensures that evaporation at the drop edge is replenished by liquid from the interior. This process, virtually, can carry all the dispersed solids to the drop edge to form close-packed ring patterns, and it is independent of particular substrates, carrier fluids, and dispersed solids. In accordance with this principle, when a droplet of CQD solution containing nanometer CQD nanoparticles is dripped on a substrate, its evaporation dynamics is also governed by the “coffee-ring” effect, and dense-packed CQD solids can be formed at the ring edges. For these reports of CQD “coffee-rings”, various solvents, like water,99 hexane,173 or toluene,100,180 are used, and the shapes of the CQD nanoparticles can be either sphere173,180 or rod.99,100 Taking CdSe/CdS CQDs dispersed in hexane as a typical example,173 the diameter of the “coffee-ring” can reach several hundred micrometers, while the thickness of the ring deposit is only about 7.7 μm (Fig. 9a). When a small pump spot covering a fraction of the ring deposit is used to excite the CQD “coffee-ring”, two sides of the covered ring deposit form an FP resonator to achieve on-chip lasing. For these CQD microlasers composed of “coffee-rings”, single-mode operation can be achieved due to their small cavity lengths, as determined by the thickness of the ring deposit.99,100,173
 Fig. 9  External-cavity-free on-chip CQD microlasers lack of controllability. (a) (top-left panel) Optical microscope image of a CQD “coffee-ring”. The scale bar is 200 μm. (top-right panel) AFM image of the ring deposit of a CQD “coffee-ring”. (bottom panel) Lasing spectra of a CQD “coffee-ring” under different pump fluences. Inset shows the pump fluence-dependent peak intensities. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) (b) (top-left panel) Schematic of an inkjet printing method to fabricate CQD “coffee-rings”. (top-right panel) Optical microscope image of an array of CQD “coffee-rings”. The scale bar is 100 μm. (bottom panels) SEM images of a CQD “coffee-ring”. (Reproduced with permission from 180, copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH.) (c) Procedures of an oil-in-water emulsion method to fabricate CQD suprapartref. icles. The method mainly involves three steps: preparation of monodisperse cyclohexane CQD droplets in water, evaporation of cyclohexane, and self-assembly of CQD nanoparticles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 166, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (d) (top panels) Schematic of two main procedures (drop-casting and water-dripping) to fabricate CQD microplates. (bottom-left panel) Optical image of an irregular CQD microplate above the pump threshold. (bottom-right panel) Polarization-resolved single-mode lasing spectra from the irregular CQD microplate. The lasing spectra are measured at position I, and two polarization states along (θP = 0°) and perpendicular to (θP = 90°) the corresponding edge are implemented. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) 
Albeit the advantages in simple fabrication procedures, these CQD “coffee-rings” obtained by drop-casting CQD solution are imparted with inevitable drawbacks. Firstly, their sizes can reach several hundred micrometers, which hinder the realization of compact on-chip CQD microlasers. Secondly, sizes and shapes of these “coffee-rings” are uncontrollable, and only a very low positioning accuracy can be achieved, all of which will lead to difficulties when they are integrated with other on-chip components. Although the method to solve all the mentioned issues requires the high-precision micro/nanofabrication techniques that we shall introduce in the last section, several methods to tackle some of these drawbacks with a moderate accuracy also exist. For example, positions of the CQD “coffee-rings” can be controlled by the inkjet printing method (Fig. 9b).180 In this work, CQD solution with an appropriate concentration (∼5 mg mL−1 in toluene) is loaded into an inkjet nozzle by the capillary force, and the generated CQD droplets are deposited by a microplotter in a controllable manner. However, due to intrinsic limitations from the uncontrollable liquid evaporation process, shapes and sizes of these CQD “coffee-rings” are still not easy to be controlled. The typical diameter of the fabricated CQD “coffee-rings” is about 80 μm, and lasing is observed from WGMs supported along the ring circumferences, in contrast to those where only FP modes are supported.99,100,173
Besides CQD “coffee-rings”, regular CQD microspheres can also be obtained via a controlled self-assembly.166,167 In ref. 166, Federico Montanarella and coworkers employ an oil-in-water emulsion method to fabricate CQD microsphere resonators (Fig. 9c). Monodisperse cyclohexane droplets (polydispersity <5%) containing CQDs are prepared by an in-flow microfluidic chip, which allows a precise control of the shear force imposed by the continuous flow of water to the CQD solution, pinching off the droplets at a certain size. Accompanied by the slow evaporation of cyclohexane droplets dispersed in water, CQD nanoparticles confined in the droplets start to self-assemble, and ordered spherical assemblies (or supraparticles) are obtained once the solvent is completely evaporated. Another important feature of this method is that diameters of the supraparticles can be tuned between 5 μm and 15 μm by controlling either sizes of the droplets or concentration of the initial CQD solution. Specifically, the average diameter of the CQD supraparticles employed by the authors to demonstrate on-chip lasing is 10.2 ± 0.5 μm, and lasing modes originate from WGMs supported at the rims of these smooth microspheres.
Based on an interesting interplay between water and close-packed CQD films, another work is also reported to fabricate on-chip CQD microplate lasers by a very simple and low-cost method (Fig. 9d).31 For these microplates, in-plane resonances are constructed by total internal reflection of planar waveguide modes at end facets of the microplates, and thus their generated in-plane lasing is easy to be on-chip routed. To manufacture these CQD microplates, Chen's group first prepared close-packed CQD films (thickness about 780 nm) by drop-casting a CQD solution with a mixed solvent of hexane and octane (volume ratio of 5:1) on a glass substrate. This optimized solvent ratio, in combination with an appropriate environment temperature and humidity, enables a desired evaporation rate of the mixed solvent to form high-quality CQD films, which are very flat (surface roughness of about 10 nm) and uniform with nearly no defects. To crack the large-area CQD film (2 × 2 cm2) for microscale microplates, a water drop is dripped on the CQD film to release the residual strain remaining in the CQD film during the evaporation of the solvent. This crack process is triggered by the surface tension of the water drop, whereby the CQD film quickly cracks from the three-phase (CQD film–water–air) contact line to the whole surface. More importantly, these crack-enclosed areas leave the substrate due to buoyancy and float on the surface of the water drop, which enables a convenient substrate transfer for further characterization. Measurements show that these microplates inherit the flatness of the CQD film, and their end facets are very sharp and smooth, which thus are appropriate to serve as in-plane resonators. Under the picosecond pump beam, lasing with a well-defined polarization state is output from end facets of the CQD microplates, which thus can be easily integrated with other on-chip nanophotonic devices. Moreover, by using a CQD microplate with a very irregular shape, single-mode lasing is observed (Pth = 470 μJ cm−2) due to a reduction in the number of resonant modes supported by the microplate.185,186 Note that, although shapes and sizes of these CQD microplates are uncontrollable, the number of microplates fabricated from the large-area CQD film is very huge, and hence the desired CQD microplates can be found for practical applications. Besides, positions of the CQD microplates can be micromanipulated by a probe or stamp connected to a 3D translation stage, which provides the way to achieve integration with other on-chip devices.41
Albeit being very simple and cost-effective, the aforementioned on-chip CQD microlasers are difficult to be simultaneously controlled in size, shape, and position due to intrinsic limitations in the fabrication method. However, all these characteristics are very important for practical on-chip applications, and hence high-precision micro/nanofabrication techniques have become more and more popular to manufacture on-chip CQD microlasers in recent years.29,36,37,40,43,53,116 Moreover, due to the well-controlled properties of these CQD microstructures, lasing mode manipulation in these microlasers also becomes possible, such as by coupled resonators.40,43,187,188
Widely used resonators to achieve controllable CQD microlasers are DFB structures, which are constructed by 1D periodic structures to modulate in-plane propagating modes. For a given period of Λ for the DFB resonator, resonant wavelength λ0 satisfying the Bragg condition is determined by 2neffΛ = mλ0, in which m is the diffraction order. Conventionally, based on the value of m, they are referred to as m-order (mth) DFB structures, and the commonly employed ones are 1st and 2nd DFB structures. For the 1st DFB structures, both the optical feedback and output are achieved from the 1st diffraction that propagates in plane, and thus they are preferred by integrated photonics.116 For the 2nd DFB structures, the optical feedback is provided by the 2nd diffraction that propagates in plane, while the output is enabled by the 1st diffraction that propagates perpendicular to the substrate, and thus they are desirable for surface-emitting lasers. Due to our focus on CQD microlasers in integrated photonics, we will limit our discussion to 1st CQD DFB microlasers, while reports about 2nd CQD DFB microlasers can be found elsewhere.39,107,108,128,139,140,174
Utilizing SiN/CQDs/SiN planar sandwich stacks, Dries Van Thourhout's group also patterns them for 1st DFB resonators to demonstrate on-chip CQD microlasers (Fig. 10a).116 In the stack, a 50 nm-thick CQD layer is embedded between two SiN layers (thickness of 75 nm and 90 nm) to enhance the spatial overlap between the gain material and resonant mode. To fabricate these structures, EBL is used to fabricate grating masks above the stack, and the mask patterns are transferred to the underlying SiN layer (etching depth: 35 nm, and duty cycle: 50%) through RIE. After the removal of the resist, these structures are etched in the lateral direction (width: 2 μm) for further connections to ridge waveguides. It is worth mentioning that, to eliminate the degenerate lasing modes originating from a uniform grating, the authors incorporate a quarter-wave phase shift at the center of the structure, which ensures lasing from a single frequency at the center of the stop band.189 Although being exposed to a high temperature (270 °C) during the top SiN layer deposition, a net gain coefficient around 300 cm−1 is still measured for the embedded CQD layer. One of the advantages for these 1st DFB microlasers is that they intrinsically give out single-mode lasing tunable by the period (Fig. 10b). The single-mode lasing is preferable for practical applications due to less mode competition, higher spectral purity, and better beam quality. However, these 1st DFB resonators are generally designed in big sizes (∼100 μm) in order to achieve a sufficient optical feedback, hindering a high integration density for PICs. This drawback can be solved by using 2D periodic structures (or PhCs) due to strong optical feedback, and on-chip CQD lasing from band-edge modes with zero group velocities is also demonstrated (e.g., 50 × 50 μm2 in size).111,141
 Fig. 10  On-chip CQD microlasers by top-down fabrication methods. (a) Schematic of the procedures to fabricate 1st DFB microlasers made of a SiN/CQDs/SiN stack. (b) Single-mode lasing spectra from 1st CQD DFB microlasers with different grating periods. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic of a waveguide-integrated CQD microdisk laser made of a SiN/CQDs/SiN stack. (d) Lasing spectra of a 7 μm-diameter CQD microdisk below and above the pump threshold. Insets show the corresponding optical images of the CQD microdisk at these pump fluences. (e) Temporal coherence of the emission from a CQD microdisk. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH.) 
Besides DFB resonators, compact resonators such as microdisk or microring are also popular choices for on-chip CQD microlasers. Using the same patterning method, microdisks are also fabricated from SiN/CQDs/SiN stacks by Dries Van Thourhout's group (Fig. 10c).37 Due to high refractive indices of both SiN and CQD solids (n ∼ 2), high-Q (>103) WGMs can be supported along the circumference of the microdisk with a diameter as small as 5 μm. In these CQD microdisks, both TE and TM-polarized WGMs can be supported. But the TE-polarized WGMs possess a higher Q factor, resulting in dominated TE-polarized lasing (Pth ∼ 27 μJ cm−2) due to mode competition. Considering that the free spectral range satisfies FSR ≈ λ2/ngπD (ng – group velocity of light), shrinking the microdisk diameter D provides a way to reduce resonant modes in the gain region of the CQDs, and single-mode on-chip lasing is observed from a small CQD microdisk at certain pump fluences (Fig. 10d and e). Due to the incorporation of CQDs in the mature SiN platform, these CQD microdisks are appealing candidates for on-chip lasers in integrated photonics. However, the top-down fabrication of these CQD microdisks requires complicated techniques and procedures in order to properly deposit or etch the materials, such as the careful temperature selection for SiN deposition and the optimized gas mixture for etching. Moreover, these complicated procedures may impose unwanted degradations to CQDs; for example, their PL intensity decreases by 80% after the top SiN deposition at 270 °C.37 Consequently, many later works adopt the hybrid top-down/bottom-up approaches to fabricate on-chip CQD microlasers, and these approaches have no fabrication damage to CQDs.
For these hybrid approaches, Vladimir V. Tsukruk's group develops a pattern-assisted layer-by-layer assembly method to fabricate on-chip CQD microdisk lasers (Fig. 11a).53 Photolithography is used to fabricate microdisk holes (depth: 300 nm) on a photoresist, which is spin-coated above a low-index CYTOP substrate (n = 1.34) for better mode confinements. Subsequently, CQDs are filled in the holes by a spin-assisted layer-by-layer assembly (thickness of each CQD layer is 25–30 nm), which is repeated until the achievement of the desired CQD thickness (100–200 nm). Importantly, the filled CQDs are tethered to each other via a solid-state ligand exchange process, which is essential to maintain the integrity of the CQD structures in harsh environments, such as the lift-off process utilized to remove the photoresist. Note that the removal of the photoresist (also the CQD layer above it) eliminates the possible light leakage from the thick CQD layer. By using this method, various CQD microdisks with diameters ranging from 10 to 52 μm are fabricated. These CQD microdisks exhibit a nest-like shape with elevated rims (Fig. 11b). Under picosecond pulses, both multimode and near single-mode on-chip lasing are observed from these CQD microdisks (Pth = 29–90 μJ cm−2, and Q = 1500), as shown in Fig. 11c.
 Fig. 11  On-chip CQD microlasers by hybrid fabrication methods. (a) Schematic of the procedures to fabricate CQD microdisks by a pattern-assisted layer-by-layer assembly method. (b) AFM images of a CQD microdisk in top view and tilted view. (c) Lasing spectra of CQD microdisks with various diameters. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 53, copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH.) (d) Active color control in a CQD microring laser by different pump fluences. (e) Schematic of the procedures to fabricate CQD microrings by a template-stripping method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 36, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (f) (top-left panel) AFM image of a CQD microcavity fabricated by a pattern-assisted stacking approach. The scale bar is 10 μm. (top-right panel) SEM image of the cross-section at the edge of a CQD microcavity. A thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (bottom panel) Height distributions of a CQD microcavity before and after CQD filling. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH.) (g) (left panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD WRR fabricated by a pattern-assisted stacking approach. (right panel) SEM image of the cross-section for a CQD WRR. A thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (h) SEM image of a plasmonic resonator incorporated with a printed CQD strip. The scale bar is 2 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2017, the authors.) 
Similarly, David J. Norris's group employs a template-stripping method to fabricate on-chip CQD microring lasers (Fig. 11e).36 An array of microrings (depth: 500 nm) is firstly fabricated on a silicon template via EBL and RIE. To reduce the surface tension and facilitate the release of CQD nanostructures, the template is coated with an alkane-terminated self-assembled monolayer. Following these steps, the CdSe/CdS/ZnS core/shell/shell CQD solution is spin-coated above the template, and CQD nanoparticles will uniformly stack in the microrings. Note that a smooth CQD layer is also formed above the template surface. This CQD layer is removed by adhesive tape to avoid possible light leakage from this high-index layer, leaving behind only CQDs filled in the microrings. Lastly, these CQD microrings are stripped off from the template via epoxy, creating well-defined CQD microrings (surface roughness of 4.2 nm) on a glass slide. By using this method, the authors fabricate CQD microrings with a diameter ranging from 1 μm to 14 μm (Q factor from 500 to 2500). Interestingly, due to competition between the carrier transfer from the CdS/ZnS shell to the core and the stimulated emission from the shell, the lasing wavelength can be tuned from red (Pth = 30–40 μJ cm−2) to orange, and even to green (Pth = 400 μJ cm−2), by simply changing the pump fluence (Fig. 11d).
In parallel, Chen's group develops another hybrid approach based on pattern-assisted stacking to construct CQD microcavity lasers (Fig. 6a and 11f).43 The microcavity holes are fabricated by EBL on a 370 nm-thick PMMA film (n = 1.5) that is spin-coated on a silica substrate (n = 1.45). The stacking of CQD nanoparticles in the holes is enabled by drop-casting CQD solution with a mixed solvent of hexane and octane (volume ratio = 5:1) on the patterned PMMA film. During the fast solvent evaporation process (∼10 s), CQDs inside the hole aggregate around the tilted PMMA sidewall, while those outside (but close to) the hole are forced into the hole by the interfacial capillary force. Consequently, CQD nanoparticles densely stack around the circumference of the hole to form a quasi-toroid structure (see the SEM image in Fig. 11f). Specifically, the thickness of the CQD solids against the PMMA sidewall equals that (∼370 nm) of the PMMA film, and it quickly decreases to be about 30 nm at the center of the hole. Note that, far away from the hole, a thin CQD layer with a thickness of only about 50 nm is also formed. This thin CQD layer nearly has no influence on the resonant modes in the CQD microcavity, and thus no additional lift-off or template-stripping process is needed. Based on this method, a large-scale fabrication of CQD microlasers (diameter ranging from 15 μm to 50 μm) also becomes possible, and on-chip lasing (Pth = 175 μJ cm−2 under picosecond pulses) is observed. Importantly, the authors show that the success rate of lasing samples is as high as 95%, and their lasing performances remain nearly unchanged after eight months.
Following this work, the same group also employed this method to fabricate CQD waveguide-ring resonators (WRRs, Fig. 11g).40 In these structures, CQDs compactly stack in ring trenches (width: 800 nm, and height: 310 nm) on a low-index MgF2 substrate (n = 1.38), and a lower lasing threshold (Pth = 82 μJ cm−2) is achieved for these CQD WRR microlasers due to better mode confinement. Since the CQD drop-casting process is the last step, there is no damage to the CQDs during the whole fabrication procedure. Similarly, David J. Norris’ group incorporated CQDs into plasmonic resonators on an ultrasmooth silver substrate via electrohydrodynamic printing or drop-casting as the last step (Fig. 11h), and lasing is also observed from these plasmonic resonators after pumping by a pulsed laser source.29
As can be seen from the above on-chip CQD microlasers,29,36,37,40,43,53,116 the introduction of the micro/nano fabrication techniques enables controllability in sizes, shapes, and positions of the CQD structures, which thus have important applications in integrated photonics to serve as coherent light sources. Moreover, relying on the accurate fabrication of these CQD structures, the fine tuning and manipulation of the lasing modes also become possible, such as by using coupled resonators.40,43,187,188
For many of those CQD microlasers based on isolated WGM resonators, they usually give rise to multimode lasing due to moderate resonator sizes. Although it is possible to achieve single-mode lasing by reducing the number of resonant modes in the CQD gain region via decreasing the resonator size, this method will increase lasing threshold and decrease lasing intensity due to reduced Q factor and gain material volume. By using the Vernier effect in coupled resonators, single-mode lasing can be achieved without these constraints. This is attributed to the fact that a resonant mode existing in the coupling system must satisfy constructive interference conditions in both resonators (Vernier effect). Hence, the free spectral range for the coupled system increases to be FSRc ≈ λ2/ngπ|D1 − D2|. Specifically, when diameters of the two coupled resonators are designed to be close to each other, the resulting FSRc can be greater than half of the gain range of the gain material, and thus single-mode lasing can be achieved. For coupled resonators achieved by the pattern-assisted staking approach (Fig. 17c and d),43 the Vernier effect is realized by fabricating two CQD microcavities (D1 = 20 μm and D2 = 26 μm) in close proximity to each other (gap distance <200 nm), which makes evanescent fields in individual resonators overlap with each other. The calculated FSRc for the coupling system is about 12 nm, which is much greater than half of the gain range (∼8 nm) of the constituting CQDs. Consequently, single-mode lasing (Pth = 147 μJ cm−2) is observed when the two coupled CQD microcavities are uniformly excited. Based on the same mechanism, single-mode lasing is also reported from two coupled CQD WRRs by the same group in a later work (Fig. 18a and b).40
Another interesting work demonstrated by Evan Lafalce et al. is to use coupled resonators to reestablish spectral purity of microlasers.187 For CQD microdisks fabricated by the pattern-assisted assembly method, there are, sometimes, defects at the edges of the microdisks, which can be from either aggregates in the initial CQD solution or an inhomogeneous drying of the CQD solution. Both types of defects can serve as local perturbations that introduce asymmetric back-scattering between the clockwise and the counter-clockwise WGMs in the CQD microdisks. Consequently, the degeneracy between the pair of modes is broken, and two sets of modes with similar free spectral range and linewidth values appear in the emission spectra of the CQD microdisks (Fig. 12a). Although being an inherent disorder in these CQD microdisks, the authors demonstrated that this intra-cavity mode splitting can be overcome through an inter-cavity evanescent coupling by fabricating a second CQD microdisk close to it (gap distance of about 400 nm). In the presence of gain/loss variation in the coupled CQD microdisks by shifting a pump beam, it is shown that the parasitic mode splitting can be driven into coalescence at an exceptional point of the non-Hermitian three-mode system, thus reestablishing the spectral purity (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  Mode manipulation in coupled CQD microlasers. (a) (top panels) Lasing spectra of a clean CQD microdisk and a defective CQD microdisk. The inset shows the Fourier transfer of the lasing spectrum as a function of the optical path length. (bottom panels) Optical images and emission directionalities of the corresponding CQD microdisks above pump thresholds. (b) Lasing spectra of two coupled CQD microdisks under various pump positions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 187, copyright 2019, the authors.) (c) Lasing spectrum of a CQD microdisk with a deep notch on its perimeter. Inset shows the SEM image of the notch. (d) Lasing spectra of two coupled CQD microdisks with deep notches. Three different pump positions are employed, as shown by the corresponding schematics. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 188, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.) 
Besides these uncontrollable defects, the same group also demonstrates the controllable fabrication of notches (depth: 1000 nm) on the perimeters of the CQD microdisks to actively suppress the mode splitting (Fig. 12c).188 This can be easily implemented by fabricating a complementary structure in the microdisk pattern. As revealed by the coupled-mode theory, a deep notch introduces a large gain-loss contrast between the clockwise and counter-clockwise WGMs in the microdisk. When this contrast is greater than the coupling coefficient between them, the two WGMs recover the same frequency. Note that a similar frequency splitting can still be observed if the notch depth is too shallow (<450 nm) and not enough gain-loss contrast is provided. Moreover, if two such CQD microdisks with deep notches couple with each other, an inversed mode-splitting phenomenon can be observed when the position of the pump beam is changed (Fig. 12d), as compared to the case without notches (Fig. 12b). Since the presence of defects in solution-processable gain materials is relatively common, these works provide insights into parasitic mode removal for CQD microlasers when pure lasing spectra are pursued.
In short, the room-temperature operation of on-chip CQD microlasers is already very common in recent days. However, all the aforementioned on-chip CQD microlasers are pumped by short pulses (femtosecond to nanosecond pulse duration), and electrical pumping CQD lasers are still lacking although they are more desirable in practical applications. Fortunately, thanks to advances in CQD synthesis and resonator optimization, a bright future for the CQD lasers is envisaged,55 and two milestones in the development of CQD lasers are the achievements of continuous-wave pumping CQD lasers39 and electrical pumping optical gains from CQDs.38


3.2.2 CQD optical amplifiers. 
The optical amplifiers are devices used to amplify an input light signal without the conversion to an electrical signal and achieve an output signal with a higher intensity, and thus they are widely used in optical communications and high-energy laser systems. Based on the amplification mechanism, the optical amplifiers can rely on stimulated emission or nonlinearity. Thus far, the reported on-chip CQD optical amplifiers are based on stimulated emission,29,40 which occurs in a CQD-activated layer after pumping by an external source. To achieve the signal amplification, it is important that the volume fraction of CQDs is high enough to provide a sufficiently high optical gain; otherwise, only the partial compensation of the propagation losses can be achieved.95,190–192
Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), surface waves supported on metal-dielectric interfaces, offer a potential to achieve a fast response and an ultra-compact footprint for nanophotonic devices. Hence, they have attracted intensive investigations in recent decades. Unfortunately, there exists a trade-off between their subwavelength field confinements and low propagation losses due to intrinsic Ohmic losses from metals. This fundamental constraint hinders the information transportation and processing in integrated circuits by using SPPs, and thus it is highly desirable to compensate those propagation losses by optical amplification. For the work demonstrated by Stephan J. P. Kress and coworkers,29 this is achieved by incorporating close-packed CQD solids into a plasmonic system (top panel of Fig. 13a). Specifically, tapered plasmonic waveguides (angle: 14°, and height: 400–600 nm) are fabricated by a template-stripping method, which gives rise to smooth silver surfaces possessing very low scattering losses. Left to the waveguide, a plasmonic resonator is designed for on-chip generation of plasmonic signals for amplification. Taking advantage of the solution processability of CQDs, a 150 nm-thick CQD film is conformally coated on the whole structure by drop-casting. The plasmonic amplification is demonstrated by pumping the whole structure by femtosecond pulses, and the plasmonic signals generated from the left resonator (that is, a spaser) will propagate along edges of the tapered waveguide and undergo amplification due to stimulated emission achieved by the excited CQDs (bottom panel of Fig. 13a). Compared to the case without optical amplification, the authors demonstrate a 103 enhancement of the signal intensity at the tip. Although it is claimed that there is a selective amplification of a single plasmonic mode at low pump fluences, the noises from spontaneous emission are also amplified by nearly the same magnitude (Fig. 13b). These amplified noises are unwanted in practical applications requiring pure signal amplification.
 Fig. 13  On-chip CQD optical amplifiers. (a) (top panel) SEM image of a tapered plasmonic waveguide. Left to the waveguide, a plasmonic resonator is constructed to generate on-chip plasmonic signals for amplification. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding plasmonic waveguide above pump threshold of the spaser. The whole system is uniformly coated with a drop-casted CQD film, and a large pump spot (diameter ∼60 μm) is used to excite the whole structure. (b) Signal spectra at the right mirror of the spaser and at the tip of the plasmonic waveguide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2017, the authors.) (c) (top panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD waveguide. A CQD WRR laser is fabricated in tangential coupling to the CQD waveguide for on-chip generation of lasing signals, and an unequal length for the two CQD waveguide parts is intentionally designed for the net gain coefficient measurement. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding CQD waveguide above the pump threshold of the CQD WRR laser. A large pump spot (diameter ∼80 μm) is used to excite the whole structure. (d) Signal spectra at two ends of the CQD waveguide. (e) Net gain coefficients of the CQD waveguide under different pump fluences. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Very recently, such a low-noise amplification was demonstrated by Chen's group in dielectric CQD waveguides (Fig. 13c).40 The CQD waveguides (and CQD gratings at two ends of them) are fabricated using the pattern-assisted stacking approach (Fig. 6a). Similarly, a CQD WRR laser (cross-section of 310 × 800 nm) is fabricated in tangential coupling to the CQD waveguide (cross-section of 310 × 290 nm) to generate on-chip lasing signals for amplification. When the whole structure is pumped by a picosecond beam, on-chip lasing generated from the CQD WRR equally couples to the left and right parts of CQD waveguide for propagation and amplification. Due to the intentionally designed unequal length of the two parts (LL = 15 μm and LR = 40 μm), the lasing signal propagating in the right part undergoes a larger amplification, and a brighter scattering spot can be observed (intensity ratio IL:IR = 1:1.8) from the right CQD grating. In this configuration, the net gain coefficient of the CQD waveguide can be deduced to be g(λ) = ln[IR(λ)/IL(λ)]/(LR − LL), based on which the authors reveal a net gain coefficient greater than 600 cm−1 for the CQD waveguide (Fig. 13e). More importantly, the measured spectra of the lasing signals scattered from the two CQD gratings exhibit a negligible spontaneous emission noise, although the lasing signals are greatly amplified (Fig. 13d). This low-noise amplification is attributed to a distinct coupling efficiency for the lasing signals and the spontaneous emission. The lasing signals from the CQD WRR laser can be easily coupled to the nearby CQD waveguide and propagate along it, while the majority of the omnidirectional spontaneous emission can only radiate to free space because of a small lateral dimension of the CQD waveguide. This also prevents the occurrence of ASE along the CQD waveguide for a pure signal amplification.


3.2.3 CQD photodetectors. 
A photodetector converts incident photons into electrical signals, thus enabling light detection in photonic and optoelectronic systems in the form of photoconductor, photodiode, or phototransistor.4,61 Due to the lack of widely tunable active materials, present-day commercially available photodetectors are made of various materials to achieve light detection in different spectral ranges.27 In the visible regime, photodetectors are well established by the cheap and mature silicon technology. In the infrared regime, there are also high-performance semiconductors for choices, such as InGaAs for short-wave infrared (1–2.5 μm), InSb for mid-wave infrared (3–5 μm), and HgCdTe for both mid- and long-wave infrared (8–12 μm).5 The technologies behind the infrared photodetectors are also mature, and these infrared photodetectors present outstanding performances like high quantum efficiency, low dark current, and fast response time. However, they suffer from a very high cost that is several orders of magnitude greater than silicon photodetectors, and they are also limited to the low-temperature operation.193 Consequently, alternative materials with low cost, wide spectral tunability, and room-temperature operation are desperately needed, and CQDs composed of lead and mercury chalcogenides are one of the competitive candidates.23,56,57,194–196
After absorbing a photon, interband or intraband transitions happen in the CQD-active layer, which enables the generation and transportation of charges for desired electrical signals under an appropriate bias. Generally, CQD solids are insulating and a “solid-state ligand exchange” step must be conducted to increase the conductivity of the solids, in which dried CQD solids with long ligands are exposed to a solution containing short ligands.199 Due to the great success of CQD photodetectors, there are already a large number of review papers elsewhere.4,5,27,193,200 Here, we only introduce no-chip CQD photodetectors that can be integrated in nanophotonic circuits.
For example, a very recent work demonstrated the usage of PbS CQDs to construct on-chip photodetectors with nanoscale footprints (Fig. 14a).42 This is achieved by integrating a 320 nm-diameter PbS nanodisk at the center of a plasmonic bull's eye structure, which simultaneously offers wavelength selectivity and enhanced sensitivity by concentrating light into its central area. Because of the near-infrared operation wavelength, gold is chosen as the plasmonic material, which also provides an effective ohmic contact with the PbS CQDs. To fabricate the structure, four gold triangles placed about 100 nm apart from each other are first fabricated by successive EBL, gold evaporation (thickness of 50 nm), and lift-off processes. The left and right triangles also serve as contacts for electrical bias. Later, the same procedures are repeated to fabricate the gold arcs (thickness of 50 nm). Lastly, a nanoscale hole determining the position of the CQD nanodisk is fabricated on a PMMA film spin-coated above the preceding structure. PbS CQDs are selectively placed at the center of the bull's eye structure by spin-casting a CQD solution on the PMMA template and then conducting a lift-off process. In order to enhance the charge transport by shortening the dot-to-dot spacing, a ligand exchange from oleic acid to butylamine is conducted for the PbS solution, and the butylamine ligands are further removed using methanol after the placement of the PbS nanodisk. By varying the period of the bull's eye structure, the spectral sensitivity of this on-chip CQD photodetector can be tuned to be different wavelengths, and a sixfold performance improvement as compared to a reference can be achieved (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  On-chip CQD photodetectors. (a) SEM image of a CQD photodetector composed of a plasmonic bull's eye structure and a PbS nanodisk selectively placed at the center of the structure. Inset shows details of the PbS nanodisk. (b) Wavelength-dependent responsivity of two CQD photodetectors with different periods. Results from two reference structures are also presented for comparison. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2015 CIOMP.) (c) Schematic of a CQD photodetector integrated with the silicon-based platform. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 197, copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH.) (d) Schematic of a CQD photodetector inserted in a silicon waveguide. Inset shows the cross section of the MIM waveguide incorporated with HgTe CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 198, copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.) 
Very recently, there have also been reports that demonstrate CQD photodetectors on mature CMOS-compatible platforms like silicon.197,198,201 Due to intrinsic band gap constraints, silicon cannot absorb light at wavelengths longer than about 1100 nm.5 To overcome this limitation, Sargent's group designed a photovoltage field-effect transistor, which uses silicon for charge transport but is also highly sensitive to infrared light due to the usage of PbS CQDs as the absorber (Fig. 14c).197 Triggered by a photovoltage generated at the silicon–CQDs interface, the on-chip CQD photodetectors show a high-gain and fast response, competitive with state-of-the-art epitaxial semiconductors. Furthermore, Bingqing Zhu et al. inserted a CQD photodetector into a silicon waveguide to achieve on-chip infrared light detection (Fig. 14d).198 This CQD photodetector is constructed out of a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) waveguide that is filled with HgTe CQDs as the light absorber. Due to the strongly confined MIM mode, these on-chip CQD photodetectors not only show a compact footprint but also possess an improved detection efficiency. These reports show that CQDs can be effectively integrated with mature semiconductor platforms, further paving the way for applications of CQD photodetectors in PICs.

4. CQD nanophotonic circuits
In the above two sections, we introduced individual passive and active CQD nanophotonic devices that are capable of on-chip integration. By combining these components in a single chip, one can construct PICs, which have long been sought after in integrated photonics due to reliability, miniaturization, robustness, low energy consumption, and scalability as compared to bulk optics. A fully functional PIC is generally composed of four parts, that is, components for light generation, propagation, manipulation, and detection, all of which have already been reported by CQDs. However, although there is a proposal dating back to ten years ago about using CQD nanocomposites for nanophotonic circuits,202 few works have been reported in this research field until recently using CQD solids. Thus far, most of the CQD nanophotonic circuits are still limited to the simple demonstration of on-chip coupling between microlasers and waveguides.31,37,41,43,116,141,202 Very recently, CQD nanophotonic circuits incorporated with more functional components have also been demonstrated,40,41 but a fully functional PIC with photodetectors is still missing.
4.1 Integration of CQD microlasers and waveguides
Due to the intrinsic processing capabilities of CQD nanocomposites, basic CQD components like waveguide and microring resonator were fabricated more than ten years ago using high-precision EBL or optical lithography.95,142 Under such a background, achieving nanophotonic circuits by using CQD nanocomponents is proposed.202 However, the integration scheme outlined in this early work is still very immature. Owing to a low CQD-doping density in the nanocomposites, a high CQD volume fraction to achieve stimulated emission is hard to fulfil. This issue leads to difficulties in the construction of microlasers for nanophotonic circuits. Besides, these works only demonstrate the possibility to fabricate CQD nanostructures out of nanocomposites, and the optical performances of important structures, such as resonators and resonator-waveguide coupling structures (Fig. 15a),142,202 still remain largely unknown. Hence, only a very limited development of nanophotonic circuits using CQD nanocomposites was achieved in the following years, and this situation was changed with the application of CQD solids in nanophotonic devices.
 Fig. 15  Integration of CQD microlasers and waveguides lack of full controllability. (a) SEM image of a waveguide-integrated ring resonator made of CQDs–SU8 nanocomposites. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 202, copyright 2009 SPIE.) (b) (left panel) Optical microscope image of a CQD microplate laser connected to a CQD stripe waveguide. The green circle indicates the position and size of the pump beam. (right panel) Optical image of the corresponding structure above the pump threshold of the CQD microplate laser. Besides the bright emission from the CQD microplate laser, obvious scattering can also be observed at a defect on the CQD waveguide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (c) PL and absorption spectra of the constituting small-diameter CQDs. The PL wavelength range of the constituting large-diameter CQDs is highlighted by the red area, in which the small-diameter CQDs have negligible absorption. (d) (left panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD microplate laser made of large-diameter CQDs and a CQD waveguide made of small-diameter CQDs. (middle panel) Optical image of the corresponding structure above the pump threshold of the CQD microplate laser. (right panel) Lasing spectra at different positions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2020 Optical Society of America.) 
After the successful demonstration of on-chip CQD microplate lasers (Fig. 9d),31 Chen's group also conducts proof-of-principle experiments to verify that their in-plane lasing can be easily integrated with CQD waveguides. Due to the large number of CQD microplates obtained in a single fabrication, there are also stripe-like microplates, which, accidentally, are connected to microplate lasers (Fig. 15b). In this coupling structure, the CQD microplate laser (∼40 × 40 μm2) has a narrow lug, which is connected to one facet of the CQD strip (width: 10 μm, length: 150 μm) serving as the waveguide. When only the CQD microplate is pumped, the microplate still preserves a sufficiently high Q factor to sustain lasing, and the same lasing peaks are measured from the microplate laser and a defect on the waveguide, confirming the coupling between them. Although this work is of interest to show the integration capabilities of CQD microplate lasers, the coupling systems possess obvious drawbacks. Importantly, the shapes, sizes, and positions for both the on-chip microlasers and waveguides are uncontrollable. Besides, the CQD waveguides show considerable absorption losses at the lasing wavelengths of the CQD microplate lasers composed of the same CQDs.
These issues are partially solved by the same group in a later work (Fig. 15c and d),41 where the CQD waveguides (cross-section of 600 × 370 nm2) are deterministically fabricated by the pattern-assisted stacking approach. Here, CQDs (λPL = 530 nm) with small diameters, as compared to the CQDs (λPL = 645 nm) utilized to fabricate CQD microplate lasers, are filled in trench patterns to form waveguides. Consequently, the CQD waveguides show negligible absorption losses at the lasing wavelengths of the CQD microplate lasers (Fig. 15c). To enable the integration between a CQD microplate laser and a CQD waveguide individually fabricated on different chips, Hui Liu et al. use a high-precision transfer-printing approach to place the microplate laser above the waveguide. This process nearly has no influence on the performances of the CQD microplate laser. In this configuration, lasing from the CQD microplate can be evanescently coupled to the underlying low-loss CQD waveguide for on-chip routing. This method of using different CQDs to construct passive and active CQD nanophotonic devices is promising to demonstrate the all-CQD PICs.
Note that, although it is endowed with advantages of simplicity and low cost, the lasing properties of the CQD microplate lasers are still difficult to control due to their random crack-enclosed shapes. Hence, a complete control over on-chip microlasers and waveguides is later explored by fabricating both structures using micro/nanofabrication techniques. After the successful demonstration of CQD PhC band-edge lasers built on a SiN backbone,111 Heonsu Jeon's group further achieves their integration with planar waveguides made of the same SiN layer (Fig. 16a and b).141 The square-lattice PhCs are fabricated on a 140 nm-thick SiN layer by successive EBL and RIE, and the surrounding unetched SiN layer serves as the planar waveguide. A selective coverage of CQDs above the PhC structure is achieved by a lift-off process after spin-coating CQDs above the whole structure. In these PhCs, the X or M band-edge modes are designed to overlap with the emission wavelengths (∼615 nm) of the CQDs, enabling a strong interaction between resonant modes with zero group velocities and gain materials for lasing action. Besides, these resonant modes exist below the light line, and hence they give rise to in-plane lasing emission with well-defined directions (X or M direction) under the excitation of femtosecond pulses. This simple coupling structure has several advantages. Firstly, due to the limited number of band-edge modes in the gain range of the CQDs, single-mode on-chip lasing can be easily achieved. Secondly, the employed SiN platform is compatible with mature CMOS techniques, which are important for future developments. Thirdly, the PhCs and planar waveguides share the same coplanar layer, so a high coupling efficiency (∼95% by simulation) between them is expected. However, these planar waveguides without lateral confinements largely limit the compactness of PICs and may cause cross-talk problems in practical information transportation.
 Fig. 16  Integration of CQD microlasers and waveguides in SiN platforms. (a) Schematic of a CQD PhC microlaser integrated with a coplanar slab waveguide. (b) Optical microscope image of the coupling structure shown in (a). The central octagon is the square-lattice PhC incorporated with CQDs, while the eight rectangles are gratings for light outcoupling. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, copyright 2017 Optical Society of America.) (c) Schematic of the fabrication procedures for SiN waveguide-integrated CQD microdisk lasers. (d) (top panel) Optical microscope image of an array of CQD microdisk lasers integrated with SiN waveguides. (middle panel) SEM image of a CQD microdisk laser integrated with a SiN waveguide. (bottom panel) SEM image of the cross-section for a CQD microdisk and its underlying SiN waveguide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.) (e) SEM image of a 1st DFB CQD microlaser integrated with stripe waveguides at its two ends (not shown here). Inset shows the cross-section of the strip waveguide composed of the SiN/CQDs/SiN stack. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) 
Using the same SiN platform, Dries Van Thourhout's group also reports important progress regarding the on-chip integration of CQD microlasers and SiN waveguides with lateral confinements (Fig. 16c and d).37 The CQDs are incorporated in the SiN platform by means of a SiN/CQDs/SiN (100 nm/55 nm/100 nm) sandwich stack (Fig. 5a), which enables the fabrication of on-chip CQD microdisk lasers as we introduced before. To realize the integration between these CQD microdisk lasers and the SiN waveguides, a complicated fabrication and alignment method is adopted (Fig. 16c). At first, SiN stripe waveguides (cross-section of 900 × 125 nm2) are defined from a SiN layer (by PECVD) using an optimized contact lithography and RIE. Then, these SiN waveguides are planarized by depositing a thick SiO2 layer (by PECVD) on top of them, which is flattened until reaching the desired thickness (300 nm) by an optimized chemical mechanical planarization process. At last, the deposited SiN/CQDs/SiN sandwich stack (by PECVD) is patterned by an optimized RIE to form microdisks (typical diameter: 7 μm) above the SiN waveguides, with a gap distance determined by the planarized SiO2 layer. In this coupling structure, the cross-section of the SiN waveguide is carefully chosen to support only the fundamental TE and TM modes at the lasing wavelength (∼625 nm). The waveguide width, gap distance, and lateral offset of the microdisk are all accurately controlled to achieve a critical coupling between the CQD microdisk laser and the SiN waveguide (Fig. 16d). This work creates a versatile technology to achieve the hybrid integration between CQDs and the mature SiN platform,203 and these waveguide-integrated CQD microdisk lasers also possess very low thresholds (Pth = 27 μJ cm−2 under picosecond pulses). Later, the same group also reported the integration between a 1st DFB microlaser and a stripe waveguide using the same SiN/CQDs/SiN stack (Fig. 16e).116
Besides these dielectric waveguides, plasmonic waveguides can also be integrated with on-chip CQD microlasers.29,43 These dielectric–metal hybrid structures combine both advantages of small dielectric lasers and plasmonic waveguides, enabling low-threshold, narrow-linewidth, and deep-subwavelength coherent output sources.65,204,205 Nevertheless, owing to complexities originating from the employment of different materials (i.e., dielectrics and metals), these hybrid structures are generally fabricated by multistep micro/nanofabrication techniques in previous reports, in which fabrication damage to the gain materials remains a big concern. In the work demonstrated by Chen's group (Fig. 17),43 Kexiu and coworkers propose a high-resolution dark-field optical imaging technique (position uncertainty about 20 nm), which, in combination with the high-precision EBL, enables the fabrication of CQD microcavity lasers accurately aligned with plasmonic waveguides, and no fabrication damage is imposed to the CQDs.
Specifically, silver nanowires (diameter of 100 nm) serving as the plasmonic waveguides are drop-casted on a silica substrate, which is later covered by a 370 nm-thick e-beam resist (PMMA). Subsequently, alignment marks (+) distributed in a square array (period of 100 μm) are fabricated on the resist via a first-step EBL. By the dark-field optical imaging technique, positions of the nanowires with respect to the alignment marks can be accurately determined via the centroid and Gaussian fit methods, and the position uncertainty is only about 20 nm. Based on this position information, microholes are deterministically fabricated beside the nanowires by a second-step EBL. At last, CQDs are uniformly stacked in the microholes by the aforementioned pattern-assisted stacking approach (Fig. 6a), creating CQD microcavity–silver nanowire hybrid structures. This configurable integration method is highly flexible and controllable, which offers the possibility to place multiple nanostructures in parallel with a very high accuracy. In this work, Chen's group demonstrates the tangential, radial, and complex coupling between CQD microcavity lasers and plasmonic waveguides, whereby deep-subwavelength (mode area of 0.008λ2) coherent output sources (multimode, one-color single mode, or two-color single mode) are achieved (Fig. 17a–d).
 Fig. 17  Configurable integration of CQD microcavity lasers and plasmonic waveguides. (a) (top panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD microcavity laser in tangential coupling to a silver nanowire. Inset shows the SEM image of the cross-section for the coupling structure at the tangency point. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding structure above the pump threshold of the CQD microcavity laser. Inset shows the lasing spectra at different positions. (b) Radial and tangential coupling between CQD microcavity lasers and silver nanowires. (c) Tangential coupling between two coupled CQD microcavity lasers and a silver nanowire. The two coupled CQD microcavities give out single-mode lasing due to the Vernier effect. (d) Tangential coupling between two sets of coupled CQD microcavities and a silver nanowire. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.) 
4.2 Integration of CQD microlasers and functional devices
In the last section, we introduced the integration of on-chip CQD microlasers and waveguides, which, although of fundamental importance to PICs, is still far from the goal of a fully functional PIC. An important reason is the limited scalability of the integration methods, such as complexity,37,43 compatibility,37,43,116 uncontrollability,31,41 and short mode propagation distance.29,31,43 Specifically, the complexity and compatibility are attributed to the fact that light sources and other nanophotonic devices are generally made of different materials, which considerably increase the fabrication and integration difficulties when various nanostructures are involved. Taking the CQD-embedded SiN platform as an example,37 the PECVD is needed to incorporate CQDs between two SiN layers, and very complicated fabrication procedures, such as film deposition, optical lithography, RIE, and chemical mechanical planarization, are required to place the CQD microdisk lasers above the SiN waveguides. Moreover, these multistep fabrications lead to profound damage to the CQDs, whose PL intensity is reduced by 80% after the annealing in the PECVD process. The same complexity issue also exists for the aforementioned configurable integration of dielectric CQD microcavity lasers and plasmonic waveguides,43 for which the time-consuming dark-field optical imaging technique and two-step EBL processes are required. These multistep fabrications inevitably introduce alignment errors among different nanostructures, especially when a large number of nanophotonic devices are integrated. Hence, although many on-chip CQD microlasers have been demonstrated in recent years, the majority of the reports only achieve the integration between CQD microlasers and waveguides, and their integration with functional devices is still a challenge.
A very interesting trial is reported by Chen's group to construct both passive and active nanophotonic devices in PICs using the same material of CQDs (Fig. 18a–c).40 To achieve this goal, Kexiu and et al. firstly fabricate trench patterns with various shapes and functionalities on a PMMA film via a single-step EBL. Then, CQD building blocks serving as both high-gain and high-index media are uniformly stacked in the trenches to form CQD nanostructures, which include on-chip microlasers and other nanophotonic devices (i.e., the aforementioned “pattern-assisted staking approach”, Fig. 6a). Relying on the built-in pattern-generating abilities of the EBL system, besides the integration of multimode CQD WRR lasers and CQD waveguides, individual CQD functional devices, including bending waveguide (Fig. 18a), Y-splitter (Fig. 18b), and MZ interferometer (Fig. 18b), are integrated with single-mode microlasers achieved by coupled CQD WRRs. Furthermore, a PIC composed of more than ten CQD-based nanophotonic devices, including WRR laser, low-noise amplifier, bending waveguide, Y-splitter, MZ interferometer, and grating, is also achieved (Fig. 18c). In this work, due to the employment of the same material of CQDs, the fabrication and integration procedures of different nanophotonic devices are simplified to a single-step EBL, and the alignment errors among them are only limited by the high-precision EBL system (<5 nm). Besides, thanks to the combination of top-down and bottom-up fabrications, CQDs remain intact after the whole fabrication procedures. Moreover, this method offers the appealing advantages of large-area fabrication. The authors verify that the drop-casting technique, which enables the uniform stack of CQDs in the trench patterns, gives rise to uniform CQD layers as large as 1 cm2 with a thickness variation as small as 17%.
 Fig. 18  Integration of CQD microlasers and functional devices. (a) Integration between a single-mode CQD microlaser and a CQD bending waveguide. The single-mode microlaser is achieved by coupling two CQD WRRs using the Vernier effect. (top-left panel) Dark-field optical image of the coupling structure. (bottom-left panel) Optical image of the corresponding coupling structure above the pump threshold of the single-mode microlaser. (right panel) Lasing spectra at different positions. (b) Integration between a single-mode CQD microlaser and (top panels) a CQD Y-splitter or (bottom panels) a CQD MZ interferometer. (c) A nanophotonic circuit composed of more than ten CQD-based nanophotonic devices, including WRR microlaser, low-noise optical amplifier, bending waveguide, Y-splitter, MZ interferometer, and gratings. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) A CQD nanophotonic circuit operating above the central PL wavelength of the constituting CQDs via an external source. The excitation positions for the left and right cases are gratings A and C, respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2020 Optical Society of America.) 
However, one drawback of the above all-CQD PICs is that the passive components show nonnegligible absorption losses at the lasing wavelengths of the microlasers made of the same CQDs (Fig. 15c). A possible solution provided by the same group is to pump the passive components, which can not only compensate the absorption losses but also achieve a low-noise amplification of the lasing signals (see optical amplifier section for details). Another solution, demonstrated by this group in a later work,41 is to operate the PICs at a wavelength far away from the central PL wavelength of the constituting CQDs. For demonstration, Hui et al. use a long-wavelength external source (λ = 800 nm) to excite a grating to inject energy to the PIC (λPL = 645 nm for the constituting CQDs), where distinct routing paths of the lasing signals can be observed due to an opposite mode circulation direction in the ring resonators (Fig. 18d). On the other hand, they also demonstrate the possibility to integrate on-chip CQD microlasers made of large-diameter CQDs (λPL = 645 nm) to nanophotonic devices made of small-diameter CQDs (λPL = 530 nm), and the loss problem can also be circumvented in such an all-CQD PIC (Fig. 15d).
5. Summary and perspectives
Endowed with high refractive indices, large optical gains, size-tunable emission (or absorption), and convenient solution processabilities, CQDs are competitive candidates to build nanophotonic devices and circuits. The past decade has witnessed a rapid and significant advance in material synthesis and device application of CQDs. Due to the progress in material synthesis, high-performance CQDs give rise to new possibilities in practical applications. For instance, the suppressed nonradiative Auger recombination enables the continuous-wave pumping lasing (also electrical pumping optical gains),38,39 the improved stability permits device operations in harsh environments, and the extended spectral coverage even empowers the long-wave infrared photodetection. On the other hand, high-precision micro/nanofabrication techniques have been introduced to deterministically fabricate CQD nanophotonic devices, whose shapes, sizes, and positions can be simultaneously controlled. This controllability also leads to the successful integration of many CQD nanophotonic devices with different functionalities in a single chip to form the nanophotonic circuits. By considering these two aspects, we firstly introduced the synthesis and optical properties of CQDs, and then we summarized the recent progress in on-chip passive and active CQD nanophotonic devices. At last, we reviewed the recent development of nanophotonic circuits composed of these passive and active CQD nanophotonic devices. All these advances clearly demonstrate a promising future for CQD applications in hybrid or even all-CQD nanophotonic circuits.
However, there is still plenty of room for improvement of these CQD nanostructures. Firstly, although there are already continuous-wave pumping CQD lasers39 and electrical pumping optical gains from CQDs,38 the on-chip CQD microlasers still heavily rely on the excitation by short pulses. The same issue also exists for other appealing solution-processable materials such as organic semiconductors and perovskites.34,206,207 Expectedly, electrical pumping CQD lasing will remain a hot topic in upcoming days, such as the very recent trial using LED-like structures.174 Secondly, despite being known to have substantial nonlinear optical properties,208,209 there are still few reports on the nonlinear applications of CQDs, which hinder the construction of important optical components like switches and modulators. In this sense, it is promising that the reported CQD MZ interferometers can be further constructed to be MZ modulators if necessary nonlinear properties of CQDs are explored. Thirdly, the fascinating scheme to construct an all-CQD PIC is limited by absorption losses of CQDs at the lasing wavelengths of microlasers made of the same CQDs. A reliable solution comes from the construction of passive and active optical components using CQDs with different sizes. To overcome the difficulties in selectively filling CQDs in different nanostructures, the ink-jet printing technique may provide an effective way to achieve such a goal.35,180,210 Up to now, the majority of the reported works only demonstrate a very basic integration of CQD microlasers and waveguides, which is still far from the final goal of a fully functional PIC. Although several recent works tried to integrate more functional devices to the CQD-based nanophotonic circuits, these CQD nanophotonic circuits are still immature. More efforts should be made on CQD synthesis, device design and fabrication as well as integration technology to achieve functional CQD PICs with practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Z180015), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91850103, 61922002 and 11674014), and the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFA0704401, 2017YFF0206103, and 2016YFA0203500).
References

          B. G. Yacobi, Semiconductor Materials: An Introduction to Basic Principles, Springer Science & Business Media,  2003 Search PubMed .
A. I. Ekimov and A. A. Onushchenko, Quantum size effect in three-dimensional microscopic semiconductor crystals, Sov. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. Lett., 1981, 34, 345 Search PubMed .
Y.-S. Park, J. Roh, B. T. Diroll, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Colloidal quantum dot lasers, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 1–20 Search PubMed .
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Building devices from colloidal quantum dots, Science, 2016, 353, aac5523 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, M. K. Choi, D.-H. Kim and T. Hyeon, Designed Assembly and Integration of Colloidal Nanocrystals for Device Applications, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1176–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, Y.-S. Park, J. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. Klimov, Spectroscopic and Device Aspects of Nanocrystal Quantum Dots, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10513–10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Smith, C. H. Lin, S. Yu and V. V. Tsukruk, Composite Structures with Emissive Quantum Dots for Light Enhancement, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 1801072 Search PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Prospects of Colloidal Nanocrystals for Electronic and Optoelectronic Applications, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, Synthesis and characterization of nearly monodisperse CdE (E = sulfur, selenium, tellurium) semiconductor nanocrystallites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu and X. Peng, Formation of High-Quality CdS and Other II–VI Semiconductor Nanocrystals in Noncoordinating Solvents: Tunable Reactivity of Monomers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2368–2371 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Micic, C. J. Curtis, K. M. Jones, J. R. Sprague and A. J. Nozik, Synthesis and Characterization of InP Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4966–4969 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, D. Li and F. Wang, InP Quantum Dots: Synthesis and Lighting Applications, Small, 2020, 16, 2002454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Colloidal PbS Nanocrystals with Size-Tunable Near-Infrared Emission: Observation of Post-Synthesis Self-Narrowing of the Particle Size Distribution, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Synthesis and Characterization of Strongly Luminescing ZnS-Capped CdSe Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 468–471 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Brichkin and V. F. Razumov, Colloidal quantum dots: synthesis, properties and applications, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2016, 85, 1297–1312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pu, F. Cai, D. Wang, J.-X. Wang and J.-F. Chen, Colloidal Synthesis of Semiconductor Quantum Dots toward Large- Scale Production: A Review, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 1790–1802 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, M. Yang and Y. Duan, Chemistry, Biology, and Medicine of Fluorescent Nanomaterials and Related Systems: New Insights into Biosensing, Bioimaging, Genomics, Diagnostics, and Therapy, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6130–6178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, L. Yang, J. A. Petros, F. F. Marshall, J. W. Simons and S. Nie, In vivo molecular and cellular imaging with quantum dots, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2005, 16, 63–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, J. Huang, H. Zhu, Y. Li, J.-X. Tang and Y. Jiang, Surface Ligand Engineering for Near-Unity Quantum Yield Inorganic Halide Perovskite QDs and High-Performance QLEDs, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6099–6107 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Hanifi, N. D. Bronstein, B. A. Koscher, Z. Nett, J. K. Swabeck, K. Takano, A. M. Schwartzberg, L. Maserati, K. Vandewal, Y. van de Burgt, A. Salleo and A. P. Alivisatos, Redefining near-unity luminescence in quantum dots with photothermal threshold quantum yield, Science, 2019, 363, 1199–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, S. Jia, Y. Gu and J. Chen, Brightening and Guiding Single-Photon Emission by Plasmonic Waveguide–Slit Structures on a Metallic Substrate, Laser Photonics Rev., 2019, 13, 1900025 CrossRef CAS .
S. Morozov, E. L. Pensa, A. H. Khan, A. Polovitsyn, E. Cortés, S. A. Maier, S. Vezzoli, I. Moreels and R. Sapienza, Electrical control of single-photon emission in highly charged individual colloidal quantum dots, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb1821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Goubet, A. Jagtap, C. Livache, B. Martinez, H. Portalès, X. Z. Xu, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret and E. Lhuillier, Terahertz HgTe Nanocrystals: Beyond Confinement, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5033–5036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lin, H. Kan, W. Zheng and F. Huang, Ligand Tailoring Oxide Colloidal Quantum Dots for Silicon-Integrated Ultraviolet Photodiode, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1901238 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, M. M. Ackerman, M. Chen and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Dual-band infrared imaging using stacked colloidal quantum dot photodiodes, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, K.-H. Kim, S. Kim, S.-M. Choi, H. Jang, H.-K. Seo, H. Lee, D.-Y. Chung and E. Jang, Efficient and stable blue quantum dot light-emitting diode, Nature, 2020, 586, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Saran and R. J. Curry, Lead sulphide nanocrystal photodetector technologies, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nannen, J. Frohleiks and S. Gellner, Light-Emitting Electrochemical Cells Based on Color-Tunable Inorganic Colloidal Quantum Dots, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907349 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. P. Kress, J. Cui, P. Rohner, D. K. Kim, F. V. Antolinez, K.-A. Zaininger, S. V. Jayanti, P. Richner, K. M. McPeak, D. Poulikakos and D. J. Norris, A customizable class of colloidal-quantum-dot spasers and plasmonic amplifiers, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700688 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, M. Pelton, I. Fedin, D. V. Talapin and E. Waks, A room temperature continuous-wave nanolaser using colloidal quantum wells, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 143 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Rong, C. Sun, K. Shi, Q. Gong and J. Chen, Room-Temperature Planar Lasers Based on Water-Dripping Microplates of Colloidal Quantum Dots, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1776–1784 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lin, E. Lafalce, J. Jung, M. J. Smith, S. T. Malak, S. Aryal, Y. J. Yoon, Y. Zhai, Z. Lin, Z. V. Vardeny and V. V. Tsukruk, Core/Alloyed-Shell Quantum Dot Robust Solid Films with High Optical Gains, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 647–658 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Fang, R. Ding, S.-Y. Lu, Y.-D. Yang, Q.-D. Chen, J. Feng, Y.-Z. Huang and H.-B. Sun, Whispering-gallery mode lasing from patterned molecular single-crystalline microcavity array, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 281–288 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, G. Xing, Q. Song and S. Xiao, Micro- and Nanostructured Lead Halide Perovskites: From Materials to Integrations and Devices, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000306 Search PubMed .
S. J. P. Kress, P. Richner, S. V. Jayanti, P. Galliker, D. K. Kim, D. Poulikakos and D. J. Norris, Near-Field Light Design with Colloidal Quantum Dots for Photonics and Plasmonics, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5827–5833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. le Feber, F. Prins, E. De Leo, F. T. Rabouw and D. J. Norris, Colloidal-Quantum-Dot Ring Lasers with Active Color Control, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1028–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xie, T. Stöferle, G. Rainò, T. Aubert, S. Bisschop, Y. Zhu, R. F. Mahrt, P. Geiregat, E. Brainis, Z. Hens and D. Van, Thourhout, On-Chip Integrated Quantum-Dot-Silicon-Nitride Microdisk Lasers, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604866 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lim, Y.-S. Park and V. I. Klimov, Optical gain in colloidal quantum dots achieved with direct-current electrical pumping, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fan, O. Voznyy, R. P. Sabatini, K. T. Bicanic, M. M. Adachi, J. R. McBride, K. R. Reid, Y.-S. Park, X. Li, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Saravanapavanantham, M. Liu, M. Korkusinski, P. Hawrylak, V. I. Klimov, S. J. Rosenthal, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Continuous-wave lasing in colloidal quantum dot solids enabled by facet-selective epitaxy, Nature, 2017, 544, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rong, H. Liu, K. Shi and J. Chen, Pattern-assisted stacking colloidal quantum dots for photonic integrated circuits, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13885–13893 RSC .
H. Liu, K. Rong, K. Rong, Z. Li, J. Chen, J. Chen, J. Chen, J. Chen, J. Chen and J. Chen, Experimental demonstration of nanophotonic devices and circuits with colloidal quantum dot waveguides, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 23091–23104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Diedenhofen, D. Kufer, T. Lasanta and G. Konstantatos, Integrated colloidal quantum dot photodetectors with color-tunable plasmonic nanofocusing lenses, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e234 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rong, F. Gan, K. Shi, S. Chu and J. Chen, Configurable Integration of On-Chip Quantum Dot Lasers and Subwavelength Plasmonic Waveguides, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706546 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, V. D. Ta, K. S. Leck, B. H. Tan, Z. Wang, T. He, C. D. Ohl, H. V. Demir and H. Sun, Robust Whispering-Gallery-Mode Microbubble Lasers from Colloidal Quantum Dots, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2640–2646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gordillo, I. Suárez, R. Abargues, P. Rodríguez-Cantó, S. Albert and J. P. Martínez-Pastor, Polymer/QDs Nanocomposites for Waveguiding Applications, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, e960201 Search PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Synthesis and Characterization of Monodisperse Nanocrystals and Close-Packed Nanocrystal Assemblies, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Charge transport in strongly coupled quantum dot solids, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1013–1026 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Self-Organization of CdSe Nanocrystallites into Three-Dimensional Quantum Dot Superlattices, Science, 1995, 270, 1335–1338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, M. Chen, M. M. Ackerman, C. Melnychuk and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Direct Imprinting of Quasi-3D Nanophotonic Structures into Colloidal Quantum-Dot Devices, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jasieniak, J. Pacifico, R. Signorini, A. Chiasera, M. Ferrari, A. Martucci and P. Mulvaney, Luminescence and Amplified Stimulated Emission in CdSe-ZnS-Nanocrystal-Doped TiO2 and ZrO2 Waveguides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1654–1662 CrossRef CAS .
I. Suárez, H. Gordillo, R. Abargues, S. Albert and J. Martínez-Pastor, Photoluminescence waveguiding in CdSe and CdTe QDs-PMMA nanocomposite films, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 435202 CrossRef .
W. Xie, Y. Zhu, T. Aubert, S. Verstuyft, Z. Hens and D. Van, Thourhout, Low-loss silicon nitride waveguide hybridly integrated with colloidal quantum dots, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 12152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lin, Q. Zeng, E. Lafalce, M. J. Smith, S. T. Malak, J. Jung, Y. J. Yoon, Z. Lin, Z. V. Vardeny and V. V. Tsukruk, Large-Scale Robust Quantum Dot Microdisk Lasers with Controlled High Quality Cavity Modes, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700011 CrossRef .
J. Chen, W. Du, J. Shi, M. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, Perovskite quantum dot lasers, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 170–183 CrossRef CAS .
P. Geiregat, D. Van Thourhout and Z. Hens, A bright future for colloidal quantum dot lasers, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11, 1–8 CrossRef .
D. C. Oertel, M. G. Bawendi, A. C. Arango and V. Bulović, Photodetectors based on treated CdSe quantum-dot films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 213505 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Ultrasensitive solution-cast quantum dot photodetectors, Nature, 2006, 442, 180–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, J. Clifford, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Sensitive solution-processed visible-wavelength photodetectors, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 531–534 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Clifford, G. Konstantatos, K. W. Johnston, S. Hoogland, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Fast, sensitive and spectrally tuneable colloidal-quantum-dot photodetectors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 40–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, J. Wang, M. J. Strain, B. Johnson-Morris, J. Zhu, M. Sorel, J. L. O’Brien, M. G. Thompson and S. Yu, Integrated Compact Optical Vortex Beam Emitters, Science, 2012, 338, 363–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. A. Coldren, S. W. Corzine and M. L. Mashanovitch, Diode lasers and photonic integrated circuits, John Wiley & Sons,  2012, vol. 218 Search PubMed .
K. C. Y. Huang, M.-K. Seo, T. Sarmiento, Y. Huo, J. S. Harris and M. L. Brongersma, Electrically driven subwavelength optical nanocircuits, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 244–249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahim, E. Ryckeboer, A. Z. Subramanian, S. Clemmen, B. Kuyken, A. Dhakal, A. Raza, A. Hermans, M. Muneeb, S. Dhoore, Y. Li, U. Dave, P. Bienstman, N. Le Thomas, G. Roelkens, D. Van Thourhout, P. Helin, S. Severi, X. Rottenberg and R. Baets, Expanding the Silicon Photonics Portfolio With Silicon Nitride Photonic Integrated Circuits, J. Light Technol., 2017, 35, 639–649 CAS .
P. Dong, Y.-K. Chen, G.-H. Duan and D. T. Neilson, Silicon photonic devices and integrated circuits, Nanophotonics, 2014, 3, 215–228 CAS .
Y. J. Li, Y. Lv, C.-L. Zou, W. Zhang, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Output Coupling of Perovskite Lasers from Embedded Nanoscale Plasmonic Waveguides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2122–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Weller, U. Koch, M. Gutiérrez and A. Henglein, Photochemistry of Colloidal Metal Sulfides. 7. Absorption and Fluorescence of Extremely Small ZnS Particles (The World of the Neglected Dimensions), Ber. Bunsen-Ges., 1984, 88, 649–656 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Birth of a Nanoscience Building Block, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1514–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rossetti, S. Nakahara and L. E. Brus, Quantum size effects in the redox potentials, resonance Raman spectra, and electronic spectra of CdS crystallites in aqueous solution, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, Electron-electron and electron-hole interactions in small semiconductor crystallites: The size dependence of the lowest excited electronic state, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rogach, Quantum Dots Still Shining Strong 30 Years On, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6511–6512 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, 25th Anniversary Article: Colloidal Quantum Dot Materials and Devices: A Quarter-Century of Advances, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4986–5010 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. LaMer and R. H. Dinegar, Theory, Production and Mechanism of Formation of Monodispersed Hydrosols, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 4847–4854 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, J. Wickham and A. P. Alivisatos, Kinetics of II-VI and III-V Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystal Growth: “Focusing” of Size Distributions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 5343–5344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, Formation of High-Quality CdTe, CdSe, and CdS Nanocrystals Using CdO as Precursor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nanocrystals of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I): Novel Optoelectronic Materials Showing Bright Emission with Wide Color Gamut, Nano Lett.,  2015, 15, 3692–3696 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, S. Shendre, W. Koh, B. Liu, M. Li, S. Hou, C. Hettiarachchi, S. Delikanli, P. Hernández-Martínez, M. D. Birowosuto, H. Wang, T. Sum, H. V. Demir and C. Dang, Electrically control amplified spontaneous emission in colloidal quantum dots, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Michalet, Quantum Dots for Live Cells, in Vivo Imaging, and Diagnostics, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. E. Panfil, M. Oded and U. Banin, Colloidal Quantum Nanostructures: Emerging Materials for Display Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4274–4295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, Spectral and Dynamical Properties of Multiexcitons in Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Semiconductor Nanocrystals: Structure, Properties, and Band Gap Engineering, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, A. P. Beyler, I. Coropceanu, L. Cleary, T. R. Avila, Y. Chen, J. M. Cordero, S. L. Heathcote, D. K. Harris, O. Chen, J. Cao and M. G. Bawendi, Evolution of the Single-Nanocrystal Photoluminescence Linewidth with Size and Shell: Implications for Exciton-Phonon Coupling and the Optimization of Spectral Linewidths, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 289–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. Leatherdale, H.-J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Optical Gain and Stimulated Emission in Nanocrystal Quantum Dots, Science, 2000, 290, 314–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guzelturk, M. Pelton, M. Olutas and H. V. Demir, Giant Modal Gain Coefficients in Colloidal II-VI Nanoplatelets, Nano Lett., 2018, 19, 277–282 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Christodoulou, I. Ramiro, A. Othonos, A. Figueroba, M. Dalmases, O. Özdemir, S. Pradhan, G. Itskos and G. Konstantatos, Single-Exciton Gain and Stimulated Emission Across the Infrared Telecom Band from Robust Heavily Doped PbS Colloidal Quantum Dots, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5909–5915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, X. Wang and R. Chen, Optical waveguiding properties of colloidal quantum dots doped polymer microfibers, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 13408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shen, S. Baig, G. Jiang, Y. Paik, S. J. Kim and M. R. Wang, Improved light emitting UV curable PbS quantum dots-polymer composite optical waveguides, Opt. Commun., 2017, 402, 606–611 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perez, I. Suárez, J. Hervás, A. L. Ricchiuti, J. Martínez-Pastor and S. Sales, Continuous Broadband MWP True-Time Delay With PbS-PMMA and PbS-SU8 Waveguides, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2016, 28, 1657–1660 CAS .
C. Dang, J. Lee, C. Breen, J. S. Steckel, S. Coe-Sullivan and A. Nurmikko, Red, green and blue lasing enabled by single-exciton gain in colloidal quantum dot films, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 335–339 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, Optical Nonlinearities and Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in Semiconductor Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6112–6123 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Cragg and A. L. Efros, Suppression of Auger Processes in Confined Structures, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 313–317 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Quantization of Multiparticle Auger Rates in Semiconductor Quantum Dots, Science, 2000, 287, 1011–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, G. Yu, Y. Wang, C. Dang, T. C. Sum, H. Sun and H. V. Demir, Green Stimulated Emission Boosted by Nonradiative Resonant Energy Transfer from Blue Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2772–2778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Moreels, G. Rainò, R. Gomes, Z. Hens, T. Stöferle and R. F. Mahrt, Nearly Temperature-Independent Threshold for Amplified Spontaneous Emission in Colloidal CdSe/CdS Quantum Dot-in-Rods, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP231–OP235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          O. Svelto, Principles of Lasers, Springer, US, 5th edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Grandidier, G. C. des Francs, S. Massenot, A. Bouhelier, L. Markey, J.-C. Weeber, C. Finot and A. Dereux, Gain-Assisted Propagation in a Plasmonic Waveguide at Telecom Wavelength, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2935–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Sundar, H.-J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Room-Temperature, Tunable Gain Media from Novel II-VI Nanocrystal-Titania Composite Matrices, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 739–743 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gollner, J. Ziegler, L. Protesescu, D. N. Dirin, R. T. Lechner, G. Fritz-Popovski, M. Sytnyk, S. Yakunin, S. Rotter, A. A. Yousefi-Amin, C. Vidal, C. Hrelescu, T. A. Klar, M. V. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, Random Lasing with Systematic Threshold Behavior in Films of CdSe/CdS Core/Thick-Shell Colloidal Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9792–9801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Di Stasio, A. Polovitsyn, I. Angeloni, I. Moreels and R. Krahne, Broadband Amplified Spontaneous Emission and Random Lasing from
Wurtzite CdSe/CdS “Giant-Shell” Nanocrystals, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 2083–2088 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Stasio, J. Q. Grim, V. Lesnyak, P. Rastogi, L. Manna, I. Moreels and R. Krahne, Single-Mode Lasing from Colloidal Water-Soluble CdSe/CdS Quantum Dot-in-Rods, Small, 2015, 11, 1328–1334 CrossRef .
M. Zavelani-Rossi, M. G. Lupo, R. Krahne, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Lasing in self-assembled microcavities of CdSe/CdS core/shell colloidal quantum rods, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 931 RSC .
M. Kazes, D. Y. Lewis, Y. Ebenstein, T. Mokari and U. Banin, Lasing from Semiconductor Quantum Rods in a Cylindrical Microcavity, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 317–321 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Lutich, C. Mauser, E. Da Como, J. Huang, A. Vaneski, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Multiexcitonic Dual Emission in CdSe/CdS Tetrapods and Nanorods, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4646–4650 CrossRef CAS .
N. Taghipour, S. Delikanli, S. Shendre, M. Sak, M. Li, F. Isik, I. Tanriover, B. Guzelturk, T. C. Sum and H. V. Demir, Sub-single exciton optical gain threshold in colloidal semiconductor quantum wells with gradient alloy shelling, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3305 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu and M. Xiao, Lasing action in colloidal CdS/CdSe/CdS quantum wells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 173117 CrossRef .
J. Q. Grim, S. Christodoulou, F. Di Stasio, R. Krahne, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and I. Moreels, Continuous-wave biexciton lasing at room temperature using solution-processed quantum wells, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 891–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Diroll, E. A. Gaulding, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Spectrally-Resolved Dielectric Functions of Solution-Cast Quantum Dot Thin Films, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6463–6469 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Adachi, F. Fan, D. P. Sellan, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, A. J. Houtepen, K. D. Parrish, P. Kanjanaboos, J. A. Malen and E. H. Sargent, Microsecond-sustained lasing from colloidal quantum dot solids, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Prins, D. K. Kim, J. Cui, E. De Leo, L. L. Spiegel, K. M. McPeak and D. J. Norris, Direct Patterning of Colloidal Quantum-Dot Thin Films for Enhanced and Spectrally Selective Out-Coupling of Emission, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1319–1325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Yao, Z.-P. Yang, J.-M. Hwang, H.-C. Su, J.-Y. Haung, T.-N. Lin, J.-L. Shen, M.-H. Lee, M.-T. Tsai and Y.-J. Lee, Coherent and Polarized Random Laser Emissions from Colloidal CdSe/ZnS Quantum Dots Plasmonically Coupled to Ellipsoidal Ag Nanoparticles, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600746 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, L. Y. M. Tobing, A. Kiffer, D. H. Zhang, C. Dang and H. V. Demir, Azimuthally Polarized, Circular Colloidal Quantum Dot Laser Beam Enabled by a Concentric Grating, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 2255–2261 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, K. Min, M. Lee, M. Kang, Y. Park, K.-S. Cho, Y.-G. Roh, S. W. Hwang and H. Jeon, Colloidal quantum dot lasers built on a passive two-dimensional photonic crystal backbone, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6571–6576 RSC .
C. Dang, J. Lee, K. Roh, H. Kim, S. Ahn, H. Jeon, C. Breen, J. S. Steckel, S. Coe-Sullivan and A. Nurmikko, Highly efficient, spatially coherent distributed feedback lasers from dense colloidal quantum dot films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 171104 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, B. Guilhabert, J. Herrnsdorf, Y. Zhang, A. R. Mackintosh, R. A. Pethrick, E. Gu, N. Laurand and M. D. Dawson, Flexible distributed-feedback colloidal quantum dot laser, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 241103 CrossRef .
I. D. W. Samuel, E. B. Namdas and G. A. Turnbull, How to recognize lasing, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 546–549 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Negro, P. Bettotti, M. Cazzanelli, D. Pacifici and L. Pavesi, Applicability conditions and experimental analysis of the variable stripe length method for gain measurements, Opt. Commun., 2004, 229, 337–348 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, W. Xie, S. Bisschop, T. Aubert, E. Brainis, P. Geiregat, Z. Hens and D. Van Thourhout, On-Chip Single-Mode Distributed Feedback Colloidal Quantum Dot Laser under Nanosecond Pumping, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2446–2452 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bisschop, P. Geiregat, T. Aubert and Z. Hens, The Impact of Core/Shell Sizes on the Optical Gain Characteristics of CdSe/CdS Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9011–9021 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Winkler, M. J. Ruckriegel, H. Rojo, R. C. Keitel, E. De Leo, F. T. Rabouw and D. J. Norris, Dual-Wavelength Lasing in Quantum-Dot Plasmonic Lattice Lasers, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5223–5232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guan, L. K. Sagar, R. Li, D. Wang, G. Bappi, N. E. Watkins, M. R. Bourgeois, L. Levina, F. Fan, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, J. Martins de Pina, R. D. Schaller, G. C. Schatz, E. H. Sargent and T. W. Odom, Engineering Directionality in Quantum Dot Shell Lasing Using Plasmonic Lattices, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1468–1474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Park, A. V. Malko, J. Vela, Y. Chen, Y. Ghosh, F. García-Santamaría, J. A. Hollingsworth, V. I. Klimov and H. Htoon, Near-Unity Quantum Yields of Biexciton Emission from CdSe/CdS Nanocrystals Measured Using Single-Particle Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 187401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-S. Park, W. K. Bae, T. Baker, J. Lim and V. I. Klimov, Effect of Auger Recombination on Lasing in Heterostructured Quantum Dots with Engineered Core/Shell Interfaces, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7319–7328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Park, W. K. Bae, L. A. Padilha, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Effect of the Core/Shell Interface on Auger Recombination Evaluated by Single-Quantum-Dot Spectroscopy, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 396–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saba, S. Minniberger, F. Quochi, J. Roither, M. Marceddu, A. Gocalinska, M. V. Kovalenko, D. V. Talapin, W. Heiss, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Exciton-Exciton Interaction and Optical Gain in Colloidal CdSe/CdS Dot/Rod Nanocrystals, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4942–4946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, V. D. Ta, Y. Gao, T. C. He, R. Chen, E. Mutlugun, H. V. Demir and H. D. Sun, Stimulated emission and lasing from CdSe/CdS/ZnS core-multi-shell quantum dots by simultaneous three-photon absorption, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2954–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Grivas, C. Li, P. Andreakou, P. Wang, M. Ding, G. Brambilla, L. Manna and P. Lagoudakis, Single-mode tunable laser emission in the single-exciton regime from colloidal nanocrystals, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2376 CrossRef .
V. I. Klimov, S. A. Ivanov, J. Nanda, M. Achermann, I. Bezel, J. A. McGuire and A. Piryatinski, Single-exciton optical gain in semiconductor nanocrystals, Nature, 2007, 447, 441–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Bae, L. A. Padilha, Y.-S. Park, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Controlled Alloying of the Core-Shell Interface in CdSe/CdS Quantum Dots for Suppression of Auger Recombination, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3411–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Kozlov, Y.-S. Park, J. Roh, I. Fedin, T. Nakotte and V. I. Klimov, Sub-single-exciton lasing using charged quantum dots coupled to a distributed feedback cavity, Science, 2019, 365, 672–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Y.-S. Park, J. Lim and V. I. Klimov, Towards zero-threshold optical gain using charged semiconductor quantum dots, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1140–1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Choi, K. J. Koski, S. Sivasankar and A. P. Alivisatos, Strain-Dependent Photoluminescence Behavior of CdSe/CdS Nanocrystals with Spherical, Linear, and Branched Topologies, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3544–3549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Quantum-Dot Light-Emitting Diodes for Large-Area Displays: Towards the Dawn of Commercialization, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607022 CrossRef .
H.-C. Chien, C.-Y. Cheng and M.-H. Mao, Continuous Wave Operation of SiO2 Sandwiched Colloidal CdSe/ZnS Quantum-Dot Microdisk Lasers, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2017, 23, 1–5 Search PubMed .
M. S. Alias, Y. Yang, T. K. Ng, I. Dursun, D. Shi, M. I. Saidaminov, D. Priante, O. M. Bakr and B. S. Ooi, Enhanced Etching, Surface Damage Recovery, and Submicron Patterning of Hybrid Perovskites using a Chemically Gas-Assisted Focused-Ion Beam for Subwavelength Grating Photonic Applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 137–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yariv, Y. Xu, R. K. Lee and A. Scherer, Coupled-resonator optical waveguide: a proposal and analysis, Opt. Lett., 1999, 24, 711–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Malak, E. Lafalce, J. Jung, C. H. Lin, M. J. Smith, Y. J. Yoon, Z. Lin, Z. V. Vardeny and V. V. Tsukruk, Enhancement of optical gain characteristics of quantum dot films by optimization of organic ligands, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10069–10081 RSC .
H. Kogelnik and V. Ramaswamy, Scaling Rules for Thin-Film Optical Waveguides, Appl. Opt., 1974, 13, 1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Todescato, I. Fortunati, S. Gardin, E. Garbin, E. Collini, R. Bozio, J. J. Jasieniak, G. D. Giustina, G. Brusatin, S. Toffanin and R. Signorini, Soft-Lithographed Up-Converted Distributed Feedback Visible Lasers Based on CdSe-CdZnS-ZnS Quantum Dots, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 337–344 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Jasieniak, I. Fortunati, S. Gardin, R. Signorini, R. Bozio, A. Martucci and P. Mulvaney, Highly Efficient Amplified Stimulated Emission from CdSe-CdS-ZnS Quantum Dot Doped Waveguides with Two-Photon Infrared Optical Pumping, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, H. Jung, J. Lee, M. Lee, Y. Park, K.-S. Cho and H. Jeon, Wet-Transfer of Freestanding Dense Colloidal Quantum Dot Films and Their Photonic Device Application, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700291 CrossRef .
H. Jung, C. Han, H. Kim, K.-S. Cho, Y.-G. Roh, Y. Park and H. Jeon, Tunable colloidal quantum dot distributed feedback lasers integrated on a continuously chirped surface grating, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22745–22749 RSC .
H. Jung, M. Lee, C. Han, Y. Park, K.-S. Cho and H. Jeon, Efficient on-chip integration of a colloidal quantum dot photonic crystal band-edge laser with a coplanar waveguide, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 32919 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pang, K. Tetz, Y. Shen, C.-H. Chen and Y. Fainman, Photosensitive quantum dot composites and their applications in optical structures, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2005, 23, 2413 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pang, Y. Shen, K. Tetz and Y. Fainman, PMMA quantum dots composites fabricated via use of pre-polymerization, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rong, B. Wang, A. Reuven, E. Maguid, B. Cohn, V. Kleiner, S. Katznelson, E. Koren and E. Hasman, Photonic Rashba effect from quantum emitters mediated by a Berry-phase defective photonic crystal, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 927–933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Dieleman, W. Ding, L. Wu, N. Thakur, I. Bespalov, B. Daiber, Y. Ekinci, S. Castellanos and B. Ehrler, Universal direct patterning of colloidal quantum dots by (extreme) ultraviolet and electron beam lithography, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11306–11316 RSC .
H. Gordillo, I. Suárez, R. Abargues, P. Rodríguez-Cantó, G. Almuneau and J. P. Martínez-Pastor, Quantum-Dot Double Layer Polymer Waveguides by Evanescent Light Coupling, J. Light Technol., 2013, 31, 2515–2525 CAS .
W. Xie, Y. Zhu, T. Aubert, Z. Hens, E. Brainis and D. Van Thourhout, Fabrication and characterization of on-chip silicon nitride microdisk integrated with colloidal quantum dots, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. De Geyter, K. Komorowska, E. Brainis, P. Emplit, P. Geiregat, A. Hassinen, Z. Hens and D. Van, Thourhout, From fabrication to mode mapping in silicon nitride microdisks with embedded colloidal quantum dots, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 161101 CrossRef .
Y. Justo, I. Moreels, K. Lambert and Z. Hens, Langmuir-Blodgett monolayers of colloidal lead chalcogenide quantum dots: morphology and photoluminescence, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 295606 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, M. T. Björk, J. A. Liddle, C. Sönnichsen, B. Boussert and A. P. Alivisatos, Integration of Colloidal Nanocrystals into Lithographically Patterned Devices, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1093–1098 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Krasavin and A. V. Zayats, Active Nanophotonic Circuitry Based on Dielectric-loaded Plasmonic Waveguides, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1662–1690 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, X. Zhang, W. Cai, L. Wang, C. Ying and J. Xu, Optical bistability based on Bragg grating resonators in metal-insulator-metal plasmonic waveguides, AIP Adv., 2013, 3, 012106 CrossRef .
G. Di Martino, Y. Sonnefraud, M. S. Tame, S. Kéna-Cohen, F. Dieleman, Ş. K. Özdemir, M. S. Kim and S. A. Maier, Observation of Quantum Interference in the Plasmonic Hong-Ou-Mandel Effect, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 1, 034004 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M.-H. Kim, C. Wang, Z. Han, S. Shrestha, A. C. Overvig, M. Lu, A. Stein, A. M. Agarwal, M. Lončar and N. Yu, Controlling propagation and coupling of waveguide modes using phase-gradient metasurfaces, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 675–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar and S. Aditya, Performance of S-bends for integrated-optic waveguides, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., 1998, 19, 289–292 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Z. Li, M. Lei, X. Fu, J. Xiao and Q. Gong, Plasmonic Y-splitters of High Wavelength Resolution Based on Strongly Coupled-Resonator Effects, Plasmonics, 2012, 7, 441–445 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, S. Aghaeimeibodi, C. J. K. Richardson, R. P. Leavitt, D. Englund and E. Waks, Hybrid Integration of Solid-State Quantum Emitters on a Silicon Photonic Chip, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7394–7400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ayata, Y. Fedoryshyn, W. Heni, B. Baeuerle, A. Josten, M. Zahner, U. Koch, Y. Salamin, C. Hoessbacher, C. Haffner, D. L. Elder, L. R. Dalton and J. Leuthold, High-speed plasmonic modulator in a single metal layer, Science, 2017, 358, 630–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bueno, I. Suarez, R. Abargues, S. Sales and J. P. M. Pastor, Temperature Sensor Based on Colloidal Quantum Dots-PMMA Nanocomposite Waveguides, IEEE Sens. J., 2012, 12, 3069–3074 CAS .
P. Jorge, M. A. Martins, T. Trindade, J. L. Santos and F. Farahi, Optical Fiber Sensing Using Quantum Dots, Sensors, 2007, 7, 3489–3534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, M. Zhi, H. Zhu, W. Y. Wu, Q. H. Xu, M. H. Jhon and Y. Chan, Ultralow-threshold multiphoton-pumped lasing from colloidal nanoplatelets in solution, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Patel, A. A. P. Trichet, D. M. Coles, P. R. Dolan, S. M. Fairclough, M. A. Leontiadou, S. C. E. Tsang, D. J. Binks, E. Jang, H. Jang, R. A. Taylor and J. M. Smith, Gain Spectroscopy of Solution-Based Semiconductor Nanocrystals in Tunable Optical Microcavities, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 285–290 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Li, V. Nalla, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Solution-Processed Low Threshold Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers from All-Inorganic Perovskite Nanocrystals, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605088 CrossRef .
H. Kim, K.-S. Cho, H. Jeong, J. Kim, C.-W. Lee, W. Koh, Y.-G. Roh, S. W. Hwang and Y. Park, Single-Mode Lasing from a Monolithic Microcavity with Few-Monolayer-Thick Quantum Dot Films, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1536–1541 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Snee, Y. Chan, D. G. Nocera and M. G. Bawendi, Whispering-Gallery-Mode Lasing from a Semiconductor Nanocrystal/Microsphere Resonator Composite, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1131–1136 CrossRef .
F. Montanarella, D. Urbonas, L. Chadwick, P. G. Moerman, P. J. Baesjou, R. F. Mahrt, A. van Blaaderen, T. Stöferle and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Lasing Supraparticles Self-Assembled from Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12788–12794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Cha, M. H. Bartl, M. S. Wong, A. Popitsch, T. J. Deming and G. D. Stucky, Microcavity Lasing from Block Peptide Hierarchically Assembled Quantum Dot Spherical Resonators, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 907–911 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schäfer, J. P. Mondia, R. Sharma, Z. H. Lu, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach and L. J. Wang, Quantum Dot Microdrop Laser, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1709–1712 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hoogland, V. Sukhovatkin, I. Howard, S. Cauchi, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, A solution-processed 1.53 um quantum dot laser with temperature-invariant emission wavelength, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 3273–3281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Malko, A. A. Mikhailovsky, M. A. Petruska, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon, M. G. Bawendi and V. I. Klimov, From amplified spontaneous emission to microring lasing using nanocrystal quantum dot solids, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1303–1305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Li, J. Song, L. Xiao, H. Zeng and H. Sun, All-Inorganic Colloidal Perovskite Quantum Dots: A New Class of Lasing Materials with Favorable Characteristics, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101–7108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. S. Leck, V. D. Ta, R. Chen, V. Nalla, Y. Gao, T. He, H. V. Demir and H. Sun, Blue Liquid Lasers from Solution of CdZnS/ZnS Ternary Alloy Quantum Dots with Quasi-Continuous Pumping, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 169–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liao, R. Xu, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, L. Zhang, C. Lu, Y. Cui and J. Zhang, Ultralow-Threshold Single-Mode Lasing from Phase-Pure CdSe/CdS Core/Shell Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4968–4976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Roh, Y.-S. Park, J. Lim and V. I. Klimov, Optically pumped colloidal-quantum-dot lasing in LED-like devices with an integrated optical cavity, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Cao, Y. Zhang, X. Song, Y. Che, H. Zhang, H. Dai, G. Zhang and J. Yao, Random lasing in a colloidal quantum dot-doped disordered polymer, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 9325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Herrnsdorf, B. Guilhabert, Y. Zhang, I. M. Watson, E. Gu, N. Laurand and M. D. Dawson, Colloidal quantum dot random laser, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 2996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guan, L. K. Sagar, R. Li, D. Wang, G. Bappi, W. Wang, N. Watkins, M. R. Bourgeois, L. Levina, F. Fan, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, J. M. de Pina, R. D. Schaller, G. C. Schatz, E. H. Sargent and T. W. Odom, Quantum Dot-Plasmon Lasing with Controlled Polarization Patterns, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3426–3433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Min, S. Kim, K. Okamoto, L. Yang, A. Scherer, H. Atwater and K. Vahala, Ultralow threshold on-chip microcavity nanocrystal quantum dot lasers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 191124 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, S. Yang, H. Yang and H. Sun, Quaternary Alloy Quantum Dots: Toward Low-Threshold Stimulated Emission and All-Solution-Processed Lasers in the Green Region, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. E. Fong, S. Yang, V. D. Ta, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, V. Nalla, H. V. Demir and H. Sun, Unraveling the ultralow threshold stimulated emission from CdZnS/ZnS quantum dot and enabling high-Q microlasers, Laser Photonics Rev., 2015, 9, 507–516 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S.-X. Zhang, Q. Song, Q. Gong and Y.-F. Xiao, Light confinement in a low-refraction-index microcavity bonded on a silicon substrate, Optica, 2016, 3, 937 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Ta, R. Chen and H. D. Sun, Self-Assembled Flexible Microlasers, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP60–OP64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, V. Duong Ta and H. D. Sun, Single Mode Lasing from Hybrid Hemispherical Microresonators, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 244 CrossRef .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Capillary flow as the cause of ring stains from dried liquid drops, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS .
R.-M. Ma, R. F. Oulton, V. J. Sorger, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Room-temperature sub-diffraction-limited plasmon laser by total internal reflection, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 110–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Tang, S.-S. Sui, Y.-D. Yang, J.-L. Xiao, Y. Du and Y.-Z. Huang, Mode selection in square resonator microlasers for widely tunable single mode lasing, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 27739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lafalce, Q. Zeng, C. H. Lin, M. J. Smith, S. T. Malak, J. Jung, Y. J. Yoon, Z. Lin, V. V. Tsukruk and Z. V. Vardeny, Robust lasing modes in coupled colloidal quantum dot microdisk pairs using a non-Hermitian exceptional point, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, E. Lafalce, C. Lin, M. J. Smith, J. Jung, Y. J. Yoon, Z. Lin, V. V. Tsukruk and V. Vardeny, Control of Whispering Gallery Modes and PT-symmetry Breaking in Colloidal Quantum Dot Microdisk Lasers with Engineered Notches, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6049–6057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. A. Whiteaway, G. H. B. Thompson, A. J. Collar and C. J. Armistead, The design assessment of lambda/4 phase-shifted DFB laser structures, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1989, 25, 1261–1279 CrossRef CAS .
C. Garcia, V. Coello, Z. Han, I. P. Radko and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Partial loss compensation in dielectric-loaded plasmonic waveguides at near infra-red wavelengths, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 7771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Radko, M. G. Nielsen, O. Albrektsen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Stimulated emission of surface plasmon polaritons by lead-sulphide quantum dots at near infra-red wavelengths, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 18633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Bolger, W. Dickson, A. V. Krasavin, L. Liebscher, S. G. Hickey, D. V. Skryabin and A. V. Zayats, Amplified spontaneous emission of surface plasmon polaritons and limitations on the increase of their propagation length, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 1197–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Livache, B. Martinez, N. Goubet, J. Ramade and E. Lhuillier, Road Map for Nanocrystal Based Infrared Photodetectors, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Keuleyan, P. Guyot-Sionnest, C. Delerue and G. Allan, Mercury Telluride Colloidal Quantum Dots: Electronic Structure, Size-Dependent Spectra, and Photocurrent Detection up to 12 μm, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8676–8682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Livache, B. Martinez, N. Goubet, C. Gréboval, J. Qu, A. Chu, S. Royer, S. Ithurria, M. G. Silly, B. Dubertret and E. Lhuillier, A colloidal quantum dot infrared photodetector and its use for intraband detection, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2125 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xu, L. Meng, K. Sinha, F. I. Chowdhury, J. Hu and X. Wang, Ultrafast Colloidal Quantum Dot Infrared Photodiode, ACS Photonics, 2020, 7, 1297–1303 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Ning, Integrated Structure and Device Engineering for High Performance and Scalable Quantum Dot Infrared Photodetectors, Small, 2020, 16, 2003397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, M. Chen, Q. Zhu, G. Zhou, N. M. Abdelazim, W. Zhou, S. V. Kershaw, A. L. Rogach, N. Zhao and H. K. Tsang, Integrated Plasmonic Infrared Photodetector Based on Colloidal HgTe Quantum Dots, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900354 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guyot-Sionnest and C. Wang, Fast Voltammetric and Electrochromic Response of Semiconductor Nanocrystal Thin Films, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7355–7359 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guyot-Sionnest, M. M. Ackerman and X. Tang, Colloidal quantum dots for infrared detection beyond silicon, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 060901 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, L. Meng, T. Zeng, K. Sinha, C. Dick and X. Wang, On-chip colloidal quantum dot devices with a CMOS compatible architecture for near-infrared light sensing, Opt. Lett., 2019, 44, 463–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. M. Menon, S. Husaini, N. Valappil and M. Luberto, Photonic emitters and circuits based on colloidal quantum dot composites, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2009, 7224, 72240Q.
W. Xie, Y. Zhu, S. Bisschop, T. Aubert, Z. Hens, D. van Thourhout and P. Geiregat, Colloidal Quantum Dots Enabling Coherent Light Sources for Integrated Silicon-Nitride Photonics, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2017, 23, 1–13 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Xiao, C. Meng, X. Zhang, S. Yu, Y. Wang, C. Yang, X. Guo, C. Z. Ning and L. Tong, Hybrid Photon-Plasmon Nanowire Lasers, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5654–5659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bermúdez-Ureña, G. Tutuncuoglu, J. Cuerda, C. L. C. Smith, J. Bravo-Abad, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, A. Fontcuberta i Morral, F. J. García-Vidal and R. Quidant, Plasmonic Waveguide-Integrated Nanowire Laser, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 747–754 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Matsushima, F. Bencheikh, K. Yoshida, M. Inoue, T. Fujihara, K. Goushi, J.-C. Ribierre and C. Adachi, Toward continuous-wave operation of organic semiconductor lasers, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602570 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, The pursuit of electrically-driven organic semiconductor lasers, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2827–2836 RSC .
H. Cheng, Y. Wang, H. Dai, J.-B. Han and X. Li, Nonlinear Optical Properties of PbS Colloidal Quantum Dots Fabricated via Solvothermal Method, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3288–3292 CrossRef CAS .
W.-G. Lu, C. Chen, D. Han, L. Yao, J. Han, H. Zhong and Y. Wang, Nonlinear Optical Properties of Colloidal CH3NH3PbBr3 and CsPbBr3 Quantum Dots: A Comparison Study Using Z-Scan Technique, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1732–1737 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kim, M. S. Onses, J. B. Lim, S. Nam, N. Oh, H. Kim, K. J. Yu, J. W. Lee, J.-H. Kim, S.-K. Kang, C. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. H. Shin, N. H. Kim, C. Leal, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, High-Resolution Patterns of Quantum Dots Formed by Electrohydrodynamic Jet Printing for Light-Emitting Diodes, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Jianjun Chen
	Jianjun Chen is a professor in the Department of Physics at Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China. From 2013 to 2020, he worked in the School of Physics at Peking University as a 100-Talent professor. He received his BS degree in Optics from Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2006. He received his PhD degree in Optics under the guidance of Prof. Qihuang Gong from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2011. His research interests mainly focus on nanophotonic devices and integrated nanophotonics in both theory and experiments. He has published more than 80 journal papers in Advanced Materials, Advanced Functional Materials, Nano Letters, Laser & Photonics Reviews, and so on. His papers have been cited over 2000 times, and his h-index is 23.

Kexiu Rong
	Kexiu Rong is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Israel Institute of Technology (Technion), Israel. He earned his PhD from the Department of Physics, Peking University in 2018. His current research interests in nanophotonics mainly focus on micro/nanoscale lasers, spinoptics, and geometric phase metasurfaces.

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis of CQDs. (a) Schematic diagram of the hot-injection method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (b) Schematic graph of CQD growth by hot-injection method (top panel) and the corresponding LaMer plot for the change of monomer concentration as a function of the reaction time (bottom panel). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH.) (c) Typical PL and absorption spectra of CQDs. Left inset shows the schematic of the CQD structure with core, shell, and surface ligands. Right inset shows the TEM image of the CQDs (scale bar: 10 nm). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, copyright 2019, the authors.) (d) Size-tunable emission colors of CdSe/ZnS CQDs. The leftmost (rightmost) color corresponds to a CdSe core diameter of about 1.8 nm (6.9 nm). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, copyright 2020, the authors.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Size-dependent band gaps of CQDs. (a) Illustration of electronic band structures for bulky material and CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited.) (b) Size-dependent band gaps for CQDs of different material systems. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, copyright 2005 American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (c) Calculated size-dependent band gaps for colloidal CdSe quantum dots, wires, and platelets under different lengths of the confined dimension. dB indicates the Bohr radius. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2018, the authors.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Optical properties of CQDs. (a) Illustration of emission spectrum from an ensemble of CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (b) SEM images for close-packed (top panel) CQD superlattice with a long-range order and (bottom panel) glassy CQD solid with a short-range order. Scale bars are 50 nm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science.) (c) Absorption (or gain) spectra of CQD solids with different radii. The shaded areas indicate gain regions. Inset shows the schematic of absorbing and emitting transitions in CdSe CQDs. The intraband relaxation times are provided. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, copyright 2000, the authors.) (d) Calculated gain threshold as a function of temperature for CQDs with radii from 1 nm to 20 nm. The threshold is nearly temperature-independent if the temperature remains below a critical value, which is defined at 〈Ngain〉 = 2 (inset). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited.) (e) Schematic of a typical setup for ASE characterization. The slit width can be tuned for different stripe lengths in the VSL measurement. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (f) Typical ASE spectra of a CQD solid under different pump fluences (top panel) and the corresponding superlinear intensity dependence of the ASE (bottom panel). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.)	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  CQD waveguides made of CQD nanocomposites. (a) Schematic of a CQD planar waveguide made of a CQDs–PMMA nanocomposite. (b) Transmission and absorption spectra of a CQD planar waveguide with various CQD filling factors. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, copyright 2011 IOP Publishing Ltd.) (c) Schematic of a CQD microfiber made of a CQDs–PMMA/PS nanocomposite. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright 2018 Optical Society of America.) (d) Schematic of a CQD stripe waveguide made of a CQDs-UV curable polymer nanocomposite. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.) (e) Schematic of a bilayer CQD waveguide made of a CQDs–SU8 nanocomposite and SU8. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, copyright 2016 IEEE.)	 

 	Fig. 5  CQD waveguides made of CQD-embedded semiconductors. (a) Schematic of fabrication processes for a SiN/CQDs/SiN strip waveguide. (b) SEM images of the (left panel) cross-section and (right panel) sidewall for a SiN/CQDs/SiN strip waveguide. (c) Propagation losses of a SiN/CQDs/SiN strip waveguide under various waveguide widths. The inset shows the measured transmission values of a 2 μm wide waveguide with different lengths. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2015 Optical Society of America.)	 

 	Fig. 6  CQD waveguides made of CQD solids. (a) Illustration of the pattern-assisted stacking approach. Inset shows the SEM image of the cross-section for a fabricated CQD waveguide (scale bar: 300 nm). The CQD solids are highlighted by a red color, and a thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (b) Simulated field (|E|2) and electric field vector distributions for the fundamental TE mode in the CQD waveguide. (c) Absorption and PL spectra of the constituting CQDs. Inset shows the zoomed-in absorption spectrum around the central PL wavelength (λPL = 650 nm). (d) (top panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD waveguide. CQD gratings are fabricated at the two ends of the CQD waveguide. The scale bar is 10 μm. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding CQD waveguide when an s-polarized beam (λ = 630 nm) illuminates the left CQD grating. (e) Extracted PL intensity distribution along the CQD waveguide shown in (d). (f) (left panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD bending waveguide. (right panel) Optical image of the corresponding CQD bending waveguide when an s-polarized beam (λ = 630 nm) illuminates the lower CQD grating. Inset shows the intensities of the scattered light from the upper CQD grating as a function of the bending radius. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 7  CQD waveguide-based on-chip nanophotonic devices. (a) (top panel) Schematic of a Y-splitter. (middle panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD Y-splitter (Wys = 20 μm, and Hys = 6 μm). (bottom panel) SEM image of the cross-section for a CQD Y-splitter. A thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (b) Energy splitting ratios for CQD Y-splitters with various longitudinal Wys and lateral Hys offsets. (c) (top panel) Schematic of an MZ interferometer. (bottom panel) Optical image of a CQD MZ interferometer when an s-polarized beam illuminates the left CQD grating (Wmz = 20 μm, and Hmz = 2 μm). (d) (top panel) Schematic of a directional coupler. (bottom panel) Optical image of a CQD directional coupler when an s-polarized beam illuminates the bottom-left CQD grating (Wdc1 = 12 μm, Hdc = 2 μm, Gdc = 150 nm, Ldc2 = 23 μm). A bright spot is observed at the top-right CQD grating due to a controlled energy transfer from the lower CQD waveguide to the upper CQD waveguide in the straight interaction region. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2020 Optical Society of America.)	 

 	Fig. 8  On-chip CQD microlasers using external resonators. (a) Schematic of a taper-fiber-coupled toroidal microcavity coated with CQDs. Inset shows the SEM image of the microcavity covered with CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2006 American Institute of Physics.) (b) (top panel) Lasing spectra of a hemisphere microcavity coated with CQDs under different pump energies. The left and right insets show the pump energy-dependent peak intensities and the schematic of the hemisphere laser, respectively. (middle panels) Optical microscope images of a hemisphere microcavity before and after CQD coverage. (bottom panels) Optical images of a CQD hemisphere microcavity below and above the pump threshold. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH.) (c) (left panel) Fluorescent optical images of silica microspheres uniformly coated with a CQDs/titania film. The upper and lower insets show the optical and fluorescent images of a CQD-coated microsphere, respectively. The scale bars in the insets are 15 μm. (right panel) SEM image of a CQDs-microsphere composite structure. Inset shows the top-view SEM image of the same composite structure. The scale bar in the inset is 10 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 165, copyright 2005 WILEY-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 9  External-cavity-free on-chip CQD microlasers lack of controllability. (a) (top-left panel) Optical microscope image of a CQD “coffee-ring”. The scale bar is 200 μm. (top-right panel) AFM image of the ring deposit of a CQD “coffee-ring”. (bottom panel) Lasing spectra of a CQD “coffee-ring” under different pump fluences. Inset shows the pump fluence-dependent peak intensities. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) (b) (top-left panel) Schematic of an inkjet printing method to fabricate CQD “coffee-rings”. (top-right panel) Optical microscope image of an array of CQD “coffee-rings”. The scale bar is 100 μm. (bottom panels) SEM images of a CQD “coffee-ring”. (Reproduced with permission from 180, copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH.) (c) Procedures of an oil-in-water emulsion method to fabricate CQD suprapartref. icles. The method mainly involves three steps: preparation of monodisperse cyclohexane CQD droplets in water, evaporation of cyclohexane, and self-assembly of CQD nanoparticles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 166, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.) (d) (top panels) Schematic of two main procedures (drop-casting and water-dripping) to fabricate CQD microplates. (bottom-left panel) Optical image of an irregular CQD microplate above the pump threshold. (bottom-right panel) Polarization-resolved single-mode lasing spectra from the irregular CQD microplate. The lasing spectra are measured at position I, and two polarization states along (θP = 0°) and perpendicular to (θP = 90°) the corresponding edge are implemented. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  On-chip CQD microlasers by top-down fabrication methods. (a) Schematic of the procedures to fabricate 1st DFB microlasers made of a SiN/CQDs/SiN stack. (b) Single-mode lasing spectra from 1st CQD DFB microlasers with different grating periods. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic of a waveguide-integrated CQD microdisk laser made of a SiN/CQDs/SiN stack. (d) Lasing spectra of a 7 μm-diameter CQD microdisk below and above the pump threshold. Insets show the corresponding optical images of the CQD microdisk at these pump fluences. (e) Temporal coherence of the emission from a CQD microdisk. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 11  On-chip CQD microlasers by hybrid fabrication methods. (a) Schematic of the procedures to fabricate CQD microdisks by a pattern-assisted layer-by-layer assembly method. (b) AFM images of a CQD microdisk in top view and tilted view. (c) Lasing spectra of CQD microdisks with various diameters. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 53, copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH.) (d) Active color control in a CQD microring laser by different pump fluences. (e) Schematic of the procedures to fabricate CQD microrings by a template-stripping method. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 36, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (f) (top-left panel) AFM image of a CQD microcavity fabricated by a pattern-assisted stacking approach. The scale bar is 10 μm. (top-right panel) SEM image of the cross-section at the edge of a CQD microcavity. A thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (bottom panel) Height distributions of a CQD microcavity before and after CQD filling. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH.) (g) (left panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD WRR fabricated by a pattern-assisted stacking approach. (right panel) SEM image of the cross-section for a CQD WRR. A thin gold layer is deposited for charge conduction. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (h) SEM image of a plasmonic resonator incorporated with a printed CQD strip. The scale bar is 2 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2017, the authors.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Mode manipulation in coupled CQD microlasers. (a) (top panels) Lasing spectra of a clean CQD microdisk and a defective CQD microdisk. The inset shows the Fourier transfer of the lasing spectrum as a function of the optical path length. (bottom panels) Optical images and emission directionalities of the corresponding CQD microdisks above pump thresholds. (b) Lasing spectra of two coupled CQD microdisks under various pump positions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 187, copyright 2019, the authors.) (c) Lasing spectrum of a CQD microdisk with a deep notch on its perimeter. Inset shows the SEM image of the notch. (d) Lasing spectra of two coupled CQD microdisks with deep notches. Three different pump positions are employed, as shown by the corresponding schematics. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 188, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 13  On-chip CQD optical amplifiers. (a) (top panel) SEM image of a tapered plasmonic waveguide. Left to the waveguide, a plasmonic resonator is constructed to generate on-chip plasmonic signals for amplification. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding plasmonic waveguide above pump threshold of the spaser. The whole system is uniformly coated with a drop-casted CQD film, and a large pump spot (diameter ∼60 μm) is used to excite the whole structure. (b) Signal spectra at the right mirror of the spaser and at the tip of the plasmonic waveguide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2017, the authors.) (c) (top panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD waveguide. A CQD WRR laser is fabricated in tangential coupling to the CQD waveguide for on-chip generation of lasing signals, and an unequal length for the two CQD waveguide parts is intentionally designed for the net gain coefficient measurement. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding CQD waveguide above the pump threshold of the CQD WRR laser. A large pump spot (diameter ∼80 μm) is used to excite the whole structure. (d) Signal spectra at two ends of the CQD waveguide. (e) Net gain coefficients of the CQD waveguide under different pump fluences. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 14  On-chip CQD photodetectors. (a) SEM image of a CQD photodetector composed of a plasmonic bull's eye structure and a PbS nanodisk selectively placed at the center of the structure. Inset shows details of the PbS nanodisk. (b) Wavelength-dependent responsivity of two CQD photodetectors with different periods. Results from two reference structures are also presented for comparison. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2015 CIOMP.) (c) Schematic of a CQD photodetector integrated with the silicon-based platform. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 197, copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH.) (d) Schematic of a CQD photodetector inserted in a silicon waveguide. Inset shows the cross section of the MIM waveguide incorporated with HgTe CQDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 198, copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.)	 

 	Fig. 15  Integration of CQD microlasers and waveguides lack of full controllability. (a) SEM image of a waveguide-integrated ring resonator made of CQDs–SU8 nanocomposites. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 202, copyright 2009 SPIE.) (b) (left panel) Optical microscope image of a CQD microplate laser connected to a CQD stripe waveguide. The green circle indicates the position and size of the pump beam. (right panel) Optical image of the corresponding structure above the pump threshold of the CQD microplate laser. Besides the bright emission from the CQD microplate laser, obvious scattering can also be observed at a defect on the CQD waveguide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (c) PL and absorption spectra of the constituting small-diameter CQDs. The PL wavelength range of the constituting large-diameter CQDs is highlighted by the red area, in which the small-diameter CQDs have negligible absorption. (d) (left panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD microplate laser made of large-diameter CQDs and a CQD waveguide made of small-diameter CQDs. (middle panel) Optical image of the corresponding structure above the pump threshold of the CQD microplate laser. (right panel) Lasing spectra at different positions. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2020 Optical Society of America.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Integration of CQD microlasers and waveguides in SiN platforms. (a) Schematic of a CQD PhC microlaser integrated with a coplanar slab waveguide. (b) Optical microscope image of the coupling structure shown in (a). The central octagon is the square-lattice PhC incorporated with CQDs, while the eight rectangles are gratings for light outcoupling. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, copyright 2017 Optical Society of America.) (c) Schematic of the fabrication procedures for SiN waveguide-integrated CQD microdisk lasers. (d) (top panel) Optical microscope image of an array of CQD microdisk lasers integrated with SiN waveguides. (middle panel) SEM image of a CQD microdisk laser integrated with a SiN waveguide. (bottom panel) SEM image of the cross-section for a CQD microdisk and its underlying SiN waveguide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.) (e) SEM image of a 1st DFB CQD microlaser integrated with stripe waveguides at its two ends (not shown here). Inset shows the cross-section of the strip waveguide composed of the SiN/CQDs/SiN stack. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Configurable integration of CQD microcavity lasers and plasmonic waveguides. (a) (top panel) Dark-field optical image of a CQD microcavity laser in tangential coupling to a silver nanowire. Inset shows the SEM image of the cross-section for the coupling structure at the tangency point. (bottom panel) Optical image of the corresponding structure above the pump threshold of the CQD microcavity laser. Inset shows the lasing spectra at different positions. (b) Radial and tangential coupling between CQD microcavity lasers and silver nanowires. (c) Tangential coupling between two coupled CQD microcavity lasers and a silver nanowire. The two coupled CQD microcavities give out single-mode lasing due to the Vernier effect. (d) Tangential coupling between two sets of coupled CQD microcavities and a silver nanowire. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 18  Integration of CQD microlasers and functional devices. (a) Integration between a single-mode CQD microlaser and a CQD bending waveguide. The single-mode microlaser is achieved by coupling two CQD WRRs using the Vernier effect. (top-left panel) Dark-field optical image of the coupling structure. (bottom-left panel) Optical image of the corresponding coupling structure above the pump threshold of the single-mode microlaser. (right panel) Lasing spectra at different positions. (b) Integration between a single-mode CQD microlaser and (top panels) a CQD Y-splitter or (bottom panels) a CQD MZ interferometer. (c) A nanophotonic circuit composed of more than ten CQD-based nanophotonic devices, including WRR microlaser, low-noise optical amplifier, bending waveguide, Y-splitter, MZ interferometer, and gratings. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) A CQD nanophotonic circuit operating above the central PL wavelength of the constituting CQDs via an external source. The excitation positions for the left and right cases are gratings A and C, respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2020 Optical Society of America.)	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
