Unique physicochemical properties of two-dimensional light absorbers facilitating photocatalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00396C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00396C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6410-6444Unique physicochemical properties of two-dimensional light absorbers facilitating photocatalysis

        
          
            Gang 
            Liu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Zhen†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yuyang 
            Kang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lianzhou 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Hui-Ming 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *ad
aShenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 72 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China. E-mail: cheng@imr.ac.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, 72 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China
cNanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering and AIBN, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: l.wang@uq.edu.au
dTsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, 1001 Xueyuan Road, Shenzhen 518055, China
Received 
      14th May 2018
    First published on 6th August 2018AbstractThe emergence of two-dimensional (2D) materials with a large lateral size and extremely small thickness has significantly changed the development of many research areas by producing a variety of unusual physicochemical properties. Semiconductor photocatalysis is intrinsically controlled by multiple light–matter, light absorber–cocatalyst and molecular/ionic-matter interactions that can be highly dependent on the geometric features of the light absorber. In this review, we focus on the unique structures and unusual physicochemical properties of 2D semiconducting light absorbers and their roles in facilitating photocatalysis. In particular, we highlight their structure–property relationships considering the unique electronic structure, optical absorption, spatial separation of charge carriers, structural advantages as a host of active guests, and the strain-modulated band structures of the 2D light absorbers. The representative development of a number of 2D light absorbers with structural/compositional features such as nonporous and porous structures, heteroatom/defect modification and manufactured hybrid structures for photocatalysis are discussed in detail. We conclude with a discussion of some key challenges and future directions for the development of 2D photocatalysts for efficient solar energy conversion.
Gang Liu
Gang Liu received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Physics from Jilin University in 2003. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2009. During his PhD study, he worked at Prof. G. Q. Max Lu's laboratory for one and half years in Australia. He was the recipient of the T. S. Kê Research Fellowship founded by Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, IMR CAS. Now he is a professor of materials science in IMR. His main research interests focus on solar-driven photocatalytic materials for renewable energy.
Chao Zhen
Chao Zhen received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Physics from Jilin University in 2007. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2013. He worked as an assistant professor of materials in IMR between 2013 and 2015, and now he is an associate professor of materials science in IMR. His current research interest is in developing efficient solar energy conversion devices including photoelectrochemical water splitting cells and new types of photovoltaic cells.
Yuyang Kang
Yuyang Kang received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry from Liaoning University in 2013. Now he is a PhD candidate at the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on layered photocatalysts for water splitting under the supervision of Professor Gang Liu and Professor Hui-Ming Cheng.
Lianzhou Wang
Lianzhou Wang is a Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and the Director of Nanomaterials Centre, the University of Queensland (UQ), Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1999. Before joining UQ in 2004, he worked at two national institutes (NIMS and AIST) of Japan for five years. Wang's research interests include the design and application of semiconducting nanomaterials in renewable energy conversion/storage systems, including photocatalysts and photoelectrochemical devices.
Hui-Ming Cheng
Hui-Ming Cheng is a Professor and the Director of the Advanced Carbon Research Division of Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, CAS, and the Low-Dimensional Material and Device Laboratory of the Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University. His research focuses on carbon nanotubes, graphene, two-dimensional materials, energy storage materials, photocatalytic semiconducting materials, and bulk carbon materials. He is a highly cited researcher in materials science and chemistry fields. He is now the founding Editor-in-Chief of Energy Storage Materials and the Associate Editor of Science China Materials. He was elected a member of CAS and a fellow of TWAS.
1. Introduction
The sustainable development of modern society inevitably requires increasing dependence on renewable energy supplies. Solar energy as the largest renewable energy source has been considered the ultimate solution to this need. Solar energy can be realized by many ways including solar-to-thermal, solar-to-electrical, solar-to-biomass, and solar-to-chemical conversions. Among them, solar-to-chemical conversion based on photocatalysis represents an amazing way to produce solar fuels or high-value chemicals by inducing important redox reactions at ambient temperature.1 Solar-driven photocatalytic water splitting to produce hydrogen is considered the key reaction in closing the loop on carbon emission by providing clean feedstock hydrogen and has been pursued since the 1970s.2 Over 10% solar-to-hydrogen (STH) energy conversion for solar-driven photocatalytic water splitting3 is required to economically compete with the currently dominant industrial hydrogen production technology, namely steam reforming from hydrocarbons. As a result of long-term intensive research, photocatalytic overall water splitting has seen very encouraging progress including over 1% STH,4 an apparent quantum yield (AQY) record of 71% at 254 nm,5 and overall water splitting beyond 600 nm with particulate photocatalysts.6 All these achievements indicate a bright future for solar-driven water splitting, yet there is still a long way to go before reaching the goal of ∼10% STH efficiency.
A typical photocatalyst for the solar generation of hydrogen usually consists of a light absorber and a co-catalyst, and sometimes an electron mediator or a passivation layer in order to simultaneously meet the requirements of all three basic steps (light absorption, separation and transport of photogenerated charge carriers, and catalysis) of photocatalysis.7 The realization of the 10% STH by photocatalysis depends on both the availability of suitable materials as the building blocks of photocatalysts and the ability to integrate these materials. In the past four decades, a large number of light absorbers have been established by changing the compositions and crystal structures. An increasing number of co-catalysts, most of which are derived from electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution reactions, have substantially improved the catalysis reactions, in particular water splitting without apparent back reactions. Equally important, driven by the rapid development of nanoscience and nanotechnology, rational control of the photocatalyst components in terms of their size and morphology (shape), crystallinity, defects and dopants also provides flexible platforms to facilitate the integration of particles. Reducing the particle size of bulk materials in one-direction leads to the formation of attractive 2D materials with a thickness of one atom or one unit cell,8–22 and these have been intensively explored in a large variety of research fields.12,14,23–32 Besides the geometric features of large basal size and small thickness, 2D materials possess unique physicochemical properties in terms of electronic structure (for example, the transition from an indirect to a direct bandgap, and from metallic to semiconducting), optical absorption, carrier transport, sorption of molecules and ions, reactive sites, etc. These properties make 2D materials promising as the active components of solar-driven photocatalytic systems. To this end, many 2D materials in addition to graphene11,33–104 have already been used to construct various photocatalysts and photoelectrodes that do significantly boost solar energy conversion efficiency and/or exhibit some distinct features.
To rationally construct high-efficiency photocatalytic conversion systems with 2D materials as building blocks, it is important to understand the underlying correlations between the physicochemical properties of “2D” light absorbing materials and the basic steps of photocatalysis by critically reviewing the state-of-the-art advancements in 2D based photocatalysts. To our knowledge, there is no such comprehensive review focusing on this aspect, though some reviews have given excellent summaries of the progress in the synthesis of various 2D materials and their related photocatalytic performance.85,105–117 In this review, we will first present a brief introduction to the fundamentals of photocatalysis including principles, material challenges, and the motivations for pursuing 2D photocatalysts. Then, the unique properties of 2D materials as light absorbers will be summarized to demonstrate the advantages and drawbacks of using them as light absorbers for photocatalysis. Based on a deep understanding, representative progress in using 2D materials as the light absorbers of photocatalysts will be discussed and compared with their bulk counterparts. Finally, the concluding remarks will address the key challenges in the field and propose a developing map of 2D material based photocatalysts for more efficient solar energy utilization.
2. Fundamental aspects of photocatalysis
2.1. General principles of photocatalysis
Many important reviews have summarized the general principles of photocatalysis from different aspects,118–123 so that we shall give only a very brief introduction in order to help readers readily understand the necessity of using the 2D materials in the construction of solar-driven photocatalysts.
Photocatalysis can be simply described as a process in which photo-generated electrons and holes induce targeted redox reactions on the light absorbers and/or co-catalysts loaded on it. Photocatalysis consists of three distinct steps: (1) light absorption, (2) separation and transport of the photo-generated charge carriers in the bulk, and (3) catalysis on the surface of the light absorber and/or co-catalyst, as illustrated in Fig. 1. How to realize this efficiently is very challenging, both thermodynamically and kinetically. The difficulties lie in at least the following aspects: (1) maximum harvesting of solar energy (particularly visible light) to generate sufficient energetic electrons and holes; (2) high mobility and long diffusion length of the photo-generated electrons and holes to suppress bulk recombination; (3) sufficiently strong redox power of photo-generated electrons and holes to induce reactions, particularly water oxidation that requires four electrons; (4) abundant surface sites for the forward targeted reactions instead of the back reactions (like the reaction between H2 and O2 to produce H2O). Each of these four topics represents an important research direction. Moreover, the three steps span a huge time-scale from 10−15 to 10−1 s.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of photocatalytic water splitting occurring on a photocatalyst consisting of a light absorber and co-catalysts for the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions. Time scale of each step is also given. 
What's more challenging are the inherent conflicts between the requirements for the three key steps. There are at least three factors involved here: (1) increasing the light absorption range (reduced bandgaps) normally leads to a lower reductive ability of the photo-generated electrons and/or a lower oxidation ability of the photo-generated holes;124 (2) the much lower mobility of the holes than electrons in most semiconductors125 does not favor the rate-determining water oxidation reactions,126 (3) the mismatch between the random distributions of reductive and oxidative reaction sites and the desired migration of the electrons and holes in different directions.127
The strong underlying conflicts associated with photophysical processes, electronic properties and catalysis principles make the realization of high-efficiency photocatalysis very challenging. To address the challenges, it is of critical importance to precisely control each basic step based on a comprehensive understanding of photocatalysis and structure–property relationships. In this review, we will highlight the important roles of “2D” structures as light absorbers in each step of the photocatalysis and hope to shed light on the rational design of better photocatalytic materials for improved solar energy conversion.
2.2. Challenges from the materials aspect and the advantages of 2D structures as light absorbers
As mentioned in the previous section, photocatalysis is an extremely complex process involving multiple interactions of light with the material, adsorbate with the catalyst surface, and the photo-generated charge carriers with the adsorbate. Materials provide the platforms for manipulating these interactions by changing their compositions, crystal structures, particle size, morphology (shape), crystallinity, defect and dopant concentrations, and the integration of different components into hybrid structures. Although the ability to prepare, modify and integrate various photocatalytic materials has been well developed, there are many challenges to be addressed from the viewpoint of materials science as detailed below.
Research on extending the absorption range of photocatalysts to capture all visible light of the solar spectrum has continued for the past two decades.128–131 Based on the sum of the theoretical 1.23 V for water splitting and the overpotential requirement of several hundred millivolts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), the appropriate bandgap of solar-driven semiconducting photocatalysts is considered to be between 1.6 and 2 eV. Considering the requirement of the long-term stability of photocatalysts in an aqueous solution under light irradiation, metal oxides clearly stand out compared to the less stable metal sulfides, nitrides and halides. However, most stable metal oxides with appropriate band edges for water splitting suffer from wide bandgaps and find it difficult to capture visible light due to the very deep position of the O 2p dominant valence band maximum. Although narrowing the bandgap by introducing different electronic structure modifiers (dopants, defects, disorder and stress) is a general and widely used strategy for increasing visible light absorption, the challenges associated with this are not only the difficulty in realizing a homogeneous distribution of the modifiers in the materials,126,132–135 but also the increased number of concomitant recombination centers for the photo-generated charge carriers in the materials.136
The effectiveness of using layer structures to facilitate the diffusion of active modifiers from the surface to the bulk of materials through the interlayer spaces to obtain a homogeneous distribution has been validated in many layer photocatalysts including Cs0.68Ti1.83O4,132 CsTaWO6137 and g-C3N4.134,135 Compared to the mother materials, these homogeneously modified layer photocatalysts show an extraordinary band-to-band redshift of the whole absorption edge. However, the layer photocatalysts usually have a relatively low intrinsic activity due to the large energy barriers existing between layers that are maintained by weak interactions like van der Waals forces and electrostatic attraction. One typical example is polymeric carbon nitride (widely described as g-C3N4 in the literature) with weak interlayer van der Waals forces and abundant hydrogen bonds in the covalent bonding dominated intralayer framework shown in Fig. 2.138 The theoretical potential barriers across the local regions containing van der Waals forces and hydrogen bonds are as large as 33.2 and 7.9 eV, respectively. Thus, the photo-generated charge carriers are highly localized in each melon strand as marked by the green and red angles in Fig. 2b, resulting in a very low probability of inducing photocatalysis reactions. Innovative strategies are important to solve the challenges associated with layer structures that are also commonly used as the parent structures to produce other 2D materials. Therefore, the straightforward strategy is to produce ultrathin and/or porous sheets of layered materials to give full exposure of each layer to the reactants. This is the first challenge to be highlighted in the development of 2D materials for efficient photocatalysis.
 Fig. 2  Atomic structures and electrostatic potentials of layer carbon nitride with hydrogen bonds. (a) Side and (b) top view of the atomic structure of layer carbon nitride. H, C and N atoms are denoted by small yellow, large white and light blue balls, respectively. Two nearest neighbor melon strands in the basal plane of monolayer carbon nitride are marked by solid green and red triangles in (b). The calculated electrostatic potentials along the direction perpendicular to (c) and the two directions parallel to (d and e) in the basal plane of the layer carbon nitride. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
Another challenge concerning the bandgap narrowing of the light absorber of a photocatalyst is to increase light absorption while maintaining the strong redox power of the photo-generated charge carriers. It is difficult to address this problem with a photocatalyst containing a single light absorber, although loading suitable co-catalysts on it can improve the reaction kinetics, to some extent. To solve this problem, a Z-scheme photocatalytic system has been designed that uses two light absorbers and an electron-mediator to mimic the natural photosynthesis process. This design is effective not only in capturing large portion of the solar spectrum but also in maintaining the strong redox powers of the charge carriers.139 For Z-scheme photocatalysts, efficient communication between the two light absorbers using the mediator or directly at their interface is essential for promoting photocatalysis. The advantageous features such as very large surface area and strong interfacial contact, which can be obtained by using 2D light absorbers, are therefore crucial for the construction of efficient Z-scheme photocatalysts. There is no doubt that 2D materials have outstanding advantages in enabling intimate interfacial contact.
The separation and transport of photo-generated electrons and holes to reach the surface of light absorbers is crucial for the subsequent transfer of charge carriers in catalysis reactions. This process is intrinsically controlled by both the crystal structures and compositions of the materials, and is sensitive to the crystallinity, shape, exposed facets, defects, interfacial properties etc. The result of the much larger effective mass of valence band holes than conduction band electrons in most metal oxide photocatalysts limits the separation and transport of charge carriers.125,140 In clear contrast, the significance of the small effective mass of both electrons and holes for charge separation is clearly indicated by the excellent photovoltaic performance of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite iodides.141 Unfortunately, there is only limited room to substantially change the effective masses of the charge carriers in most photocatalyst materials by introducing common electronic structure modifiers. One favorable factor is the surface upward band bending of the n-type metal oxides, which can partially regulate the transport behaviors of photo-generated electrons and holes by accelerating the holes and slowing the electrons in the charge depletion layer of the oxides in contact with the co-catalyst or solution. Moreover, surface band bending can be changed by controlling the concentration of free carriers, exposure of different facets, and also the size and shape of the particles.142 On the other hand, controlling the distances that the charge carriers travel from the bulk to the surface along different directions provides another way of regulating the transport behaviors of the carriers. In a word, with the prerequisite of a smaller mass of electrons than holes, controlling surface band bending and distances along the transport directions of electrons and holes from the bulk to the surface by changing the morphology and size (for example, being 2D) of photocatalyst particles can create new ways to overcome the mobility mismatch between electrons and holes.
Catalysis reactions on the photocatalyst surface induced by photo-generated electrons and holes are controlled not only by the properties of the light absorber and co-catalyst but also by the spatial distribution of reductive and oxidative co-catalysts on the absorber. Surface atoms with different coordination numbers and surface defects sensitively affect the chemical states of sorbates on both the light absorber and the co-catalyst. Selective loading of the reductive and oxidative co-catalysts of the light absorber can significantly improve photocatalytic activity as already demonstrated for faceted photocatalysts.127,143,144 However, this facet dependent selective loading can only be used for a limited number of light absorbers. Other innovative strategies like using a ferroelectric field145 and anisotropic shape (for example, 2D sheets146) of materials have been developed to control the selective loading of co-catalysts.
Surface atomic structures of photocatalysts intrinsically determine the sorption behaviors of reactants/products and also the abundance and distribution of surface states. The complexity of the surface atomic structures of the particles of conventional light absorbers and co-catalysts makes the rational design and construction of photocatalysts difficult to achieve. The origin of this complexity is the presence of many different micro-facets and also defects on them. The selective exposure of some specific facets with favorable features, which has been actively pursued in the last decade,143,147 represents an important way of simplifying the surface atomic structures of the light absorbers. Despite the rapid development of various faceted photocatalysts, the flexibility of synthesizing photocatalysts with a large percentage of the desired facets is still quite limited. Alternative strategies for controlling surface atomic structures are desirable. From this aspect, atomic or unit-cell thick 2D materials with a large basal surface have desirable uniform surface atomic structures for photocatalysis.
3. Unique physicochemical properties of 2D light absorbers
Ultrathin 2D materials show many unprecedented optical, electrical, and magnetic properties as a consequence of the confinement of electrons in two dimensions. The large lateral size but atomic or unit-cell thickness offers them a high specific surface area, a fast rate of production of photo-carriers under a low photon flux density and active surface atoms, and a short migration distance for the photo-carriers. These fascinating features of 2D materials favor photocatalysis by changing light absorption, carrier transportation and separation, and surface catalytic reactions, and these will be discussed in the following sections.
3.1. Electronic structures
According to the particle-in-a-box model, the reduction of the dimensionality of a semiconductor particle leads to an increase in the degree of quantization along the confined direction. The electronic band structure becomes sparser with respect to the density of states (DOS) along the confined direction of motion. By reducing the structure from three dimensions to two, the DOS changes from a continuous square-root dependence on E to a step-like dependence (Fig. 3).148 The relationships of the DOS [N(E)] with E in the bulk and 2D semiconductors are given by: (1) (2)
 Fig. 3  Schematic of a parabolic energy band in the quantum limit. Two-dimensional bands in the kx,y plane give rise to a stepped cumulative density of states with increasing energy. Modified with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 1975, Springer Nature. 
Some interesting things occur due to the spatial confinement. One is that the electron–hole binding energy increases with the degree of confinement, which leads to an increased likelihood of exciton formation. An exciton is strongly analogous to a hydrogen atom, in which the positively charged carrier hole acts as the nucleus binding to the carrier electron. The Bohr radius of excitons in a bulk semiconductor is simplified into the following equation: (3)where ε is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor, μ is the reduced effective mass of the exciton , n is the exciton quantum number, and m0 is the free electron mass in vacuum.149 The binding energy for ground state (n = 1) excitons in a bulk semiconductor is written as (4)
Taking CdTe (me* = 0.067m0, mh* = 0.5m0) as an example, the reduced effective mass (μ) of an exciton in CdTe is 0.0828m0. As the dielectric constant of CdTe is known to be 10.6, so the 3D bulk exciton binding energy is estimated to be 10.0 meV with a Bohr radius of 6.8 nm. Once the crystal dimension becomes smaller than the Bohr radius of an exciton in a bulk semiconductor, the exciton binding energy must increase along with the degree of quantization. When the thickness (Lz) of a 2D material becomes half the Bohr radius of an exciton in the bulk, the exciton binding energy increases by a factor of four compared with that in the bulk. The shift (ΔEb) in the energy of excitons is proportional to 1/Lz2,150 which is given approximately by (5)
The second feature of the spatial confinement and reduced dimensionality is an enlarged bandgap. The change (ΔEg) in energy gap (Eg) is also proportional to 1/Lz2,151 which is given approximately by (6)
The stronger the confinement, the larger the bandgap and energy of optical emission resulting from electron–hole recombination. According to the particle-in-a-box approximations, 3D confinement is stronger than 2D confinement, which in turn is stronger than 1D confinement. Consequently, the change in the bandgap energy (ΔEg) in the nanostructures of a semiconductor is greatest in quantum dots, followed by quantum rods, quantum wires and finally quantum wells (Fig. 4a and b).152 For a 2D material, the thinner the material becomes, the stronger is the confinement effect. This leads to a larger bandgap and thus a blue-shift of the optical emission peak. As a consequence of the bandgap enlargement, the band edge positions separate in opposite directions. The ability to modify the electronic structure of semiconductors by controlling the dimensionality of the structure provides an additional variable to optimize the system.
 Fig. 4  (a) Geometries of the different structures. (b) Plots of ΔEg (the increase in the bandgap over the value for bulk material) against d (the thickness or diameter) for rectangular quantum wells, cylindrical quantum wires and spherical quantum dots obtained from particle-in-a-box approximations. The grey area between the dot and wire curves is the intermediate zone corresponding to quantum rods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. (c) Emission and absorption spectra of CdSe nanoplatelets with different numbers of monolayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. 
Here we shall keep using CdSe as an example. Bulk CdSe is known to be inactive for photocatalytic H2 evolution as its conduction band edge is lower than the redox potential of hydrogen production. In contrast, 2D CdSe nanoplatelets with a thickness smaller than the Bohr radius (∼5.6 nm) exhibit a noticeable blue-shift in the optical absorption and photoluminescence spectra compared to the bulk (Fig. 4c). The blue-shift of the absorption edge increases with the reduction of the number of monolayers in the nanoplates from 7 to 4, which leads to a remarkable upward shift of the conduction band edge.153 Once the edge is higher than the potential of proton reduction, photocatalytic hydrogen evolution becomes possible.154,155
The third remarkable feature of 2D materials because of the confinement is the possible transition between an indirect and a direct bandgap. As an example, MoS2 undergoes an indirect-to-direct bandgap transition when its thickness is reduced to a monolayer, as shown in Fig. 5a.156,157 Reducing the number of layers in MoS2 strengthens the confinement effect, which causes the increased indirect gap. The transition from the indirect to direct bandgap occurs in the monolayer. Such a transition causes a more than 104-fold increase of the luminescence quantum yield observed in the monolayer (Fig. 5b).156
 Fig. 5  (a) Calculated band structures of bulk MoS2, four-layer MoS2, bilayer MoS2 and monolayer MoS2 from left to right. The solid arrows indicate the lowest energy transitions. Bulk MoS2 is characterized by an indirect band gap. The direct excitonic transitions occur at high energies at the K point. With reduced layer thickness, the indirect band gap becomes larger, while the direct excitonic transition barely changes. Monolayer MoS2 becomes a direct band gap semiconductor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) PL spectra of mono- and bilayer MoS2 samples in the photon energy range from 1.3 to 2.2 eV. Inset: PL quantum yield of thin layers (1–6 layers). Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society. 
Another feature is that the atomically thin nanosheets typically possess a higher DOS near the band edges compared to their bulk counterparts. This provides new opportunities to modify the electronic properties including the mobility and concentration of carriers. Compared to the bulk, a three atom thick SnS2 monolayer has an increased bond length and structural distortions so that a much increased DOS at the valence band maximum is generated.158 This feature is considered to improve the carrier mobility. The photocurrent generated from an electrode of monolayer SnS2 under visible light is over 70 times larger than that of the bulk counterpart. Similar results were also seen in other semiconductors such as ZnSe, C3N4 and Bi2WO6 nanosheets with unit-cell thickness.159–161
3.2. Optical absorption characteristics
The optical absorption characteristics of semiconductors are intrinsically determined by their band structures. As discussed in Section 3.1, the quantum confinement effect leads to an increase in the bandgap and thus a narrower absorption range for ultrathin 2D nanosheets. Meanwhile, the DOS in the nanosheets appears to be a step-like distribution with energy so their absorption edge is also step-like. These steps originate from excitations from relatively discrete valence-band states (sub-band states) to discrete conduction-band states (Fig. 6d). When the binding energies of the excitons are larger than the thermal energy (kT), sharp peaks with energies corresponding to confined excitons appear at each step (Fig. 6b). Taking InAs with a large Bohr radius of ∼34 nm as an example, a strong quantum confinement of carriers is readily obtained in quantum membrane thicknesses less than 20 nm. As a result of the interband transitions between the subbands of 2D InAs nano-membranes, stepwise absorption spectra can be observed at room temperature in such free-standing membranes with thicknesses ranging from 3 to 19 nm. Meanwhile, the absorption edge has a gradual blue-shift with thickness decreasing from 19 to ∼3 nm (Fig. 6e).162
 Fig. 6  (a) Bulk GaAs band-edge absorption profile including exciton effects shown together with the bulk conduction band DOS; (b) comparison of the bulk and quantum limit (two-dimensional) DOS of an energy band; (c) schematic of absorption spectra for valence band to quantized conduction band transitions with and without exciton effects at each two-dimensional band edge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 1975, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic of the qualitative band structure of a 2D InAs QM, with arrows indicating the allowed optical transitions between valence and conduction subbands; (e) absorption spectra of InAs QMs with thickness of Lz ∼ 3 nm, 6 nm, 9 nm, 14 nm, and 19 nm at room temperature, Aen–hn represents the absorption from the corresponding interband transitions, en–hhn and en–lhn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2013, National Academy of Sciences. 
The enlarged bandgap of 2D materials is favorable for inducing redox reactions because of the large driving force of the photogenerated charge carriers. However, in terms of solar light utilization, the large bandgap limits the capture of low-energy photons in sunlight. Band engineering by various electronic structure modifiers is highly important in producing a wider absorption range. As surface atoms in 2D nanomaterials become dominant, surface modifications could drastically change the electronic structure of the nanosheets to obtain the desired optical absorption.
3.3. Spatial separation of photogenerated charge carriers
One remarkable property of semiconductor nanosheets as a photocatalyst is the effective spatial separation of photogenerated electrons and holes between the edges and basal surface of the nanosheets. As indicated in Fig. 7, the photodeposition of Cu2O and MnO2 particles occurs selectively on the edges and surface of the lepidocrocite-type Ti0.91O2 nanosheets with a crystallographic thickness of 0.75 nm, respectively.146 It is proposed that the electron moves in the 3d conduction band mainly consisting of the Ti4+ network in the 2D nanosheet and then reduces Cu2+ at the edge, while the hole exists in the 2p valence band mainly consisting of the O2− surface and oxidizes Mn2+ on the surface. This phenomenon is also observed for the selective photodeposition of other products including Ag and Cu and is independent of the pH value of the reaction solutions (a lower pH simply reduces the reactivity), suggesting that the spatial separation of the charge carriers can be controlled by an intrinsic feature of the 2D nanosheets.
 Fig. 7  (a) Model of the movements of the photoproduced electron and hole in a TiOx nanosheet with a lepidocrocite structure. The electron moves in the 3d CB consisting of the Ti4+ network in the nanosheet and then reduces Ag+ and Cu2+ at the edge of the 2D sheets, while the hole exists in the 2p VB consisting of the O2− surface and oxidizes Mn2+ on the flat surface. (b) AFM images of TiOx nanosheets photodeposited under UV light (265 nm) illumination; nanosheets deposited with (left panel) Cu2O and (right panel) MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
Despite the obvious spatial separation of the reductive and oxidative sites on a Ti0.91O2 monolayer film, the results from individually dispersed nanosheets of calcium niobate are controversial. Based on TEM images, Compton et al. claimed the nanosheet edges as the reductive sites by monitoring the distribution of the photodeposited Pt nanoparticles on the TBAx[H1−xCa2Nb3O10] (x = 0.15–0.20) nanosheets with a thickness of 1.16 nm and a lateral size of around 1.2 μm as a particulate photocatalyst.163 It was proposed that dangling Nb–O bonds at the edges provide Pt nucleation sites that are absent from the surface of the nanosheets. However, TEM results from Ebina et al. seem to support the dominant distribution of Pt nanoparticles on the basal surface of the Ca2Nb3O10 nanosheets after the photoreduction of PtCl62− at a high concentration (3 wt%) of PtCl62− ions,164 while a 0.1 wt% Pt-loaded nanosheet has Pt nanoclusters on the edges. This inconsistency might be caused by the following three factors. (1) The nucleation and growth of Pt (or other reductive products) nanoparticles on the ultrathin edges of individually dispersed nanosheets in solution, whose positions always change during the reaction, is very hard to control. In contrast, the edges of nanosheets immobilized in a monolayer film do not move during the photodeposition process, which may facilitate the nucleation and growth of the Pt nanoparticles. (2) Some oxygen vacancies on the basal surface of the nanosheets lead to the exposure of some metal atoms and thus provide additional pathways for the diffusion of the photogenerated electrons to reach the surface. (3) Some isolated Pt nanoparticles produced by the photochemical reaction of PtCl62− ions might be reloaded on the surface of the nanosheets. Based on a comprehensive analysis of the results, we tend to believe the first of these plays the dominant role. Future studies on the spatial distribution of the reductive and oxidative sites of the nanosheets, for instance edges vs. flat surface, are required to clarify the origin of the inconsistency.
The spatial separation of reductive and oxidative sites has also been realized in some organic 2D materials that have emerged as a new class of attractive photocatalysts. Among them, carbon nitride polymer (g-C3N4), which was explored as a visible light photocatalyst for the first time by Wang et al. in 2009,165 has a graphite-like layer structure that allows the production of various ultrathin carbon nitride nanosheets. The dominant distribution of photodeposited Pt nanoparticles on the edges of the sheets suggests that the edges are the reductive sites.40 Compared to single-layer metal oxide nanosheets with metal cations and oxygen anions in alternate atomic layers, the single-layer carbon nitride nanosheet has its carbon cations and nitrogen anions in the same layer. Therefore, the mechanism of controlling its charge separation between the edges and basal surface should be different and deserves further study.
Although similar spatial separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes on different facets was also observed in photocatalysts, the driving force has been shown to be the difference in work function of the facets and thus surface band bending at different facets. Compared to the strategy of selective exposure of different facets to enable the spatial separation of the charge carriers, 2D structure design provides an alternative flexible way to induce spatial separation of the photo-generated charge carriers for improved photocatalytic activity.
3.4. Planner host of abundant guests
Owing to their geometric shape, charged surface, and abundant unsaturated surface atoms, 2D nanosheets have the outstanding advantage of being able to host some active guests to enrich or tailor their properties. Some typical studies are now reviewed to demonstrate such advantages.
For the assembly films of the nanosheets, the binders between them can play an additional role in changing the photo-response properties of the electrodes of the films. One interesting example demonstrated by Seger et al. is an n-type to p-type switchable photoelectrode assembled from alternating exfoliated Ti0.91O2 nanosheets and polyaniline (PANI) layers.166 The behaviors of the photoelectrode are found to be very sensitive to the pH value of the electrolyte and give an anodic photocurrent in a strong basic electrolyte and a cathodic photocurrent in a strong acidic electrolyte under light irradiation, as illustrated in Fig. 8. This pH dependent photocurrent property is intrinsically related to the changed structure of PANI under different pH conditions. PANI acts as an n-type semiconductor under basic conditions while acidic conditions make it act as a p-type semiconductor by protonating its nitrogen atoms. This finding might provide a strategy for controlling both the type and intensity of the photocurrent of the electrodes for not only photoelectrochemical water splitting but also other photo-active devices.
 Fig. 8  Scheme of multilayer thin films containing alternate conducting PANI and exfoliated Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets. Because of the significant structural changes in the PANI molecule under basic and acidic conditions, when used as photoelectrodes the multilayer films exhibit a unique n-type to p-type switchable electron transfer behavior under different pH conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
Other molecules or ions with desirable functions can also be introduced into the spaces between the nanosheets to tailor their properties. One example related to photocatalysis is flocculated Ti0.91O2 nanosheets with iodine molecules in the interlayer spaces, which show an extraordinary band-to-band redshift of the absorption edge to 2.38 eV compared to 3.29 eV for flocculated nanosheets without the iodine molecules as shown in Fig. 9.167 The origin of the observed redshift is the upward shift of the valence band maximum at a high iodine concentration. The resultant nanosheets have the ability to photocatalytically decompose Rhodamine B under visible light. In principle, this strategy of using the strong adsorption of the negatively charged nanosheets towards nonpolar iodine molecules is generic for the realization of the effective coupling of various charged nanosheets of metal oxides with functional molecules to extend the absorption range of metal oxides that usually have too large bandgaps to capture visible light. In addition, this strategy might be applicable to further increase the light absorption capability of the hybrids of the charged 2D materials.168–172 It should be noted that the separation of photogenerated charge carriers in 2D light absorbers mainly originates from their structure anisotropies along different crystallographic orientations, while the separation of photo-generated charge carriers in 2D nanosheet hybrids is mainly induced by the energy difference between the band alignments of two or multiple components.
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the coupling of Ti0.91O2 nanosheets with I2 molecules. Plots of the transformed Kubelka–Munk function versus the energy of the light recorded from the flocculated (X%) I2–Ti0.91O2 sheets with different amounts of I2 dopant: (a) X = 0; (b) X = 0.4; (c) X = 1.2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Loading co-catalysts is almost indispensable for the construction of photocatalysts for solar fuel generation.173,174 Compared to bulk or even nanosized particles, nanosheets with a large surface have the advantage of being able to host co-catalysts and studies have shown the feasibility of doing this for molecular and even single-atom co-catalysts. For instance, Bi et al. used K4Nb6O17 nanosheets with a lateral size ranging from 100 to 500 nm and a thickness of several nanometers to host trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), by virtue of its reversible redox couple TFA˙/TFA−, as a homogeneous co-catalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, as shown in Fig. 10.73 As a result of the greatly promoted transfer of holes from the nanosheets to the molecular co-catalysts and the maximized contact areas between the co-catalysts and reactants, the nanosheets have an increased photocatalytic hydrogen production rate 32 times that of the bare nanosheets.
 Fig. 10  Schematic of the molecular co-catalyst strategy for accelerating hole transfer. Homogeneous molecular co-catalysts use reversible redox couple and highly active free radical reactions to promote hole transport, unlike supported heterogeneous co-catalysts, which are constrained by the finite contact areas between co-catalysts and reactants. Purple, cyan and red spheres denote K, Nb and O atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
Single atom catalysts supported on different substrates have emerged as an attractive class of new catalysts for various catalysis reactions.175 The concept of single atom catalysis has also been introduced to realize photocatalysis by loading noble metal atoms on a light absorber to maximize their efficiency. The effective anchoring of a high concentration of co-catalyst single atoms on a light absorber usually requires it to have a large surface area, which is one of the features of 2D materials. Isolated single Pt atoms as a new co-catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction have been embedded in the sub-nanopores of 2D g-C3N492 and this results in a photocatalytic H2 generation which is 8.6 times higher than that of Pt nanoparticles on a per Pt atom basis. The single-atom Pt is determined to be located on top of the five-membered rings of g-C3N4 where it forms Pt–C/N bonds. The synergy of the prolonged lifetime of photo-generated electrons and changed surface trap states produced by the introduced single-atom Pt atoms in the g-C3N4 framework is proposed to be responsible for the higher photocatalyst activity. Another example by Li et al. also demonstrated the significance of forming Pt–N bonds in the framework of g-C3N4 by producing visible-near-infrared photocatalytic hydrogen generation.176 In addition, single atoms of palladium and platinum supported on graphitic carbon nitride acting as photocatalysts for CO2 reduction have been investigated by density functional theory calculations.177
3.5. Strain-modulated band structures
Band structure engineering of semiconductors has long been pursued in order to fully capture solar light and change the redox ability of photogenerated charge carriers for efficient solar-driven photocatalysis. The introduction of elastic strain as a continuous variable is considered a highly desirable way of changing the physical and chemical properties of a material without changing its chemical compositions. However, there is usually little opportunity for producing a homogeneous elastic strain in three-dimensional bulk materials which intrinsically limits the use of this effect. The emergence of 2D monolayers that can withstand a very high elastic strain provides a new opportunity to use elastic strain engineering to modify the electronic structures.
An interesting example is that a monolayer of molybdenum disulphide (MoS2) can withstand an effective in-plane strain of up to 11%,178 which is high enough to cause a substantial change to its band structure. A systematic investigation of the dependence of the band structure of a MoS2 monolayer on biaxial strain up to 9% has been theoretically and computationally conducted.179 The results shown in Fig. 11 clearly demonstrate that both the direct and indirect bandgaps of a MoS2 monolayer continuously decrease with increasing strain. The excitation energy correspondingly decreases from 2.0 eV at zero strain to 1.1 eV at 9% biaxial strain. Conley et al. showed that the bandgap decrease of MoS2 is nearly linear with strain, and ∼45 meV/% strain for monolayer MoS2 and ∼120 meV/% strain for bilayer MoS2 have been determined by photoluminescence spectroscopy.180 Moreover, a pronounced strain-induced decrease in the photoluminescence intensity of monolayer MoS2 at an applied strain of ∼1% is attributed to a direct-to-indirect transition of the character of the optical band gap. Elastic strain engineering is a general method for changing the band structure of other 2D materials as demonstrated in phosphorene.68,181–183 All these results strongly indicate that there are many possibilities for changing the band structure of 2D semiconductors using elastic strain in order to obtain desired optical properties, particularly a smaller bandgap for the wider solar light absorption.
 Fig. 11  Strain-dependent electronic and optical properties of a MoS2 monolayer. (a) Electronic DFT band structure under different biaxial strains from 0% (blue line) to 9% (red line). (b) Direct and indirect bandgaps under different biaxial strains calculated using DFT and GW. The GW direct bandgap refers to the minimum direct transition energy. It is located at the K points of the hexagonal Brillouin zone, indicated by an arrow in (a). The corresponding lowest optical excitation energy (black triangles) is calculated by BSE on top of GW quasiparticle energies with electron–hole Coulomb interactions included. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2012, Springer Nature. 
Elastic strain engineering has also been used to modulate the band structure of 2D photocatalysts and has demonstrated its effectiveness in increasing visible light absorption by narrowing the bandgap. Freestanding lepidocrocite 2D TiO2 with a bandgap of 1.84 eV that can absorb all visible light and a portion of the near infrared light (Fig. 12a) was synthesized by a one-step solvothermal method.184 The presence of large non-uniform strain in the freestanding monolayer with a thickness of around 1 nm and crumpled morphology has shown to be the origin of the much smaller bandgap than that of its flat counterpart (4.7 eV). The effects on the bandgap of lattice distortions (4% and 20% compressive strain along the a and b axes, respectively, together with a distortion in the angle between the a and b axes, from 90° to 116° in Fig. 12b) shown by an STEM image of a nanosheet have been theoretically investigated as shown in Fig. 12c. The strained TiO2 monolayer has a much smaller bandgap than an unstrained monolayer. These highly strained 2D nanosheets exhibit obvious photocatalytic activity under light irradiation with wavelengths of higher than 700 nm.
 Fig. 12  (a) Left vertical axis: the Kubelka–Munk functions plotted for the estimation of the optical band gap (R, the reflectance tested on the sample). The optical band gap was obtained by extending the slopes of the curve, to intercept the energy axis. Right vertical axis: optical absorption (as a function of energy) computed from GW-BSE calculations for unstrained and strained lepidocrocite monolayers (εaver2 = (εxx2 + εyy2)/2); the strained lattice is taken from an STM image. Atomic and electronic structure of the strained lepidocrocite TiO2 monolayer. (b) Top views of the atomic structures for a one-layer 2-D lepidocrocite phase TiO2. (c) Calculated DFT LDA band gap as a function of different uniaxial and biaxial strains for the lepidocrocite TiO2 monolayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
All ultrathin, particularly unit-cell thin nanosheets actually tend to be crumpled in order to improve their stability. The concomitant structural distortions cause additional visible light absorption by allowing some originally prohibited excitation processes and/or promoting the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. Compared to flat nanosheets, crumpled g-C3N4 nanosheets185,186 were shown experimentally and theoretically to have an extended visible light range because of n → π* excitation caused by the structural distortion.187 It was also demonstrated that the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 with structural distortion increases with the degree of distortion in the crystal.188 These studies suggest the significant role of strain engineering for designing and understanding nanosheet-based photocatalysts.
4. Use of 2D light absorbers in photocatalysis
The 2D structures of oxides, hydroxides, oxyhalides, nitrides and dichalcogenides of many transition metals, and metal-free compounds and elements have been intensively investigated as light absorbers.11,43,85,102,105–108,110–113,116,117,189–193 Considering the requirements of long-term stability and low-cost for light absorbers for solar fuels, representative results from the oxide family, which normally have very good chemical stability and long lifetime for photocatalysis reactions, will be mainly discussed as model systems to demonstrate the unusual photocatalytic properties of 2D materials.
4.1. Non-porous 2D light absorbers
Among a variety of transition metal oxide based photocatalysts, there is no doubt that titanium oxide is the most important model photocatalyst and it has been intensively studied.128 The first examples of a 2D titanium oxide material are probably the Ti1−δO24δ− (δ = 0.09–0.13) nanosheets with a theoretical thickness of 0.75 nm shown in Fig. 13a that were produced by the delamination of lepidocrocite-type protonated titanate by reacting with tetrabutyl ammonium (TBA+) ions.194–196 Depending on the particle size of the protonated titanate used, the lateral size of the Ti1−δO24δ− sheets varies from several nanometers to tens of microns. An aqueous suspension of these macromolecule-like negatively charged sheets that are charge-compensated and stabilized by TBA+ ions can stably exist for several months and even years at room temperature. The nature of the negatively charged surface and the high stability of these ultrathin sheets make them promising building blocks for the construction of various photocatalysts. As a light absorber, the first feature to be concerned with is its band structure that determines the absorption range, energies of photo-generated electrons and holes, and the mobility of charge carriers. On the basis of a combination of electrochemical (Mott–Schottky method) and optical absorption measurements, the bandgap of the Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets was determined to be 3.84 eV, which is consistent with the 3.82 eV determined by measuring the photoelectrochemical response range of a photoanode of Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets. Their bandgap is much larger than those of the anatase (3.2 eV) and rutile TiO2 (3 eV) polymorphs. The reason for the larger bandgap of the nanosheets is the obvious quantum size effect associated with their small thickness. Compared with anatase TiO2, the edges of the conduction and valence bands of the nanosheets were determined to be negatively and positively shifted by 0.12 and 0.48 eV, respectively. This unequal shift was attributed to the large difference in the effective mass of electrons and holes. A comparison of the total densities of electronic states of single layer TiO2, bulk anatase and rutile TiO2 (Fig. 13b) consistently shows a larger bandgap of single layer TiO2 than anatase and rutile TiO2.197 Moreover, the density of total states of the single layer is quite different from that of rutile, but is similar to that of anatase TiO2 except for the bandgap probably because of their similar atomic arrangements. This is also indicated by the easy topotactic transformation from the lepidocrocite-type titanates or their single layers to anatase TiO2 particles.
 Fig. 13  (a) Atomic structure of the nanosheet crystallites of Ti1−δO24δ−. Red and yellow circles represent Ti and O atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society. (b) Total and partial density of states for stacked TiO2, single-layer TiO2, rutile and anatase TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of exfoliated Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets (blue) and anatase TiO2 nanoparticles (pink). Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (d) UV-visible absorption spectra for multilayer films of (PEI/Ti0.91O2)n on a quartz glass substrate. The inserted figure is the dependence of peak absorbance at 262 nm on the number of deposition cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Despite the theoretically similar densities of states of the nanosheets and anatase, the former have a remarkably different optical absorption band with a sharp peak at around 260 nm, as shown in Fig. 13c.196 This peak is related to the exciton absorption, which is commonly observed in the optical absorption bands of materials with strong exciton binding energies (for example, semiconductor quantum dots). The absorbance of this sharp peak increases almost linearly with an increase of the concentration of the nanosheet colloid or an increase in the number of layers in the nanosheet films (Fig. 13d),35 indicating the high dispersion with no obvious interactions between single nanosheets. This property is theoretically supported by the unchanged bandgap of stacked layers separated by a 1 nm thick vacuum slab compared with that of a single layer (Fig. 13b).197
Due to the coexistence of TBA+ ions as the stabilizer and charge-compensator for the Ti1−δO24δ− nanosheets, an exact evaluation of the photocatalytic activity of the nanosheets is hard to make. So far, most studies on the photocatalytic properties of nanosheets of various metal oxides, produced by exfoliation using the insertion of ions, have used restacked particles or nanostructures of the nanosheets and assembled films obtained by many methods including freeze-drying, spray-drying, flocculation, electrostatic sequential deposition and Langmuir–Blodgett deposition. An early study by Sakai et al.195 demonstrated that the photoelectrochemical (PEC) properties of photoanode films composed of n layer pairs of Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets and poly(diallyldimethylammonium) (PDDA) polymer binder (exactly, ITO/PEI/nanosheet/(PDDA/nanosheet)n−1) depended on the number of layers. Two related features were derived from the PEC and optical absorption results obtained from the films. One is the unchanged bandgap energy for nanosheet photoanodes with different numbers of layers, suggesting that a nanosheet is electronically isolated in multilayer assemblies without affecting the electronic state of neighboring nanosheets. The other is the fact that the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) of photoanodes with different numbers of layers (n) shows a far from linear increase with n (IPCE is only doubled when n increases from 2 to 10). This can be easily understood because the diffusion of the photogenerated electrons and holes in the photoanodes towards the ITO current collector and electrode–electrolyte interface, respectively, is greatly limited by the large potential barrier between the electronically isolated nanosheets. This challenge also exists in particulate photocatalysts with a layer structure, where the interaction between unit layers is weak. These two features provide a very important guide for the design of efficient layer heterostructures and understanding their photocatalytic properties.
Among a number of metal oxide nanosheets exfoliated from their bulk counterparts, nanosheets of niobium- and tantalum-based oxides (some of their structures are shown in Fig. 14)198 are promising light absorbers for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, in particular overall water splitting. Compared with the titania nanosheets, these nanosheets have similar properties including a negatively charged surface, electronically isolated layer-by-layer assembly, quantum size effects, and the spatial separation of the photogenerated charge carriers. Based on electrochemical and photoelectrochemical measurements of the niobium-based oxide nanosheets, the electronic band alignments and band edges are important electronic parameters that control photocatalytic activity, and vary somewhat with a change of composition. For instance, Ca2Nb3O10− nanosheets have the smallest bandgap of 3.44 eV, and the bandgaps of the TiNbO5−, Ti2NbO7− and Ti5NbO143− nanosheets are also smaller than that of the Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 15.199 Mott–Schottky analysis of the layer-by-layer assembled films of perovskite nanosheets with the general formula A2B3O10 including Sr2Nb3O10, Ca2Nb3O10, Ca2Nb2.25Ta0.75O10, and Ca2Nb1.5Ta1.5O10 suggests a pH dependence of their flatband potentials close to −59 mV per pH.200 Nanosheets with tunable band edge potentials and well-controlled other parameters (for example, comparable thickness, high crystallinity, and a very low concentration of defects) provide good candidates to help understand the band structure-dependent photocatalytic activity at the nanoscale. Moreover, the band edge potentials of all these nanosheets are suitable for water splitting to release hydrogen and oxygen. Equally important, surface atomic configurations and arrangements of these metal oxide nanosheets can be considered the same as that of their mother layer materials, so that it is reasonable to state that changes in the photocatalytic properties of the nanosheets can be exclusively attributed to effects related to their ultrathin thickness.
 Fig. 14  Structure of typical oxide nanosheets: (a) titanium oxide; (b) calcium niobium oxide; (c) manganese oxide; (d) niobium oxide; (e) tantalum oxide; (f) titanium niobium oxide; (g) cesium tungsten oxide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 15  Energy diagram depicting the conduction-band edges, valence-band edges, and bandgap energy for (a) Ca2Nb3O10−, (b) TiNbO5−, (c) Ti2NbO7−, (d) Ti5NbO143−, (e) Ti0.91O20.36−, and (f) Nb3O8− nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Wide bandgap calcium niobate nanosheets as photocatalysts have exhibited promising photocatalytic water splitting activity under UV light irradiation, as shown by an early study by Ebina et al.164 They demonstrated that photocatalytic hydrogen generation from an aqueous methanol solution with restacked Ca2Nb3O10 nanosheets by use of K+ ions is increased from a value of 63 μmol h−1 for their parent material KCa2Nb3O10 to 550 μmol h−1 at an optimal loading (0.1 wt%) of Pt co-catalyst. The 8.7-fold increase seems to be rationalized simply by the 9-time surface area increase caused by exfoliation-restacking. However, restacking the 0.1 wt% Pt-loaded nanosheets with Na+ ions leads to a 15.7× increase in hydrogen generation. This increase is attributed to the more rapid migration of the photogenerated electrons to the nearby Pt for proton reduction because the Pt nanoparticles are located not only on the surface of the restacked agglomerates but also in the interlayer spaces. Increasing the Pt loading to 3 wt% causes the activity of the restacked Pt-loaded nanosheets to rapidly decrease from 900 to around 200 μmol h−1 possibly because the higher loading results in larger Pt particles (∼1 nm versus 10 nm) that may have a lower catalytic activity. A large number of studies have confirmed the much superior catalytic activity of nanoclusters and single atoms of noble metals compared to their nanoparticles.
Comprehensive studies of photocatalytic properties under various conditions are always important for the rational design of 2D photocatalysts. A detailed study into the effects of nanoscaling, sacrificial charge donors, co-catalysts, and co-catalyst deposition conditions on the photocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen generation activity of TBA-supported HCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets together with their parent phase KCa2Nb3O10 (structure and morphology shown in Fig. 16a and b) was conducted by Sabio et al.201 Under all conditions with and without a co-catalyst and sacrificial agents, the nanosheets exhibited a much higher activity in generating hydrogen or oxygen than the bulk, as shown in Fig. 16c–e. The kinetic model suggests that the superior activity of the nanosheet is due to shortened transport paths for electrons and holes to the reactive surface, which reduce lattice recombination. This effect outweighs the increase in surface recombination because of the increased specific surface area. It is concluded that both the kinetics of the redox reactions and the rate of charge transport to the water–catalyst interface instead of mass transport and surface recombination are dominant in controlling the activity of the nanosheets.
 Fig. 16  (a) Bulk niobate KCa2Nb3O10 consists of sheets of corner-shared NbO6 octahedra with intercalated Ca2+ ions that are held together by the layers of K+ ions. Exfoliation with TBA+ (tetrabutylammonium) produces the nanoniobate as individual nanosheets. Both niobates are functionalized with photodeposited Pt or IrOx nanoparticles to serve as active sites for H2 and O2 production, respectively. (b) SEM and TEM micrographs of bulk and nanoniobate. (c) H2 evolution rates from catalysts in H2O, (d) H2 evolution rates in aqueous MeOH, and (e) O2 evolution rates in aqueous AgNO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The dependence of photocatalytic activity on the band edge potentials of the nanosheets has been demonstrated by comparing the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from a mixture of methanol and water with a group of eight restacked perovskite nanosheets of HCa2−xSrxNb3O10 and HCa2Nb3−yTayO10 with tunable conduction band-edge potentials.67 It was found that three types of nanosheets containing tantalum atoms greatly outperform the other five kinds of nanosheets without tantalum atoms due to their much larger bandgaps and more negative conduction band potentials in the former materials. The most active sample HCa2Nb2TaO10 with 0.5 wt% Pt co-catalyst gives a maximum AQY of 80%, which is the highest value reported for nanosheet-based photocatalysts. This is attributed to the nanosized thickness which enables prompt migration of the photogenerated charge carriers to the surface and a sufficiently negative conduction band edge potential which provides a strong driving force for proton reduction.
Overall water splitting for photocatalytic solar energy conversion that releases hydrogen and oxygen in a stoichiometry of 2:1 must be achieved without any sacrificial agents, but only a very limited number of semiconductor photocatalysts can do this. Several studies have focused on the splitting of water using niobate-based nanosheets as photocatalysts without adding sacrificial agents. Ca2Nb3O10 nanosheets with and without co-catalyst Pt have the ability to induce photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from pure water, but no oxygen evolution is obtained.163 The highest quantum efficiency of 3.49% is observed for a structure with Pt directly grown onto the nanosheets. The adsorption of oxygen on the photocatalyst surface is proposed to be the reason for the absence of oxygen evolution.202 A further study by Compton et al. showed that TBA-stabilized Ca2Nb3O10 nanosheets photocatalytically split water into hydrogen and hydrogen peroxide stoichiometrically. The H2O2 molecules formed are adsorbed on the nanosheet surface by coordinating as a side-on ligand with the surface Nb5+ ions.203 The high stability of the Nb-peroxide bond seems to be the reason for the inability of the nanosheets to evolve O2 under UV light irradiation. However, other possible reasons that need to be carefully investigated are the presence of some residual TBA+ ions attached to the nanosheets as a sacrificial agent that consume the photogenerated holes and the bi-directional catalytic role of Pt in inducing the reduction of oxygen.
It is encouraging that aggregates of RuOx-loaded Ca2Nb3O10 restacked with K+ and Na+ showed the ability of overall water splitting.204 In contrast, bulk KCa2Nb3O10 loaded with RuOx by a conventional impregnation procedure showed only H2 but no O2 evolution. The high dispersion of RuOx nanoparticles in the restacked agglomerates is considered to be responsible for the overall stoichiometric water splitting. A high dependence of overall water splitting on the alkali metal ions used to restack the nanosheets has been observed. Na+-based agglomerates exhibit a higher activity than K+-based agglomerates (118 versus 96 μmol h−1 of H2 generation) while the molar ratio (23:7.7) of H2 to O2 for Li+-based agglomerates is far from the stoichiometric ratio. A lower hydration tendency has been proposed to be the possible reason for this. A further study by Oshima et al. demonstrated an 8× higher photocatalytic overall water splitting activity for exfoliated and restacked KCa2Nb3O10 modified with Pt clusters smaller than 1 nm diameter in their interlayer spaces than that modified with RuOx particles.205 The introduction of electron-deficient Pt nanoclusters, which are considered to play a role in collecting the photogenerated electrons, was realized by the electrostatic interaction between a cationic metal complex [Pt(NH3)4]Cl2 and a negatively charged two-dimensional Ca2Nb3O10− nanosheet and subsequent restacking and thermal hydrogen treatment, as shown in Fig. 17. Although these clusters tend to aggregate in a long-term photocatalytic water splitting test of 30 h, no activity degradation was observed. The AQY in the steady-state was estimated to be about 3% at 300 nm, which was reported to be the highest efficiency for nanosheet-based photocatalysts. These results demonstrate the great significance of the exfoliation-restacking processes of layered metal oxides in constructing efficient photocatalysts for overall water splitting by dispersing suitable ultra-small nanoparticle co-catalysts in the interlayer spaces of the agglomerates.
 Fig. 17  Preparation of Pt-intercalated KCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets through electrostatic attraction between a cationic complex and anionic nanosheets [TBA+ indicates tetra(n-butyl)ammonium cation]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the metal oxide nanosheets exfoliated from layer materials discussed above (the top-down strategy), nanosheets of many materials including binary oxides (i.e., ZnO,72 WO3,61 SnO63) and ternary oxides (i.e., Ba5Nb4O15,82 La2Ti2O7,33 Bi2WO6,44,88 FeVO4,71 ZnGa2O465) have also been synthesized by the bottom-up strategy. The combination of these two strategies leads to a huge number of 2D materials of semiconducting oxides. One early representative sample of the bottom-up synthesis of 2D photocatalysts is the hydrothermal synthesis (the most widely used method for 2D materials) of the monomolecular-layer perovskite Ba5Ta4O15 nanosheets with a hexagonal structure.206 The nanosheets have a dominant thickness of 1.08 nm, which is very close to the c-axis lattice parameter (c = 1.3 nm). It is surprising that the bandgap of the nanosheets is smaller than that of the bulk of Ba5Ta4O15 (3.75 versus 4.1 eV), which is contrary to the usual bandgap enlargement resulting from the quantum size effect. These 2D nanosheets show good separation of photo-generated charge carriers and have abundant reactive sites resulting in a much superior activity in photocatalytically decomposing Rhodamine B compared with the bulk photocatalyst. Recent progress in other oxide nanosheets consistently shows the result of the much superior photocatalytic activity of the nanosheets compared with the bulk.
Compared to oxides with a bandgap of >3 eV, which are responsive only to UV light, the oxides with a smaller bandgap allow visible light absorption. Monolayer Bi2WO6 with a sandwich substructure of [BiO]+–[WO4]2−–[BiO]+, which may also be considered as a layered heterojunction with different monolayer oxides as indicated in Fig. 18a and b, was prepared by a cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)-assisted hydrothermal bottom-up route.88 The strong adsorption of Br− ions from CTAB on the monolayer surfaces makes the monolayers negatively charged, which effectively blocks their stacking by Coulombic repulsion forces and the hydrophobic chains of CTA+ ions (Fig. 18c). The synthesized monolayer has a thickness of around 0.8 nm, which is close to that of a monolayer Bi2WO6 sheet along the [001] direction. Remarkably, the adsorbed Br− ions can produce a smaller bandgap of 2.7 eV by elevating the valence band so that a wider visible light absorption range can be utilized. Equally important, the [BiO]+–[WO4]2−–[BiO]+ sandwich substructure of monolayer Bi2WO6 simulates a heterojunction interface with a space charge that promotes the spatial separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes in the interface, as shown in Fig. 18e. Thanks to the broader visible light absorption, promoted charge separation, and abundant surface reactive sites, monolayer Bi2WO6 used as a photocatalyst shows a remarkably improved photocatalytic activity in generating ˙OH radicals and O2−, and hydrogen from an aqueous solution containing ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid as a sacrificial reagent under visible light (Fig. 18f–h). Other visible light responsive oxide nanosheets include SnNb2O6,100 SnO,63 BiVO4,34 Cu2O,59 and WO3.61
 Fig. 18  Synthesis of monolayer Bi2WO6. (a) Crystal structure of Bi2WO6. (b) Structure of pristine monolayer Bi2WO6. (c) Formation mechanism of monolayer Bi2WO6 with CTAB assistance. (d) TEM image of the synthesized Bi2WO6 with Br− ion assistance; inset is the corresponding HRTEM image. Photocatalytic performances of Bi2WO6 samples. (e) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism over the monolayer Bi2WO6. (f and g) Electron spin resonance signals of DMPO–˙OH− adducts and DMPO–O2˙− adducts produced by Bi2WO6 samples under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). (h) Visible-light-driven photocatalytic H2 evolution over nanocrystals, monolayers and RhB sensitized monolayers (λ ≥ 420 nm); 0.3 wt% of Pt was loaded. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
4.2. Porous 2D light absorbers
Mesoporous single crystal particles provide both a highly accessible surface and long-range electronic connectivity and structural coherence that are required in many applications. Such particles of oxide and nitride based photocatalysts can be prepared by seed-template and template free routes. For example, Crossland et al. developed a new method to grow semiconductor mesoporous single crystals of anatase TiO2 using seeded nucleation and growth inside a mesoporous template immersed in a dilute reaction solution.207 The porous single crystal films produced had mobility values over an order of magnitude higher than those of nanoparticle films over a broad range of charge densities. This synthesis method has been used to produce mesoporous single crystals of several metal oxides including rutile TiO2,208,209 and Fe2O3,210 for photo(electro)catalysis applications. In contrast to the seeded-template synthesis routes, template-free routes have the merits of scalability and low cost. Volume shrinkage of the materials after the phase transition can lead to the formation of abundant pores throughout crystals. Typical examples include the formation of porous single crystalline LaTiO2N plates from solid La2Ti2O7 plates in a flux of gaseous ammonia at 950 °C,211 and porous perovskite PbTiO3 fibers from solid pre-perovskite PbTiO3 fibers in air at 600 °C.212 Some unique strategies have also been developed to produce porous photocatalysts. Based on the stability difference of different bonds (chemical interactions) in a material, the selective breaking of weaker bonds by thermal treatment can be used to induce the formation of pores. A typical example is the formation of porous g-C3N4 by selectively breaking hydrogen bonds of bulk g-C3N4.138 All these porous bulk photocatalysts exhibit a higher photocatalytic activity than their non-porous counterparts. These strategies developed to produce porous bulk material can also be used to produce porous 2D materials for photocatalysts.
The introduction of pores in 2D nanosheets is very attractive because they increase the exposure of atoms to reactants and shorten the diffusion length of the photo-excited charge carriers to reach the surface. Moreover, the porous 2D structure can cause the increase of the edges or corners that are usually catalytically active sites. These advantages of porous nanosheets as active light absorbing materials for solar water splitting, which are applicable not only in powder form photocatalysis, but also thin film photoelectrocatalytic processes, are evident from the following representative results. Butburee et al. prepared porous single crystal array films of anatase TiO2 (Fig. 19a) on FTO substrates, using a one-pot hydrothermal reaction and subsequent ion exchange/thermal dehydration-induced pore-forming processes.213 The resultant nano-branched 2D porous backbone plate was used as a photoanode for photoelectrochemical water oxidation and delivered a photocurrent of 1.02 mA cm−2 at a very low potential of 0.4 V versus a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), close to the theoretical value of TiO2 (1.12 mA cm−2). Moreover, the current–potential curve has a small potential window from 0.1 to 0.4 V versus RHE under one-sun illumination, and has the near-ideal shape predicted by the Gartner Model. The excellent performance is attributed to the efficient spatial separation of photogenerated electrons and holes between the basal planes and edges of the plates and a surface reaction, as indicated in Fig. 19c–e. The synthesis strategy developed in this study might be applicable to the formation of porous single crystals of other metal oxides from their protonated metal oxides.
 Fig. 19  (a) HRTEM images of a branch and backbone plate of anatase TiO2; (b) photocurrent density versus applied potential curves for 2D, E-2D, and F-2D films. (c and d) Active site distribution in the non-branched 2D single-crystal structure indicated by the location of photodeposited Au and MnOx particles. (e) Diagram illustrating the working mechanism of E-2D photoelectrode-based PEC water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Porous nanosheets of some other metal oxides have also been developed. For example, single-crystal ZnO porous nanosheets with {0001} polar facets, prepared by a templating method, can not only accelerate the hole–electron separation and electron transport because of their being single crystals, but can also enhance the selective adsorption of organic molecules owing to the porous structure and the exposed {0001} polar facets with more O-termination (000−1) surfaces.214 In addition to the obvious role of nanopores in promoting charge separation and providing abundant reactive sites, the pores in the nanosheets can also modify the optical absorption range. Wang et al. found that Bi3NbO7 nanosheets with pores have a smaller bandgap than those without pores.94 It was proposed that the different edges, angles and facets of the pores compared to single crystal nanosheets without pores are responsible for the wider absorption spectra. Another example is BN porous sheets with a large number of exposed (002) plane edges (functionalized with hydroxyl groups) that exhibit wide-spectrum light absorption in both UV and visible light ranges. Theory shows that the narrower HOMO–LUMO band-gaps of –OH edge-terminated BN nanoribbons than those of h-BN and -H terminated analogs215 are the reason for the visible light absorption in the yellow region. Moreover, the coupling of porous BN sheets with TiO2 nanoparticles leads to a strong visible light absorption band of the BN/TiO2 hybrid,216 which shows photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation. A number of possible reasons have been proposed to explain the increased visible light absorption in porous nanosheets, including defects and strains, which can also be produced during the formation of the pores.
Different from the 2D binary oxide nanosheets considered above, the porous Ga–In oxide nanofibers with atomically thin pore walls in Fig. 20a–d were prepared by electrospinning followed by thermal treatment.217 It was theoretically shown that these nanofibers have an unprecedented electronic structure arising from their ultrathin walls, so that the conduction band bottom and the valence band top are on two opposite surfaces separated with a small electrostatic potential difference, as indicated in Fig. 20e. This feature not only shortens the distance of the photogenerated charge carriers from the reactive sites, but also promotes their spatial charge separation in the nanofibers. As a consequence, these nanofibers with no additional HER co-catalyst have a multifold increase in photocatalytic hydrogen generation from the mixture of aqueous solution of methanol compared to their bulk counterpart, suggesting the great potential of using atomically thin porous nanosheets to construct efficient photocatalysts.
 Fig. 20  (a) SEM image, (b and c) TEM images, and (d) HRTEM images of Ga1.7In0.3O3. (e) Electrostatic potentials of the top and bottom surfaces of b-Ga1.7In0.3O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
Due to the higher energy level of N 2p than O 2p states, nitride semiconductors usually have a smaller bandgap than their oxide counterparts. Among them, tantalum nitride Ta3N5 with a bandgap of ∼2 eV has been considered to be an efficient light absorber for photocatalytic water splitting because it has excellent light harvesting and appropriate band edges for water splitting. However, the material always suffers from serious drawbacks of low carrier mobility (1.3–4.4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and fast carrier recombination (<10 ps); as a result its activity is extremely low. The 2D structure addresses these problems. An innovative strategy using graphene oxide as a template was developed by Xiao et al.218 to synthesize ultrathin Ta3N5 single crystal nanosheets with a thickness of around 2 nm, specific surface area of 284.6 m2 g−1 and pores of 2–5 nm diameter, as shown in Fig. 21a–d. The hydrogen evolution rate of Ta3N5 nanomeshes with Pt as a co-catalyst under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight is 10× higher than that of bulk Ta3N5 (Fig. 21e). The apparent quantum efficiency of the Ta3N5 nanomeshes under 450 nm light irradiation was estimated to be 0.53%. The photodeposition of Pt on them shows a uniform distribution of Pt nanoparticles on the whole surface and also the edges, suggesting abundant reactive sites for the HER reaction. Equally important, compared to the bulk, the blue-shift of the absorption edge of the nanomeshes caused by quantum size effects (Fig. 21f) means an enlarged bandgap for the stronger redox energy of electrons and holes.
 Fig. 21  (a, b and d) SEM, TEM, and HR-TEM images of ultrathin Ta3N5 nanomeshes. (c) AFM image and height profile of the Ta3N5 nanomeshes. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of bulk Ta3N5 and Ta3N5 nanomeshes under simulated sunlight irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). 0.02 g of photocatalysts were loaded with 1 wt% Pt in 10 vol% methanol aqueous solution. (f) UV-visible light absorption spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
4.3. Heteroatom and defect modified 2D light absorbers
As discussed, most metal oxides with suitable band structures for photocatalytic water splitting are only UV active due to having bandgaps >3 eV. As a result of the quantum size effect their 2D structures have an even narrower light response range. On the other hand, many materials even with 2D structures are photocatalytically inactive due to their unfavorable intrinsic atomic structures. Introducing heteroatoms and/or defects is the most commonly used method to address the challenge by changing the electronic band structures and surface atomic structures. In some cases, the heteroatoms and defects themselves (or their local regions) convert the materials into co-catalyst-free photocatalysts for solar fuel generation. Despite the abundant information obtained from heteroatom/defect-modified bulk photocatalysts, our understanding of the phenomenon is still in its infancy. One of the most distinct differences between the modifications of bulk and 2D structures by heteroatoms/defects might be that the heteroatoms/defects exert a stronger influence on the ultrathin 2D structure because most of its atoms are exposed. In contrast, the extent to which they can exert their influence in a bulk material is highly dependent on their spatial distribution.
As shown in Section 4.1, the exfoliated 2D nanosheets of most metal oxides have a large bandgap >3 eV. And introducing suitable anion dopants, particularly nitrogen, is an effective way of modifying their band structures. Thanks to the layer structure of their parent materials, which can be homogeneously doped with anions, homogeneous anion-doped metal oxide nanosheets can be easily produced. The first study on this topic was conducted by Liu et al. Homogeneous nitrogen doping in layer-structure cesium titanate leads to an extraordinary band-to-band redshift of the absorption edge from 356 to 472 nm (Fig. 22a) as a result of the bandgap narrowing.132 The exfoliation of the homogeneously nitrogen doped protonated titanate produces nitrogen-doped titania (Ti0.91O2−xNx) nanosheets with a yellow color.35 In contrast to the band-to-band visible light absorption spectrum of the nitrogen-doped titanate, only a shoulder-like visible light absorption band up to 450 nm (Fig. 22b) occurs in the Ti0.91O2−xNx nanosheets, indicating that the bandgap is not really narrowed but that some nitrogen dopant-related states are formed in the bandgap. Based on XPS data, the amount of the substitutional nitrogen in the nanosheets is comparable to that in the parent titanate, so homogeneous nitrogen doping occurs in both the titanate particles and nanosheets. The substantial change of the optical absorption of the doped titanate before and after exfoliation must be caused by the disruption of long-range interactions between nitrogen atoms in the titania layers of the parent material. This is validated by the fact that nitrogen doping in H-restacked Nb–O based nanosheets (the substitutional nitrogen content is about 3% of all O atoms) can only cause a shoulder-like absorption band in the visible light region.36 In addition, the photo-nitrogen doping process developed in this study is unique. The photogenerated charge carriers in H-restacked Nb–O nanosheets containing TBA in the absence of oxygen leads to the decomposition of TBA to induce nitrogen doping in the randomly stacked nanosheets. It is recognized that the sufficiently high conduction band edge of the Nb–O nanosheets plays an essential role in enabling nitrogen doping by generating electrons with a sufficiently strong reductive power. The photo-nitrogen doping process is not possible for Ti–O nanosheets with a conduction band edge that is not high enough.
 Fig. 22  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of Cs0.68Ti1.83O4 particles before and after homogeneous nitrogen doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) UV-visible absorption spectra of Ti0.91O2 nanosheets exfoliated from protonated Cs0.68Ti1.83O4 particles with and without homogeneous nitrogen doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nitrogen-doped nanosheets of calcium tantalum oxynitride [Ca2Ta3O9.7N0.2]−, prepared by exfoliating a layered perovskite oxynitride (CsCa2Ta3O9.7N0.2) by proton exchange and two-step intercalation, show some interesting optical properties and photocatalytic activities.38 Compared to the strong visible light absorption band of their layer-structure parent oxynitride, the nanosheet suspension has a much lower absorbance in the visible light region due to the lower concentration of the nanosheets than in the bulk material. The nanosheets obtained by drying the suspension have an increased absorbance in the visible light region that is still lower than that of the bulk material. Note that the absorbance of the nanosheet suspension and dried nanosheet powder in the UV region below 300 nm, which is the excitation of the O 2p orbital to the Ta 5d orbital, is very close to that of their parent material. This again suggests the lack of a long range interaction of nitrogen dopant atoms in the nanosheets so that only a narrow sub-band consisting of N 2p states is formed in the bandgap to enable low absorbance in the visible light region. Because of their small thickness and anisotropy, the nanosheets have photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution from water under visible light irradiation. In contrast, CsCa2Ta3O9.7N0.2 exhibits a very low photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution under visible light, even with methanol as a sacrificial agent. However, when the same nanosheets are loaded with Rh and H-restacked, after a 42 h UV-light exposure to remove surface organic species, they show photocatalytic activity for H2 and O2 evolution from pure water under UV-light irradiation, although the ratio of evolved H2/O2 is around 3 (probably because of the side reactions, including the decomposition of organic species). However, no visible light photocatalytic H2 and O2 evolution from pure water was seen, probably because of the lack of band-to-band visible light absorption in the restacked nanosheets.38 In addition, black Ca2Nb3O10−xNy nanosheets were obtained by exfoliating the parent layer-structure KCa2Nb3O10−xNy,47 and ultrathin nitrogen-doped perovskite nanosheets LaTa2O6.77N0.15− with strong visible light absorption were prepared by exfoliating the Dion–Jacobson-type layered perovskite RbLaTa2O6.77N0.15.219
The doping of some free-standing nanosheets also leads to an expansion of the light absorption range. Typical examples are as follows. Approximately 15 nm thick single crystal nanosheets of La2Ti2O7 with the perovskite structure showed a band-to-band redshift of the absorption edge from 378 to 495 nm after nitrogenation,39 demonstrating the advantage of using ultrathin nanosheets for the doping. Based on sub-nanopore engineering using molecular titanium-oxide incorporation, as shown in Fig. 23a, the electronic band structure of 2D graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets with a thickness of 3–3.3 nm (Fig. 23b) can be tuned to produce increased visible light absorption (Fig. 23c). The resultant material showed improved separation and migration rates of the photo-excited charge carriers, leading to a significantly improved photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation.93 Note that only an additional shoulder-like absorption band is formed by incorporating different amounts of molecular titanium-oxide in the nanosheets. The possible reason for this may be the lack of the long-range interaction of Ti atoms perpendicular to the nanosheets. Similarly, iodine-doped graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets with a thickness of around 2 nm, where the iodine atoms replace nitrogen atoms, also have an additional shoulder-like absorption band between 450 and 650 nm.220 Boron is an effective dopant for modifying the electronic structure of photocatalysts, including carbon nitride. The replacement of a small number of carbon atoms with boron atoms causes a slight decrease of the bandgap by 0.05 eV, but greatly increases the absorbance, which enhances visible light photocatalytic hydrogen generation.49 Carbon-doped carbon nitride nanosheets can also be produced by the copolymerization of dicyandiamide with barbituric acid (BA) and by increasing the amount of BA in the precursor mixture, the absorption edge of the carbon nitride gradually shifts from 470 to 750 nm as a result of the respective shifts of the conduction and valence bands down and up. This study strongly indicates the importance of controlling intrinsic defects (or self-doping) of the nanosheets to achieve high performance.221
 Fig. 23  (a) Details of the TiO–CN structure. (b) TEM image of a TiO–CN2 nanosheet. (c) UV-visible absorption spectra of 2D CN and TiO–CN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides carbon nitride nanosheets, Huang et al. have developed polycrystalline carbon doped boron nitride (BCN) nanosheets with a thickness of around 3–4 nm (Fig. 24a–c).75 The ternary nanosheets have a highly delocalized 2D electron system with sp2 carbon incorporated in the h-BN lattice, where the bandgap can be adjusted by the amount of the incorporated carbon to produce unique features (Fig. 24d and e). The incorporation of carbon in the h-BN layers smears out the Raman signals of h-BN due to the distortion of the layer symmetry (Fig. 24f). These BCN nanosheets have the ability to induce photocatalytic hydrogen generation under visible light (λ > 420 nm) without an additional co-catalyst. With the assistance of a Ni–Co layered double hydroxide, the BCN nanosheets induce water oxidation to release oxygen under visible light. Moreover, the nanosheets also showed the ability to photocatalytically reduce CO2 to CO using visible light, which was confirmed by isotopic experiments. This new metal-free 2D photocatalyst with tunable optical and surface properties may find potential uses in many areas, from artificial photosynthesis to organocatalysis by further optimizing their local structures.
 Fig. 24  (a) HRTEM image of the BCN-30 sample. Scale bar, 100nm, inset scale bars, 5 nm. (b) Typical TEM dark-field image of the BCN-30 sample and the elemental mapping images of B, C and N of the enlargement of selected-area in the picture. Scale bar, 300nm. (c) High-resolution STEM of the BCN-30 sample along the (002) facet. Scale bar, 5 nm. (d) Ultraviolet-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (UV-vis DRS) of the BCN-x samples and (e) bandgap determination of the BCN-x samples from the (F(R)·E)nversus E plots. (f) Raman spectra of h-BN, BCN-30 and a physical mixture of h-BN and graphite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
As well demonstrated in bulk photocatalysts, heteroatoms can affect the charge separation of 2D photocatalysts because the entire ultrathin nanosheet with an extremely large surface area can be substantially changed. Despite a slight change in the bandgap, the replacement of sulfur with oxygen (4.4 at%) in ZnIn2S4 nanosheets causes an upward shift of the edges of the conduction and valence bands. As a result, the photo-generated electrons have increased power for proton reduction98 and the increased density of states at the valence band maximum guarantees more photogenerated charge carriers and their longer average recovery lifetime to promote their separation thus favoring efficient photocatalysis. As a result of these features, the oxygen-doped nanosheets with no additional co-catalyst exhibit a stable and enhanced photocatalytic activity with a hydrogen-evolution rate of 2120 μmol h−1 g−1, which is 4.5× higher than that of undoped nanosheets under the same conditions. Co-Doping in three atomic layer In2S3 also results in similar positive effects by increasing the charge carrier concentration by a factor of 3 and the average recovery lifetime by 25× compared to non-doped layers.77 A photoanode of Co-doped nanosheets has a one order of magnitude higher photocurrent than that of undoped nanosheets under visible light.
Intentionally introducing suitable cation heteroatoms in the nanosheets to create reactive centers at the atomic scale is highly promising in terms of both improving catalytic activity and lowering the amount of the noble metal co-catalyst used. A combination of pre-doping with such heteroatoms and subsequent exfoliation leads to the formation of cation-doped nanosheets. The merits of this route include the high crystallinity of the resulting doped nanosheets with an atomic dispersion of the dopant. By exfoliating KCa2Nb3−xRhxO10−δ, Rh-doped calcium niobate, nanosheets with a tunable amount of Rh up to x = 0.15 were obtained.37 The replacement of Nb5+ with Rh3+ in the Rh-doped Ca–Nb–O nanosheets is confirmed by a binding energy shift of Rh 3d5/2 and lattice expansion of the nanosheets. Further TEM observation reveals an atomic dispersion of Rh in the Rh-doped Ca–Nb–O nanosheets. In contrast, many fine particles, 2–5 nm in diameter, were deposited on 1 wt% Rh2O3-loaded nanosheets. The superiority of Rh doped Ca–Nb–O nanosheets for photocatalytic water splitting is clearly demonstrated in Fig. 25b. The apparent quantum efficiency at 300 nm is as high as 65%. The proposed mechanism for this is given in Fig. 25a, where the RhO6 units in the top layer of the nanosheets act as the sites for proton reduction. The Rh-doped Ca–Nb–O nanosheets can be considered a photocatalyst containing a single atom Rh cocatalyst. This concept is generic and is also demonstrated by a study showing that isolated single-atom Rh dopants in titanium oxide nanosheets act as a co-catalyst to promote photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from a methanol aqueous solution.37 The hydrogen evolution rate of the Rh-doped nanosheets is around 1.5-fold of that of the RhOx loaded nanosheets at their respective optimal concentrations of Rh (1.4 versus 4.6 for Rh/(Rh + Ti)). The isolated Rh atoms in the nanosheets instead of RhOx clusters are confirmed by the brighter images of Rh atoms at Ti lattice sites in Fig. 26a and b due to the much larger atom number of Rh than Ti. Based on the XANES and EXAFS data in Fig. 26d, one can conclude that the chemical environments of the Rh species in both Rh-doped nanosheets and RhOx-loaded nanosheets are similar to that in Rh2O3 but Rh is slightly more oxidized in the Rh-doped case. Three vacancy-like defects are present in the Rh-containing region in Fig. 26c probably because of the oxidation state difference between Rh3+ and Ti4+. In addition, theoretical simulations suggest different surface adsorption behaviors of water on pristine and doped nanosheets.222
 Fig. 25  (a) Crystal structure of a Rh-doped calcium niobate nanosheet prepared by exfoliation of KCa2Nb3−xRhxO10−δ and a model of the photocatalytic reaction in water/methanol. (b) Hydrogen evolution versus time over Rh(3.0 wt%)-doped Ca–Nb–O sheets, Rh(3.0 wt%)-doped KCa2Nb3O10, and Rh(1.0 wt%)-loaded Ca–Nb–O sheets. Reaction conditions: 5 mg of catalyst, 150 cm3 of aqueous 10 vol% methanol solution, 500 W Xe lamp. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 26  (a) HAADF-STEM (200 kV) image of a Rh (x = 0.026)-doped Ti1.82−xRhxO4 nanosheet, (b) magnified HAADF-STEM image (80 kV) of a Rh (x = 0.026)-doped nanosheet, (c) model of the structure expected from panel (b), (d) Fourier transforms of Rh K-edge k3-weighted EXAFS for Rh (x = 0.026)-doped and RhOx-loaded titania nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Defects can play an equally important role in extending the absorption range and/or promoting the separation of photogenerated charge carriers in the nanosheets.223 Oxygen vacancies can induce some localized states in the bandgap to capture photons with lower energies that are difficult to capture by the bandgap of pure semiconductors. They can also alter reaction kinetics by changing reaction barriers. A series of the oxide nanosheets with a large number of oxygen vacancies have been developed to boost photocatalytic activity. Taking advantage of an artificial hexagonal mesostructured In-oleate complex, Lei et al. synthesized In2O3 nanosheets containing oxygen vacancies with a thickness of around 0.9 nm that corresponds to the thickness of 5-atoms.62 The vacancies produce a new donor level and an increased density of states for the nanosheets so that both the absorption range and separation of the charge carriers are improved. As a result, compared to a nanosheet-based photoanode containing few oxygen vacancies, the one with many oxygen vacancies has a 2.5× increase in photocurrent density of 1.73 mA cm−2 under visible light. Oxygen vacancy-related levels are located 0.64 eV below the conduction band minimum. Excitation from the valence band to the defect levels or from the defect levels to the conduction band is responsible for the increased visible light absorption of nanosheets containing oxygen vacancies. Oxygen vacancies introduced in ∼2 nm thick K4Nb6O17 nanosheets without a co-catalyst significantly improve stable photocatalytic hydrogen generation with a rate of 1616 μmol g−1 h−1 from a methanol/water mixture.224 Although the important role of anion vacancies in improving the photocatalytic activities of metal oxide nanosheets has been demonstrated, the fundamental understanding on local structures of anion vacancies is still rare in the literature and needs to be explored in much more detail in further studies.
It is rare to have cation vacancies in most bulk n-type metal oxides, but several recent studies have reported their formation in ultrathin nanosheets. For example, the concentration of vanadium vacancies (VV) in freestanding gram-scale single-unit-cell orthorhombic-BiVO4 layers with an average 1.28 nm thickness can be changed by controlling the hydrothermal temperature.101 A temperature of 160 °C leads to nanosheets with a large number of VV's while a temperature of 120 °C leads to few VV's. A combination of advanced characterization techniques as well as theoretical investigations consistently reveals increased photo-absorption, electronic conduction, and separation of the photogenerated charge carriers. Because of this, nanosheets with a large number of VV's but without co-catalysts show an impressively stable activity of 98.3 μmol g−1 h−1 in reducing CO2 to methanol under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight. An apparent quantum efficiency of 5.96% at 350 nm is reached. It is interesting to see how the type of Bi vacancy depends on the nanosheet thickness of BiOCl. As the thickness of nanosheets with a large percentage of exposed reactive {001} facets is reduced from about 30 nm to the atomic scale (around 2.7 nm), the bismuth vacancies evolve from isolated defects  to triple vacancy associates  (Fig. 27a and b).45 As a result of the enhanced adsorption capability, effective separation of the photo-generated electron–hole pairs (Fig. 27c) and more reductive photo-excited electrons resulting from the triple vacancy associates, the ultrathin nanosheets have significantly improved photocatalytic activity under both UV and visible light irradiation (Fig. 27d). Such cation defects in ultrathin nanosheets may open up new ways to develop highly efficient solar-driven photocatalysts. Further studies on the reason for the formation of the cation defects in ultrathin nanosheets are needed.
 Fig. 27  Positron annihilation spectroscopy of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates. (a and b) Schematic of trapped positrons for (a) a  defect and (b)  vacancy associates. (c) Positron lifetime spectrum of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates. (d) Comparison of the photodecomposition of Rhodamine B with ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates under simulated solar irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
4.4. Hybrid 2D based light absorbers
The formation of heterostructures is also one of the most widely used strategies for increasing light absorption, and promoting the separation and directional transfer of photo-generated charge carriers. Besides the appropriate band alignments thermodynamically required in heterostructures, the interface between the components is critically important for the smooth transfer of the photo-generated charge carriers. Among the many heterostructure configurations, those formed by the face-to-face stacking of 2D materials clearly have the largest interfacial contact area. Moreover, the quality of the interfaces can be controlled by the crystallinity of the 2D materials used and the properties of the interface may be changed because of the many possible different properties of the available materials. Because of the large number of 2D materials already developed, the construction of a huge variety of hybrid layer structures,91,112,225–234 particularly those held together by van der Waals (vdW) bonds, with unique functions is feasible, as illustrated in Fig. 28.235 Although the majority of 2D heterostructures has been constructed for condensed physics studies, recent work has shown their great potential for solar-driven photocatalysis applications. Some representative developments are highlighted below.
 Fig. 28  Building van der Waals heterostructures. If one considers 2D crystals to be analogous to Lego blocks (right panel), the construction of a huge variety of layered structures becomes possible. Conceptually, this atomic-scale Lego resembles molecular beam epitaxy but employs different ‘construction’ rules and a distinct set of materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
Theoretical studies have predicted some very interesting features of vdW 2D heterostructures consisting of two monolayers as photocatalysts for water splitting. On the basis of the ∼2% lattice mismatch between AlN (or GaN) and MoS2 monolayers with the same hexagonal crystal structure, the formation of high-quality and intimate heterostructures is possible. Liao et al. predicted that a bilayer of MoS2/AlN (or GaN) can separately produce hydrogen and oxygen at opposite surfaces, where photo-excited electrons transfer from AlN (or GaN) to MoS2 during photocatalysis, as shown in Fig. 29a.236 The calculated optical absorption spectra show significantly increased visible light absorption because the formation of the vdW heterostructure reduces the bandgap. Specifically, the bandgap of the MoS2/AlN heterostructure is smaller than that of two separate monolayers (1.62 eV versus 1.92 eV for MoS2 and 3.39 eV for AlN). Moreover, the negative formation energies indicate that MoS2/AlN and MoS2/GaN heterostructures are energetically favorable and should be easily obtained experimentally. Similar effects are also confirmed in other vdW heterostructures including the strained h-BN/ZrS2 and g-C3N4/ZrS2 heterostructures.231 In addition, a bilayer of g-C3N4 is theoretically predicted to have a 0.8 eV smaller optical absorption threshold than the monolayer.237
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of MoS2/AlN(GaN) vdW heterostructures used as photocatalysts for water splitting, where VBM is the valence band maximum and CBM is the conduction band minimum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) The optimized structure of F-BNBNH, top (left) and side (right) views. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2014, American Physical Society. 
A surface-functionalized hexagonal boron-nitride bilayer (AB stacking) (Fig. 29b), whose two surfaces have been modified, one with fluorine and the other with hydrogen atoms, has been theoretically found to be active in inducing water splitting under near-infrared light.238 This activity is attributed to the unique electronic structure of the modified bilayer, where the valence and conduction bands are located on the two opposite surfaces (F-BN and BN-H) with a large electrostatic potential difference produced by the intrinsic dipole of the bilayer. This surface potential difference effectively reduces the band gap required for water splitting in the infrared region. The good spatial dispersion of valence and conduction bands between the lower and upper BN layers facilitates the separation of photo-generated electrons and holes in the bilayer. The high thermal stability of the modified F-BNBN-H bilayer with its nearly perfect AB stacking interface makes preparation of the bilayer experimentally possible.
As discussed above, a solid state Z-scheme heterostructure, consisting of two light absorbers and one electrically conductive mediator, has the outstanding merit of both utilizing the energetic photo-generated charge carriers and promoting their spatial separation. Compared to photocatalysts consisting of a single light absorber, these heterostructures have the ability to achieve high-efficiency water splitting. However, the construction of such heterostructures remains challenging and only a limited number of such structures have been produced. 2D materials with good flexibility are excellent for constructing these heterostructures because not only do they make large interfacial contact possible but they also minimize lattice mismatch at the interfaces. A recent theoretical study239 shows that graphene can be a good intermediate for the formation of a MoSe2/graphene/HfS2 heterostructure, where the MoSe2 and HfS2 monolayers act as the photocatalysts for HER and OER, respectively. The replacement of graphene with N-doped graphene produces the even more efficient MoSe2/N-graphene/HfS2. This is because the increased Fermi level of graphene after nitrogen doping reduces its work function from 4.35 to 3.61 eV and increases the density of states of electrons near the Fermi level, which promotes electron migration.
Compared to the conventional three-component Z-scheme heterostructures, a Z-scheme heterostructure without the use of a redox mediator was reported in a ZnO–CdS heterostructure in 2009.240 Formally named as a direct Z-scheme in 2010,129 the new design is easy to construct with two components. Due to the clean and controllable interface, 2D vdW heterostructures are promising candidates for direct Z-scheme photocatalysts. On the basis of the relative position of the partitioned band edges of the MoSe2 and HfS2 monolayers to the redox potential of H+/H2 and H2O/O2, the MoSe2/HfS2 heterostructure with a predicted strong internal electric field has proved to be an active direct Z-scheme photocatalyst for water splitting.239
Different from the construction the vdW heterostructures of two monolayers for only photocatalysis, Yang et al.241 proposed a dual function multi-layer structure, where carbon nitride is sandwiched between two graphene sheets modified by different functional groups (hydroxyl and epoxy groups), as shown in Fig. 30. It was theoretically shown that this system can harvest light and deliver photo-generated holes from the inner carbon nitride layer to the outer graphene-based sheets for water splitting and proton generation. Driven by electrostatic attraction, protons penetrate the graphene to react with electrons on the inner carbon nitride to generate a hydrogen molecule, which is then stored at a high-density within the sandwich. Moreover, the bandgap of carbon nitride is also narrowed for wider visible light absorption, as a result of the interaction between carbon nitride and graphene. The spatial separation of the reductive and oxidative sites between the inner and outer layers suppresses the recombination of the photo-generated electrons and holes. The ability to integrate photocatalytic hydrogen generation and safe storage has made the sandwich system an exciting candidate for practical solar and hydrogen energy utilization. This study provides a new viewpoint in the development of highly efficient systems for the solar-driven generation and utilization of hydrogen.
 Fig. 30  Scheme of water splitting and the hydrogen capsuling scheme. (a) Models of graphitic carbon nitrides CN, C2N, and C3N4. (b) The photocatalytic (water splitting) hydrogen generation and capsule storage scheme: (1) photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) separating; (2) water splitting to produce protons (H+) under the attack of holes (h+); (3) protons (H+) penetrating the GO and producing H2 molecules; (4) H2 molecules are prohibited from moving out of the sandwich. Here GO–CN–GO is used as an example. Blue, grey, pink and red beads respectively represent N, C, H (H+) and O atoms, the yellow and light blue clouds are respectively photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+), and the blue and magenta arrows indicate the migration of corresponding particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
Inspired by exciting theoretical predictions, increasing experimental effort has focused on 2D-based hybrid photocatalysts. One of the early studies is on layer-by-layer ordered nanohybrids prepared by self-assembly between oppositely charged nanosheets of a Zn–Cr-layered double hydroxide (Zn–Cr-LDH) and titanium oxide nanosheets.225 The resultant nanohybrids consist of alternate Zn–Cr-LDH and titanium oxide nanosheets as shown in Fig. 31. The hybridization has a negligible influence on the crystal structure and electronic structure of the Zn–Cr-LDH. The transfer of photogenerated electrons from the Zn–Cr-LDH nanosheets to the neighboring titanium oxide nanosheets leads to the spatial separation of electrons and holes between them so that their recombination probability is greatly reduced. As a photocatalyst, the hybrid shows almost double the photocatalytic oxygen generation under visible light compared to the LDH layer. Considering the large number of charged metal oxide nanosheets that are available, there are many possibilities of producing layer heterostructures to increase photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 31  (a) Cross-sectional HR-TEM image of the ZCT-1 nanohybrid and (b) an enlarged view and structural model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Many 2D/2D vdW heterostructures containing graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets, with a high conduction band edge, and another 2D component (phosphorene, Bi4O5I2,227 LDH234 and Fe2O3103) have been developed to control the transfer direction of the photo-generated charge carriers and their spatial separation between different layers. The traditional transfer of the photogenerated electrons (holes) from a higher conduction (lower valence) band edge to a lower conduction (higher valence) band edge is proposed in the 2D/2D vdW heterostructures of SnS2/g-C3N4,242 g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2,243 MoS2/g-C3N4226 and phosphorene or black P/g-C3N4.244,245 All these heterostructures show a higher photocatalytic activity than their individual components due to the increased charge separation. Different from common vdW heterostructures with weak interactions between the layers, Li et al. formed a novel bilayer junction by assembling metallic MoS2 monolayers on the oxygen-deficient end-faces (Bi12O17) of Bi12O17Cl2 semiconductor monolayers using oxygen-vacancy chemistry.91 The bilayer has a photocatalytic hydrogen generation rate 38× that of the Bi12O17Cl2 monolayers in an ascorbic acid solution under visible light. A good quantum efficiency of 36% at 420 nm was achieved on the bilayer sample. The Bi–S bonds formed between the Bi12O17Cl2 monolayer with oxygen vacancies and the MoS2 monolayer were shown to be the “high-speed” path for the transfer of photo-generated electrons from the former to the latter (Fig. 32). The directional separation of the charge carriers between the layers is responsible for the greatly enhanced photocatalytic activity. The findings in this study can help us understand the commonly observed activity increase in the various reported 2D/2D heterostructures, where vacancies seem to be always present in the monolayers.
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic of the crystal structure of Bi12O17Cl2-MoS2 (BOC-MS) and (b) of the charge flow processes within BOC-MS, including the electron–hole separation within 1L-BOC and (c) the interfacial electron transfer from 1L-BOC to 1L-MS along the Bi–S bonds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
It is very encouraging to see recent progress in the formation of direct Z-scheme 2D/2D heterostructures for overall water splitting. For instance, She et al. demonstrated that a (0.1%) RuO2/α-Fe2O3/g-C3N4/Pt (3%) Z-scheme photocatalyst consisting of ∼15 nm thick Fe2O3 nanosheets and 1.1–1.4 nm thick g-C3N4 nanosheets has the ability to induce overall water splitting under visible light.103 The tight interface between the nanosheets together with their appropriate band alignments is proposed to play a key role in causing the direct Z-scheme (Fig. 33a and b). Polymer-based vdW heterostructures using aza-fused microporous polymers (CMP) and C2N ultrathin nanosheets as HER and OER catalysts, respectively, have been designed as metal-free Z-scheme photocatalytic systems, to produce photocatalytic overall water splitting under visible light (Fig. 33c–e).246 The heterostructure has an optimal STH conversion efficiency of 0.23%, which can be increased to 0.40% by using graphene as a solid intermediate to facilitate the interfacial charge-transfer process. These two examples indicate the great potential of using polymers with a good flexibility to construct Z-scheme 2D heterostructures. A Z-scheme photocatalyst based on black phosphorus (BP)/BiVO4 has also been developed for visible light water splitting.233 Using this material with a Co3O4 cocatalyst produces a molar ratio of hydrogen to oxygen evolved from pure water that depends on the ratio of phosphorous to BiVO4. When the amount of BP reaches 40 wt%, a nearly stoichiometric H2/O2 ratio can be detected. The presence of the charge transfer path from the conduction band of BP to the valence band of BiVO4 is confirmed by the shorter lifetime of the charge carriers in the heterostructure. All these results demonstrate the great potential of using 2D materials to construct direct Z-scheme heterostructures for overall water splitting. Besides the large tight interfacial contact between the materials, some other underlying factors like defects and local surface structure changes may play an important role in inducing the Z-scheme and the important role of defects has been demonstrated in bulk heterostructures.
 Fig. 33  (a) HRTEM image of the α-Fe2O3/2D g-C3N4 (3.8%) hybrid. Scale bar: 5 nm. (b) Energy band diagram of the Z-scheme mechanism in α-Fe2O3/2D g-C3N4 (3.8%) hybrids at pH = 0. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Chemical structures of both aza-CMP and C2N. (d) TEM image of aza-CMP/C2N heterostructures. Arrows indicate overlapping interfaces. (e) Illustration of the electronic band structures of aza-CMP and C2N nanosheets, resulting in a Z-scheme structure. Key: ① C2N nanosheets, ② aza-CMP nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
5. Concluding remarks and perspective
With the development of a huge number of 2D materials over the past decade, 2D material-based photocatalysts have attracted increasing attention with exciting new opportunities in the rational design and construction of highly efficient solar-driven photocatalysts. So far, most traditional bulk photocatalysts have been explored in the form of their 2D counterparts. Compared to the bulk photocatalysts, the 2D materials for solar fuel generation have exhibited many unusual physicochemical properties. Because of their large lateral size and ultrathin thickness they are considered as macromolecule-like photocatalysts and therefore bridge the gap between homogeneous molecular catalysts and heterogeneous photocatalysts, to some extent. The results obtained from 2D photocatalysts certainly provide valuable new understanding of the photocatalytic processes and reaction mechanisms, which should lead to innovative strategies and guidelines for the development of a new generation of photocatalysts. We believe that this might be more important than the 2D photocatalysts themselves. Nevertheless, there are still key issues about 2D photocatalysts to be addressed.
What is the optimum thickness of the nanosheets for maximum photocatalytic activity?
Apart from the noticeable success in synthesizing 2D photocatalysts with considerably improved photocatalytic activities, there is a trend to pursue 2D structural engineering to achieve a material that is as thin as possible. The apparently favorable features associated with such a thickness reduction include significantly increased specific surface areas for abundant reactive sites, a shorter diffusion length of photo-generated charge carriers from the inside to the surface, and an enlarged bandgap for higher energies of photogenerated charge carriers. However, the quantum confinement effect in ultrathin nanosheets can also narrow the light absorption range and probably increase the recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers because of the high binding energy of excitons. It is clear that there is a strong trade-off between the favorable and unfavorable features caused by a 2D structure. The question then arises as to whether the photocatalytic activity of 2D photocatalysts reaches an optimum at a certain thickness? Finding the answer to this question requires further exploration of a series of 2D materials with different thicknesses, which remains a challenge.
What is the underlying role of the strong interaction between 2D light absorbers and co-catalysts in affecting photocatalysis?
As a result of the geometric features of ultrathin structures, the loading of co-catalysts on 2D nanosheets becomes much easier than on bulk or other shaped light absorbers. These co-catalysts usually have a particle size of several nanometers and can even be single atoms. The tight interfacial contact between the co-catalysts and light absorber nanosheets normally facilitates charge transfer. For a bulk light absorber with a small surface-area to volume ratio, the influence of a surface co-catalyst on the electronic structure should be negligible. In contrast, the strong interaction between the co-catalyst and nanosheets with a large surface-area to volume ratio is so strong that the electronic structure of the nanosheets is modified. This is indicated by a recent study that some localized states have been introduced in the band gap of metal oxides by coating with an ultrathin amorphous boron oxynitride layer on the surface.136 An understanding of this interaction might provide some useful guidelines for co-catalyst-modified 2D light absorbers.
Can we understand the correlation between structural changes in the nanosheets and their photocatalysis performance?
The high flexibility of ultrathin nanosheets inevitably causes structural changes, including elastic strain as indicated by the crumpled morphology of free-standing nanosheets.184 Strain-induced modification of electronic structures has been demonstrated experimentally and theoretically in some monolayer nanosheets. Intentionally using and even increasing this effect is desirable and may generate unanticipated photocatalytic activity increases. Although a strain-induced band structure modification has been recognized, its underlying role in changing the bonding structure to modulate the sorption of molecules/ions deserves further investigation.
How to rationally control the abundant defects of the nanosheets to boost the photocatalytic performance?
The fabrication of artificial layer structures with the ultrathin nanosheets of different materials as building blocks may open up a new door for creating some extraordinary properties. Many monolayer nanosheets have their surface atoms with the saturated coordination so that the interaction between the layers might be too weak to cause a long-range interaction along the direction perpendicular to the nanosheets. Some reports have preliminarily demonstrated the feasibility of using surface defects to strengthen the interaction between layers by forming additional strong bonds in the layer galleries.91 Controlling the defects of the nanosheets therefore represents an important aspect for fine-tuning the properties of 2D photocatalysts. Equally important, the rotation between layers in the restacked nanosheets might exert an influence on the electronic structure of the resultant hybrid structures.
Being 2D cannot solve all the challenges that photocatalysis faces, but does provide new opportunities for understanding the principles or mechanisms of photocatalysis, and strengthens the ability to manipulate or change photocatalysts at the atomic level. Thanks to the ever increasing number of 2D materials available and their applications in many sectors including energy, environment and bioengineering, we are confident that more exciting progress will be achieved in the photocatalytic solar energy conversion field in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Some studies covered in this paper were financially supported by the Major Basic Research Program, Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2014CB239401), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572266, 51629201, 51422210, 51521091), and the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences CAS (QYZDB-SSW-JSC039). G. L. is grateful for the award of a Newton Advanced Fellowship. Financial support from the Australian Research Council through its discovery and linkage project is also appreciated.
References
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander III, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. B. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sakata, T. Hayashi, R. Yasunaga, N. Yanaga and H. Imamura, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12935–12938 RSC .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955–2959 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nasilowski, B. Mahler, E. Lhuillier, S. Ithurria and B. Dubertret, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10934–10982 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kory, M. Woerle, T. Weber, P. Payamyar, S. W. van de Poll, J. Dshemuchadse, N. Trapp and A. D. Schlueter, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 779–784 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Duan, N. Yan, R. Yu, C.-R. Chang, G. Zhou, H.-S. Hu, H. Rong, Z. Niu, J. Mao, H. Asakura, T. Tanaka, P. J. Dyson, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3093 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, L. You, K. L. Seyler, X. Li, P. Yu, J. Lin, X. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Wang, H. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, P. Sharma, X. Xu, P. M. Ajayan, J. Wang and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12357 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Mannix, X.-F. Zhou, B. Kiraly, J. D. Wood, D. Alducin, B. D. Myers, X. Liu, B. L. Fisher, U. Santiago, J. R. Guest, M. J. Yacaman, A. Ponce, A. R. Oganov, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Science, 2015, 350, 1513–1516 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1420–1424 CrossRef .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Gupta, T. Sakthivel and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 73, 44–126 CrossRef .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef .
Z. A. Piazza, H.-S. Hu, W.-L. Li, Y.-F. Zhao, J. Li and L.-S. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3113 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Liu, S. Gao, H. Cheng, F. Lei, Z. Sun, Y. Jiang, H. Su, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2899 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, Y.-J. Xu, W. Lu, K. Zeng, H. Zhu, Q.-H. Xu and G. W. Ho, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14224 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yao, K. J. Koski, W. Luo, J. J. Cha, L. Hu, D. Kong, V. K. Narasimhan, K. Huo and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5670 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Boneschanscher, W. H. Evers, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, B. Goris, F. T. Rabouw, S. A. P. van Rossum, H. S. J. van der Zant, L. D. A. Siebbeles, G. Van Tendeloo, I. Swart, J. Hilhorst, A. V. Petukhov, S. Bals and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Science, 2014, 344, 1377–1380 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hunt, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, A. F. Young, M. Yankowitz, B. J. LeRoy, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Moon, M. Koshino, P. Jarillo-Herrero and R. C. Ashoori, Science, 2013, 340, 1427–1430 CrossRef PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Li, C. Chi, H. Shan, L. Zheng and Z. Fang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600430 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Li, Y. Wang, H. Wang, M. Zhu and H. Yan, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4863–4867 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, D. R. Chen and X. L. Jiao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2668–2673 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Wang, C. Sun, Z. Chen, X. Yan, L. Cheng, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1383–1385 RSC .
Y. Matsumoto, M. Koinuma, Y. Iwanaga, T. Sato and S. Ida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6644–6645 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Okamoto, S. Ida, J. Hyodo, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18034–18037 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ida, Y. Okamoto, M. Matsuka, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15773–15782 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meng, Z. Hong, J. Arndt, M. Li, M. Zhi, F. Yang and N. Wu, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 213–221 CrossRef .
P. Niu, L. Zhang, G. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4763–4770 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, H. Cheng, S. Gao, Z. Sun, Q. Liu, Q. Liu, F. Lei, T. Yao, J. He, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8727–8731 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. Liu, J. Piao, T. Yao, C. Wu, S. Hu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1057 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Waller, T. K. Townsend, J. Zhao, E. M. Sabio, R. L. Chamousis, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 698–704 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, C. Chang, P. Chen, X. Chu and L. Zhu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 254, 185–192 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. Fan, R. An, Q. Cheng, J. Xie, M. Zhou, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411–10417 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Guo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6291–6297 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ida, Y. Okamoto, S. Koga, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11521–11524 RSC .
Y. Li, Y.-L. Li, C. M. Araujo, W. Luo and R. Ahuja, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2214–2220 RSC .
Z. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1735–1738 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sun, S. Xiong, X. Wu, C. He, T. Li and P. K. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2035–2039 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Hong, W. Zhang and R. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1703–1711 RSC .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Shi and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14766–14772 RSC .
Y. Xu, W. Zhao, R. Xu, Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9803–9805 RSC .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Yin, D. Yang, T. Sun, H. Yu, H. E. Hoster, H. H. Hng, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 987–993 RSC .
F. Chang, C. Li, J. Chen, J. Wang, P. Luo, Y. Xie, B. Deng and X. Hu, Superlattices Microstruct., 2014, 76, 90–104 CrossRef .
J. Chen, M. Guan, W. Cai, J. Guo, C. Xiao and G. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20909–20914 RSC .
S. Gao, Y. Sun, F. Lei, J. Liu, L. Liang, T. Li, B. Pan, J. Zhou and Y. Xie, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 205–213 CrossRef .
J. Hong, S. Yin, Y. Pan, J. Han, T. Zhou and R. Xu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14984–14990 RSC .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. P. Dagg, J. Liu and P. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5043–5049 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lei, Y. Sun, K. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826–6829 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liang, Y. Sun, F. Lei, S. Gao and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10647–10653 RSC .
J. Liu, X.-B. Li, D. Wang, H. Liu, P. Peng and L.-M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6755–6761 RSC .
Q. Liu, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, H. Su, R. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Yan, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2356–2361 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Low, S. Cao, J. Yu and S. Wageh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768–10777 RSC .
K. Maeda, M. Eguchi and T. Oshima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13164–13168 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Sa, Y.-L. Li, J. Qi, R. Ahuja and Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26560–26568 CrossRef .
K. Schwinghammer, M. B. Mesch, V. Duppel, C. Ziegler, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1730–1733 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. Liu, F. Lei, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300611 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, K. Yao, Q. Cai, Z. Shi, M. Sheng, H. Lin and M. Shao, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 270–276 RSC .
D. Liu, Y. Lv, M. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15377–15388 RSC .
W. Bi, X. Li, L. Zhang, T. Jin, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8647 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dang, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Dong, G. Wang, C. Ma, X. Zhang, H. Ma and M. Xue, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15052–15058 RSC .
C. Huang, C. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Ye, S. Lin, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7698 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ji, W. Guo, H. Chen, L. Zhang, S. Chen, M. Hua, Y. Long and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27053–27059 CrossRef .
F. Lei, L. Zhang, Y. Sun, L. Liang, K. Liu, J. Xu, Q. Zhang, B. Pan, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9266–9270 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6885–6892 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, L. Li, S. Liang, M. Liu, J. Bi and L. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 135–142 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Xiong, S. Luo, R. Liang, N. Qin, S. Liang and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15125–15128 RSC .
Y. Lu, D. Chu, M. Zhu, Y. Du and P. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17355–17361 RSC .
S. Park, H. J. Song, C. W. Lee, S. W. Hwang and I. S. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21860–21867 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, T. Y. Ma, G. Gao, X.-W. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3708–3717 RSC .
Y. Xu, X. Yin, Y. Huang, P. Du and B. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4571–4575 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3092–3108 RSC .
Z. Zhang, J. Huang, M. Zhang, L. Yuan and B. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 298–305 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, G. Chen, Y. Yu, Y. Hu, Y. Feng and J. Sun, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 8111–8119 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, M. Lin, J. Long, Z. Zhang, H. Lin, J. C. S. Wu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8340 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhukovskyi, P. Tongying, H. Yashan, Y. Wang and M. Kuno, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6615–6623 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, T. Chen, P. Wang, L. Wang and L. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 304, 454–460 CrossRef .
J. Li, G. Zhan, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11480 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lu, K. Xu, S. Tao, Z. Shao, X. Peng, W. Bi, P. Chen, H. Ding, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1462–1467 RSC .
Q. Wang, L. Yuan, M. Dun, X. Yang, H. Chen, J. Li and J. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 196, 127–134 CrossRef .
J. Xia, M. Ji, J. Di, B. Wang, S. Yin, Q. Zhang, M. He and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 191, 235–245 CrossRef .
J. Xiong, Y. Liu, S. Liang, S. Zhang, Y. Li and L. Wu, J. Catal., 2016, 342, 98–104 CrossRef .
J. Yang, Y.-L. Jiang, L.-J. Li, E. Muhire and M.-Z. Gao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8170–8177 RSC .
W. Yang, L. Zhang, J. Xie, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, T. Yao, S. Wei, Q. Zhang and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6716–6720 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, X. Jin, C. Liu, C. Ding, H. Xie, K. H. Chu and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 281–290 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, R. Shi, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8239–8242 RSC .
S. Gao, B. Gu, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, X. Zu, F. Yang, W. Zhu, C. Wang, Z. Feng, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3438–3445 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Y.-L. Li, B. Sa and R. Ahuja, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 545–559 RSC .
X. She, J. Wu, H. Xu, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, Y. Song, K. Nie, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, D. Du, H. Li and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700025 CrossRef .
J. Xia, M. Ji, J. Di, B. Wang, S. Yin, M. He, Q. Zhang and H. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 695, 922–930 CrossRef .
M. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 598–618 CrossRef .
X. Dong and F. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23642–23652 RSC .
B. Peng, P. K. Ang and K. P. Loh, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 128–137 CrossRef .
B. Luo, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6904–6920 RSC .
L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10744–10766 RSC .
Y. Zhang, L. Xie, Y. Zhou and L. Yin, Prog. Chem., 2016, 28, 1528–1540 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, G. Jia, Y. Hu, G. Fan, Y. H. Tsang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1875–1898 RSC .
J. Di, J. Xia, H. Li and Z. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 79–91 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Li, G. Zhan and L. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 112–121 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, Front. Mater., 2017, 4, 11 Search PubMed .
W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang, G. Zhang and X. Fan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 4611–4626 CrossRef .
J. Di, J. Xiong, H. Li and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704740 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Wu, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Z. Zhou, G. R. Qian, Z. P. Xu, Z. Du and Q. L. Rao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1207–1228 RSC .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef .
J. Kou, C. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Xu and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1445–1514 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Chen, H. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987–10043 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .
G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 222–225 RSC .
G. Hautier, A. Miglio, G. Ceder, G. M. Rignanese and X. Gonze, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2292 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Yang, G. Liu, J. T. S. Irvine and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5850–5856 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, H. Irie and T. Ohwaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9824–9852 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Wang, H. G. Yang, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 831–843 RSC .
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Wang, C. Sun, X. Yan, X. Wang, Z. Chen, S. C. Smith, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1266–1274 CrossRef .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. H. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Niu, L. C. Yin, Y. Q. Yang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8046–8052 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kang, Y. Yang, L. C. Yin, X. Kang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4572–4577 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. B. Yu, X. Q. Chen, X. D. Kang, Y. P. Xie, H. Z. Zhu, S. L. Wang, S. Ullah, H. Ma, L. Z. Wang, G. Liu, X. L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706259 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mukherji, R. Marschall, A. Tanksale, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 126–132 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Kang, Y. Q. Yang, L. C. Yin, X. D. Kang, L. Z. Wang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6471–6477 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Thulin and J. Guerra, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 195112 CrossRef .
G. Giorgi, J. I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4213–4216 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates Jr., Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Q. Yang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9559–9612 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. Mu, Y. Zhao, A. L. Li, S. Y. Wang, Z. L. Wang, J. X. Yang, Y. Wang, T. F. Liu, R. T. Chen, J. Zhu, F. T. Fan, R. G. Li and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2463 RSC .
C. Zhen, J. C. Yu, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10416–10419 RSC .
Y. Matsumoto, S. Ida and T. Inoue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11614–11616 CrossRef .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Dingle, Festkoerperprobleme, 1975, 15, 21–48 Search PubMed .
A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1993, 42, 173–262 CrossRef .
P. G. Harper and J. A. Hilder, Phys. Status Solidi, 1968, 26, 69–76 CrossRef .
V. B. Sandomirskii, Sov. Phys. JETP, 1967, 25, 101–106 Search PubMed .
W. E. Buhro and V. L. Colvin, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 138–139 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ithurria, M. D. Tessier, B. Mahler, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret and A. L. Efros, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 936–941 CrossRef PubMed .
F. A. Frame and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10628–10633 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, M. A. Holmes and F. E. Osterloh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4316–4325 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. B. Zhang, T. S. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, H. Cheng, S. Gao, Z. Sun, Q. Liu, Q. Liu, F. Lei, T. Yao, J. He, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8727–8731 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. Liu, J. Piao, T. Yao, C. Wu, S. Hu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1057 CrossRef PubMed .
X. D. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Wang, J. J. Zhang, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18–21 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liang, F. Lei, S. Gao, Y. Sun, X. Jiao, J. Wu, S. Qamar and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13971–13974 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, H. A. Bechtel, E. Plis, M. C. Martin, S. Krishna, E. Yablonovitch and A. Javey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 11688–11691 CrossRef PubMed .
O. C. Compton, E. C. Carroll, J. Y. Kim, D. S. Larsen and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14589–14592 CrossRef .
Y. Ebina, T. Sasaki, M. Harada and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4390–4395 CrossRef .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Seger, J. McCray, A. Mukherji, X. Zong, Z. Xing and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6400–6403 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, C. Sun, L. Wang, S. C. Smith, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14672–14679 RSC .
Q. H. Weng, Y. Ide, X. B. Wang, X. Wang, C. Zhang, X. F. Jiang, Y. M. Xue, P. C. Dai, K. Komaguchi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 19–27 CrossRef .
J. M. Lee, H. B. Jin, I. Y. Kim, Y. K. Jo, J.-W. Hwang, K.-K. Wang, M. G. Kim, Y.-R. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, Small, 2015, 11, 5771–5780 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Y. Kim, J. M. Lee, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, H.-I. Kim, W. Choi and S.-J. Hwang, Small, 2012, 8, 1038–1048 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, J. M. Lee, Y. K. Jo, I. Y. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 10566–10573 RSC .
J. M. Lee, E. K. Mok, S. Lee, N.-S. Lee, L. Debbichi, H. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8546–8550 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Wang, T. Xia, H. Ju, K. Zhang, R. Long, Q. Xu, C. Wang, L. Song, J. Zhu, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6959–6965 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, J. Brivio and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9703–9709 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Feng, X. Qian, C.-W. Huang and J. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 865–871 CrossRef .
H. J. Conley, B. Wang, J. I. Ziegler, R. F. Haglund Jr., S. T. Pantelides and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3626–3630 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Rodin, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176801 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Peng, Q. Wei and A. Copple, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 085402 CrossRef .
M. Elahi, K. Khaliji, S. M. Tabatabaei, M. Pourfath and R. Asgari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 115412 CrossRef .
S. L. Wang, X. Luo, X. Zhou, Y. Zhu, X. Chi, W. Chen, K. Wu, Z. Liu, S. Y. Quek and G. Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15414–15419 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, B. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12868–12884 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Wang, S. Lin, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 29981–29989 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Xie, J. Zhang, P. Ma, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5152–5156 RSC .
H. Yin and Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4873–4891 RSC .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 623–636 RSC .
Y. Zhao, B. Li, Q. Wang, W. Gao, C. J. Wang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, X. Duan and D. O'Hare, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 951–958 RSC .
S. Ida, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 88, 1619–1628 CrossRef .
L. Wang and M. Zhou, New Chem. Mater., 2017, 45, 30–32 Search PubMed .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, H. Hashizume, H. Yamada and H. Nakazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8329–8335 CrossRef .
N. Sakai, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5851–5858 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang and T. Sasaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9455–9486 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sato, K. Ono, T. Sasaki and A. Yamagishi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9824–9828 CrossRef .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5082–5104 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Akatsuka, G. Takanashi, Y. Ebina, M. Haga and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12426–12433 CrossRef .
P. T. Xu, T. J. Milstein and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11539–11547 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Sabio, R. L. Chamousis, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3161–3170 CrossRef .
O. C. Compton, C. H. Mullet, S. Chiang and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6202–6208 CrossRef .
O. C. Compton and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 479–485 CrossRef .
Y. Ebina, N. Sakai and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17212–17216 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Oshima, D. Lu, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2698–2702 CrossRef PubMed .
T. G. Xu, C. Zhang, X. Shao, K. Wu and Y. F. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1599–1607 CrossRef .
E. J. W. Crossland, N. Noel, V. Sivaram, T. Leijtens, J. A. Alexander-Webber and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 495, 215–219 CrossRef PubMed .
T. T. Wu, X. D. Kang, M. W. Kadi, I. Ismail, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2103–2108 CrossRef .
C. Zhen, T. T. Wu, M. W. Kadi, I. Ismail, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2171–2177 CrossRef .
C. W. Wang, S. Yang, W. Q. Fang, P. Liu, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 427–433 CrossRef PubMed .
F. X. Zhang, A. Yamakata, K. Maeda, Y. Moriya, T. Takata, J. Kubota, K. Teshima, S. Oishi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8348–8351 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Ren, R. Y. Zhao, X. Chen, M. Li, X. Li, H. Tian, Z. Zhang and G. R. Han, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1638 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Butburee, Y. Bai, H. J. Wang, H. J. Chen, Z. L. Wang, G. Liu, J. Zou, P. Khemthong, G. Q. Lu and L. Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705666 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Y. Hu, Y. Peng, H. W. Huang, Y. Li, M. Wu, X. X. Ke, G. V. Tendeloo and B.-L. Su, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 138–145 CrossRef .
D. Krepel, L. Kalikhman-Razvozov and O. Hod, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21110–21118 CrossRef .
D. Liu, M. W. Zhang, W. J. Xie, L. Sun, Y. Chen and W. W. Lei, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 72–78 CrossRef .
H. Chen, G. Yu, G. D. Li, T. F. Xie, Y. Sun, J. Liu, H. Li, X. Huang, D. J. Wang, T. Asefa, W. Chen and X. X. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11442–11446 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, B. Luo, M. Q. Lyu, S. C. Wang and L. Z. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701605 CrossRef .
M. L. Lv, X. Q. Sun, S. H. Wei, C. Shen, Y. L. Mi and X. X. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11441–11448 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Han, C. Hu, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4612–4619 RSC .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ida, N. Kim, E. Ertekin, S. Takenaka and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 239–244 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Bi, C. Ye, C. Xiao, W. Tong, X. Zhang, W. Shao and Y. Xie, Small, 2014, 10, 2820–2825 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Gunjakar, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, I. Y. Kim and S. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14998–15007 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, A. B. Laursen, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3621–3625 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Tian, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, S. Yu, M. Li and H. Huang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 10895–10903 RSC .
J. Yan, Z. Chen, H. Ji, Z. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Xu, X. She, L. Huang, L. Xu, H. Xu and H. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4764–4773 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yuan, L. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Xu, H. Xu, S. Huang, J. Yan, M. He and H. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 41204–41213 RSC .
Y. J. Yuan, Z.-J. Ye, H.-W. Lu, B. Hu, Y. H. Li, D.-Q. Chen, J.-S. Zhong, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 532–541 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Meng, D. Rao, Y. Wang, Q. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Wu, K. Deng, H. Liu and R. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 841–849 RSC .
Z. Zhang, K. Liu, Z. Feng, Y. Bao and B. Dong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19221 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, Z. Sun, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2160–2164 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tonda, S. Kumar, M. Bhardwaj, P. Yadav and S. Ogale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2667–2678 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liao, B. Sa, J. Zhou, R. Ahuja and Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17594–17599 CrossRef .
F. Wu, Y. Liu, G. Yu, D. Shen, Y. Wang and E. Kan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3330–3334 CrossRef .
X. X. Li, Z. Y. Li and J. L. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 018301 CrossRef PubMed .
C. F. Fu, Q. Q. Luo, X. X. Li and J. L. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18892–18898 RSC .
X. W. Wang, G. Liu, Z. G. Chen, F. Li, L. Z. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3452–3454 RSC .
L. Yang, X. Y. Li, G. Z. Zhang, P. Cui, X. J. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Zhao, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 8, 16049 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Huang, M. Zhang, Q. Yuan and B. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 298–305 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, L. Ye, L. Wang, X. Shi, P. Wang, W. Bai and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 98–104 CrossRef .
J. Ran, W. W. Guo, H. L. Wang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800128 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. C. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, X. S. Zheng, L. Chen, Y. J. Xiong and H. X. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3454–3458 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors were equal major contributors to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Gang Liu
	Gang Liu received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Physics from Jilin University in 2003. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2009. During his PhD study, he worked at Prof. G. Q. Max Lu's laboratory for one and half years in Australia. He was the recipient of the T. S. Kê Research Fellowship founded by Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, IMR CAS. Now he is a professor of materials science in IMR. His main research interests focus on solar-driven photocatalytic materials for renewable energy.

Chao Zhen
	Chao Zhen received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Physics from Jilin University in 2007. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research (IMR), Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2013. He worked as an assistant professor of materials in IMR between 2013 and 2015, and now he is an associate professor of materials science in IMR. His current research interest is in developing efficient solar energy conversion devices including photoelectrochemical water splitting cells and new types of photovoltaic cells.

Yuyang Kang
	Yuyang Kang received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry from Liaoning University in 2013. Now he is a PhD candidate at the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on layered photocatalysts for water splitting under the supervision of Professor Gang Liu and Professor Hui-Ming Cheng.

Lianzhou Wang
	Lianzhou Wang is a Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and the Director of Nanomaterials Centre, the University of Queensland (UQ), Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1999. Before joining UQ in 2004, he worked at two national institutes (NIMS and AIST) of Japan for five years. Wang's research interests include the design and application of semiconducting nanomaterials in renewable energy conversion/storage systems, including photocatalysts and photoelectrochemical devices.

Hui-Ming Cheng
	Hui-Ming Cheng is a Professor and the Director of the Advanced Carbon Research Division of Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, CAS, and the Low-Dimensional Material and Device Laboratory of the Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University. His research focuses on carbon nanotubes, graphene, two-dimensional materials, energy storage materials, photocatalytic semiconducting materials, and bulk carbon materials. He is a highly cited researcher in materials science and chemistry fields. He is now the founding Editor-in-Chief of Energy Storage Materials and the Associate Editor of Science China Materials. He was elected a member of CAS and a fellow of TWAS.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of photocatalytic water splitting occurring on a photocatalyst consisting of a light absorber and co-catalysts for the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions. Time scale of each step is also given.	 

 	Fig. 2  Atomic structures and electrostatic potentials of layer carbon nitride with hydrogen bonds. (a) Side and (b) top view of the atomic structure of layer carbon nitride. H, C and N atoms are denoted by small yellow, large white and light blue balls, respectively. Two nearest neighbor melon strands in the basal plane of monolayer carbon nitride are marked by solid green and red triangles in (b). The calculated electrostatic potentials along the direction perpendicular to (c) and the two directions parallel to (d and e) in the basal plane of the layer carbon nitride. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of a parabolic energy band in the quantum limit. Two-dimensional bands in the kx,y plane give rise to a stepped cumulative density of states with increasing energy. Modified with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 1975, Springer Nature.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Geometries of the different structures. (b) Plots of ΔEg (the increase in the bandgap over the value for bulk material) against d (the thickness or diameter) for rectangular quantum wells, cylindrical quantum wires and spherical quantum dots obtained from particle-in-a-box approximations. The grey area between the dot and wire curves is the intermediate zone corresponding to quantum rods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2003, Springer Nature. (c) Emission and absorption spectra of CdSe nanoplatelets with different numbers of monolayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Calculated band structures of bulk MoS2, four-layer MoS2, bilayer MoS2 and monolayer MoS2 from left to right. The solid arrows indicate the lowest energy transitions. Bulk MoS2 is characterized by an indirect band gap. The direct excitonic transitions occur at high energies at the K point. With reduced layer thickness, the indirect band gap becomes larger, while the direct excitonic transition barely changes. Monolayer MoS2 becomes a direct band gap semiconductor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) PL spectra of mono- and bilayer MoS2 samples in the photon energy range from 1.3 to 2.2 eV. Inset: PL quantum yield of thin layers (1–6 layers). Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Bulk GaAs band-edge absorption profile including exciton effects shown together with the bulk conduction band DOS; (b) comparison of the bulk and quantum limit (two-dimensional) DOS of an energy band; (c) schematic of absorption spectra for valence band to quantized conduction band transitions with and without exciton effects at each two-dimensional band edge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 1975, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic of the qualitative band structure of a 2D InAs QM, with arrows indicating the allowed optical transitions between valence and conduction subbands; (e) absorption spectra of InAs QMs with thickness of Lz ∼ 3 nm, 6 nm, 9 nm, 14 nm, and 19 nm at room temperature, Aen–hn represents the absorption from the corresponding interband transitions, en–hhn and en–lhn. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2013, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Model of the movements of the photoproduced electron and hole in a TiOx nanosheet with a lepidocrocite structure. The electron moves in the 3d CB consisting of the Ti4+ network in the nanosheet and then reduces Ag+ and Cu2+ at the edge of the 2D sheets, while the hole exists in the 2p VB consisting of the O2− surface and oxidizes Mn2+ on the flat surface. (b) AFM images of TiOx nanosheets photodeposited under UV light (265 nm) illumination; nanosheets deposited with (left panel) Cu2O and (right panel) MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Scheme of multilayer thin films containing alternate conducting PANI and exfoliated Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets. Because of the significant structural changes in the PANI molecule under basic and acidic conditions, when used as photoelectrodes the multilayer films exhibit a unique n-type to p-type switchable electron transfer behavior under different pH conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the coupling of Ti0.91O2 nanosheets with I2 molecules. Plots of the transformed Kubelka–Munk function versus the energy of the light recorded from the flocculated (X%) I2–Ti0.91O2 sheets with different amounts of I2 dopant: (a) X = 0; (b) X = 0.4; (c) X = 1.2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of the molecular co-catalyst strategy for accelerating hole transfer. Homogeneous molecular co-catalysts use reversible redox couple and highly active free radical reactions to promote hole transport, unlike supported heterogeneous co-catalysts, which are constrained by the finite contact areas between co-catalysts and reactants. Purple, cyan and red spheres denote K, Nb and O atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Strain-dependent electronic and optical properties of a MoS2 monolayer. (a) Electronic DFT band structure under different biaxial strains from 0% (blue line) to 9% (red line). (b) Direct and indirect bandgaps under different biaxial strains calculated using DFT and GW. The GW direct bandgap refers to the minimum direct transition energy. It is located at the K points of the hexagonal Brillouin zone, indicated by an arrow in (a). The corresponding lowest optical excitation energy (black triangles) is calculated by BSE on top of GW quasiparticle energies with electron–hole Coulomb interactions included. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2012, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Left vertical axis: the Kubelka–Munk functions plotted for the estimation of the optical band gap (R, the reflectance tested on the sample). The optical band gap was obtained by extending the slopes of the curve, to intercept the energy axis. Right vertical axis: optical absorption (as a function of energy) computed from GW-BSE calculations for unstrained and strained lepidocrocite monolayers (εaver2 = (εxx2 + εyy2)/2); the strained lattice is taken from an STM image. Atomic and electronic structure of the strained lepidocrocite TiO2 monolayer. (b) Top views of the atomic structures for a one-layer 2-D lepidocrocite phase TiO2. (c) Calculated DFT LDA band gap as a function of different uniaxial and biaxial strains for the lepidocrocite TiO2 monolayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Atomic structure of the nanosheet crystallites of Ti1−δO24δ−. Red and yellow circles represent Ti and O atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society. (b) Total and partial density of states for stacked TiO2, single-layer TiO2, rutile and anatase TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of exfoliated Ti0.91O20.36− nanosheets (blue) and anatase TiO2 nanoparticles (pink). Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (d) UV-visible absorption spectra for multilayer films of (PEI/Ti0.91O2)n on a quartz glass substrate. The inserted figure is the dependence of peak absorbance at 262 nm on the number of deposition cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Structure of typical oxide nanosheets: (a) titanium oxide; (b) calcium niobium oxide; (c) manganese oxide; (d) niobium oxide; (e) tantalum oxide; (f) titanium niobium oxide; (g) cesium tungsten oxide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  Energy diagram depicting the conduction-band edges, valence-band edges, and bandgap energy for (a) Ca2Nb3O10−, (b) TiNbO5−, (c) Ti2NbO7−, (d) Ti5NbO143−, (e) Ti0.91O20.36−, and (f) Nb3O8− nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Bulk niobate KCa2Nb3O10 consists of sheets of corner-shared NbO6 octahedra with intercalated Ca2+ ions that are held together by the layers of K+ ions. Exfoliation with TBA+ (tetrabutylammonium) produces the nanoniobate as individual nanosheets. Both niobates are functionalized with photodeposited Pt or IrOx nanoparticles to serve as active sites for H2 and O2 production, respectively. (b) SEM and TEM micrographs of bulk and nanoniobate. (c) H2 evolution rates from catalysts in H2O, (d) H2 evolution rates in aqueous MeOH, and (e) O2 evolution rates in aqueous AgNO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Preparation of Pt-intercalated KCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets through electrostatic attraction between a cationic complex and anionic nanosheets [TBA+ indicates tetra(n-butyl)ammonium cation]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  Synthesis of monolayer Bi2WO6. (a) Crystal structure of Bi2WO6. (b) Structure of pristine monolayer Bi2WO6. (c) Formation mechanism of monolayer Bi2WO6 with CTAB assistance. (d) TEM image of the synthesized Bi2WO6 with Br− ion assistance; inset is the corresponding HRTEM image. Photocatalytic performances of Bi2WO6 samples. (e) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism over the monolayer Bi2WO6. (f and g) Electron spin resonance signals of DMPO–˙OH− adducts and DMPO–O2˙− adducts produced by Bi2WO6 samples under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). (h) Visible-light-driven photocatalytic H2 evolution over nanocrystals, monolayers and RhB sensitized monolayers (λ ≥ 420 nm); 0.3 wt% of Pt was loaded. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) HRTEM images of a branch and backbone plate of anatase TiO2; (b) photocurrent density versus applied potential curves for 2D, E-2D, and F-2D films. (c and d) Active site distribution in the non-branched 2D single-crystal structure indicated by the location of photodeposited Au and MnOx particles. (e) Diagram illustrating the working mechanism of E-2D photoelectrode-based PEC water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) SEM image, (b and c) TEM images, and (d) HRTEM images of Ga1.7In0.3O3. (e) Electrostatic potentials of the top and bottom surfaces of b-Ga1.7In0.3O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a, b and d) SEM, TEM, and HR-TEM images of ultrathin Ta3N5 nanomeshes. (c) AFM image and height profile of the Ta3N5 nanomeshes. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of bulk Ta3N5 and Ta3N5 nanomeshes under simulated sunlight irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). 0.02 g of photocatalysts were loaded with 1 wt% Pt in 10 vol% methanol aqueous solution. (f) UV-visible light absorption spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of Cs0.68Ti1.83O4 particles before and after homogeneous nitrogen doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) UV-visible absorption spectra of Ti0.91O2 nanosheets exfoliated from protonated Cs0.68Ti1.83O4 particles with and without homogeneous nitrogen doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Details of the TiO–CN structure. (b) TEM image of a TiO–CN2 nanosheet. (c) UV-visible absorption spectra of 2D CN and TiO–CN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) HRTEM image of the BCN-30 sample. Scale bar, 100nm, inset scale bars, 5 nm. (b) Typical TEM dark-field image of the BCN-30 sample and the elemental mapping images of B, C and N of the enlargement of selected-area in the picture. Scale bar, 300nm. (c) High-resolution STEM of the BCN-30 sample along the (002) facet. Scale bar, 5 nm. (d) Ultraviolet-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (UV-vis DRS) of the BCN-x samples and (e) bandgap determination of the BCN-x samples from the (F(R)·E)nversus E plots. (f) Raman spectra of h-BN, BCN-30 and a physical mixture of h-BN and graphite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Crystal structure of a Rh-doped calcium niobate nanosheet prepared by exfoliation of KCa2Nb3−xRhxO10−δ and a model of the photocatalytic reaction in water/methanol. (b) Hydrogen evolution versus time over Rh(3.0 wt%)-doped Ca–Nb–O sheets, Rh(3.0 wt%)-doped KCa2Nb3O10, and Rh(1.0 wt%)-loaded Ca–Nb–O sheets. Reaction conditions: 5 mg of catalyst, 150 cm3 of aqueous 10 vol% methanol solution, 500 W Xe lamp. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) HAADF-STEM (200 kV) image of a Rh (x = 0.026)-doped Ti1.82−xRhxO4 nanosheet, (b) magnified HAADF-STEM image (80 kV) of a Rh (x = 0.026)-doped nanosheet, (c) model of the structure expected from panel (b), (d) Fourier transforms of Rh K-edge k3-weighted EXAFS for Rh (x = 0.026)-doped and RhOx-loaded titania nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Positron annihilation spectroscopy of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates. (a and b) Schematic of trapped positrons for (a) a  defect and (b)  vacancy associates. (c) Positron lifetime spectrum of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates. (d) Comparison of the photodecomposition of Rhodamine B with ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates under simulated solar irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Building van der Waals heterostructures. If one considers 2D crystals to be analogous to Lego blocks (right panel), the construction of a huge variety of layered structures becomes possible. Conceptually, this atomic-scale Lego resembles molecular beam epitaxy but employs different ‘construction’ rules and a distinct set of materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of MoS2/AlN(GaN) vdW heterostructures used as photocatalysts for water splitting, where VBM is the valence band maximum and CBM is the conduction band minimum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) The optimized structure of F-BNBNH, top (left) and side (right) views. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2014, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Scheme of water splitting and the hydrogen capsuling scheme. (a) Models of graphitic carbon nitrides CN, C2N, and C3N4. (b) The photocatalytic (water splitting) hydrogen generation and capsule storage scheme: (1) photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) separating; (2) water splitting to produce protons (H+) under the attack of holes (h+); (3) protons (H+) penetrating the GO and producing H2 molecules; (4) H2 molecules are prohibited from moving out of the sandwich. Here GO–CN–GO is used as an example. Blue, grey, pink and red beads respectively represent N, C, H (H+) and O atoms, the yellow and light blue clouds are respectively photo-generated electrons (e−) and holes (h+), and the blue and magenta arrows indicate the migration of corresponding particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Cross-sectional HR-TEM image of the ZCT-1 nanohybrid and (b) an enlarged view and structural model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic of the crystal structure of Bi12O17Cl2-MoS2 (BOC-MS) and (b) of the charge flow processes within BOC-MS, including the electron–hole separation within 1L-BOC and (c) the interfacial electron transfer from 1L-BOC to 1L-MS along the Bi–S bonds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) HRTEM image of the α-Fe2O3/2D g-C3N4 (3.8%) hybrid. Scale bar: 5 nm. (b) Energy band diagram of the Z-scheme mechanism in α-Fe2O3/2D g-C3N4 (3.8%) hybrids at pH = 0. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Chemical structures of both aza-CMP and C2N. (d) TEM image of aza-CMP/C2N heterostructures. Arrows indicate overlapping interfaces. (e) Illustration of the electronic band structures of aza-CMP and C2N nanosheets, resulting in a Z-scheme structure. Key: ① C2N nanosheets, ② aza-CMP nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 
Footnote
† These authors were equal major contributors to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
