Comparative life cycle assessment of electrochemical upgrading of CO 2 to fuels and feedstocks   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0GC02831B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0GC02831B
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 867-880Comparative life cycle assessment of electrochemical upgrading of CO2 to fuels and feedstocks†

        
          
            Shariful 
            Kibria Nabil
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sean 
            McCoy
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Md Golam 
            Kibria
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive, NW Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4. E-mail: md.kibria@ucalgary.ca
Received 
      19th August 2020
    , Accepted 6th December 2020First published on 8th December 2020AbstractDevelopment of electrochemical pathways to convert CO2 into fuels and feedstock is rapidly progressing over the past decade. Here we present a comparative cradle-to-gate life cycle assessment (LCA) of one and two-step electrochemical conversion of CO2 to eight major value-added products; wherein we consider CO2 capture, conversion and product separation in our process model. We measure the carbon intensity (i.e., global warming impact) of one and two-step electrochemical routes with its counterparts – thermochemical CO2 utilization and fossil-fuel based incumbent synthesis routes for those eight products. Here we show that due to inevitable carbonate formation or CO2 crossover in one-step CO2 electrolysis using neutral pH membrane electrode assembly, the two-step electrosynthesis pathways (i.e., CO2 to CO in solid oxide electrolysis cell followed by CO electroreduction in alkaline flow cell) would be distinctively compelling through the lens of climate benefits. This analysis further reveals that the carbon intensity of electrosynthesis products is due to significant energy requirement for conversion (77–83% of total energy consumption for gas products) and product separation (30–85% of total energy consumption for liquid products) phases. Global warming impact of electrochemical route is highly sensitive to the electricity emission intensity and is compelling over incumbent routes only when coupled with low emission intensity (<0.25 kg CO2e per kWh). As the technology advances, we identify near-term compelling products that would provide climate benefits over incumbent routes, including syngas, ethylene and n-propanol. We further identify technological goals required for electrochemical route to be competitive, notably achieving liquid product concentration >20 wt%. It is our hope that this analysis will guide the CO2 electrosynthesis community to target achieving these technological goals, such that when coupled with low-carbon electricity, electrochemical route would bring climate benefits in near future.
1. Introduction
Increasing industrialization and growing demand of incumbent (fossil-based) fuels have driven greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to grow by approximately 1.3% between 2009 and 2018 to reach nearly 37 Gigatonne (Gt) carbon dioxide (CO2) per year.1 These emissions are driving anthropogenic climate change, which manifests itself as an increase in average temperatures (and extremes) globally, changes in precipitation patterns including drought and extreme events, reductions in snow and ice cover, sea level rise, and ocean acidification amongst other impacts.2 To mitigate climate change, governments have agreed to hold the increase in global average temperature to well below 2 °C and pursue in-depth efforts to limit the increase to 1.5 °C by the end of the century.3,4 Mitigating climate change requires society to limit cumulative CO2 emissions to the atmosphere from human activities5 and, due to past CO2 emissions, around 500 Gt CO2 remain in a “carbon budget” that has a 50% chance of limiting temperature increase to 1.5 °C.6 The rapidly dwindling room in our carbon budget warrants aggressive measures to reduce emissions and develop negative emission technologies7 that can be rapidly deployed to limit climate change.8 In this regard, carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) can play a vital role to substantially mitigate climate change. In CCUS, carbon dioxide is captured from power generation, industrial processes (e.g., cement, steelmaking, hydrogen, ammonia), or from the atmosphere and then be geologically stored in suitable formations, utilized in an industrial process as is (e.g., working fluid), or incorporated into other products (e.g., as a feedstock).7,9,10 The economic and climate benefits of CCUS schemes depend on the feedstock for the process (e.g., fossil fuels, biomass, or air), technological attributes of the processes involved, energy requirements and sources, markets for the products, and their final disposition. Assessing the climate and economic benefits of emerging CCUS technologies can, thus, be difficult, and getting robust results requires careful analysis.11,12
Over the years, CO2 has been directly (i.e., non-reductively) used in various industrial processes, including food processing, carbonated beverages, structural materials and enhanced oil recovery (largest direct CO2 use by far).3,13 Among various indirect (i.e., reductively) conversion technologies of CO2 (including thermochemical, electrochemical, electro-thermochemical hybrid, photochemical, biochemical etc.), thermochemical conversion is technologically most advanced (technology readiness level, TRL of 5–8).14,15 Thermochemical conversion includes: (1) one-step direct hydrogenation of CO2, wherein hydrogen (H2) is produced from steam-methane-reforming (SMR), (2) two-step process, wherein CO2 is converted to syngas (via reverse water gas shift (RWGS) or CO2 reforming process) followed by Fischer–Tropsch (F–T) synthesis of hydrocarbons and oxygenates.16,17 Thermochemical process often involves the use of fossil hydrocarbons (e.g., methane) for H2 production or CO2 reforming; consequently, the associated GHG emission defeats the climate benefits of CO2 conversion. Alternatively, commercial water electrolysis to generate H2 can be coupled with thermochemical process, making a hybrid thermo-electrochemical process.15 Despite high TRL of thermochemical CO2 conversion processes, unfavourable economics at small-scale, thermodynamically limited single-pass CO2 conversion as well as energy efficiency (EE) are some of the roadblocks for further development and investment to be utilized for distributed CO2 sources.15
Alternatively, there has been rapid progress in one-step (CO2 → products) or two-step (CO2 → CO → products) electrochemical conversion of CO2 into fuels and chemical feedstocks.18,19 Today, CO2 electrolyzer to produce carbon monoxide (CO) is commercially available at full-scale (from Haldor Topsoe20 based on high temperature solid-oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) technology) with a TRL of 4–6.21 On the other hand, low temperature electrochemical CO2 conversion to multi-carbon products is relatively immature (TRL of 2–4) and often limited in lab-scale testing.15,21 Interestingly, the electrochemical route offers a number of potential opportunities, including modular scaling for small to large-scale applications, lower capital investment, load balancing for electric grid, storage of intermittent renewable electricity (e.g., wind or solar energy) into energy-dense hydrocarbons that can be transported and traded globally etc.15 With continuous reduction in renewable electricity price, electrochemical CO2 conversion technologies could become economically competitive with thermochemical and incumbent fossil-based synthesis pathways.16,22 To date, depending on the reaction conditions, operating parameters and catalyst used, over 16 different chemicals have been produced via electrochemical CO2 conversion, including, carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methane (CH4), methanol (CH3OH), ethylene (C2H4), ethanol (C2H5OH), n-propanol (C3H7OH) and acetic acid (CH3COOH).23,24 Aside from one-step direct electrochemical conversion of CO2, recent perspectives have emerged highlighting the feasibility of two-step reduction – CO2 reduction to CO, followed by CO reduction to multi-carbon products (i.e., C2H4, C2H5OH) (Fig. 1).25 The two-step process can potentially reap multiple benefits, including mature SOEC with high stability, energy efficiency (∼45% in first step20) and with high selectivity towards multi-carbon (C2+) products in alkaline environment (in second step); overcoming challenges (i.e., low single-pass CO2 conversion due to carbonate formation) for one-step CO2 conversion to C2+ products.25,26
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) One-step (CO2 → products) electrosynthesis using neutral pH membrane electrode assembly (MEA) and (b) two-step (CO2 → CO → products) electrosynthesis, wherein step 1 (solid-oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) converts CO2 → CO) and step 2 (alkaline flow cell) converts CO → products. The eight products considered in this study are shown in (a). 
All the processes mentioned herein signify diverse pathways and opportunities for alternative utilisation of CO2.27,28 While recent studies13–17 have highlighted some of the potential pathways for near-term deployment due to their technological maturity and economical feasibility over others, concerns remain on the climate benefits of these potential pathways. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is one such standardized tool to assess environmental sustainability of any process/product.29,30 LCA is a holistic approach that considers environmental impacts from all materials and energy flows associated throughout the life cycle of a product or service. The results of LCA can guide technology developers, manufacturers, governments, and other stakeholders towards decisions that improve environmental performance of complex systems, including CO2 conversion technologies (CCTs). There have been relatively few LCA studies of thermochemical CCT products,31 such as formic acid,32 methyl formate,33 polyols,34 methane, methanol and derived polymers35,36 and C1, C2 chemicals.36,37 LCA studies of electrochemical CO2 conversion technologies and products are fewer in number, and often limited to one particular product (i.e., Formate or HCOOH),38,39 hybrid thermo-electrochemical process (i.e., electrochemical CO2 → CO followed by F–T),40 or focused heavily on the CO2 conversion process, ignoring the significant contribution of downstream separation process.41,42 Furthermore, systematic studies comparing electrochemical routes to thermochemical or incumbent routes are scarce. To this end, the present study aims to bridge this knowledge gap by performing a comparative assessment of electrochemical CO2 conversion routes with thermochemical CO2 conversion and incumbent routes (i.e., fossil-fuel based).
In this study, we seek to answer four related questions: which of one-step and two-step electrosynthesis is likely to have a lower climate impact? how does the climate impact of feasible electrochemical CO2 conversion routes compare with that of thermochemical and incumbent, predominantly fossil-based routes? which specific CO2 derived products, if any, might have a climate benefit relative to the incumbent? and, what technological goals would need to be achieved for electrochemical CO2 conversion pathways to have a lower climate impact than the incumbent? To answer these questions, we have performed a cradle-to-gate LCA for eight commonly reported electrochemical CO2 conversion products with a focus on production phase. We explicitly model CO2 capture, electrochemical conversion and separation of products in the system and examine the impact of variation in technology parameters (e.g., EE and product feed concentration) and upstream impacts (e.g., electricity emission factor) on the results. Because development of CCTs is being pursued first and foremost as a means to reduce emissions (or even contribute negative emissions), we focus on global warming impact (GWI) as midpoint indicator to assess these three selected processes. We expect the results to be useful to technology developers who are looking to focus their research and development (R&D) activities, and also to the broader systems modeling community who are trying to better bound the climate impacts of CO2 conversion systems. Importantly, the core technologies in question are, for the most part, emerging technologies and while they may be introduced into mature markets (e.g., with well defined incumbents) they may also have disruptive characteristics (e.g., new feedstock, different scaling behavior).12 Thus, the results should not be seen as definitive, as they reflect current progress in R&D and do not fully consider progress that might be made in reducing impacts of the incumbent.
2. System description
The scope of this LCA includes GWI assessment for one and two-step electrochemical CO2 conversion pathway (Fig. 1) as compared with that of thermochemical route and incumbent fossil-based routes. Main products under study are the eight C1–C3 products for electrochemical CO2 conversion and incumbent (fossil or bio based) routes, while five C1–C2 products (i.e., CO, HCOOH, CH4, CH3OH and C2H4) for thermochemical CO2 conversion, as the later is yet to be developed for C2H5OH, CH3COOH and C3H7OH products.
2.1. One and two-step electrochemical CO2 conversion
The electrolyzer for electrochemical CO2 conversion can be thought of as a blueprint of commercially available water electrolyzer.46,47 It involves multiple proton–electron transfer steps, leading to single or multi-carbon CO2 derived products. Based on the mode of operation and ion transport medium, various configuration for CO2 electrolyzers are available, including alkaline flow cell and membrane electrode assembly (MEA).16,48,49 Due to the close proximity of thermodynamic voltages for various CO2 derived products (see Table 1), high selectivity towards one particular product is challenging; which subsequently influences downstream separation energy and associated carbon footprint.50 Electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction involves multiple reaction steps, wherein multiple products (e.g., CO, CH3OH and C2H4) share similar reaction pathway, leading to selectivity challenge for multi-carbon products.23 While high selectivity, current density and low overpotential have been demonstrated for one-step CO2 reduction to multi-carbon products in alkaline environment,23,49–51 the inherent carbonate formation in such electrolyte often leads to significant loss of CO2 and consequently low CO2 single-pass conversion efficiency (up to 43%) as well as low energy efficiency.48,52–54 In this context, two-step electrochemical CO2 conversion approach is appealing; since the first step i.e., the electrolyzer for CO2 → CO conversion is commercially available today at full-scale with high stability and selectivity towards CO (∼100%).20 Recent studies have demonstrated that two-step process (i.e. CO electroreduction) can minimize overpotential and facilitate CO–CO dimerization, leading to increased single-pass conversion,55 current density and selectivity (including C2H4, C2H5OH and C3H7OH).25,26,56 The key performance parameters that govern the energetics of electrochemical conversion process are overpotential, and faradaic efficiency (FE), which define the EE of the electrolyzer. On the other hand, single-pass CO2 conversion efficiency determines the energy cost of CO2 capture, and downstream product separation processes.42,54,57Table 1 summarizes the eight electrochemical CO2 conversion products, their half-cell reactions, thermodynamic voltage, stoichiometric CO and CO2 per kg product, molar mass per electron transfer, and global production.
Table 1 One and two-step electrochemical CO2 reduction products and associated parameters along with their global production43




CO2 derived products
Process steps
Half-cell electrochemical reaction (only the second step is shown for two-step process)
Voltage vs. NHE (E°)
Stoichiometric CO (kg CO per kg product)
Stoichiometric CO2 (kg CO2 per kg product)
Molar mass per electron transfer
Global production (Mtonne per year)44,45





a CO is industrially produced as syngas in captive facilities (i.e., steam-methane-reforming (SMR)) and is not marketed in bulk. This production volume is thus on the basis of global syngas production volume.
b This process involves CO2 reduction to CO as in first step, followed by CO reduction.





HCOOH
One-step
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.19
—
0.956
23.01
0.6


CO
One-step
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.103
—
1.57
14.00
150a


CH4
One-step
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
0.17
—
2.74
2.00
250


Two-stepb
CO + 6H+ + 6e− → CH4 + H2O
0.26
1.74
2.67


CH3OH
One-step
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
0.017
—
1.37
5.34
110


Two-stepb
CO + 4H+ + 4e− → CH3OH
0.07
0.87
8.01


C2H4
One-step
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O
0.08
—
3.14
2.34
140


Two-stepb
2CO + 8H+ + 8e− → C2H4 + 2H2O
0.17
1.99
3.51


C2H5OH
One-step
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O
0.085
—
1.91
3.84
77


Two-stepb
2CO + 8H+ + 8e− → C2H5OH + H2O
0.18
1.21
5.75


CH3COOH
One-step
2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH + 2H2O
0.098
—
1.47
7.51
18


Two-stepb
2CO + 4H+ + 4e− → CH3COOH
0.30
0.93
15.01


C3H7OH
One-step
3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH + 5H2O
0.10
—
2.19
3.34
0.2


Two-stepb
3CO + 12H+ + 12e− → C3H7OH + 2H2O
0.20
1.39
5.00




2.2. Thermochemical utilization of CO2
Thermochemical conversion combining heat, pressure and catalysts is an alternative technology for CO2 conversion into hydrocarbons and oxygenated products.15 This CO2 utilization technology is primarily based on hydrogenation of CO2, that is combining CO2 from pre or post-combustion capture process and H2 from water electrolysis process (50 kWh per kg H2)58 followed by water-gas-shift reaction.59 We considered five products (i.e., CO, HCOOH, CH4, CH3OH and C2H4) that can be produced using this approach and is included in this comparative study. However, we did not model the thermochemical route for these five products and GWI results were extracted from published reports for comparison.60,61 Detail process outlook for each product is included in ESI (Table S1†).
2.3. Incumbent routes
Industrially mature incumbent processes for the eight products studied herein were used to benchmark the climate benefits of the electrochemical CO2 conversion routes. Commonly, these are incumbent fossil-fuel derived routes (with an exception for bio-ethanol) and reaction mechanisms are product specific. Natural gas primarily acts as the fossil equivalent for most of the products due to its high availability. These processes for the aforesaid eight products under comparison were not modeled in this study and GWI values were collected from existing LCA database (ecoinvent) as well as published reports,25,41,60 wherein consistent boundary conditions were assumed. Descriptions of these incumbent processes are provided in ESI (Table S2†).
3. LCA materials, methods and assumptions
We followed the ISO 14040/14044 framework to perform this LCA study. We incorporated major elements under goal & scope definition, life cycle inventory, impact assessment and sensitivity analysis as summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Overview of the assumptions used in this study




Parameter
Value




Average carbon intensity of CO2 as feedstock
−0.5 to −0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 (ref. 62)


H2 generation via water electrolysis
50 kWh per kg H2 (ref. 58)


O2 generation via cryogenic air separation
0.20 kWh per kg O2 at supercritical condition for 95% purity63


Water (H2O) extraction energy
0.78 kWh per tonne H2O (ref. 64)


Electrolyzer for CO production
Solid-oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC)


Electrolyzer for CO2 → products
Neutral pH membrane electrode assembly (MEA)


Electrolyzer for CO → products
Alkaline flow cell


Faradaic efficiency (FE)
90% for all products


Overpotential for neutral pH MEA cell
1.4 V (for anodic and cathodic reactions)


Overpotential for alkaline flow cell
0.6 V (anodic and cathodic)


Balance of plant (BOP)
10% of conversion energy65


Product feed concentration for distillation
10 wt%


Pressure Swing Adsorption (PSA) energy
0.25 kWh m−3 for all gases66


Energy conversion efficiency for distillation (thermal to electrical)
95% (ref. 67)


Electricity emission intensity
0.17 kg CO2e per kWh (assuming average carbon intensity in Canada (2017–2018))68




3.1. System boundary and functional unit
We assessed the CO2 emissions associated with electrochemical CO2 conversion route using cradle-to-gate LCA, involving CO2 capture, conversion and product separation (without considering end-of-life/disposal of products), as shown in Fig. 2. The boundaries for this assessment thus include flows associated with utility provision (e.g., electricity), CO2 capture, electrochemical CO2 conversion and separation of products. We excluded any difference in emissions associated with the use phase of the products (i.e., gate-to-grave) from the scope of this assessment by assuming each CO2 derived product is a perfect substitute for the one currently produced via incumbent process. We also excluded emissions associated with construction and decommissioning of the systems (e.g., CO2 capture, electrolyzer, separation units etc.), as their contribution is generally insignificant as compared to the operation phase of the process.41,69,70
 Fig. 2  Cradle-to-gate system boundary for the LCA study (represented by dashed line). Overall GWI assessment is based on energy requirement in each phase. Emissions contribution from use phase, construction and decommissioning phases were excluded. Functional unit is 1 kg of each product of interest except CO (wherein functional unit is 1 kg CO + 0.216 kg H2). 
We assumed a functional unit of 1 kg of each CO2 derived product except CO. To our knowledge, no LCA study is available in the literature that analyzes solely the production of CO. However, several LCA studies analyzed the production of synthesis gas (H2/CO = 3, molar ratio) as a feedstock to produce methanol, dimethyl ether etc.71,72 Therefore, as CO is commercially available as syngas (CO + H2), functional unit was considered as 1 kg CO + 0.216 kg H2 for electrochemical process as a means to compare consistently with other routes. And hydrogen supply (0.216 kg H2 per kg of CO) is considered using water electrolysis (50 kWh per kg H2) for consistency as compared to thermochemical route.
The GWI (kg CO2e per kg product) is the sole environmental measure considered for assessing the three aforementioned processes. The GWI of the overall process was calculated based on electrical energy required (kWh per kg product) in each phase (i.e., capture, conversion and separation) and electricity generation intensity (kg CO2e per kWh). All necessary calculations have been conducted based on Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Report (AR5) guideline using GWP100 values.73
3.2. CO2 feedstock
To avoid multi-functionality problem (i.e., primary product, CO2 feedstock), we have taken into account the carbon footprint of CO2 feedstock from various point sources as per the methodology reported by Müller et al.62 We considered carbon footprint of CO2 feedstock as −0.5 and −0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 feedstock as average scenarios to reflect different CO2 source and capture technologies for our analysis, instead of presuming impact from a specific source. We excluded energy requirement for storage and transportation of captured CO2 assuming integrated on-site capture and conversion system in this analysis.43
3.3. Electrochemical CO2 conversion
We assumed high-temperature SOEC for one and two-step electrochemical routes involving CO2 → CO conversion. Based on commercially available Haldor Topsoe's eCOs™ unit, we assumed 6 kWh N−1 m−3 CO as the total process energy required, which includes conversion, gas separation, purification and recycling as well as other necessary thermal energy requirements for the operation of SOEC unit to produce high purity CO (99.99%).20 For the remaining seven products, we assumed a room temperature neutral pH MEA cell for CO2 reduction (Fig. 1a) and alkaline flow cell for CO reduction (Fig. 1b), wherein each of the seven products to be generated with 90% selectivity, along with H2 as a by-product with 10% selectivity at the cathode, and O2 from anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER); resulting in a multi-product system. We calculated thermodynamic potential based on Gibb's free energy of formation (free energy values are provided in Table S3†) for both one-step and two-step electrochemical routes. We assumed 0.6 V cathodic overpotential and 0.8 V anodic overpotential (total 1.4 V) in near-neutral pH room temperature MEA cell for one-step CO2 electrolysis. For alkaline CO electrolysis flow cell, we assumed 0.3 V overpotential for cathodic and 0.3 V overpotential for anodic reactions (total 0.6 V). These assumptions are in accordance with our assumed current density of 300 mA cm−2 based on the literature reports.74,75 Despite recent technological advances in CO2 electrolysis for the production of CO, HCOOH, C2H4etc., the performance metrics of multi-carbon product synthesis remain low.76 However, we consider such aspirational values for benchmarking purposes for consistent comparison across various products in this LCA study. We considered similar performance metrics for all the products of interest as a prospective scenario – to identify what the optimistic case would look like compared to its relatively matured counterparts – incumbent and thermochemical processes.
Based on the recent literature, the single pass conversion of CO2 is theoretically limited to 50% for CO2 → CO in a MEA and flow cell, regardless of the testing conditions (i.e., CO2 feeding rate, operating current density, and reaction temperature).54 Consequently, a significant amount of CO2 feed is consumed due to inevitable carbonate formation at the cathode-membrane interface through side-reactions with hydroxide (OH−) anions that are locally generated during the electrolysis.54,77 When an anion exchange membrane is used, the consumed CO2 could transport (along with the products) across the membrane (i.e., membrane crossover)77 in the form of carbonate (CO32−) and subsequently releasing CO2 along with O2 in acidic/neutral anolyte.78 Experimental studies indicate that for every 2 electrons transferred, one CO32− crosses over the membrane and degases out of anolyte as one CO2 molecule.79 Considering CO2 → CO as an example, ratio of single pass CO2 conversion to single pass carbonate/bicarbonate (CO32−/HCO3−) formation is 1:1 (i.e., 50% CO2 conversion to CO versus 50% CO2 conversion to CO32−/HCO3− formation). Taking into account the number of electrons transferred and reaction stoichiometry (Table 1), we thus calculated the maximum achievable single-pass CO2 conversion efficiency of 50%, 50%, 20%, 25%, 25%, 25%, 33% and 25% for HCOOH, CO, CH4, CH3OH, C2H4, C2H5OH, CH3COOH, C3H7OH, respectively. Assuming neutral anolyte (0.1 M potassium bicarbonate, KHCO3), we estimated the energy required to separate CO2 (generated from carbonate and bicarbonate) from O2 (generated from OER) using a PSA unit. We calculated the EE of the electrolyzer based on higher heating value (HHV) of the products (see Table S4 and ESI† for detail calculation). Analogous to commercial water electrolyzer systems, we also assumed 10% of the energy required for electrochemical conversion of CO2 as the balance of plant (BOP) energy, which includes energy required to run pumps, coolers etc.65
3.4. Product separation
In case of one-step electrosynthesis using MEA cell, the gas products (i.e., C2H4 and CH4) from the cathode effluent need to be separated from unreacted CO2 and by-product (i.e., H2). Depending on the CO2 feeding rate, the gaseous product stream from the cathode can have 5–70% unreacted CO2 that needs to be separated to achieve high product purity.48,54,55 On the other hand, the crossover CO2 needs to be separated from O2 from the anode effluent. Based on commercial and operational feasibility to obtain high purity, pressure swing adsorption (PSA) was considered for gas product separation. The liquid and gas products in the 2nd stage were separated using distillation and PSA, respectively.
The required energy for the PSA unit is taken from a biogas upgrading plant (0.25 kWh m−3)66 and assumed to be the same for all gaseous products, as this variation (to separate mixtures of CO2/CH4, CO2/C2H4 for product purification) is negligible as compared to the other energy intensive processes.42,70 This required energy for CO2 separation was included in separation phase. We assumed CO2 separated via PSA will be recycled to offset the CO2 feed (Fig. 2). Overall energy requirement for separation of gaseous products was detailed in ESI (Table S5†).
In previous experimental studies (one-step using MEA cell), due to membrane cross-over, the liquid products (i.e., HCOOH, C2H5OH) were found in the anolyte as well as at the cathode effluent with concentration as high as 4 wt%.48,77,80 In this study, to separate liquid products (HCOOH, CH3OH, C2H5OH, CH3COOH, C3H7OH), conventional distillation column (RadFrac) was modeled using Aspen Plus V10 software. Condenser and reboiler heat duties are the most significant contributors to overall energy required for product separation. While alcohols are commercially separated using distillation process industrially, separation of HCOOH using distillation is extremely energy intensive due to the close boiling point of HCOOH and H2O. Alternatively, liquid–liquid extraction process has been demonstrated to purify formic acid solution up to 95 wt%.81,82 However, economic feasibility for liquid–liquid extraction at commercial scale is yet to be evaluated.57,83 Thus, in this analysis, distillation is considered for HCOOH for consistent comparison across different liquid products. We note that the single-pass liquid product accumulation in the electrolyte is very low (∼0.03 wt%),22 leading to highly energy intensive downstream separation process. Consequently, we assumed the electrolyte will be recirculated until the product concentration reaches 10 wt%, which would then be directed to the distillation column to achieve desired distillate concentration to meet the market specifications (∼85–99 wt%). We also note that the impact of product accumulation on the electrolyzer performance has not been studied yet, and for simplicity, we assumed the electrolyzer performance remains unchanged even at 10 wt% product concentration. Later, we have discussed the implications of product concentration using sensitivity analysis. Design and operational parameters (i.e., reflux ratio, number of trays, feed pressure and temperature) were optimized to estimate distillation energy requirement. However, more detail design optimization as well as provision of other extensive methods (e.g., extractive) are beyond the scope of this study as Aspen modeling is connected to multiple units for a whole process to be optimized. Finally, based on the efficiencies of reboiler and condenser, 95% energy conversion efficiency (i.e., thermal to electrical) was assumed for distillation.67
3.5. Cradle-to-gate GWI assessment
We aggregated the energy required in different phases (capture, conversion, and separation) on the basis of per mass of product (i.e., the functional unit). To calculate product specific impact for equivalent systems, we considered product substitution or avoided burden approach.84 Given the fact that the anolyte will be recovered after downstream product separation for reuse, the carbon footprint of 1 M KOH or 0.1 M KHCO3 production would be insignificant85 and thus excluded from GWI analysis. We also calculated effect of water extraction and purification on GWI and was found to be negligible (0.78 kWh per tonne H2O)64 (see details in ESI†).
We calculated the product specific GWI by assuming an electricity emission factor (EEF in kg CO2e per kWh) that resulted in system emission based on total energy consumption from all phases. Furthermore, we have taken environmental burden for H2 (kg CO2e per kg product based on stoichiometry and GWI of water electrolysis, see details in ESI†) that displaces H2 generation from incumbent routes into account. Considering high share of renewables in Canada's electricity generation (mostly due to hydroelectricity), we assumed a conservative value of 0.17 kg CO2e per kWh for this analysis which would represent average carbon intensity from electricity generation in Canada. We also performed sensitivity analysis to reveal the impact of electricity emission factor, EEF on overall GWI.
In order to assess environmental performance of electrochemical with respect to thermochemical CO2 conversion and incumbent routes, respectively, GWIs for the later two were collected from literatures, and LCA database (ecoinvent). For consistent comparison, identical cradle-to-gate approach was considered for all the three processes. For both incumbent and thermochemical process, there are further precursor products (i.e., H2, CO can be co-produced as syngas). However, for simplicity, system boundary of electrochemical route was not adjusted or expanded to include the inference of such co-production.
4. Results and discussion

Fig. 3 shows the required energy breakdown for the eight products (one-step and two-step electrochemical routes) in capture, conversion, and separation phases (see details in Table S6†). As indicated in Fig. 3, the energy requirement for CO2 capture is insignificant (∼1–4% of total energy) as compared to CO2 conversion and product separation processes. We note that CO2 required per kg product in one-step route is equal to that in two-step route based on stoichiometry; which leads to same energy requirement for CO2 capture in both routes. In contrast to capture energy, the energy required for CO2 conversion varies widely across various products, as shown in Fig. 3. While thermodynamic voltage and the stoichiometric CO2 per kg product for the eight products are at close proximity to each other, their molar mass per electron transfer varies widely (i.e., 2–23 in Table 1). Thus, difference in thermodynamic voltage, and stoichiometric CO2 per kg product, as shown in Table 1, have insignificant effect on the energy required for CO2 conversion and is primarily governed by the molar mass per electron transfer. For instance, CH4 and HCOOH require the highest (36.54 kWh kg−1) and lowest conversion energy (3.62 kWh kg−1) and is attributed to lowest (2.0) and highest (23.01) molar mass per electron transfer, respectively, as indicated in Table 1. Fig. 3 illustrates that the energy required for CO2 conversion in one-step route is 41–46% higher than that of two-step CO2 electroreduction for the products of interest. This is attributed to the higher overpotential (total overpotential of 1.4 V) required in one-step neutral pH MEA electrolyzer as compared to the overpotential required in two-step pathway involving SOEC and CO electrolysis in alkaline electrolyzer. While in one-step process, an additional PSA unit is required to separate cross-over CO2 from the anode gas stream, an additional PSA is required to separate CO/CO2 in two-step process, resulting in an equivalent system requirement.
 Fig. 3  Energetic assessment of electrochemical CO2 conversion via one-step and two-step routes. Detail breakdown is shown in Table S6.† For syngas, we assumed that required hydrogen (0.216 kg H2 per kg CO) will be produced by water electrolysis. 
Apart from conversion energy, we observed that the downstream product separation process plays a significant role, specifically with distillation for liquid product separation. Lower concentration of liquid product (10 wt%) which is inevitable to ensure steady electrolyzer performance, is responsible for far-reaching downstream separation energy. For example, distillation of CH3OH needs the highest energy (26.43 kWh kg−1, 62% of total energy required in one-step route, see details in Table S6†) due to its physico-chemical properties (e.g., polarity, miscibility, volatility) as well as ability to achieve ∼99% purity (in the absence of azeotropic property with water). In contrast, the energy required for gas product separation (i.e., CO, CH4 and C2H4) is substantially low due to the energy efficient PSA process (0.25 kWh m−3).66 Although CH4 and C2H4 exceed other products in terms of conversion energy, their energy of separation is much lower compared to liquid products, indicating the importance of separation energy optimization for liquid products to reap overall life cycle climate benefits. As two-step route is energetically favorable, detail analysis in following sections thus concerns on two-step route only.

Fig. 4 shows the GWI for two-step electrochemical CO2 conversion route. In this analysis, the stoichiometric H2 production is negligible (due to 10% selectivity) as compared to the CO2 derived products. However, the environmental burden from H2 is noticeable (0.04–0.50 kg CO2e per kg product) owing to high GWI from incumbent water electrolysis process (8.50 kg CO2e per kg H2).58 Thus, this credit from H2 was used to calculate net GWI as this much CO2e can be avoided by producing H2 electrochemically compared to incumbent routes. On the other hand, while stoichiometric O2 production is relatively high (0.40–4.00 kg O2 per kg product) in CO2 electrolysis, the GWI associated with cryogenic distillation for commercial O2 separation is insignificant (0.034 kg CO2e per kg O2 at supercritical condition for 95% purity),63 resulting in negligible environmental burden (0.01–0.14 kg CO2e per kg product) from O2 by-product (see details in ESI†). Our analysis reveals that the production of CH3OH has the highest GWI (5.38–5.79 kg CO2e per kg CH3OH), and is attributed to the energy intensive separation process involved in electrochemical pathway (Fig. 3). In contrast, CO and C2H4 has the lowest GWI (1.66–2.13 kg CO2e per kg syngas and 2.00–2.94 kg CO2e per kg C2H4) due to lowest separation energy required for these products (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 4  Cradle-to-gate carbon intensity (i.e., GWI) for two-step electrochemical CO2 conversion route. Net GWI is based on two assumptions for CO2 feedstock capture from various point sources (−0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 and −0.5 kg CO2e per kg CO2).62 Detail breakdown is provided in Table S7.† EEF is considered as 0.17 kg CO2e per kWh (see details in Table S8†).68 
We then sought to reveal how these GWI of electrochemical process compares with those of incumbent process and thermochemical CO2 conversion processes. As illustrated in Fig. 5 (and Table S9†), most electrochemical CO2 derived products are likely to involve higher carbon footprint due to the energy intensive conversion and separation phases. Assuming a EEF of 0.17 kg CO2e per kWh, we identified syngas (CO + H2), C2H4 and C3H7OH as the viable products to provide climate benefits over incumbent process for cradle-to-gate phases. This analysis reveals that syngas (CO + H2) would be the most compelling product (GWI ∼ 1.66 kg CO2e per kg syngas), which would provide annual climate benefits of 12 Mtonne CO2e assuming present day global production volume of 150 Mtonne. In contrast, incumbent process for C2H5OH production provides climate benefits (GWI ∼−0.5 to 0 kg CO2e per kg C2H5OH),41 which is the result of biomass based metabolic corn fermentation with little energy usage, making it a really optimistic production system to compete with.41 Thus, for electrochemical CO2 utilization to produce C2H5OH and to provide climate benefits, extensive process optimization including direct air capture (DAC), use of renewables or biomass-based fuel would be necessary to match this far-fetched value. Likewise, for electrosynthesis of liquid products, including CH3OH and HCOOH, significant reduction in the required energy (possibly from the separation phase) could bring climate benefits as compare to those from fossil-based routes.
 Fig. 5  GWI comparison among electrochemical (two-step assuming −0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 feedstock footprint) and thermochemical CO2 conversion routes as well as incumbent routes. EEF is considered as 0.17 kg CO2e per kWh (see details in Table S8†). Thermochemical CO2 conversion to C2H5OH CH3COOH, C3H7OH is yet to be developed and therefore ignored here. 
To this end, we performed sensitivity analysis involving key performance indicators, including EEF, EE, and product feed concentration using CO electrolysis in a two-step process as a representative model. Fig. 6(a), (b) show the impact of EEF and EE on overall GWI (with CH3OH and C2H4 as examples, results for other products are provided in Fig. S1†). Based on the reported performance (i.e., EE of 20% for the CO2 → CH3OH electrolysis86), and 10 wt% feed concentration for distillation, it can be seen that EEF needs to be <0.05 kg CO2e per kWh (which is indeed an ambitious target in present scenario) to compete with incumbent and thermochemical processes.40,87 The insignificant impact of EE on the GWI is due to the fact that the required energy for conversion is only ∼25% of the total energy demand for two-step CH3OH electrosynthesis (Fig. 3). In contrast, for gas products (e.g., C2H4 in Fig. 6(b)), the EE has significant impact on the GWI, as the conversion energy dominates the overall energy requirement (Fig. 3). For instance, assuming EEF of 0.17 kg CO2e per kWh, EE over >45% and >60% for C2H4 electrosynthesis from CO would bring climate benefits as compared to thermochemical CO2 conversion and incumbent process, respectively.
 Fig. 6  (a) Effect of electricity emission factor (EEF) and energy efficiency of CO electrolysis on GWI (assuming 10 wt% CH3OH concentration) for CH3OH electrosynthesis via two-step route. (b) Effect of EEF and energy efficiency of CO electrolysis on GWI for C2H4 electrosynthesis via two-step route. (c) Effect of CH3OH product feed concentration and EE on GWI; considering EEF = 0.05 kg CO2e per kWh. Solid line denotes GWI for incumbent process, while dashed line denotes the same for thermochemical CO2 conversion process. GWI has been calculated based on total energy required for two-step process with −0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 capture. 
Based on previous discussion in this section (Fig. 3 and 4), separation energy has appreciable impact on overall GWI. In order to investigate further, Aspen modeling was performed for distillation to generate commercial concentration for CH3OH (∼99 wt%) with 5 wt%, 10 wt%, 20 wt% and 30 wt% feed concentrations. As shown (Fig. S2†), the required energy for separation increases exponentially when feed concentration drops below 30 wt%. Thus, with EEF of 0.05 kg CO2e per kWh and 30% EE, product feed concentration >20 wt% is required to bring climate benefits (Fig. 6(c)). Thus, electrochemical synthesis of liquid products at higher concentration is by far the most challenging and requires more focus to achieve technological maturity to an extent. In this regard, adoption of two-step electrochemical CO2 conversion (Fig. 1b) can play a vital role to achieve higher concentration of liquid products. Recently, Ripatti et al. reported electrosynthesis of 1 M acetate via CO reduction.55 By optimizing mass transport inside the cell, 95–98 wt% purity for acetate was obtained with >70% single-pass conversion efficiency when 40 wt% CO with N2 was utilized as feed.55 Although generation of higher carbon liquid products like CH3COOH, C3H7OH and C2H5OH is still an open research question due to limitations with system design and selectivity of catalytic materials, recent report have emerged to produce these liquids in millimolar (mM) concentration range.88 Recent breakthroughs in electrochemically produce highly concentrated HCOOH up to 12 M (ref. 88) and 20 wt% (ref. 91) assures future research opportunities to explore the same for other multi-carbon fuels and chemicals. Considering all these performance metrics, sensitivity analysis has also been summarized in Table S11 and Fig. S3 of ESI.†
Finally, we sought to identify environmental threshold values for the electricity supply to reveal under which conditions electrochemical CO2 reduction products would bring climate benefits as compared to their incumbent synthesis routes. We also considered present day annual global production volume for these eight products (Fig. 7). Considering the fact that incumbent synthesis routes are well optimized over the years, we ignored future optimization and performance improvement of such routes in the analysis. With these assumptions and with a hypothetical assumption of 60% EE for CO electrolysis for all products, we calculated the EEF threshold below which each of these products would bring climate benefits as compared to their respective incumbent synthesis routes. As shown in Fig. 7, products with high global demands, including CH4, C2H4, CO + H2, would not be environmentally compelling to produce via two-step electrolysis in present day (year 2020) and with projected (year 2050) carbon intensity of US and European Union (EU) grid mix. While C3H7OH, seem to be the most compelling product, its present-day annual production volume will provide little incentive to produce this electrochemically. It is important to note that carbon footprint of electrochemical route is strongly dependent on the carbon intensity (i.e., EEF) of the electricity used, unlike thermochemical or incumbent processes and the above scenario is highly dependent on the geographical location. Given the continuous adoption of higher renewables share in global energy sector, operation of electrochemical system with 100% renewable energy (i.e., carbon intensity <0.1 kg CO2e per kWh) would extract larger climate benefits than incumbent or thermochemical routes. Considering the example of eastern Canada, emissions from reservoir-based hydropower is only 0.017 kg CO2e per kWh,68 which would bring potential superior climate benefit from electrochemical process for all of the products of interest. For instance, considering 5.7 Mtonne ethylene production in Canada in 2015, the two-step electrochemical route would reduce ∼24 Mtonne CO2e per year from ethylene production (when coupled with hydropower based electricity) as compared to incumbent synthesis route.92
 Fig. 7  Identification of environmentally compelling CO2 electrosynthesis products via two-step reduction pathway. Reference values have been taken for US grid mix 2020,89 EU grid mix 2020 & 2050,60 Canadian average carbon intensity for electricity generation 202068 and geothermal, solar, wind energy90 cases. Projected EEF (US grid mix 2020, 2050)90 is provided in Table S10† respectively. 
5. Conclusion and outlook
One of the drivers in performing the above analysis is to provide a broad-brush assessment on how and under what scenario electrochemical CO2 reduction products would be environmentally compelling as compared to thermochemical CO2 utilization and incumbent fossil-based (except ethanol) pathways. This study reveals that the energy required for CO2 capture contributes only 1–4% of the overall energy requirement and associated CO2 emissions for electrochemical CO2 utilization pathway. However, notable energy requirement for electrochemical conversion (77–83% of total energy) and product separation (30–85% of total energy) were found for gas and liquid products, respectively. Through the lens of climate benefits, this analysis shows two-step electrosynthesis is distinctly compelling over one-step route. The potential benefits of two-step process, including higher conversion efficiency and selectivity towards multi-carbon products may outweigh any additional energy requirements for the separation phases. The electrochemical route is highly sensitive to the electricity emission factor and would be compelling over thermochemical and incumbent routes only when it is coupled with low-carbon electricity i.e., <0.25 kg CO2e per kWh (as shown in Fig. 7 for all products). To put this into perspective, present day share of renewables in Alberta, Canada for electricity generation is ∼13% resulting in an emission intensity of ∼0.70 kg CO2e per kWh (ref. 68) while jurisdictions like Quebec utilizes >95% renewables to generate electricity with subsequent emission as low as ∼0.017 kg CO2e per kWh.68 Although Alberta is phasing out coal-based electricity, it would require significant investment, policy and government incentives for the expansion of renewables in electricity mix, energy storage as well as adoption of carbon capture and storage (CCS). On the other hand, to reap such benefits, it would be equally critical to achieve high energy efficiency (>60%) of CO2 electrolysis for all the products of interest. While energy efficient (∼45%) CO2 electrolyzer is commercially available today to produce CO, such high performance is yet to be reported for other gas and liquid products. Furthermore, for liquid products, in order to reduce downstream separation energy and associated CO2 emissions, higher product concentration (>20 wt%) needs to be achieved through performance improvement (via catalyst design, optimization of reaction condition) and system design of CO2 electrolyzer (e.g., membrane, gas diffusion electrode, and electrolyzer design). Recent reports have demonstrated feasibility of achieving such high concentration for CO2 electroreduction to HCOOH; however, the same for other liquid products are yet to be reported.
As the technology advances, this analysis further reveals near-term electrochemical CO2 derived products that would provide climate benefits over fossil-based routes, including CO + H2, C2H4 and C3H7OH. Given the level of technological maturity (TRL 2–4),15 and considering annual production volume, we identify syngas CO + H2 as the most compelling product with global annual emissions reduction potential of ∼12 Mtonne CO2e, compared to incumbent route when coupled with low-carbon electricity (0.17 kg CO2e per kWh). Incorporation of ∼100% renewable energy sources will clearly maximize the potential of electrochemical system to reduce dependency on fossil-fuel feedstocks in the long-term.93
This study sets the stage to develop further comprehensive LCA studies on electrochemical CO2 conversion and the technologies it could potentially be paired with. For instance, syngas (CO + H2) is often used as an industrially important intermediate chemical precursor to produce a number of highly demanded products, for example via Fischer–Tropsch process. Therefore, future LCA studies should consider integrating further downstream processes to make a “final” CO2 derived product, involving storage, transportation, construction and decommissioning phases. One such layout could be evaluating potential alternative separation technologies instead of energy intensive distillation process. In this context advanced membrane separation technologies could be a potential contestant as they can result in 1/25 times lower energy consumption compared to conventional distillation.94 However, this technology is still emerging and needs extensive research to optimize large-scale economics. Additionally, hybrid separation systems like integration of membrane based electrodialysis with distillation can produce concentrated product from dilute streams as a cost and energy effective solution than standalone conventional distillation.83 Future studies should also consider other environmental impacts (e.g., fossil or resource depletion, land use, water consumption) to reveal true impacts of electrochemical routes with fossil-based and bio-based ones. Commercially, these products can compete with and displace other market products which will create consequential environmental impact. Also, the time dependence or cumulative nature of environmental impact that can come from CO2 utilization over larger time period needs to be considered.14 It thus is obvious that there are opportunities for a more rigorous study focusing on overall process optimization and aforesaid limitations, uncertainties in relation to climate benefits. Approach for such study could be cradle-to-grave which will produce more extensive results along with parallel environmental comparison with other alternative CO2 utilization techniques (i.e., bio-electrochemical, plasma) as well as in different geographic regions. It is our hope that the present study will guide the CO2 electrolysis community to target overcoming the technological goals to make CO2 derived products environmentally compelling as compared to other routes of CO2 removal.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, M.G.K.; Formal Analysis, S.K.N.; Methodology, Investigation, Original Draft Writing, Review & Editing, S.K.N., S.M, and M.G.K.; Funding Acquisition, M.G.K.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF) at University of Calgary for this study.
References
E. G. Hertwich, T. Gibon, E. A. Bouman, A. Arvesen, S. Suh, G. A. Heath, J. D. Bergesen, A. Ramirez, M. I. Vega and L. Shi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 6277–6282 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Hoegh-Guldberg, D. Jacob, M. Taylor, M. Bindi, S. Brown, I. Camilloni, A. Diedhiou, R. Djalante, K. L. Ebi, F. Engelbrecht, J. Guiot, Y. Hijioka, S. Mehrota, A. Payne, S. I. Seneviratne, A. Thomas, R. Warren and G. Zhou, Impacts of 1.5 °C Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems, in Global Warming of 1.5 °C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty, ed. V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor and T. Waterfield, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland,  2018 Search PubMed .

          D. Roberts, Pulling CO2 out of the air and using it could be a trillion-dollar business, https://www.vox.com/energy-and-environment/2019/9/4/20829431/climate-change-carbon-capture-utilization-sequestration-ccu-ccs, (accessed 13 May 2020).

          United Nations, Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-first session, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015,  2016 .

          J. Rogelj, S. Drew, K. Jiang, S. Fifita, P. M. Forster, V. Ginzberg, C. Handa, H. Kheshgi, S. Kobayshi, E. Kriegler, L. Mundaca, R. Séférian and M. V. Vilarino, Mitigation Pathways Compatible with 1.5 °C in the Context of Sustainable Development, in Global Warming of 1.5 °C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty, ed. V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor and T. Waterfield, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland,  2018 Search PubMed .
Carbon Tracker, Carbon budgets: Where are we now?, https://carbontracker.org/carbon-budgets-where-are-we-now/, (accessed 5 October 2020).

          National Academies of Sciences Engineering, Medicine and others, Negative emissions technologies and reliable sequestration: a research agenda, National Academies Press,  2018 Search PubMed .

          S. K. Allen, N. L. Bindoff, F. B. France, U. Cubasch, M. R. A. Uk, O. B. France, J. Hesselbjerg, C. Denmark, P. C. France, M. C. Uk, V. Vasconcellos and R. A. Feely, Clim. Chang. 2013 – Phys. Sci. Basis,  2014, pp. 31–116 Search PubMed .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .

          National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, Medicine and Others, Gaseous carbon waste streams utilization: Status and research needs, National Academies Press,  2019 Search PubMed .
K. Roh, A. Bardow, A. Bardow, A. Bardow, A. Bardow, D. Bongartz, J. Burre, W. Chung, S. Deutz, D. Han, M. Heßelmann, Y. Kohlhaas, A. König, J. S. Lee, R. Meys, S. Völker, M. Wessling, M. Wessling, J. H. Lee, A. Mitsos, A. Mitsos and A. Mitsos, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 3842–3859 RSC .
J. A. Bergerson, A. Brandt, J. Cresko, M. Carbajales-Dale, H. L. MacLean, H. S. Matthews, S. McCoy, M. McManus, S. A. Miller, W. R. Morrow, I. D. Posen, T. Seager, T. Skone and S. Sleep, J. Ind. Ecol., 2020, 24, 11–25 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, Clean Energy, 2019, 3, 85–100 CrossRef .

          J. Friedmann, ICEF Roadmap 2.0,  2017 Search PubMed .
R. G. Grim, Z. Huang, M. T. Guarnieri, J. R. Ferrell, L. Tao and J. A. Schaidle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 472–494 RSC .
J. M. Spurgeon and B. Kumar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1536–1551 RSC .
M. A. Adnan and M. G. Kibria, Appl. Energy, 2020, 278, 115614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Pérez-gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Göttle, F. Calle-vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CAS .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendor, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS .
Haldor Topsoe, Produce your own carbon monoxide On-site and on-demand, https://www.topsoe.com/processes/carbon-monoxide, (accessed 30 September 2020).
R. Küngas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 044508 CrossRef .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2165–2177 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–24 CrossRef .
S. Garg, M. Li, A. Z. Weber, L. Ge, L. Li, V. Rudolph, G. Wang and T. E. Rufford, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1511–1544 RSC .
M. Jouny, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Romero Cuellar, K. Wiesner-Fleischer, M. Fleischer, A. Rucki and O. Hinrichsen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 307, 164–175 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Cuéllar-Franca and A. Azapagic, J. CO2 Util., 2015, 9, 82–102 CrossRef .
P. Gabrielli, M. Gazzani and M. Mazzotti, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7033–7045 CrossRef CAS .
ISO, ISO 14040:2006 Environmental management—Life cycle assessment—Principles and framework, https://www.iso.org/standard/37456.html, (accessed 6 October 2020).
ISO, ISO 14044:2006 Environmental management—Life cycle assessment—Requirements and guidelines, https://www.iso.org/standard/38498.html, (accessed 6 October 2020).
J. Artz, T. E. Müller, K. Thenert, J. Kleinekorte, R. Meys, A. Sternberg, A. Bardow and W. Leitner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 434–504 CAS .
Y. Ahn, J. Byun, D. Kim, B. S. Kim, C. S. Lee and J. Han, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 3442–3455 CAS .
C. M. Jens, L. Müller, K. Leonhard and A. Bardow, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12270–12280 CAS .
N. Von Der Assen and A. Bardow, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3272–3280 RSC .
M. Matzen and Y. Demirel, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 139, 1068–1077 CrossRef CAS .
N. Thonemann and M. Pizzol, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2253–2263 RSC .
H. H. Khoo, I. Halim and A. D. Handoko, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 41, 101229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dominguez-Ramos, B. Singh, X. Zhang, E. G. Hertwich and A. Irabien, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 104, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Sustainable Prod. Consum., 2019, 18, 72–82 CrossRef .
X. Li, P. Anderson, H. R. M. Jhong, M. Paster, J. F. Stubbins and P. J. A. Kenis, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 5980–5989 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Greenblatt, D. J. Miller, J. W. Ager, F. A. Houle and I. D. Sharp, Joule, 2018, 2, 381–420 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mohsin, T. A. Al-Attas, K. Z. Sumon, J. Bergerson, S. Mccoy and M. G. Kibria, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100104 CrossRef .
Gasification & Syngas Technologies Council, https://www.globalsyngas.org/, (accessed 5 July 2020).
U.S. Department of Energy Alternative Fuels Data Centre, https://afdc.energy.gov/, (accessed 5 July 2020).
J. J. Kaczur, H. Yang, Z. Liu, S. D. Sajjad and R. I. Masel, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 1–16 CrossRef .
A. J. Martín, G. O. Larrazábal and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 5114–5130 RSC .
C. M. Gabardo, C. P. O'Brien, J. P. Edwards, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Joule, 2019, 3, 2777–2791 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Song, H. Song, B. Kim and J. Oh, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 224 CrossRef .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 1–12 Search PubMed .
B. Endrődi, G. Bencsik, F. Darvas, R. Jones, K. Rajeshwar and C. Janáky, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 133–154 CrossRef .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, R. Luo, M. Heima, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rabinowitz and M. W. Kanan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 10–12 CrossRef .
E. Jeng and F. Jiao, React. Chem. Eng., 2020, 5, 1768–1775 RSC .
D. S. Ripatti, T. R. Veltman and M. W. Kanan, Joule, 2019, 3, 240–256 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. A. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, M. Orazov, C. G. Morales-Guio, X. Liu, D. C. Higgins, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7445–7454 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Orella, S. M. Brown, M. E. Leonard, Y. Román-Leshkov and F. R. Brushett, Energy Technol., 2019, 1900994, 1–12 Search PubMed .

          L. Bertuccioli, A. Chan, D. Hart, F. Lehner, B. Madden and E. Standen, Study on development of water electrolysis in the EU, Fuel Cells and hydrogen Joint Undertaking,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. Sternberg, C. M. Jens and A. Bardow, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2244–2259 RSC .
J. Artz, T. E. Müller, K. Thenert, J. Kleinekorte, R. Meys, A. Sternberg, A. Bardow and W. Leitner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 434–504 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Bennett, D. J. Schroeder and S. T. Mccoy, Energy Procedia, 2014, 63, 7976–7992 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Müller, A. Kätelhön, S. Bringezu, S. McCoy, S. Suh, R. Edwards, V. Sick, S. Kaiser, R. Cuéllar-Franca, A. El Khamlichi, J. H. Lee, N. von der Assen and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2979–2992 RSC .
P. Markewitz, J. Marx, A. Schreiber and P. Zapp, Energy Procedia, 2013, 37, 2864–2876 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Plappally and J. H. Lienhard V, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4818–4848 CrossRef .
D. Peterson, J. Vickers and D. DeSantis, US Dep. Energy, 2020, 1–15 Search PubMed .
A. Paturska, M. Repele and G. Bazbauers, Energy Procedia, 2015, 72, 71–78 CrossRef .
C. M. Summers, Sci. Am., 1971, 225, 148–160 CrossRef .
Canada Energy Regulator, Canada's Renewable Power Landscape 2017 – Energy Market Analysis, https://www.cer-rec.gc.ca/en/data-analysis/energy-commodities/electricity/report/2017-canadian-renewable-power/index.html, (accessed 15 July 2020).
R. Bhandari, C. A. Trudewind and P. Zapp, J. Cleaner Prod., 2014, 85, 151–163 CrossRef CAS .

          P. L. Spath and M. K. Mann,  2001, NREL/MP-560-35404.
M. T. Luu, D. Milani, A. Bahadori and A. Abbas, J. CO2 Util., 2015, 12, 62–76 CrossRef CAS .
H. Al-Kalbani, J. Xuan, S. García and H. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 165, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .

          IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report, Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. Core Writing Team, R. K. Pachauri and L. A. Meyer, IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland,  2015, 151 pp Search PubMed .
C. C. L. Mccrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Du, A. He, Z. Liu and C. Tao, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 279, 120946 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS .
G. O. Larrazábal, P. Strøm-Hansen, J. P. Heli, K. Zeiter, K. T. Therkildsen, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41281–41288 CrossRef .
M. Ma, S. Kim, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8854–8861 RSC .
M. Ma, E. L. Clark, K. T. Therkildsen, S. Dalsgaard, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 977–985 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, F. P. García de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, A. Ozden, Y. C. Li, D. H. Nam, J. Li, Y. S. Liu, J. Wicks, Z. Chen, M. Chi, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Tam, J. Y. Howe, A. Proppe, P. Todorović, F. Li, T. T. Zhuang, C. M. Gabardo, A. R. Kirmani, C. McCallum, S. F. Hung, Y. Lum, M. Luo, Y. Min, A. Xu, C. P. O'Brien, B. Stephen, B. Sun, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 478–486 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 466–474 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Wolf, R. Schmidt, U. Block, H. Schoenmakers, K. Bott and G. Kaibel, US Patent, US4326073A,  1982 Search PubMed .
M. Ramdin, A. R. T. Morrison, M. De Groen, R. Van Haperen, R. De Kler, E. Irtem, A. T. Laitinen, L. J. P. Van Den Broeke, T. Breugelmans, J. P. M. Trusler, W. De Jong and T. J. H. Vlugt, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 22718–22740 CrossRef CAS .
N. Von Der Assen, P. Voll, M. Peters and A. Bardow, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7982–7994 RSC .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Sustain. Prod. Consum., 2019, 18, 72–82 CrossRef .
D. Yang, Q. Zhu, C. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, S. Liu and B. Han, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, H. Peng, X. Wei, H. Zhou, J. Gong, M. Huai, L. Xiao, G. Wang, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2455–2462 RSC .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitsk, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. de Chalendar, J. Taggart and S. M. Benson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 25497–25502 CrossRef CAS .

          U.S Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook 2020,  2020 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, J. J. Kaczur, S. D. Sajjad and R. I. Masel, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .
Canada Energy Regulator, Market Snapshot: Petrochemical products in everyday life, https://www.cer-rec.gc.ca/en/data-analysis/energy-markets/market-snapshots/2018/market-snapshot-petrochemical-products-in-everyday-life.html, (accessed 14 July 2020).
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711–1731 RSC .
L. Shao, Front. Environ. Chem., 2020, 1, 1–4 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0gc02831bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) One-step (CO2 → products) electrosynthesis using neutral pH membrane electrode assembly (MEA) and (b) two-step (CO2 → CO → products) electrosynthesis, wherein step 1 (solid-oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) converts CO2 → CO) and step 2 (alkaline flow cell) converts CO → products. The eight products considered in this study are shown in (a).	 


HCOOH	One-step	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.19	—	0.956	23.01	0.6
CO	One-step	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.103	—	1.57	14.00	150a
CH4	One-step	CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	0.17	—	2.74	2.00	250
Two-stepb	CO + 6H+ + 6e− → CH4 + H2O	0.26	1.74	2.67
CH3OH	One-step	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	0.017	—	1.37	5.34	110
Two-stepb	CO + 4H+ + 4e− → CH3OH	0.07	0.87	8.01
C2H4	One-step	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O	0.08	—	3.14	2.34	140
Two-stepb	2CO + 8H+ + 8e− → C2H4 + 2H2O	0.17	1.99	3.51
C2H5OH	One-step	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O	0.085	—	1.91	3.84	77
Two-stepb	2CO + 8H+ + 8e− → C2H5OH + H2O	0.18	1.21	5.75
CH3COOH	One-step	2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH + 2H2O	0.098	—	1.47	7.51	18
Two-stepb	2CO + 4H+ + 4e− → CH3COOH	0.30	0.93	15.01
C3H7OH	One-step	3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH + 5H2O	0.10	—	2.19	3.34	0.2
Two-stepb	3CO + 12H+ + 12e− → C3H7OH + 2H2O	0.20	1.39	5.00

Average carbon intensity of CO2 as feedstock	−0.5 to −0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 (ref. 62)
H2 generation via water electrolysis	50 kWh per kg H2 (ref. 58)
O2 generation via cryogenic air separation	0.20 kWh per kg O2 at supercritical condition for 95% purity63
Water (H2O) extraction energy	0.78 kWh per tonne H2O (ref. 64)
Electrolyzer for CO production	Solid-oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC)
Electrolyzer for CO2 → products	Neutral pH membrane electrode assembly (MEA)
Electrolyzer for CO → products	Alkaline flow cell
Faradaic efficiency (FE)	90% for all products
Overpotential for neutral pH MEA cell	1.4 V (for anodic and cathodic reactions)
Overpotential for alkaline flow cell	0.6 V (anodic and cathodic)
Balance of plant (BOP)	10% of conversion energy65
Product feed concentration for distillation	10 wt%
Pressure Swing Adsorption (PSA) energy	0.25 kWh m−3 for all gases66
Energy conversion efficiency for distillation (thermal to electrical)	95% (ref. 67)
Electricity emission intensity	0.17 kg CO2e per kWh (assuming average carbon intensity in Canada (2017–2018))68

 	Fig. 2  Cradle-to-gate system boundary for the LCA study (represented by dashed line). Overall GWI assessment is based on energy requirement in each phase. Emissions contribution from use phase, construction and decommissioning phases were excluded. Functional unit is 1 kg of each product of interest except CO (wherein functional unit is 1 kg CO + 0.216 kg H2).	 

 	Fig. 3  Energetic assessment of electrochemical CO2 conversion via one-step and two-step routes. Detail breakdown is shown in Table S6.† For syngas, we assumed that required hydrogen (0.216 kg H2 per kg CO) will be produced by water electrolysis.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cradle-to-gate carbon intensity (i.e., GWI) for two-step electrochemical CO2 conversion route. Net GWI is based on two assumptions for CO2 feedstock capture from various point sources (−0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 and −0.5 kg CO2e per kg CO2).62 Detail breakdown is provided in Table S7.† EEF is considered as 0.17 kg CO2e per kWh (see details in Table S8†).68	 

 	Fig. 5  GWI comparison among electrochemical (two-step assuming −0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 feedstock footprint) and thermochemical CO2 conversion routes as well as incumbent routes. EEF is considered as 0.17 kg CO2e per kWh (see details in Table S8†). Thermochemical CO2 conversion to C2H5OH CH3COOH, C3H7OH is yet to be developed and therefore ignored here.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Effect of electricity emission factor (EEF) and energy efficiency of CO electrolysis on GWI (assuming 10 wt% CH3OH concentration) for CH3OH electrosynthesis via two-step route. (b) Effect of EEF and energy efficiency of CO electrolysis on GWI for C2H4 electrosynthesis via two-step route. (c) Effect of CH3OH product feed concentration and EE on GWI; considering EEF = 0.05 kg CO2e per kWh. Solid line denotes GWI for incumbent process, while dashed line denotes the same for thermochemical CO2 conversion process. GWI has been calculated based on total energy required for two-step process with −0.8 kg CO2e per kg CO2 capture.	 

 	Fig. 7  Identification of environmentally compelling CO2 electrosynthesis products via two-step reduction pathway. Reference values have been taken for US grid mix 2020,89 EU grid mix 2020 & 2050,60 Canadian average carbon intensity for electricity generation 202068 and geothermal, solar, wind energy90 cases. Projected EEF (US grid mix 2020, 2050)90 is provided in Table S10† respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0gc02831b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
