Metal chalcogenide semiconductor nanocrystals synthesized from ion-conducting seeds and their applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC02895A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC02895A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13868-13895Metal chalcogenide semiconductor nanocrystals synthesized from ion-conducting seeds and their applications

        
          
            Nilotpal 
            Kapuria
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Uma V. 
            Ghorpade
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Maria 
            Zubair
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mohini 
            Mishra
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shalini 
            Singh
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kevin M. 
            Ryan
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Sciences and Bernal Institute, University of Limerick, Limerick, V94 T9PX, Ireland. E-mail: kevin.m.ryan@ul.ie
Received 
      18th June 2020
    , Accepted 22nd July 2020First published on 11th August 2020AbstractPrecise control over the shape and elemental composition of colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) is challenging, especially for anisotropic growth. While the most studied nanocrystal syntheses involve homogenous nucleation and growth, the solution-based approach involving heterogenous growth from ion conductive seeds has proved to be very efficient yet less explored. The static nature and superionic conductivity of the seeds enable rapid cation transport for catalysis of defect-free, phase pure NC growth. This review aims to explain the significance of ion-conductive solid seed-based synthesis from a mechanistic point of view to produce 1D and quasi-1D NCs for applications such as photocatalysis, photovoltaics, and photodetectors. We highlight the significant synthetic information reported for heterostructure and alloyed metal chalcogenide NCs synthesized via solution–solid–solid and diffusion-controlled growth based on several kinetic and thermodynamic growth parameters. We also provide a perspective on the areas that hold promise and are in need of further development.
Nilotpal Kapuria
Nilotpal Kapuria received his BS-MS dual degree (2018) in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Bhopal. Nilotpal's research interest encompasses the synthesis and mechanistic understanding of growth processes for colloidal nanocrystals for energy harvesting and conversion applications. Currently, he is a doctoral researcher at the Bernal Institute, University of Limerick where he is exploring the seed-based colloidal synthesis approaches for tuning thermoelectric properties in multinary metal chalcogenide nanocrystals.
Uma V. Ghorpade
Uma Ghorpade has been working as an SFI-funded Post-Doctoral Researcher at the Bernal Institute, Ireland since 2019. She was previously a BK-21 Postdoctoral Fellow at Chonnam National University (CNU), S. Korea. She received her PhD in 2017 in Chemistry from Shivaji University, India. She has been awarded the “International Exchange Student” Scholarship from the Korean Government to work at CNU, S. Korea, and “INSPIRE” fellowship award from the DST, India to conduct PhD research. Her research interests include the solution-based synthesis of a variety of semiconductor materials including chalcogenides, phosphides, perovskites as well as wide-bandgap metal oxides for energy-related applications.
Maria Zubair
Maria Zubair received her master's degree from Quaid-i-Azam University Pakistan in 2017. After that She worked as a research assistant on higher education commission of Pakistan (HEC) funded project entitled “Synthesis, Characterization and Application of Organic Photonic and electrochromic Materials” from 2017 to 2018. She joined the nanotechnology group at the Bernal Institute of University of Limerick as a PhD student in 2019 under SFI funded project. Currently, her research focus is on the colloidal synthesis of metal chalcogenide materials and their application.
Mohini Mishra
Mohini received her BTech degree in Chemical Engineering from India. After that, she completed her MTech in Chemical Engineering from the IIT BHU and awarded a scholarship from MHRD India. She started her professional journey as a Researcher for a Project of collaboration between the DAE-BRNS and IIT Kanpur, India. Since February 2019, she has been working with Prof Kevin M Ryan as a PhD student at the University of Limerick, having received funding from the Science Foundation of Ireland. Her research focuses on colloidal nanocrystals synthesis, characterizations, and assemblies for energy and environmental application.
Shalini Singh
Dr Shalini Singh recently joined University of Limerick, Ireland as a lecturer at the Department of Chemical Sciences and Bernal Institute. She received her PhD from University of Limerick in 2016 under INSPIRE Structural PhD Program. From 2016–2019, she worked as a postdoctoral researcher with FWO fellowship at Ghent University Belgium. Her research interests include design and characterization of novel nanomaterials, surface chemistry study of nanocrystals and their use in the field of energy conversion and storage.
Kevin M. Ryan
Prof. Kevin M. Ryan holds a Personal Chair in Chemical Nanotechnology at the Department of Chemical Sciences and Bernal Institute at the University of Limerick and is a Co Principal Investigator on SFI Research centres MaREI and AMBER and funded Investigator on SSPC and Confirm Centres. He is coordinator of Horizon 2020 EU project Si-Drive and holder of SFI IVP and Irish Research Council Laureate Awards. He has authored over 120 papers and 8 patents. He received his PhD (2003) from University College Cork, Ireland before joining Merck Chemicals in Southampton, UK, as a Marie Curie Industry Fellow. In 2004/5 he worked at UC Berkeley on a Marie Curie outgoing fellowship on the synthesis and assembly of colloidal nanocrystals. He joined University of Limerick in 2006. His research interests are in the solution synthesis and assembly of colloidal copper chalcogenide nanocrystals and main group semiconductor nanowires for energy conversion and storage applications.
1. Introduction
Metal chalcogenide-based semiconductor nanomaterials have received considerable attention over the last few decades due to their potential applications in various fields, e.g. photovoltaic (PV), photocatalytic, photodetection, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), biomedicine, catalysis, magnetism, etc.1–6 Among the various approaches to form nanocrystals (NCs), colloidal synthesis involving thermal decomposition and reduction is the most successful allowing good control over physical and chemical properties.1,7,8 Colloidal strategies such as doping, alloying and heterostructure formation allow excellent shape, size and composition tunable properties in NCs which in turn controls phase, Zeeman splitting of excitonic excited states, charge transfer and photoluminescence (PL) emission bands.9–11 For example, the incorporation of aliovalent metal cations into binary (Cu2−xSe or CdSe) NCs alters the optoelectronic properties of the newly formed host material allowing for greater efficiencies in a range of applications including solar cells, water splitting, batteries, and LEDs respectively.12–14 Furthermore, composition alloying in colloidal ternary and quaternary chalcogenide such as CuIn(SxSe1−x)2 (CISSe), Cu(InGa)(S,Se)2 (CIGSSe), Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) NCs are industrially viable routes to solar absorber materials as their syntheses use lower processing temperatures allowing for cheaper device fabrication from roll to roll and print processing.15–22
Understanding the crystallisation process of NCs during colloidal synthesis and understanding the relation between synthesis kinetics and NC properties is important. Nucleation is the first stage of crystal phase formation that defines the boundary conditions for the crystallization system and most likely dictates the subsequent growth process.23,24 Various theories have yielded insights into the underlying reaction in nucleation and growth of NCs and have provided guidelines for rational synthetic manipulation.23,25 The LaMer based concept is the most commonly accepted theory that explains the nucleation process.26 This suggests when the reaction solution enters the point of supersaturation with monomers, it undergoes burst nucleation to form clusters that can develop seeds with high surface energy, which serve as catalysts or nuclei for the final production of the NCs. Further, the growth of the NCs can take place through Ostwald/digestive ripening, coalescence, and/or oriented attachment controlling the size distribution.23,25
Pearson's Hard–Soft [Lewis] acid–base (HSAB) concept must be taken into consideration, which is considered as a fundamental rule for determining the thermodynamic preference during ionic reactions where the assessment is based on the respective polarizability of the corresponding ionic precursors and ligands.14,27 The cations, anions, and ligands are categorized as hard, soft, and borderline Lewis acid and Lewis base. The hard–hard and soft–soft acid–base interactions are considered to be stronger interactions than any other interaction possibilities. In this context, controlling the reactivities of the individual chemical entities is particularly important in multinary NC formulation. For example, during the synthesis of ternary semiconductor NC, CuAgInX2 (X = S, Se, Te), Cu+ is a soft Lewis acid in comparison with Ag+ and In3+ and consequently have their different reactivity towards S2−, Se2− and Te2− soft bases.8,13 Thus, nucleation of NCs depends on relative reactivity and influx rate of monomers supplied from the solution. Consequently, it affects the surface chemistry, elemental distribution, and shape in heterostructures, alloyed, and multinary compounds as well as the size of the NCs.
Understanding the ligand binding, and precursor reactivity is key to design synthesis protocols which involve more than one growth process. For instance, during the synthesis of the biaxial–isotropic SnSe nanoplates from SnS seeds, the mixture of n-dodecanethiol (n-DDT) and tert-dodecyl mercaptan (t-DDT) promoted homogeneous growth of SnSe NCs. Whereas n-DDT alone induces the formation of SnS nuclei for the epitaxial growth of SnSe. Because, t-DDT, a comparatively harder acid than n-DDT, it was more likely to bind through ionic bonds rather than covalent bonds with borderline acid Sn2+.28
These studies demonstrate that the nucleation process is consequently challenging for multi-component systems, as reactivity differences between the different elemental precursors, their surface interaction, and uneven distribution of components within the clusters complicate the further growth of the NCs. The nucleation occurs either by a homogeneous or heterogeneous process (Fig. 1a–c). Homogeneous nucleation takes place without any preferential nucleation sites and nuclei forms uniformly. Heterogeneous nucleation occurs in the presence of heterogeneities (substrate, grain boundary, seed), that promotes nucleation by reducing the free energy barrier to NCs formation. Heterogeneous nucleation by seeded growth is therefore considered as a versatile and efficient process as it offers a controllable synthesis of colloidal NCs in terms of composition, size, phase and structural parameters and also provides different dimensions, orientation, and defects in the newly grown phase.29
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of semiconductor nanorods (NRs) and nanowire (NWs) formation by seeded (catalyst) approach (VLS, VSS) and (b) the general colloidal synthesis (via nucleation and subsequent growth) of NCs, (c) LaMer model of NCs formation without (a), and (b) with seed-mediated growth showing a clear difference in the nucleation barrier. Numbering 1, 2, 3 denotes prenucleation stage, nucleation stage, and growth stage respectively,29 © 2016 ACS, (d) SLS, and (e) SSS, and DCG fall within the colloidal seeded approach. The SLS growth is catalysed by metal seeds and the SSS growth and DCG are catalysed by ion conducting seeds. The highlighted area displays the colloidal growth regimes involving ion-conducting solid catalyst seeds. Here P – precursors, B – byproduct, SLS – solution–liquid–solid, SSS – solution–solid–solid, DCG – diffusion-controlled growth, VLS – vapour–liquid–solid, VSS – vapour–solid–solid, Cs – solubility level; Cmin* – minimum monomer concentration, Cseeds* – minimum monomer concentration in presence of seed, Cmax* – maximum monomer concentration. 
Seed mediated synthesis can produce a wide library of shape controlled NCs by isotropic and anisotropic growth with well-defined composition. The materials designed through seeding have shown significant potential to develop defined interfaces and shape-controlled heterostructures along with the development of polytypic NCs (CdSe, ZnSe, CdTe, ZnTe) with nanocubes, rods, wires, bullet-shape, platelets and hyper-branched structures (tripods, tetrapods, octopods, etc.).10,30–33 Seeded-grown metal chalcogenides, including binary–binary, binary–ternary or alloyed NCs have demonstrated outstanding properties in PV, LEDs, batteries, and sensors.14,34–36 According to the classical LaMer theory, the effect of seed on the nucleation barrier is delineated as shown in Fig. 1c. The seeded growth is favourable when the surface energy of the growing phase is high enough to create a lower free energy barrier (nucleation). This synthesis route divides the growth of NCs into two stages, formation of seeds nuclei and then nucleation and growth of the product on the seeds by monomer deposition. It offers several advantages by controlling the kinetics and thermodynamics of the reaction.
The semiconductor seed materials synthesized by using Cd-, Bi-, Zn-, Mn-, Pb-based sulphides, selenides or tellurides can tune the properties of the host material by forming the heterostructure, core/shell and alloy that could vary the electronic, optical and magnetic properties.37–41 For example, Au/PbS heterostructure shows an improvement in the plasmonic absorption cross-section due to synergistic coupling between42 plasmon and exciton of Au and PbS, whereas the optical, catalytic and LSPR performance of anisotropically grown Cu–M (M = Au, Pt, or Pd) NRs has outperformed compared to their individual components.43,44 By precisely controlling the reaction kinetics, a favourable lattice mismatch can be induced at the growth stage and epitaxial growth from these seeds can lead to preferential anisotropic growth.24,28
While the pseudo-spherical NC synthesis via seed-mediated route has been widely adapted by the colloidal approach, anisotropic nanostructure growth has also attracted interest for specific applications where diameter-dependent properties can be tuned independently from length-dependent properties.12,36 Furthermore the seed-mediated anisotropic NCs offer larger surface area, tunable aspect ratio, regioselective functionalization and direction dependant properties such as linearly polarised emission, and charge separation along the long axis.29 As an example, seeded CdSe/CdS NRs exhibited fluorescence quantum yields up to unity, suppressed residual defect emissions transferring energy within the structure and have generated strong internal piezoelectric fields by strain engineering, etc.45,46 Whereas, seed mediated formation of CdSe/CdS core/shell tetrapods with wider CdS pods effectively suppressed Auger recombination in the CdSe core to reduce blinking and photobleaching at a single particle level.47
Several seed-based synthetic approaches have been used to date to prepare various anisotropic NCs heterostructures with different morphologies ranging from NRs to NWs. The most popular methods include vapor–liquid–solid (VLS), vapor–solid–solid (VSS), solution–liquid–solid (SLS) and solution–solid–solid (SSS) which mainly differ from one another in terms of the phases of precursor (vapour or solution phase) and catalyst (liquid or solid) utilized as shown in Fig. 1a, b and d.48–56 The VLS growth mechanism was first introduced to synthesize a variety of group-IV, III–V, and II–VI based materials.49,53–56 Fundamentally, it works by thermal decomposition of a vapor phase precursor introducing to the liquid-metal catalyst for the crystal growth at the liquid–solid interface. The growth kinetics and the requirements for catalyst stability are different in VLS and VSS with the main difference being the phase of catalyst (solid catalyst in VSS growth).57,58 In last few years, research has stepped up to SLS, and related synthetic strategies introducing advantages from colloidal synthesis to metal catalyst-based anisotropic growth (Fig. 1d). Advances in the synthesis of Si, Ge, and binary III–V, II–VI NRs and NWs by liquid-phase seed-mediated SLS and SLS-related methods have been extensively studied over the last decade for a variety of applications.48 Solid-phase seed catalysed supercritical fluid solid–solid (SFSS) and SSS growth models further allow lower growth temperatures, better control of growth orientation, increased purity, etc.44,59
Although extensive work has taken place in the field of semiconductor NWs, solid phase catalyst seeded approaches are important yet less studied in colloidal synthesis. In case of SSS growth, the group-IB-based metal chalcogenides (I2–VI) have been used widely as solid seed catalysts for the synthesis of highly crystalline semiconductor heterostructures at relatively low temperatures (<250 °C) (Fig. 1e).12,60,61 The SSS mechanism comprises the growth of a solid crystalline NCs via a solid seed catalyst in a solution form. The growth offers significant benefits in terms of size, composition, and crystalline phase control.52,62,63 The static nature of solid seeds enables comparatively low change in the contact angle between solid seed and solid crystal growth phase, whereas low solubility of cations in the solid seed ensures the effective precipitation of cations from the seed matrix. This, in turn, facilitates the formation of a heterostructure devoid of any gradient of composition, thus forming defect-free heterostructures. The combination of surface and reaction chemistry controls the nucleation and growth stage, whereas the concentration of precursors and choice of reaction parameters enables crystal growth to be optimized to produce a variety of well-defined shapes. Furthermore, diffusion-controlled growth (DCG) is an integral part of the SSS mechanism that proceeds by dissolution of the ionic species into the seed material, accompanied by molecular diffusion to the seed growing-facet interface (Fig. 1d).52
Binary metal chalcogenide seeds (such as Cu2−xS, Ag2S, Ag2Se) are employed very commonly in SSS and DCG based synthesis of NCs. Cu2−xS, Ag2S, Ag2Se NC-based seed catalysts, also called superionic or ion conductive seeds, possess high cationic mobility in their solid phase at typical reaction temperatures and favours the foreign cation incorporation. This facilitates formation of heterostructures by introducing divalent metal cations and or alloyed NCs by the incorporation of di-, tri- or tetravalent metal cations.36,64 The key to the formation of either heterostructures or homogeneously alloyed NCs is the charge equilibrium and coordination chemistry. Divalent cations (e.g., Zn2+, Cd2+, and Mn2+) are unable to alloy homogeneously with group IB based-Cu2−xS, Ag2S, Ag2Se NCs and leads to the formation of II–VI, IV–VI (–ZnS/Se, –MnS/Se, –CdS/Se, –PbS/Se, etc.) classes of semiconductor heterostructures following the seed catalysed growth via SSS. On the other hand, trivalent and tetravalent cations (e.g., In3+, Ga3+, Sn4+) can alloy homogeneously with the conductive seed cations and leads to the formation of monophasic structures involving ternary I–III–VI2 (–CuInSe2, –CuGaS2, etc.), pseudo-ternary I2–III1−x–IIIx–VI4 (–CIGS) and quaternary I2–II–IV–VI4, (–CIGS, –CZTS, etc.) chalcogenide semiconductors NCs by sacrificial catalytic seed-based diffusion control mechanisms. In addition, the multi-stage synthesis of nanostructures through the combination of SSS and DCG follows a different approach in the growth mechanism. For example in the multi-step synthesis of CuGaS2–ZnS nanostructures, Cu1.94S NCs were first employed as a catalyst for the heterostructure growth of Cu1.94S–ZnS, and then as sacrificial seeds for the formation of CuGaS2.65 For the heterostructures, lattice mismatch induced interfacial strain controls the electronic states at the interface and helps to tune the NCs functional properties. Alongside, the reactivity of precursor, ligand selection, and the diffusion capacity of ions are the crucial parameters in controlling the shape, size, morphology, crystallinity, and composition of the desired alloy or heterostructure. Considering this, in the present review we have explicitly focused on the monophasic, heterostructure, and alloyed semiconductor NCs synthesized by superionic conducting seeds.
We have structured this review by first discussing various ways of NC growth evolution via solid seed-based catalyst and addressed the differences between conventional solid seed-based synthesis with catalyst assisted growth. We discuss the ion conductive semiconductor chalcogenide-based seeded growth, focusing on their synthesis parameters and phase relationship with final growth. We then focus on the mechanism of catalytic seed-assisted growth and the role of crystal mismatch at the heterointerface towards NC formation. The review further covers the discussion on the solid seed-based synthesis of various colloidal semiconductor architectures of different compositions, phases, crystallography, and growth patterns. The section is categorized based on heterostructure and alloy formation and remarks are made on, effects of synthetic parameters, dimensions, lattice mismatch, and preferential growth direction. Finally, we describe the implementation of the seed-based NCs in the fields of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, photovoltaics, and photodetection and conclude with a perspective on future work.
2. Ion-conductive seeds: synthesis, mechanism and heterointerface study
In colloidal synthesis, seeds are considered as pre-existing nuclei which act as a template for secondary growth of a new crystallographic phase. Seeds can be either metallic or semiconductor NCs. The metallic seeds are usually utilised in epitaxial overgrowth for the semiconductor NCs in SLS growth where the metallic seed behave as liquid droplets, or in high temperature-based vapour phase growths such as VLS or VSS. The discussion on metallic seed-based growth is beyond the scope of this review as it concerns different growth kinetics. The following section is dedicated to differentiating solid metal chalcogenide catalyst-assisted growth from other conventional solid seed-based growths.
2.1 Overview of solid semiconductor seed-based growth
The growth of the newly formed crystal phase from a solid semiconductor seed can either occur through epitaxial (/heteroepitaxial), cation exchange (CE), or through catalyst assisted growth (SSS and DCG) (Fig. 2a–c).12,66,67,68 Epitaxial growth can be described as deposition of crystalline material on a preformed crystal substrate with defined crystal facets. Seed cations play no major role in the growth, i.e. no chemical transformation takes place in the seed and the seed acts only as a template for overgrowth of a new layer. Therefore, the growth direction is opposite to that for the catalysed growth from the seed. If the overgrowth of a chemically different material occurs on the pre-existing seed surface, it is known as hetero-epitaxial growth (Fig. 2a),61 where the lattice mismatch mostly decides the wetting of the seed by the secondary crystalline material.14
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of hetero-epitaxial growth,14 ©2020 ACS (i and ii) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of CdS nano-interfaces epitaxially grown on CuS NCs;40 ©2018 Nature (b) schematic illustration of cation exchange from a colloidal semiconductor seed,69 ©2016 ACS (c) cation exchange reactions and scanning transmission electron microscopy-X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (STEM-EDS) maps of products formed upon cation exchange of Zn2+, Cd2+, Co3+, Mn2+, Ni2+ with Cu1.8S;75 ©2018 Science (d) schematic illustration of solid seed catalysed SSS growth form a solid seed catalyst,77 ©2016 ACS, (e) TEM and STEM-EDS of ZnSe NWS catalysed from Ag2Se seeds.44 ©2013 ACS. 
Lattice mismatch is a key factor to decide the interfacial energy during seeded growth. Depending upon the mismatch between the seed and the growing phase, heteroepitaxial growth can give rise to core–shell structures (lattice mismatch 1–3%), segmented islands on the seeds (>5%) or anisotropic growth (higher mismatch in one direction).14 However, the phase in hetero-epitaxial growth does not require direct involvement of the seed's crystal lattice with the foreign atoms. For example, Lian et al.,40 synthesized covellite CuS nanoplates and utilized the nanoplates as seeds for heteroepitaxial deposition of wurtzite CdS nano-segments [Fig. 2a(i and ii)]. A considerably high lattice mismatch of 8.3% along the connecting [0001] planes of CuS and CdS was responsible for the segmented island formation of CdS on CuS nanoplates. However, if the cations in the seed lattice create vacancies by moving into interstitial sites, they provide an opportunity for the foreign cations to occupy the void created. This can initiate two different kinds of growth. In one kind, the host cations diffuse out from interstitial sites upon creating voids, and more foreign cations diffuse in, to fill the voids which result in a topotactic transformation of the seed NCs termed as cation exchange (CE) (Fig. 2b and c).69,70 In the other kind, incoming foreign cations form a solid solution with the host crystal lattice until a supersaturation has been reached and undergo a catalyst-assisted growth. In CE, Lewis bases present in the form of ligands, surfactant, or co-ordinating solvent are vital, as suitable interaction between the ligands and host cations can create cationic vacancies in seed NCs. For example, during CE of Cu2−xS with trivalent cations such as In3+ and Ga3+ soft Lewis base tri-alkyl phosphine are used as ligands to create cationic vacancies by extracting the soft Lewis acid Cu+ from the host lattice.69 Hinterding et al.,71 utilized triphenyl and diphenyl phosphine as ligands to facilitate Ga3+ cation exchange in Cu2−xS seeds by extracting Cu+ to create cationic vacancies for the incorporation of Ga3+ cations and formed CuGaS2 NCs. Hence, in CE the seed only acts as a template for cationic replacement without any actual growth.71,72 Due to the bulky nature of the anion, the anionic framework mostly remains intact during cationic replacement which results in an unchanged NC morphology.73 CE of the seed NCs can form heterostructures when host cations are partially replaced by foreign cations or when host cations are homogeneously distributed with foreign cations in a segment of the seed crystal lattice (Fig. 2b).74 Besides, CE can also form monophasic NCs when foreign cations completely replace the host cations or homogeneously distribute among them in the host lattice. Fig. 2c displays CE of Cu1.8S NCs where partial replacement of Cu+ cations with Cd2+ and Zn2+ generated Cu1.8S–CdS and Cu1.8S–ZnS heterostructures. Further cationic replacement of the Cu1.8S segment of the generated heterostructures with Co2+, Mn2+, Ni2+ completely replaced the Cu+ and formed CoS, MnS, Ni8S9 segments respectively interfacing with CdS and ZnS segment.75 Similarly, CE of Cu1.8S NCs with In3+, Ga3+ cations generated alloyed CuInS2 and CuGaS2 segments in heterostructure NCs and as well as completely transformed monophasic ternary NCs.64,74 The partial CE can also lead to doped NCs when the stoichiometric ratio of foreign to host cation is <0.05. Besides, partial cationic replacement of host cations by foreign cations from surface to inner core of the seed can generate core–shell NCs. Slow cation exchange rate facilitates such core–shell structure formation. Tu et al.,76 reported formation of Cu2−xTe@PbTe core@shell NCs upon partial CE exchange of Cu2−xTe NCs with slower diffuser Pb2+ cations.
SSS or DCG are catalyst-assisted growth models possessing the characteristics (catalysis and diffusion) from both hetero-epitaxial growth and CE. However, the mechanism behind the growth process from conductive solid seeds turns out to be different (Fig. 2d). In solid seed catalysed growth, the foreign cations fill in the void created by highly mobile seed cations until it reaches a supersaturation, i.e. the seed behaves as a solid matrix for crystallisation. Upon reaching supersaturation, the foreign cations precipitate as a new crystal phase on a suitable facet of the seed by creating a hetero-epitaxial interface.44 The intrinsic superionic nature of the seed is crucial to catalyse the growth, as the seeds must act as a solid solution to accommodate such supersaturation in the solid phase. For example, Wang et al.,44 utilised superionic Ag2Se NCs as seeds to catalyse the growth of ZnSe NCs (Fig. 2e). The ZnSe phase was precipitated at the hetero interface between seed and growth phase upon the supersaturation of the seeds with Zn2+ cations. The interface created between the seed and precipitated phase acts as the only active site for further growth and therefore the growth always occurs in one-direction irrespective of lattice mismatch. Section 2.4 addresses the comprehensive role of lattice mismatch in catalyst assisted growth process.
2.2 Conductive semiconductor chalcogenide ncs as seeds
Catalyst-assisted growth of colloidal NCs can be controlled by understanding the crystalline nature of the ion-conductive seeds (Cu2−xS, Ag2S, and Ag2Se). But first let's address why these seeds are called superionic conductors. Due to its heavy nature, the mobility of chalcogen ions in metal chalcogenide NCs is negligible compared with highly mobile cations. Similar to the superionic materials as described by Faraday, cations constituted in these semiconductor NC seeds are highly mobile above certain temperatures with a rigid anionic lattice.78–80 Hence, a rapid cationic movement along many sites over the rigid anionic lattice results in high ionic conductivity as exhibited by superionic solids. The temporal cationic vacancy generated by these highly mobile cations provides an active site for the incorporation of foreign cations in the conductive seeds to form a solid solution. Cu2−xS, Ag2S, and Ag2Se NCs as conductive seeds are the most frequently reported NCs where they either behave as a catalyst or sacrificial seed for the growth of heterostructure or alloyed chalcogenides NCs respectively.36,44,81,82 Looking at each of these seeds more specifically in-turn reveals key differences.
Copper(I) sulphides (Cu2−xS) (x ≤ 1) are comprised of different kinds of NCs (e.g. Cu2S, Cu1.94S, Cu1.8S, Cu1.75S, etc.) with diverse crystal structures.11,13,83 Cu+ cations display tetrahedral or trigonal coordination in these structures while the S2− sub-lattice possesses either a hexagonal closed packed (hcp) or cubic closed packed (fcc or bcc) structure. While in the Cu2−xS variants with pseudo-hcp packing e.g., monoclinic (djurleite/Cu1.94S) and trigonal (roxbyite/Cu1.81S) crystals, the sulphur sub-lattice expands to emulate hexagonal packing above 100 °C and provides vacant sites for the Cu+ to move freely (Fig. 3a).†62,84 These p-type semiconductor materials with a large number of Cu vacancies (x < 0.3) and high cationic mobility facilitate the other cations to incorporate into the lattice and results in the formation of an ionic solid solution.
 Fig. 3  (a) The low-temperature and high-temperature (>100 °C) crystal structures of Cu2−xS. The blue balls denote Cu+ cations and orange balls denote sulphur, the fractional filling of the blue balls in hexagonal structure illustrates partial occupancy of Cu+ in the crystal lattice; (b) the Se2− and S− anions (shown green) form a bcc unit, with the Ag+ cations rapidly diffusing across distorted tetrahedral interstitial sites (shown pink) through the trigonal interstitial sites (shown sea green). The dotted circles show distorted octahedral sites.92 ©2016 RSC; TEM images of a typical MnSe stem terminated by an Ag2Se tip (at 200 °C for 2 h with 0.3 atom% Ag+/Mn2+) irradiated with an electron beam for various durations: (c) 420–600 s with intact Ag2Se tip and (d) 2100 s where tip was no longer present. (e) The corresponding STEM-EDX line scan after 2100 s of irradiation confirmed the absence of Ag+ in the tip77 © 2016 ACS. 
Ag2S NCs are abundant in the monoclinic phase (JCPDS: 14-0072) at room temperature and transform to a body-centred cubic (bcc) phase above 180 °C which accounts for high Ag+ mobility across the interstitial sites.85,86 Monoclinic phase of Ag2S NCs possess a hcp S-sub lattice in contrast to the cubic structure above 180 °C where the S2− framework is present in a cubic arrangement.
The Ag2Se NCs can exist either in the orthorhombic phase or metastable tetragonal phase at room temperature but transform to cubic α-Ag2Se above 100 °C.80,87 The Se ions in α-Ag2Se are arranged in a bcc lattice, and the Ag+ ions exhibit rapid diffusional characteristics largely across the tetrahedral interstitial sites, through trigonal interstitial sites and occasionally across the octahedral interstitial sites, which accounts for the super-ionic behaviour (Fig. 3b).88 Zhang et al.,77 reported that during TEM analysis of the as-synthesised MnSe NWs catalysed by an Ag2Se seed, longer irradiation (>2100 s) by an electron beam of Ag2Se tip at 200 °C displaced it from the MnSe stem as irradiation transformed the tetragonal phase to the bcc phase where Ag+ are highly mobile and removed upon longer irradiation time (Fig. 3c–e). X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) study of Ag2Se seeds displayed a phase transition from tetragonal to cubic phase which increased the mobility of Ag+ required for catalytic behavior.77 Due to the high mobility of Ag+, Ag2Se cannot be observed at the tip of the MnSe stem after the longer irradiation of the beam and transformed it from a tetragonal to a zinc blende (ZB) phase.
These findings suggest that as non-stoichiometric Cu2−xS and stoichiometric Ag2S and Ag2Se NCs possess a large fraction of intrinsic cationic vacancies with high mobility in their crystal matrix above certain temperatures, they can act as very effective conductive solid super-ionic seeds.44,62,80,84,85,88 However, the seeds are not only limited to group IB based chalcogenides. For instance, Buhro and group, catalysed CdTe NWs from a solid bismuth (Bi)-based catalyst in an SSS mechanism.89 Interestingly, processes that favoured high incorporation of tellurium (Te) in the Bi seeds such as low Cd:Te ratio (the Cd:Te ratio was above 2.5 in all occasions but below 4.0) facilitated the Bi to be oxidised with excess Te and the BixCdyTez appeared to be faceted (Bi:Cd:Te = 34–71:19–3:47–26).90,91 Similarly, Bi2Te3 was also successfully employed for catalytic CdTe growth despite having a high melting point of 546 °C. In addition, the faceted NCs of BixCdyTez and Bi2Te3 were found to have similar pseudo rhomboidal morphologies. The structures are both layered and perpendicular to the [0001] direction which can facilitate anisotropic diffusion of foreign cations to facilitate SSS growth.

2.2.1 Synthesis of the seeds. 
The conductive seeds can be synthesized prior to catalytic growth or can form in situ during the initial nucleation stage. Thermal decomposition of metal-complexes in alkyl thiol and alkyl amine has been utilized as an effective technique for I2–VI NC synthesis. The single-source precursors such as Cu/Ag-dialkyldithiocarbamate (DDTC) or thiolate complexes have been mostly used for the thermal decomposition methods. Also, redox reactions such as sulfurization or selenization of nanoparticles (NPs) especially for Ag0 NPs were proved to be effective on many occasions to produce I2–VI seeds. In this section, the methods for seed generation using single source and molecular precursors will be discussed.
The formation of copper thiolate or thiocarbamate complex was found responsible for the Cu2−xS NC formation on most occasions.13 The strong interaction between soft Lewis acid Cu+ and soft Lewis base thiols or thiocarbamate (RS−, where R = alkyl chain) makes the C–S bond weaker, hence, copper thiolate or thiocarbamate complex formation favoured Cu2−xS NC growth upon decomposition. For example, CuInS2 NCs were synthesized by using a metal thiolate complex as a single-source precursor along with different ligands, where a β-Cu2S seed initiated CuInS2 NC growth.93 The active ligand groups suppressed the formation of In2S3 and increased the precipitation of Cu2S. Zhang et al.,94 reported the synthesis of Cu2ZnSnS4 nano leaves via catalytic growth by α-Cu2S seeds formed in situ in thermolysis of a Cu–DDT complex. Copper thiocarbamate complexes also play a vital role in the synthesis of Cu1.8S, C1.94S, and Cu2S NCs.95–97 Several reports demonstrated the synthesis of metal chalcogenides where copper sulphide was either pre-synthesized or generated in situ using a thiocarbamate based precursor. Regulacio and co-workers reported the synthesis of Cu1.94S–CdS and Cu1.94S–ZnxCd1−xS heterostructure nanodiscs using a preformed Cu1.94S seed generated by decomposition of Cu(S2CNEt2)2 in the presence of thiols at 250 °C.97 While, Li et al.,96 reported formation of Cu1.75S NCs in a reaction of Cu(S2CNEt2)2 with n-DDT in oleylamine (OLA) with subsequent use of the NCs for synthesis of CuInS2 and CuInxGa1−xS2 nanoribbons. Also, Geng et al.,95 reported the synthesis of hexagonal wurtzite (WZ) CuGaSxSe2−x nanoribbons catalysed by Cu1.75SxSe1−x seeds generated in a similar thermal decomposition reaction of Cu(DDTC) precursors along with n-DDT and Se in OLA.
Cu1.94S seeds can also be synthesized by sulfurization of Cu NPs with n-DDT at 180 °C,98 in most occasions metal salts of Cu(II) such as Cu(II) acetylacetonate [Cu(acac)2] or Cu(II) acetate [Cu(OAc)2] were utilized in the presence of n-DDT and OLA or oleic acid (OA).99–102 Cu2−xS formation is similar as it occurs during the decomposition of single source precursors. In this case, the n-DDT forms a Cu-thiolate complex ascribed to the soft Lewis acid–soft Lewis base interaction and the Cu-thiolate complex decomposes in situ to form Cu2−xS nuclei. For example, Liu et al.,81 reported the synthesis of Cu–Zn–Ga–S with internally formed Cu1.94S seeds during the reaction of Cu(acac)2 and n-DDT in the non-coordinating solvent n-octadecene (ODE) at 240 °C. Zhuang et al.,102 also noticed that during synthesis of Cu2S–PbS heterostructures, the growth was catalysed by Cu1.94S seeds formed in a decomposition reaction of Cu-thiolate complex formulated between Cu(acac)2 and DDT. Similarly, Cu2S–ZnS and Cu2S–CuInS2 heterostructures were synthesized in the solution mixture containing Cu(OAc)2 and n-DDT in ODE at 240 °C via the in situ formed Cu2S seeds.103 Moreover, Zhou et al.,104 reported WZ MnS nanocylinders (∼16 nm length) using pre-synthesized monoclinic Cu1.94S NCs seeds formed by the reaction of Cu(OAc)2 and n-DDT in OLA at 200 °C for 15 min. Likewise, the synthesis of a CuGaS2–ZnS heterostructures was catalysed by employing the pre-synthesized Cu1.94S generated in the reaction of Cu(OAc)2 and n-DDT in OLA at 150 °C.99 Cu1.94S first served as a conductive seed for Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure formation and then as sacrificial seed for CuGaS–ZnS heterostructure synthesis.
Monoclinic Ag2S seeds were mostly synthesized via decomposition of a single source Ag(DDTC) complex generated in the reaction of Ag+ from AgNO3 and S2CNnR2 [where R is alkyl group] from the metal–DDTC complex.105–109 For instance, Ag2S NCs were generated via thermal pyrolysis of single-source Ag(DDTC) based precursors during the synthesis of Ag2S–ZnS and Mn@Ag2S–ZnS heterostructure NWs.107,108 Quaternary AgInZn7S9 NCs and ternary CuInS2 NC growth were also assisted by an Ag2S catalyst formed by decomposition of Ag(DDTC) precursor in OLA and n-DDT.105,106 Zhang et al.,82,110 reported the growth of ZnxCd1−xS solid solution NRs and MnS NWs with preformed Ag2S NPs produced by thermal decomposition of (C4H9)2NCS2Ag in dodecyl amine (DDA) and n-DDT. Decomposition of the Ag–DDT complex formed in an in situ reaction of n-DDT and Ag precursor or reduction of Ag-precursor to Ag0 in presence of organic amine and later, sulfurization by excess sulphur source are mainly responsible for Ag2S NC formation by using molecular precursors. Torimoto et al.,111 synthesised ZnS–AgInS2 NCs by catalyst-assisted growth from Ag2S seeds formed in the reaction of silver acetate (AgOAc) in OLA and n-DDT. Similarly, synthesis of an Ag8SnS6/Ag2S heterostructure was accomplished from Ag2S by reaction of AgOAc with sulphur powder using OLA as a solvent.63 Zhang et al.,112 reported seed mediated growth of MnS NWs by using Ag2S seeds generated from the reaction of AgNO3 and dibenzyl disulphide in OLA. Heterostructures of Ag2S–AgGaS2 and AgGaS2 with pyramidal morphology was assisted by in situ formation of Ag2S from the reaction of Ag-oleate and n-DDT in ODE and OLA mixture.
On most occasions, Ag2Se was synthesized by selenisation of Ag0 NPs generated in a redox reaction of AgNO3 precursor in the presence of alkylamine such as OLA. For selenisation of Ag0 particles Se powder in OLA, SeO2 or selenourea were used as precursors.113–115 For example, ZnSe NWs growth was reported with an Ag2Se seed formed by in situ by reduction of Ag+ in a solution containing AgNO3 and PVP in ethanol. As the solubility product (Ksp) of Ag2Se (2 × 10−64) is less than ZnSe (3.6 × 10−26), the treatment of Ag0 NPs and Zn2+ source mixture with selenourea resulted in precipitation of Ag2Se before ZnSe and serves as a seed for the growth of ZnSe wires.115 Ag2Se NCs synthesized by selenisation of Ag0 using Se powder as a selenium source also served as a seed for the synthesis of binary–binary heterostructure (CdSe–Ag2Se and ZnSe–Ag2Se) and as a sacrificial catalyst for binary–ternary NCs (CdSe–AgInSe, CdSe–AgGaSe, ZnSe–AgInSe, and ZnSe–AgGaSe).116 Wang et al.,44 accomplished Ag2Se formation upon selenisation of Ag0 by using SeO2 as selenium source.


2.2.2 Effect of seeds on NC's phase. 
Since the seeds act as the nucleation matrix for NC growth, they control the phase of the newly formed NCs to a great extent. This section will give an understanding of the correlation between the crystal phase of the seed and the growth phase. Understandably, the rigid nature of the anionic sublattice denies further re-arrangement in the growth phase unless a high activation energy is provided to re-organize the crystal lattice. Hence, it is likely during low energy kinetic growth, that the NCs formed will have the same or similar anionic sublattice as the seed, whereas the cations can re-arrange depending on their mobility and coordination environment. The most critical thermodynamic parameters for colloidal NCs synthesis are growth temperature and time.117 Hence, an elevated growth temperature or reaction time may provide ample energy to re-arrange the anionic sub-lattice in the growth phase to achieve the thermodynamically stable crystal phase.
Among the Cu2−xS variants, djurleite (Cu1.94S) has been explored extensively as a seed.98,99,102,104,118 Cu1.94S NCs either synthesized externally or in situ are abundant in the monoclinic crystal phase (JCPDS 23-0959) at room temperature and above 100 °C. The monoclinic S-sub lattice expands to the hexagonal lattice and thereby provide large vacancies for the Cu+ ions to move rapidly which accounts for their super-ionic behavior.84 In between the large interspaces of the hexagonal lattice (two rows of unit cells) deficiency of Cu+ cations takes place, which is caused by a sandwich-like arrangement of the Cu cations between every two sulphur layers.119 As a result of which, Cu+ cations occupy only 85% of the lattice sites. This provides enough room for foreign cations to come in to form a solid ionic solution.101 Besides, mixing of the foreign cations can fill in the vacant sites and stabilize the hexagonal chalcocite phase of Cu2−xS. Upon complete precipitation of the new crystal phase, the chalcocite phase of the seed can transform back to the monoclinic Cu1.94S phase. Incorporation and diffusion of the cations are fluidic in Cu1.94S NCs seeds. The S-sub lattice possesses a rigid hcp framework which results in a hexagonal anionic sublattice formation in the newly formed phase under kinetic growth conditions (Fig. 4a). The thermodynamically preferred re-arrangement may generate phases other than hexagonal causing the transformation of the crystal phase of the seed. PbS is normally abundant in the cubic phase, however when monoclinic Cu1.94S NCs catalysed the growth of cubic PbS NCs, the Cu1.94S phase transformed to the hexagonal chalcocite phase upon heterostructure formation.102 The bulky nature of Pb2+ ensures the slow diffusion rate of the Pb2+ into the crystal lattice which can provide ample time for re-arrangement of the crystal lattice to form the thermodynamically stable cubic phase.76 The presence of a seed mostly generates a kinetic product unless a condition is achieved which influences phase transition to a more stable thermodynamic product. For example, Zhang et al.,112 reported that catalytically grown MnS NWs synthesised in the metastable ZB phase changed to thermodynamically stable rock-salt phase (RS) upon extended exposure to elevated temperatures.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of anionic sublattices of (a) Cu1.94S, (b) Cu1.81S, (c) Cu1.75S, (d) monoclinic Ag2S, (e) cubic Ag2S, and (f) cubic Ag2Se seeds and the predicted product upon catalysed growth with MII (Zn2+, Cd2+, Mn2+), MIII (In3+, Ga3+), MIV (Sn4+) cations under kinetic growth conditions.† 
Other Cu2−xS variants can be present in either monoclinic (low chalcocite, Cu2S), triclinic (roxbyite, Cu1.81S) or orthorhombic (anilite, Cu1.75S) crystal phases depending on the Cu–S stoichiometry. Most of the crystal phases (monoclinic, and triclinic) possess a hcp anionic sub-lattice.13 Hence, during kinetic growth, the anionic sublattice of the growth stem mimics the hcp arrangement of the seed anionic sublattice and leads to preferred formation in the hexagonal phase. The orthorhombic anilite (Cu1.75S) phase in contrast possesses a cubic packing of the S-sub lattice leading to preferred growth of cubic NCs (Fig. 4c). For example, Zou et al.,120 observed the formation of quaternary cubic Cu–In–Zn–S nano-belts where in situ formed Cu1.75S nanoplates catalysed the growth. In a similar approach, they exploited both in situ formed and pre-synthesized roxbyite NCs (Cu1.81S) to catalyse the growth of CuInS2 and CuInxGa1−xS2 nanoribbons (Fig. 4b).96 Contrary to the Cu1.75S, cubic phase Cu1.81S NCs belong to the triclinic crystal family where the S2− sublattice is present in hexagonal packing, hence the dominant WZ phase formation of CuInS2 and CuInxGa1−xS2.83
In a similar fashion, catalyst assisted growth of NCs with monoclinic Ag2S seeds at 180 °C or below favoured the formation of NCs in the hexagonal phase. The existence of the hcp S2− sublattice in the monoclinic Ag2S phase directs formation of similar hcp anionic arrangement in the growth phase. Whereas the Ag2S catalysed growth of NCs with cubic anionic sublattice takes place above 180 °C. The bias is attributed to the transition of monoclinic Ag2S NCs to the cubic phase above 180 °C where the hexagonal S-sublattice that was present in the monoclinic phase experience a transition to cubic arrangement, hence influencing formation of a similar cubic anionic sublattice in the growth phase (Fig. 4d and e).80,86,121 For example, CdS, ZnS, or ternary ZnxCd1−xS NRs in the hexagonal phase are catalysed by Ag2S seeds at 130 °C,110 as both Cd2+ and Zn2+ prefers tetrahedral co-ordination with the S and hcp S-sublattice during kinetic growth. Hence the NCs formed in the WZ phase are influenced by the rigid hcp S2− framework present in the Ag2S seeds. But temperature plays a crucial role in deciding the fate of catalysed growth as a particular temperature is required to provide enough activation energy for crystal phase transition of the seeds. For instance, the Ag2S seed catalysed growth of WZ-MnS NCs at a temperature of 140 °C directs the formation of MnS NCs in the WZ phase as Ag2S can exist in the monoclinic phase with a hexagonal S-sublattice.82 Whereas at a growth temperature of 180–200 °C, it catalyses the growth of non-equilibrium ZB MnS NCs accredited to the phase change of monoclinic Ag2S seeds to the cubic phase.112 Similarly, quaternary NCs such as AgInZn7S9 nanobelts, and CuIn1−xGaxS2 NWs synthesized at 180 °C with catalytic Ag2S seeds were formed predominantly in the WZ phase.105,120 In contrast, a high temperature (280 °C) diffusion-controlled growth of AgGaS2 NCs catalysed by Ag2S seed produces NCs predominantly in tetragonal phase where the S-sublattice has a cubic arrangement.122
Interestingly, Ag2Se NCs transform to the cubic phase at temperatures as low as 100 °C. Wang et al.,44 reported a temperature dependent in situ HRTEM analysis of the Ag2Se tips in the Ag2Se–ZnSe heterostructure which revealed the transition between the tetragonal to cubic phases at 115 °C where Ag+ ions are known to be highly mobile and can catalyse SSS growth. Hence, growth catalysed by Ag2Se seeds at a temperature beyond 100 °C will produce NCs with cubic packing of the anionic sub-lattice (Fig. 4f). The divalent cations (e.g. Zn2+, Cd2+, Mn2+) which prefer tetrahedral co-ordination predominantly forms cubic metal chalcogenides.44,113,115 Guria et al.,115 synthesized tetragonal Ag2Se NCs to catalyse ZB ZnSe heterostructure growth where the source of Zn2+ was pre-synthesized ZnSe NCs. Pre-synthesized ZnSe NCs of different sizes and shapes (dots, hemisphere, rods) and crystal structure (WZ and ZB) were annealed at temperatures of 200–300 °C with Ag2Se seeds to form ZnSe NWs. Irrespective of the crystal structure of pre-synthesized NCs used, the catalytically grown ZnSe NCs were present predominantly in the ZB phase with a cubic S-sublattice as the tetragonal Ag2Se seed transformed to cubic Ag2Se beyond 100 °C. Following the same trend, the growth of MnSe NCs on cubic Ag2Se seeds ensured existence of similar S-sublattice as the seed in the growth phase, and produced metastable ZB phase of MnSe.77 Similarly, growth of ternary NCs with In3+, Ga3+ cations catalysed from Ag2Se seeds forms NCs with a cubic anionic sublattice either in the tetragonal or orthorhombic phase.52,116 For instance, tetragonal AgGaSe2 NCs were formed when Ag2Se NCs were employed as seeds.123 Therefore, the crystal structure of the NCs under kinetic conditions mimics the anionic sublattice of the seed, unless the growth temperature is high enough for crystal phase transition of the NCs.

2.3 Mechanism of catalyst-assisted growth
The colloidal metal chalcogenide NCs catalysed by conductive seeds usually follows the solution–solid–solid (SSS) or a sacrificial seed-based diffusion control growth (DCG) mechanism depending upon the co-ordination preference of foreign cations and their compatibility with the seed cations. These approaches normally function under 300 °C, which permits the utilization of various organic solvents and surfactants that can modulate the shape, crystal structure, trap-state passivation, and solution processability. The fate of the growth mechanism vastly depends on the crystal phase of the seed and the compatibility of the seed matrix with the incoming foreign cations i.e. alteration in co-ordination and charge balance of metal chalcogenide seed upon introduction of a foreign cation. Normally, the divalent metal cations such as Zn2+, Cd2+ exhibit tetrahedral co-ordination, while the Mn2+ and Pb2+ can display both octahedral and tetrahedral coordination.76 But divalent cations cannot alloy homogeneously with I–VI NCs, hence SSS growth occurs to form binary–binary heterostructures.83,124 Whereas the alloying cations such as trivalent (In3+, Ga3+) and tetravalent (Sn4+) cations which prefer tetrahedral coordination in the crystal lattice can mix homogenously with seed cations and follow the diffusion-controlled growth.52,83,124,125 This section will discuss the SSS and DCG mechanism for binary–binary, binary–ternary heterostructure and alloyed multinary metal chalcogenide NC synthesis.

Solution–solid–solid. 
In analogy to VLS, SLS, and VSS, a solid seed catalyst initiated mechanism in the solution phase is termed as solution–solid–solid or SSS where superionic semiconductor NCs such as Cu2−xS, Ag2S, and Ag2Se function as seed materials.12,44 The superionic chalcogenide NCs with the cation vacancies favour incorporation of other foreign cations resulting in a solid superionic solution (Fig. 5).44,80,84,85,115,126 The fast movement of Cu+ or Ag+ cations in between the seed and growth phase ensures their diffusion at the heterointerface. This is succeeded by an influx of foreign cations and exchange of seed cations by the foreign cations. The progressive diffusion and exchange of highly mobile seed cations with foreign cations and limited solubility of the foreign cations in the solid seed instigate precipitation and subsequent crystalline growth at the seed-growth phase interface (Fig. 5, path I).44 As the melting of seed material is no longer necessary, SSS can be achieved at a low-temperature range of 100–250 °C depending upon the effect of temperature on cation mobility.44,62,87 For example, Wang et al.,44,87 observed a phase transition of tetragonal Ag2Se to cubic Ag2Se NCs at temperatures below 100 °C and utilized the cubic Ag2Se seeds to catalyse ZnSe NWs growth at a temperature as low as 100 °C. Also, Zhang et al.,112 synthesized ZB MnS NCs at 200 °C using Ag2S seeds.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of NC growth catalysed by conductive semiconductor seeds. Growth starts from conductive metal chalcogenide seeds which upon supersaturation with divalent (MII) cation undergoes solution–solid–solid (SSS) growth (path I) and with trivalent (MIII) or tetravalent (MIV) cations follows a diffusion-controlled growth (DCG) (path II). While a combination of both growth systems can form binary-ternary heterostructures and further growth produces quaternary alloyed NCs (path III). 


Diffusion-controlled-growth. 
Trivalent (MIII) and tetravalent (MIV) cations can alloy with a I–IV based seed matrix, as the MIII or MIV cations can participate in tetrahedral coordination involving MI cations and chalcogen anions. Hence, in a solid seed catalysed mechanism involving MIII or MIV cations, the growth phase will be the ternary phase of MI–MIII/IV–E (E = S, Se) which forms a heterointerface with the binary seed. Upon an increment in the growth temperature and time, seed cations can diffuse further into the ternary segment to form monophasic ternary NCs. Connor et al.,100 reported the catalytic Cu2S seeded Cu2S–CuInS2 NCs growth which transformed into monophasic CuInS2 upon prolonged reaction time at a higher temperature. This growth mode is defined as diffusion-controlled growth (Fig. 5, path II).52 Unlike SSS, here the seed NC function both as a catalyst and a sacrificial host or reactant. Furthermore, the NC growth can occur by two possible routes (Fig. 5, path II) and the processes can be categorized as interfacial and non-interfacial diffusion-controlled growth. In the non-interfacial approach, the cations from active facets of seed NCs react with foreign cations and anions supplied from an amorphous metal-polymeric matrix (created via interaction of metal cations with alkyl thiols) to form a ternary crystal phase interfacing with binary seed crystal. Subsequently, the seed cations diffuse further and penetrate the newly formed ternary phase and combine with the anion and foreign cations supplied from the solution until the rate of diffusion becomes very low to limit the process. As the growth progresses, the concentration of mobile seed cations decreases which results in a gradually decreasing diffusion rate and tapered morphology towards the growth axes (Fig. 6c). For example, Prusty et al.,52 described the formation of tadpole-shaped AgGaSe2 NCs based on diffusion of Ag+ ions from Ag2Se seed (Fig. 6a) to amorphous Ga–selenide nanostructures (Fig. 6b and c). Upon formation of the initial hetero-interface between Ag2Se–AgGaSe2, the mobile Ag+ cations penetrated the ternary phase to combine with more Ga3+ supplied by Ga–selenide nanostructures. The diffusion of Ag+ continued to form the ternary AgGaSe2 phase until the seed was depleted of Ag+ and the reaction system could provide no more active Ga3+. While in interfacial diffusion-controlled growth, after the formation of the initial hetero-interface, the foreign cations incorporate through the interface until the seed is completely converted in the compound form. As the growth occurs from the interface, the initial formation width is comparable to the seed diameter.100,122 With progress in growth, the gradual decrease in mobile cation concentration sourced from the seeds narrows down the width of final growth and materializes tapered NCs. For example, Huang et al.,122 observed a transformation of monoclinic Ag2S seed to a tetragonal AgGaS2 nano-pyramid, where Ag2S (Fig. 6d) acting as both reactant and catalyst allowed Ga(III) to diffuse in Ag2S to form the Ag2S–AgGaS2 heterostructure (Fig. 6e) nano-pyramidal morphology (Fig. 6f). As the seeds behave as a sacrificial host or reactant, the concentration of mobile seed cations decreases with the progression of DCG. This results in the formation of quasi-1D morphology such as nano-tadpole,127 heliotrope,128 pyramids,122 leaves94etc.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) TEM images of the intermediate sample at two different magnifications. The inset of (b) provides a magnified view of tadpole formation of the Ag2Se–AgGaSe2 nanostructure, (c) TEM of tadpole-shaped AgGaSe2 NCs.52 © 2015 ACS; (d) TEM of the Ag2S NCs, (e) Ag2S–AgGaS2 heterostructure, and (f) final AgGaS2 nanopyramids.122 © 2014 RSC; (i) TEM of ZnS–CuGaS2 heterostructure NCs, (g) produced from Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructures which formed tri-segmented (h) Cu1.94S–CuGaS2–ZnS heterostructure at intermediate stages of growth.99 © 2016 RSC. 
Interestingly, the binary–binary heterostructure formed in SSS growth can also be employed as a seed to catalyse DCG to form binary–ternary heterostructures that can eventually transform to quaternary NCs through increased temperature and time (Fig. 5, path III).81,99,116 In this case, the conductive seed in binary–binary heterostructures undergoes interfacial DCG with MIII or MIV to form the ternary phase. Further, the tetrahedral coordination present in MIII/MIV and MI with chalcogen anion relaxes the restriction for MII involvement leading towards balanced charge and coordination in the crystal structure. MII cations, therefore, alloy with MI–MIII/IV–E (E = S, Se) ternary phase, at higher growth temperature and prolonged time to form quaternary monophasic NCs (thermodynamic product) depending upon the diffusion rate of MII cations. For example, Zhao et al.,99 utilized catalytic Cu1.94S seeds to synthesize a Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure which was further utilized in a diffusion-controlled growth at 190 °C for 10 min to produce CuGaS2–ZnS heterostructures (Fig. 6g–i). While L-shaped quaternary Cu–Ga–Zn–S NCs can be synthesized by increasing diffusion of Zn2+ and allowing it to alloy further with CuGaS2 thermodynamically with a longer growth time (90 min) and a higher temperature of 240 °C.81

2.4 Effect of crystal mismatch at hetero interface
The stability of a hetero-epitaxial interface does not only depend on the seed's surface energy but the interfacial energy change occurring during growth of a secondary phase over the seed. In this scenario, the total change in surface energy can be described as, Δγ = γg − γs − γs,g where γg is the surface energy of the growth phase, γs is the surface energy of the seed, and γs,g is interfacial surface energy.66 The γg, and γs are mostly influenced by the chemical neighbourhood of the NCs surface and type of ligands present and hence can vary from system to system. However, the interfacial surface energy is largely dependent on the lattice mismatch (f) between seed and growth phase and can be described as,  where ls and lg denote the lattice parameter of connecting interfacial planes from seed and growth phases respectively.14 Thus, a low lattice mismatch ensures low interfacial energy. Though crystallographic relations between the hetero-interfacial planes were not completely clear for catalyst assisted growth, there were many instances where a relation can be drawn. For example, Han et al.,101 synthesized Cu1.94S seeded In2S3 NCs that displayed a lattice mismatch as low as 0.6% between the interfacial [100] II [102] planes of Cu2S and In2S3 respectively (Fig. 7a and b). Whereas, Yi et al.,118 catalysed ZnS with Cu1.94S seeds and found the interfacial mismatch to be <3% between [080] II [110] planes of Cu1.94S and ZnS respectively (Fig. 7c and d). Similarly, Zhu et. al.,109 observed Ag2S catalysed ZnS and CdS NCs materialized on a plane of Ag2S NCs with the smallest crystal lattice mismatch (Fig. 7e and f). In case of Ag2Se seeded ZB-MnSe, a low lattice mismatch of 0.7% was observed between the interfacial plane [101] of Ag2Se and [110] of MnSe (Fig. 7j).77 Similarly for ternary NCs, the Ag2S and AgInS2 interfacial planes in the Ag2S–AgInS2 heterostructure exhibited a lattice mismatch as low as 1.6% (Fig. 7i).109 Hence, it is understandable that a low lattice mismatch of <5% between seed and growing NC phase is favourable for catalyst-assisted growth.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) HRTEM of two differently oriented matchstick-shaped Cu2S–In2S3 NRs and the interface between epitaxial planes of Cu2S [0002] and In2S3 [109] and the connecting hetero-interfacial planes [102]In2S3 and [100]Cu2S showing a nominal lattice mismatch of 0.6%.101 © 2008 ACS; (c and d) HRTEM of Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure where the hetero-interface was formed between [004]Cu1.94S and [0002]ZnS and the connecting planes [080]Cu1.94S and [1100]ZnS displayed a lattice mismatch of 2.5%.118 © 2010 RSC; (e) HRTEM image showing the heteroepitaxial growth of a hexagonal ZnS NWs on Ag2S NC between [110]ZnS and [121]Ag2S. The insets: The corresponding Fourier transform (FFT) images from the Ag2S area and the ZnS area, however, the connecting hetero-interfacial planes displayed a high mismatch of 8.9%, (f) HRTEM of Ag2S–CdS heterostructure with a lower lattice mismatch of 3.7%.109 © 2011 JACS; (g) HRTEM of Ag2Se–CdSe heterostructure where the interface exhibited a low lattice mismatch of 0.8% whereas a high lattice mismatch of 6.7% during ZnSe formation (h) generated tortuous NWs (inset).114 © 2013 RSC; (i) HRTEM of Ag2S–AgInS2 heterostructure where the interfacial planes had a mismatch of 1.6%109 © 2011 JACS; (j) Ag2Se NC tip with a clear interface present between the planes of tetragonal Ag2Se and ZB MnSe where a lattice mismatch was only 0.7%.77 © 2016 ACS. 
To attain the lowest energy interface, the same seed can exhibit hetero-interface formation between different planes with similar materials. For example, Zhou et al.,114 observed the interface formed between the [002] plane of Ag2Se and [100] of CdSe which displayed a lattice mismatch as low as 0.8% (Fig. 7g). In contrast, for similarly interfaced ZnSe growth from the same seed, the lattice mismatch would appear as high as 8.5%. Therefore, to minimize the interfacial energy, the [0002] plane of ZnSe formed the interface with the [012] plane of Ag2Se where a lower lattice mismatch of 6.7% was displayed (Fig. 7h). In catalyst assisted growth, stable heterostructures formation is feasible even with a higher lattice mismatch at the hetero-interface. For example, Wang and group synthesized matchstick-shaped Ag2S–WZ ZnS heterostructures where the heterointerface was formed in between [21]Ag2S and [0008]ZnS with a large lattice mismatch of 16%.108 A higher lattice mismatch can be accommodated by other means of strain relaxation such as defects to reduce the interfacial energy. For example, with catalyst-assisted growth, the heterostructures were materialized but resulted in tortuous ZnSe NCs with defects to minimize the strain.110 To relax the interfacial energy, the seeds can also display morphological changes. For example, due to the fluidic nature of Ag+ ions in Ag2Se, upon heterostructure formation, the spherical seeds change to a hemisphere keeping the total volume constant to minimize the interfacial energy. Recently, Wang et al.,129 studied the occurrence of elastic lattice deformation such as lattice dislocations, screw step, or in-plane twist to relax higher lattice mismatches between the seed and growing crystal phase. Thus, unlike conventional hetero-epitaxial growth, SSS or DCG growth may occur with a higher lattice mismatch but results in tortuous or defective end products.
3. Conductive catalyst-assisted nc synthesis and structural modulation
The Gibbs free energy of an individual NC can be described as, ΔG = ΔGbulk + γδA, where ΔGbulk is the Gibbs free energy of the bulk, γ is surface energy per unit area of the NCs and A is total surface area of NC.117,130 Achieving a local free energy minimum (kinetic product) or a global free energy minimum (thermodynamic product) largely depends on the surface energy factor γδA. The surface energy is instrumental in deciding the outcome of catalyst-assisted growth and it depends on various parameters such as lattice stress–strain, monomer supply rate, temperature, growth time and crystal structure of the seed. The factors such as low lattice mismatch, high monomer influx rate, low reaction temperature that increase the deposition rate during catalyst-assisted growth are responsible for kinetic product formation typical in the case of SSS synthesis. Whereas high growth temperature, longer growth time, and ligand interactions instigate a high diffusion rate of molecular entities and lead to thermodynamic product formation in the case of DCG synthesis. Different types of ligands with varied binding strength can access different energetic facets of the NCs.38 Linear ligands can access more surface area than sterically hindered ligands and could retain the phase of NCs as generated from the seed, irrespective of the degree of lattice strain in the resulting hetero-structures. The sterically hindered ligands, in contrast, receive less seed surface access and result in the different phase than of the seed and could obtain segmented hetero-structures.131 Furthermore, the polarity of the ligands can either curtail or benefit interactions with certain NC facets and thereby change the morphology during growth. Meyns et al.,132 analysed the binding strength of ligands to different facets of WZ CdSe NRs and reported that selective strong binding of Cl− to the [0001] facet resulted in a morphological change from rod to hexagonal pyramids. According to Nair et al.,133 labile acetate (−OAc) bind selectively to [000] facets of hexagonal CdSe NRs (where tetradecyl phosphonic acids were poorly bound) and increase the surface tension for further growth along [000] to form pyramidal NCs. Growth patterns can also be monitored by attenuating the relative rates of atom deposition and surface diffusion that define corresponding site-selected growth and conformal growth. While the ratio of these rates could be controlled by altering the precursor injection rate (sequential, delayed, etc.) or reaction time and temperature.38,134 The induction time of a particular cationic source can modulate catalyst-assisted growth in a system containing multiple cationic species. The delayed cationic precursor injection allows small fluctuations in concentration gradients and a transient proximity of molecular species from the seeds, therefore an unspoiled local chemical environment of the seed that can lead to low amounts of phase alternations and stacking faults.35,135 Among the various factors, the crystal structure of the seed determines the phase and direction during crystalline growth as explained in the previous section. The lattice mismatch between the seed and growth phase is well known to have a major effect on epitaxial growth as the resulting interface is often non-coherent with a high density of defects if the lattice inconsistency is extremely strong.30 Thus, the reaction must be controlled thermodynamically as well as kinetically. Based on the miscibility of the growth phase with the seed matrix, the NCs synthesised using the conductive seeds are categorized as heterostructures and alloyed multinary NCs. Based on the cationic composition of the growth phase in the heterostructures, they are further classified as binary–binary and binary–ternary heterostructures. This section considers all the related parameters that affect structural evolution by changing shape or crystal structure of these NCs. Table 1 outlines example of such heterostructured and alloyed NCs where the crystal phase of the seed, reaction conditions, and growth mechanism have been highlighted to showcase their effect on the crystal structure of the final product.
Table 1 Overview of crystalline properties (seed and growth phase) and reaction conditions for binary–binary, binary–ternary heterostructures, and alloyed multinary NCs. Where l × d – length and diameter




Seeds
CRG phase (anionic sublattice) of seed
Final product (heterostructure/alloy)
CRG phase and anionic sublattice of growth phase
MC
Precursors/solvent/ligands, reaction temperature and time
Ref.




Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs
ZB (fcc)
SSS
AgNO3, ZnCl2, SeO2, DMF, OA, 100–210 °C, 15 h

52



Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–CdSe NWs
ZB (fcc)
SSS
AgNO3, SeO2, Cd(OAc)2·2H2O, OLA, 160 °C, 30 min


Ag2S
Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)
Ag2S–ZnS NRs
ZB (fcc)
SSS
AgNO3 in EtOH solution, OLA, Zn(DDTC)2, 180 °C, 3 h


Cu2S
Hexagonal (hcp)
Cu2S–CdS NRs
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Cu(OAc)2·H2O, DDT, Cd(Ac)2·2H2O, OLA, 230 °C, 1 h


Ag2S
Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)
Ag2S–CdS NRs
ZB (fcc)
SSS
AgNO3, S-powder, OLA, Cd(DDTC)2, 160 °C, 45 min


Cu2S
Hexagonal (hcp)
Cu2S–ZnS NRs
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Cu(OAc)2·H2O, DDT, Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, OA, OLA, 220 °C, 1 h


Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs
ZB (fcc)
SSS
ZnSe (ex situ), selenourea, HDA, AgCl, OA, 250 °C, 5 min

115



Bi2Te3 NPs (12 nm)
Rhomboidal (hcp)
CdTe QWs
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Cd (di-octylphosphinate)2, TOPO, TOPTe, DOP, 300 °C

89



Cu1.94S (10.4 nm)
Monoclinic (hcp)
Cu2S–In2S3 NRs, l × d 77 × 12 nm
Tetragonal
SSS (fcc)
Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, 1-DDT, 200 °C, 1600 min

101



Cu1.94S NPs (∼13.4–17.9 nm)
Monoclinic (hcp)
Cu1.94S–ZnS NRs, (l × dZnS 11.2 × 17.4 nm)
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, n-DDT, 200 °C, 25–200 min.

118



Ag2S
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–CdS NWs, l 21–235 nm
Hexagonal (hcp)
SSS
Cd(DDTC)2, ODA, 150 °C and 10–60 min

109



Ag2S
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–ZnS–CdS–ZnS heterostructure
Hexagonal (hcp)
SSS
Ag NCs solution, Zn (dbdc)2, Cd(dbdc)2. Sequential injection of Zn and Cd precursor, 150 °C


Ag2S NPs
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–CdS–ZnS trimer heterostructure
Hexagonal (hcp)
SSS
Ag NCs solution, Zn (dbdc)2, Cd(dbdc)2. Sequential injection of Zn and Cd precursor, 150 °C


Ag2Se (8 nm)
Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–CdSe NR
Hexagonal (hcp)
SSS
OLA, Cd(OAc)2, Se-powder 180 °C, 1–7 min

114



Ag2Se (8 nm)
Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs
Hexagonal (hcp)
SSS
OLA, Zn(OAc)2, Se-powder 180 °C at various time 1 min, 2 min, 4 min, 7 min


Ag2Se (8 nm)
Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–CdSe–ZnSe NWs
Hexagonal (hcp)
SSS
Zn(OAc)2, OLA, Cd(OAc)2, first injection of Zn precursor at 180 °C, next Cd precursor injection in next 5 min


Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
MnSe straight and zigzag NWs (d 35 nm)
ZB (fcc)
SSS
MnCl2·4H2O, (PhCH2)2Se2, OLA, 200 °C for 2 h

77



Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs
ZB (fcc)
SSS
ZnCl2, OA, AgNO3, SeO2 DMF solution, PVP, 160 °C, 3 min

129



Cu1.94S
Monoclinic (hcp)
Cu2S–PbS cylindrical shape
Cubic (fcc)
SSS
Cu(acac)2, DDT, Pb(DDTC)2, 200 °C, 30 min

102



Cu1.94S nanoplates, l × d 15 × 7 nm
Monoclinic (hcp)
Cu1.94S–MnS nanocylinder, l 16–21 nm
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Cu(OAc)2, n-DDT, OLA, Mn(OAc)2, 220 °C and 10–20 min

104



Cu2S NCs d ∼ 7 nm
Hexagonal (hcp)
Cu2S–ZnS NRs, l × d 26 × 7.3 nm
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Zn(Stearate)2, Zn(EtXn)2, Cu(OAc)2, ODE, DDT, at 240 °C

103



Ag2S
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–ZnS, matchstick like dsphericalhead ∼ 4.5 nm and l × dstem 4 × 48 nm
Hexagonal (hcp)
SSS
Ag(DDTC), Zn(DDTC)2, OLA and n-DDT, 160 °C, 30 min

108



Ag2S
Cubic (bcc)
Mn@Ag2S–ZnS tadpole shape, headAg2S 7 nm, tailZnS ∼6.3 × 19.2 nm
ZB (fcc)
SSS
MnCl2 Ag(DDTC), Zn(DDTC)2, OLA and DDT, 240 °C, 5 min, 5.9% Mn doping

136



Ag2Se
Tetragonal to cubic (bcc)
Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs, StemZnSed 25 nm
Cubic (fcc)
SSS
PVP, AgNO3 in EtOH solution, ZnCl2, Se powder and OA, 210 °C, 15 h

180



Ag2S d 13.4 ± 1.8 nm
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–MnS NWs, d 9.7 ± 1.7 nm
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Pre-synthesized Ag2S NPs Mn(DDTC)2, n-DDT and DDA 140 °C, 8 min

82



Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
CdSe–Ag2Se, NCs
WZ (hcp)
SSS
AgCl, OLA, Cd(OAc)2·2H2O, Se-powder, 200 °C, 15 min

116



Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
ZnSe–Ag2Se, NCs
ZB (fcc)
SSS
AgCl, OLA, Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, Se-powder, 200 °C, 15 min


Ag2S NCs
Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)
Ag2S–MnS NWs
ZB
SSS
Pre-synthesized Ag2S NCs, MnCl2·4H2O (PhCH2)2S2, OLA, 190 °C, 0 min

112



Ag2Se NPs
Cubic (bcc)
Kinked MnSe NWs
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Pre-synthesized Ag2Se NPs, MnCl2, Se–OLA solution, 250 °C and 60 min

181



Cu1.94S
Monoclinic (hcp)
Cu1.94S–ZnS HNCs (matchstick, rods, tadpoles and taper)
WZ
SSS
Zn(acac)2, Cu(acac)2, n-DDT, ODE, 240–270 °C, 180–360 min

138



Cu1.94S
Monoclinic (hcp)
CuInS2–ZnS torch like, l × dhead 33.4 × 23.6 nm, l × dtail 29.4 × 9.4 nm
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Pre-synthesized Cu1.94S–ZnS seeds, In(OAc)3, DDT and ODE, 200 °C, 4 h

119



Cu2S NCs, d ∼ 7 nm
Hexagonal (hcp)
Cu2S–CuInS2 NR, l × d 35 × 14 nm
WZ (hcp)
SSS
ODE, In(OAc)3, DDT, Cu(OAc)2 at 240 °C

103



Cu2S NCs, d ∼ 7 nm
Hexagonal (hcp)
Cu2S–CZIS NR, l × d 65 × 13 nm
WZ (hcp)
SSS
(Inac)3, Zn(St)2, Zn(EtXn)2, DDT, Cu(ac)2, ODE at 240 °C


Ag2S NCs 20 nm
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–CuInS2 NWs, l × d 1–2 μm × 20–50 nm
WZ (hcp)


Ag(DDTC)2, Cu(DDTC)2, and In(DDTC)3 in n-DDT, 200 °C, 60 min

105



Ag2S
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–AgInS2
Orthorhombic (hcp)
SSS
In(OAc)3 in OLA, ODE Ag(OAc), 210 °C, 10 min

139



Ag2S NPs (∼11.1 nm)
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag2S–ZnxCd1−xS NRs
WZ (hcp)
SSS
Ag2S NPs, DDA, n-DDT [(C4H9)2NCS2]2M; (M = Zn, Cd), 130 °C

110



Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
CdSe–AgInSe2 tadpoles
WZ (hcp)-orthorhombic
SSS + DCG
Pre-synthesized CdSe–AgSe2, In(acac)3, 250 °C, 1 h

116



Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
CdSe–AgGaSe2 tadpoles
WZ (hcp)–tetragonal (bcc)
SSS + DCG
Pre-synthesized CdSe–Ag2Se, Ga(AcAc)3, 250 °C, 1 h


Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
ZnSe–AgInSe2 tadpoles
ZB (fcc)-orthorhombic
SSS + DCG
Pre-synthesized ZnSe–AgSe2, In(acac)3, 250 °C, 1 h


Ag2Se
Cubic (bcc)
ZnSe–AgGaSe2 tadpoles
ZB (fcc)-tetragonal
SSS + DCG
Pre-synthesized ZnSe–AgSe2, Ga(acac)3, 250 °C and 1 h


Ag2S particles
Monoclinic (hcp)
ZnS–AgInS2 rice shape, l 40 ± 10 nm
Hexagonal
SSS + DCG
M(OAc)x (M = Ag, Zn, In) S powder, n-DDT, and DBTU, 250 °C and up to 10 min

111



Ag2S NPs
Monoclinic (hcp) to cubic
Ag8SnS6–Ag2S HNs of Bowtie and Drop shape, ∼13.9 nm
Orthorhombic (p)
DCG
Sn(OAc)4, OLA, Ag(OAc), 220 °C and 10 min

63



Cu31S16
Monoclinic (hcp)
CuGaS2 NRs
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu(acac)2, Ga(acac)3, ODE, OLA, n-DDT, 240–270 °C

140



Ag2Se NPs
Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)
AgGaSe2 tadpole-shape, l × dhead 98.41 × 34.85 nm
Tetragonal (bcc)
DCG
AgCl, Ga(acac)3, OLA, Se powder 250 °C, 1 h

52



Ag2S nanosphere
Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)
AgGaS2 nano-pyramids, 15 nm
Tetragonal (bcc)
DCG
Ga(acac)3, Ag-oleate, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, 280 °C, 40 min

122



Cu2S nano discs, l × d 22 × 9 nm
Hexagonal (hcp)
CuInS2 NRs
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu-oleate, In-oleate, DDT, OLA, 250 °C

100



Cu2S NPs
Hexagonal (hcp)
Cu2ZnSnS4 Nanoleaves, l × d 200 × 30 nm
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Sn(DDTC)4, Cu(EtXn)2, OA, DDT 200 °C and 60 min

96



Cu1.94S
Djurleite (hcp)
Cu2ZnSnS4 bullet and leaf shape
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu(acac)2, SnCl2, Sn(OAc)2, DDT, ZnCl2, Zn(OAc)2, 230 °C, 4 h and longer

125



Cu1.94S NPs, 100 nm
Monoclinic (hcp)
CuInS2 nanoleaves, l × d 500 × 100
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu-NPs, In(DDTC)3, OA and DT, 180 °C, 60 min

98



Cu1.75S
Roxbyite (hcp)
CuInS2 nanoribbons, l × d 2–3 μm × 20–50 nm
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu(acac)2, In(DDTC)3, n-DDT and OLA, 180 °C, 60 min

96



Cu1.75S
Roxbyite (hcp)
CuInxGa1−xS2 Nanoribbons, l × d 1–2 μm × 30–50 nm
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu(DDTC)2, Cu(acac)2, In(DDTC)3, Ga(DDTC)3, n-DDT and OLA, 180 °C, 60 min.


Cu31S16 nanosphere
Monoclinic (hcp)
CuGaZnS2 L-shaped NRs
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu(acac)2, Ga(acac)3, Zn(acac)2, DDT, and ODE, 240 °C and 7–120 min

81



Cu2S discs
Hexagonal (hcp)
CuGaS2 tadpoles, l × d × h ∼28 × 10–15 × 6–8 nm
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu(acac)2, Ga(acac)3, n-DDT, and HDA, 220 °C, 30 min

127



Cu1.75(SxSe1−x) NCs
Roxbyite (hcp)
CuGaSxSe2−x nanoribbon, l × d 2–3 μm × 50 nm
WZ (hcp)
DCG
Cu(DDTC)2, Ga(DDTC)3, n-DDT, and Se–OA solution, 200 °C, 60 min

95



Ag2S
Monoclinic (hcp)
Ag–In–S NCs
Orthorhombic (hcp)
DCG
In(OAc)3, OA and DDT pre-synthesized parent Ag2S NCs, 100 °C, 60 min

172





3.1 Binary–binary heterostructures
In binary–binary heterostructures, the seeds (I2−x–VI) form one segment and catalyse the growth of the second metal chalcogenide segment comprising cations that are immiscible in the I2–VI crystal structure. As described in the mechanism section (Section 2.3), the divalent cations mostly comprise the growth phase and are synthesized by the SSS growth mechanism. As most of the syntheses are conducted at relatively low temperatures, the deposition rate is normally greater than the diffusion rate, hence generally result in kinetic products. So far many cations such as In3+, Cd2+, Zn2+ and Mn2+ have been utilized to form binary–binary heterostructure chalcogenides NCs in SSS mode.101,108,112,118,136 In colloidal NC synthesis, the precursor addition sequence can affect the nucleation and post-nucleation ripening processes, as depending on the metallic precursor addition sequence the monomer supply rate varies. Hence, the injection time and intervals of cationic precursor addition are crucial in a multi-cationic system to modulate the structural evolution by controlling the monomer supply rate.
Reaction systems involving alkyl thiol as solvent, ligand, or S-source are known to exhibit coordination polymer formation between alkyl thiol and cationic precursors which in turn results in gelification. Controlling formation of such a polymeric complex, via delayed addition of one of the cationic precursors, varies the reaction kinetics and modulates the NC morphology. For example, depending on the supply rate of In3+ to the reaction system containing djurleite Cu1.94S (JCPDS: 23-0959) NCs as seeds, the Cu2S–In2S3 hetero-structures were synthesized in the form of NRs, teardrop like quasi-core/shell particles, and in a pencil-like morphology.101 Three equal portions of In(acac)3 in n-DDT were injected at different time intervals in to a copper sulphide (Cu1.94S) containing n-DDT solution at 200 °C to produce the matchstick like Cu2S–In2S3 heterostructures (Fig. 8a). However, the delayed addition of the In-precursor provided ample time for the Cu1.94S NCs to grow further from ∼10 nm to 20 nm in diameter with the unreacted Cu-precursors present in the system. This depleted the system of unreacted Cu+ concentration. As per HSAB theory, Cu+ displays a stronger interaction with alkyl thiols in comparison to the hard Lewis acid In3+. The reduced free Cu+-concentration allowed formation of an In(acac)3–DDT coordination polymer network which extracted Cu+ from Cu1.94S and hindered formation of the heterostructure.118 This in turn initiated a morphology change of the heterostructure Cu2S–In2S3 NRs to a teardrop like quasi-core/shell structure (Fig. 8b). Delayed addition of the In3+ source combined with a longer annealing time after each In3+ precursor injection ensured a lower concentration of unreacted In-precursor to an extent that restricted the formation of the coordination polymer networks at the initial stages of growth. But after multiple injections (5) of In-precursor eventually, the unreacted In3+ concentration increased facilitating the formation of the polymeric complex and initiation of the gelification process. The gel network again extracted Cu+ and promoted tapered growth to form a pencil-shaped morphology (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Match-stick shaped NCs showing epitaxial relationship with Cu2S[002] and In2S3[109] planes and nominal mismatch of 0.6% between Cu2S[100] and In2S3[102]; (b) teardrop-shaped core/shell Cu2S@In2S3 generated due to extraction of Cu+via In(acac)3–DDT gel network formation, (c) pencil-shaped In2S3 NCs where the inset TEM image depicts a small segment of Cu2S still present before complete extraction of Cu+.101 © 2008 ACS; (d–f) temporal evolution of Ag2Se–ZnS heterostructure displaying increased stem length with growth time137 © 2013 ACS; (g) formation of WZ dominated bent segment in ZB-MnS NW which was rich in Ag content (i) high-angle annular dark-field-STEM and (ii) elemental mapping for Ag112 © 2017 ACS; (h) TEM of Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure displaying marks along the long axis generated due to repetitive nucleation.118 © 2010 RSC. 
The delayed injection time of the second metallic precursor in multi-cationic systems provides ample time for the initial nuclei to go through post nucleation modification processes yielding a narrow distribution of seed sizes. Gao and group developed a multi-step injection process where multiple portions of colloidal solution of Zn(acac)2 in n-DDT were injected in a hot (200 °C) n-DDT and Cu(acac)2 containing reaction system at different time intervals.118 The diameter of the product was determined by the injection time of Zn-precursor. The long wait time (200 min) before the addition of the 1st portion of Zn-precursor in comparison to a shorter time of 25 min facilitated NR formation with a narrow diameter distribution. Similarly, the early addition of a second cationic precursor hinders the growth process by altering the nucleation kinetics. For example, during ZnS growth from in situ generated Cu1.94S NCs, early addition of Zn-precursor hindered the nucleation kinetics of Cu1.94S NCs. As a result, the Cu1.94S NCs went through repetitive nucleation, thus, resulting in a wider diameter distribution of the seeds. Due to the change in nucleation rate and wider seed diameter distribution, the ZnS NRs displayed striation marks along the long axis (Fig. 8h) and wider stem width distribution.
The growth temperature and time are crucial to increase the diffusion rate of chemical species and are considered as thermodynamic parameters that hugely affect the NC morphology and phase. Prolonged growth time can change the phase of metastable NCs to a thermodynamically stable phase. For example, a growth time of >30 min at >200 °C converted the Ag2Se catalysed metastable ZB MnSe to thermodynamically stable rock-salt phase (JCPDS: 89-4952).82,104,112 A prolonged growth time can also help in elongation of NCs along the growth axis by decomposing more precursor and providing more monomer concentration. Xu et al.,137 observed that length of WZ ZnS NWs can be increased from 12 nm to 80 nm when the growth time was prolonged from 5 min to 3 h with no change in the diameter of the NWs (Fig. 8d–f).
The concentration of precursors also has serious implications on the reaction outcome. Ye et al.,138 observed that a lower Cu to Zn-precursor ratio (1:9) generated Cu(I)-doped ZB-ZnS NCs (JCPDS: 80-0020). However, equal or higher concentrations of Cu to Zn precursors was able to generate conductive Cu1.94S NCs which catalysed the growth of WZZnS phase and generated match-stick shaped Cu1.94S seeded WZ-ZnS heterostructures NCs.
SSS-based approaches can be employed to obtain metastable NC phases through a judicious choice of precursor-ligand chemistry, growth temperature and duration or other synthesis parameters to access kinetic growth regimes. For instance, MnE (E = S, Se) NCs are abundant in the thermodynamically stable rock salt phase (JCPDS: 65-0891) but SSS growth can yield metastable ZB and WZ phase NCs which are otherwise difficult to synthesize. As discussed in Section 2.1.2, the similarity between the anionic sublattice of the seed and the growth phase normally leads to the kinetically accessible metastable phases. Hence, a cubic seed will be more inclined to form a ZB structure while a monoclinic seed will give rise to WZ phase upon tetrahedral cation coordination. On most occasions, the crystal phase of the seed utilized is determined by the growth temperature. Zhang et al.,82 utilized monoclinic Ag2S (JCPDS: 14-0072) NCs to catalyse SSS growth of WZ-MnS NWs (JCPDS: 40-1289) at 140 °C. In a similar process when Mn(II) precursors and dibenzyl disulphide were injected in relatively hot (180–200 °C) OLA solution containing Ag2S, ZB MnS NWs (JCPDS: 89-3840) were formed.112
Diffusion of mobile seed cations along the growth phase can also stabilize growth of certain metastable phases. ZB-MnS NCs with a 〈112〉 growth direction exhibited short bent segments of WZ-MnS (JCPDS: 89-4089) with a 〈0001〉 growth direction near the seed interface. The WZ segment was observed to be Ag rich while a nominal Ag concentration was observed for the ZB segment (Fig. 8g and i). Here, a low Ag content in ZB-segment denoted a required critical Ag concentration to stabilize the metastable ZB phase. Similarly, a solid seed-based method successfully materialized four-coordinate metastable ZB MnSe NCs instead of the thermodynamically stable six-coordinate rock salt structure. Zhang et al.,77 injected inorganic Mn(II) salts and dibenzyl diselenide in hot (120–220 °C) OLA solution in the presence of Ag2Se seeds to synthesize ultralong non-equilibrium straight and zigzag ZB MnSe (JCPDS: 27-0311) NWs (∼35 nm in diameter). A tendency to retain the anionic framework of the Ag2S and Ag2Se seeds during kinetic growth governed the metastable phase formation of MnE NCs. As discussed before, diffusion of seed cations into the growth phase in an optimum concentration helps to stabilise the stem crystal phase. In the case of ZB-MnSe NWs, a nominal concentration of Ag (<2 atom%) diffused into the MnSe stem and stabilized the metastable ZB state of MnSe.
As discussed in Section 2.3 lattice mismatch is a crucial parameter for stable hetero-epitaxial interface formation with the inclination to achieve a low lattice mismatch determining the growth direction. For example, Zhang et al.,77 observed that the interface created between bcc-Ag2Se and ZB-MnSe NCs presented a low lattice mismatch (2dAg2Se[211] and dMnSe[011] had a mismatch of 2.40% while 2dAg2Se[−222] and dMnSe(01−1) displayed 2.37% mismatch) which benefitted the formation of metastable ZB in 〈110〉 instead of the usual growth 〈111〉 direction reported for four-coordinate ZB system. In a different approach, Zou and co-workers were able to produce kinked WZ-MnSe NWs (∼13.2 ± 1.6 nm) via growth orientation conversion between two sets of nonpolar axes.181 A low lattice mismatch of 1.7% between non-polar [010]MnSe and [002]Ag2Se planes in-comparison to polar [0002]MnSe plane (where the mismatch was ∼5.5%), instigated the growth along non-polar [010] set of planes which is unusual to the normally observed 〈0001〉 direction for anisotropic WZ NC formation. Furthermore, kinking was facilitated via transition of the growth direction to identical non-polar axes. Due to the six-fold symmetry of the WZ structure, the [100] planes were identical to [010], [100], [100], [010], [010] planes. Also, [20] appeared identical to [110], [20], [210], [20], [110] planes. This similarity facilitated switching of the growth along identical directions.
3.2 Binary–ternary heterostructure
As illustrated in Section 2.3, binary–ternary heterostructure formation can be achieved by DCG from a sacrificial host or by combining both SSS and DCG.52,81,94,114,116,139 One such development was the formation of CuInS2–ZnS NCs. To synthesize such a heterostructure Yi et al.,119 employed Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure NRs pre-synthesized via SSS mechanism as the seed. The Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure NRs were synthesized via injecting a multiple portion of Zn(acac)2 dissolved in n-DDT in a hot (200 °C) solution of n-DDT containing in situ derived Cu1.94S NCs. Addition of the In3+-precursor in a different sequence controlled the growth mechanism and morphology of CuInS2. Interestingly, direct addition of the Cu1.94S–ZnS seeds into a solution of n-DDT and ODE containing In (OAc)3 at 200 °C with a growth time of 4 h formed burning torch-shaped CuInS2–ZnS heterostructures. Whereas, addition of In(OAc)3 at equal time intervals in the solution containing the seeds formed a long-rod shaped morphology. The In3+ forms a polymeric complex with n-DDT, hence the complex extracts cations from Cu1.94S, and undergo DCG. So, in case of direct addition of Cu1.94S–ZnS the In3+–DDT complex gets an immediate source of Cu+, and undergo DCG to form the burning torch shaped morphology. Whereas, the controlled supply of In-precursor in specific intervals provided low enough In3+–DDT concentration to limit the growth rate at each step probably by lowering the extraction rate of Cu+ by In3+–DDT complex during DCG. Hence, a slow decrease in the rate of diffusion of Cu+ due to lower supply of In3+ ensured the formation of a long rod-shaped morphology with slight decrease in width at the tip. Similarly, for Ag8SnS6 NC synthesis, a different addition sequence of metallic precursors formed monophasic NCs and heterostructures. Addition of S–OLA and Ag(OAc) in Sn(OAc)4 containing OLA solution formed monophasic Ag8SnS6 NCs whereas addition of only S–OLA solution in Ag(OAc) and Sn(OAc)4 containing solution formed Ag2S–Ag8SnS6 heterostructures.63
In the binary–ternary heterostructure system, lattice mismatch plays a key role to control morphology and growth direction. For example, CuGaS2–ZnS heterostructures were synthesized utilizing preformed Cu1.94S–ZnS seeds and Ga(acac)3 with n-DDT and OLA (Fig. 9a).99 Ascribed to the preferred growth direction for WZ NCs the ZnS and CuGaS2 phase from Cu1.94S conductive seeds formed the interface between [0002] planes and displayed a very low lattice mismatch of 0.7% between connecting [100] planes of both the NC phase (Fig. 9b(i and ii)). Interestingly, in the Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure, the [800]Cu1.94S formed the hetero-interface with [0002]ZnS (Fig. 9c) where the connecting [004]Cu1.94S and [100]ZnS planes displayed a mismatch of 2% which was higher than the mismatch observed for ZnS–CuGaS2 interface (Fig. 9e). Hence, it can be hypothesized that a comparatively higher mismatch at the hetero-interface makes the interface active to catalyse the interfacial DCG. To attain the lowest energy interface, the boundary between Cu1.94S and CuGaS2 was comprised of [804]Cu1.94S and [102]CuGaS2 plane instead of the [800]Cu1.94S plane. This introduced a twisted morphology as the angle between [804] and [800] plane of Cu1.94S was ∼44° (Fig. 9d) which resulted in the zigzag shapes of the NCs. Similarly, Pradhan and group employed SSS growth catalysed by Ag2Se seeds to form Ag2Se–CdSe and Ag2Se–ZnSe heterostructures. The heterostructures were further utilized as seeds in a DCG to form CdSe–AgGaSe2, –AgInSe2, ZnSe–AgGaSe2, and –AgInSe2 binary–ternary heterostructures.116 The Ga(acac)3 and In(acac)3 precursors in OLA were injected at 230 °C in OLA containing Ag2Se–CdSe and Ag2Se–ZnSe seeds and annealed at 250 °C for 1 h to form the heterostructures. HRTEM analysis demonstrated that the heterostructure was either straight or positioned at an angle of ∼120° with the stem. It was accredited to the formation ability of AgGaSe2 along 〈12〉, 〈11〉 or 〈112〉 to achieve a low interfacial lattice mismatch with the seed interface (Fig. 9f–h). While the 〈112〉 direction formed straight NCs but 〈12〉, and 〈11〉 made an angle of ∼120° with ZnSe.
 Fig. 9  (a) The Zigzag ZnS–CuGaS2 heterostructures generated from (c) pre-synthesized Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructures; (b) HRTEM of the hetero-interface displayed the heterointerface formation between [0002]ZnS and [0001]CuGaS2 while the connecting [100] planes displayed a mismatch of 0.7% (d and e) the trimeric ZnS–CuGaS2–C1.94S heterostructure displayed the change of plane and presence of twist to form the second suitable interface with [100]CuGaS2 and [804]Cu1.94S.99 © 2016 RSC; (f) TEM image showing binary–ternary heterostructure formed between ZnSe and AgGaSe2 and the growth direction of AgGaSe2 as 〈112〉, (g) HRTEM of AgGaSe2 head. (h) Selected area FFT pattern from the AgGaSe2 part of the heterostructure.116 © 2016 Wiley. 
3.3 Alloyed multinary NCs
Diffusion-controlled growth is usually responsible for alloyed chalcogenide NC formation from conductive NC seeds. The temperature is a critical parameter to control the diffusion of ions. Hence, at higher temperatures, diffusion of the cation facilitates mixing of the heterostructure phase to form monophasic alloyed NCs. The alloyed NCs are normally formed beyond 200 °C. In addition to growth temperature, prolonged growth time is essential for alloyed ternary and quaternary NC formation. Biphasic Cu2S–CuInS2 to monophasic CuInS2 formation is an apt example of such systems. Conner et al.,100 investigated the formation of CuInS2 NRs through an aliquot study of the reaction system containing the metal-oleate precursors, OLA, and n-DDT at 260 °C. During the NC growth intermediate Cu2S–CuInS2 heterostructures were generated from Cu2S nanodiscs. From the changes in morphology during NC evolution, it can be hypothesized that the growth was driven by both interfacial and non-interfacial DCG. After 5 min of growth time, biphasic NCs were formed with Cu2S as the tip segment. This growth process can be seen as non-interfacial based on the evolution of the NCs starting from wide Cu2S to the narrow CuInS2 end with a tapered shape. While the second segment presumably started with interfacial diffusion-controlled growth at the hetero-interface of Cu2S–CuInS2 and formed a tapered CuInS2 phase with a narrow Cu2S tip. Similarly, Huang et al.,122 observed AgGaS2 nanopyramid evolution from Ag2S–AgGaS2 heterostructures with prolonged reaction time and temperature. Upon 3 min of growth time, the AgGaS2 phase started to form on the Ag2S seed NCs which displayed a similar size as the initial Ag2S NCs. Further growth reduced the Ag2S segment while the AgGaS2 grew larger structures anisotropically along the 〈001〉 direction to form the pyramid-shaped AgGaS2 NCs. The diffusion-controlled mode also facilitated the formation of a quaternary chalcogenide NC. For example, Liao et al.,125 synthesized WZ-CZTS in a one-pot reaction using a starting material of Cu1.94S NCs (JCPDS: 23-0959) confirmed from XRD (peaks at 37.6° and 48.7°) analysis and LSPR frequency which displayed a copper deficiency of 5.7%. The LSPR peak of Cu1.94S NCs diminished at higher temperatures (>230 °C) as the CZTS NCs started to evolve from Cu1.94S by forming intermediated Cu1.94S–CZTS heterostructures. While in another report, the reaction involving metal–DDTC complexes of Zn and Sn in OLA and n-DDT facilitated WZ-CZTS NC growth (200 nm length and 30 nm width) from hexagonal α-Cu2S NCs.94 After 8 min of annealing, the NCs formed had a Cu2S tip and a CZTS segment. Further annealing formed a nano leaf morphology through DCG. Presumably, the exhaustion of the Zn and Sn precursors established the CZTS segment as the only source for Zn2+ and Sn4+ and promoted inter-diffusion and further growth. Similar diffusion-controlled growth with roxbyite type NCs (Cu1.75S, and Cu1.75SSe) materialized CuInxGa1−xS2, CuxInxZn2(1−x)S2, and CuGaSxSe2−x nanoribbons.96,120 The low temperature halts the process of alloying which is attributed to slow diffusion rate of the cationic entities. Liu et al.,81 observed during L-shaped Cu–Ga–Zn–S NC formation, a temperature lower than 240 °C generated the Cu31S16–ZnS (at 220 °C) and L-shaped CGZS–Cu31S16 heterostructures (at 230 °C) instead of alloyed quaternary Cu–Ga–Zn–S NCs.
Like the heterostructures, a lattice mismatch is pivotal to alter the growth direction during alloyed NC formation. Liu et al.,81 synthesized L-shaped WZ Cu–Ga–Zn–S alloyed NCs catalysed by in situ generated Cu31S16 NCs. The initially formed Cu31S16 catalysed the growth of Cu31S16–ZnS heterostructure via SSS growth. During binary–binary heterostructure formation, WZ-ZnS formed an interface between [0002]ZnS and [004]Cu31S16 and the growth of ZnS stem occurred along the 〈0002〉 direction (Fig. 10j). After a prolonged growth time for the reaction mixture containing Cu31S16–ZnS and Ga(OAc)3, the Cu–Ga–Zn–S segment formed at the hetero-interface of Cu31S16–ZnS NCs in an interfacial DCG (Fig. 10k(i and ii)). To attain the lowest energy interface the crystal boundary was formed between [880]Cu31S16 and [201]Cu–Ga–Zn–S instead of [1100]Cu–Ga–Zn–S and [080]Cu31S16. The growth direction of Cu–Ga–Zn–S was determined to be 〈1100〉 which was perpendicular to 〈0002〉. This resulted in the growth of L-shaped NCs (Fig. 10l).
 Fig. 10  (a) HRTEM of a single NCs obtained before complete transformation to 2D-CuGaS2 tadpole displayed a CuGaS2 shell retaining Cu2S (b) The 2D-CuGaS2 tadpoles formed upon addition of alkyl amine; (c) HRTEM of a single tadpole NC showed 〈100〉 as the growth direction, corresponding FFT (inset).127 © 2017 ACS; (d and e) quasi 2D-nano disc formed upon addition of OLA due to competitive growth along 〈100〉 and 〈1100〉, FFT (inset) (f) growth of CuGaS2 NCs on addition of excess n-DDT, low amount of DDT formed Cu31S16 dominated phase (inset)140 © 2019 RSC; (g) formation of L shapes NCs upon Zn2+ addition.127 © 2017 ACS; (h and i) HRTEM of the 2D CuGaS2 nano-plates formed in presence of Cl−.140 © 2019 RSC; (j) HRTEM of Cu31S16–ZnS and (k (i and ii)) Cu31S16–CGZS heteronanostructure, with the heterointerface and growth direction; (l) HRTEM of different parts of a typical L-shaped CGZS NR, FFT patterns of I and III parts of the NR (inset)81 © 2018 RSC. 
The ligands play a major role in determining the growth direction in anisotropic NCs. The system with a considerable amount of polar or coordinating ligands such as OLA and oleic acid (OA) can bind tightly with polar facets and promote growth along other non-polar facets. For example, in hexagonal CdSe NCs the {0001} set of facets are polar in nature. Binding of polar ligands reduces the surface energy of the {0001} facets and promotes growth along the lateral planes, resulting in quasi-1D or 2D morphologies.130 For instance, Adhikari et al.,127 observed that addition of alkylamine in the reaction system passivated the [0001] facet and promoted the growth of CuGaS2 along the 〈100〉 direction to form 2D-CuGaS2 tadpoles (Fig. 10a–c). In the absence of amine, the growth was facilitated along the conventional 〈0001〉 direction for hexagonal CuGaS2 NCs. Similarly, Liu et al.,140 observed that addition of OLA prohibited the growth along the polar 〈0001〉 direction. As result, a competitive growth along the non-polar 〈1100〉 and 〈100〉 directions promoted quasi-2D CuGaS2 nanodiscs (Fig. 10d and e). Feng and group reported increased OLA concentration in the reaction system changed shape of the quasi-1D AgInSe2 nano tadpole to short and irregular 2D-discs.141 Similarly, Kruszynska et al.,142 observed addition of phosphonic acid source while synthesizing CuInS2 from Cu2S, changed the 1-D shapes of CuInS2 NRs and formed hexagonal discs. The addition of trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) in excess slowed down the diffusion of In3+ cations due to strong coordination between hard acid In3+ and hard base TOPO and resulted in P-shaped NCs and short NRs due to slow DCG. In the diffusion-controlled growth, n-DDT plays a vital role by forming a polymeric matrix with MIII cations. The In/Ga-precursors form an amorphous matrix with n-DDT which can be critical to facilitate diffusion-controlled growth by extracting Cu+/Ag+ from the seeds or providing In3+/Ga3+ during interfacial and non-interfacial growth. Prusty et al.,52 suggested that during AgGaSe2 nano-tadpole formation the Ag+ ions get diffused into amorphous Ga-selenide to form the crystalline AgGaSe2 tetragonal NCs. Liu et al.,140 observed that addition of n-DDT in low quantity generated Cu31S16 dominated phase even at higher temperatures (240 °C) accredited to hindrance in amorphous Ga3+–DDT complex formation. In contrary, a high quantity of n-DDT increased the diffusion rate of Cu+ ascribed to increased concentration of Ga3+–DDT complex. As a result, elongated CuGaS2 NCs were generated, even at a comparatively lower growth temperature (200 °C) (Fig. 10f). Likewise, during L-shaped Cu–Ga–Zn–S NC synthesis, a high dosage of n-DDT ensured a longer length with wider angles between L arms. In contrast, lower concentration of n-DDT generated short Cu–Ga–Zn–S NCs with the presence of Cu31S16 NCs.81 Furthermore, the presence of anionic or cationic elements can modulate the shape by altering the preferred growth directions.127,140 For example, addition of Zn2+ facilitated the growth of CuGaS2 2D nanodiscs relatively along 〈010〉 or 〈100〉 directions forming L-shaped NCs while in absence of Zn2+ the growth occurred along 〈100〉 (Fig. 10g).127 Also, the morphology of 2D CuGaS2 nanoplates can be influenced by the presence of Cl− ions from the precursor GaCl3 (Fig. 10h and i).140 The Cl− ions specifically bound to [0001] and [1100] facets and passivated the growth, and facilitated growth along the free {100} set of planes possessing a six-fold symmetry. Hence, leading to the formation of WZ hexagonal nanoplates.
4. Applications
In this section, we highlight the possible applications of the NCs synthesized through SSS and diffusion-controlled growth in photocatalysis, photovoltaics, and photodetectors. The optoelectronic properties of colloidal metal chalcogenide NCs catalysed by conductive seeds can be tuned via modulating the composition, shape, and growth pattern of the NCs. In addition, the propensity to form 1-D NCs is advantageous as their high surface area to volume ratio, unidirectional charge carrier transport and efficient separation of the charges make them suitable to be integrated into various optoelectronic devices.
4.1 Photocatalytic H2 production
Enormous efforts have been made to find suitable green energy sources to satiate the ever-increasing global energy demand and to replace non-renewable alternatives such as fossil fuel. One such development is photocatalysis where artificial photosynthesis systems such as semiconductor NCs can harness solar energy and convert it into chemical fuel. Colloidal metal chalcogenide NCs with suitable bandgap energy are promising for fabricating economically feasible photocathodes for photocatalytic devices.143 To ensure efficient absorption of the solar spectrum and enough energy (redox potential of HER 1.23 eV) for water splitting while considering the overpotential related energy losses, NCs are required to possess the bandgap >2 eV but <3 eV. Various factors such as dimensions, shape, and aspect ratio of the metal chalcogenide NCs affect the photocatalytic performance for H2 production. 1-D semiconductor NCs have attracted attention due to their aspect ratio and surface area dependent efficient light absorption, along with effective directional conduction of quantum particles along the long axis and efficient charge carrier separation.144,145 Tuning the bandgap of these semiconductor NCs with different shapes is one way to enhance the photocatalytic activity. As an example, binary–ternary ZnS–AgInS2 heterostructures synthesized in different morphologies following seeded growth displayed shape-dependent photocatalytic activity. It was shown that ZnS–AgInS2 NCs with rod-shaped morphology displayed two folds higher photocatalytic activity (high H2 production) in comparison to the spherical and rice-shaped NCs (Fig. 11a, 11a (inset) and b).111 Controlling the dimensions of the semiconductor is the other possible way to enhance the photocatalytic H2 production. CuGaS2 NCs in 1D NR, 2D nanoplate, and quasi 2D nano disc shapes exhibited different H2 evolution capacity when used as a catalyst depending on the facets exposed to solar illumination. For example, Tang and group observed that 2D CuGaS2 NCs exhibited higher H2 evolution (183.6 μmol g−1 h−1) compared to 1D (136.5 μmol g−1 h−1) and quasi-1D NCs (169.1 μmol g−1 h−1) (Fig. 11c).140
 Fig. 11  (a) Relationship between energy gap and various shapes of ZnS–AgInS2 solid–solution NCs, photocatalysts were dispersed in a water and 2-propanol solution containing S2− as a sacrificial electron donor. Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic H2 evolution from different shapes of NCs (inset); (b) relationship between rate of H2 production and Eg of ZnS–AgInS2 solid–solution NCs with various shapes: rod (squares), sphere (triangles), and rice (circles)111 © 2016 ACS; (c) rate of photocatalytic hydrogen production from 1D CuGaS2 NRs, quasi-2D nano disc and 2D nanoplates140 © 2019 RSC; (d) time courses of photocatalytic H2 evolution on stoichiometric and gallium-rich Cu–Ga–S ternary NCs and ZnS–CuGa5S8 under visible-light illumination (λ =385–740 nm)146 © 2015 RSC; (e) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of Cu31S16 nanospheres, tadpole-like CuGaS2 NCs and L-shaped CGZS NRs under simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2)81 © 2018 RSC; (f) time courses of photocatalytic hydrogen production on CuGaS2, ZnS and CuGaS2–ZnS from an aqueous Na2S (0.1 mol L−1)/Na2SO3 (0.3 mol L−1) solution (100 ml) under visible light irradiation (>420 nm)99 © 2016 RSC; (g) photocatalytic hydrogen production rates of samples with variables Zn to Cd ratio under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm);61 © 2016 ACS; (h and i) comparison of H2 production amount, rate, and band gaps for Ag2S–ZnS heterostructure NRs with different Ag:Zn molar ration and the varied aspect ratio of ZnS stem from 11.9 to 24.3.147 © 2020 ACS. 
If the conduction band energy becomes lower than the required reduction potential of the chemical photocatalytic process, doping or alloying of higher energy elements helps to tune the bandgap to suit the process. For instance, the bandgap of ZnS is too wide for visible-light catalysis, while the conduction band of CuInS2 is not enough to reduce H2O to H2. In this regard, formation of ZnS/CuInS2 heterostructures can achieve a suitable band-gap for photocatalytic reactions. Ye et al.,97 synthesised ZnS/CuInS2 NRs and investigated the photocatalytic potential of H2 production in an aqueous solution containing Na2S and Na2SO3 as hole scavengers. The results displayed that a ZnS/CuInS2 solid solution formed between ternary CuInS2 with binary ZnS exhibited a much better photocatalytic performance for H2 evolution than its parent semiconductors CuInS2 NRs. Similarly, a Zn substituted gallium rich Cu–Ga–S ternary system shows a 5 fold enhancement in photocatalytic H2 production in Zn0.6–CuGa5S8 NCs compared to stoichiometric Cu–Ga–S and Ga rich Cu–Ga–S system (Fig. 11d).146 L-shaped CGZS NRs (1D) formed by the one-pot synthesis via in situ conductive seed formation exhibited efficient charge separation and electrical transport due to their one-dimensional geometry, which resulted in a maximum hydrogen production rate of 730.2 μmol g−1 h−1 at 300 mW cm−2 (Fig. 11e).81 The reduced Cu vacancies in the material improved significantly the photocatalytic H2 production and photoresponse. A high amount of Zn substitution (Cd0.19Zn0.81S) in CdS enhanced the H2 generation rate more than 10-fold.148 While Chen et al.,61 observed a 59 fold increase in H2 production rate for a Cd rich Cu1.94S–Zn0.23Cd0.77S solid solution heterostructure in comparison to CdS NCs (Fig. 11g). The lattice mismatches in HNS traps the charge carrier to prevent diffusion and recombination. In addition, the lattice strain produced by the mismatch induces an electric field that is beneficial for charge separation. In this regard, type-II heterostructures are well explored to enhance the photocatalytic performance.149 Pradhan and group synthesized type-II heterostructure CdSe–AgGaSe2 NCs and quasi type-II CdSe–AgInSe2 and observed superior H2 evolution performance in comparison to AgGaSe2, AgInSe2 or CdSe NCs.116 Zhao et al.,99 synthesized CuGaS2–ZnS heterostructures in a synthetic process combining SSS and a diffusion-controlled mechanism. The heterostructure displayed superior H2-production ability (15-fold higher H2 yield) in comparison to n-type ZnS and p-type CuGaS2 NCs (Fig. 11f). The photo generated electrons in CuGaS2 are transported to n-type ZnS segment due to the built-in potential gradient at the interface which reduced the chance of recombination. Changing the aspect ratio of the heterostructure results in the variation of energy difference at the interface that affects the driving force for delocalization of the electrons along the conduction band. Ag2S–ZnS NRs shows an significant gain in electron transfer from 5.27 × 106 to 3.24 × 108 s−1 by changing the aspect ratio from 11.9 to 18.4 (Fig. 11h and i).147 These reports demonstrate that photo catalytically efficient components can be incorporated via catalyst-assisted synthesis that can enhance metal chalcogenide NC's photocatalytic efficiencies.
4.2 Photovoltaics
Structural modifications in semiconductor nanostructures make them ideal for absorbing a broader spectrum of visible-near-IR photons and are thus applicable to DSSC.150 Inorganic NCs such as CuInS/S2 and CZTS exhibited high catalytic activity for I3−/I− conversion and have device efficiency comparable to Pt CE-based DSSCs.151 One approach to enhance the photovoltaic property of these NCs is to integrate different active domains in one NC by synthesising heterostructures. For instance, CdS possesses grain boundaries that increase the transport of charge carriers and decrease the probability of electron recombination reaction during diffusion.152 However, CdS NCs (bandgap of 2.42 eV) can only absorb <512 nm, limiting its photovoltaic application. One possible solution to tackle such a problem is to integrate another absorbing component with a lower bandgap energy (e.g., Cu2−xS, Ag2Se, CdSe, PbS, and SnS, etc.) and form heterostructures to achieve good spectral absorption from visible to NIR regions.153–155 A major contribution in this area comes from heterostructured NCs such as, CdS/CdSe and CuInS2/CdS due to their suitable band alignment match. CuInS2/CdS heterostructures synthesized by seeded growth display large absorptions over the entire visible spectral range and exhibit higher sunlight absorbing capacity with more efficient charge transport and low carrier recombination compared to spherical CuInS2 QDs.156 The combined properties of the CuInS2/CdS heterostructure resulted in a 3.4-fold improvement in the solar cell device efficiency compared to the spherical CuInS2@CdS (Fig. 12c and e). Similarly, 1D CuInS2–ZnS heterostructures were investigated in a solar device fabricated by drop-casting the NCs on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass. The prepared device displayed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.5% and short circuit current of 15.3 mA cm−2 which was better in performance with conventional Pt foil as CE (Fig. 12a).119
 Fig. 12  (a) I–V curves of the DSSC devices fabricated using burning torch-shaped CuInS2–ZnS heterostructure (BTCIS–ZnS), flame-shaped CuInS2 (FCIS), long rod-shaped CuInS2 (LRCIS–ZnS) and Pt electrodes as the counter electrodes with their respective performance119 © 2013 RSC; (b) I–V characteristics of drop-casting films of CuInxGa1−xS2 nanoribbons in the dark (black curves) and under light (red curves)96 © 2013 RSC; (c) J–V curves for CuInS2@CdS QD (black) and CuInS2/CdS HNT (red) SSCs.156 © 2018 ACS. (d) I–V characteristics of drop-casting films of CuInS2 NWs in the dark (black curve) and under light (red curve)105 © 2013 RSC; (e) schematic illustration of the energy levels of a CuInS2/CdS SSC.156 © 2018 ACS; (f) schematic of a lab-scale photo-detector device, where the arrows indicated the place for NC drop-casting.96 © 2013 RSC. 
The device fabricated with quasi type-II Ag2S–AgInS2 heterostructures as an active material and PEDOT–PSS as hole transporting material exhibited a fill factor of 36%, open circuit voltage of 0.68 V with photon conversion efficiency of 0.52%. In Ag2S–AgInS2 heterostructures the hole was confined to Ag2S and the electron was delocalized over the entire structure which reduced the charge carrier recombination process and resulted in increased power conversion efficiency.139 CuInS2, CIGSSe semiconductor NCs have high absorption coefficients and their metastable wurtzite phase helps to control the stoichiometric composition in the final crystalline phase. If these materials are further studied for their anisotropic growth by the seeded approach, this might be useful to improve their optical and electronic properties. Since different morphologies (dots, rods, and branched structure) of colloidal semiconductor materials are indeed the topic of interest in various optoelectronic applications.157–164
4.3 Photodetectors
Anisotropic semiconductor metal chalcogenide NCs possess high intrinsic carrier motilities and broadband absorption. Additionally, they display strong polarization sensitivity and enhanced carrier transport characteristics due to the absence of grain boundaries along their length. Since the optoelectronic properties are size and composition-dependent, semiconductor NCs can be used to tune the photo response and response time for high external quantum efficiency, and hence efficient photodetection devices. For example, Li et al.,96 fabricated photodetector devices by drop-casting the NCs silicon substrate test chips comprising of interdigitated electrodes (Fig. 12f). They observed a six-fold increase in current (1.83 × 10−5 A) at 10 V under illumination than 9.96 × 10−7 A in dark for the CIGS nanoribbons (Fig. 12b). Furthermore, CuInS2 NWs catalysed by Ag2S NC seeds exhibited a four-fold increase in current under-illumination in comparison to the dark state (Fig. 12d).105 The enhancement was accredited to faster carrier transport with noticeable photocurrent gain. Similarly, Huang and group synthesized CZTS nanoleaves from α-Cu2S seeds and fabricated devices which exhibited a two-fold increase in current under illumination.94 The CuInS2 nanoleaves obtained from Cu1.94S NCs exhibited an 11-fold increase in current under illumination.98
5. Future perspectives
The review provides insights on conductive seed catalysed metal-chalcogenide NCs. The experimental findings to date suggest that selective growth and synthesis of heterostructures and alloys can be made possible mainly by controlling the hetero-interfacial features and crystal structure of seed catalyst. However, the fundamental understandings of growth mechanism, as well as ion diffusion with detailed experimental and theoretical work, is still of great interest. More exploration in regard to different concepts need to be considered, for example, the morphology is not only determined by the surface energy of the growing facets when in thermodynamic equilibrium but also by non-equilibrium kinetic effects or the energetic and steric contributions of capping ligands during the growth. The preferred growth direction and growth rate is also dependent on the kinetics of injection. It is comparatively challenging to balance the reactivity of precursors for effective seed formation and hence use of a syringe pump could be more widely applied to manually regulate the precursor injection rate during synthesis. This helps to control concentration and rate of precursor addition and thus the rate of thermal decomposition to control selective growth from the side facet. As an example, anisotropic growth of metal selenide (CdSe) and phosphides (e.g. M2P, where M = Fe, Mn, Ni, Co), fluoride (NaLnF4) based NCs was achieved by controlling injection rate either by dropwise, sequential or constant addition by using a syringe pump.165–169
The study of crystallographic relations between the hetero-interfacial planes needs to be investigated extensively for seed-catalysed metal chalcogenide NCs growth. The currently reported Bi2Te3 seeded II–VI quantum wires encourage the exploration of other feasible seeds to fully understand the seed's crystallographic relationship with the growth phase.89 The growth of other group IB-based chalcogenides from telluride-based seeds (Cu2−xTe, Ag2Te, etc.) can also be explored further which has yet not been studied by a catalyst-assisted growth mechanism. In addition, solid seeds with layered crystal structure such as Bi2Te3 can be utilised to grow group IB based chalcogenide nanocrystals. Co-existence of both ion-conducting metal chalcogenide and layered metal chalcogenide in heterostructure nanocrystals can be exploited further in DCG to form novel compound metal chalcogenide NCs. Similar transformation approaches were also utilised for Cu2−xS and Ag2S based binary–ternary heterostructure formation and quaternary metal chalcogenide colloidal nanocrystal.81
Advanced experimental techniques could help to study time-resolved in situ growth process in multistep NCs formation and hence allow in-depth understanding of the synthesis mechanism in the near future. For instance, (i) small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) employing synchrotron radiation as well as neutron scattering experiments can be used to monitor precursor reduction and NP formation in multistep synthesis,170 (ii) the combination of UV-vis absorption spectroscopy and SAXS can be useful to recognize the precursor conversion reaction and nucleation/growth pathway as applied before to study ZnSe quantum dots,171 (iii) quantitative information on the ion distribution in the gradient or interface can be observed by extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy, which has been successfully applied for ZnSe/CdS core/shell NCs by Boldt et al.,172 (iv) crystalline quality and interfacial studies (such as strain, atomic bonding order, doping level, depletion layer width, electric field strengths) can be studied by Raman spectroscopy. Since the spectral widths and positions of the phonon peaks in the Raman spectrum originate from the crystal lattice vibration modes that become unique within the heterostructure.173
There is also further opportunity for the seeded approach to deliver new nanocrystal platforms that can impact on a range of technological areas. As an example, enabling the synergetic effect of anisotropy, polarized light emission, and dense alignment could have significant impacts for LEDs and lasers for use in all optical integrated circuits.174–179 Harnessing the properties of superionic conductivity in the seed and capability of tunable heterostructure and alloy formation in the particle can allow for unlimited possibilities for materials design where these properties are exploited in advanced optoelectronics, thermoelectrics, photonics, sensing, and or magnetic applications.
List of abbreviation

bccBody centered cubic
Cd(OAc)2Cadmium acetate dihydrate
Cd(OAc)2Cadmium acetate
CECation exchange
Cu(OAc)2Copper(II) acetate
Cu(EtXn)2Copper ethylxanthogenate
[Cu(acac)2] andCopper(II) acetylacetonate
(Cu(DDTC)2, 97%),Copper(II) diethyldithiocarbamate
CRGCrystallographic
CZTSCu2SnZnS4
CGZSCu–Ga–Zn–S
CIGSCuInxGa1−xS2
(PhCH2)2Se2Dibenzyldiselenide
(PhCH2)2S2Dibenzyldisulfide
DBTUDibutylthiourea
DCGDiffusion-controlled-growth
(DOP)Di-n-octylphosphinate
(DOCA)Di-octylamine
(OE)Di-octylether

n-DDT
n-dodecanethiol
(DDA)Dodecylamine
EtOHEthanol
fccFace centered cubic
Ga(acac)3Gallium(III)acetylacetonate
Ga(DDTC)3Gallium diethyldithiocarbamate
HDHexadecane
HADHexadecylamine
hcpHexagonal close packed
In(OAc)3indium(III) acetate
In(DDTC)3,Indium diethyldithiocarbamate
[In(acac)3]Indium(III)acetylacetonate
Pb(DDTC)2Lead diethyldithiocarbamate
LEDLight emitting diode
MCMechanism involved
(MnCl2·4H2O, 99.99%)Manganese chloride tetrahydrate
[(C4H9)2NCS2]2MnManganese dibutyldithiocarbamate
Mn (OAc)2Manganese(II)acetate
NCsNanocrystals
NPsNanoparticles
NRsNanorods
NWsNanowires
ODEOctadecene
ODAOctadecylamine
OLAOleylamine
(PVP)Polyvinyl pyrrolidone
[(C4H9)2NCS2]AgSilver dibutyldithiocarbamate
Ag(DDTC)Silver diethyldithiocarbamate
SSSSolution–solid–solid
Sn(DDTC)4Tin diethyldithiocarbamate
Sn(OAc)2,Tin (II) acetate
TOCATri-octylamine
TBPTributylphosphine
TOPOTri-n-octylphosphine oxide
TOPTeTri-n-octylphosphine telluride
TOPTrioctylphosphine
WZWurtzite
Zn(OAc)2,Zinc acetate dehydrate
Zn(Ac)2Zinc acetate
ZBZinc blende
Zn(DDTC)2Zinc diethyldithiocarbamate
Zn(EtXn)2Zinc ethylxanthate
Zn(St)2Zinc stearate
Zn(Uct)2Zinc undecylenate
[Zn(acac)2]Zinc(II) acetylacetonate

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support of Science Foundation Ireland (SFI), Grant Number 16/IA/4629, Irish Research Council (IRC) under Grant Number IRCLA/2017/285. K. R. further acknowledges SFI Research Centres MaREI, AMBER, and CONFIRM 12/RC/2278_P2, 12/RC/2302_P2, and 16/RC/3918.
Notes and references
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aldakov, A. Lefrançois and P. Reiss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3756 RSC .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Drummen, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. R. Manders, J. Xue, P. H. Holloway and L. Qian, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Xi, P. Zhang and W. Zhang, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 194706 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chang and E. R. Waclawik, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23505 RSC .
S. D. Deshmukh, R. G. Ellis, D. S. Sutandar, D. J. Rokke and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9087 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Carey, I. J. Kramer, P. Kanjanaboos, G. Moreno-Bautista, O. Voznyy, L. Rollny, J. A. Tang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Makkar and R. Viswanatha, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 22103 RSC .
Y. Liu, M. Liu and M. T. Swihart, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13435 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Wang, A. G. Dong and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibanez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu and J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Voggu, J. Sham, S. Pfeffer, J. Pate, L. Fillip, T. B. Harvey, R. M. Brown Jr and B. A. Korgel, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 574 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Z. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Redinger, S. Molesa, S. Yin, R. Farschi and V. Subramanian, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2004, 51, 1978 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hages, M. J. Koeper, C. K. Miskin, K. W. Brew and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7703 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. McLeod, C. J. Hages, N. J. Carter and R. Agrawal, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 1550 CrossRef CAS .
C. Coughlan, Y. Guo, S. Singh, S. Nakahara and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8679 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, S. Singh, S. Levcenko, T. Unold, F. Laffir and K. M. Ryan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Singh, P. Liu, A. Singh, C. Coughlan, J. Wang, M. Lusi and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4742 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Thanh, N. Maclean and S. Mahiddine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ntholeng, B. Mojela, S. Gqoba, M. Airo, S. Govindraju, M. Moloto, J. Van Wyk and N. Moloto, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 10259 RSC .
S. Karthika, T. K. Radhakrishnan and P. Kalaichelvi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 6663 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. LaMer and R. H. Dinegar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 4847 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Pearson, J. Chem. Educ., 1968, 45, 643 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, Y. Wu, J. Cui, Y. Ran, W. Lin, L.-M. Liu, J. Ye, Y. Zhang and A. Cabot, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 2774 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Burrows, A. M. Vartanian, N. S. Abadeer, E. M. Grzincic, L. M. Jacob, W. Lin, J. Li, J. M. Dennison, J. G. Hinman and C. J. Murphy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Habas, H. Lee, V. Radmilovic, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fiore, R. Mastria, M. G. Lupo, G. Lanzani, C. Giannini, E. Carlino, G. Morello, M. De Giorgi, Y. Li and R. Cingolani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mishra, J. Lian, S. Chakrabortty, M. Lin and Y. T. Chan, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2040 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mishra, W. Y. Wu, B. M. Srinivasan, R. Hariharaputran, Y. W. Zhang and Y. Chan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, N. Winckelmans, P. T. Prins, S. Bals, H. C. Gerritsen and C. de Mello Donegá, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, H. Ye, Z. Liu, J. Liu, H. Fu, Y. Huang, F. Teng, Z. Wang and A. Tang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6111 RSC .
L. Figueroa-Cosme, J. Park, S. Bao and Y. Xia, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 1033 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, K. D. Gilroy, H. C. Peng and X. Xia, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Wang and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1316 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Lian, M. Sakamoto, H. Matsunaga, J. J. M. Vequizo, A. Yamakata, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, W. Ota, T. Sato and T. Teranishi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2314 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. DeSantis, A. C. Sue, M. M. Bower and S. E. Skrabalak, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Heitsch, D. D. Fanfair, H.-Y. Tuan and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, E. V. Shevchenko and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, K. Chen, M. Gong, B. Xu and Q. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Christodoulou, F. Rajadell, A. Casu, G. Vaccaro, J. Q. Grim, A. Genovese, L. Manna, J. I. Climente, F. Meinardi, G. Raino, T. Stoferle, R. F. Mahrt, J. Planelles, S. Brovelli and I. Moreels, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Coropceanu, A. Rossinelli, J. R. Caram, F. S. Freyria and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mishra, N. J. Orfield, F. Wang, Z. Hu, S. Krishnamurthy, A. V. Malko, J. L. Casson, H. Htoon, M. Sykora and J. A. Hollingsworth, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hanrath and B. A. Korgel, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 437 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wagner and W. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Trentler, K. M. Hickman, S. C. Goel, A. M. Viano, P. C. Gibbons and W. E. Buhro, Science, 1995, 270, 1791 CrossRef CAS .

          T. G. Walker, Yearbook of Diagnostic Radiology,  2009, vol. 2009, p. 218 Search PubMed .
G. Prusty, A. K. Guria, B. K. Patra and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 298 CrossRef CAS .
H. Geaney, E. Mullane and K. M. Ryan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4996 RSC .
K. Stokes, H. Geaney, G. Flynn, M. Sheehan, T. Kennedy and K. M. Ryan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Stokes, G. Fynn, H. Geaney, G. Bree and K. M. Ryan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kodambaka, J. Tersoff, M. Reuter and F. Ross, Science, 2007, 316, 729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamins, R. Stanley Williams, D. Basile, T. Hesjedal and J. Harris, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 1008 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Tuan, D. C. Lee, T. Hanrath and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5705 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, A. Dong, J. Sun, R. Tang, H. Yu and W. E. Buhro, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Zhao, X. Wang, Q. Peng, R. Lin, Y. Wang, R. Shen, X. Cao, L. Zhang, G. Zhou, J. Li, A. Xia and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Rivest, L. K. Fong, P. K. Jain, M. F. Toney and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2402 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Ning and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6566 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Fenton, B. C. Steimle and R. E. Schaak, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, F. Huang, H. Lin, J. Zhou, J. Xu, Q. Wu and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16670 RSC .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oh, L. P. Keating, G. A. Drake and M. Shim, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1973 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mishra, V. G. V. Dutt and M. P. Arciniegas, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9216 CrossRef CAS .
L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhan, Z. B. Shao, T. H. Jiang, J. Ye, X. F. Wu, B. C. Zhang, K. Ding, D. Wu and J. S. Jie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 789 RSC .
S. O. M. Hinterding, A. C. Berends, M. Kurttepeli, M. E. Moret, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Bals, W. van der Stam and C. D. Donega, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wang, L. J. Li, H. S. Yu, F. Guan and D. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 12998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. K. Lim, Z. Fu, D. Q. Yin and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5706 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Steimle, J. L. Fenton and R. E. Schaak, Science, 2020, 367, 418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Fenton, B. C. Steimle and R. E. Schaak, Science, 2018, 360, 513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Y. Tu, Y. Xie, G. Bertoni, A. Lak, R. Gaspari, A. Rapallo, A. Cavalli, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and Q. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hull, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2004, 67, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Gong and P. K. Jain, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3285 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xiao, J. Xu, K. Li, J. Feng, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Liu, A. W. Tang, J. Liu, D. X. Zhu, X. F. Shi, Q. H. Kong, Z. J. Wang, S. C. Qu, F. Teng and Z. G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18649 RSC .
Y. L. Zhang, R. Xu, W. M. Chen, O. Zhuo, Q. Wu, J. Cai, X. Z. Wang and Z. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6493 RSC .
M. X. Liu, Y. Liu, B. B. Gu, X. B. Wei, G. X. Xu, X. M. Wang, M. T. Swihart and K. T. Yong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4950 RSC .
T. A. Miller, J. S. Wittenberg, H. Wen, S. Connor, Y. Cui and A. M. Lindenberg, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hull, D. A. Keen, D. S. Sivia, P. A. Madden and M. Wilson, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, L9 CrossRef CAS .
T. Blanton, S. Misture, N. Dontula and S. Zdzieszynski, Powder Diffr., 2011, 26, 114 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, W. L. Fan, J. Yang, Z. L. Da, X. F. Yang, K. M. Chen, H. Yu and X. N. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5647 CrossRef CAS .
P. Boolchand and W. J. Bresser, Nature, 2001, 410, 1070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang and W. E. Buhro, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1316 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and W. E. Buhro, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Varzi, R. Raccichini, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17251 RSC .
T. Kuzuya, Y. Hamanaka, K. Itoh, T. Kino, K. Sumiyama, Y. Fukunaka and S. Hirai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 388, 137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, L. Zhai, N. He, C. Zou, X. Geng, L. Cheng, Y. Dong and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8114 RSC .
X. Geng, H. Liu, L. Zhai, Z. Xiong, J. Hu, C. Zou, Y. Dong, Y. Yang and S. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 617, 961 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, L. L. Zhai, C. Zou, X. S. Huang, L. J. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Chen and S. M. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1638 RSC .
M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, M. Bosman, L. Polavarapu, W. L. Koh, J. Zhang, Q.-H. Xu and M.-Y. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cai, L. Zhai, C. Zou, Z. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yang and S. Huang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 996 Search PubMed .
M. S. Zhao, F. Huang, H. Lin, J. C. Zhou, J. Xu, Q. P. Wu and Y. S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16670 RSC .
S. T. Connor, C. M. Hsu, B. D. Weil, S. Aloni and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, L. X. Yi, N. Zhao, A. W. Tang, M. Y. Gao and Z. Y. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Zhuang, F. J. Fan, M. Gong and S. H. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9762 RSC .
J. Y. Chang and C. Y. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9089 RSC .
J. C. Zhou, F. Huang, J. Xu and Y. S. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4217 RSC .
Q. Li, C. Zou, L. Zhai, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. A. Chen and S. Huang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1806 RSC .
C. Zou, M. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, Q. Li, X. A. Chen, X. Xu and S. Huang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3515 RSC .
H. Shen, H. Shang, J. Niu, W. Xu, H. Wang and L. S. Li, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6509 RSC .
S. L. Shen, Y. J. Zhang, L. Peng, Y. P. Du and Q. B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Zhu and Z. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Zhang, J. Cai, T. P. Ji, Q. Wu, Y. Y. Xu, X. Z. Wang, T. Sun, L. J. Yang and Z. Hu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 584 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torimoto, Y. Kamiya, T. Kameyama, H. Nishi, T. Uematsu, S. Kuwabata and T. Shibayama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. You, M. Zuo and Q. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 7679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, H. Yu, C. Lu, L. Wang, L. Long, Y. Wu and J. Wang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2015, 416, 90 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Zhou, F. Huang, J. Xu and Y. S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9714 RSC .
A. K. Guria, S. Sarkar, B. K. Patra and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Prusty, A. K. Guria, I. Mondal, A. Dutta, U. Pal and N. Pradhan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Xia, X. H. Xia and H. C. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Yi, A. W. Tang, M. Niu, W. Han, Y. B. Hou and M. Y. Gao, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4124 RSC .
L. X. Yi, Y. Y. Liu, N. L. Yang, Z. Y. Tang, H. J. Zhao, G. H. Ma, Z. G. Su and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 835 RSC .
C. Zou, L. Zhang, L. Zhai, D. Lin, J. Gao, Q. Li, Y. Yang, X. Chen and S. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5256 RSC .
H. Doh, S. Hwang and S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8123 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, J. C. Zhou, J. Xu and Y. S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2340 RSC .
T. Y. Bai, S. H. Xing, C. G. Li, Z. Shi and S. H. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8581 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Q. Yin and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1399 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Liao, M. H. Jao, J. J. Shyue, Y. F. Chen and W. F. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 337 RSC .
S. Hoshino, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 48, 179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das Adhikari, A. Dutta, G. Prusty, P. Sahu and N. Pradhan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5384 CrossRef .
S. H. Choi, E. G. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Qiao, J. Zhang, H. Tang, X. Yang, K. Chen, G. Liu and G. Qiao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 4911 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai, J. C. Flanagan and M. Shim, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Meyns, F. Iacono, C. Palencia, J. Geweke, M. D. Coderch, U. E. A. Fittschen, J. M. Gallego, R. Otero, B. H. Juarez and C. Klinke, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1813 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Nair, K. P. Fritz and G. D. Scholes, Small, 2007, 3, 481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Q. Zheng, J. Zeng and Y. N. Xia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jia and J. Du, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 14961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Shen, Y. J. Zhang, Y. S. Liu, L. Peng, X. Y. Chen and Q. B. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2407 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Xu, J. Z. Niu, H. Z. Wang, H. B. Shen and L. S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Ye, A. W. Tang, L. M. Huang, Y. Wang, C. H. Yang, Y. B. Hou, H. S. Peng, F. J. Zhang and F. Teng, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bose, G. Manna, S. Jana and N. Pradhan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3074 RSC .
Z. M. Liu, J. Liu, Y. B. Huang, J. Li, Y. Yuan, H. H. Ye, D. X. Zhu, Z. J. Wang and A. W. Tang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 158 RSC .
T. Y. Bai, C. G. Li, F. F. Li, L. Zhao, Z. R. Wang, H. Huang, C. L. Chen, Y. Han, Z. Shi and S. H. Feng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6782 RSC .
M. Kruszynska, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Stroyuk, A. Raevskaya and N. Gaponik, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5354 RSC .
K. Khan, X. Tao, Y. Zhao, B. Zeng, M. Shi, N. Ta, J. Li, X. Jin, R. Li and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15607 RSC .
F. X. Xiao, J. Miao, H. B. Tao, S. F. Hung, H. Y. Wang, H. B. Yang, J. Chen, R. Chen and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 2115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Kandiel, D. H. Anjum, P. Sautet, T. Le Bahers and K. Takanabe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8896 RSC .
Y.-C. Pu, L.-C. Wang, S.-N. Wu, J.-C. Chang and C.-S. Yeh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, H. n. Cui, Z. Liang, X. Lu, Y. Tong, C. Su and H. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 466 RSC .
Y. J. Wang, Q. S. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, F. M. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326 RSC .
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Xin, M. He, W. Han, J. H. Jung and Z. Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Majumder and B. R. Sankapal, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 5808 RSC .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Lai, L. Protesescu, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 736 RSC .
Y. Xu, N. Al-Salim, C. W. Bumby and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, K. Kim, Y. Kwon, W. Lee, W. H. Shin, S. Kim and J. Bang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2449–2454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Zhang, Z. A. Tan, Y. Li, C. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Bando, S. Yang and B. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2081 CrossRef CAS .
M. Booth, A. P. Brown, S. D. Evans and K. Critchley, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2064 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Wu, G. J. Liang, D. G. Kong, J. Q. Chen, Z. Y. Chen, X. H. Shan, J. R. McBride and T. Q. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1238 RSC .
Y. L. Liao, G. C. Xing, N. Mishra, T. C. Sum and Y. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, Op159 CAS .
N. Mishra, B. Mukherjee, G. Xing, S. Chakrabortty, A. Guchhait and J. Y. Lim, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14203 RSC .
S. W. Tong, N. Mishra, C. L. Su, V. Nalla, W. Y. Wu, W. Ji, J. Zhang, Y. Chan and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1904 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Wong, N. Mishra, G. C. Xing, M. J. Li, S. Chakrabortty, T. C. Sum, Y. M. Shi, Y. T. Chan and H. Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Hamachi, H. R. Yang, I. Jen-La Plante, N. Saenz, K. Qian, M. P. Campos, G. T. Cleveland, I. Rreza, A. Oza, W. Walravens, E. M. Chan, Z. Hens, A. C. Crowther and J. S. Owen, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6539 RSC .
Y. Taniguchi, M. A. Bin Sazali, Y. Kobayashi, N. Arai, T. Kawai and T. Nakashima, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. B. Koo, Y. Hwang, C. Bae, K. An, J. G. Park, H. M. Park and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2282 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, B. Koo, K. Y. Yoon, Y. Hwang, M. Kang, J. G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fischer, J. K. Swabeck and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Polte, T. T. Ahner, F. Delissen, S. Sokolov, F. Emmerling, A. F. Thunemann and R. Kraehnert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Hao, M. Chen, L. X. Wang, Z. P. Cao, Y. Li, S. Han, M. Zhang, K. Yu and J. R. Zeng, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2031 RSC .
K. Boldt, S. Bartlett, N. Kirkwood and B. Johannessen, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Geurts, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2015, 252, 19 CrossRef CAS .
C. O'Sullivan, S. Ahmed and K. M. Ryan, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5218 RSC .
D. Kelly, A. Singh, C. A. Barrett, C. O'Sullivan, C. Coughlan, F. R. Laffir, C. O'Dwyer and K. M. Ryan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4580 RSC .
A. Singh, C. Dickinson and K. M. Ryan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, C. Coughlan, D. J. Milliron and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1517 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, S. Singh, G. Bree and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11587 RSC .
P. Liu, S. Singh, Y. N. Guo, J. J. Wang, H. X. Xu, C. Silien, N. Liu and K. M. Ryan, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43884 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Yang, Z. Huang, M. G. Humphrey, D. Jia, T. You, K. Chen, Q. Yangc and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10009 RSC .
X. Y. Yang, B. Zhou, C. Liu, Y. M. Sui, G. J. Xiao, Y. J. Wei, X. Wang and B. Zou, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2311 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† The crystal structures in Fig. 3a and 4 were acquired utilising VESTA version 3.4.8.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Nilotpal Kapuria
	Nilotpal Kapuria received his BS-MS dual degree (2018) in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Bhopal. Nilotpal's research interest encompasses the synthesis and mechanistic understanding of growth processes for colloidal nanocrystals for energy harvesting and conversion applications. Currently, he is a doctoral researcher at the Bernal Institute, University of Limerick where he is exploring the seed-based colloidal synthesis approaches for tuning thermoelectric properties in multinary metal chalcogenide nanocrystals.

Uma V. Ghorpade
	Uma Ghorpade has been working as an SFI-funded Post-Doctoral Researcher at the Bernal Institute, Ireland since 2019. She was previously a BK-21 Postdoctoral Fellow at Chonnam National University (CNU), S. Korea. She received her PhD in 2017 in Chemistry from Shivaji University, India. She has been awarded the “International Exchange Student” Scholarship from the Korean Government to work at CNU, S. Korea, and “INSPIRE” fellowship award from the DST, India to conduct PhD research. Her research interests include the solution-based synthesis of a variety of semiconductor materials including chalcogenides, phosphides, perovskites as well as wide-bandgap metal oxides for energy-related applications.

Maria Zubair
	Maria Zubair received her master's degree from Quaid-i-Azam University Pakistan in 2017. After that She worked as a research assistant on higher education commission of Pakistan (HEC) funded project entitled “Synthesis, Characterization and Application of Organic Photonic and electrochromic Materials” from 2017 to 2018. She joined the nanotechnology group at the Bernal Institute of University of Limerick as a PhD student in 2019 under SFI funded project. Currently, her research focus is on the colloidal synthesis of metal chalcogenide materials and their application.

Mohini Mishra
	Mohini received her BTech degree in Chemical Engineering from India. After that, she completed her MTech in Chemical Engineering from the IIT BHU and awarded a scholarship from MHRD India. She started her professional journey as a Researcher for a Project of collaboration between the DAE-BRNS and IIT Kanpur, India. Since February 2019, she has been working with Prof Kevin M Ryan as a PhD student at the University of Limerick, having received funding from the Science Foundation of Ireland. Her research focuses on colloidal nanocrystals synthesis, characterizations, and assemblies for energy and environmental application.

Shalini Singh
	Dr Shalini Singh recently joined University of Limerick, Ireland as a lecturer at the Department of Chemical Sciences and Bernal Institute. She received her PhD from University of Limerick in 2016 under INSPIRE Structural PhD Program. From 2016–2019, she worked as a postdoctoral researcher with FWO fellowship at Ghent University Belgium. Her research interests include design and characterization of novel nanomaterials, surface chemistry study of nanocrystals and their use in the field of energy conversion and storage.

Kevin M. Ryan
	Prof. Kevin M. Ryan holds a Personal Chair in Chemical Nanotechnology at the Department of Chemical Sciences and Bernal Institute at the University of Limerick and is a Co Principal Investigator on SFI Research centres MaREI and AMBER and funded Investigator on SSPC and Confirm Centres. He is coordinator of Horizon 2020 EU project Si-Drive and holder of SFI IVP and Irish Research Council Laureate Awards. He has authored over 120 papers and 8 patents. He received his PhD (2003) from University College Cork, Ireland before joining Merck Chemicals in Southampton, UK, as a Marie Curie Industry Fellow. In 2004/5 he worked at UC Berkeley on a Marie Curie outgoing fellowship on the synthesis and assembly of colloidal nanocrystals. He joined University of Limerick in 2006. His research interests are in the solution synthesis and assembly of colloidal copper chalcogenide nanocrystals and main group semiconductor nanowires for energy conversion and storage applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of semiconductor nanorods (NRs) and nanowire (NWs) formation by seeded (catalyst) approach (VLS, VSS) and (b) the general colloidal synthesis (via nucleation and subsequent growth) of NCs, (c) LaMer model of NCs formation without (a), and (b) with seed-mediated growth showing a clear difference in the nucleation barrier. Numbering 1, 2, 3 denotes prenucleation stage, nucleation stage, and growth stage respectively,29 © 2016 ACS, (d) SLS, and (e) SSS, and DCG fall within the colloidal seeded approach. The SLS growth is catalysed by metal seeds and the SSS growth and DCG are catalysed by ion conducting seeds. The highlighted area displays the colloidal growth regimes involving ion-conducting solid catalyst seeds. Here P – precursors, B – byproduct, SLS – solution–liquid–solid, SSS – solution–solid–solid, DCG – diffusion-controlled growth, VLS – vapour–liquid–solid, VSS – vapour–solid–solid, Cs – solubility level; Cmin* – minimum monomer concentration, Cseeds* – minimum monomer concentration in presence of seed, Cmax* – maximum monomer concentration.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of hetero-epitaxial growth,14 ©2020 ACS (i and ii) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of CdS nano-interfaces epitaxially grown on CuS NCs;40 ©2018 Nature (b) schematic illustration of cation exchange from a colloidal semiconductor seed,69 ©2016 ACS (c) cation exchange reactions and scanning transmission electron microscopy-X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (STEM-EDS) maps of products formed upon cation exchange of Zn2+, Cd2+, Co3+, Mn2+, Ni2+ with Cu1.8S;75 ©2018 Science (d) schematic illustration of solid seed catalysed SSS growth form a solid seed catalyst,77 ©2016 ACS, (e) TEM and STEM-EDS of ZnSe NWS catalysed from Ag2Se seeds.44 ©2013 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The low-temperature and high-temperature (>100 °C) crystal structures of Cu2−xS. The blue balls denote Cu+ cations and orange balls denote sulphur, the fractional filling of the blue balls in hexagonal structure illustrates partial occupancy of Cu+ in the crystal lattice; (b) the Se2− and S− anions (shown green) form a bcc unit, with the Ag+ cations rapidly diffusing across distorted tetrahedral interstitial sites (shown pink) through the trigonal interstitial sites (shown sea green). The dotted circles show distorted octahedral sites.92 ©2016 RSC; TEM images of a typical MnSe stem terminated by an Ag2Se tip (at 200 °C for 2 h with 0.3 atom% Ag+/Mn2+) irradiated with an electron beam for various durations: (c) 420–600 s with intact Ag2Se tip and (d) 2100 s where tip was no longer present. (e) The corresponding STEM-EDX line scan after 2100 s of irradiation confirmed the absence of Ag+ in the tip77 © 2016 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of anionic sublattices of (a) Cu1.94S, (b) Cu1.81S, (c) Cu1.75S, (d) monoclinic Ag2S, (e) cubic Ag2S, and (f) cubic Ag2Se seeds and the predicted product upon catalysed growth with MII (Zn2+, Cd2+, Mn2+), MIII (In3+, Ga3+), MIV (Sn4+) cations under kinetic growth conditions.†	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of NC growth catalysed by conductive semiconductor seeds. Growth starts from conductive metal chalcogenide seeds which upon supersaturation with divalent (MII) cation undergoes solution–solid–solid (SSS) growth (path I) and with trivalent (MIII) or tetravalent (MIV) cations follows a diffusion-controlled growth (DCG) (path II). While a combination of both growth systems can form binary-ternary heterostructures and further growth produces quaternary alloyed NCs (path III).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) TEM images of the intermediate sample at two different magnifications. The inset of (b) provides a magnified view of tadpole formation of the Ag2Se–AgGaSe2 nanostructure, (c) TEM of tadpole-shaped AgGaSe2 NCs.52 © 2015 ACS; (d) TEM of the Ag2S NCs, (e) Ag2S–AgGaS2 heterostructure, and (f) final AgGaS2 nanopyramids.122 © 2014 RSC; (i) TEM of ZnS–CuGaS2 heterostructure NCs, (g) produced from Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructures which formed tri-segmented (h) Cu1.94S–CuGaS2–ZnS heterostructure at intermediate stages of growth.99 © 2016 RSC.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) HRTEM of two differently oriented matchstick-shaped Cu2S–In2S3 NRs and the interface between epitaxial planes of Cu2S [0002] and In2S3 [109] and the connecting hetero-interfacial planes [102]In2S3 and [100]Cu2S showing a nominal lattice mismatch of 0.6%.101 © 2008 ACS; (c and d) HRTEM of Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure where the hetero-interface was formed between [004]Cu1.94S and [0002]ZnS and the connecting planes [080]Cu1.94S and [1100]ZnS displayed a lattice mismatch of 2.5%.118 © 2010 RSC; (e) HRTEM image showing the heteroepitaxial growth of a hexagonal ZnS NWs on Ag2S NC between [110]ZnS and [121]Ag2S. The insets: The corresponding Fourier transform (FFT) images from the Ag2S area and the ZnS area, however, the connecting hetero-interfacial planes displayed a high mismatch of 8.9%, (f) HRTEM of Ag2S–CdS heterostructure with a lower lattice mismatch of 3.7%.109 © 2011 JACS; (g) HRTEM of Ag2Se–CdSe heterostructure where the interface exhibited a low lattice mismatch of 0.8% whereas a high lattice mismatch of 6.7% during ZnSe formation (h) generated tortuous NWs (inset).114 © 2013 RSC; (i) HRTEM of Ag2S–AgInS2 heterostructure where the interfacial planes had a mismatch of 1.6%109 © 2011 JACS; (j) Ag2Se NC tip with a clear interface present between the planes of tetragonal Ag2Se and ZB MnSe where a lattice mismatch was only 0.7%.77 © 2016 ACS.	 

Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs	ZB (fcc)	SSS	AgNO3, ZnCl2, SeO2, DMF, OA, 100–210 °C, 15 h	
52

Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–CdSe NWs	ZB (fcc)	SSS	AgNO3, SeO2, Cd(OAc)2·2H2O, OLA, 160 °C, 30 min
Ag2S	Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)	Ag2S–ZnS NRs	ZB (fcc)	SSS	AgNO3 in EtOH solution, OLA, Zn(DDTC)2, 180 °C, 3 h
Cu2S	Hexagonal (hcp)	Cu2S–CdS NRs	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Cu(OAc)2·H2O, DDT, Cd(Ac)2·2H2O, OLA, 230 °C, 1 h
Ag2S	Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)	Ag2S–CdS NRs	ZB (fcc)	SSS	AgNO3, S-powder, OLA, Cd(DDTC)2, 160 °C, 45 min
Cu2S	Hexagonal (hcp)	Cu2S–ZnS NRs	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Cu(OAc)2·H2O, DDT, Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, OA, OLA, 220 °C, 1 h
Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs	ZB (fcc)	SSS	ZnSe (ex situ), selenourea, HDA, AgCl, OA, 250 °C, 5 min	
115

Bi2Te3 NPs (12 nm)	Rhomboidal (hcp)	CdTe QWs	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Cd (di-octylphosphinate)2, TOPO, TOPTe, DOP, 300 °C	
89

Cu1.94S (10.4 nm)	Monoclinic (hcp)	Cu2S–In2S3 NRs, l × d 77 × 12 nm	Tetragonal	SSS (fcc)	Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, 1-DDT, 200 °C, 1600 min	
101

Cu1.94S NPs (∼13.4–17.9 nm)	Monoclinic (hcp)	Cu1.94S–ZnS NRs, (l × dZnS 11.2 × 17.4 nm)	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Cu(acac)2, Zn(acac)2, n-DDT, 200 °C, 25–200 min.	
118

Ag2S	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–CdS NWs, l 21–235 nm	Hexagonal (hcp)	SSS	Cd(DDTC)2, ODA, 150 °C and 10–60 min	
109

Ag2S	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–ZnS–CdS–ZnS heterostructure	Hexagonal (hcp)	SSS	Ag NCs solution, Zn (dbdc)2, Cd(dbdc)2. Sequential injection of Zn and Cd precursor, 150 °C
Ag2S NPs	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–CdS–ZnS trimer heterostructure	Hexagonal (hcp)	SSS	Ag NCs solution, Zn (dbdc)2, Cd(dbdc)2. Sequential injection of Zn and Cd precursor, 150 °C
Ag2Se (8 nm)	Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–CdSe NR	Hexagonal (hcp)	SSS	OLA, Cd(OAc)2, Se-powder 180 °C, 1–7 min	
114

Ag2Se (8 nm)	Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs	Hexagonal (hcp)	SSS	OLA, Zn(OAc)2, Se-powder 180 °C at various time 1 min, 2 min, 4 min, 7 min
Ag2Se (8 nm)	Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–CdSe–ZnSe NWs	Hexagonal (hcp)	SSS	Zn(OAc)2, OLA, Cd(OAc)2, first injection of Zn precursor at 180 °C, next Cd precursor injection in next 5 min
Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	MnSe straight and zigzag NWs (d 35 nm)	ZB (fcc)	SSS	MnCl2·4H2O, (PhCH2)2Se2, OLA, 200 °C for 2 h	
77

Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs	ZB (fcc)	SSS	ZnCl2, OA, AgNO3, SeO2 DMF solution, PVP, 160 °C, 3 min	
129

Cu1.94S	Monoclinic (hcp)	Cu2S–PbS cylindrical shape	Cubic (fcc)	SSS	Cu(acac)2, DDT, Pb(DDTC)2, 200 °C, 30 min	
102

Cu1.94S nanoplates, l × d 15 × 7 nm	Monoclinic (hcp)	Cu1.94S–MnS nanocylinder, l 16–21 nm	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Cu(OAc)2, n-DDT, OLA, Mn(OAc)2, 220 °C and 10–20 min	
104

Cu2S NCs d ∼ 7 nm	Hexagonal (hcp)	Cu2S–ZnS NRs, l × d 26 × 7.3 nm	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Zn(Stearate)2, Zn(EtXn)2, Cu(OAc)2, ODE, DDT, at 240 °C	
103

Ag2S	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–ZnS, matchstick like dsphericalhead ∼ 4.5 nm and l × dstem 4 × 48 nm	Hexagonal (hcp)	SSS	Ag(DDTC), Zn(DDTC)2, OLA and n-DDT, 160 °C, 30 min	
108

Ag2S	Cubic (bcc)	Mn@Ag2S–ZnS tadpole shape, headAg2S 7 nm, tailZnS ∼6.3 × 19.2 nm	ZB (fcc)	SSS	MnCl2 Ag(DDTC), Zn(DDTC)2, OLA and DDT, 240 °C, 5 min, 5.9% Mn doping	
136

Ag2Se	Tetragonal to cubic (bcc)	Ag2Se–ZnSe NWs, StemZnSed 25 nm	Cubic (fcc)	SSS	PVP, AgNO3 in EtOH solution, ZnCl2, Se powder and OA, 210 °C, 15 h	
180

Ag2S d 13.4 ± 1.8 nm	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–MnS NWs, d 9.7 ± 1.7 nm	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Pre-synthesized Ag2S NPs Mn(DDTC)2, n-DDT and DDA 140 °C, 8 min	
82

Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	CdSe–Ag2Se, NCs	WZ (hcp)	SSS	AgCl, OLA, Cd(OAc)2·2H2O, Se-powder, 200 °C, 15 min	
116

Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	ZnSe–Ag2Se, NCs	ZB (fcc)	SSS	AgCl, OLA, Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, Se-powder, 200 °C, 15 min
Ag2S NCs	Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)	Ag2S–MnS NWs	ZB	SSS	Pre-synthesized Ag2S NCs, MnCl2·4H2O (PhCH2)2S2, OLA, 190 °C, 0 min	
112

Ag2Se NPs	Cubic (bcc)	Kinked MnSe NWs	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Pre-synthesized Ag2Se NPs, MnCl2, Se–OLA solution, 250 °C and 60 min	
181

Cu1.94S	Monoclinic (hcp)	Cu1.94S–ZnS HNCs (matchstick, rods, tadpoles and taper)	WZ	SSS	Zn(acac)2, Cu(acac)2, n-DDT, ODE, 240–270 °C, 180–360 min	
138

Cu1.94S	Monoclinic (hcp)	CuInS2–ZnS torch like, l × dhead 33.4 × 23.6 nm, l × dtail 29.4 × 9.4 nm	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Pre-synthesized Cu1.94S–ZnS seeds, In(OAc)3, DDT and ODE, 200 °C, 4 h	
119

Cu2S NCs, d ∼ 7 nm	Hexagonal (hcp)	Cu2S–CuInS2 NR, l × d 35 × 14 nm	WZ (hcp)	SSS	ODE, In(OAc)3, DDT, Cu(OAc)2 at 240 °C	
103

Cu2S NCs, d ∼ 7 nm	Hexagonal (hcp)	Cu2S–CZIS NR, l × d 65 × 13 nm	WZ (hcp)	SSS	(Inac)3, Zn(St)2, Zn(EtXn)2, DDT, Cu(ac)2, ODE at 240 °C
Ag2S NCs 20 nm	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–CuInS2 NWs, l × d 1–2 μm × 20–50 nm	WZ (hcp)	
	Ag(DDTC)2, Cu(DDTC)2, and In(DDTC)3 in n-DDT, 200 °C, 60 min	
105

Ag2S	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–AgInS2	Orthorhombic (hcp)	SSS	In(OAc)3 in OLA, ODE Ag(OAc), 210 °C, 10 min	
139

Ag2S NPs (∼11.1 nm)	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag2S–ZnxCd1−xS NRs	WZ (hcp)	SSS	Ag2S NPs, DDA, n-DDT [(C4H9)2NCS2]2M; (M = Zn, Cd), 130 °C	
110

Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	CdSe–AgInSe2 tadpoles	WZ (hcp)-orthorhombic	SSS + DCG	Pre-synthesized CdSe–AgSe2, In(acac)3, 250 °C, 1 h	
116

Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	CdSe–AgGaSe2 tadpoles	WZ (hcp)–tetragonal (bcc)	SSS + DCG	Pre-synthesized CdSe–Ag2Se, Ga(AcAc)3, 250 °C, 1 h
Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	ZnSe–AgInSe2 tadpoles	ZB (fcc)-orthorhombic	SSS + DCG	Pre-synthesized ZnSe–AgSe2, In(acac)3, 250 °C, 1 h
Ag2Se	Cubic (bcc)	ZnSe–AgGaSe2 tadpoles	ZB (fcc)-tetragonal	SSS + DCG	Pre-synthesized ZnSe–AgSe2, Ga(acac)3, 250 °C and 1 h
Ag2S particles	Monoclinic (hcp)	ZnS–AgInS2 rice shape, l 40 ± 10 nm	Hexagonal	SSS + DCG	M(OAc)x (M = Ag, Zn, In) S powder, n-DDT, and DBTU, 250 °C and up to 10 min	
111

Ag2S NPs	Monoclinic (hcp) to cubic	Ag8SnS6–Ag2S HNs of Bowtie and Drop shape, ∼13.9 nm	Orthorhombic (p)	DCG	Sn(OAc)4, OLA, Ag(OAc), 220 °C and 10 min	
63

Cu31S16	Monoclinic (hcp)	CuGaS2 NRs	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu(acac)2, Ga(acac)3, ODE, OLA, n-DDT, 240–270 °C	
140

Ag2Se NPs	Orthorhombic to cubic (bcc)	AgGaSe2 tadpole-shape, l × dhead 98.41 × 34.85 nm	Tetragonal (bcc)	DCG	AgCl, Ga(acac)3, OLA, Se powder 250 °C, 1 h	
52

Ag2S nanosphere	Monoclinic to cubic (bcc)	AgGaS2 nano-pyramids, 15 nm	Tetragonal (bcc)	DCG	Ga(acac)3, Ag-oleate, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, 280 °C, 40 min	
122

Cu2S nano discs, l × d 22 × 9 nm	Hexagonal (hcp)	CuInS2 NRs	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu-oleate, In-oleate, DDT, OLA, 250 °C	
100

Cu2S NPs	Hexagonal (hcp)	Cu2ZnSnS4 Nanoleaves, l × d 200 × 30 nm	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Sn(DDTC)4, Cu(EtXn)2, OA, DDT 200 °C and 60 min	
96

Cu1.94S	Djurleite (hcp)	Cu2ZnSnS4 bullet and leaf shape	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu(acac)2, SnCl2, Sn(OAc)2, DDT, ZnCl2, Zn(OAc)2, 230 °C, 4 h and longer	
125

Cu1.94S NPs, 100 nm	Monoclinic (hcp)	CuInS2 nanoleaves, l × d 500 × 100	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu-NPs, In(DDTC)3, OA and DT, 180 °C, 60 min	
98

Cu1.75S	Roxbyite (hcp)	CuInS2 nanoribbons, l × d 2–3 μm × 20–50 nm	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu(acac)2, In(DDTC)3, n-DDT and OLA, 180 °C, 60 min	
96

Cu1.75S	Roxbyite (hcp)	CuInxGa1−xS2 Nanoribbons, l × d 1–2 μm × 30–50 nm	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu(DDTC)2, Cu(acac)2, In(DDTC)3, Ga(DDTC)3, n-DDT and OLA, 180 °C, 60 min.
Cu31S16 nanosphere	Monoclinic (hcp)	CuGaZnS2 L-shaped NRs	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu(acac)2, Ga(acac)3, Zn(acac)2, DDT, and ODE, 240 °C and 7–120 min	
81

Cu2S discs	Hexagonal (hcp)	CuGaS2 tadpoles, l × d × h ∼28 × 10–15 × 6–8 nm	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu(acac)2, Ga(acac)3, n-DDT, and HDA, 220 °C, 30 min	
127

Cu1.75(SxSe1−x) NCs	Roxbyite (hcp)	CuGaSxSe2−x nanoribbon, l × d 2–3 μm × 50 nm	WZ (hcp)	DCG	Cu(DDTC)2, Ga(DDTC)3, n-DDT, and Se–OA solution, 200 °C, 60 min	
95

Ag2S	Monoclinic (hcp)	Ag–In–S NCs	Orthorhombic (hcp)	DCG	In(OAc)3, OA and DDT pre-synthesized parent Ag2S NCs, 100 °C, 60 min	
172


 	Fig. 8  (a) Match-stick shaped NCs showing epitaxial relationship with Cu2S[002] and In2S3[109] planes and nominal mismatch of 0.6% between Cu2S[100] and In2S3[102]; (b) teardrop-shaped core/shell Cu2S@In2S3 generated due to extraction of Cu+via In(acac)3–DDT gel network formation, (c) pencil-shaped In2S3 NCs where the inset TEM image depicts a small segment of Cu2S still present before complete extraction of Cu+.101 © 2008 ACS; (d–f) temporal evolution of Ag2Se–ZnS heterostructure displaying increased stem length with growth time137 © 2013 ACS; (g) formation of WZ dominated bent segment in ZB-MnS NW which was rich in Ag content (i) high-angle annular dark-field-STEM and (ii) elemental mapping for Ag112 © 2017 ACS; (h) TEM of Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructure displaying marks along the long axis generated due to repetitive nucleation.118 © 2010 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The Zigzag ZnS–CuGaS2 heterostructures generated from (c) pre-synthesized Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructures; (b) HRTEM of the hetero-interface displayed the heterointerface formation between [0002]ZnS and [0001]CuGaS2 while the connecting [100] planes displayed a mismatch of 0.7% (d and e) the trimeric ZnS–CuGaS2–C1.94S heterostructure displayed the change of plane and presence of twist to form the second suitable interface with [100]CuGaS2 and [804]Cu1.94S.99 © 2016 RSC; (f) TEM image showing binary–ternary heterostructure formed between ZnSe and AgGaSe2 and the growth direction of AgGaSe2 as 〈112〉, (g) HRTEM of AgGaSe2 head. (h) Selected area FFT pattern from the AgGaSe2 part of the heterostructure.116 © 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) HRTEM of a single NCs obtained before complete transformation to 2D-CuGaS2 tadpole displayed a CuGaS2 shell retaining Cu2S (b) The 2D-CuGaS2 tadpoles formed upon addition of alkyl amine; (c) HRTEM of a single tadpole NC showed 〈100〉 as the growth direction, corresponding FFT (inset).127 © 2017 ACS; (d and e) quasi 2D-nano disc formed upon addition of OLA due to competitive growth along 〈100〉 and 〈1100〉, FFT (inset) (f) growth of CuGaS2 NCs on addition of excess n-DDT, low amount of DDT formed Cu31S16 dominated phase (inset)140 © 2019 RSC; (g) formation of L shapes NCs upon Zn2+ addition.127 © 2017 ACS; (h and i) HRTEM of the 2D CuGaS2 nano-plates formed in presence of Cl−.140 © 2019 RSC; (j) HRTEM of Cu31S16–ZnS and (k (i and ii)) Cu31S16–CGZS heteronanostructure, with the heterointerface and growth direction; (l) HRTEM of different parts of a typical L-shaped CGZS NR, FFT patterns of I and III parts of the NR (inset)81 © 2018 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Relationship between energy gap and various shapes of ZnS–AgInS2 solid–solution NCs, photocatalysts were dispersed in a water and 2-propanol solution containing S2− as a sacrificial electron donor. Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic H2 evolution from different shapes of NCs (inset); (b) relationship between rate of H2 production and Eg of ZnS–AgInS2 solid–solution NCs with various shapes: rod (squares), sphere (triangles), and rice (circles)111 © 2016 ACS; (c) rate of photocatalytic hydrogen production from 1D CuGaS2 NRs, quasi-2D nano disc and 2D nanoplates140 © 2019 RSC; (d) time courses of photocatalytic H2 evolution on stoichiometric and gallium-rich Cu–Ga–S ternary NCs and ZnS–CuGa5S8 under visible-light illumination (λ =385–740 nm)146 © 2015 RSC; (e) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of Cu31S16 nanospheres, tadpole-like CuGaS2 NCs and L-shaped CGZS NRs under simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2)81 © 2018 RSC; (f) time courses of photocatalytic hydrogen production on CuGaS2, ZnS and CuGaS2–ZnS from an aqueous Na2S (0.1 mol L−1)/Na2SO3 (0.3 mol L−1) solution (100 ml) under visible light irradiation (>420 nm)99 © 2016 RSC; (g) photocatalytic hydrogen production rates of samples with variables Zn to Cd ratio under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm);61 © 2016 ACS; (h and i) comparison of H2 production amount, rate, and band gaps for Ag2S–ZnS heterostructure NRs with different Ag:Zn molar ration and the varied aspect ratio of ZnS stem from 11.9 to 24.3.147 © 2020 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) I–V curves of the DSSC devices fabricated using burning torch-shaped CuInS2–ZnS heterostructure (BTCIS–ZnS), flame-shaped CuInS2 (FCIS), long rod-shaped CuInS2 (LRCIS–ZnS) and Pt electrodes as the counter electrodes with their respective performance119 © 2013 RSC; (b) I–V characteristics of drop-casting films of CuInxGa1−xS2 nanoribbons in the dark (black curves) and under light (red curves)96 © 2013 RSC; (c) J–V curves for CuInS2@CdS QD (black) and CuInS2/CdS HNT (red) SSCs.156 © 2018 ACS. (d) I–V characteristics of drop-casting films of CuInS2 NWs in the dark (black curve) and under light (red curve)105 © 2013 RSC; (e) schematic illustration of the energy levels of a CuInS2/CdS SSC.156 © 2018 ACS; (f) schematic of a lab-scale photo-detector device, where the arrows indicated the place for NC drop-casting.96 © 2013 RSC.	 
bcc	Body centered cubic
Cd(OAc)2	Cadmium acetate dihydrate
Cd(OAc)2	Cadmium acetate
CE	Cation exchange
Cu(OAc)2	Copper(II) acetate
Cu(EtXn)2	Copper ethylxanthogenate
[Cu(acac)2] and	Copper(II) acetylacetonate
(Cu(DDTC)2, 97%),	Copper(II) diethyldithiocarbamate
CRG	Crystallographic
CZTS	Cu2SnZnS4
CGZS	Cu–Ga–Zn–S
CIGS	CuInxGa1−xS2
(PhCH2)2Se2	Dibenzyldiselenide
(PhCH2)2S2	Dibenzyldisulfide
DBTU	Dibutylthiourea
DCG	Diffusion-controlled-growth
(DOP)	Di-n-octylphosphinate
(DOCA)	Di-octylamine
(OE)	Di-octylether

n-DDT	
n-dodecanethiol
(DDA)	Dodecylamine
EtOH	Ethanol
fcc	Face centered cubic
Ga(acac)3	Gallium(III)acetylacetonate
Ga(DDTC)3	Gallium diethyldithiocarbamate
HD	Hexadecane
HAD	Hexadecylamine
hcp	Hexagonal close packed
In(OAc)3	indium(III) acetate
In(DDTC)3,	Indium diethyldithiocarbamate
[In(acac)3]	Indium(III)acetylacetonate
Pb(DDTC)2	Lead diethyldithiocarbamate
LED	Light emitting diode
MC	Mechanism involved
(MnCl2·4H2O, 99.99%)	Manganese chloride tetrahydrate
[(C4H9)2NCS2]2Mn	Manganese dibutyldithiocarbamate
Mn (OAc)2	Manganese(II)acetate
NCs	Nanocrystals
NPs	Nanoparticles
NRs	Nanorods
NWs	Nanowires
ODE	Octadecene
ODA	Octadecylamine
OLA	Oleylamine
(PVP)	Polyvinyl pyrrolidone
[(C4H9)2NCS2]Ag	Silver dibutyldithiocarbamate
Ag(DDTC)	Silver diethyldithiocarbamate
SSS	Solution–solid–solid
Sn(DDTC)4	Tin diethyldithiocarbamate
Sn(OAc)2,	Tin (II) acetate
TOCA	Tri-octylamine
TBP	Tributylphosphine
TOPO	Tri-n-octylphosphine oxide
TOPTe	Tri-n-octylphosphine telluride
TOP	Trioctylphosphine
WZ	Wurtzite
Zn(OAc)2,	Zinc acetate dehydrate
Zn(Ac)2	Zinc acetate
ZB	Zinc blende
Zn(DDTC)2	Zinc diethyldithiocarbamate
Zn(EtXn)2	Zinc ethylxanthate
Zn(St)2	Zinc stearate
Zn(Uct)2	Zinc undecylenate
[Zn(acac)2]	Zinc(II) acetylacetonate
Footnote
† The crystal structures in Fig. 3a and 4 were acquired utilising VESTA version 3.4.8.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
