Ruthenium sulphide thin layers as catalysts for the electrooxidation of water  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42348K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42348K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1452-1459Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRuthenium sulphide thin layers as catalysts for the electrooxidation of water

        
          
            Peter 
            Bogdanoff
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Carolin 
            Zachäus
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Stephan 
            Brunken
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andreas 
            Kratzig
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Klaus 
            Ellmer
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Sebastian 
            Fiechter
          
        
      
Institute of Solar Fuels, Helmholtz-Centre Berlin for Materials and Energy, D-14109 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: Bogdanoff@helmholtz-Berlin.de
Received 
      10th July 2012
    , Accepted 29th November 2012First published on 29th November 2012AbstractCrystalline RuS2 layers were prepared on titanium sheets by reactive magnetron sputtering using a metallic ruthenium target and a H2S–Ar mixture as process gas. The ability of these layers for the electrooxidation of water (OER) was investigated by differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. It was observed that the activity for water oxidation is increased with increasing temperature of the titanium substrate during the sputter deposition process whereas a competitive corrosion process is diminished. The reason for this effect seems to be a better crystallinity of these layers at higher substrate temperatures as it is proved by XRD analysis. In contrast to RuS2 single crystals no photo effect could be observed on the sputtered layers under illumination with a tungsten lamp. Time resolved microwave conductivity analysis indicates the presence of mobile charge carriers after illumination but apparently these cannot participate in the electrooxidation of water.
1 Introduction
The electrooxidation of water to oxygen (OER) is a challenging problem in the field of electrocatalysis and energy conversion because the oxidation kinetics limits the overall efficiency of water electrolysis. Ruthenium oxide and especially the mixed oxides IrxRu1−xO2 are known to be some of the best and most stable catalysts for the OER up to now.1–4
On the way to a regenerative energy production it is desirable to draw the energy required for the electrochemical reaction from sun light. Since RuO2 and IrxRu1−xO2 have metallic character they are not able to provide a photovoltage for the water oxidation upon illumination. These electrocatalysts have to be combined with n-type semiconducting absorber materials, which can generate charge carriers (holes) under illumination. Under suitable electronic conditions these charge carriers can then be used for electrochemical reactions via the deposited electrocatalyst. A more direct way however is the development of photocatalysts in which a highly light absorbing semiconducting material simultaneously serves as a catalyst in electrochemical reactions.
Already 25 years ago Tributsch et al. demonstrated that single crystals of the compound semiconductor RuS2 (laurite) can act as a photocatalyst, which shows light-assisted electro-oxidation of water with high stability in aqueous acid electrolytes.5–7 RuS2 crystallizes as laurite in a pyrite type structure in which disulfide ions are octahedrally coordinated to the Ru(II) metal ion. The material is distinguished by an indirect band gap of about 1.3 eV and a direct transition at about 2.3 eV. The band gap is derived from the Ru-4d-states, which was split into a t2g valence band and an eg conduction band. Based on the position of the valence band at approximately +1.5 VNHE (approx. −6.2 eV on the vacuum scale) photogenerated holes are in general enabled to oxidize water at the electrolyte–electrode interface. From comparative electrochemical studies between RuO2 and RuS2 Tributsch et al. concluded that a thin Ru–oxide layer is formed under oxidative electrochemical conditions onto crystal surfaces of the RuS2, which is supposed to be responsible for the catalytic activity towards water oxidation.8–10 This is also verified by XPS and electroreflectance measurements.10,11 By this surface oxidation the semiconducting property of the RuS2 as absorber is combined on an atomic level with the Ru–oxide's outstanding catalytic activity for water oxidation. Nevertheless, due to the indirect low band gap in general the photovoltage obtained on RuS2 is too small to split water and an additional bias voltage has to be applied to evolve oxygen. This could be achieved by combining the photoactive RuS2 anode with a suitable photocathode where hydrogen could be produced as a counter reaction to the water oxidation. However, for these kinds of devices one has to be able to produce RuS2 in the form of closed thin layers. The so far published preparation techniques of RuS2 single crystals via chemical vapour transport or high temperature melt growth12 are not suited since on one hand it is a time consuming and expensive procedure and on the other single crystals are unsuitable for the production of devices.
Besides its interesting but yet largely unexplored properties as photocatalysts, RuS2 is presumably much more known as one of the most active catalysts for hydrodesulfurization and hydrogenation of organic compounds.13 For this application RuS2 nanoparticles were prepared and intensively characterized which was published recently by Diaz et al.14 In another approach, RuS2 colloids were formed and used for the photo-sensitization of TiO2 electrodes.15,16 Unfortunately all these materials have not yet been tested in detail for the water oxidation in aqueous acid electrolytes and therefore are not optimized for this application. In addition, it is questionable whether it is possible to produce closed and stable layers of RuS2 with such nanoparticles.
In this contribution the preparation of RuS2 layers is presented using the technique of reactive sputtering from a ruthenium target in the presence of a H2S gas atmosphere. The work was originally motivated by an article published by Licht et al.25 In this work the authors compared a plasma deposited RuS2 layer with RuS2 and Ru1−xFexS2 single crystals. A light activated O2 evolution was reported for the RuS2 layer, which was illuminated by a light intensity of 120 mW cm−2 leading to a current density of about 20 mA cm−2 at 1.25 VNHE. However no proof of the oxygen evolution was given by the authors and no dark currents were shown. Furthermore no systematic optimisation of sputtered RuS2 layers was done.
In order to reproduce these results and to investigate the electrochemical behaviour of such RuS2 layers in more detail we prepared RuS2 layers with varying substrate temperature and gas pressure during the sputter process which reveal a strong influence on the electrochemical activity and stability towards water oxidation in acidic media. The RuS2 layers were analysed by differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS), X-ray Diffractometry (XRD), Rutherford Back Scattering (RBS), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, EDX), Cyclic Voltammetry (CV), Time resolved microwave conductivity measurements (TRMC), and UV/Vis spectroscopy.
Even high crystallinity of the RuS2 layers was achieved, no photoeffect could be observed so far. Unfortunately this is also valid for layers which had been prepared under very similar conditions reported by Licht et al.25 Reasons for this lack of photoresponse are discussed evaluating TRMC results.
2 Experimental
2.1 Preparation of RuS2 films
The films were prepared by reactive magnetron sputtering from metallic ruthenium targets (diameter 4′′, EVOCHEM and diameter 2′′, GOODFELLOW, purities 99.9%) in Ar–H2S gas mixtures. The sputtering chamber was equipped with a load lock in order to have constant base pressure conditions in the deposition chambers. The balanced magnetron plasmas were excited by a DC power supply. The total sputtering pressure was varied between 1 Pa and 8 Pa. The fraction of the H2S partial pressure in the Ar–H2S sputter atmosphere was 1:3. The substrate temperature was changed from room temperature to 600 °C. Technical titanium foils with a thickness of 0.1 mm were used as substrates.
2.2 Electrochemical measurements (DEMS)
The details of the differential electron mass spectroscopy (DEMS) are already published by Bogdanoff et al.17,18 The inlet system between the electrochemical cell and the differential pumped vacuum system of the mass spectrometer (Balzers; QMI 420, QME 125, QMA 125 with 90° off axis SEM) consists of a porous hydrophobic membrane, covered with a 100 nm thick Au-layer. This layer serves as a working electrode contact for the RuS2 films which were attached to the gold layer. Oxygen which is formed in an electrochemical experiment at the RuS2–working electrode surface diffuses to some extent into the mass spectrometer where it is monitored simultaneously with the electrochemical data. All experiments were carried out in N2-purged 0.5 M H2SO4 at scan rates of 2 mV s−1. As a reference, a mercury sulfate electrode (+680 mVNHE) and as a counter electrode a Pt-wire were used. All data given in this paper are related to the standard hydrogen potential (NHE).
2.3 Structural characterisation
The deposited films were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer. It is equipped with a Goebel mirror which produces a parallel X-ray beam. The shape of the X-ray diffraction lines was analysed with the software “FullProf”.
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was performed employing a LEO 1530 Gemini (Zeiss). This microscope is also equipped with a system for Energy Dispersive X-ray fluorescence analysis (EDX, Thermo Scientific) which is used to determine the composition of the samples.
Additionally, the film stoichiometry was measured calibration-standard free by Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) with 1.7 MeV He+ ions at a scattering angle of 170°. For this purpose the RuSx films were deposited either on oxidized silicon or on glassy carbon (SIGRADUR G). The measured spectra were analyzed with the RBS simulation program “RUMP”.19
2.4 Optical characterization
Optical measurements of ruthenium sulfide layers deposited on glass substrates were performed using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 UV/VIS spectrometer.
2.5 Time resolved microwave conductivity measurements (TRMC)
TRMC measurements were performed in a Ka band (30 GHz) equipment in the same configuration as described previously.20–22 In these measurements the (transient) change of the microwave power reflected by the sample after (light) excitation is measured. Sample excitation was induced by 10 ns (FWHM) Nd:YAG laser pulses at 532 nm wavelength with a spot diameter of 3 mm and 50 mJ cm−2 intensity. The incident laser intensity was changed by use of calibrated filters. The light intensities are given in the figure legend.
3 Results and discussion
RuS2 layers were deposited onto titanium sheets via the magnetron sputtering technique as already described in the experimental section.
Based on previous experience with sputtered WS2 and MoS2 of the institute the thereby optimized sputtering parameters were used as starting parameters for initial deposition experiments of RuS2.23,24 After preliminary tests and adaptations of the parameters, the well defined deposition of RuS2 layers was successful. A sputtering pressure of 1.3 Pa was used as a standard parameter choosing a gas composition of Ar:H2S = 1:3.
SEM images prove that comprehensive homogeneous layers were formed, which adhere strongly to the substrate. Fig. 1a shows as an example the edge of an approx. 800 nm thick layer, which was detached from the substrate for the microscopy study. From images with higher magnification (Fig. 1b) it can clearly be seen that the layers consists of small particles which grow in a columnar manner to a compact layer.
 Fig. 1  SEM image of a sputtered RuS2 layer (substrate temperature: 280 °C, 1.3 Pa, Ar:H2S = 1:3) showing a columnar structure (a). Higher magnification elucidates an intergrowth of RuS2 particles along the axis of the individual columns (b). 
3.1 Influence of the substrate temperature on the film crystallinity
Further systematic investigations show a significant effect of the titanium substrate's temperature during the sputtering process on the properties of the RuS2 layers. In Fig. 2, XRD patterns are depicted which were obtained from samples sputtered at various substrate temperatures in the range from 70 °C to 570 °C. The layer thickness was about 800 nm equally for all samples. Up to a temperature of 430 °C the samples clearly show the diffraction lines of RuS2 (laurite, JCPDS-database) with the characteristic peaks at 2θ = 27.51° (111), 31.88° (200), 45.70° (220) and 54.18° (311) besides the diffraction pattern of the titanium substrate. The intensity of RuS2 diffraction peaks increases at a constant layer thickness with increasing deposition temperature up to 430 °C, which points to a higher degree of crystallinity at higher temperatures. The mean size of the crystallites was calculated from the XRD spectra for the 111 RuS2 peak by means of Scherrer's equation and shows that the particles grow from approximately ≤10 nm at 70 °C to approximately 20 nm at 430 °C.
 Fig. 2  XRD diagrams of RuS2 layers which were deposited on titanium sheets at different substrate temperatures. (Ar:H2S = 1:3, total pressure: 1.3 Pa). 
The ratio of Ru to S was determined by EDX and RBS and is 1:2.1 (Ru:S) equally for all layers deposited in the temperature range from 70 °C to 430 °C (measurement accuracy about 2% for Ru:S atomic ratio). This observation indicates that even layers formed at low substrate temperatures already have the composition of stoichiometric RuS2. Obviously, these RuS2 particles are very small or to some extent amorphous and grow to larger particles at higher substrate temperatures. The reason for the slightly increased sulfur content compared to the stoichiometric phase of RuS2 has not been clarified, yet. It could be due to either a small sulfur surplus in the crystalline lattice or to S-containing compounds adsorbed onto the crystal surface. However no evidence for adsorbed sulfur could be found in RBS measurements.
At substrate temperatures higher than 500 °C additional diffraction peaks of metallic ruthenium can be seen in Fig. 2 while the intensity of the laurite peaks drops off significantly. At a substrate temperature of 570 °C no further laurite peaks can be observed. Obviously, the RuS2 is no longer stable at these temperatures under these sputtering conditions (gas pressure 1.3 Pa, Ar:H2S = 1:3) and decomposes on the substrate to metallic ruthenium. Accordingly, the EDX analysis of these samples reveals a considerable decrease of the sulphur ratio in the samples (Ru/S = 10:1 at 570 °C) and SEM analysis reveals a significant change in the layer morphology.
3.2 Electrochemical characterisation
The electrochemical behaviour of the samples was investigated via cyclic voltammetry in 0.5 M H2SO4. Fig. 3 exemplarily shows the current voltage curves for a sample prepared at a substrate temperature of 430 °C which is characteristic for all samples. In compliance with own and in the literature mentioned measurements on RuS2 single crystals the sputtered layers also exhibit a pronounced oxidation current in the first potential scan which starts already at about 0.85 VNHE.7 Electrochemical mass spectroscopy reveals that this oxidation current is not attributed to any oxygen evolution. In the following scans the current steadily drops off from one scan to the next in order to finally reach a stable steady state behaviour. The Tafel-slope of the current curve in the potential range 1.1–1.3 VNHE is 260 mV dec−1 for the initial scan. It must be noted that this high value most likely points to upstreamed slow chemical reaction steps like adsorption processes and do not reflect the kinetics of the electron transfer. In analogy with detailed measurements on RuS2 single crystals10,11 we concluded also for the sputtered material an electrooxidation of the RuS2 surface within the first scans which comes to an end after the whole interface is totally occupied with an oxide layer. The formation of this layer is confirmed by analysis of the O1s-XPS spectrum which shows a significant increase of the oxygen peak (531.1 eV) measured at the electrochemical treated surface. The layer thickness can be roughly estimated from the flowed electrical charge to be about 0.5 nm. The real thickness however will be smaller because the roughness of the electrode has not been taken into account.
 Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammetry of a RuS2 layer deposited at a substrate temperature of 430 °C (Ar:H2S = 1:3, total pressure 1.3 Pa) performed in N2 purged 0.5 M H2SO4 and a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The curves show the electrochemical response of the first five potential scans. 
Since the catalytic activity of RuS2 towards the water oxidation is entirely assigned to this oxide layer the oxidation step is also called activation process. This activation phase can be observed in all samples independent of the utilized substrate temperature (up to 430 °C) and shows the electrochemical similarity of the RuS2 layers with RuS2 single crystals. However none of the layers showed any photocurrent or photovoltage under illumination as has been observed with single crystals or has been claimed for sputtered RuS2 layers by Licht et al.25 The only effect that can be observed under illumination of these layers is a significantly increased current density due to a thermal heating of the electrode surface in contact with the electrolyte. This effect can be easily suppressed by jetting the electrode with a tempered electrolyte. It is thought that this behaviour of the layers could also have led to the misleading conclusion of a photoactivity in the paper of Licht et al.25
The reasons for the absence of any photoeffect will be discussed later on. The measurements described below were therefore only performed under dark conditions.
As shown in the following, the current remaining after the activation step is connected to the oxidation of water to oxygen and partially also to an electrocorrosion of the material. In contrast to the activation process these currents are stable within the experimental duration and reveal significant differences with varying substrate temperatures. To investigate the water oxidation behaviour measurements were performed on pre-activated layers via the differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS), which allows the simultaneous detection of the current voltage data and the generated oxygen.

Fig. 4a and b show, representative for all measurements, typical DEMS curves for layers prepared at substrate temperatures of 70, 210 and 430 °C. It is obvious that with increasing deposition temperatures the current (Fig. 4a) is shifted towards more positive potentials and the slope of the current voltage curves becomes smaller. For a better comparison of the measured current voltage curves of all prepared samples the current density at a potential of 1.5 VNHE is taken and plotted in Fig. 5a against the corresponding substrate temperature. The potential of 1.5 V is chosen because all samples show a well defined anodic current at this value. It can clearly be seen that up to a substrate temperature of 450 °C the current density steadily decreases with the substrate temperature reaching a minimum at about 350 °C. However, at higher temperatures this trend reverses. As already mentioned for the XRD measurements the RuS2 layers decompose during the sputtering process above 430 °C so that a growing portion of metallic ruthenium instead of RuS2 determines the electrochemical properties of the samples. This is the reason for the trend change in Fig. 5 at substrate temperatures above 430 °C. Therefore these points are set in brackets in Fig. 5. As it will be shown later however this increased current density is also correlated with an increased corrosion rate.
 Fig. 4  Current voltage curves (a) and O2 mass signal (b) measured with pre-activated RuS2 layers, which were deposited on titanium substrates at different temperatures. Measurements were carried out in 0.5 M H2SO4, with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, at room temperature. 
 Fig. 5  Current density (a) and O2 mass signal (b) which were measured at a potential of 1.5 VNHE plotted against the temperature of the titanium substrate. (c) The ratio of the oxygen signal and the corresponding current. 

Fig. 4b shows the corresponding mass signals for oxygen (m/z = 32) simultaneously measured with the current during a potential scan. Since the sensitivity of the inlet system of the mass spectrometer remained unchanged for all measurements, the O2-mass signal is proportional to the water oxidation rate. Even though an anodic current can be measured starting at a potential of about 1.3 VNHE on the 70 °C samples, no correlating oxygen evolution could be detected. The most likely explanation for this behaviour is that only an anodic decomposition of the RuS2 layer occurs. Actually, a total dissolution of this layer during a long term electrochemical experiment can be observed. In contrast, an oxygen evolution can be observed on the samples which were generated at a higher substrate temperature as shown for the samples deposited at 210 °C and 430 °C in Fig. 4b. In order to compare the oxygen evolution of all prepared RuS2 samples the intensity of the mass signal which was obtained at a potential of 1.5 VNHE was plotted against the substrate temperature (see Fig. 5b). The O2 mass signal increases up to 210 °C, remains nearly constant until 430 °C and rises again at higher temperatures. It is important to correlate these oxygen signals to the corresponding current densities in order to discuss the results in terms of water oxidation efficiencies. For that the ratio of the oxygen signal and the corresponding current is plotted against the applied temperature in Fig. 5c.
It can be deduced from Fig. 5c that with increasing substrate temperature the efficiency towards the oxidation of water is enhanced. However, in return it has also to be concluded that lowering the substrate temperature an increasing portion of the current is not involved in water oxidation but most likely responsible for an anodic corrosion of the material. In the extreme case the sample at 70 °C exhibits a current but no water oxidation, which means an efficiency of zero. Thus the entire current seems to be exclusively involved in an anodic corrosion process. The highest efficiency towards water oxidation can be measured at samples which were prepared in a temperature range from 350° to 450 °C. At higher temperatures the values decrease again since there is an increasing amount of metallic ruthenium present in the layers, which exhibits in spite of the high oxygen evolution rate also a high corrosion rate under the given experimental conditions.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to derive from these measurements any absolute efficiencies of water oxidation and corrosion processes since the collection efficiency of the inlet system towards the electrochemically generated oxygen is not known. Nevertheless, the trends can easily be recognized and discussed on the basis of the mass signals observed.
It is noticeable that in all samples the water oxidation starts at nearly the same potential of about 1.4 V and the O2 evolution rates increase very similarly with increasing electrode potential (Fig. 4b). The improved water oxidation efficiency with increasing substrate temperature seems rather to be due to a suppression of the corrosion process than to the improvement of the catalytic activity for water oxidation. Since the corrosion process obviously starts at a potential approximately 100 mV lower than water oxidation (Fig. 4) the total current shifts to the more positive potential of the water oxidation when the corrosion process is suppressed. Obviously, the disposition towards corrosion decreases with increasing crystallinity of the RuS2 layers. Tentatively, it can be assumed that a higher number of crystallite edges and lattice defects in very small particles or amorphous parts of the films are more prone to corrosion processes than in well crystallized materials. In order to clarify this question further experiments with epitaxial grown RuS2 layers on differently orientated pyrite single crystals are in progress and the results will be published in a forthcoming paper.
3.3 Optical characterization and time resolved microwave conductivity measurements
Ruthenium sulphide layers were deposited on glass substrates by reactive magnetron sputtering at different substrate temperatures and sputter parameters as described in the experimental part. The absorption curves of these films of about 600 nm thickness were measured using a double beam photospectrometer. The transmission curves were evaluated from Tauc plots Ephvs. (α × Eph)2 (Fig. 6). Films deposited at 70 °C show a nearly structureless linearly increasing absorption curve which can be explained by a still substantial fraction of amorphous parts beside nanocrystalline particles (see XRD in Fig. 2). The onset of the small absorption step at 1.4 eV might be correlated with defects in the band or the indirect optical transition of ruthenium sulfide. As shown by XRD analysis layers deposited at elevated temperatures reveal high crystallinity and show a pronounced absorption step pointing to a direct band gap of 2.05 eV (360 °C) and 2.1 eV (430 °C), respectively. Interestingly, the band gap increases with increasing deposition temperatures. The increase of band gap with increasing deposition temperature can be explained by an improved crystalline perfection.
 Fig. 6  Tauc plot derived from UV-Vis absorption spectra, measured at sputtered RuS2 layers which were deposited onto glass substrates at different temperatures. 
It is further suggested that the shift of the direct band gap to higher values is correlated with the S:Ru ratio in the films. The more the value approaches the ideal composition the higher the band gap of the sulfide layer. Using the generalization of Van Vechten's cavity model the formation energies of neutral ruthenium and sulfur point defects (3.29 eV and 2.64 eV, respectively) in the crystal lattice could be calculated.27 The formation of antisite pairs amounted to 3.33 eV. Most probable in the transition metal sulfides laurite and pyrite are Me–S pairs replacing Ru–S2 pairs.27
As already mentioned, however all sputtered RuS2 layers show, opposed to RuS2 single crystals, no photocurrent under illumination with Vis-light. Neither an n-type nor a p-type characteristic of the electrochemical experiments could be found. Absorption measurements confirmed that light is absorbed by the material generating electrons and holes. However, these light induced charge carriers obviously cannot contribute to electrochemical reactions at the electrode–electrolyte interface. Hence the catalytic activity of the RuO2 covered electrode–electrolyte interface towards the water oxidation is assumed to be high electronic features of the RuS2 layer which must be responsible for this drawback. It could be explained by a high recombination rate of the photo generated charge carriers and/or by a too low mobility of the minority charge carriers. As RuS2 crystallises in the same crystal structure as FeS2 pyrite indeed similar small mobility for holes (μh = 0.9 cm2 Vs−1) and a high for electrons (μe = 350 cm2 Vs−1) are most likely.26 Because of the high conductivity of the RuS2 material (high majority charge carrier concentration) a low expansion of the space charge region on the electrolyte–semiconductor interface has to be assumed. In combination with a low mobility of the minority carriers generated in the electrical field-free bulk of the semiconductor they would recombine faster than finding their way into the space charge region of the electrolyte semiconductor interface.
Light induced generation of charge carriers can be measured directly via the Time Resolved Microwave Conductivity (TRMC) method, in which the change of the microwave reflectivity is proportional to the product of the concentration of light induced charge carriers and their mobility.20–22 For TRMC measurements, a RuS2 layer was deposited at 200 °C on a glass substrate instead of titanium because the metallic conductivity of titanium is attenuating the TRMC signal. The measurements were performed ex situ, i.e. not under electrochemical conditions. The TRMC signal after illumination via a laser pulse (λ = 532 nm) displays the generation of free charge carriers with non-neglectable mobility and its recombination as depicted in Fig. 7. With growing light intensity the TRMC amplitude increases proportionally, which points to no or only insignificant fast second order recombination processes during the excitation (approximately 10 ns). As the excitation densities are rather high this suggests a fast minority carrier trapping. Furthermore the TRMC transients measured after the excitation show a relative slow decay in the μs time domain. This is most probably due to remaining excess majority carriers with a relatively long life time because of the trapping of minority carriers with a small cross section for majority carriers. Unfortunately, in spite of the long lifetime of charge carriers no photocurrent is observed. Obviously, the short diffusion length and the low mobility of the trapped minority charge carriers hinder them to arrive at the electrode interface and to participate in electrochemical reactions before recombination.
 Fig. 7  Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC), transients obtained at a RuS2 layer (prepared at 200 °C substrate temperature onto glass) after illumination with a laser pulse at t = 0 under different light intensities (λ = 532 nm). (OD1.3: 2.5 mW cm−2, OD1.6: 1.3 mW cm−2, OD1.9: 0.635 mW cm−2, OD2.3: 0.255 mW cm−2). 
In general defect structures of the bulk material as well as surface states can be responsible for deep traps. A high concentration of ionized defects in the particles of the layers is very probable as is already reported for FeS2 pyrite which crystallizes in the same lattice as RuS2.26
Further experiments to investigate these processes by in situ TRMC measurements are in progress.
3.4 Variation of the gas pressure during the sputter process
As stated, deep traps and recombination centres could be due to imperfections in the crystalline lattice. As shown above the crystallinity can generally be improved by raising the substrate temperature during the sputtering process (Fig. 2). Unfortunately, in the formerly described experiments it was found that RuS2 starts to decompose to metallic ruthenium at 500 °C in the presence of a gas pressure of 1.3 Pa. From the electrochemical results in Fig. 5 it can be expected that the efficiency for water oxidation could be improved if RuS2 is stabilized against decomposition at higher substrate temperatures (>500 °C). For this purpose sputtering experiments were performed under elevated pressure of the process gases (H2S und Ar) during the deposition process. Again titanium sheets were used as substrates. The layers sputtered in this way were characterized via DEMS and XRD analogue to experiments mentioned above.

Fig. 8 shows XRD spectra of RuS2 layers which were sputtered at a substrate temperature of 500 °C and a process gas pressure ranging from 1.3 Pa to 7.5 Pa. At 1.3 Pa mostly metallic ruthenium caused by thermal decomposition of RuS2 is observed whereas at the elevated pressure of 3.3 Pa only little ruthenium and mainly the XRD signals of RuS2 are detected. Finally, at sputtering pressures higher than 5.3 Pa the XRD pattern of metallic ruthenium is completely vanished and only RuS2 is formed. These results clearly show that the thermal decomposition of RuS2 can effectively be inhibited by an increase of the H2S gas pressure during the sputtering process.
 Fig. 8  XRD diagrams of RuS2 layers which were generated onto titanium sheets at different pressures of the process gas. (Ar:H2S = 1:3, substrate temperature: 500 °C). 
The electrochemical characterization of the layers has been performed by DEMS measurements, which are discussed in analogy to the above described investigations studying the substrate temperature dependence (see Section 3.2). From the current voltage characteristics the current density and the corresponding oxygen mass signal have been determined at a potential of 1.5 VNHE and plotted in Fig. 9a and b as a function of the process gas pressure. In order to illustrate the efficiency with respect to water oxidation the ratio between the oxygen signal and the corresponding current is depicted in Fig. 9c.
 Fig. 9  Current density (a) and O2 mass signal (b) which were measured at a potential of 1.5 VNHE plotted against the Ar:H2S gas pressure applied during the sputter process. (c) The ratio of the oxygen signal and the corresponding current. 
As already mentioned the sample deposited at low pressure (1.3 Pa) is predominantly composed of ruthenium nanoparticles which show in spite of high current density and high O2-evolution rate only a moderate efficiency towards the water oxidation due to a simultaneously occurring corrosion process. At higher deposition pressures the samples are composed of RuS2. Fig. 9c reveals that the efficiency towards water oxidation is now enhanced with respect to the metallic ruthenium particles although the O2 signals and the current densities are smaller. Compared to the above presented values on the substrate temperature dependence the here measured values for the sample prepared at 500 °C and 3.3 Pa fit well into the temperature dependency curves in Fig. 5. Thereby it becomes evident that in fact higher substrate temperatures during the sputtering process enhance the efficiency towards the water oxidation. This is however not achieved by a higher O2 evolution rate, but only by a suppressed corrosion process. Due to the thermal decomposition of RuS2 this can only be made possible by increasing the H2S pressure during the sputtering process.
Unfortunately, an increased gas pressure has also an opposite effect with respect to the efficiency towards water oxidation. As can be seen in Fig. 9, the O2 value decreases whereas the current increases at high gas pressure (7.5 Pa) at a fixed substrate temperature which leads to a worst efficiency. In general this effect can also be found in experiments using lower substrate temperatures where RuS2 is thermally stable. Under these conditions however an increase of the substrate temperature seems to be able to partially compensate the negative effect of the increasing gas pressure. The reason for this effect is the decreased free pathway of the sputtered particles during the sputtering process with increasing gas pressure. As a result the energy of these particles which reaches the substrate is diminished, which obviously leads to a changed growth mechanism of the RuS2 layers which is not favourable for the water oxidation reaction.
Even though RuS2 layers sputtered at a substrate temperature of 500 °C and a pressure of 3.3 Pa show an improved efficiency with respect to water oxidation again no photocurrents could be observed under illumination as can be obtained from RuS2 single crystals. The latter were prepared by crystallization at high temperatures (ca. 1000 °C) from a Bi-melt under thermal equilibrium conditions, which obviously lead to an improved crystallinity of the semiconductor. Such high thermal energies can so far not yet be improved in sputter processes for the deposition of RuS2 layers so that the perfection of the individual crystallites in the layers with respect to bulk and surface remains limited leading to trapping and recombination processes after illumination of the layer. A further contribution for charge carrier trapping is given by the high number of grain boundaries in the films. It can be expected that with increasing particle size in the films also this influence can be lowered. An improvement of the semiconductor properties is assumed to be obtained by further thermal treatments of the sputtered layers under a defined sulphur vapour pressure at temperatures as high as possible. In these experiments however a problem with the insufficient chemical stability of the titanium substrate arises under the harsh conditions of annealing at high temperatures. These experiments are in progress and the results will be published in a forthcoming paper.
4 Conclusions
For the first time it has been shown that crystalline RuS2 layers can be deposited via reactive magnetron sputtering technique using a Ar:H2S atmosphere, which exhibit an activity towards the electrochemical oxidation of water in the dark. However, a corrosion process of the material under electrochemical conditions is always observed as a competing reaction. With increasing substrate temperature during the sputtering process the RuS2 layers show an improved crystallinity and thereby a suppressed corrosion process which leads to an enhanced efficiency towards the water oxidation reaction.
Unlike RuS2 single crystals so far no photo currents could be observed upon illumination with a tungsten iodine lamp. This can be traced back to trapping of minority charge carriers and recombination processes in the bulk and at the surface of individual crystallites in the layers.
Best films for the OER in the dark could be grown at high temperatures preventing a decomposition into metallic ruthenium and gaseous sulphur species by using elevated pressures of the process gases during the sputter deposition.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Dr Elias Martinez Moreno for the TRMC measurements and M. M. May for the XPS analysis. Financial support by a grant of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research under contract # 03SF0353A “H2-NanoSolar” is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
R. Kötz and S. Stucki, Electrochim. Acta, 1986, 31, 1311–1316 CrossRef .
A. Marshall, B. Børresen, G. Hagen, M. Tsypkin and R. Tunold, Energy, 2007, 32, 431–436 CrossRef CAS .
S. Songa, H. Zhanga, X. Maa, Z. Shaoa, R. T. Bakerc and B. Yia, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4955–4961 CrossRef .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ezzaouia, R. Heindl, R. Parsons and H. Tributsch, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 145, 279–292 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ezzaouia, R. Heindl, R. Parsons and H. Tributsch, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 165, 155–166 CrossRef .
H. M. Kühne and H. Tributsch, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1986, 201, 263–282 CrossRef .
N. Alonso-Vante, H. Colell and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 8261–8268 CrossRef CAS .
H. Colell, N. Alonso.Vante, C. Fischer, P. Bogdanoff, S. Fiechter and H. Tributsch, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1607–1611 CrossRef CAS .
H. Colell, N. Alonso-Vante and H. Tributsch, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 324, 127–144 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Chaparro, N. Alonso Vante, P. Salvador and H. Tributsch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2991 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fiechter and H.-M. Kühne, J. Cryst. Growth, 1987, 83, 517–522 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lacroix, N. Boutarfa, C. Guillard, M. Vrinat and M. Breysse, Catalysis, 1989, 120, 473–477 CrossRef CAS .
D. Diaz, S. E. Castillo-Blum, O. lvarez-Fregoso, G. Rodriguez-Gattorno, P. Santiago-Jacinto, L. Rendon, L. Ortiz-Frade and Y. Leon-Paredes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22715–22724 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ashokkumar, A. Kudo, N. Saito and T. Sakata, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 229, 389–388 CrossRef .
M. Ashokkumar, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Mater. Sci., 1995, 30, 2759–2764 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bogdanoff and N. Alonso-Vante, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 940–942 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bogdanoff and N. Alonso-Vante, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 379, 415–421 CrossRef .
L. R. Doolittle, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1986, 15, 227–231 CrossRef .
C. Colbeau-Justin, M. Kunst and D. Huguenin, J. Mater. Sci., 2003, 38, 2429–2437 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kunst and G. Beck, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 63, 1093 CrossRef CAS .
C. Swiatkowski, A. Sanders, K. D. Buhre and M. Kunst, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 1763 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ellmer, R. Mientus, S. Seeger and V. Weiß, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, R97–R100 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lichtenberger, K. Ellmer, R. Schieck, S. Fiechter and H. Tributsch, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 246, 6–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, S. Ghosh, H. Tributsch and S. Fiechter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 471, 471–480 CrossRef .
Y. Tomm, R. Schieck, K. Ellmer and S. Fiechter, J. Cryst. Growth, 1995, 146, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fiechter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 459–477 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM image of a sputtered RuS2 layer (substrate temperature: 280 °C, 1.3 Pa, Ar:H2S = 1:3) showing a columnar structure (a). Higher magnification elucidates an intergrowth of RuS2 particles along the axis of the individual columns (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD diagrams of RuS2 layers which were deposited on titanium sheets at different substrate temperatures. (Ar:H2S = 1:3, total pressure: 1.3 Pa).	 

 	Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammetry of a RuS2 layer deposited at a substrate temperature of 430 °C (Ar:H2S = 1:3, total pressure 1.3 Pa) performed in N2 purged 0.5 M H2SO4 and a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The curves show the electrochemical response of the first five potential scans.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current voltage curves (a) and O2 mass signal (b) measured with pre-activated RuS2 layers, which were deposited on titanium substrates at different temperatures. Measurements were carried out in 0.5 M H2SO4, with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current density (a) and O2 mass signal (b) which were measured at a potential of 1.5 VNHE plotted against the temperature of the titanium substrate. (c) The ratio of the oxygen signal and the corresponding current.	 

 	Fig. 6  Tauc plot derived from UV-Vis absorption spectra, measured at sputtered RuS2 layers which were deposited onto glass substrates at different temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 7  Time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC), transients obtained at a RuS2 layer (prepared at 200 °C substrate temperature onto glass) after illumination with a laser pulse at t = 0 under different light intensities (λ = 532 nm). (OD1.3: 2.5 mW cm−2, OD1.6: 1.3 mW cm−2, OD1.9: 0.635 mW cm−2, OD2.3: 0.255 mW cm−2).	 

 	Fig. 8  XRD diagrams of RuS2 layers which were generated onto titanium sheets at different pressures of the process gas. (Ar:H2S = 1:3, substrate temperature: 500 °C).	 

 	Fig. 9  Current density (a) and O2 mass signal (b) which were measured at a potential of 1.5 VNHE plotted against the Ar:H2S gas pressure applied during the sputter process. (c) The ratio of the oxygen signal and the corresponding current.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
