Synergistic effects of plasmon induced Ag@Ag 3 VO 4 /ZnCr LDH ternary heterostructures towards visible light responsive O 2 evolution and phenol oxida ...  - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7QI00742F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7QI00742F
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 879-896Synergistic effects of plasmon induced Ag@Ag3VO4/ZnCr LDH ternary heterostructures towards visible light responsive O2 evolution and phenol oxidation reactions†

        
          
            Dipti Prava 
            Sahoo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sulagna 
            Patnaik
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dharitri 
            Rath
          
        
       and 

        
          
            K. M. 
            Parida
          
        
      *
      Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan University, Bhubaneswar-751030, India. E-mail: kulamaniparida@soauniversity.ac.in
Received 
      23rd November 2017
    , Accepted 27th January 2018First published on 26th February 2018AbstractFor enhancing solar energy conversion and environmental remediation, noble metal plasmonic photocatalysis originating from the effectual light absorbance and confinement of surface plasmons provides a new promising route. In the present study, by integrating these two aspects, a series of ternary Ag@Ag3VO4/ZnCr LDH heterostructures have been prepared by an in situ hydrothermal followed by co-precipitation method. In this method, there is self-assembling of Ag3VO4 nanoparticles on the brucite surface of the LDH material along with partial reduction of Ag+ to Ag. The phase identity, optical response, and morphological structure of the heterostructure photocatalysts were systematically characterized through PXRD, HRTEM, UV-Vis DRS, PL, and XPS methods. The resulting monodisperse Ag nanoparticles deposited on LDH materials offer a heterogeneous interaction at the interface and exhibit high photocatalytic activity towards generation of O2 and oxidation of phenol. Evaluation of photocatalytic activity showed that 40 wt% of Ag3VO4 modified LDH is the most effective photocatalyst for O2 evolution (571 μmol) and phenol oxidation (93%). The highly improved photocatalytic performance of the composite was ascribed mainly to the SPR effect of Ag nanoparticles, Schottky barriers formed at the interface of LDH and Ag3VO4 nanoparticles, and strong coupling between Ag, Ag3VO4 and LDH. The electrochemical studies such as LSV, CV, EIS and Tafel plots further support the high rate of photoactivity towards O2 evolution and phenol oxidation. These newly designed plasmonic Ag–LDH nanoheterostructures may offer a promising strategy for maximum light absorption and be authoritative in meeting environmental claims in the future.
Introduction
The rapid development of civilization along with industrialization has led to a severe energy crisis and serious environmental problems because of pollution. From the point of view of mitigating environmental and energy problems caused by mass consumption of exhaustible fossil fuels, alternative renewable and economically feasible energy sources are widely needed.1 In this regard, semiconductor-based photocatalysis has been emerging as a challenging and green technology for energy conversion and eliminates environmental contamination. However, complete water splitting reactions are often both energetically and mechanically very difficult. O2 evolution is a 4 electron transfer process whereas H2 evolution is a 2 electron transfer process. Therefore, constructing a viable and efficient catalyst for promoting oxygen evolution reactions photocatalytically is highly desirable.2,3 Similarly phenolic compound are considered as acute water pollutants, owing to their solubility, stability, bioaccumulation capability and carcinogenic nature. The traditional techniques used for the removal of phenolic compounds are now replaced by an advanced oxidation process based on semiconductor photocatalysis to totally decontaminate these toxic phenolic threats. As an alternative way, the development of a suitable photocatalyst plays an important role in solving both energy and environmental problems.4,5
In this context, layered double hydroxide (LDH) based photocatalytic materials have been widely used because of their tunable cationic layers which intercalate charge-balancing guest anions.6 Owing to their unique properties like atomic level homogeneous distribution of metal cations, versatility of matrix elements and the intercalated anionic structure with a large interlayer distance can increase the photocatalytic behavior.7,8 The presence of surface –OH groups facilitate the generation of highly active radicals and the metal to metal charge transfer (MMCT); ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) by excitation of the oxo-bridged bimetallic linkage in LDH plays a major role for energy and environmental applications. In spite of all these advantages, LDHs have serious limitations because of rapid charge recombination tendency and low quantum yield.9 Therefore, to extend their potential applications towards photocatalytic activity, LDH based semiconductors are coupled with other semiconducting materials with matched energy levels by different strategies like deposition of metal cations in the brucite layer,10 heterostructure construction,11 nanocomposite formation with metal oxide,12 metal sulphide,13 metal vanadate14,15 and carbonaceous materials16etc. In particular, the inter gallery space and the MO6 octahedron unit of LDH play an important role in O2 evolution and phenol oxidation reactions.9 Efficient O2 generation by a g-C3N4/NiFe LDH composite and substituted phenol (4-chloro 2-nitro phenol) degradation by ZnCr LDH were also investigated in two different studies by our group.17,18
The fabrication of novel plasmonic photocatalysts is an alternative and promising approach for designing highly efficient visible-light photocatalysts. Among Ag based photocatalysts, Ag/Ag3VO4 has been reported as the efficient catalyst for conversion of solar energy into chemical energy. The valence band of Ag3VO4 consists of the 4d orbital of Ag and 2p orbital of O, which hybridize to form a more dispersed VB, whereas the conduction band consists of the 3d orbital of vanadium to favour charge mobility.19 Ag3VO4 has attracted much attention from research groups because of its wider absorption in the visible region owing to narrow band gap energy (2–2.2 eV) and n-type semiconducting character with oxidizing properties.20 Moreover the presence of metallic Ag results in surface plasmon resonance (SPR), and the collective oscillation of conduction electrons on its surface, which interact with electromagnetic radiation, can significantly amplify the absorption of visible light and consequently improve photocatalytic activity.21,22 In the past few years, a good number of research studies on Ag/Ag3VO4 heterostructures have been reported for degradation of organic pollutants and water oxidation into O2 evolution.23–26 Among various silver modified LDH photocatalysts, α-Ag2WO4/Zn–Cr and ortho-Ag3PO4/flaky LDH composites were prepared by Zhu et al. and Cui et al., respectively, for organic pollutant degradation showed good photocatalytic performance.27,28 In another study, Sun et al. prepared a Fe3O4@LDH@Ag/Ag3PO4 sub-microsphere as a magnetically separable visible light photocatalyst for photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB).29 Ag/AgBr/CoNi-NO3 LDH catalysts designed by Fan et al. through a facile anion-exchange precipitation with photoreduction method showed excellent adsorption and photocatalytic degradation activity.30
Taking into account the benefits of Ag nanoparticles discussed in all these literature studies, we have fabricated nanocomposites of ZnCr LDH along with Ag3VO4 to modulate the band structure of LDH and to extend its photocatalytic application towards oxygen evolution and phenol degradation. Ag@Ag3VO4/ZnCr LDH nanoheterostructures were prepared by an in situ hydrothermal followed by co-precipitation method. The surface hydroxyl groups of LDH as well as ethanol and NaOH (used during synthesis) helped the reduction of Ag+ to metallic Ag clusters. A high concentration of plasmonic Ag and Ag3VO4 particles is uniformly dispersed on the brucite sheet of ZnCr LDH that develops a close interfacial Schottky junction between these components. By heterostructure formation, the coupling effects, structural advantages, convenient band gap energy and intrinsic SPR phenomena improve the charge transport efficiency of the bare ZnCr LDH material and provide a better platform towards photocatalytic activity. A detailed mechanism based on the SPR effect over a three component heterostructure is discussed in the present study.
Experimental section
Materials and reagents
Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (>98%) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, NaOH (>97%), Na2CO3 (>99.5%) and AgNO3 (>99%) were bought from Merck, Cr(NO3)3·6H2O (>99%) and Na3VO4·2H2O (>98%) were obtained from Acros Organics and S.D. Fine Chemicals, India, respectively. Metal salt solutions were prepared using double distilled water. All other reagents used in this work were of analytically pure grade and used without further purification.
Preparation of ZnCr LDH
ZnCr-CO32− LDHs were synthesized by a co-precipitation method according to previous literature.18 To a 1000 mL solution containing Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and Cr(NO3)3·6H2O with a desired Zn/Cr molar ratio of 2:1 (solution 1), a 80 mL solution containing 1 M NaOH and Na2CO3 (solution 2) was added slowly under vigorous stirring at room temperature until the pH reached 7–8. The resulting precipitate (LDH) was washed thoroughly with deionized water for removing excess unwanted soluble ions, and then finally dried at 80 °C for 24 h.
Preparation of Ag@Ag3VO4/ZnCr LDH
1 g freshly synthesized LDH was well dispersed in 20 mL ethanol solution for 30 min by using an ultrasonicator. Then it was poured into the solution containing Na3VO4·12H2O and under stirring, a required amount of AgNO3 solution was added dropwise into this solution. The pH of the suspension was adjusted to 11 using 4 M NaOH solution. After 1 h stirring, the obtained precipitate was transferred to a 100 mL Teflon-lined stainless autoclave and heated to 140 °C for 8 h. The products on cooling were washed with deionized water by centrifugation and dried at 60 °C. The samples were prepared by changing the different wt% (10–50) of Ag3VO4 with LDH and designated as 10ALDH, 20ALDH, 30ALDH, 40ALDH and 50ALDH, respectively. Bare Ag3VO4 (AgV) was synthesized by the same hydrothermal method without using LDH.25 The synthesis procedure is illustrated in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  A diagram of the synthesis procedure of 40ALDH. 
Formation mechanism of Ag nanoparicles
In the present work, we have designed an improved in situ reduction–deposition method to deposit silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) directly on the surface of LDH by using a AgNO3 precursor. In the presence of ethanol which acts as a dispersing as well as reducing agent, Ag+ ions get attached onto the surface of LDH and partially get reduced. Recently, Nishimura and his group have illustrated the enhanced reduction ability of NaOH for the deposition of Ag NPs through the formation of the Ag2O intermediate.31 Plentifully available surface –OH groups of LDH complexed with Ag+ and helped the formation of Ag2O on the surface of LDH (eqn (1)). However, the standard reduction potential for Ag+/Ag is 0.7996 V (SHE, pH = 0) which is greater than the potential value of Ag2O/Ag+OH− (0.342 V SHE, pH = 0); therefore, Ag2O species are more easily reduced than Ag+.32Scheme 2 depicts the formation mechanism of silver during composite preparation.
 Scheme 2  A schematic description of formation of Ag NPs. 
The whole reduction process is depicted by the following equations. (1) (2) (3)
Characterization techniques
Several techniques such as XRD, TEM, XPS, UV-visible DRS, PL and photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out for characterizing the as synthesized samples. The phase purity of the prepared sample was measured by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) using a Rigaku MiniFlex (set at 30 kV and 15 mA) instrument over the range of 5° < 2θ < 70° with a scan rate of 0.02° min−1. The stretching vibration mode of the catalyst was determined using a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (JASCO FT/IR-4600) within the range of 4000–400 cm−1. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of the prepared samples were recorded on a VG Microtech Multilab ESCA 3000 spectrometer. The samples were excited under non-monochromatised Mg-Kα radiation at a binding energy of 50 eV and the spectra were plotted using the reference C 1s peak at a binding energy of 284.9 eV. To determine the internal microstructure of the material, high resolution transmission microscopy (HRTEM) was performed using a Philips TECNAI G2 electron microscope analyzer at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (UV-vis DRS) were recorded at a wavelength between 200 and 800 nm to measure the optical response of the photocatalyst, using a JASCO V-750 spectrophotometer. A JASCO FP-8300 spectrofluorometer was used at an excitation wavelength of 320 nm for recording the fluorescence properties with the charge separation rate of the as synthesized samples.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
Photoelectrochemical studies were performed by using an as-synthesized material film electrode. An electrophoresis deposition technique was used for preparing the film electrode by taking 40 mL acetone containing 20 mg samples with 20 mg iodine powder. Two parallel FTO electrodes were placed at a distance of 15 mm in iodine catalyst suspension. Under potentiometric control, 60 V bias and 100 mA current were applied between these two FTO electrodes for 6 min. The deposition area of the catalyst on the surface of FTO was maintained i.e. 1 cm2 and then it was dried in an oven. The photoelectrochemical studies were recorded using an IVIUMnSTAT instrument. A conventional Pyrex electrochemical cell consists of a three electrode system such as prepared FTO, Pt and Ag/AgCl as a working electrode, a counter electrode and a reference electrode, respectively. The Nyquist plots were measured at a frequency of 106–101 Hz with an applied bias of 20 V, Mott–Schottky plots were studied at 500 Hz with a potential range between −0.8 and 0 V, whereas the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves were recorded at a voltage of 0–1.6 V and −1–1.2 V, respectively, and a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 by using 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution as the electrolyte.
Evaluation of photocatalytic activity

Experiments for the photocatalytic reaction towards O2 evolution. 
The photocatalytic activity of the as-synthesized products towards O2 evolution was carried out in an inner-radiation batch reactor. In a typical experiment, 0.02 g photocatalyst was dispersed in 20 mL of 0.05 M AgNO3 aqueous solution (pH = 5.2). To avoid the settlement of the material at the bottom of the reactor, the reaction mixture was vigorously stirred using a magnetic stirrer. Before light illumination, the suspension was purged with N2 gas to remove the dissolved gases. A 150 W medium pressure Hg lamp was used as the visible light source and equipped with a UV cut-off filter (λ > 400) of 1 M NaNO2 solution. The whole reaction was conducted for 2 h. The evolved gas was recorded by the water displacement technique and collected for analyzing with GC-17A using a 5 Å sieve column with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD).


Experiments for the photocatalytic reaction towards phenol oxidation. 
All the prepared samples were tested for the photocatalytic oxidation of phenol under solar light illumination. At first, a desired amount (0.02 g) of the well dispersed catalyst was suspended in 20 mL of 20 ppm (20 mg L−1) phenol solution. Prior to the experiment, this mixture was stirred for 30 min under dark conditions for achieving the adsorption–desorption equilibrium. The above solution mixtures were irradiated with solar light for 3 h with constant stirring. After irradiation, the suspensions were centrifuged for separating the material and the residual phenol concentration was monitored by using a UV–visible spectrophotometer. The effect of pH on photocatalytic phenol oxidation was evaluated by repeating the photooxidation reaction at different pH (4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 11). Also two control reactions were performed using this same procedure: the first one is without the catalyst under solar light illumination and the second one is with the catalyst under dark conditions. The photocatalytic oxidation efficiency of phenol over all photocatalysts was estimated from the following expression: (4)
Here, C0 is the initial and C is the final concentration of the phenol solution.


Experiments for point of zero charge (pzc) determination. 
The pzc of the catalyst was determined by the Drift method.33 In this typical method, primarily 0.005 M NaCl solution was boiled to remove dissolved CO2 gas and then it was cooled at room temperature. Then the pH of the NaCl solution was adjusted to 5, 7, 8, 9, and 11 by adding 0.5 M HCl and NaOH solution. After maintaining the pH, 0.02 g 40ALDH catalyst was poured into the pH adjusted solution. In order to attain the adsorption–desorption equilibrium, they were stirred for 24 h. Finally, the final pH of those solutions was measured and plotted against initial pH. The pzc of 40ALDH was calculated to be 7.7.


Experiments for trapping the active species. 
To investigate the active species involved in the photocatalytic phenol oxidation reaction, the trapping experiments were performed. Trapping reagents such as ethylene diaminetetraacetic acid disodium (EDTA-Na), dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO), p-benzoquinone (BQ) and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) were used for scavenging the active species such as holes (h+), electrons (e−), superoxide (˙O2−) and hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), respectively. 1 mM of all quenchers was dissolved in the catalyst with phenol mixture solution and exposed to irradiation of sun light for 1 h. The formation of ˙O2− was quantitatively analyzed by detecting the concentration of 5 × 10–5 mol L−1 nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) solution. The process was similar to that of the above photocatalytic experiments except that phenol was replaced by NBT. Both the filtrate of trapping quenchers and NBT solution were analyzed by using a UV–visible spectrophotometer. Similarly, the production of ˙OH on the surface of the photocatalyst was confirmed by the PL technique using terephthalic acid (TA) as the reagent. By following this same procedure, this experiment was carried out by taking the 5 × 10–4 M of TA and 2 × 10−3 M of NaOH solution along with samples. Then the fluorescence intensity of this residual solution was recorded by using a spectrofluorometer at an excitation wavelength of 315 nm.

Results and discussion
Crystal structure and morphology
The crystal graphic phase structure and relative crystallinity of as-synthesized nanocomposites were investigated by XRD analysis. The powder XRD patterns of prepared LDH, AgV and ALDH nanocomposites with different weight ratios are illustrated in Fig. 1a and b. The pristine ZnCr LDH was evidenced by four intense basal reflections consistent with (003), (006), (009) and (110) planes, along with three less intense basal reflections for (015), (012), and (113) planes analogous to 2θ values of 11.5°, 23.3°, 34.3°, 38.8°, 47.3°, 59.6° and 61.1° respectively. All the planes of LDH were reflected with R3m rhombohedral symmetry (JCPDS. 41-1428) containing various Zr/Cr octahedra.18 The d003 Bragg's plane with a basal spacing of 0.77 nm indicated the carbonate intercalated LDH. The peaks of pure AgV were completely in accordance with the monoclinic phase (JCPDS. 43-05) of 2θ values at 19.2°, 30.96°, 32.42°, 35.16°, 35.9°, 38.9°, 41.4°, 48.3°, 51.2° and 54.1° which could be attributed to the (001), (−121), (121), (301), (202), (002), (400), (−322), (132) and (331) reflection planes, respectively.25 The weaker intense peaks observed at 38.1, 44.2 and 64.3 corresponded to the basal planes (111), (200) and (220), respectively, for metallic Ag NPs with face centered cubic symmetry.34 As shown in Fig. 1b, as the wt% of AgV increased in ALDH composites, the peak intensity of (009), (110) and (113) planes of LDH gradually decreased, but the peak intensity of (−121) and (121) planes progressively increased. These results confirmed the existence of a well synergetic interaction between LDH and AgV semiconductors. Simultaneously, the intensity of the diffraction peak [(111) at 2θ 38.1°] of metallic Ag NPs regularly increased with increasing AgV concentration.35 After 50 wt% loading of AgV on the LDH surface, Ag4V2O7 phases appeared with less intense peaks in comparison with other nanocomposites.36 The lattice parameters a = 2d110 and c = 3d003 were calculated to be 3.0 and 15.4 nm, respectively, for pristine LDH. After composite formation, these “a” and “c” values are nearly the same for all materials because all ALDHs have a constant Zn2+/Cr3+ ratio of 2:1 and CO32− as the inter layer ion.37 From the XRD results, it can also be said that the lattice structures of LDH and AgV were little affected after composite formation due to the development of a coupling interaction between these two materials. On the basis of the Scherrer calculation (eqn (1)), the crystallite size of the photocatalysts was estimated. In this equation, Lhkl is the crystallite size perpendicular to the reflection plane (hkl) [nm], θ is the Bragg angle in degree (°), λ is the wavelength of X-rays in nm and β0 is the width of the diffraction beam [rad]. The average crystallite size of LDH by using (003) and (006) reflection planes was found to be 4.7 nm, and the average crystallite size of AgV by using (−121) and (121) reflection planes was calculated to be 28.5 nm. However, the average crystallite size of the 40ALDH composite lies in between two parent materials and was estimated to be 19.96 nm.38 (5)
 Fig. 1  PXRD patterns: (a) AgV and (b) LDH and all (x%) ALDH samples. 
To investigate the microscopic structural information and corroborate the co-existence of LDH and AgV in 40ALDH nanostructures, TEM and HRTEM studies were performed. The TEM results displayed in Fig. 2a and b reveal the distribution of spherical AgV and some metallic Ag NPs on the surface of LDH. However, in Fig. 2c the TEM images clearly show that there was construction of an interface between LDH, AgV and Ag which endorsed the evidence for the formation of a heterostructure.39 Furthermore, the HRTEM analysis was carried out as the decisive evidence for the presence of AgV and LDH in heterostructure geometry. As shown in Fig. 2d, the 40ALDH nanostructure acquired through a close interface resulted in the presence of three sets of lattice fringes with a d-spacing of 0.192, 0.29 and 0.237 nm representing LDH, AgV and metallic Ag regions, respectively. The fringes of d = 0.192 nm corresponded to the crystallographic plane (012) of pristine LDH; d = 0.29 and 0.237 nm arose due to the (−121) plane of AgV located at a 2θ value of 30.96° and the (111) plane of metallic Ag located at a 2θ value of 38.1°, respectively.25,40 The visualization of the SAED pattern in Fig. 2e further confirms the planes of (012), (−121) and (111) for LDH, AgV and Ag NPs, respectively. These images clearly certified that ALDH possessed several concentric rings, unveiling that it was a polycrystalline material. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) studies were carried out to uncover the information regarding the elemental composition of the 40ALDH heterostructure (Fig. 2f). The results of the EDS studies of the 40ALDH heterostructure indicated the co-existence of C, O, Zn, Cr, Ag and V elements. The formation of the 40ALDH heterostructure was also justified by elemental mapping. The mapping images of Zn–K, Cr–K, C–K, O–K, Ag–L and V–L are well defined and in sharp contrast (Fig. 2h–m). These mapping images proved the homogeneous distribution of Ag and AgV domains on the LDH surface. It is observable that all elements are localized at the nanoparticle region. Summing up the analysis from the HRTEM studies of 40ALDH further reveals the presence of well dispersed AgV and metallic Ag NPs on the surface of LDH and an intimate interface in the heterostructure.
 Fig. 2  TEM images (a), (b), HRTEM images (c), (d), SAED pattern (e), EDS (f), and high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images (g) of the 40ALDH heterostructure. Elemental mapping of Zn (h), Cr (i), C (j), O (k), Ag (l) and V (m). 
Chemical group and chemical states
The information about the bonding state and the co-ordination of LDH, AgV and ALDH samples was investigated by FTIR spectroscopy (Fig. 3). In the case of LDH, a broad absorption peak was observed at 3300–3600 cm−1 due to the stretching mode of the hydroxyl group attached to the octahedron positive sheet of brucite layers and stretching vibration of intercalated H2O groups.17 The broadness of the O–H stretching band gradually decreased after modification of AgV photocatalysts as the Ag+ ion bonded to the –OH group LDH and reduced to metallic Ag. The absorption peaks at 1630 cm−1 and 1396 cm−1 were ascribed to the H–O–H bending vibration band of the absorbed water molecule in all samples.41 The symmetric and antisymmetric stretching vibration peak of the carbonate anion in the intergallery region appeared at 1370 cm−1 and 1493 cm−1, respectively.37 The intensity of these bands gradually decreased after higher wt% loading of AgV. The peaks for M–O–H, O–M–O and M–O–M (M = Zn, Cr, V and Ag) lattice vibration modes are centered below 1000 cm−1. In the case of AgV, 40ALDH and 50ALDH, three shoulder peaks at 920, 849 and 700 cm−1 correspond to V–O, Ag–O–V and Ag–V stretching vibration, respectively.42 Similarly, the bands at 660, 585 and 500 cm−1 appeared in LDH and all ALDH nanocomposites represent Zn/Cr–OH and Zn–O–Cr stretching vibration modes. From FTIR spectra, it has been concluded that the higher wt% of AgV significantly affected the LDH unit and developed an energetic communication towards photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 3  FTIR spectra of as prepared (a) LDH, (b) 10ALDH, (c) 20ALDH, (d) 30ALDH, (e) 40ALDH, (f) 50ALDH and (g) AgV. 
To determine the surface chemical states of the various elements present in the ALDH material, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was carried out. The binding energy of surface chemical species was evaluated by the XPS spectrum. Fig. 4a–f shows the XPS spectra of 40 ALDH, which revealed the presence of Zn, Cr, Ag, V, C and O in the material. The survey scans of the XPS spectra are presented in Fig. 4g. In the present study, C 1s (Fig. 4a) was observed at a binding energy of 284.9 and 289.0 eV which indicated the reference carbon and the presence of intercalated carbonate anions in the layered structure of LDH.12 O 1s spectra showed three peaks, corresponding to binding energy values of 529.30, 531.5 and 532.5 eV, respectively (Fig. 4d). The first peak was due to lattice oxygen in the heterogeneous multiphase nanocomposites, the second peak was attributed to oxygen bonded in the CO32− anion in the interlayer space and the third peak was due to the hydroxide form in the positive sheet of LDH. The binding energy of Zn and Cr manifested the presence of Zn(OH)2 and Cr(OH)3 in the composites as shown in Fig. 4c and d. In pristine LDH, Zn 2p and Cr 2p show XPS signals located at a B.E of 1022.7 eV (Zn 2p3/2), 1045 eV (Zn 2p1/2), 577.6 eV (Cr 2p3/2) and 586.38 eV(Cr 2p1/2) as shown in Fig. S1,† in good agreement with previous literature,43 whereas in 40 ALDH Zn 2p and Cr 2p show a slightly positive shift in B.E at 1022.06 eV (Zn 2p3/2), 1045.1 eV (Zn 2p1/2), 577.6 eV (Cr 2p3/2) and 586.8 eV(Cr 2p1/2) in comparison with their neat counterparts. Another peak was observed at 573.3 eV in the Cr 2p XPS spectrum which was for metallic traces of Cr0.44 The AgV material on the surface of ALDH is mostly in the form of Ag+ and Ag0, which was confirmed by high resolution Ag 3d XPS spectra (Fig. 4e). The two shoulder peaks approximately at 368.0 and 374.0 eV can be ascribed to the binding energy of Ag 3d5/2 and Ag 3d3/2, respectively, and supported the +1 oxidation state of Ag. Ag 3d5/2 and Ag 3d3/2 were further deconvoluted into two different bands at 368.6 and 374.6 eV, indicating the Ag0 species in the AgV material.24 Additionally, as illustrated in Fig. 4f, two peaks at 516.9 eV and 522.0 eV correspond to V 2p5/2 and V 2p3/2 of V5+ in the AgV semiconductor.26,45 The binding energy of Ag 3d and V 2p in ALDH displayed a shift to lower energy compared to pristine AgV. The relative concentration of Ag0 was calculated to be 42% by considering the deconvoluted areas of both Ag+ and Ag0 peaks in the XPS spectra of Ag using the following equation: (6)
 Fig. 4  High resolution XPS spectra of (a) C 1s, (b) O 1s, (c) Zn 2p, (d) Cr 3d, (e) Ag 3d, and (f) V 2p and (g) XPS survey spectra of all elements. 
All the above XPS results emphatically demonstrated that positive shifting in the binding energy of Zn and Cr and negative shifting in the binding energy of Ag and V elements resulted in the formation of strong electronic coupling between AgV and LDH photocatalysts which is an effective approach to promote photocatalytic behavior for water and phenol oxidation.25,46
Optical properties, electronic and electrochemical band structures
For exploring the extent of the light absorption properties, the UV-vis DRS spectra of LDH, AgV and all ALDH nanocomposites were studied (Fig. 5a and b). The UV-vis DRS spectra of pristine LDH showed two intense absorption peaks at 413 and 570 nm. The first one was due to ligand to metal charge transfer spectra (LMCT), transition arising from the O-2p orbital to the Cr-3dt2g orbital and the second peak was attributed to metal to metal charge transfer spectra corresponding to d–d transition between Cr-3dtg and Cr-3deg orbitals. However, the AgV material had a broader absorption band at 470 nm in the visible region with an absorption edge of about 620 nm which was in accordance with previous literature and indicated the presence of metallic Ag.47 The AgV absorption spectra were composed of VO4 tetrahedra with the HOMO consisting of the Ag-4d and O-2p orbitals and the LUMO consisting of the V3d orbital.19 When the loading of AgV on LDH was increased from 10 to 50 wt%, the absorption edge was shifted towards the longer wavelength region. Moreover, an enhanced absorption shoulder around 500–600 nm revealed the SPR effect of Ag NPs.48 The two strong absorption peaks of LDH were merged with each other and showed a broad shoulder peak at 200–800 nm which was due to narrowing of the band gap.24 The encumbering of AgV particles on the surface of LDH revealed the shifting of the absorption edge compared with the LDH and AgV photocatalysts. These optical absorption results illustrated the enhanced absorption by nanocomposites to generate light induced charge carriers to improve the photocatalytic oxidation of water and phenol. The band gap energy of a crystalline photocatalyst was estimated by fitting the absorption data with Kubelka–Munk absorbance and Tauc's plot (Fig. 5c) using the following expression: (7)
 Fig. 5  UU-vis DRS spectra of (a) LDH, and (b) AgV with (x%) ALDH composites and (c) band gap images of LDH, AgV and 40ALDH. 
The band gap energy was calculated by plotting (αhυ)1/nversus hυ and extrapolating the straight line to the x-axis intercept as shown in Fig. 5c. In this equation, A, υ, h, Eg and α are the proportionality constant, light frequency, Planck's constant, band gap energy and absorption coefficient, respectively. The properties of transition in a photocatalyst depend on ‘n’ (for direct transition n = 1/2, and for indirect transition n = 2).17,49 In the present study, the neat LDH, AgV and 40ALDH catalysts showed direct allowed transition and band gap energy values were estimated to be 2.5 eV and 2.05 eV and 1.75 eV, respectively. 40ALDH showed a narrowing band gap compared to LDH and AgV due to the SPR effect of metallic Ag NPs.24
Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots based on capacitance were conducted to analyze the conductive types and carrier concentration of the semiconducting materials.50Fig. 6 shows the Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots of LDH and AgV. The relationship between the capacitance of the space charge region and the applied potential was derived from the Mott–Schottky plot and was represented by the following equation. (8)where C represents the interfacial capacitance of the space charge region; ND is the electron carrier density; ε0 and εs are the permittivity of free space and the dielectric constant of a semiconductor, respectively; Efb, E and e are the flat band potential, applied potential and electronic charge, respectively; and Kb is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. According to this M–S equation, the slope value in the M–S linear plot was inversely proportional to the carrier density and the product of the semiconductor dielectric constant. The carrier density (ND) was increased by dropping values in the slope. By extrapolating C−2 = 0, the flat band potentials of the semiconductor–electrolyte interface were determined. The overall shapes of reversed sigmoid plots consistent with those of typical n-type semiconductors with electrons as the majority carriers were obtained.51 The corresponding flat band potentials for LDH and AgV were found to be −0.68 V and −0.64 V versus the Ag/AgCl reference electrode (−0.08 V and −0.05 V versus NHE).52 However, for n-type semiconductors the conduction band (CB) edge potential practically coincides with the flat band potential. From the electronic band structure of LDH and AgV, the band gap energy was estimated to be 2.5 eV and 2.05 eV, respectively. So the valence band edge of LDH and AgV was easily calculated from the band gap energy and CB edge, and it was found to be 2.42 V and 2.0 V versus NHE.
 Fig. 6  Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots: (a) LDH and (b) AgV. 
Separation and transport efficiency of photogenerated electron–holes
To gain deeper insight into the photogenerated charge migration process in the photocatalytic reaction, PL measurements were conducted and the results are shown in Fig. 7. An efficient photocatalyst should transfer the surface charges and inhibit the electron–hole recombination process. The enhanced activity of 40ALDH relative to LDH, AgV, 10ALDH, 20ALDH, 30ALDH and 50ALDH was disclosed by the PL spectra. All the samples were examined in the range of 380–560 nm wavelengths with an excitation wavelength of 370 nm. As in Fig. 7, two strong emission bands were observed at the range of 420–450 nm in LDH (inset) and 10ALDH catalysts due to the band–band emission PL phenomenon of LDH, indicative of a high recombination rate of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. After loading of AgV wt% (20–50), the two strong emission bands became merged with the AgV emission band and showed broad spectra in the case of all ALDH samples. The intrinsic emission peak of AgV appeared at around 438 nm and suggests an improved separation efficiency of photoinduced charges. The PL signal of the pristine LDH becomes nearly quenched after hybridization with AgV demonstrating a remarkable depression of the electron–hole recombination. The decrease of the peak intensity indicates that the introduction of Ag/AgV NPs and the fabrication of the heterostructure not only significantly facilitate photoinduced charge transfer between the interfaces but also effectively inhibit the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, resulting in excellent photocatalytic performance. Generally, a decrease in the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs would lead to lower fluorescence intensity; compared with other photocatalysts, the peak intensities of 40ALDH was much lower. The PL quenching demonstrates efficient charge separation in the case of 40ALDH. This can be understood by the internal electron–hole transfer between LDH and AgV components, resulting in outstanding photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 7  PL spectra of LDH (inset), AgV and (x%) ALDH samples. 
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to reveal the transfer and separation efficiency of excited electron–holes in the electrode reaction kinetics for better understanding of the electron transfer process.53 The EIS data were presented in the form of Nyquist plots which can assess the charge migration and recombination properties of the photocatalyst films. Fig. 8 shows the Nyquist plots of LDH, AgV and 40 ALDH, in which the radius of the semicircle represents the surface charge transfer resistance arising at the contact interface between the working electrode and electrolyte solution and light induced electron–hole separation of the samples. In general, the smaller arc of a semi-circle indicates a decrease in the state interface layer resistance and an increase in the charge migration on the surface of a photocatalyst, while the larger arc has the larger charge transfer resistance along with a lower separation efficiency of photogenerated charge pairs.54 The surface charge transfer resistance (Rct) values of 64 Ώ and 82 Ώ are estimated for AgV and LDH, respectively. These larger semicircles observed for LDH and AgV electrodes lead to larger interfacial charge-transfer resistance, corresponding to lower conductivity of the material. After the introduction of 40 wt% of the AgV material into the LDH, the surface charge transfer resistance (Rct) value was reduced to 50 Ώ and exhibited the smallest surface charge transfer resistance indicating an effective separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs at the hybrid and fast interfacial charge transfer as the electron donor. Moreover, the straight line part in the lower frequency region was related to the Warburg impedance (Ws), which resulted from the transfer or diffusion of ions in the electrolyte which was in good agreement with the photocurrent response.55 It was clearly seen that the Warburg region was the smallest in the case of 40ALDH in comparison with LDH and AgV. The smallest Warburg region of the nanocomposites as compared to two single materials indicates effective ion movement which favors high photocatalytic performance. After AgV modification, a decrease in Rct values indicates changes in the density of the electron cloud distribution in the molecular chain, which results significantly high conductivity of the composite material. The formation of the interface between two semiconductors helps to decrease the charge transfer resistance with a faster charge separation rate which improves the photocatalytic activity of the composite. Also decreasing Rct value increases interfacial capacitance, owing to which there was an increase in the surface state density. The rate of photoelectrochemical reaction was significantly enhanced. Actually, the surface states performed as catalytic centers and access the surface photocatalytic reaction. Conclusively, the results of the EIS data suggested that the designing of 40ALDH was favored to reduce the charge transfer resistance and enhance the separation and transfer efficiency of photogenerated charge pairs, resulting in enhanced photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 8  EIS Nyquist plots of LDH, AgV and 40ALDH. 
Photoelectrochemical studies
To evaluate the photoresponse of as-synthesized LDH, AgV and 40ALDH materials, the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was performed. The catalytic activities of all the catalysts were qualitatively estimated from the value of limiting current density and the respective onset potentials. It was observed that neat LDH, AgV and 40ALDH showed a slightly higher anodic current density upon light irradiation compared to the dark conditions (Fig. 9a). A prominent anodic current density was observed in 40 ALDH, i.e. 4 mA cm−2, which is higher than that in the bare LDH (1.3 mA cm−2) and AgV (2.07 mA cm−2) photoanodes, hence suggesting that Ag and AgV functionalized on the LDH surface play important roles in accelerating the photocatalytic activity. The regular distribution of AgV NPs on the surface of LDH results in the effective separation of light generated charge carriers and enhances the visible light absorption capacity. In situ formation of Ag NPs helped to prolong the life time of photoinduced charges.56 The LSV curves of LDH, AgV and 40 ALDH had onset potentials of 1.0 V, 0.9 V and 0.4 V, respectively. Moreover, the anodic polarization curves studied in the range of 0 to 1.6 V also show an increase in the oxidation potential of the composites with successive cathodic shifts in the value of onset potentials, which in turn accelerate the transport of carriers assembled on the surface of LDH.57 As oxygen evolution and phenol oxidation are anodic processes, the photocatalytic reaction preferably takes place on the electrode surfaces at sufficiently anodic potentials. For anodic reactions, a lower onset potential (the potential at which the reaction starts) is better for the photocatalytic performance of the photoanode, which is in agreement with our photocatalytic activity.58
 Fig. 9  LSV plots under both darkness and light (a), Tafel plots (b) and CV curves (c) of LDH, AgV and 40ALDH. 
The catalytic kinetic efficiency of O2 evolution and phenol oxidation was further examined using steady-state Tafel plot analysis (Fig. 9b). The Tafel slope gives insights into the intrinsic electrochemical catalytic property of heterogeneous catalysts and also gives the rate determining steps of the photocatalytic reactions. Tafel plots are derived from the polarization curves using the Tafel equation.59 η = a + blogj(9)where η is the potential, b is the Tafel slope and j is the current density. This equation gives a relationship between the potential and the logarithm of the current, which are the crucial parameters for photocatalytic activity. The Tafel plots also provide very necessary information about geometric and electronic improvement of photocatalysts. As displayed in Fig. 7b, the estimated Tafel slope for LDH, AgV and 40ALDH was 378 mV dec−1, 278 mV dec−1 and 216 mV dec−1, respectively. The lowest Tafel slope of 40ALDH was the result of favorable geometric and electronic effects with enhanced surface area, suggesting the improved water and phenol oxidation kinetics over the 40ALDH composite and exhibiting a superior chemical and electronic coupling between the Ag, AgV and LDH materials.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is another technique for determining the stability of photocatalysts. The CV polarization curves of LDH, AgV and 40ALDH are shown in Fig. 9c. In the present study, the CV curve of the 40ALDH photoelectrode displayed a larger anodic current at different potentials as compared to that of pristine LDH and AgV, which accelerated the oxidation process and led to better photocatalytic activity towards O2 evolution and phenol oxidation.24
Photocatalytic performance

Photocatalytic oxygen evolution. 
Inspired by the studies of various groups on LDH based photocatalysts which have been found effective as water oxidation catalysts, we have carried out photocatalytic oxidation of water to generate molecular oxygen for transformation of light energy into chemical energy. The photocatalytic achievement of LDH, AgV and all ALDH composites was examined by monitoring the water oxidation into O2 evolution under visible light (λ ≥ 400) irradiation with AgNO3 as an electron trapping agent followed by this stoichiometric reaction.10 4Ag+ + 2H2O → 4Ag + O2 + 4H+(10)
As plotted in Fig. 10, the bare LDH material was highly active for water oxidation. Silva et al. confirmed that ZnCr LDH is a very efficient catalyst for O2 generation under visible light illumination.60 Additionally, AgV is also an oxidative photocatalyst under the same conditions. But owing to poor light capturing efficiency and high rate of charge recombination, neat LDH and AgV display a low rate of O2 evolution i.e. 365 and 379 μmol, respectively. After the hybridization of LDH with AgV, the photocatalytic activity towards O2 generation gradually increased up to 40ALDH, and then decreased at 50 ALDH. The O2 evolution performance of these ALDH photocatalysts was displayed in the following sequence: 40ALDH (571 μmol) > 50ALDH (522 μmol) > 30ALDH (516 μmol) > 20ALDH (456 μmol) > 10ALDH (424 μmol).
 Fig. 10  The amount of O2 evolution by LDH, AgV and (x%) ALDH photocatalysts. 

Photocatalytic phenol oxidation

Effects of photocatalysts on phenol oxidation. 
Furthermore, the photocatalytic activities of the synthesized nanocomposites were evaluated at pH 6.8 under direct natural sunlight irradiation by taking phenol as the model organic contaminant. In the absence of both the prepared photocatalyst and sunlight, negligibly small oxidation was observed such as 4% and 23%, respectively. However, about 93% of phenol oxidation was achieved in 3 h under direct sunlight irradiation. A curve representing the comparison in the percentage of oxidation is displayed in Fig. 11a. The photocatalytic oxidation capability of the as prepared catalysts is shown by the following sequence: 40ALDH (93%) > 50ALDH (86%) > 30ALDH (79%) > 20ALDH (72%) > 10ALDH (66%) > AgV(49%) > LDH(45%). The observed larger O2 evolution data and percentage of phenol oxidation clearly suggested the importance of this optimum amount (40%) of AgV in 40ALDH towards photocatalytic performances. The interaction among AgV, Ag, and LDH NPs further confirms the photocatalytic achievement of 40ALDH. With an increase in AgV loading on the surface of LDH, the concentration of metallic Ag NPs was also increased and exhibited the SPR phenomena which is in agreement with our UV-vis DRS study. This higher concentration of metallic Ag, on the surface of the 40ALDH heterostructure, traps the electron and suppresses the electron–hole recombination process. Furthermore, the superior photocatalytic performance of 40ALDH having an appropriate amount of Ag loading was due to the enhanced absorption by the SPR effect and the synergetic coupling interaction between AgV and LDH. However, in 50ALDH the photocatalytic performance towards phenol and water oxidation was significant but in comparison with 40ALDH it was much less. This is because in the case of 50ALDH, Ag4V2O7 might act as a recombination center for photogenerated electron–hole pairs.61 The lowest PL intensity, the largest photocurrent density, reduced arc in the Nyquiest plot and the smallest Tafel slope also claimed that the 40ALDH heterostructure showed the best photocatalytic performance. Tables 1 and 2 represent a state of comparison for O2 evolution and phenol oxidation, respectively, over different LDH modified nanocomposites. Fig. 11c displays a characteristic UV oxidation spectrum of phenol. Phenol exhibits an absorption peak at 270 nm which is found to decrease gradually with time as the reaction mixture is exposed to natural sunlight irradiation. The phenol oxidation process occurred through the formation of some aromatic intermediates. Upon the irradiation of solar light, the absorbance peak at 270 nm was first decreased to several absorbance peaks like catechol (278–280 nm) and p-benzoquinone (249 nm) and then finally converted to CO2 and water.62
 Fig. 11  (a), (b) The rate of phenol oxidation over all catalysts [(a) without photocatalyst, (b) without light, (c) LDH, (d) AgV, (e) 10ALDH, (f) 20ALDH, (g) 30ALDH, (h) 40ALDH and (i) 50ALDH] and (c) time-dependent UV-vis absorption spectra of the phenol solution in the presence of the 40ALDH sample. 
Table 1 The values of O2 evolution by different LDH modified nanocomposites




Photocatalysts
Visible light source
Preparation method
Incident light (nm)
Sacrificial agents
O2 evolution (μmol g−1 h−1)
Ref.




ZnCr-LDH
200 W Xe
Co-precipitation

λ > 400
AgNO3
1073

60



TbZnCr-LDH
150 W Xe
Hydrothermal followed by co-precipitation

λ > 420
AgNO3
1022

10



ZnCr/layeredTiO2
450 W Xe
Layer by layer

λ > 420
AgNO3
1180

63



ZnCr-LDH/RGO
—
Self-assembly

λ > 420
AgNO3
1200

64



ZnCr-LDH/POM
450 W Xe
Self-assembly

λ > 420
AgNO3
2400

65



TiO2@CoAl-LDH
300 W Xe

In situ growth

λ > 420
AgNO3
2240

66



g-C3N4/NiFeLDH
125 W Hg
Impregnation

λ > 420
AgNO3
14767

17




40ALDH (present research)

150W Hg



In situ hydrothermal


λ
> 420


AgNO

3



14250







Table 2 The rate of phenol oxidation over different LDH modified nanocomposites




Photocatalysts
UV/visible light source with incident light (nm)
Preparation method
Concentration/oxidation of phenol
Time (h)
Ref.




TiO2/MgAl LDH
8 W, UV Philips, λ = 365
Calcination
50 ppm/80%
8

67



TiO2/LDH (M2+/M3+/M4+) = Zn2+, Cu2+, Al3+, Fe3+ or Ti4+
100 W Hg, λ < 365
Impregnation
10 ppm/90%
5

68



150 W halogen, λ > 420


ϒ-Fe2O3/ZnAlFe LDH
700 W Pen-Ray power supply, λ < 400
Impregnation
25 ppm/96%
3

69



CeO2/Mg–Al LDH
Pen-Ray power supply, λ < 400
Impregnation
80 ppm/50%
7

70



Zn2+Me3+(MeAl/Ga)LDHs doped with Ga2O3 and In2O
180 W Unnasol US 800 solar simulator
Calcination followed by coprecipitation
25 ppm/77%
4

71




40ALDH (present research)


Exposed on the whole range of solar light



In situ hydrothermal method


20 ppm/93%


3









Effects of pH on photooxidation. 
The pH of the aqueous solutions plays a vital role in determining the percentage and kinetics of the photocatalytic oxidation of the phenolic compounds. The nature of the formation of active species involved in phenol oxidation was also greatly affected by the pH of the solution. The pKa value of phenol is 9.9.70 In order to study the phenol oxidation and adsorption, experiments were carried out by varying the pH from 4 to 11. The percentage of oxidation and adsorption as a function of pH is shown in Fig. 12a and Table S1†, respectively. The highest phenol oxidation efficiency (95%) under sunlight irradiation and adsorption efficiency (23%) in 3 h are observed at pH 7. The surface charge of the catalyst is an important parameter for oxidation of phenol. By using the Drift method, the pzc value of 40ALDH was calculated to be 7.7. At pH < pzc value, the surface was positively charged and favored the columbic force between the positively charged surface of the catalyst and the negatively charged phenolate ion, which was in good consistency with the adsorption phenomena.18 Thus at pH 7 the oxidation as well as adsorption percentage of phenol was maximum compared to that at other pH values. Under both strongly acidic and basic conditions, the percentage of oxidation was found to decrease. Under very strong acidic or basic conditions the oxygen containing functional groups present on the nanocomposites would dissolve and decrease the adsorption process as well as the rate of oxidation.72 Phenol being weakly acidic undergoes dissociation feebly and exists to some extent in the form of a phenolate ion, owing to which maximum phenol molecules get adsorbed on the surface of the composite through the formation of H-bonding (Fig. 12b). As the rate of photooxidation of organic pollutants mainly depends on the number of surface active sites on the photocatalyst and the extent of adsorption, the rate of degradation increases with adsorption.
 Fig. 12  (a) Photocatalytic oxidation of phenol with different pH and (b) interaction of phenol with the 40ALDH photocatalyst. 

Kinetics of photocatalytic phenol oxidation
To understand deeply the reaction kinetics of the phenol oxidation, the Langmuir–Hinshelwood model was implemented.73 It demonstrates the photocatalytic oxidation of phenol as a function of irradiation time with the support of catalysts. The Langmuir–Hinshelwood model is generally utilized to explain the kinetics of the photocatalytic reaction of organic compounds in aqueous solution and give a relation between the rate of oxidation and the concentration of organic reactants. Additionally, the kinetic curves of all catalysts with irradiation of light and without light were investigated by fitting their kinetic curve according to an appropriate pseudo-first-order process. Fig. 13a shows the plots of ln(C/C0) versus irradiation time followed by this expression. (11)where C0 is the initial concentration of phenol (mol L−1); C is the final concentration after the reaction; Kapp and t are the apparent pseudo-first-order rate constant (min−1) and the reaction time, respectively. The independent rate constant kapp (Fig. 13b) of the used concentration can be estimated from the kinetic plot using a linear regression, and the t½ factor indicated the time required to oxidize phenol into half of its initial concentration and it is calculated by the following equation. (12)
 Fig. 13  The kinetic plot (a) and apparent rate constant plot (b) of phenol oxidation. 
The apparent oxidizing rate constant (Kaap), reaction half-time (t1/2) and correlation coefficient (R2) of phenol oxidation over LDH, AgV and all ALDH composites are determined and listed in Table 3. The higher value of Kaap (254 × 10–4 min−1) with the lowest value of tt1/2 (27 × 10–4 min) was also evidenced for the higher percentage of phenol oxidation over 40ALDH.
Table 3 
K
aap, R2 and t1/2 values of as-prepared catalysts




Catalysts

K
aap (10–4 min−1)

t
1/2


R
2





Without light
2.753
0.251725
0.89


Without catalyst
13.4
0.051716
0.72


LDH
29.8
0.023255
0.79


AgV
38.2
0.018141
0.91


10ALDH
59.7
0.011608
0.90


20ALDH
69
0.010043
0.95


30ALDH
89.5
0.007743
0.99


40ALDH
254
0.002728
0.99


50ALDH
122.3
0.005666
0.97




As we know, the photostability of the photocatalyst decides its service lifetime and practical application, we have further investigated the stability and reusability of the 40ALDH catalyst. The results of recycling experiments towards phenol and water oxidation are depicted in Fig. S2a and b.† 40ALDH was found to show a slightly decreased photocatalytic activity towards phenol oxidation after each photocatalytic cycle. The slightly reduced photooxidation rate was due to the loss of the photocatalyst during the recovery process.18 Similarly, a constant value of photocatalytic activity towards O2 evolution was observed after repeating three consecutive cycles. The slight decline of the O2 generation curve in the 3rd cycle indicates that the originated Ag NPs as side products from the reduction of AgNO3 (sacrificial agent) were deposited on the surface of the material and caused some depletion of photoactivity.10
Furthermore, to examine the photostability of the photocatalyst, the used 40ALDH sample was collected after three cycles of phenol oxidation and investigated for UV-vis DRS and FTIR spectra. Fig. S2c and d† show the UV-vis DRS and FTIR spectra of the 40ALDH sample after and before the oxidation reaction. The absorbance peak intensity and visible light capturing area were slightly weak after 9 h irradiation of sunlight. As shown in Fig. S2d,† the intensity of all stretching and bending vibrations was slightly decreased after the oxidation reaction. From all of these results, it was confirmed that the 40ALDH photocatalyst could maintain good stability after multiple regeneration cycles.
Study of active species
To understand the exact mechanism of photocatalytic oxidation of phenol and the principle behind improved photocatalytic performance of the 40ALDH heterostructure, scavenger tests were performed under solar light irradiation (>400 nm). The trapping experiments were carried out by using 1 mM BQ (˙O2−), DMSO (e−), IPA (˙OH) and EDTA (h+) over LDH, AgV and 40ALDH photocatalysts and the results are presented in Fig. S3a.† The significantly inhibited photooxidation of phenol proves that ˙O2− was the dominant reactive species which played a crucial role in the photocatalytic oxidation process. Moreover, the results also indicate that in comparison with e−, ˙OH and photogenerated h+ were also involved in the photooxidation process. In the case of LDH and 40ALDH, ˙OH was the main active species in comparison with AgV. But in the case of EDTA, the rate of oxidation for LDH, AgV and 40ALDH (45%, 49.1% and 93%) was reduced to 26.5%, 22% and 65.3%, respectively, indicating h+ was also equally responsible to carry out the photocatalytic oxidation reaction. From these results of the active species trapping experiment it was found that the rate of oxidation was remarkably reduced when ˙O2− was trapped as well as by trapping h+ and ˙OH in the photocatalytic process. Therefore, the ˙O2− radical is the primary active species, h+ and ˙OH are to play the secondary role in photocatalytic oxidation process. On combination of these three active species, the photocatalytic activity of the 40ALDH ternary heterostructure increases significantly.
Furthermore, the quantification experiments of ˙OH and ˙O2− generation were carried out under 1 h solar light irradiation by measuring the fluorescence intensity of TAOH and the transformation percentage of NBT, respectively (Fig. S3b and c†). A gradually decreased PL intensity at about 426 nm appeared from 40ALDH to AgV. However, no peak was observed in the absence of solar light irradiation. Actually, the OH˙ radical readily reacts with TAOH to produce a highly fluorescent product, 2-hydroxy terephthalic acid.73 As the PL intensity is directly proportional to the concentration of ˙OH, the strongest PL intensity of the ternary 40ALDH heterostructure suggests the formation of a larger number of ˙OH radicals compared to neat LDH and AgV materials. Additionally, the surface –OH groups of the LDH are able to produce ˙OH radicals which play a secondary role in the photocatalytic oxidation process. Fig. S3c† represents the absorption spectra of NBT catalyzed by these three samples (40ALDH, LDH, AgV); the 40ALDH ternary heterostructure was found to be a more efficient catalyst for producing ˙O2− than LDH and AgV materials. The difference in the fluorescence intensity of the TAOH measurement and the absorbance value of the NBT experiment can be attributed to the effective separation of interfacial charge carriers at 40ALDH.
Photocatalytic charge transfer mechanism
On the basis of characterization, photocatalytic data and results of the active species experiment, we can conclusively say that both AgV and Ag enhanced the photocatalytic activity of 40ALDH. A schematic photocatalytic mechanism induced by SPR over the 40ALDH ternary heterostructure is depicted in Scheme 3. The drastically reinforced photocatalytic activity achieved by the 40ALDH material was due to the synergetic interaction between the SPR effect of metallic Ag and the polarization field around AgV, which in turn accelerates the photoinduced electrons in Ag NPs far away from the AgV interface to facilitate the separation and quick transfer of interfacial excited electron–hole pairs.74 According to the Mott–Schottky plot in the electrochemical study and band gap energy, the CB potential of LDH and AgV was −0.08 V and −0.06 V (vs. NHE), respectively. Similarly, the VB potential of LDH and AgV was 2.42 V and 1.99 V (vs. NHE), respectively. The Fermi level of Ag was situated at 0.4 V (vs. NHE).75 From our UV-vis DRS spectra of the ternary 40ALDH heterostructure, the SPR of Ag was observed at 560 nm, so the electrons were induced at an energy of 1.81 eV with regard to the Fermi level of Ag. In order to maintain the energy band alignment and the formation of the heterostructure the Fermi level of silver was shifted to −1.81 V (vs. NHE) in the presence of visible light irradiation. The energetic electrons migrate to the CB of both LDH and AgV.75,76 The production and separation of charge pairs were accelerated by resonant field energy transfer of Ag NPs to these two semiconductors. Upon visible light irradiation, both semiconductors are excited and result in the formation of electrons and holes on their CB and VB, respectively. Due to the relatively negative CB potential of LDH(−0.08 V vs. NHE) and AgV (−0.06 V vs. NHE) compared to O2/˙O2−(−0.046 eV vs. NHE), the accumulator electrons on the CB of both LDH and AgV react with O2 to produce ˙O2−. So the amount of ˙O2− is increased; it reacts with proton to generate H2O2 and subsequently ˙OH is produced. These ˙OH radicals get directly involved in the reaction process and oxidize phenol into carbon dioxide and water. More positive VB potential of LDH (2.42 V vs. NHE) than ˙OH/H2O (2.27 eV) and OH−/˙OH (1.99 eV), are found suitable to oxidize OH− to produce ˙OH for phenol oxidation, but the OH− cannot be oxidized to h+ at the VB of AgV due lower potential (1.99 V vs. NHE).77 According to our active species trapping experiment, the hole is one of the active species for the reaction process. So the photogenerated holes at the VB of LDH and AgV directly oxidize phenol. In the water oxidation reaction, the photogenerated h+ on the VB is responsible for O2 evolution in the presence of AgNO3 as the scavenger. It can be concluded that the superior photocatalytic behavior of the 40ALDH ternary heterostructure is based on multiple interacting factors like (i) the plasmon-induced electrons produced by the SPR effect of Ag and (ii) the formation of the intimately contact interface between these three components (LDH, Ag and AgV).
 Scheme 3  A charge transfer mechanism over the 40ALDH heterostructure. 
Conclusion
A series of ternary Ag@AgV/LDH plasmonic heterostructured nanocomposites were successfully synthesized by an in situ hydrothermal followed by co-precipitation method. Among all, the 40ALDH nanohybrid shows excellent photocatalytic activity with 571 μmol of O2 evolution and 93% of phenol oxidation. The presence of Ag3VO4 along with Ag0 exhibits the SPR effect and amplifies the absorbance of parent LDH. From HRTEM and XPS studies, the presence of the intimate Schottky interface and synergetic coupling effect among the three species is clearly visualized. The lowest fluorescence intensity in the PL spectra induces the quick charge transfer and migration process in 40ALDH resulting in a better photocatalytic activity. Again the improved activity is also associated with the highest photocurrent density (4 mA cm−2), the reduced arc of the Nyquist plot (50 Ώ) and the lowest Tafel slope (216 mV dec−1). Finally, a possible photocatalytic mechanism was also proposed on the basis of active species trapping experiments. The recycling experiments further confirm good photocatalytic stability of the photocatalyst. This present investigation might provide a new perspective for developing stable and high performance plasmonic heterogeneous photocatalysts for challenging energy and environmental problems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are very much thankful to the management of SOA University for their encouragement and support.
References
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Suzuki, Z. Pan, J. Seo, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Takata, K. Seki, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1675–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Betley, Q. Wu, T. V. Voorhis and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1849–1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Cukier and D. G. Nocera, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 337–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Calace, E. Nardi, B. M. Petronio and M. Pietroletti, Environ. Pollut., 2002, 118, 315–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Wang, Y.-H. Hsieh, M.-Y. Chou and C.-Y. Chang, Appl. Catal., B, 1998, 21, 1 CrossRef .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Xiang, D. Yan and F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13250–13258 CAS .
J. Fang, Z. X. Zheng and Z. Shourong, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 164, 250–1256 Search PubMed .
X. Zong and L. Wang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 18, 32–49 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mohapatra and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10744–10766 CAS .
Y. Fu, F. Ning, S. Xu, H. An, M. Shao and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3907–3913 CAS .
S. Kumar, M. A. Isaacs, R. Trofimovaite, L. Durndell, C. M. A. Parlett, R. E. Douthwaite, B. C. Martin, C. R. Cockett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 394–404 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak and K. M. Parida, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 21166–21180 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Li, C. Xu, P. Yang, D. H. L. Ng, P. Song and M. Zuo, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 698, 852–862 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, R. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Xiang and F. Lia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17977–17982 CAS .
Y. Tang, R. Wang, Y. Yang, D. Yan and X. Xiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19446–19455 CAS .
F. Ning, M. Shao, S. Xu, Y. Fu, R. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2633–2643 CAS .
S. Nayak, L. Mohapatra and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18622–18635 CAS .
L. Mohapatra and K. M. Parida, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 91, 73–80 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, C. Zhangab and C. Zhouab, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 50146–50154 RSC .
R. Konta, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 3061–3065 RSC .
Y. Tang, Z. Jiang, J. Deng, D. Gong, Y. Lai, H. T. Tay, I. T. K. Joo, T. H. Lau, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 438–446 CAS .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16413–16419 RSC .
W. D. Chemelewski, O. Mabayoje and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26803–26808 CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10119–10126 CAS .
J. Wang, H. Ruan, W. Li, D. Li, Y. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Shao and Y. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13935–13943 CAS .
W. Zhao, Y. Guo, S. Wang, H. He, C. Sun and S. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 335–343 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, H. Fan, J. Sun and S. Ai, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 120, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 263254–263260 CrossRef .
J. Sun, H. Fan, B. Nan and S. Ai, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 130, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, J. Zhu, J. Sun, S. Zhang and S. Ai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2523–2530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nishimura, D. Mott, A. Takagaki, S. Maenosono and K. Ebitani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9335–9343 RSC .
Y. Cai, F. Tan, X. Qiao, W. Wang, J. Chena and X. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 18407–18412 RSC .
V. Kostas, M. Baikousi, K. Dimos, K. C. Vasilopoulos, I. Koutselas and M. A. Karakassides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7303–7311 CAS .
V. K. Tomer, R. Malik and K. Kailasam, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 3658–3668 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Yan, H. Ji, Z. Chen, Y. Xu, L. Huang, Q. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Xu and H. Li, SpringerPlus, 2016, 5, 369 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-S. Chang, Y.-C. M. Li, T.-W. Chung, Y.-S. Lin and C.-M. Huang, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 407, 224–230 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baliarsingh, L. Mohapatra and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4236–4243 CAS .
A. Nashim, S. Martha and K. M. Parida, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 2352–2359 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, Y. Xu, S. Huang, M. Xie, M. He, H. Xu, H. Li and Q. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 11–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, L. Tang, G. Zeng, C. Feng, H. Dong, J. Wang, H. Feng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou and Y. Pang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1494–1511 RSC .
V. R. Raja, D. R. Rosaline, A. Suganthi and M. Rajarajan, Solid State Sci., 2017, 67, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shekofteh-Gohari and A. Habibi-Yangjeh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 2402–2413 RSC .
K. M. Parida and L. Mohapatra, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1173–1178 RSC .
S. Surviliene, V. Jasulaitiene, A. Cesuniene and A. Lisowska-Oleksiak, Solids States Ionics, 2008, 179, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, Z. Li and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 27515–27525 RSC .
G. Zhang, B. Lin, Y. Qiu, L. He, Y. Chen and B. Gao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 4758–4765 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Y. Ren, G. J. Zhou, J. P. Wang, H. F. Cheng, Z. Y. Wang, J. Zhan, B. B. Huang and M. H. Jiang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 228, S283–S286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Y. Xu, M. Xie, Q. Liu, H. Xu, Y. Zhao, M. Hea and H. Li, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 30845–30854 RSC .
R. Lopez and R. Gomez, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, D. Wang and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5280–5289 CAS .
C. Bhattacharya, H. C. Lee and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9633–9640 CAS .
X. Jin, X. Fan, J. Tian, R. Cheng, M. Li and L. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 52611–52619 RSC .
Y. Bu, Z. Chen and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 622–630 CrossRef CAS .
P. Madhusudan, J. Yu, W. Wang, B. Cheng and G. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 14345 RSC .
D. Kandi, S. Martha, A. Thirumurugan and K. M. Parida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4834–4849 CAS .
J. Huo and H. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 342–349 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, C. Mao, R. Zhang, M. Shao, M. Wei and P. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11016–11025 CAS .
C. Comninellis and A. Nerini, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1995, 25, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lu, Y. Chen, H. Li, A. Dowd, M. B. Cortie, Q. Xie, H. Guo, Q. Qi and D.-L. Peng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 18919–18928 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Silva, Y. Bouizi, V. Fornes and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13833–13839 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ren, J. Fan, S. Liu, W. Li, F. Wang, H. Li, X. Liu and Z. Chang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 95156–95164 RSC .
G. Darabdhara, P. K. Boruah, P. Borthakur, N. Hussain, M. R. Das, T. Ahamad, S. M. Alshehri, V. Malgras, K. C.-W. Wu and Y. Yamauchi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8276–8287 RSC .
J. L. Gunjakar, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, I. Y. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 113, 14998–15007 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Gunjakar, I. Y. Kim, J. M. Lee, N.-S. Lee and S.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1008–1017 CAS .
J. L. Gunjakar, T. W. Kim, I. Y. Kim, J. M. Lee and S.-J. Hwang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2080 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dou, S. Zhang, T. Pan, S. Xu, A. Zhou, M. Pu, H. Yan, J. Han, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Dua, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2243–2249 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Paredes, M. A. Valenzuela, G. Fetter and S. O. Flores, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2011, 72, 914–919 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Seftel, M. Niarchos, C. Mitropoulos, M. Mertens, E. F. Vansant and P. Cool, Catal. Today, 2015, 252, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Seftel, M. Puscasu, M. Mertens, P. Cool and G. Carja, Catal. Today, 2015, 252, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Valente, F. Tzompantzi and J. Prince, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 102, 276–285 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carja, E. F. Grosu, M. Mureseanu and D. Lutic, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 5402–5412 CAS .
T. Wu, L. Mao and H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 23246–23254 RSC .
L. Mohapatra and K. M. Parida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16985–16996 RSC .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22116–22125 CAS .
F. Chen, H. Huang, C. Zeng, X. Du and Y. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7777–7791 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sultana, S. Mansingh, M. Scurrell and K. M. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 55, 12297–12307 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Tian, H. Huang, C. Liu, F. Dong, T. Zhang, X. D. S. Yu and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17120–17129 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7qi00742fThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2018
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  A diagram of the synthesis procedure of 40ALDH.	 

 	Scheme 2  A schematic description of formation of Ag NPs.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 1  PXRD patterns: (a) AgV and (b) LDH and all (x%) ALDH samples.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images (a), (b), HRTEM images (c), (d), SAED pattern (e), EDS (f), and high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images (g) of the 40ALDH heterostructure. Elemental mapping of Zn (h), Cr (i), C (j), O (k), Ag (l) and V (m).	 

 	Fig. 3  FTIR spectra of as prepared (a) LDH, (b) 10ALDH, (c) 20ALDH, (d) 30ALDH, (e) 40ALDH, (f) 50ALDH and (g) AgV.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  High resolution XPS spectra of (a) C 1s, (b) O 1s, (c) Zn 2p, (d) Cr 3d, (e) Ag 3d, and (f) V 2p and (g) XPS survey spectra of all elements.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 5  UU-vis DRS spectra of (a) LDH, and (b) AgV with (x%) ALDH composites and (c) band gap images of LDH, AgV and 40ALDH.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 6  Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots: (a) LDH and (b) AgV.	 

 	Fig. 7  PL spectra of LDH (inset), AgV and (x%) ALDH samples.	 

 	Fig. 8  EIS Nyquist plots of LDH, AgV and 40ALDH.	 

 	Fig. 9  LSV plots under both darkness and light (a), Tafel plots (b) and CV curves (c) of LDH, AgV and 40ALDH.	 
η = a + blogj	(9)
4Ag+ + 2H2O → 4Ag + O2 + 4H+	(10)

 	Fig. 10  The amount of O2 evolution by LDH, AgV and (x%) ALDH photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a), (b) The rate of phenol oxidation over all catalysts [(a) without photocatalyst, (b) without light, (c) LDH, (d) AgV, (e) 10ALDH, (f) 20ALDH, (g) 30ALDH, (h) 40ALDH and (i) 50ALDH] and (c) time-dependent UV-vis absorption spectra of the phenol solution in the presence of the 40ALDH sample.	 

ZnCr-LDH	200 W Xe	Co-precipitation	
λ > 400	AgNO3	1073	
60

TbZnCr-LDH	150 W Xe	Hydrothermal followed by co-precipitation	
λ > 420	AgNO3	1022	
10

ZnCr/layeredTiO2	450 W Xe	Layer by layer	
λ > 420	AgNO3	1180	
63

ZnCr-LDH/RGO	—	Self-assembly	
λ > 420	AgNO3	1200	
64

ZnCr-LDH/POM	450 W Xe	Self-assembly	
λ > 420	AgNO3	2400	
65

TiO2@CoAl-LDH	300 W Xe	
In situ growth	
λ > 420	AgNO3	2240	
66

g-C3N4/NiFeLDH	125 W Hg	Impregnation	
λ > 420	AgNO3	14767	
17


40ALDH (present research)	
150W Hg
	

In situ hydrothermal
	
λ
> 420
	
AgNO

3

	
14250
	


TiO2/MgAl LDH	8 W, UV Philips, λ = 365	Calcination	50 ppm/80%	8	
67

TiO2/LDH (M2+/M3+/M4+) = Zn2+, Cu2+, Al3+, Fe3+ or Ti4+	100 W Hg, λ < 365	Impregnation	10 ppm/90%	5	
68

150 W halogen, λ > 420
ϒ-Fe2O3/ZnAlFe LDH	700 W Pen-Ray power supply, λ < 400	Impregnation	25 ppm/96%	3	
69

CeO2/Mg–Al LDH	Pen-Ray power supply, λ < 400	Impregnation	80 ppm/50%	7	
70

Zn2+Me3+(MeAl/Ga)LDHs doped with Ga2O3 and In2O	180 W Unnasol US 800 solar simulator	Calcination followed by coprecipitation	25 ppm/77%	4	
71


40ALDH (present research)
	
Exposed on the whole range of solar light
	

In situ hydrothermal method
	
20 ppm/93%
	
3
	


 	Fig. 12  (a) Photocatalytic oxidation of phenol with different pH and (b) interaction of phenol with the 40ALDH photocatalyst.	 
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 13  The kinetic plot (a) and apparent rate constant plot (b) of phenol oxidation.	 

Without light	2.753	0.251725	0.89
Without catalyst	13.4	0.051716	0.72
LDH	29.8	0.023255	0.79
AgV	38.2	0.018141	0.91
10ALDH	59.7	0.011608	0.90
20ALDH	69	0.010043	0.95
30ALDH	89.5	0.007743	0.99
40ALDH	254	0.002728	0.99
50ALDH	122.3	0.005666	0.97

 	Scheme 3  A charge transfer mechanism over the 40ALDH heterostructure.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7qi00742f

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2018
