Fabrication of a low-cost functionalized poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanohybrid membrane for superior fuel cells   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8SE00631H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8SE00631H
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1269-1282Fabrication of a low-cost functionalized poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanohybrid membrane for superior fuel cells†

        
          
            Om 
            Prakash
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Karun Kumar 
            Jana
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Murli 
            Manohar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vinod K. 
            Shahi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Saif A. 
            Khan
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Devesh 
            Avasthi
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Pralay 
            Maiti
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi 221 005, India. E-mail: pmaiti.mst@itbhu.ac.in
bElectro-Membrane Processes Division, CSIR-Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar 364002, Gujarat, India
cInter University Accelerator Centre, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110 067, India
Received 
      23rd December 2018
    , Accepted 14th March 2019First published on 20th March 2019AbstractNanochannels were created in poly(vinylidene fluoride) and its nanohybrid films by bombarding with high-energy swift heavy ions. The nanochannel dimensions of the membranes varied from 80 to 100 nm using 5 × 107 ion fluence of SHIs. The walls of the nanochannels were grafted with the monomer 3-hexylthiophene using the free radicals generated by the swift heavy ions, which was followed by their sulphonation for better ion conduction. Organically modified nanoclay enhanced the electroactive β-phase in the polymer and its extent increased after irradiation, grafting and sulphonation, resulting in a better material for different electroactive applications. The semiconducting current–voltage characteristics of the functionalized nanochannels were studied through a parameter analyzer of the bulk film against the insulating behavior of the neat polymer. The current–voltage characteristic of the membrane exhibited strong dependency on functionalization and showed superior conduction in the functionalized nanohybrid membrane. The proton conductivity of the functionalized nanohybrid was 4.59 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 30 °C, while methanol permeability was drastically reduced as compared to that of standard Nafion 117; this indicated the higher values of the selectivity parameter, which is a key feature of the better performance of the fuel cell membrane: 1.02 × 105 S cm−3 s as opposed to the value of 0.73 × 105 S cm−3 s for Nafion 117. The membrane electrode assembly studies of the functionalized nanohybrid showed 0.76 V open circuit voltage, leading to power density of 92 mW cm−2 and current density of 252 mA cm−2, which were significantly higher than those of the functionalized pure polymer and standard Nafion 117 membrane, indicating its good potential for applications in fuel cells.
Introduction
Power generation (energy demand) from renewable resources is the need of the hour in the 21st century to save our environment because fossil fuels are getting exhausted very fast, leading to the increase in the demand for portable power sources.1 To fulfill the energy requirements in the portable, stationary field, there is a need to promote the research in the portable energy generating technology such as solar cells, the devices using thermal energy and wind energy and the fuel cell technology.2–5 The major drawbacks of all the above portable power sources are their bigger size and high cost. Now, more efforts are being dedicated to reducing the cost and the size of all these commercializable portable stationary power sources. The fuel cell technology is one of the most promising technology in terms of its low cost and small size as a stationary power source.6 In the fuel cell technology, the electrolyte is a key factor and based on the electrolyte, different types of fuel cells have been developed, such as solid oxide fuel cells,7 molten carbonate fuel cells,8 phosphoric acid fuel cells9 and alkaline fuel cells.10 Among these, the polymer electrolyte membrane or proton exchange membrane (PEM) has received tremendous attention for fuel cells and for the conversion of chemical energy to electrical energy.11,12 The polymer-based electrolyte membrane is a thin plastic membrane that can be used in a fuel cell technology electrolyte-cum-electron separator.13 The proton exchange capabilities of the membrane are commonly developed through the functionalization of the polymer chain by different monomers or ionic species such as phosphates, sulphates and chlorides to transport the ions from one side of the electrode to the other side, which facilitates the overall chemical reaction and thereby separates the electrons.14,15 Several methods have been reported in the literature to introduce different ionomers in the polymer chain and hence to obtain the insertion of reactive sites in long-chain molecules. Different methods used to introduce reactive sites in polymers are the sol–gel method, the phase inversion technique, and the methods involving the use of electrons, γ-irradiation and swift heavy ions (SHIs).16 Among these, the use of high-energy swift heavy ions is one of the most promising particle radiation techniques,16 where SHIs are exposed to the polymer film in vacuum; subsequently, SHIs lose most of their energy during passage through the thin film.17–19 The energy loss occurs either through atomic collision or electronic excitation when they interact with macromolecules.20 However, the path of the latent track is predominantly amorphous, which can be removed by selective chemical etching to create nanochannels across the thickness of the polymer film. Different sizes and shapes of nanochannels can be formed depending on various factors such as the linear energy transfer (LET), size of ions, mass of ions and etching conditions.21 After SHI irradiation followed by selective chemical etching, the free radical active sites are exposed in the polymer membrane, which has the potential to initiate the polymerization reaction within the nanochannels when allowed to react with the monomer to form a graft copolymer.22–24 A good proton exchange membrane (PEM) should satisfy the following requirements: (1) high proton conductivity, (2) low fuel crossover, (3) sufficient water uptake and adequate swelling and (4) good thermal and mechanical stabilities both under dry and wet conditions along with low cost and long-term durability.24–26 The quest for a better membrane has continued to improve the fuel cell technology. Ionomer Nafion 117, developed by DuPont Inc., is one of the most common membranes with good proton conductivity (σ ≥ 10−2 S cm−1) at a low temperature.27 The disadvantages of this commercially available membrane are high fuel crossover, leading to lower cell efficiency, and potential and high-temperature instability (0–80 °C), which can limit its use as a membrane.28 In view of the fact that the membrane properties such as difficulty in processing and the cost of fuel cell systems are closely related, there is an apparent need for an optimized or conceptually new type of membrane. Functionalized poly(ethylene-co-tetrafluoroethylene) (ETFE) has been reported as having open circuit voltage up to 0.9 V.29 Sulfonated poly(arylene ether) blends with polypyrrole (s-PEEK/Ppy) are reported in the literature as proton exchange membranes with proton conductivity of 6.2 × 10−2 S cm−1, methanol permeability of 2.33 × 10−7 cm2 s−1 and selectivity parameter of 0.11 × 105 S cm−3 s.30 Poly(sulfone) and sulphonated poly(imide)s31 have shown excellent chemical and thermal stabilities in fuel cell applications, but their weaker aryl sulphonic acid groups cause lower proton conductivity.14,32,33 The sulphonation of a PVDF composite affords proton conductivity in the order of 5.0 × 10−3 S cm−1 (ref. 20) and also fulfills the basic requirements of the proton exchange membrane in the fuel cell technology. Fluoropolymers, including poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF) and its copolymers, exhibit excellent properties such as high mechanical and thermal stabilities; moreover, they are thermoplastic, nonreactive, electrically insulating, durable and biocompatible and exhibit well-regulated porosity, which make them suitable as proton exchange membranes.34,35 PVDF and its copolymers exist in five different crystalline phases, namely, non-polar α, polar β, γ, δ and ε. These forms crystallize depending on the crystallization conditions in the presence of different fillers. The all-trans conformation (TTTT) (all hydrogen and fluorine species are at opposite sides to each other in the polymer backbone) of the polymer exhibits the orthorhombic piezoelectric β phase.36 Therefore, the nucleation of the β phase in PVDF is crucial to generate piezoelectric and ferroelectric properties for smart membranes.37 In order to overcome these shortcomings, focus is given to design low-cost ion-exchange membranes for fuel cells using an accelerator. In this work, nanochannels were fabricated in a polymer thin film by the irradiation of high-energy swift heavy ions, followed by selective etching and subsequent chemical grafting appropriate for proton conduction. The efficiency of the fabricated fuel cell was examined using these membranes and they were found to be suitable for real applications in the fuel cell technology.
Experimental
Materials
Commercially available SOLEF 110008 granules of poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) were kindly supplied by Ausimont, Italy, for this study. Cloisite 30B [bis(hydroxyethyl) methyl tallow ammonium ion-exchanged montmorillonite] and southern clay, U.S., CEC 110 meq./100 g, were used (tallow is a mixture of C16 & C18 long chain alkenes) as a nanofiller. Potassium permanganate (KMnO4, LOBA Chemie) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) (Himedia Chemicals) were used as the etchants. Potassium meta-bisulphate (K2S2O5, LOBA Chemie) was used for washing purposes. The monomer 3-hexylthiophene (3HT, Sigma-Aldrich, 99+%), chloroform (CHCl3) and methanol (CH3OH, LOBA Chemie) were used for grafting purposes. Chlorosulphonic acid (HSO3Cl, LOBA Chemie) was used for sulphonation on the graft copolymers.
Preparation of the nanohybrid
The nanohybrid was prepared through a solution route by dissolving an appropriate amount of PVDF granules in DMF in a beaker with stirring at a high speed (rpm 1000) at 65 °C. A predetermined amount of nanoclay (4 wt%) powder was well dispersed in another beaker under high speed (1000 rpm) stirring, followed by ultrasonication. The two solutions were mixed and stirred at a high speed for about 2 hours at 65 °C and then, the solvent was evaporated rapidly over a hot plate, followed by drying under reduced pressure in a vacuum oven. Henceforth, the PVDF nanohybrid will be termed as “NH” for 4 wt% nanoclay in the polymer matrix. Both the dry nanohybrid (NH) and neat PVDF were melt-pressed into thin films of 50–60 μm thickness and of size 4 × 4 cm2 using a hot compression molding machine (S.D. Instruments, Kolkata, India) for irradiation of the specimens.
Functionalization of the membrane
Around 50 μm thin films of PVDF and its nanohybrid (NH) were irradiated by 120 MeV Ag+ ions in vacuum of 5 × 10−6 mbar at the Inter University Accelerator Center, New Delhi, India. The ion fluence (number of ions per unit area) used was 5 × 107 ions per cm2 to secure the effect of fluence on the membrane properties. For the fuel cell electrolyte membrane, a low fluence of 5 × 107 scattered ions from a thin gold foil (250 μg cm−2) in a GPSC chamber (general purpose scattering chamber) was used for fuel cell membrane measurement of size 4 × 4 cm2. The irradiated pristine PVDF and its nanohybrid (NH) films were chemically etched using potassium permanganate solution (0.25 mol L−1) in a highly alkaline medium (9 mol L−1) at 65 °C for 4 h. The etched brownish precipitate of MnO2 films was quickly immersed in a K2S2O5 saturated solution for 15 min, followed by washing in distilled water. The residual water at the surface was entrapped with a filter paper and dried at 65 °C for 24 h in a vacuum oven under reduced pressure. The porous etched films were immersed in the monomer solution (0.5 mL distilled non-ionized form of 3-hexylthiophene (3-HT) in 1.5 mL distilled chloroform) to initiate the grafting process under a nitrogen atmosphere. The solution containing the film was stirred (solution polymerization) at 0 °C for 24 h under a nitrogen atmosphere. The homopolymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) other than grafted P3HT was washed away after stirring in chloroform for 12 h. Finally, the films were washed with methanol (CH3OH) and then dried at 65 °C overnight under reduced pressure in a vacuum oven. Sulphonation (electrophilic substitution reaction) was performed on P3HT-grafted PVDF and its NH films using chlorosulphonic (HSO3Cl) acid at 65 °C for 2.5 h. The condition was optimized by altering the temperature and time so that mechanically stable polymer films were obtained after chemical modification for ready use in fuel cell applications. The films were washed with deionized water after sulphonation and dried at 65 °C for 24 h under reduced pressure. Henceforth, we will term the etched, etched + graft and etched + graft + sulphonated specimens as -e, -g, and -g-s, respectively, for both pure PVDF and NH.
Water uptake
To calculate the water uptake (% WU) of the membrane at 30 °C, the membranes were first dried under reduced pressure in a vacuum oven at 65 °C for 24 h and their weight (Wdry) was recorded immediately; this was followed by the immersion of the membrane in deionized water for 24 hours and we measured the wet membrane weight (Wwet) after it was engrossed with the residual water of the membrane. Water uptake was calculated using the following eqn (1) (1)
Microscopic investigation
The surface morphologies of the etched, graft and functionalized thin membranes were investigated using a scanning electron microscope (SUPRA 40, Zeiss) after Pd–Au alloy coating was performed using a sputtering apparatus. Polarizing optical microscopy (POM) (Leica) was used to examine especially the bulk morphology of the thin film (∼50 μm) in the optical range at 500× magnification. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed in the semi-contact mode at ambient conditions using a silicon nitride tip. The samples used for the morphology investigation were then irradiated, followed by the functionalization of the specimens as mentioned earlier.
Spectroscopic measurement
The UV-visible absorptions of PVDF, NH and its functionalized membranes (∼50 μm) were recorded in the range of 200–800 nm wavelength using a Jasco V-650 spectrometer with a scan rate of 2 nm s−1. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on Alpha Bruker Eco-ATR furnished with a ZnSe ATR crystal in the range of 500–4000 cm−1 with 100 scans at a resolution of 2 cm−1. For the FTIR measurements, the functionalized and pristine membranes were put on the ATR crystal, followed by clamping before the scan was performed. The degree of sulphonation of the membranes was assessed through 1H-NMR using a BRUKER 500 MHz spectrometer at room temperature in DMSO-d6 solvent. The chemical shift values were reported in ppm (δ) and the degree of sulphonation was calculated using the area under the curves. The degree of sulphonation was measured from the ratio of the integrals of the peak area using the following eqn (2) (2)here, X and Y are the integration areas of the peaks assigned as a–g, as mentioned in the NMR spectra in Fig. 2a. The samples used for the spectroscopic investigation were then irradiated, followed by the functionalization of the specimens as mentioned earlier.
XRD
Wide-angle X-ray diffraction (Rigaku Miniflex) patterns were measured using a Cu Kα radiation source with a wavelength λ = 0.154 nm, and the current and voltage of the generator were kept at 40 kV and 15.0 mA, respectively. The thin film was placed on the quartz holder at room temperature and scanned at diffraction angles (2θ) from 10° to 40° at a scanning rate of 2° min−1 to investigate the crystalline structure and the qualitative nature of the dispersion of the nanoclay in the matrix polymer.
Thermal analysis
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out for the functionalized membrane using a Mettler-Toledo DSC/TGA instrument in the temperature range of 40 to 600 °C with a heating rate of 20° min−1 under a nitrogen atmosphere to determine the thermal stability of the functionalized polymer. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was conducted on the functionalized samples using a Mettler 832 instrument. The DSC instrument was calibrated with indium and zinc before the experiments and the melting temperature and heat of fusion were measured using a computer software attached to the instrument. The samples were heated at a scan rate of 10° min−1 under a nitrogen atmosphere.
Electrical characterization
The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the functionalized membranes were measured using a parameter analyzer (Keysight-B1500A model semiconductor analyzer) from −10 to +10 V at room temperature with a step voltage of 100 mV.
Proton conductivity measurement
The proton conductivity (κm) of the functionalized membranes was measured using alternating current (ac) impedance spectroscopy connected with a humidifier via a potentiostat/galvanostat frequency response analyzer (Auto Lab, Model PGSTAT 30). The samples (membrane) were clipped between two domestic-made stainless steel circular electrodes (4.0 cm2). A sinusoidal alternating current with frequency range from 1 to 106 Hz and 1 μA s−1 scanning rate was applied across the electrodes. The spectrum of the blank short-circuited cell was also recorded and these data were eliminated (as a series circuits) from each of the recorded spectrum of the functionalized membranes to remove the cell wiring resistances and other parameters. The actual spectra were viewed as complex impedance plots with the real component of Z′ on the X-axis and the imaginary component of Z′′ on the Y-axis (Z = Z′ − iZ′′); the ionic resistance of the functionalized membrane was predicted at the crossroads of the X-axis with the extrapolation to a low frequency. The membrane resistance was determined from Nyquist plots using the Fit and Simulation method. The proton conductivity (κm) of each membrane was calculated from eqn (3): (3)here, L is the distance between the electrodes used to measure the potential, R is the resistance of the membrane and A is the surface area of the membrane.
Activation energy
The activation energy (Ea), as the minimum energy required for proton transport across the membrane, also indicates the thermal stability of a membrane; the higher the activation energy, the greater the stability of the membrane at a higher temperature. The activation energy of a functionalized membrane can be calculated using the Arrhenius equation (eqn (4)): (4)here, R is the universal gas constant (8.314 J mol−1 K−1), T is the absolute temperature (K) and A is the pre-exponential factor. Proton conductivity and methanol permeability were used to calculate the selectivity parameter (SP) using the following eqn (5): (5)here, PMeOH is the methanol permeability and km is the proton conductivity.
Methanol permeability
Methanol permeability of the functionalized membranes was measured using a diaphragm diffusion cell, consisting of two compartments with a capacity of approximately (80 cm3) separated by a vertical membrane with 20 cm2 effective area. The membrane was compressed between two compartments, which were stirred throughout the experiments. Before the experiment, the membranes were equilibrated in a water–methanol mixture for 12 h. Initially, one compartment (A) contained 30% (v/v) methanol–water mixtures, while the other compartment (B) contained double distilled water. A methanol flux across the membrane was aroused due to the concentration gradient. The methanol concentration in compartment B with respect to time was observed by measuring the refractive index with a digital refractometer (Mettler Toledo RE40D). The methanol permeability (P) was obtained by the equation given below in eqn (6):38 (6)here, A is the effective membrane area, L is the thickness of the membrane, CB(t) is the methanol concentration in compartment B at time t, CA(t − t0) is the change in the methanol concentration in compartment A between time 0 and t, and VB is the volume of compartment B. The time duration of 24 h was measured for the permeability test. All the experiments were carried out at 30 °C. The uncertainty for each measurement was less than 2%.
Fabrication of membrane electrode assembly (MEA)
Membrane electrode assembly (MEA) was fabricated through a three-layer structure (anodic catalyst, functionalized membrane and cathode catalyst layer).15 A carbon paper (Toray carbon paper, thickness: 0.27 mm) was moist-proofed with 12 wt% PTFE solution using a brush painting method. The anodic catalyst Ru/Pt (10/20 wt% on carbon paper) mixture and cathodic Pt catalyst (30 wt%) were coated on the carbon paper. Two pieces of 25 cm2 size of the gas diffusion layer (GDL) were fabricated by coating a solution of carbon black (Vulcan XC72R) (0.95 mg cm−2) containing PTFE dispersion on the carbon paper. The loadings of Pt and Ru in GDL were 1 mg and 0.5 mg, respectively. The anode, membrane and cathode were put together at a pre-melting condition of the polymer membrane and the electrode assembly was pressed using compression molding at 125 °C for 5 min at 2.5 ton load. MEA was assembled in a single cell (FC25-01 DM fuel cell). The polarization curves (current–voltage) were measured with the help of MTS-150 manual fuel cell test instruments (ElectroChem Inc., USA) with a controlled fuel flow and temperature as well as pressure regulation attached to an electronic load controller ECL-150 (ElectroChem Inc. USA). The data were recorded in the air mode of operation at 0.68 atmospheric pressure with a 30% MeOH–water mixture at the anode side with a pressure of 0.48 atmospheric pressure at 70 °C for a representative membrane.
Results and discussion
Nanochannel fabrication
The fabrication of nanochannels in poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and its nanohybrid (NH), as organically modified layered silicates dispersed in a polymer matrix, was carried out using high-energy swift heavy ion (SHI) irradiation to create a latent tract of nanometer dimensions in the films, followed by selective chemical etching to take out the amorphous zone exclusively. It is worth mentioning that the passage of high-energy ions through the polymer film melts the surrounding area (tens of nanometer diameters) due to the ion–polymer matrix interactions and their rapid quenching converts them into an amorphous track along with the generation of free radicals in the polymer chains, as shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the swift heavy ion irradiation on a polymer membrane, followed by selective chemical etching on the irradiated membrane, grafting within the nanochannels, and sulphonation. The bottom column indicates the grafting reaction within the nanochannels, followed by sulphonation to afford conducting nanochannels. 
The dimension of the track zones depends on the linear energy transfer (LET) of the swift heavy ions (120 MeV Ag+ with a fluence of 5 × 107 ions per cm2).39 The dimension of the nanochannels was examined using AFM, showing black holes after the etching of the irradiated specimen, as indicated by arrows in Fig. 1a, as opposed to the smooth surface before etching. The average dimensions of the nanochannels of PVDF and NH were 90 ± 5 nm, 80 ± 5 nm, respectively, with narrower distribution of channel size in the nanohybrid, as shown in the respective histograms. The formation of nanochannels was also confirmed through the SEM images with similar dimensions of holes and their distribution (Fig. 1b). Interestingly, the channel dimensions became regular and smaller in the nanohybrid compared to the irregular and bigger shapes of holes in pure PVDF. Two-dimensional rigid layered silicate platelets along with needle-like morphology (will be discussed later) in the nanohybrid helped restrict the amorphous track (which subsequently formed the nanochannel) in an almost circular shape against the asymmetrical track/channel in the spherulite-dominated pure PVDF. Furthermore, the number density of nanochannels was quite high in the nanohybrid as compared to that in pristine PVDF, due to which we observed 10% of channel area in the nanohybrid against 5% in pure PVDF.6 The area of the nanochannels was measured from the number of channels multiplied by the average circular area of the channel. Moreover, the advantage of using Ag+ ions in this study was to create larger channel dimensions (∼80–90 nm), mainly because of their bigger size against previously reported dimensions of 60 and 45 nm using Si+ (ref. 19) or Li+ ions,32 respectively, with a similar fluence of SHIs. However, regulated and bigger dimensions of nanochannels were created in PVDF using nanoclay at a moderate fluence, which could also maintain the mechanical integrity of the film for use in real applications such as fuel cell membranes.
 Fig. 1  (a) AFM images of both PVDF and the nanohybrid (NH) before and after radiation. The arrows indicate the location of channels. Histogram shows the distribution of channel dimensions; (b) SEM images of pristine PVDF and NH before and after irradiation, and the bottom histogram indicates the distribution of channel dimensions. 
Grafting of PVDF and functionalization within the nanochannels
Swift heavy ion irradiation results in certain physical changes in a polymer film, such as chain scission, double bond formation, bond breaking, formation of free radicals and other phenomena. These free radicals are exclusively located in the amorphous latent track and they remain at the periphery of the nanochannels after etching out of the amorphous zone. These free radicals at the edge of the nanochannels act as initiators; the grafting with PVDF chains was designed using 3-HT monomer, leading to the filling up of the nanochannel cylinder with the conducting P3-HT graft, followed by the sulphonation of P3-HT to make the nanochannels better conducting. Grafting and sulphonation were confirmed through H1-NMR measurements from the appearance of the peaks at δ = 2.80 and 1.95 ppm for the grafting of P3-HT on PVDF chains,40 at δ = 7.90 ppm for the graft sulphonation in P3-HT chains, and at δ = 8.2, 7.7, 7.2 and 5.6 ppm for the sulphonate proton20,40 in the PVDF chain (direct sulphonation), as shown in Fig. 2a. The PVDF characteristic peaks appear at δ = 2.9 and 2.3 ppm for the head-to-tail and head-to-head configurations, respectively.33,41 The degrees of suphonation were calculated from the integral peak areas and were found to be 25% and 30% for pure PVDF and nanohybrid, respectively. The higher degree of suphonation in the nanohybrid arises from its larger nanochannel volume, which is subsequently filled with the P3-HT graft. The grafting was also confirmed through FTIR measurements from the appearance of the peak positions at 1649 and 1730 cm−1 due to the corresponding –CC– and –CS symmetrical stretching vibrations of the thiophene aromatic ring attached to the PVDF chain (Fig. 2b). Moreover, symmetrical stretching frequencies of aliphatic –CH3 and –CH2– were observed at 2926 and 2843 cm−1, respectively,42,43 as shown in the ESI Fig. S1,† along with a peak at 1415 cm−1 for the CH3– deformation vibration of the P3-HT group.44 The stretching vibration band of the sulphonate –OH group appeared at 3400 cm−1 for both PVDF and its NH after sulphonation, and its broadness suggested an interactive system through hydrogen bonding (ESI Fig. S1†). The sulphonation in the main chain of PVDF was visualized through the peak positions at 1047 (ref. 45) and 989 cm−1 due to the SO2 and SO3− vibration peaks attached to the PVDF chain, respectively.46 Furthermore, the appearance of peaks at 836 and 1230 cm−1 for the nanohybrid and sulphonated species indicated the presence of polar β- and γ-phases, respectively. It is noteworthy that the nanoclay nucleate β-phase in PVDF with grafting followed by sulphonation induced a further polar β-phase in PVDF against only α-phase (peaks at 764 and 795 cm−1) observed in pure PVDF.47
 Fig. 2  (a) 1H-spectra of pristine PVDF, PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s measured using 500 MHz magnetic field NMR. Respective proton positions are indicated in the chemical structure (inset) and spectrum; (b) FTIR spectra of pristine PVDF, PVDF-g-s, NH and NH-g-s, indicating various peak-assigned peak positions; (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of PVDF, NH, PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, showing the peak position by vertical lines; (d) SEM images of PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, showing filling up of the channels after grafting; and (e) AFM image after grafting of the indicated specimens, showing the filling up after grafting and functionalization. 
The UV-visible spectra of the specimens before and after grafting and functionalization are shown in Fig. 2c. Pure PVDF does not show any absorption band, while the nanohybrid exhibits a peak at 265 nm due to π–π* transition arising from the CC bond present in the organically modified nanoclay.48 Furthermore, a strong but broad band appears at 513 nm in the spectrum of PVDF-g-s, which is assigned to the π–π* transition of the conjugated backbone of the 3-HT graft along with an absorption band of the sulphonate group. A similar peak at 550 nm is observed for pure P3-HT, while significant blue-shifts for PVDF-g-s occur due to the confined conformation of the grafted species within the constrained nanochannels.6,43 Interestingly, NH-g-s (functionalized nanohybrid) shows a wider band at 525 nm due to numerous nanochannels in the nanohybrid. Furthermore, another band at 325 nm becomes visible for both PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s after grafting and sulphonation due to the n–π* transition in the sulphonate group.49 However, the spectroscopic measurements confirm the grafting of P3-HT and subsequent sulphonation within the nanochannels. Now, it is pertinent to show the effect of grafting and functionalization within the nanochannels following the process involved, as shown in Scheme 1. Clear nanochannels were observed after etching out the amorphous track caused by irradiation. The SEM images of PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s clearly indicate that there are no nanochannels in the membrane film resulting from graft polymerization within the nanochannels (Fig. 2d), which is further substantiated from the AFM micrographs of the above-mentioned specimens regarding the filling up of the nanochannels (Fig. 2e). Following the process depicted in Scheme 1, nanochannels were created through the chemical etching of the latent track generated using swift heavy ions and these nanochannels were filled up through grafting using the free radicals located in the periphery of the channel walls; this was followed by sulphonation to make the nanochannels conducting in the presence of P3-HT (conducting polymer) and sulphonate groups within the nanochannels.
Structural modifications
The effect of crystallinity and the overall structural modification were studied through wide-angle X-ray diffraction. The semi-crystalline structure of neat PVDF before irradiation showed three distinct peaks at 2θ of ∼17.8°, 18.4° and 20.06°, corresponding to the crystalline planes of (100), (020) and (110); this indicated the presence of α-phase (TGTḠ), and its intensity decreased considerably after irradiation, grafting and functionalization (Fig. 3a) primarily due to SHI-induced amorphization.48 Furthermore, the nanohybrid before irradiation exhibited a peak at 20.30°, corresponding to the (110)/(200) plane of the piezoelectric β-phase (TTTT); contrary to the result for PVDF, the intensity of the peak increased after grafting and functionalization, leading to a greater extent of the β-phase.48,50 The nanostructural investigation of the nanohybrid before and after sulphonation is presented in the ESI Fig. S2.† Pristine PVDF did not show any nanostructure peak in the XRD pattern, while a peak at 2θ of ∼6.1° appeared for the nanohybrid, indicating the intercalated structure of the nanoclay, which remained almost constant after grafting and sulphonation. The quantitative analysis of the phase fraction was performed through the deconvolution of the XRD peaks, showing a considerable increase in the β-phase in NH-g-s (72%) as opposed to the negligible presence of the polar phase in PVDF (4%) under similar conditions (Fig. 3b). The β-phase fractions after grafting were 8% and 59% in PVDF-g and NH-g, respectively. It is worth mentioning that PVDF did not possess any β-phase before irradiation, while ∼25% polar β-phase was observed in NH. The whole patterns of deconvolution are presented in the ESI Fig. S3.† The nanohybrid of the PVDF copolymer with hexafluoropropylene (HFP) exhibited only 46% (ref. 6) of the electroactive β-phase under similar conditions of SHI exposure, followed by grafting with P3-HT and sulphonation against 72% in this study; this significantly enhanced the electroactive phase in the PVDF nanohybrid presumably due to the better dispersion of the nanoclay in PVDF in comparison to that observed for the HFP copolymer. The spherulitic morphology of pristine PVDF compared to the mesh-like morphology of the nanohybrid seen under a polarized optical microscope also consolidated the phase transformation in the nanohybrid (Fig. 3c). Grafting and subsequent functionalization changed the morphology to needle-like both in PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, which was similar to that of the polar β-phase, as discussed in the XRD studies. However, the grafting and sulphonation processes induced the piezoelectric β-phase and its extent was significantly higher in the nanohybrid as compared to that in pure PVDF. The origin of the polar β-phase within the nanochannels is understood to occur from the orientation of grafting in an asymmetric manner, which influences the PVDF molecules to crystallize in the β-phase. Furthermore, the greater crystallinity in NH-g-s helped improve the mechanical stability of the nanohybrid membrane.
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the indicated samples PVDF, PVDF-g, PVDF-g-s (lower column), and the upper column displays layered silicate-dispersed specimens NH, NH-g, NH-g-s showing various crystalline planes. (b) Deconvoluted XRD patterns of PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s showing different phases. (c) Polarizing optical microscopy images of PVDF, NH, PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, showing spherulites in PVDF and mesh-like morphology in NH, while needle-like morphology can be seen after grafting and functionalization. 
Effect of functionalization on thermal and electrical properties
The thermal stabilities of neat PVDF, PVDF-g-s, NH and NH-g-s (grafted and sulphonated specimens) were measured using a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA); the thermograms are presented in Fig. 4a. Pure PVDF degraded at 471 °C, corresponding to 5 wt% loss, and showed a single sharp degradation step.51 The degradation behavior remained similar for the hybrid membrane, but the degradation temperature shifted slightly to a lower temperature as reported previously;52 however, two-step degradation patterns were evident for both PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s. The first step of degradation displayed early degradation at 220 °C due to the decomposition of the sulphonate group (–SO3H) attached to the polymer chain; the second step involved sharp degradation due to the decomposition of the main PVDF chains.20 The greater degradation of the functionalized nanohybrid could be explained from the higher degree of sulphonation compared to that for PVDF. The melting behaviors of PVDF, PVDF-g-s, NH and NH-g-s are presented in Fig. 4b; we can observe decrease in the melting temperature (Tm) by ∼17 °C after grafting and sulphonation for both PVDF and its NH specimens. This is presumably due to a considerable amount of β-phase in the functionalized membranes, as discussed in the XRD and morphology section, in addition to the diluent effect in the presence of P3-HT grafting on the PVDF chains.53 The slightly higher melting temperature for NH as compared to that for PVDF was due to the nucleation of the γ-phase along with the piezoelectric β-phase in the presence of the 2D nanoclay.25 The DSC results supported the FTIR results of the formation of piezoelectric polar β- and partially polar γ-phases in nanohybrids, while the extent of the β-phase increased upon grafting and subsequent sulphonation, as evident from the higher and sharp melting peaks of NH-g-s.
 Fig. 4  Thermal and electrical behaviors of the membranes: (a) thermograms of neat PVDF, NH and their grafted and sulphonated species (PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s). (b) DSC thermograms of PVDF/NH and their functionalization membrane indicating the melting peak positions. (c) I–V measurements under DC electrical conductivity measurements. (d) Water uptake values in percentage of the indicated membranes with error bars. 
The current–voltage (I–V) characteristic curves of PVDF and its nanohybrid before and after grafting followed by sulphonation are shown in Fig. 4c. As expected, pristine PVDF and NH exhibit very low currents both at positive as well as negative bias, indicating their insulating behaviours (ESI Fig. S4†), while the irradiated and functionalized membranes (PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s) display a systematic increase in the current with the applied bias voltage and attain 100 and 1000 nA currents at a bias voltage of 10 V for the PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s membranes, respectively. The greater degree of sulphonation arising from the comparatively large functionalized area (∼10%) in the nanohybrid is the reason behind the exhibition of a significantly higher current in NH-g-s as compared to that for functionalized PVDF under similar applied voltages. The electrical conductivity of the functionalized membrane was measured using the Van-der Pauw measurement (solid thin sample)54 and conductivity values of 4.4 × 10−6 and 4.2 × 10−7 S cm−1 were found for NH-g-s and PVDF-g-s, respectively, due to the linear chain (well-ordered) configuration of the conducting P3-HT polymer within the confined nanochannels.55 This alignment facilitated the transport of electrons, while the grafting of styrene monomer having coiled configuration inside the nanochannels restricted the electron transport. The calculation of the functionalized nanochannel area was performed from the total surface area and the area covered by the nanochannels considering the average diameter (area) multiplied by the number of nanochannels. Higher conductivity was also expected from the larger channel dimension with the Ag+-exposed membrane (greater amount of grafting) as compared to that from a relatively smaller channel dimension using Si+- or Li+-exposed membranes. However, more sulphonating groups attached to P3-HT as well as the polymer chain are the driving force for better ion transport. Water uptake (WU) is an important criterion in determining the performance of a proton exchange membrane as sufficient water is required as the mobile phase to assist proton conductivity and to maintain the humidity of the membrane for fuel cell efficiency. The nanohybrid membrane (NH-g-s) showed a higher water uptake (20%) as compared to the functionalized PVDF membrane (15%), as shown in Fig. 4d, and the value of water uptake was similar to previous results.32 It is noteworthy that pure PVDF and NH exhibited low water uptake (less than 5%) due to their hydrophobic characters. However, grafting followed by sulphonation in the nanochannels improved the hydrophilic character of the membrane, making it suitable for proton conduction, which is an essential criterion for any membrane to be used in fuel cells.
Proton conductivity and methanol permeability of the functionalized membrane
Proton conductivity and methanol permeability are two other important properties for a good proton exchange membrane besides all the above-mentioned properties of a developed membrane such as morphological criterion, thermal and mechanical stabilities, electrical properties and water uptake. Lower methanol permeability and higher proton conductivity are the major requirements of a polymer electrolyte membrane. To achieve better ion conduction, high anionic ionomer loading is generated through grafting, followed by sulphonation in the nanochannels, which are chemically attached to the main chain. A comparative study of proton conductivity was evaluated in the temperature range of 30–80 °C; the results are presented in Tables 1 and 2 for comparing the values with those of the standard Nafion 117 membrane.
Table 1 Conductivities (κm × 10−2 S cm−1) of the indicated membranes (functionalized PVDF and nanohybrid) at different temperatures




Membrane
Temperature


30 °C
40 °C
50 °C
60 °C
70 °C
80 °C




PVDF-g-s
4.21
4.69
5.31
6.08
7.06
7.84


NH-g-s
4.59
5.23
6.27
7.16
7.85
9.01




Table 2 Membrane conductivity (κm), methanol permeability (P) at 30 °C, energy of activation (Ea) and power density values for different membranes measured at 30 °C using a 30% methanol–water mixture.




Membrane

κ
m (10−2 S cm−1)

P (10−7 cm2 s−1)

E
a (kJ mol−1)
Power density (mW cm−2)





a The data is taken from ref. 15.





PVDF-g-s
4.21
4.61
11.0
81.6


NH-g-s
4.59
4.49
11.3
92.0


Nafion 117a
9.56
13.1
6.5
63.3




Functionalized specimen (NH-g-s and PVDF-g-s) membranes showed proton conductivity values of 4.59 × 10−2 and 4.21 × 10−2 S cm−1, respectively, indicating the considerably high proton conductivity in the functionalized nanohybrid membrane as compared to that for functionalized PVDF, especially at a higher temperature; a similar value for the Nafion 117 membrane was achieved (9.56 × 10−2 S cm−1).25 The higher proton conductivity in the functionalized nanohybrid was primarily due to greater sulphonation in the grafted component within the nanochannels. However, both the functionalized membranes (PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s) showed higher conductivity with increasing temperatures, exhibiting the semiconducting nature of the membrane (Fig. 5a). The activation energies (Ea) were calculated from the slopes of the curves following the Arrhenius equation and were found to be 11.0 and 11.3 kJ mol−1 for PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, respectively, compared to the much lower value of 6.5 kJ mol−1 of standard Nafion 117. The higher activation energy of the functionalized hybrid membrane indicated its greater stability at a high temperature as compared to that of Nafion 117; this clearly demonstrated the superior property of the developed membrane and its ability to overcome the shortcoming of the Nafion membrane, especially for high-temperature uses. It is worth mentioning that considerably lower conductivities of 1.22 × 10−2 and 2.55 × 10−2 S cm−1 using Li+ and Ag+ ions as SHIs with styrene were reported, as expected from the negligible amount of grafting in smaller channels and the non-conducting graft.32
 Fig. 5  (a) Arrhenius plot (proton conductivity) kmvs. 1/T for PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s; (b) methanol permeability of the indicated membranes compared to the standard Nafion 117 values measured under similar conditions. 
Methanol permeability across the membrane occurs in DMFCs (direct methanol fuel cells), which increases at a higher temperature when the fuel passes from one electrode (anode) to another electrode (cathode) and causes a drop in the open circuit voltage (OCV), resulting in decrease in the fuel cell efficiency. The methanol permeability results along with proton conductivity, activation energy and power density values of the functionalized membranes are presented in Table 2. The methanol permeability values were considerably reduced to 4.61 × 10−7 and 4.49 × 10−7 cm2 s−1 for functionalized PVDF and nanohybrid (PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s), respectively, from the higher value of Nafion 117 (13.10 × 10−7 cm2 s−1) (Fig. 5b). The lower methanol permeability of the functionalized nanohybrid membrane was due to the greater barrier effect in the presence of 2D nanoclay platelets uniformly distributed in the polymer matrix.15 The ratio of proton conductivity and methanol permeability describes the efficiency of the membrane in terms of the selectivity parameter (SP); the values of 1.02 × 105 and 0.91 × 105 S cm−3 s are calculated for NH-g-s and PVDF-g-s, respectively, indicating the superior performance of the functionalized membranes compared to that of the Nafion 117 membrane (SP = 0.73 × 105 S cm−3 s). Furthermore, the nanohybrid membrane exhibited better performance as compared to the functionalized PVDF membrane in terms of lower methanol permeability, higher proton conduction and greater selectivity parameter along with improved water uptake. It is noteworthy that all these superior properties in the nanohybrid arise from its greater degree of sulphonation, due to which it is a versatile membrane for fuel cell applications. Moreover, the advantage of much lower methanol permeability can enhance the fuel cell efficiency by reducing the voltage drop of the fuel cell; in this work, it is much lower than the value for a previously reported membrane.6
Fuel cell efficiency in MEA stack
Polarization (I–V characteristic) curves are used to measure the efficiency of a fuel cell membrane in DMFC. A complex membrane electrode assembly (MEA) sequence shown in Fig. 6a and b indicates the fuel cell performance (polarization curves) of the PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s membranes. Membrane electrode assembly (MEA) studies of the functionalized nanohybrid and PVDF membrane showed 0.753 and 0.713 V open circuit voltages (OCV), respectively, indicating the better performance using the nanohybrid membrane, as compared to the measured open circuit voltage of standard Nafion 117 under similar conditions (0.682 V, OCV). A possible reason for the higher value of OCV of the nanohybrid membrane may be its superior proton conductivity through the enhancement of grafting and sulphonation within the nanochannels, which can facilitate the cell performance. The power density of DMFC using NH-g-s showed a very high value of 92.0 mW cm−2 at a current density of 252.60 mA cm−2 against the value of 81.63 mW cm−2 at a current density of 251.40 mA cm−2 for functionalized PVDF (Fig. 6c). It is noteworthy that Nafion 117 exhibited 63.3 mW cm−2 power density at a current density of 219.21 mA cm−2 under similar measurement conditions, demonstrating the superior fuel cell activity using the functionalized nanohybrid as a proton exchange membrane. The functionalized nanohybrid membrane exhibited higher OCV, power density, current density, water uptake and proton conductivity than functionalized PVDF and standard Nafion 117 presumably due to the greater grafting followed by sulphonation inside the nanochannels. However, the Si7+-irradiated HFP-hybrid membrane followed by grafting (P3-HT) and sulphonation showed OCV of 0.68 V, current density of 140 mA cm−2 and lower power density of 45 mW cm−2.6 The porous membrane using the accelerator and subsequent grafting with styrene provided only 0.60 V OCV, current density of 170 mA cm−2 and power density of 30 mW cm−2, which were much lower than the values obtained in the present work; moreover, we also observed improved methanol permeability using the PVDF nanohybrid membrane.32 Furthermore, the 2D nanoclay dispersed in the polymer matrix converted it into the piezoelectric β-phase, whose content was further enhanced after sulphonation within the nanochannels; this provided the possibility of fabricating a smart membrane.
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic illustration of the set-up employed for the fuel cell efficiency test (complete cell stack with MEA); (b) comparison of the polarization curves of the indicated membranes; and (c) power density as a function of current density of the indicated membranes compared to the values of standard Nafion measured under similar conditions. 
Conclusions
A hybrid proton exchange membrane was developed by irradiating swift heavy ions using an accelerator, followed by functionalization for fuel cell applications. An amorphous latent track of nanometer dimensions caused by the high-energy swift heavy ion irradiation was selectively etched out chemically to create nanochannels of 90 nm average diameter. These nanochannels were filled with the conducting polymer using the free radicals generated during the swift heavy ion passage at the periphery of the nanochannel walls, followed by sulphonation to make it have better ion conduction. 1H NMR and FTIR studies confirmed grafting and functionalization. 2D layered silicates dispersed in the polymer matrix converted it into the piezoelectric β-phase (25%), whose content became significantly higher (72%) after the functionalization of the membrane. Morphological investigations also supported the filling up of the nanochannel and the structural conversion (α- to β-phase). The thermal and mechanical stabilities of the membranes were measured through TGA and UTM and were found to be appropriate for membrane applications. The water uptake of the hybrid membrane reached 20% and it showed considerably high proton conductivity, indicating that the membrane was suitable for fuel cells. The polarization curve of the I–V characteristics also supported the channel conductivity; the proton conductivity of the functionalized hybrid (NH-g-s) membrane was found to be 4.59 × 10−2 S cm−1. Methanol permeability, one of the most important criteria for proton exchange membranes, was found to be quite low (4.49 × 10−7 cm2 s−1) as compared to those of pure polymer and standard Nafion 117 (13.1 × 10−7 cm2 s−1). Direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) efficiency using the developed hybrid membrane was measured and we found excellent power density of 92.0 mW cm−2 against the value of 63.6 mW cm−2 of Nafion 117 under similar conditions. The relatively higher open circuit voltage (0.752 V) and current density (252.60 mA cm−2) also indicated the superior fuel cell performance using the functionalized hybrid membrane.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are pleased to acknowledge for swift heavy ion facility by the Inter University Accelerator Center (IUAC), New Delhi India. Om Prakash gratefully acknowledges UGC- India support for providing funding.
References
B. P. Tripathi and V. K. Shahi, Organic–inorganic nanocomposite polymer electrolyte membranes for fuel cell applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36(7), 945–979 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, A polymer tandem solar cell with 10.6% power conversion efficiency, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sharma, V. Tyagi, C. R. Chen and D. Buddhi, Review on thermal energy storage with phase change materials and applications, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13(2), 318–345 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Oğulata, Energy sector and wind energy potential in Turkey, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2003, 7(6), 469–484 CrossRef .
J. R. J. Larminie, Fuel Cell Technology Handbook, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D, 2003, 217(5), 415 CrossRef .
K. K. Jana, A. K. Thakur, V. K. Shahi, D. K. Avasthi, D. Rana and P. Maiti, A poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoro propylene) nanohybrid membrane using swift heavy ion irradiation for fuel cell applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10413–10424 RSC .
R. M. Ormerod, Solid oxide fuel cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 17–28 RSC .
M. Bischoff and G. Huppmann, Operating experience with a 250 kWel molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC) power plant, J. Power Sources, 2002, 105(2), 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, What Are Batteries, Fuel Cells, and Supercapacitors?, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105(3), 1021 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kordesch, V. Hacker, J. Gsellmann, M. Cifrain, G. Faleschini, P. Enzinger and R. R. Aronson, Alkaline fuel cells applications, J. Power Sources, 2000, 86(1–2), 162–165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sauguet, C. Boyer, B. Ameduri and B. Boutevin, Synthesis and characterization of poly(vinylidene fluoride)-g-poly(styrene) graft polymers obtained by atom transfer radical polymerization of styrene, Macromolecules, 2006, 39(26), 9087–9101 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akthakul, R. F. Salinaro and A. M. Mayes, Antifouling polymer membranes with subnanometer size selectivity, Macromolecules, 2004, 37(20), 7663–7668 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hietala, S. Holmberg, M. Karjalainen, J. Näsman, M. Paronen, R. Serimaa, F. Sundholm and S. Vahvaselkä, Structural investigation of radiation grafted and sulfonated poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVDF, membranes, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 721–726 RSC .
M. A. Hickner, H. Ghassemi, Y. S. Kim, B. R. Einsla and J. E. McGrath, Alternative polymer systems for proton exchange membranes (PEMs), Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(10), 4587–4612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Tripathi and V. K. Shahi, 3-[[3-(Triethoxysilyl)propyl]amino]propane-1-sulfonic acid-poly(vinyl alcohol) cross-linked zwitterionic polymer electrolyte membranes for direct methanol fuel cell applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1002–1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saikia, A. Kumar, F. Singh and D. K. Avasthi, Study of Li3+ ion irradiation effects in P(VDF-HFP) based gel polymer electrolytes for application in Li-ion battery, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 4208–4214 CrossRef CAS .
E. Balanzat, J. C. Jousset and M. Toulemonde, Latent tracks induced by heavy ions in the GeV energy range: results at GANIL, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1988, 32(1–4), 368–376 CrossRef .
S. Bouffard, B. Gervais and C. Leroy, Basic phenomena induced by swift heavy ions in polymers, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1995, 105(1–4), 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kumar Jana, A. Srivastava, O. Parkash, D. K. Avasthi, D. Rana, V. K. Shahi and P. Maiti, Nanoclay and swift heavy ions induced piezoelectric and conducting nanochannel based polymeric membrane for fuel cell, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 338–347 CrossRef .
K. K. Jana, C. Charan, V. K. Shahi, K. Mitra, B. Ray, D. Rana and P. Maiti, Functionalized poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanohybrid for superior fuel cell membrane, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 481, 124–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Nasef and E. S. A. Hegazy, Preparation and applications of ion exchange membranes by radiation-induced graft copolymerization of polar monomers onto non-polar films, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2004, 29(6), 499–561 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, Y. Kimura, J. Chen, M. Asano and Y. Maekawa, Preparation of PTFE-based fuel cell membranes by combining latent track formation technology with graft polymerization, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2009, 78(12), 1060–1066 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Tiwari, P. K. Kulriya, D. K. Avasthi and P. Maiti, Radiation-Resistant Behavior of Poly(vinylidene fluoride)/Layered Silicate Nanocomposites, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 311–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. J. Jones and J. Rozière, Advances in the development of inorganic–organic membranes for fuel cell applications, in Fuel Cells I, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2008, pp. 219–264 Search PubMed .
K. K. Jana, V. K. Tiwari, D. K. Avasthi, T. K. Paine and P. Maiti, New Generation Fuel Cell Membrane Using Swift Heavy Ions, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 6413–6437 CrossRef CAS .
B. Smitha, S. Sridhar and A. A. Khan, Solid polymer electrolyte membranes for fuel cell applications—a review, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 259, 10–26 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Binsu, R. K. Nagarale and V. K. Shahi, Phosphonic acid functionalized aminopropyl triethoxysilane–PVA composite material: organic–inorganic hybrid proton-exchange membranes in aqueous media, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4823 RSC .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Review of Advanced Materials for Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 7303–7330 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sproll, M. Handl, R. Hiesgen, K. A. Friedrich, T. J. Schmidt and L. Gubler, Membrane architecture with ion-conducting channels through swift heavy ion induced graft copolymerization, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24826–24835 RSC .

          S. Wang and J. E. McGrath, Synthesis of Poly(Arylene Ether)s, in Synth. Methods Step-Growth Polym., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2003, pp. 327–374 Search PubMed .
Y. Yin, O. Yamada, K. Tanaka and K.-I. Okamoto, On the Development of Naphthalene-Based Sulfonated Polyimide Membranes for Fuel Cell Applications, Polym. J., 2006, 38, 197–219 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Jana, O. Prakash, V. K. Shahi, D. K. Avasthi and P. Maiti, Poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-chlorotrifluoro ethylene) Nanohybrid Membrane for Fuel Cell, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 917–928 CrossRef CAS .
O. Prakash, K. K. Jana, R. Jain, P. Shah, M. Manohar, V. K. Shahi and P. Maiti, Functionalized poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoro propylene) membrane for fuel cell, Polymer, 2018, 151, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kim, S. W. Choi, S. M. Jo, W. S. Lee and B. C. Kim, Electrospun PVdF-based fibrous polymer electrolytes for lithium ion polymer batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50(1), 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lehtinen, G. Sundholm, S. Holmberg, F. Sundholm, P. Björnbom and M. Bursell, Electrochemical characterization of PVDF-based proton conducting membranes for fuel cells, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43(12–13), 1881–1890 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gaur, C. Kumar, R. Shukla and P. Maiti, Induced Piezoelectricity in Poly(vinylidene fluoride) Hybrid as Efficient Energy
Harvester, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 8278–8287 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, J. Sun, X. Zheng, Q. Xu and R. Song, Effect of multiwalled carbon nanotubes on crystallization behavior of poly(vinylidene fluoride) in different solvents, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 119, 1905–1913 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chai, C. Wang, H. Zhang, C. M. Doherty, B. P. Ladewig, A. J. Hill and H. Wang, Nafion-Carbon Nanocomposite Membranes Prepared Using Hydrothermal Carbonization for Proton-Exchange-Membrane Fuel Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4394–4399 CrossRef CAS .
C. Trautmann, S. Bouffard and R. Spohr, Etching threshold for ion tracks in polyimide, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1996, 116(1–4), 429–433 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Yu, W.-C. Chien, Y.-H. Ko, C.-P. Chen and C.-C. Chang, Preparation of conjugated polymer-based composite thin film for application in solar cell, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 584, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, I. C. Maurya, O. Prakash, P. Srivastava, S. Das and P. Maiti, Functionalized Thermoplastic Polyurethane as Hole Conductor for Quantum Dot-Sensitized Solar Cell, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(9), 4641–4650 CrossRef CAS .
H. Farrokhzad, T. Kikhavani, F. Monnaie, S. N. Ashrafizadeh, G. Koeckelberghs, V. T. Gerven and B. Van der Bruggen, Novel composite cation exchange films based on sulfonated PVDF for electromembrane separations, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 474, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gholamkhass and S. Holdcroft, Toward Stabilization of Domains in Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Films, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5371–5376 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Lee, A. Cirpan, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, Synthesis and photophysical property of well-defined donor–acceptor diblock copolymer based on regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) and fullerene, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19(10), 1483–1489 RSC .
S. Banerjee, A. Mishra, M. M. Singh, B. Maiti, B. Ray and P. Maiti, Highly efficient polyurethane ionomer corrosion inhibitor: the effect of chain structure, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 199 RSC .
W. Wu, Y. Li, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. He, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Molecular-Level Hybridization of Nafion with Quantum Dots for Highly Enhanced Proton Conduction, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707516 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Tiwari, T. Shripathi, N. P. Lalla and P. Maiti, Nanoparticle induced piezoelectric, super toughened, radiation resistant, multi-functional nanohybrids, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 167–175 RSC .
V. K. Tiwari, M. C. Rath, S. K. Sarkar, V. K. Patel, B. Ray, B. Maiti and P. Maiti, Electron beam-induced piezoelectric phase in poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanohybrid: effect at the molecular level, Polym. Int., 2015, 64, 212–221 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Jana, N. K. Vishwakarma, B. Ray, S. A. Khan, D. K. Avasthi, M. Misra and P. Maiti, Nanochannel conduction in piezoelectric polymeric membrane using swift heavy ions and nanoclay, RSC Adv., 2013, 3(17), 6147–6159 RSC .
A. Gaur, R. Shukla, B. Kumar, A. Pal, S. Chatterji, R. Ranjan and P. Maiti, Processing and nanoclay induced piezoelectricity in poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoro propylene) nanohybrid for device application, Polymer, 2016, 97, 362–369 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Thakur, E. J. Tan, M. F. Lin and P. S. Lee, Poly(vinylidene fluoride)-graft-poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate): a novel material for high energy density capacitors, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(11), 3751–3759 RSC .
S. Srivastava, A. Biswas, S. Senapati, B. Ray, D. Rana, V. K. Aswal and P. Maiti, Novel shape memory behaviour in IPDI based polyurethanes: Influence of nanoparticle, Polymer, 2017, 110, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maiti and A. K. Nandi, Influence of Chain Structure on the Miscibility of Poly(vinylidene fluoride) with Poly(methyl acrylate), Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 8511–8516 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Weißenrieder and J. Müller, Conductivity model for sputtered ZnO-thin film gas sensors, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 300(1–2), 30–41 CrossRef .
O. P. Dimitriev, Effect of Confinement on Photophysical Properties of P3HT Chains in PMMA Matrix, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12(1), 510 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8se00631hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the swift heavy ion irradiation on a polymer membrane, followed by selective chemical etching on the irradiated membrane, grafting within the nanochannels, and sulphonation. The bottom column indicates the grafting reaction within the nanochannels, followed by sulphonation to afford conducting nanochannels.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) AFM images of both PVDF and the nanohybrid (NH) before and after radiation. The arrows indicate the location of channels. Histogram shows the distribution of channel dimensions; (b) SEM images of pristine PVDF and NH before and after irradiation, and the bottom histogram indicates the distribution of channel dimensions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) 1H-spectra of pristine PVDF, PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s measured using 500 MHz magnetic field NMR. Respective proton positions are indicated in the chemical structure (inset) and spectrum; (b) FTIR spectra of pristine PVDF, PVDF-g-s, NH and NH-g-s, indicating various peak-assigned peak positions; (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of PVDF, NH, PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, showing the peak position by vertical lines; (d) SEM images of PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, showing filling up of the channels after grafting; and (e) AFM image after grafting of the indicated specimens, showing the filling up after grafting and functionalization.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the indicated samples PVDF, PVDF-g, PVDF-g-s (lower column), and the upper column displays layered silicate-dispersed specimens NH, NH-g, NH-g-s showing various crystalline planes. (b) Deconvoluted XRD patterns of PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s showing different phases. (c) Polarizing optical microscopy images of PVDF, NH, PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s, showing spherulites in PVDF and mesh-like morphology in NH, while needle-like morphology can be seen after grafting and functionalization.	 

 	Fig. 4  Thermal and electrical behaviors of the membranes: (a) thermograms of neat PVDF, NH and their grafted and sulphonated species (PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s). (b) DSC thermograms of PVDF/NH and their functionalization membrane indicating the melting peak positions. (c) I–V measurements under DC electrical conductivity measurements. (d) Water uptake values in percentage of the indicated membranes with error bars.	 


PVDF-g-s	4.21	4.69	5.31	6.08	7.06	7.84
NH-g-s	4.59	5.23	6.27	7.16	7.85	9.01


PVDF-g-s	4.21	4.61	11.0	81.6
NH-g-s	4.59	4.49	11.3	92.0
Nafion 117a	9.56	13.1	6.5	63.3

 	Fig. 5  (a) Arrhenius plot (proton conductivity) kmvs. 1/T for PVDF-g-s and NH-g-s; (b) methanol permeability of the indicated membranes compared to the standard Nafion 117 values measured under similar conditions.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic illustration of the set-up employed for the fuel cell efficiency test (complete cell stack with MEA); (b) comparison of the polarization curves of the indicated membranes; and (c) power density as a function of current density of the indicated membranes compared to the values of standard Nafion measured under similar conditions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8se00631h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
