Research progress on eco-friendly superhydrophobic materials in environment, energy and biology  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC03899D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC03899D
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 11201-11219Research progress on eco-friendly superhydrophobic materials in environment, energy and biology

        
          
            Jiao 
            Peng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Laiyan 
            Wu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ben 
            Wang
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Yifan 
            Si
          
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            Shiwei 
            Jin
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Hai 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *bc
aKey Laboratory of Catalysis and Energy Materials Chemistry of Education, Hubei Key Laboratory of Catalysis and Materials Science, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: jinsw@mail.scuec.edu.cn
bDepartment of Civil Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR 999077, P. R. China. E-mail: zhuhai@hku.hk
cChina State Key Laboratory of Biogeology and Environmental Geology, Engineering Research Center of Nano-Geomaterials of Ministry of Education, Faculty of Materials Science and Chemistry, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China
dKey Laboratory of Resources Conversion and Pollution Control of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission, College of Resources and Environmental Science, South-Central Minzu University, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China
eDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hongkong SAR 999077, P. R. China. E-mail: yifansi@cityu.edu.hk
fCollege of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518000, P. R. China
Received 
      13th July 2022
    , Accepted 6th September 2022First published on 6th September 2022AbstractIn the past few years, bioinspired eco-friendly superhydrophobic materials (EFSMs) have made great breakthroughs, especially in the fields of environment, energy and biology, which have made remarkable contributions to the sustainable development of the natural environment. However, some potential challenges still exist, which urgently need to be systematically summarized to guide the future development of this field. Herein, in this review, initially, we discuss the five typical superhydrophobic models, namely, the Wenzel, Cassie, Wenzel–Cassie, “lotus”, and “gecko” models. Then, the existence of superhydrophobic creatures in nature and artificial EFSMs are summarized. Then, we focus on the applications of EFSMs in the fields of environment (self-cleaning, wastewater purification, and membrane distillation), energy (solar evaporation, heat accumulation, and batteries), and biology (biosensors, biomedicine, antibacterial, and food packaging). Finally, the challenges and developments of eco-friendly superhydrophobic materials are highlighted.
Jiao Peng
Jiao Peng received her BSc Degree from South-Central University for Nationalities in 2020. Currently, she is a Master's student at the School of Chemistry and Materials Science, South-Central University for Nationalities. Her scientific interest focuses on bioinspired superwetting materials.
Yifan Si
Dr Yifan Si received his PhD from the School of Chemistry, Beihang University (2020) from Prof. Lei Jiang's group. He joined Prof. Jinlian Hu's group as a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong (2021). Currently, his main research interests include bioinspired superwetting materials and smart electrospinning membranes.
Shiwei Jin
Prof. Shiwei Jin received his BSc Degree from Wuhan Institute of Technology in 1995 and Master's Degree from Shenyang University of Chemical Technology in 1998, and PhD from the Institute of Hydrobiology (CAS) in 2006, respectively. From 2011 to 2012, he went to University of Maryland as a Visiting Scholar. In 2015, he started to work in the School of Chemistry and Material Science, South-central University for Nationalities. His research interests include chemical process development, chemical pollution control, analysis and toxicity evaluation of new organic pollutants.
Hai Zhu
Dr Hai Zhu received his PhD in China University of Geosciences under the supervision of Prof. Fan Xia in 2021. Currently, he is working at the University of Hong Kong as a Postdoctoral Fellow. His research interest mainly focuses on interfacial materials in environmental and chemical applications.
1. Introduction
Superhydrophobic organisms,1–3 such as lotus leaves,4–6 water strider,7–9 rose petals,10,11 butterfly wings,12,13 rice leaves,14 and taro leaves,15 among others,16–19 exist in nature. Benefitting from their strong water-repellency, these natural creatures survive perfectly in the surrounding environment. Thus, to illustrate the basic principles of superhydrophobicity, scientists conducted a series of investigations in the last three decades. In 1997, Barthlott's group explained that the self-cleaning superhydrophobicity on lotus leaves is attributed to their hierarchical structures and epicuticular wax.20 Jiang et al.7 demonstrated the non-wetting of the strider leg based on an air layer occupied on needle-like microstructures in 2004, thus contributing to their free sliding on the surface of water. In 2008, their group also found that rose petals are high-adhesion superhydrophobic, and thus water drops adhere to their surface, even upside down.21 In general, these results indicate that superhydrophobicity is dependent on the microstructure of the surface and chemical composition of the material, that is, surface energy.22–25 High roughness and low surface energy are more conducive to obtaining superhydrophobic surfaces, which also guide the design, preparation and applications of artificial superhydrophobic materials.26–34
To obtain a lower surface energy, fluorides,35–37 sulfhydryl compounds,38–40 long carbon chain substances,41–43 and other reagents are commonly used to construct or modify surfaces to achieve superhydrophobicity. However, these chemical modifiers are toxic and harmful to human beings and the environment, which is not conducive to health, safety, and sustainability requirements of current practice development and greatly restricts the popularization of superhydrophobic materials.44–47 Therefore, researchers are focused on designing and preparing eco-friendly superhydrophobic materials (EFSMs). Through continuous efforts in recent years, a series of breakthroughs has been made in this field. EFSMs have begun to play a crucial role in various application fields and are expected to be more widely used in the fields of environment, energy, biology, etc.48–51 By searching the topic of “superhydrophobic materials” and “EFSMs” in the ISI (Institute of Scientific Information) Web of Science, we observed that the number of papers and citation frequency of these two types of materials both show an increasing trend annually (Fig. 1a and d). Moreover, as can be seen from the data in the statistical chart, EFSMs, as an emerging field, have received increasing attention. However, this research field has entered a critical period after early development, where there are challenges and defects together with the great development trend. Thus, a timely summary and review of this progress and further clarification of the future development of this field are significant.
 Fig. 1  (a) Growth chart of number of papers on superhydrophobic materials. (b) Growth chart of EFSMs. (c) Paper citation frequency of superhydrophobic materials. (d) Paper citation frequency of environmental protection superhydrophobic materials. 
In this review, we summarize the recent developments regarding environmental, energy and biological applications based on EFSMs. Firstly, we discuss the typical wetting models including the Young model, Wenzel model, Cassie model, Wenzel–Cassie model, “lotus” model, and “gecko” model, and the relation among wetting, surface tension and surface energy. Then, superhydrophobic natural creatures, i.e., lotus leaves, rose petals, rape flowers, Osmanthus flowers, sunflower grains, and taro leave were summarized, followed by an introduction of artificial EFSMs, including carbon-based, silicon-based, and polymer-based raw materials, and other materials. Subsequently, we detail the progress of EFSMs in recent years, which are categorized as environmental (self-cleaning, wastewater purification and membrane distillation), energy (solar evaporation, heat accumulation, and batteries), biological (biosensor, biomedicine, antibacterial, and food packaging) applications. Finally, the challenges and prospects of EFSMs are presented.
2. Wetting models
2.1 Definition of wettability
Wettability can be used to characterize the ability of a liquid to spread out on a solid surface (CA). At the gas–liquid–solid three-phase contact line, the angle formed between the gas–liquid interface and tangent line of the solid–liquid interface is called the CA (θ). Taking water as the research object, surfaces can be defined as superhydrophilic (θ < 10°), hydrophilic (10° < CA < 90°), hydrophobic (90° < CA < 150°), and superhydrophobic (>150°).52–56
2.2 Surface free energy
Surface free energy (SFE) is the embodiment of the intermolecular force on the surface of an object and is closely related to the wettability of a surface. The SFE is calculated using the CA of the material, the surface tension of liquid and the interfacial tension between the solid and liquid. Surface tension is a manifestation of molecular forces, which occurs at the boundary of liquid and gas contact.57 Surface energy and surface tension per unit area are numerically the same, but have different physical meanings. Specifically, one is energy, whereas the other is force.58 As shown in Fig. 2a, if 0 J m−2 < SFE < 28 J m−2, the surface displays (super) hydrophobicity and is (super) oleophobic; 28 J m−2 < SFE < 72 J m−2, the surface displays (super) hydrophobicity and is (super) oleophilic; and SFE >72 J m−2, the surface displays (super) hydrophilicity and is (super) oleophilic.59
 Fig. 2  (a) Surface free energy and wetting behavior. (b) Definition of contact angle. Wetting model of solid surface: (c) Wenzel model, (d) Cassie model, (e) Wenzel–Cassie model, (f) “lotus” model, and (g) “gecko” model. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2021). 
2.3 Wetting models

2.3.1 Young's equation. 
Young's equation represents the wettability of droplet on a perfectly smooth solid surface (Fig. 2b),60 as follows: cosθ = (γSV − γSL)/γLV(1)where γSV is the surface tension between the solid–vapor interface, γSL is the surface tension between the solid–liquid interface, γLV is the surface tension between the liquid–vapor interface, and θ is the CA of the droplet on a smooth solid surface. Young's equation expressed the relation between CA and surface energy can for the first time. However, it only applies to solid surfaces in an ideal state.


2.3.2 Wenzel model. 
It is impossible to have a completely smooth surface. Thus, considering the influence of roughness, Wenzel modified Young's equation, and the CA of a rough surface can be expressed, as follows:61 cosθ* = rcosθ(2)where θ* is the apparent contact angle of the droplet on the rough surface under the Wenzel state and r is the roughness factor, which is the ratio between actual contact area of solid and liquid and area under its geometric projection, and in general, r > 1.
As shown in Fig. 2c, when water droplets are placed on a rough surface, they fill the gaps in the rough surface.62 The Wenzel model indicates that the roughness of a solid surface can enhance the wettability of a solid surface. When θ < 90°, the solid surface will have stronger hydrophilicity with an increase in roughness, whereas when θ > 90°, the solid surface will have stronger hydrophobicity with an increase in roughness. It is worth mentioning that the Wenzel equation only applies to stable thermodynamic equilibrium states.


2.3.3 Cassie model. 
Cassie further refined the wetting equation and believed that droplets have no contact with the grooves on a solid surface but form a gas–liquid–solid composite contact surface on an uneven, rough surface. The Cassie model is as follows:63 cosθ* = fcosθ1 + fLVcosθ2(3)where θ* is the intrinsic contact angle of the surface and θ1 and θ2 are the apparent CA of a droplet on a rough surface, respectively. fSL represents the percentage of contact surface between the droplets and solid in total area and fLV represents the percentage of contact surface between the droplets and air in total area.
The Cassie model also applies to porous surfaces because droplets do not fill the gaps between rough surfaces and air fills the gaps and below the droplets (Fig. 2d).


2.3.4 Wenzel–Cassie model. 
The Wenzel–Cassie model is an intermediate state between the Wenzel model and Cassie model.64 As shown in Fig. 2e, the droplets moisten part of the groove, trapping air at the bottom. Droplets can be transferred from the Wenzel state to the Cassie state by external stimuli such as pressure and vibration.65–67


2.3.5 “Lotus” model. 
The lotus model is a special form of the Cassie model with a composite binary structure on the micro- and nanometer scale.68 The surface of the lotus leaf has a fine microscopic rough structure and epidermal wax structure. These structures reduce the contact area between the solid surface and liquid, and thus the liquid is in a semi-suspended state (Fig. 2f), enabling pollutants to be carried away by the falling water droplets, and ultimately play the role of self-cleaning.


2.3.6 “Gecko” model. 
The surface in the “gecko” state is highly repellent and adherent to water (Fig. 2g). At the contact point between a water droplet and the surface, air is directly connected with the atmosphere and enclosed air trapped in nanotubes, respectively. Due to the change in the volume of air in the nanotubes, the negative pressure in the nanotubes increases, thus generating a high CA and making then have high adhesion to water.69

3. Superhydrophobic organisms in nature
Many organisms exhibit special surfaces with superhydrophobicity and different adhesion, such as lotus leaves, rose petals, rape flowers, Osmanthus flowers, sunflower pollen, and taro leaves, as shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Superhydrophobic organisms in nature and their corresponding structures. (a) Low adhesion superhydrophobic lotus leaf, scale bar: 10 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Elsevier (2021). (b) Rose petals with high adhesion, scale bar: 10 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2008). (c) Rape flower, scale bar: 1 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature (2016). (d) Osmanthus fragrans, scale bar: 10 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier (2020). (e) Sunflower pollen grain, scale bar: 100 μm and 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Wiley (2021). (f) Taro leaves, scale bar: 10 μm and 200 nm. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2016). (g) Water strider, scale bar: 20 μm and 200 nm. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2022). (h) Butterfly wings, scale bar: 1 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1996). 
3.1 Lotus leaf
Lotus leaves are typically superhydrophobic surfaces.70–72 In 1997, Barthlott and Neinhuis demonstrated that the self-cleaning effect of lotus leaves is ascribed to the combination of micropapillae and low surface energy waxes.20 Subsequently, Jiang et al.73 found dendritic nanostructures on the surface of lotus leaves (Fig. 3a). Their dual-scale roughness provides superhydrophobicity, reducing the contact among droplets with the material surface, thus keeping themselves clean by rolling contaminants away with the droplets.
3.2 Rose petal
Unlike lotus leaves, superhydrophobic rose petals exhibit high adhesion to water droplets.74 The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 3b shows neat micropapillae on the surface of rose petals, with nanoscale fold structures at the top. These nanostructures trap air in their folds, effectively preventing water from the wetting surface and making the surface superhydrophobic and highly adherent to water.21
3.3 Rape flower
Fresh rape flowers exhibit similar properties to lotus leaves. The surface of their petals is distributed with “intestine-like” microstructures with a and of about 0.3 μm and their cross-linked microstructures ensure roughness. Their petals contain carotenoids, which are water-insoluble pigments. Thus, the synergistic effect between their microstructure and surface composition ensures that rape flowers have superhydrophobicity with a water contact angle (WCA) of 155° (Fig. 3c).75
3.4 
          Osmanthus flower

Osmanthus flowers also exhibit interesting wetting behavior in nature, which are composed of long carbon chains. Uniform micro fold structures were observed on the surface of Osmanthus flowers (Fig. 3d). The synergistic effect of low surface energy substances and micro structure make their surface hydrophobic, with a WCA of 128.6 ± 3.5°.76
3.5 Sunflower pollen grains
Sunflower pollen grains have microcapsule structures and spiny structures. Researchers used freeze-drying and thermal annealing to produce pollen sponges with three-dimensional porous structures, and then transformed them into hydrophobic pollen sponges by adding stearic acid (SA) (Fig. 3e). With a change in the SA concentration, the maximum contact angle of sponge pollen can reach 145°.77,78
3.6 Taro leaf
Taro leaves exhibit superior water repellency, with water droplets remaining spherical on their surfaces. SEM was used to study the surface morphology of taro leaves. As observed in Fig. 3f, a series of micropapillary structures is distributed on the surface of taro leaves and there are vertical nanosheets on the micropapillae, which further improve their surface roughness. Their superhydrophobicity is attributed to the micropapillae and nanosheet structures.15
3.7 Water strider
Water striders can swim freely on water without getting wet or sinking. Jiang et al.7 found that water strider legs are superhydrophobic, with their surface covered with tiny hairs in a nano-fluted structure. This unique layered micro- and nanostructures ensure roughness, making them waterproof (Fig. 3g).
3.8 Butterfly wing
When butterflies fly in wet conditions, their wings remain clean. Butterfly wings are covered by layered microscale scales, which form a superhydrophobic and self-cleaning surface with a WCA of 152° ± 2°.79 In addition, the superhydrophobic butterfly has directional bonding properties, as observed in the nano-stripe of its laminated sheet, in which droplets easily roll off radially outward but are firmly anchored in the opposite direction (Fig. 3h).80,81
4 Artificial EFSMs beyond nature
4.1 Materials for the preparation of EFSMs
Eco-friendly materials refer to materials that are natural and non-toxic themselves, or after artificial processing and synthesis, their toxicity is harmless to the human body and pollution-free to the environment within the scope of national regulations. Eco-friendly materials can be divided into two categories, as follows: (1) natural materials, such as wood, sand, and gypsum.82,83 (2) Artificial materials prepared by processing and synthesis technology, such as cotton fabric, metal pipes, plastic and metal composite pipes.84,85 The EFSMs described herein represent those in which the sources of their ingredients, derived substances, and preparation process are eco-friendly.
4.2 Substances for the preparation of EFSMs
The use of perfluoroalkyl substances or polyfluoroalkyl substances has shown great advantages in the preparation of superhydrophobic materials, which have a WCA of more than 150°, strong mechanical properties and chemical environmental tolerance.86,87 However, these substances cause widespread pollution in the environment and are a persistent form of pollution. In addition, long-term exposure to these substances can have many negative effects on human health. Thus, it is the best choice to replace perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances with eco-friendly substances. Table 1 presents a summary of the common eco-friendly materials used to prepare EFSMs and lists their related applications.
Table 1 A brief summary of various materials, methods and applications of artificial EFSMs




Material
Preparation method
WCA
Application
Ref.




Carbon based
Candle soot
Vapor deposition
160°
Oil/water separation

90,91



CNT
Laser irradiation
155°
Strain sensor

92



Graphene
Boiling coating
153°
Self-cleaning, detecting

99



Nanodiamond
Spraying
154°
Antibacterial

100



MWCNT
Coating
154.6°
Solar desalination

171



Silicon based
MTES
Sol-gel spray
170°
Protection coating in industry

108



VTES
Sol-gel deposition
155.4°
Anti-corrosive

111



TMES
Dip-coating
157°
Optical devices

113



SiO2
Spraying
155°
Heat accumulation

184



TCMS
Hydrolytic condensation
167.4°
Battery

185



PDMS
Immerse
165° ± 1°
Antibacterial

198



PTFE
Pulsed laser deposition
151.6° ± 1°
Solar cell panel

118



Polymer based
PCL
Electrospinning/electrospraying technology
162° ± 1.5°
Oil/water separation

125



PLA
Electrospinning technique
152°
Oil/water separation

126



PTFE
Electrostatic spinning
151° ± 4°
Membrane Distillation

167



Others
Paraffin
Inlaying
156.7°
Oil/water separation

133



CuO
Solution immersion
163°
Oil/water separation

135



Ag
Physical vapor deposition
158°
Biological detection

188



Beeswax
Spray-coating
158° ± 2°
Food packaging

196






4.2.1 Carbon-based materials. 
Carbon-based materials are often used to prepare superhydrophobic materials because of their low surface energy, outstanding chemical stability, low cost and environmental protection,88,89 such as candle soot,90,91 carbon nanotubes (CNT),92,93 multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs),94–96 graphene,97–99 and nanodiamond.100,101
The layered carbon nanostructure of candle soot provides roughness, which makes it appear superhydrophobic with a WCA greater than 160°. Its surface is easily destroyed because the carbon particles in candle soot are connected by the synergy of weak van der Waals forces and weak network structures. The mechanical stability can be enhanced by covering the surface with an SiO2 layer by vapor deposition (Fig. 4a).90,91 The addition of carbon nanomaterials (CNT and graphene) to porous materials can alter their microstructure and significantly improve their hydrophobicity. Liu et al.92 successfully produced a superhydrophobic strain sensor via simple laser-irradiation. The laser-irradiated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)/CNT composite formed an irregular raised structure, which provided superhydrophobicity (WCA is 155°). Shen et al.102 proposed the use of a superhydrophobic porous monolithic material for efficient oil adsorption. They used a green thermally impacted nonsolvent-induced phase separation method to prepare porous cellulose acetate/carboxylated MWCNT monolithic material. In addition, the two-dimensional structure and superior electrical conductivity of graphene make it an ideal material for the preparation of multifunctional surfaces. Han et al.97 produced superhydrophobic graphene films via laser scanning and demonstrated that solvents such as ethanol could change the slip angle of the graphene films, causing the water droplets on the surface to change from pinning to rolling. They can be used for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) analysis of analytes and anti-icing. Similarly, nanodiamond is a candidate material for the preparation of superhydrophobic surfaces due to its outstanding hardness and electronic properties.
 Fig. 4  (a) Process for the preparation of candle soot and SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (2011). (b) Superhydrophobic cotton fabric prepared using PDMS and SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2020). (c) Optical photographs and AFM morphologic images of droplets on PTFE-coated glass. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier (2018). (d) Image of water drops and SEM image on paraffin-based superhydrophobic polyester fiber. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier (2019). (e) Wettability of water and oil on cbM-CuO-SA sample surface and SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Elsevier (2021). 


4.2.2 Silicon-based materials. 
Silicon-based materials play a critical role in the preparation of superhydrophobic materials,103–105 among which SiO2 has been proven to be superhydrophobic.106 Lei et al.107 modified colloidal silica with octyl chlorosilane, and then mixed it with resin to prepare a fluorine-free superhydrophobic material by the thermal curing method, which successfully replaced the superhydrophobic materials based on fluorine-modified colloidal silica. Pedraza et al.100 selected metals such as germanium, copper, and steel as substrates, and after coating with methyltrimethoxysilane (MTES), these metal substrates exhibited outstanding self-cleaning properties, acid resistance, and corrosion resistance. PDMS, as an eco-friendly fluorine-free polymer, is often used in the construction of superhydrophobic materials. Lai et al.109 prepared self-repairing cotton fabrics using a “PDMS-in-water” emulsion method, with a WCA of up to 160° (Fig. 4b). Miljkovic et al.110 cross-linked PDMS with dynamic borate esters to construct a durable self-healing ultra-thin and super-hydrophobic material. Chen et al.111 prepared superhydrophobic thin films on copper wafers via the hydrolysis of vinyl trimethoxysilane (VTES). Tetramethylsilane (TMS) was cleaved in radio-frequency glow discharge plasma to form a superhydrophobic surface via a simple coating method.112 Xiong et al.113 prepared transparent superhydrophobic films using trimethylethoxysilane (TMES) as the precursor system, exhibiting different adhesion properties and superior transmittance. Si et al.114 designed a fluorine-free self-healing superhydrophobic gel nanocoating by using a simple trimethyl silicyl modification process. In particular, the coating could be applied to a variety of substrates by spraying.

4.2.3 Polymer-based materials
Some common polymers are among the ideal materials for the construction of superhydrophobic nanocoatings because of their low surface energy, flexibility, and low cost. Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is a typical polymer, which is considered an ideal material for the preparation of superhydrophobic materials.115–117 Alawajji et al.118 chose glass as a substrate and prepared a highly transparent pure PTFE superhydrophobic film via a simple pulsed laser deposition method without any chemical modification, and the CA of PTFE film was 151.6° ± 1° (Fig. 4c). Qu et al.119 introduced silicon particles to prepare superhydrophobic materials to improve the stability and reusability of pure PTFE films.
Polycaprolactone (PCL) and poly(lactide) (PLA) have become new candidates for the preparation of superhydrophobic materials due to their non-toxic nature, strong mechanical properties and good biodegradability.120–124 Based on previous studies, Li et al.125 designed bionic superhydrophobic PCL composite membranes with hierarchical microspheres. The membranes were fabricated by electrostatic spinning and electrospray. SiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) mimicked hydrophobic biological wax on the surface of the lotus leaf and the PCL porous microspheres imitate the nanoprotuberance of the lotus leaf structure, which together gave the membrane superhydrophobicity with a WCA of 162.0° ± 1.5°. The membrane exhibited outstanding separation efficiency, reusability and corrosion resistance. Thus, this may provide a new way to design polymer materials for use as environmentally friendly membranes. Gore et al.126 developed Janus fabrics with superhydrophobicity/superlipophilicity and low ice adhesion through the simple electrospinning technique. The biodegradable PLA polymer-produced nanofibers were deposited on one side of cotton fabric, producing superhydrophobic properties where the loaded nano-clay provided spinnable viscosity. Due to their layered texture, the Janus fabrics demonstrated excellent oil–water separation efficiency and mechanical durability. Importantly, the authors claimed that the prepared Janus fabrics exhibit microbial and hydrolytic biodegradation.

4.2.4 Others. 
In addition to the common materials described above, paraffins, metal,127,128 metal oxides, metal salts129–132 and alkyl mercaptan can also be used to prepare superhydrophobic materials. Paraffin is a common material with low surface energy. There are numerous works in the literature on the preparation of superhydrophobic surface using paraffin. Zhao et al.133 synthesized a self-repairing superhydrophobic polyester textile. They placed raw textiles in a mixture of PDMS and paraffin wax (PWT) at 120 °C and obtained superhydrophobic textiles with a WCA of 156.7° (Fig. 4d). The textile displayed an excellent self-cleaning performance, chemical stability and mechanical stability. In the presence of strong acid, strong alkali and other harsh environments, the chemical structure and properties of the coating almost remained unchanged. Upadhyay et al.134 built micro/nano structures on the surface of copper using hydrogen sulfide as a green oxidant, and then a copper surface with a WCA of 150° was obtained by modification with SA. Yin et al.135 obtained superhydrophobic cellulose-based membranes (CBMs) through solution impregnation (Fig. 4e). Here, the synergistic effect of the CuO nanostructure coating and SA modification provided superhydrophobicity. This study indicated that the membrane has superior self-cleaning performance photocatalytic degradation ability.

4.3 Safe-by-design concept of EFSMs
Besides the precursor sources and derived materials, the safe design of eco-friendly superhydrophobic materials is also significant. Thus, to satisfy the sustainable development of functional materials, the development of simple, non-toxic and low-cost preparation methods is highly necessary. It is known that textured structures and low surface energy are crucial for surface superhydrophobicity. Now, instead of the construction and chemical modification of structures, coating technologies, such as spray coating,136,137 brushing coating,138 and dipping coating,139 are popular to achieve superhydrophobic materials based on diverse substrates. Meanwhile, the template method with the pre-design of desirable structures is also beneficial for the preparation of eco-friendly superhydrophobic materials.140 Solvents are used in most of the preparation methods to prepare functional materials. Thus, the eco-friendly nature of the solvent is also a key point that decides whether a material is an EFSM. Furthermore, solvent-free methods for the preparation of superhydrophobic coatings have been developed. Therefore, the concept of safe-by-design is also of high importance for the preparation of EFSMs.141,142
5. Applications of EFSMs in the fields of environment, energy and biology
The rapid development of FESMs has not only greatly reduced the harm of superhydrophobic materials to the human body and the environment, but also broken the restrictions on the application of superhydrophobic materials in many fields, especially in the three fields of environment, energy, and biology. A host of new and interesting applications, such as self-cleaning, oil–water separation, biological detection, biomedicine, antibacterial, food safety, solar evaporation, heat accumulation, and membrane distillation, has experienced rapid change within a short time. In this important section, we systematically summarize the representative and latest research on EFSMs in these three fields.
5.1 Environmental applications
In daily life, most surfaces are easily polluted by dirt, and thus self-cleaning superhydrophobic materials can fundamentally solve this problem. Because of their water repellency, superhydrophobic materials have broad application prospects in the fields of sewage purification and seawater desalination. The pursuit of more efficient and faster oil–water separation methods has always been the focus of researchers, where the introduction of superhydrophobic surfaces can overcome the challenges of improving the oil–water separation efficiency. However, the mechanical stability of superhydrophobic materials has always been a difficult problem to solve, which makes it impossible to employ them in practical applications on a large scale. Membrane distillation technology can convert seawater into fresh water to alleviate water shortages; however, performance degradation due to membrane scaling is a key challenge associated with this technology. Therefore, the preparation of membranes with high permeability and superhydrophobicity is an effective strategy for successful desalination.

5.1.1 Self-cleaning. 
Inspired by nature, researchers have endowed various substrates with superhydrophobicity, which reduces the adhesion of water droplets to their surface and can remove pollutants through rolling water droplets to achieve a self-cleaning performance. Lai et al.143 deposited PDMS NPs on a glass substrate by heat treatment, and then sprayed a mixed solution of titanium dioxide (P25) NPs and PDMS microparticles to obtain a superhydrophobic glass material (Fig. 5a). The prepared material had a good self-cleaning property and high transparency (Fig. 5b and c). Eshaghi et al.144 prepared a self-cleaning superhydrophobic glass material with a CA of 155° by depositing a mixture of PTFE and SiO2 NPS on a glass substrate using a simple impregnation method. Metal oxide can build a coarser surface structure and improve hydrophobicity. Saffar et al.145 deposited a ZnO solution on a copper sheet to obtain a superhydrophobic copper material with a WCA of 165°.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of preparation process of superhydrophobic glass. (b) Optical photograph of photocatalytic degradation of oil red by superhydrophobic glass. (c) Self-cleaning performance comparison of pristine glass (left) and superhydrophobic P25-P2@glass surface (right). (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier (2020). (d) Superhydrophobic COM FESEM image, the inset exhibits a drop on the surface with a WCA of 155.5°. (e) UV-Vis absorption spectra of Nile red solution under different illumination times. The insets exhibit the photodegradation of Nile red solution. (f) WCAs and RAs on superhydrophobic COM with the change of UV irradiation time, the insets exhibit the WCAs and RAs before and after UV illumination for 30 h. (g) Illustration of multifunctional self-cleaning tests. (d–g) Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry (2020). 
The degradation of organic pollutants on the surface of materials is another manifestation of self-cleaning phenomenon. At present, the introduction of photocatalytic NPs is an important means to realize superhydrophobic photocatalytic self-cleaning. Under the irradiation of light, organic matter is degraded into CO2, H2O, and other inorganic molecules. TiO2 is an ideal material for the preparation of multifunctional superhydrophobic materials due to its excellent photocatalytic properties.146,147 Our group used P25 NPs and PDMS to prepare superhydrophobic copper mesh (COM) with a WCA of 155.5° (Fig. 5d).148 Due to the presence of TiO2 NPs, a Nile red solution was degraded under UV irradiation (Fig. 5e), while the superhydrophobic COM maintained good superhydrophobicity even after 30 h of UV irradiation (Fig. 5f). Thus, the superhydrophobic COM realized dual self-cleaning of removing dirt particles and degrading organic pollutants (Fig. 5g). Similarly, our team constructed a superhydrophobic–superhydrophilic pattered bionic surface, which could reduce the concentration of pesticides in sewage, where candle soot and PDMS were mixed to form a superhydrophobic material, and P25 NPs were used to construct a superhydrophilic region. To improve the visible light absorption capacity of TiO2, Liu et al.149 prepared a WO3–TiO2 nanorod/PDMS superhydrophobic material, which had self-cleaning property and could degrade methyl red alcohol solution and oleic acid solution under visible light and ultraviolet light irradiation. It is worth mentioning that the material could also be used for the degradation of NO and be sprayed on the exterior walls of buildings and other places. Simultaneously, superhydrophobic materials based on polypropylene and graphite carbon nitride also displayed superior photocatalytic self-cleaning performance.150


5.1.2 Wastewater purification. 
With the occurrence of oil leakage and disordered discharge of industrial oily wastewater, the problem of water pollution becomes increasingly serious. Accordingly, superhydrophobic surfaces are considered a favorable choice for wastewater purification because of the significant difference in surface tension between oil and water. Oil can easily penetrate or be absorbed from superhydrophobic-superoleophilic materials and mesh surfaces, leaving water on the other side. Starting from nature, researchers have made promising progress in oil–water separation.
The lotus leaf floats on the water because its upper and lower surfaces exhibit opposite superwettability. Jiang's team151 made use of the difference in wettability of lotus leaves to prepare perforated lotus leaves to demonstrate the oil–water separation process (Fig. 6a). Water droplets could only one-way pass through the holes from the superhydrophobic surface to superhydrophobic surface. On the contrary, oil could pass through the porous lotus leaves from the superhydrophobic surface to superhydrophobic surface. Thus, the separation of light oil or heavy oil from water could be realized by flipping the lotus leaves (Fig. 6b). More than 99.9% separation efficiency could be achieved at different holes spacings of the lotus leaf. Furthermore, increasing the hole spacing could reduce the water flux (Fig. 6c). The perforated leaf exhibited outstanding durability and its separation efficiency was still higher than 99.9% after 25 cycles of separation experiment (Fig. 6d). In all types of bionic superhydrophobic materials, filter membranes and mesh superhydrophobic membranes are dominant. Zhang et al.152 reported a simple and environmentally friendly superhydrophobic filter paper with a separation efficiency of over 98%. Lim et al.153 prepared a superhydrophobic aluminum mesh material, which exhibited perfect separation efficiency for both oil and organic solvents. Li et al.154 sprayed a solution containing aluminum phosphate and TiO2 NPs on stainless steel mesh, and then modified it with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluoro-decyltriethoxysilane to form a superhydrophobic film, which could effectively remove water in lubricating oil to restore its lubrication ability. The superhydrophobic copper mesh (COM) prepared by our team could achieve more complex oil–water separation.148 When there were different components of oil in the oil–water mixture, the superhydrophobic COM could initially achieve the separation of heavy oil and water. After treating COM with oxygen plasma, the separation of light oil and water could be achieved, with a separation efficiency higher than 99.4%. Three-dimensional (3D) porous oil absorbent materials such as sponge and foam exhibit higher adsorption capacity because they have a greater exposed adsorption area. Wang et al.155 developed a superhydrophobic 3D PU sponge using a simple impregnation method. Guo et al.156 prepared superhydrophobic PU foam, which could efficiently separate oil and water mixtures by the uniform dispersion of carbon nanofibers on the PDMS foam skeleton through ultrasonic treatment.
 Fig. 6  (a) Image of lotus leaf and perforated lotus leaf manufacturing process. (b) Separation of oil (red) and water (blue) mixtures by perforated lotus leaves. (c) Separation efficiency and flux of perforated lotus leaves for different oil and water mixtures. (d) Relationship between oil–water separation cycle time and separation efficiency and flux. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2019). 
Different from lotus leaves, Osmanthus fragrans can purify wastewater by absorbing oil. Fig. 7a shows a schematic diagram of the oil absorption process of the Osmanthus flower. Clean water could be obtained by removing the Osmanthus flower after the oil was completely absorbed (Fig. 7b). The oil absorption efficiency of the fresh Osmanthus flower was more than 92%, and the oil absorption capacity (OACs) of various oils was between 2.4 ± 0.4 and 5.4 ± 0.4 g g−1. Osmanthus flower powder had stronger OACs than other oil absorption materials (copper mesh, and nickel foam), with OACs of 5.3 ± 2.2 to 27.3 ± 1.8 g g−1 (Fig. 7c and d). After 20 separation cycles, both the Osmanthus flowers and powders had stable oil absorption capacities.76 Similarly, bagasse could be used as an ideal raw material for bio-based superhydrophobic materials. Qin et al.157 esterified mechanically pretreated bagasse with stearyl chloride, and then sprayed the suspension of the resulting bagasse ester on various substrates (glass slides, aluminum sheets, and filter paper) to produce a superhydrophobic surface. The prepared superhydrophobic surface had good antifouling and oil absorption properties. Guo et al.158 prepared superhydrophobic polydopamine (PDA)@SiO2 cotton fabric through a simple one-pot approach. The cotton fabric not only could adsorb the oil directly from an oil and water mixture, but also separate heavy oil from the mixture with gravity as the driving force, thus realizing two different ways of oil and water separation.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of Osmanthus powder used for emulsion separation. (b) N-Hexane is absorbed by dry Osmanthus flowers, leaving clean water in the culture dishes after the removal of the Osmanthus flowers. (c) Oil absorption capacity (OAC) of dried Osmanthus fragrans and Osmanthus fragrans powders for different organic solvents. (d) OAC of different superhydrophobic materials for organic solvents. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier (2020). 


5.1.3. Membrane distillation. 
Membrane distillation (MD), as new technology, has been widely studied to deal with seawater desalination and saline wastewater because of its low cost and easy automation. Commonly, (super) hydrophobic membranes with microporous structures are used, where wastewater is repelled, and the water vapor generated by a temperature difference penetrates through the membrane. Non-wetting interfaces play decisive roles.159,160 At present, hydrophobic PTFE,161 polypropylene (PP)162 and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)163–165 have been extensively studied to produce MD membranes.166 Liao et al.167 reported the preparation of super-hydrophobic PTFE films with high porosity via electrostatic spinning. In the MD process, water vapor can easily pass through a highly porous superhydrophobic membrane and condense on the permeable side (Fig. 8a). The incorporation of vinyl-grafted polyhedron polysiloxane (Vinyl-POSS) improved the roughness of the PTFE nanofiber and increased the WCA of the film (Fig. 8b). The salt retention rates of both PTFE and PTFE/POSS nanofiber membranes developed were above 99.99%. Among them, the #POSS-2 membrane had the best performance, with a high permeability of 40 ± 2 LMH (Fig. 8c). The properties of the #POSS-2 membrane remained unchanged during the continuous distillation process of up to 200 h, providing long-term durability (Fig. 8d). Loading CNTs on PTFE and PP hydrophobic membranes can improve the desalination rate and water flux of the membranes, which provides a new strategy for the preparation of high-performance MD films.168,169 Compared with the two above-mentioned membranes, PVDF is superior for the preparation of superhydrophobic materials due to its unique chemical properties and easy modification. Azeem et al.170 reported a method for designing superhydrophobic PVDF membranes by casting sandpaper textures and performing phase conversion on PDMS templates. The superhydrophobic PVDF membrane had superior scale-prevention and desalination properties. Thus, PVDF membranes with special textures provide a promising alternative for the treatment of high saline water.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram showing water vapour transportation in superhydrophobic nanofibrous membrane #POSS-2 during the DCMD process. (b) WCA of calcinated PTFE and PTFE/POSS nanofibrous membranes. (c) DCMD performances of PTFE and different PTFE/POSS nanofibrous membranes. (d) Comparison of the long-term DCMD performance of #POSS-2 and commercial Millipore membranes. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Elsevier (2020). 

5.2 Energy applications
Fresh water resources and world energy resources are still in shortage. Thus, obtaining fresh water resources and developing and utilizing clean new energy becomes an urgent demand. As a type of renewable clean energy, solar energy can be directly converted into heat energy through photothermal conversion materials and applied in various fields. At present, interface evaporation solar desalination is an effective and green new method to solve the shortage of fresh water. In practical applications, due to the inevitable pollution and salt accumulation in the process of operation, the evaporation performance of the membrane is reduced, whereas superhydrophobic-modified membranes can maintain a stable high evaporation rate. Similarly, as emerging applications, heat storage coatings, supercapacitors and batteries based on superhydrophobic materials also display superior energy storage capacity and durability.

5.2.1. Solar evaporation. 
In recent years, solar-powered interfacial water evaporation has shown great potential in seawater desalination. In practice, due to the unavoidable pollution and salt accumulation, the evaporation efficiency cannot be maintained for a long time. Superhydrophobic materials are reliable for efficient and sustainable seawater desalination and exhibit great potential for sustainable water purification.
Zhang et al.171 sprayed multi-walled carbon nanotubes on the surface of superhydrophobic organosilicate sponge, and then modified the surface with oxygen plasma to be superhydrophilic, producing a yolk@shell superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic solar evaporator (Fig. 9a), where MWCNTs were uniformly covered on the top surface of the evaporator (Fig. 9b). In a seawater desalination experiment with 200 h of sunlight exposure, no salting-out was found on the top surface of the evaporator (Fig. 9c), and the generated steam condensed into water drops in the device (Fig. 9d). The evaporation rate increased rapidly to 1.72 kg m−2 h−1 within 5 h and remained almost constant (Fig. 9e). Furthermore, it exerted outstanding evaporation performance in a hostile environment. Zhang et al.172 reported a novel strategy to promote the rapid atmospheric deposition of dopamine (PDA) and Ag NPs on fabrics under UV irradiation and was modified by dodecylmercaptan (DT) to obtain superhydrophobicity. PDA and Ag NPs exhibit outstanding photothermal properties, which enabled the fabric to collect solar energy to promote the local evaporation of seawater. The evaporation efficiency was 1.66 kg m−2 h−1 and the solar energy conversion efficiency was up to 91%. To achieve high energy conversion efficiency and stable desalination rate, Chen et al.173 produced a superhydrophobic fabric with air permeability and photothermal conversion properties through a completely wet process, which remained stable after 12 h long-term evaporation.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic preparation of the silicone/MWCNT evaporators. (b) SEM images of the top surface of the silicone/MWCNT evaporator. (c) Photographs of the silicone/MWCNT evaporator 2.0 during the 200 h continuous solar desalination of seawater from the Yellow Sea under 1 sun. The seawater was replenished every 10 h during the test. (d) Experimental device for collecting clean water. (e) Evaporation rate of the silicone/MWCNT evaporator 2.0 for solar desalination. (a–e) Reproduced from ref. 171 with The Royal Society of Chemistry (2020). 


5.2.2 Heat accumulation. 
Thermal energy storage as a renewable source of energy storage and reduced energy consumption technology has received widespread attention. Therefore, phase-change materials (PCMs) with a stable shape have been favored by researchers due to their excellent heat storage ability. Among the phase-change materials, the development of organic solid–liquid PCMS is the focus of attention. However, this material is prone to fluid leakage, where the introduction of a porous skeleton and the construction of PCMS with a stable shape can effectively solve this problem. In addition, the introduction of a superhydrophobic material can further prevent fluid leakage and improve its heat storage capacity.174,175
Guo et al.176 successfully obtained a stable shape superhydrophobic composite organic phase-change material via the impregnation of paraffin (PA) in a polymethylsilsesquioxane aerogel. Zhang et al.177 developed a superhydrophobic thermal storage material based on polydivinylbenzene nanotubes to improve their mechanical durability. Delignified wood (DW) could also be used as a porous skeleton to prevent the leakage of fluids during a phase transition. Yang et al.178 impregnated 1-tetradecanol (TD) into DW to obtain a TD/DW composite phase change material, and then sprayed a superhydrophobic material on the surface of the material to prepare a superhydrophobic TD/DW composite phase-change material with a WCA of 155° (Fig. 10a and b). Under light, the phase-change material could absorb solar energy, and then convert it into heat energy for storage, with an efficiency higher than 49.84%. In addition, the PCM had strong thermal stability (less than 110 °C) and chemical stability (Fig. 10c), and thus it has promising application in the utilization of solar energy resources.
 Fig. 10  (a) Diagram of fabrication of superhydrophobic surface. (b) SEM image of superhydrophobic TD/DW composite. (c) Solar-thermal conversion: time-dependent temperature curves and corresponding infrared images of superhydrophobic TD/DW composites and DW. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier (2019). 


5.2.3 Super capacitor. 
Supercapacitors are considered as potential candidate materials for energy storage devices due to their advantages of rapid capacity, long cycle life and environmental protection.179–181 Currently, from the perspective of practical application and security, researchers managed to combine superhydrophobicity with supercapacitors.
Park et al.182 sprayed a reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/CNT/Cu NP (Cu/CNT/rGO) suspension on knitted fabrics using supersonic cold spraying technology to obtain superhydrophobic Cu/CNT/rGO fabrics (Fig. 11a). RGO and CNTs as electrode materials were employed to construct a hierarchical structure, which contributed to static charge accumulation, while copper NPs enhanced the charge transfer (Fig. 11b and c). Cu/CNT/rGO fabrics can be used in supercapacitors (Fig. 11d). As displayed in Fig. 11e, at a fixed scanning rate of 100 mV s−1, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was adopted to measure the current response of different coating quantities (N). The current response was the strongest when N = 20, and its scanning rate is shown in Fig. 11f. Galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) was used to study the electrochemical performance of the supercapacitor. Fig. 11g and h exhibit that the discharge time is proportional to N. When N = 20, the discharge time was the longest and the energy stored was the greatest. Finally, this fabric has potential in battery and transistor applications.
 Fig. 11  (a) Preparation of superhydrophobic Cu/CNT/rGO fabric. (b) Structure diagram of superhydrophobic Cu/CNT/rGO fabric. (c) Cu/CNT/rGO fabric is applied to supercapacitors. (d) SEM image of Cu/CNT/rGO fabric surface. (e) Cyclic voltammetry curves of supercapacitors with different amounts of coating (N) at the scanning rate of 100 mV s−1. (f) N = 20, cyclic voltammetry curves of supercapacitors at different scanning rates. (g) At a current of 0.125 mA cm−2, galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of supercapacitors with different N. (h) N = 20, galvanostatic charge–discharge curves under different current. (a–h) Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Elsevier (2021). 


5.2.4 Battery. 
Long-term exposure to air will accelerate the passivation of batteries, resulting in reduced performance and safety concerns.183 Thus, the design of superhydrophobic materials have proven to be an effective way to protect batteries. The protective layer of hierarchical porous carbon designed by Wang et al.184 effectively improve the usability and cycling stability of a battery. Zhang et al.185 generated silicon nanofilaments (SNFs) on the surface of a polypropylene separator (Celgard 2400) through the hydrolysis condensation reaction of trichloromethyl silane and prepared an SNF-Celgard separator to improve the performance of the battery (Fig. 12a). When activated by O2-plasma, the surface produced a large amount of hydroxyl groups, and the separator exhibited excellent superhydrophobicity (Fig. 12b and c), reducing the water absorption and achieving a hygroscopic capacity of 0% at 92% humidity. As can be seen in Fig. 12d, the battery with SNF-Celgard separator was more stable than that with a pure Celgard separator, where the battery capacity remained basically unchanged. The generation of thick and long SNFs could significantly improve the thermal stability of the battery (Fig. 12e). At 200 °C, the thermal shrinkage of SNF-Celgard120ppm and SNF-Celgard220ppm was not obvious (Fig. 12f and g, respectively). Here, the SNF nanostructure provided superhydrophobicity and inhibited the reaction on the lithium anode, effectively alleviating the growth of dendrites. In addition, the SNF-Celgard separator is suitable for common lithium batteries.
 Fig. 12  (a) Figure of the preparation of SNF-Celgard separator. (b) SEM image of SNF-Celgard separator surface, and the insert is the image of the WCA. (c) SEM image of SNF-Celgard separator cross section. (d) Moisture absorption rate of SNF-Celgard separator. (e) Cyclic stability of different Celgard-separator cells. (f) Thermal shrinkage of different Celgard-separators. (g) Optical photographs of different Celgard-separators before and after heat treatment at 200 °C. (a–g) Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from Elsevier (2019). 

5.3 Biological applications
Superhydrophobic materials have improved the problems of traditional technologies in biology because of their good repulsion to water, bacteria, blood, urine, cola and milk. It is difficult to detect ultra-low concentrations of biomolecules with early technology. Alternatively, detection based on superhydrophobic materials provides a new strategy for the ultra-sensitive detection of biomolecules, where the analyte on the superhydrophobic surface finally condenses into small points for detection. Air trapped on rough surfaces not only can reduce bacterial adhesion, but also disrupt their growth on the surface. The use of superhydrophobic materials instead of conventional packaging can reduce food waste to some extent. In recent years, the selective release of drugs has been one of the concerns of researchers, where as a new drug carrier, superhydrophobic materials have the advantages of high drug release rate and good controllability.

5.3.1 Biological detection. 
SERS technology can enhance the intensity of Raman signals and can better analyze chemical and structural information of molecules.186 In recent years, SERS technology has been widely used for the high sensitivity detection of a low concentration analytes. Considering the limitations of traditional bio-photonic devices for biological detection, Gentile et al.187 combined SERS and superhydrophobicity based on silicon microcolumns and obtained a new device, which could detect trace amounts of analyte. The analyte droplet was highly concentrated at a small point on the superhydrophobic surface after the solvent evaporated. In this work, the device could selectively detect very low concentrations of rhodamine (R6G) molecules. To obtain a more convenient and low-cost process, Xu et al.188 proposed the use of natural hydrophobic materials as SERS substrates, such as rose petals. Inspired by this, Chen et al.189 used rose petals as an SERS substrate and enriched Ag NPs on the upper epidermis (UE) and lower epidermis (LE) (Fig. 13a and b), and then condensed to a small point by using their superhydrophobicity (Fig. 13c), thus preparing an efficient and highly sensitive SERS substrate. However, due to the inhomogeneity of the nanostructure on the surface of the rose petals, the substrate could not achieve the reusability of SERS signals. Thus, it is necessary to find a type of natural hydrophobic material with a uniform nanostructure for the fabrication of SERS substrates. Taro leaves have a layered micro-nano structure, which exhibit superhydrophobicity similar to lotus leaves.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the process for concentrating AgNPs on rose petals. (b) SEM images showing analytes were concentrated on the of UE and LE. (c) Photograph of the analyte concentrated on a rose petal. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2015). (d) Single droplet SERS test process of superhydrophobic Taro-leaf@Ag. (e) SERS spectra of R6G at different concentrations on Taro-leaf@Ag. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2016). 
Zhang et al.15 developed an SERS chip based on a silver-plated taro leaf (Taro-leaf@Ag) with high sensitivity and good reproducibility. In the process of evaporation of the analyte, the superhydrophobicity of the chip enriched the droplets in a very small area. After the water was completely evaporated, the R6G droplets were concentrated from the sphere to about 0.3 mm2 area, which further reduced the SERS-detected concentration (Fig. 13d). The Taro-leaf@Ag SERS chip could detect trace amounts of R6G with different concentrations, and the detection limit was as low as 10–8 M (Fig. 13e). Uniformly covered nanosheets can improve the reproducibility of the signal. Taking the Tro-leaf@Ag structure as a model, Kumar et al.190 developed a SERS sensor based on PDMS, which could be used to detect malachite green molecules in the range of 10−11 to 10−3 M. In addition, the flexible SERS substrate made by the in situ reduction of Ag nanoparticles on the hierarchical micro-nano structure showed a superhydrophobic effect with high contact angle hysteresis.191


5.3.2 Biomedicine. 
Superhydrophobic surfaces are commonly used in clinical diagnosis and biomedical drug delivery and can also be used for the quantitative detection of biological proteins.192,193 The superhydrophobic liquid–solid contact triboelectric nanogenerators (TENG) developed by Zhao's team194 could be used as a droplet sensor for clinical diagnosis. Its structure diagram is shown in Fig. 14a, where as a superhydrophobic layer, gas-phase SiO2 NPs uniformly covered the double-sided adhesive, forming a superhydrophobic TENG surface with a copper electrode. The TENG surface exhibited superhydrophobicity for droplets, HCL, blood and other droplets, and there was no droplet residue during rolling (Fig. 14b and c). In addition, a TENG surface had a strong sense of blood and could be applied in the drainage bottle, which reflected the flow rate of fluid in real time to finish the operation, where the wound will not cause secondary injury, affecting the wound healing speed (Fig. 14d). In terms of drug delivery, Mahmoodi et al.195 used PTFE NPs to modify the surface of PDMS microchips, which made the original microchannel surface superhydrophobic and improved the synthesis efficiency of dexamethasone-coated poly(lactic-glycolic acid) nanoparticles, thus achieving a greater drug load. The material also had good resistance to organic solvents, which could effectively prevent the adhesion of solvents on a channel. Superhydrophobic materials can also address post-operative thrombosis and hemolysis by reducing the flow resistance to reduce blood damage in medical devices. Marlena et al.196 prepared superhydrophobic materials with durable drag reduction via the simple modification of porous PTFE foam. It exhibited high blood compatibility and protein adsorption and could be used in medical devices in contact with blood.
 Fig. 14  (a) Structure diagram of superhydrophobic TENG. (b) Images and CA of six droplet bands (pure water, PBS, 0.1 M HCl, 0.1 M NaOH, urine and blood) on the surface of superhydrophobic TENG. (c) Image of blood drops on the surface of superhydrophobic TENG. (d) Schematic diagram of a droplet sensor in a drainage bottle for clinical real-time monitoring of patient drainage operation. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2020). 


5.3.3 Antibacterial. 
The super-hydrophobic surface could effectively reduce and inhibit bacterial adhesion, achieving an antibacterial effect. Superhydrophobic fabrics with antimicrobial properties have attracted wide attention in daily life and medical treatment. Metal oxide NPs, such as Ag NPs and ZnO NPs, have been widely used in the preparation of antimicrobial textiles as the main antibacterial agents. Hakan et al.197 prepared a superhydrophobic composite material by combining TiO2, PDMS and Ag NPs, which displayed antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Liu et al.198 reported that a superhydrophobic film composed of TiO2 NPs and PDMS had excellent antihemorrhagic properties and could be used as wound dispersal dressings to prevent bacterial infection. As shown in Fig. 15a, under the same conditions, the number of viable bacteria on the superhydrophobic film was significantly reduced compared with that on bare glass. Blood droplets could easily slide off the surface of hydrophobic film with an angle of 8° and no blood stains were left on the surface after removal of the droplets (Fig. 15a and b). This membrane was also effective in preventing bleeding if the wound continued to bleed. In addition to the above-mentioned antibacterial surface based on metal oxide NPs, Ma et al.199 constructed a rough layered structure by introducing plant tannin acid (TA) with anti-microbial properties on polyimide nanofibers, and then modified it by hydrophobic PDMS to obtain a TA-Al3+-based superhydrophobic fiber membrane with a WCA of 153.64° (Fig. 15d and e). After the experimental test of the antibacterial performance (Fig. 15f), the authors concluded that the superhydrophobic film has excellent antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli and could effectively reduce bacterial adhesion. Fig. 15g show a diagram of the antibacterial demonstration a superhydrophobic membrane, where the combined action of metal ions and TA exhibits an antibacterial effect.
 Fig. 15  (a) Confocal microscopy images of E. coli on the bare glass and superhydrophobic film after incubation, green and red fluorescence indicate alive and dead E. coli, respectively. (b) Change diagram of blood droplet staying on the superhydrophobic film for 1 h, with the comparison diagram of the film before and after removing blood droplet. (c) Blood drops were placed on the superhydrophobic film for 1 h and then slid. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley (2020). (d) Diagram of the preparation process of PDMS/TA-Mn+/PI nanofiber membrane. (e) Surface SEM micrographs of PDMS/Ta-Al3+/PI membrane, where the inset displays water droplets on the surface. (f) Antibacterial activity of the as-prepared membrane against E. coli (left) and B. sub (right). M0: pristine PI membrane, M1: PDMS/TA-Ag+/PI, M2: PDMS/TACu2+/PI, M3: PDMS/TA-Al3+/PI, and M4: PDMS/TA-Ti4+/PI. (g) Schematic demonstration of the biocidal functions of the membrane by releasing metal ions and TA. (d–g) Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Elsevier (2019). 


5.3.4 Food packaging. 
In daily life, it can be observed that milk, honey and other sticky liquid foods leave a residue on the packaging box wall after drinking, resulting in a large amount of food waste. This problem can be solved by introducing superhydrophobic surfaces. To obtain a superhydrophobic material that can be used for food packaging, the material under preparation must be safe and edible. Beeswax has been proven to be a naturally hydrophobic material. In their work, Zhang et al.200 combined beeswax with coffee lignin to produce a heat-resistant and edible superhydrophobic material (WCA > 150°) by spraying (Fig. 16a). Various liquid foods appeared spherical on the surface and could roll freely (Fig. 16b). A contrast method was used to detect the low adhesion of the material to honey. As shown in Fig. 16c, a large amount of honey remained in the blank cup, while there was almost no honey in the cup covered with the superhydrophobic material. The preparation of this material is simple and inexpensive, and thus it has a great development prospect in the packaging of liquid food with adhesion. Guo et al.201 demonstrated that the cuticle of the skin of tomatoes protects their pulp, and they used beeswax to modify a cuticle-pectin mixture to produce an edible superhydrophobic film. Subsequently, Wang et al.202 developed a double-layer cellulose-based superhydrophobic material, where the heat resistance and mechanical stability of the material were improved remarkably by introducing a precipitated calcium carbonate layer. In addition to beeswax, carnauba wax, candelilla wax, rice bran wax and soy wax are also widely used to prepare superhydrophobic materials. Gupta et al.203 developed non-fluorinated superhydrophobic composites using naturally hydrophobic carnauba wax. Xue et al.204 reported for the first time an edible superhydrophobic material prepared on polypropylene (pp) material via a one-step spraying method using candelilla wax and rice bran wax as the main materials. The sprayed pp surface exhibited superhydrophobicity to various viscous liquids, and it was found that the material could resist sandpaper friction and immersion in hot water at 70 °C. The authors claimed that this material can be widely used on the inner surface of food packaging to effectively reduce the amount of liquid food residue.
 Fig. 16  (a) Preparation process diagram of superhydrophobic material. (b) WCA of superhydrophobic material with different liquid food. (c) Comparison photograph of the honey dumping process in the superhydrophobic cup (left) and control cup (right). (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Elsevier (2018). 

5.4 Other application
Besides the applications described above, superhydrophobic surfaces are also widely used in the fields of anti-icing,205,206 water collection,207–212 fluid drag reduction,213 and anti-biofouling.214,215 Wu et al.216 prepared a superhydrophobic surface with common candle soot. The surface did not form ice at −50 °C and could melt the accumulated frost and ice within 300 s. Superhydrophobic materials can rapidly discharge condensation droplets from their surface, and thus exhibit perfect antifogging performance. Bionic superhydrophobic materials have great application potential and will bring great changes to our daily life and industry.217,218
6. Conclusion
Herein, we summarized the recent development and application of EFSMs. Initially, the basic wetting theory and typical superwetting models were introduced, such as the Wenzel model, Cassie model, Wenzel–Cassie model, Lotus model and Gecko model. Secondly, the superhydrophobic behavior of lotus leaves, rose petals, rape flowers, Osmanthus flowers, sunflower pollen, taro leaves and other natural organisms were described. Subsequently, biomimetic superhydrophobic materials based on carbon-based and silicon-based substances, PTFE and paraffin were introduced. Finally, the recent progress in the application of superhydrophobic materials in the environment, energy and biology was summarized. Although the research on EFSMs has attracted wide attention, there are still some challenges in the related development research. In our view, the following four points are worth noting (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Current challenges and future trends in the field of EFSMs. 
1. Under the premise of ensuring superhydrophobicity, how to correctly select cheap and green materials is the key step to prepare superhydrophobic materials. Most of the superhydrophobic materials currently available use perfluorinated compounds or organosilane-based chemicals to reduce the surface energy of liquids, both of which are typically toxic, expensive, and bio-cumulative in nature. The environmental regulations issued by the government increase the demand for research and development of green environmental technologies. Therefore, removing the content of alkyl fluoride compounds in materials without sacrificing their surface superhydrophobic properties is the most important thing to achieve green chemistry. The mentioned compounds such as silica, silicates, carbon and wax can be widely used as fillers in the preparation of superhydrophobic materials. In addition, hydrogels, 3-D-printed biological materials and polymers such as PTFE, PVDF, PVDF, PCL and PLA have also been used in the successful preparation of superhydrophobic materials.
2. How to keep superhydrophobic stability is of great significance. The stability of superhydrophobic materials needs to be further strengthened, and excellent stability can enable the wide use of superhydrophobic materials. At present, the stability of most non-toxic superhydrophobic materials cannot be guaranteed. For example, wax-based materials tend to lose their wettability under friction behavior. Therefore, for their practical production and wide application, the stability of superhydrophobic materials needs to be higher. Here, the stability should include mechanical stability, temperature resistance and chemical stability. Therefore, in the construction of superhydrophobic materials, the stability of materials can be improved by introducing a bonding layer, mixing high adhesion substances and constructing an organic skeleton.
3. Developing ways to ensure that the design, preparation, and application of superhydrophobic materials are environmentally friendly is worth exploring. At present, environmental protection materials can be used completely in the preparation process, and the focus should be on the development of new applications of environmental protection superhydrophobic materials. Using environmentally friendly principles through environmentally friendly preparation technology for application in the field of environmental protection is the best choice to realize environment-friendly superhydrophobic material.
4. Realizing the industrial large-scale production of EFSMs. At present, the preparation technology of small-scale environment friendly superhydrophobic materials in the laboratory is basically mature.219,220 Inspired by these studies, through chemical stability and robust roughness, a scientific team from the Chinese Academy of Sciences utilized a series of super-hydrophobic materials to develop a new intelligent oil-spill emergency device, where crude oil, heavy oil, light oil, diesel oil, gasoline, organic chemical liquid and underwater organic chemical liquids could be purified with high adsorption or recovery efficiencies. Meanwhile, coating companies mainly focus on a series of products including high-temperature-resistant coatings, high hardness ceramic coatings, special antifouling coatings, and special superhydrophobic self-cleaning coatings. These products are now widely used in various electrical appliances, lighting, medical equipment, metal processing industry and building exterior walls and other fields. However, in regard to the widespread practical applications of EFSMs in various fields, it is still challenging. Firstly, the depth of cooperation between the scientific research community and industry is not deep enough, and many problems need to be solved by the cooperation of science and technology. Another reason is that environmental factors have a huge impact on product quality, which directly leads to the failure of applications. Furthermore, how to balance the relations between surface energy arising from chemical stability, roughness from textured structures and eco-friendly property is a challenging but urgent task for the real use of EFSMs in the future.
The most challenging aspect is creating a durable superhydrophobic material without compromising its wettability. We believe that this comprehensive review can provide new ideas for the development and application of superhydrophobic materials. The research on super hydrophobic environmental protection materials is developing and innovating, which will become a hot development direction in the next few years.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22102104) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of South-Central Minzu University (CPT22027).
Notes and references
T. T. Kong, G. T. Luo, Y. J. Zhao and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808012 CrossRef .
J. Jeevahan, M. Chandrasekaran, G. B. Joseph, R. B. Durairaj and G. Mageshwaran, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2018, 15, 231–250 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. D. Wang, J. Y. Huang, Z. Chen, G. Q. Chen and Y. K. Lai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1870123 CrossRef .
S. T. Wang, K. S. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8230–8293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Ann. Bot., 1997, 79, 667–677 CrossRef .
Z. G. Guo and W. M. Liu, Plant Sci., 2007, 172, 1103–1112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Mehanna, E. Sadler, R. L. Upton, A. G. Kempchinsky, Y. Lu and C. R. Crick, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6569–6612 RSC .
X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432, 36 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin, Y. L. Zheng, H. Y. Lu, X. J. Zhang and Y. Tian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 163701 CrossRef .
K. Koch, B. Bhushan and W. Barthlott, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2009, 54, 137–178 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bhushan and E. K. Her, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8207–8217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Bixler and B. B. Rice, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2015, 40, 1–37 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Bixler and B. Bhushan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 76–96 RSC .
E. Favret and A. Andrada, Microsc. Microanal., 2009, 15, 946–947 CrossRef .
J. A. Huang, Y. L. Zhang, Y. Q. Zhao, X. L. Zhang, M. L. Sun and W. J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11487–11493 RSC .
A. J. Schulte, D. M. Droste, K. Koch and W. Barthlott, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 228–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3863–3879 RSC .
C. A. E. Hamlett, N. J. Shirtcliffe, F. B. Pyatt, M. I. Newton, G. McHale and K. Koch, Planta, 2011, 234, 1267–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bakhshandeh, S. S. Nateghi, M. M. Gazani, Z. Dehghani and F. Mohammadzadeh, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 192, 258–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Y. N. Zhang, J. M. Xi, Y. Zhu, N. Wang, F. Xia and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4114–4119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eriksson and A. Swerin, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 47, 46–57 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale, M. I. Newton, G. Chabrol and C. C. Perry, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1929–1932 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Q. Wang, S. S. Xu and X. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 48583–48593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Teisala and H. Butt, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 10689–10703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Moghadam, H. Parsimehr and A. Ehsani, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 290, 102397 CrossRef .
W. L. Zhang, D. H. Wang, Z. N. Sun, J. N. Song and X. Deng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4031–4061 RSC .
T. Walter, T. Hein, M. Weichselgartner, K. Wommer, M. Aust and N. Vogel, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 3009–3016 RSC .
F. Sahin, N. Celik, A. Ceylan, S. Pekdemir, M. Ruzi and M. S. Onses, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Marlena, J. K. S. Tan, Z. Lin, D. X. Li, B. X. Zhao, H. L. Leo, S. Kim and C. H. Yap, NPG Asia Mater., 2021, 13, 1 CrossRef .
N. Cherupurakal, M. S. Mozumder, A. I. Mourad and S. Lalwani, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 151, 111538 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Abu-Thabit, O. J. Uwaezuoke and M. H. Abu, Elella, Chemosphere, 2022, 294, 133644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, A. Yi, J. Choi, D. H. Ko and H. J. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 584, 152625 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Zhang, Y. Jing, J. Zhang, Z. Z. Sheng, Y. Q. Hou, J. D. Xu, B. Y. Chen, J. Liu, M. Wang and X. Hou, Interdiscip. Mater., 2022, 1, 157–169 CrossRef CAS ; H. Attia, D. J. Johnson, C. J. Wright and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2018, 439, 31–45 CrossRef .
D. Yoo, Y. Kim, M. Min, G. H. Ahn, D. H. Lien, J. Jang, H. Jeong, Y. Song, S. Chung, A. Javey and T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11062–11069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mayoussi, E. H. Doeven, A. Kick, A. Goralczyk, Y. Thomann, P. Risch, R. M. Guijt, F. Kotz, D. Helmer and B. E. Rapp, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21379–21386 RSC .
Z. S. Saifaldeen, K. R. Khedir, M. T. Camci, A. Ucar, S. Suzer and T. Karabacak, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 379, 55–65 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brown, M. Bozman, T. Hickman, M. I. Hossain, T. G. Glover, K. N. West and C. W. West, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 22534–22540 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishida, Y. Yanaga, S. Yamada and Y. Takahashi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 546, 148932 CrossRef CAS .
R. Stoddard, K. Nithyanandam and R. Pitchumani, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 608, 662–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rico, J. Mora, P. García, A. Agüero, A. Borrás, A. R. G. Elipe and C. L. Santos, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 21, 100815 CrossRef .
A. A. Hossain, M. T. Yang, A. Checco, G. Doerk and C. E. Colosqui, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 100553 CrossRef .
V. Polisetti, S. Naidu, A. M. Kansara, P. Ray and P. S. Singh, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2021, 21, 101322 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Bayer, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000095 CrossRef .
Q. Y. Wang, G. Sun, Q. D. Tong, W. Yang and W. T. Hao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130829 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Ramesh and R. R. Jonnalagadda, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 134262 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Allen, P. Licence and B. Subramaniam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 14653 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. R. Razavi, J. Oh, R. T. Haasch, K. Kim and M. Masoomi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14509–14520 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liu, M. Li, C. Y. Luo, S. Zhou and W. X. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 134162 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu and Z. G. Guo, J. Bionic Eng., 2016, 13, 1–29 CrossRef .
J. Ahn, Z. J. Zhao, J. Choi, Y. Jeong, S. Hwang, J. Koa, J. M. Gu, S. Jeon, J. Park, M. G. Kang, D. V. D. Orbe, I. Cho, H. Kang, M. Bok, J. H. Jeong and I. Parka, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105978 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suzuki and K. Ueno, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 138–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale, S. Atherton and M. I. Newton, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 161, 124–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bormashenko, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 537, 597–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, S. Cai, G. F. Liao, Z. F. Gao, X. H. Min, Y. Huang, S. W. Jin and F. Xia, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 14751–14771 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Si, Z. C. Dong and L. Jiang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 1102–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Ip and J. M. Toguri, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 688–692 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chibowski and J. Adhes, Sci. Technol., 2011, 25, 1323–1336 CAS .
M. J. Liu, S. T. Wang, Z. X. Wei, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 665–669 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robert and J. Wenzel, Phys. Chem., 1949, 53, 1466–1467 CrossRef .
Y. F. Si and Z. G. Guo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5922–5946 RSC .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
A. Lafuma and D. Quéré, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Huang, X. D. Lou and F. Xia, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 6, 100034 CrossRef .
P. Forsberg, F. Nikolajeff and M. Karlsson, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 104–109 RSC .
E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, G. Whyman, Y. Bormashenko and M. Erlich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 201917 CrossRef .
A. Marmur, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3517–3519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Huang, X. D. Lou and F. Xia, View, 2021, 2, 20200053 CrossRef .
L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Nachr. Chem., 1998, 28, 314–321 Search PubMed .

          B. Bhushan, Y. C. Jung and M. Nosonovsky, Springer Handbook of Nanotechnology, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2010, pp. 1437–1524 DOI:10.1007/978-3-642-02525-9_42 .
H. J. Ensikat, P. D. Kuru, C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 152–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Teisala, M. Tuominen and J. Kuusipalo, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2011, 818707 Search PubMed .
H. Zhu and Z. G. Guo, J. Bionic Eng., 2016, 13, 213–219 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, Y. Huang and F. Xia, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 100607 CrossRef .
T. F. Fan, S. Park, Q. Shi, X. Y. Zhang, Q. M. Liu, Y. Song, H. Chin, M. S. B. Ibrahim, N. Mokrzecka, Y. Yang, H. Li, J. H. Song, S. Suresh and N. J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hwang, M. S. B. Ibrahim, J. Deng, J. A. Jackman and N. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101091 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wagner, C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Acta Zoologica, 1996, 77, 213–225 CrossRef .
Y. M. Zheng, X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 178–182 RSC .
K. S. Liu and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 155–175 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Q. Wang, S. S. Xu, L. Qu and Z. Q. Shi, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 608, 125624 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Liu, T. Cai, X. Y. Shen, E. Z. Huang, Z. Wang and Q. F. Sun, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 21262–21269 Search PubMed .
C. N. Niu, J. Y. Han, S. P. Hu, D. Y. Chao, X. G. Song, M. M. R. Howlader and J. Cao, Surf. Interfaces, 2021, 22, 100830 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seth and S. Jana, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2022, 19, 813–827 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zahid, G. Mazzon, A. Athanassiou and I. S. Bayer, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 270, 216–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Joudan and R. J. Lundgren, Science, 2022, 377, 816–817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hill, H. Apsey, A. R. Barron and S. Alexander, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 13664–13673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alexander, J. Eastoe, A. M. Lord, F. Guittard and A. R. Barron, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 660–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Sahoo and B. Kandasubramanian, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 148, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, C. Yang, L. H. Song, Y. Wang, Q. Wei, Alamusi, Q. B. Deng and N. Hu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2022, 218, 109148 CrossRef CAS .
R. Soni, S. R. Joshi, M. Karmacharya, H. Min, S. K. Kim, S. Kumar, G. H. Kim, Y. K. Cho and C. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 8491–8499 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eseev, A. Goshev, S. Kapustin and Y. Tsykareva, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zandi, Z. D. Sh, F. Shojaeian, S. M. S. M. Kiasary, F. Abbasvandi, A. Zandi, A. Gilani, Z. Saghafi, Y. Kordehlachin, A. Mamdouh, S. H. Miraghaie, M. Hoseinyazdi, M. A. Khayamian, R. Anbiaee, M. Faranoush and M. Abdolahad, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 6214–6226 RSC .
Z. Mokarian, R. Rasuli and Y. Abedini, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 369, 567–575 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Han, Y. R. Han, Y. Z. Huang, C. Wang, H. Liu, L. Han and Y. Zhang, Small Methods, 2022, 6, 2200096 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Ding, W. C. Jiao, R. G. Wang, M. L. Yan, Z. M. Chu and X. D. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17766–17774 RSC .
G. M. Ding, W. C. Jiao, L. Y. Chen, M. L. Yan, L. F. Hao and R. G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16992–17000 RSC .
P. C. Uzoma, Q. M. Wang, W. Y. Zhang, N. J. Gao, J. W. Li, P. C. Okonkwo, F. C. Liu and E. H. Han, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 630, 127532 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Long, H. N. Li, B. Yang, N. Huang, L. S. Liu, Z. G. Gai and X. Jiang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 48, 1–8 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, B. Z. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Z. Feng, W. J. Han, C. T. Liu and C. Y. Shen, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 259, 117750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Rasitha, S. C. Vanithakumari, D. Nanda Gopala Krishna, R. P. George, R. Srinivasan and J. Philip, Prog. Org. Coat., 2022, 162, 106560 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Chen, Z. D. Lv, Z. Zhang, D. A. Weitz, H. B. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang and W. G. Cui, Exploration, 2021, 1, 20210036 CrossRef .
H. X. Zhao, Q. Q. Sun, J. Zhou, X. Deng and J. X. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2070215 CrossRef .
G. Newcombe and J. Ralston, Langmuir, 1992, 8, 190–196 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lei, J. Xiao, M. N. Xiong, L. P. Zheng and Q. X. Zhuang, Coating, 2019, 9, 159 CrossRef .
S. A. Mahadik, F. Pedraza and R. S. Vhatkar, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 663, 487–493 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Ge, C. Y. Cao, F. H. Liang, R. Liu, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, T. X. Zhu, B. Yi, Y. X. Tang and Y. K. Lai, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 65–73 RSC .
J. C. Ma, L. E. Porath, M. F. Haque, S. Sett, K. F. Rabbi, S. Nam, N. Miljkovic and C. M. Evans, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Fan, C. Z. Li, Z. J. Chen and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 6531–6536 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Marchand, Z. R. Dilworth, R. J. Stauffer, E. Hsiao, J. H. Kim, J. G. Kang and S. H. Kim, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 234, 14–20 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang and D. S. Xiong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 292, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Si, H. Zhu, L. W. Chen, T. Jiang and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16794–16797 RSC .
K. J. Heo, H. J. Oh, H. Eom, Y. Kim and J. H. Jung, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 783, 147043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. C. Aktas, S. Schröder, S. Veziroglu, M. Z. Ghori, A. Haidar, O. Polonskyi, T. Strunskus, K. Gleason and F. Faupel, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801967 CrossRef .
A. McGaughey, P. Karikar, M. Gupta and A. E. Childress, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 1256–1267 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Alawajji, G. K. Kannarpady and A. S. Biris, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 444, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. He, Y. Zhao, M. J. Hou, A. Abbas, M. H. Xue, X. R. Ma, J. He and M. N. Qu, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2020, 17, 755–763 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lim, J. Ryu, E. H. Sohn, S. G. Lee, I. J. Park, J. Hong and H. S. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 10825–10835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Reshmi, S. P. Sundaran, A. Juraij and S. Athiyanathil, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 2092–2102 RSC .
J. J. Koh, X. W. Zhang and C. B. He, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 109, 99–113 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Lee, H. Park, J. Kim and D. M. Chun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467-468, 979–991 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Bae, J. Jang, Y. G. Jeong, W. S. Lyoo and B. G. Min, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 344, 584–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Zhang, J. Zhao, L. Ma, X. J. Shi and L. L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2019, 7, 24532–24542 RSC .
P. M. Gorea and B. Kandasubramanian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7457–7479 RSC .
M. Balordi, F. Pini and G. S. D. Magistris, Surf. Interfaces, 2022, 30, 101855 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. A. Mousavi and R. Pitchumani, Corros. Sci., 2021, 186, 109420 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Saji and J. Magnes, Alloys, 2021, 9, 748–778 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hill, A. R. Barron and S. Alexander, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 567, 45–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hill, A. R. Barron and S. Alexander, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 555, 323–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hill, H. Attia, A. R. Barron and S. Alexander, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 543, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Zhao, E. Z. Liu, J. Fan, B. Chen, X. Y. Hu, Y. D. He and C. L. He, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 132, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Upadhyay and P. R. Waghmare, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2020, 18, 505–510 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Yin, F. Yuan, M. S. Xue, Y. H. Xue, Y. Xie, J. F. Ou, Y. D. Luo, Z. Hong and C. Xie, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 611, 93–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Jarad, H. Imran, S. M. Imani, T. F. Didar and L. Soleymani, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2022, 2101702 CrossRef .
A. Baldelli, J. Ou, D. Barona, W. Li and A. Amirfazli, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 1902110 CrossRef CAS .
R. Soni, S. R. Joshi, S. R. Joshi, M. Karmacharya, H. Min, S. K. Kim, S. Kumar, G. H. Kim, Y. K. Cho and C. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 8491–8499 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Liao, Y. G. Li, M. H. Gao, Y. O. Xia, W. H. Chai, X. Y. Su, Z. H. Zheng and Y. Liu, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 651, 129647 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tang, K. S. S. Christie, D. Y. Hou, C. L. Ding, X. L. Jia and J. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 617, 118666 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ozbay, U. Cengiz and H. Y. Erbil, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 2033–2043 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Huang, M. Yang, H. Zhang and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1323–1332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Zhu, Y. Cheng, J. Y. Huang, J. Q. Xiong, M. Z. Ge, J. J. Mao, Z. K. Liu, X. L. Dong, Z. Chen and Y. K. Lai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125746 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eshaghi, A. M. Mesbahi and A. A. Aghaei, Optik, 2021, 241, 166967 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Saffar, A. Eshaghi and M. R. Dehnavi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 259, 124085 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu and F. Xia, Matter, 2022, 5, 785–787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Y. D. Tu, C. H. Luo, L. Dai, X. D. Lou, Y. Huang and F. Xia, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100669 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, L. Z. Wu, X. Meng, Y. Q. Wang, Y. Huang, M. H. Lin and F. Xia, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11455–11459 RSC .
G. Y. Liu, H. Y. Xia, Y. H. Niu, X. Zhao, G. T. Zhang, L. F. Song and H. X. Chen, Biochem. Eng. J., 2021, 409, 128187 CAS .
S. Q. Liu, W. C. Wan, X. T. Zhang, A. D. Crema and S. Seeger, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123969 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang, X. Xiao, G. L. Liu, Z. Xu, B. Wang, C. M. Yu, R. H. A. Ras and L. Jiang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 6579–6584 RSC .
K. M. Zhang, M. M. Wang, M. Y. Wu, Q. Y. Wu, J. Y. Liu, J. J. Yang and J. N. Zhang, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 469–480 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barthwal and S. H. Lim, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 618, 118716 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Zhao, L. Tie, Z. G. Guo and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11703–11710 RSC .
N. Wang, Y. Lu, D. S. Xiong, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4107–4116 RSC .
Z. Guo, B. Long, S. J. Gao, J. C. Luo, L. Wang, X. W. Huang, D. Wang, H. G. Xue and J. F. Gao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 402, 123838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Qin, W. Wang, W. Li, S. Zhang and Z. R. Li, Cellulose, 2021, 28, 3617–3630 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Sui, H. F. Quan, Y. K. Hu, M. M. Hou and S. Q. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 589, 275–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Eykens, K. D. Sitter, C. Dotremont, L. Pinoy and D. B. B. Van, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 182, 36–51 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. F. Luo, W. Wang and X. D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 702–726 RSC .
E. G. Castro, R. C. Muñoz and M. Lieder, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2022, 52, 2104–2149 CrossRef .
J. Y. Chin, G. H. Teoh, A. L. Ahmad and S. C. Low, Water Sci. Technol., 2020, 82, 2948–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yadav, R. Farnood and V. Kumar, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 132092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Hong, H. Kim, H. Lee, G. Lim and S. J. Cho, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 641, 119862 CrossRef CAS .
H. Attia, S. Alexander, C. J. Wright and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2017, 420, 318–329 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Subrahmanya, P. T. Lin, Y. H. Chiao, J. Widakdo, C. H. Chuang, S. F. Rahmadhanty, S. Yoshikawa and W. S. Hung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7868–7880 RSC .
J. G. Ju, K. Fejjari, Y. Cheng, M. Y. Liu, Z. J. Li, W. M. Kang and Y. Liao, Desalination, 2020, 486, 114481 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Xie, G. R. Xu, Y. H. Jia, L. K. Gu, Q. Wang, N. Mushtaq, B. W. Cheng and Y. X. Hu, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 625, 118978 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bhadra, S. Roy and S. Mitra, Sep. Purif.
Technol., 2016, 161, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Azeem, D. U. Lawal, H. A. Abdulgader and T. N. Baroud, Desalination, 2022, 528, 115603 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, L. X. Li, Y. F. Yang and J. P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14736–14745 RSC .
H. L. Zhang, J. F. Ou, X. Z. Fang, S. Lei, F. J. Wang, C. Q. Li, W. Li, Y. T. Hu, A. Amirfazli and P. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132539 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, K. Chen, L. X. Li and J. P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17502–17511 RSC .
S. Naderizadeh, J. A. H. Guerrero, G. Caputo, S. Grasselli, A. Malchiodi, A. Athanassiou and I. S. Bayer, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801782 CrossRef .
H. Y. Sun, T. Li, F. Lei, S. Lyu, Y. Yang, B. Li, H. Han, B. Y. Wu, J. T. Huang, C. T. Zhang, D. D. Li and D. Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 48088–48100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Guo, W. Chu, J. Zhang, X. C. Liu, X. F. Zhao, B. X. Liu and X. B. Yi, J. Porous Mater., 2021, 28, 345–354 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Kong, X. F. Kong, Z. Y. Ji, X. M. Wang and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49694–49704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Yang, S. Y. Wang, X. Wang, W. X. Chao, N. Wang, X. L. Ding, F. Liu, Q. Q. Yu, T. H. Yang, Z. L. Yang, Z. L. Yang, J. Li, C. Y. Wang and G. L. Li, Appl. Energy, 2020, 261, 114481 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avasthi, A. Kumar and V. Balakrishnan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 1484–1495 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wan, Y. C. Zhao, Z. Li and L. L. Li, Exploration, 2022, 2, 20210029 CrossRef .
S. J. Moon, H. J. Min, C. S. Lee, D. R. Kang and J. H. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132240 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, T. Kim, E. P. Samuel, Y. Kim, S. An and S. S. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230142 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Guo, C. Li, J. Y. Liu, Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7505–7509 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. S. Wei, K. Qiu and Y. G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23010–23016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yang, B. C. Li, L. X. Li, S. Seeger and J. P. Zhang, iScience, 2019, 16, 420–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Naresh and N. Lee, Sensors, 2021, 21, 1109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gentile, M. L. Coluccio, N. Coppedè, F. Mecarini, G. Das, C. Liberale, L. Tirinato, M. Leoncini, G. Perozziello, P. Candeloro, F. D. Angelis and E. M. D. Fabrizio, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3213–3224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Xu, Y. L. Zhang, W. Y. Zhang, X. Q. Liu, J. N. Wang, X. L. Zhang, D. D. Zhang, H. B. Jiang, R. Zhang and H. B. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 56–60 CrossRef .
S. Y. Chou, C. C. Yu, Y. T. Yen, K. T. Lin, H. L. Chen and W. F. Su, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 6017–6024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kumar, R. Khosla, M. Soni, D. Deva and S. K. Sharma, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 246, 477–486 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. George, V. K. Unnikrishnan, D. Mathur, S. Chidangil and S. D. George, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 272, 485–493 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Arun, R. Ghosh and A. J. Domb, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010284 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z. Z. Zhang, Z. Pan and Y. Liu, Exploration, 2021, 1, 20210089 CrossRef .
S. M. Hu, Z. J. Shi, R. Z. Zheng, W. L. Ye, X. Gao, W. W. Zhao and G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 40021–40030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mahmoodi, J. Mohammadnejad, S. R. Bazaz, A. A. Mehrizi, M. A. Ghiass, M. Saidijam, R. Dinarvand, M. E. Warkiani and M. Soleimani, Drug Delivery Transl. Res., 2019, 9, 707–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Marlena, J. K. S. Tan, Z. G. Lin, D. X. Z. Y. Li, B. X. Zhao, H. L. Leo, S. Kim and C. H. Yap, NPG Asia Mater., 2021, 13, 58 CrossRef CAS .
H. Görgülüer, B. Çakıroğlu and M. Özacar, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2021, 18, 569–579 CrossRef .
J. Liu, L. J. Ye, Y. L. Sun, M. H. Hu, F. Chen, S. Wegner, V. Mailänder, W. Steffen, M. Kappl and H. J. Butt, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908008 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ma, Y. C. Ding, M. J. Zhang, S. T. Gao, Y. S. Li, C. B. Huang and G. D. Fu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhang, J. G. Bi, S. Q. Wang, Q. P. Cao, Y. Li, J. H. Zhou and B. W. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 533, 742–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Wang, J. X. Huang and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125883 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, J. X. Huang, Z. G. Guo and W. M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1495–1499 RSC .
S. Gupta, J. Ivvala and H. S. Grewal, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 171, 113871 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Liu, C. H. Xue, Q. F. An, S. T. Jia and M. M. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 833–841 CrossRef CAS .
A. Allahdini, R. Jafari and G. Momen, Prog. Org. Coat., 2022, 165, 106758 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barthwal, B. Lee and S. H. Lim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 496, 143677 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, Y. Huang, S. W. Zhang, S. W. Jin, X. D. Lou and F. Xia, NPG Asia Mater., 2021, 13, 47 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, S. Cai, J. Zhou, S. Q. Li, D. W. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Q. Wu, Y. Huang, S. H. Yuan, S. W. Jin and F. Xia, Water Res., 2021, 206, 117759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Nioras, K. Ellinas, V. Constantoudis and E. Gogolides, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 48322–48332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, J. W. Ai, Y. S. Shi, K. Wang and B. Su, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2006839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, R. L. Duan, X. D. Wang, J. L. Yang, J. H. Wang, Y. Huang and F. Xia, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13045–13054 RSC .
H. Zhu, F. C. Yang, J. Li and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12415–12417 RSC .
H. Zhu and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6809–6812 RSC .
P. C. Zhang, L. Lin, D. M. Zang, X. L. Guo and M. J. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1503334 CrossRef PubMed .
P. C. Zhang, C. Q. Zhao, T. Y. Zhao, M. J. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900996 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Wu, Y. J. Du, Y. Alsaid, D. Wu, M. T. Hua, Y. C. Yan, B. W. Yao, Y. F. Ma, X. Y. Zhu and X. M. He, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 11240–11246 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, M. H. Wang, L. Of., P. López, X. Deng and J. X. Cui, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Fan, Y. H. Xie, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhao, R. Yu, X. Y. Liu, Y. H. Lin and C. X. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6225–6228 RSC .
M. Z. Khan, J. Militky, M. Petru, B. Tomková, A. Ali, E. Tören and S. Perveen, Eur. Polym. J., 2022, 178, 111484 CrossRef .
Z. P. Fang, Z. M. Guo, Y. Y. Fan, S. Y. Li, Z. W. Han and Y. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 435, 128902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Jiao Peng
	Jiao Peng received her BSc Degree from South-Central University for Nationalities in 2020. Currently, she is a Master's student at the School of Chemistry and Materials Science, South-Central University for Nationalities. Her scientific interest focuses on bioinspired superwetting materials.

Yifan Si
	Dr Yifan Si received his PhD from the School of Chemistry, Beihang University (2020) from Prof. Lei Jiang's group. He joined Prof. Jinlian Hu's group as a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong (2021). Currently, his main research interests include bioinspired superwetting materials and smart electrospinning membranes.

Shiwei Jin
	Prof. Shiwei Jin received his BSc Degree from Wuhan Institute of Technology in 1995 and Master's Degree from Shenyang University of Chemical Technology in 1998, and PhD from the Institute of Hydrobiology (CAS) in 2006, respectively. From 2011 to 2012, he went to University of Maryland as a Visiting Scholar. In 2015, he started to work in the School of Chemistry and Material Science, South-central University for Nationalities. His research interests include chemical process development, chemical pollution control, analysis and toxicity evaluation of new organic pollutants.

Hai Zhu
	Dr Hai Zhu received his PhD in China University of Geosciences under the supervision of Prof. Fan Xia in 2021. Currently, he is working at the University of Hong Kong as a Postdoctoral Fellow. His research interest mainly focuses on interfacial materials in environmental and chemical applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Growth chart of number of papers on superhydrophobic materials. (b) Growth chart of EFSMs. (c) Paper citation frequency of superhydrophobic materials. (d) Paper citation frequency of environmental protection superhydrophobic materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Surface free energy and wetting behavior. (b) Definition of contact angle. Wetting model of solid surface: (c) Wenzel model, (d) Cassie model, (e) Wenzel–Cassie model, (f) “lotus” model, and (g) “gecko” model. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2021).	 
cosθ = (γSV − γSL)/γLV	(1)
cosθ* = rcosθ	(2)
cosθ* = fcosθ1 + fLVcosθ2	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Superhydrophobic organisms in nature and their corresponding structures. (a) Low adhesion superhydrophobic lotus leaf, scale bar: 10 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Elsevier (2021). (b) Rose petals with high adhesion, scale bar: 10 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2008). (c) Rape flower, scale bar: 1 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature (2016). (d) Osmanthus fragrans, scale bar: 10 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier (2020). (e) Sunflower pollen grain, scale bar: 100 μm and 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Wiley (2021). (f) Taro leaves, scale bar: 10 μm and 200 nm. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2016). (g) Water strider, scale bar: 20 μm and 200 nm. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2022). (h) Butterfly wings, scale bar: 1 μm and 1 μm. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1996).	 

Carbon based	Candle soot	Vapor deposition	160°	Oil/water separation	
90,91

CNT	Laser irradiation	155°	Strain sensor	
92

Graphene	Boiling coating	153°	Self-cleaning, detecting	
99

Nanodiamond	Spraying	154°	Antibacterial	
100

MWCNT	Coating	154.6°	Solar desalination	
171

Silicon based	MTES	Sol-gel spray	170°	Protection coating in industry	
108

VTES	Sol-gel deposition	155.4°	Anti-corrosive	
111

TMES	Dip-coating	157°	Optical devices	
113

SiO2	Spraying	155°	Heat accumulation	
184

TCMS	Hydrolytic condensation	167.4°	Battery	
185

PDMS	Immerse	165° ± 1°	Antibacterial	
198

PTFE	Pulsed laser deposition	151.6° ± 1°	Solar cell panel	
118

Polymer based	PCL	Electrospinning/electrospraying technology	162° ± 1.5°	Oil/water separation	
125

PLA	Electrospinning technique	152°	Oil/water separation	
126

PTFE	Electrostatic spinning	151° ± 4°	Membrane Distillation	
167

Others	Paraffin	Inlaying	156.7°	Oil/water separation	
133

CuO	Solution immersion	163°	Oil/water separation	
135

Ag	Physical vapor deposition	158°	Biological detection	
188

Beeswax	Spray-coating	158° ± 2°	Food packaging	
196


 	Fig. 4  (a) Process for the preparation of candle soot and SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (2011). (b) Superhydrophobic cotton fabric prepared using PDMS and SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2020). (c) Optical photographs and AFM morphologic images of droplets on PTFE-coated glass. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier (2018). (d) Image of water drops and SEM image on paraffin-based superhydrophobic polyester fiber. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier (2019). (e) Wettability of water and oil on cbM-CuO-SA sample surface and SEM image. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Elsevier (2021).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of preparation process of superhydrophobic glass. (b) Optical photograph of photocatalytic degradation of oil red by superhydrophobic glass. (c) Self-cleaning performance comparison of pristine glass (left) and superhydrophobic P25-P2@glass surface (right). (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier (2020). (d) Superhydrophobic COM FESEM image, the inset exhibits a drop on the surface with a WCA of 155.5°. (e) UV-Vis absorption spectra of Nile red solution under different illumination times. The insets exhibit the photodegradation of Nile red solution. (f) WCAs and RAs on superhydrophobic COM with the change of UV irradiation time, the insets exhibit the WCAs and RAs before and after UV illumination for 30 h. (g) Illustration of multifunctional self-cleaning tests. (d–g) Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry (2020).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Image of lotus leaf and perforated lotus leaf manufacturing process. (b) Separation of oil (red) and water (blue) mixtures by perforated lotus leaves. (c) Separation efficiency and flux of perforated lotus leaves for different oil and water mixtures. (d) Relationship between oil–water separation cycle time and separation efficiency and flux. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2019).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of Osmanthus powder used for emulsion separation. (b) N-Hexane is absorbed by dry Osmanthus flowers, leaving clean water in the culture dishes after the removal of the Osmanthus flowers. (c) Oil absorption capacity (OAC) of dried Osmanthus fragrans and Osmanthus fragrans powders for different organic solvents. (d) OAC of different superhydrophobic materials for organic solvents. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier (2020).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram showing water vapour transportation in superhydrophobic nanofibrous membrane #POSS-2 during the DCMD process. (b) WCA of calcinated PTFE and PTFE/POSS nanofibrous membranes. (c) DCMD performances of PTFE and different PTFE/POSS nanofibrous membranes. (d) Comparison of the long-term DCMD performance of #POSS-2 and commercial Millipore membranes. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Elsevier (2020).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic preparation of the silicone/MWCNT evaporators. (b) SEM images of the top surface of the silicone/MWCNT evaporator. (c) Photographs of the silicone/MWCNT evaporator 2.0 during the 200 h continuous solar desalination of seawater from the Yellow Sea under 1 sun. The seawater was replenished every 10 h during the test. (d) Experimental device for collecting clean water. (e) Evaporation rate of the silicone/MWCNT evaporator 2.0 for solar desalination. (a–e) Reproduced from ref. 171 with The Royal Society of Chemistry (2020).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Diagram of fabrication of superhydrophobic surface. (b) SEM image of superhydrophobic TD/DW composite. (c) Solar-thermal conversion: time-dependent temperature curves and corresponding infrared images of superhydrophobic TD/DW composites and DW. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier (2019).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Preparation of superhydrophobic Cu/CNT/rGO fabric. (b) Structure diagram of superhydrophobic Cu/CNT/rGO fabric. (c) Cu/CNT/rGO fabric is applied to supercapacitors. (d) SEM image of Cu/CNT/rGO fabric surface. (e) Cyclic voltammetry curves of supercapacitors with different amounts of coating (N) at the scanning rate of 100 mV s−1. (f) N = 20, cyclic voltammetry curves of supercapacitors at different scanning rates. (g) At a current of 0.125 mA cm−2, galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of supercapacitors with different N. (h) N = 20, galvanostatic charge–discharge curves under different current. (a–h) Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Elsevier (2021).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Figure of the preparation of SNF-Celgard separator. (b) SEM image of SNF-Celgard separator surface, and the insert is the image of the WCA. (c) SEM image of SNF-Celgard separator cross section. (d) Moisture absorption rate of SNF-Celgard separator. (e) Cyclic stability of different Celgard-separator cells. (f) Thermal shrinkage of different Celgard-separators. (g) Optical photographs of different Celgard-separators before and after heat treatment at 200 °C. (a–g) Reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from Elsevier (2019).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the process for concentrating AgNPs on rose petals. (b) SEM images showing analytes were concentrated on the of UE and LE. (c) Photograph of the analyte concentrated on a rose petal. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2015). (d) Single droplet SERS test process of superhydrophobic Taro-leaf@Ag. (e) SERS spectra of R6G at different concentrations on Taro-leaf@Ag. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (2016).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Structure diagram of superhydrophobic TENG. (b) Images and CA of six droplet bands (pure water, PBS, 0.1 M HCl, 0.1 M NaOH, urine and blood) on the surface of superhydrophobic TENG. (c) Image of blood drops on the surface of superhydrophobic TENG. (d) Schematic diagram of a droplet sensor in a drainage bottle for clinical real-time monitoring of patient drainage operation. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the American Chemical Society (2020).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Confocal microscopy images of E. coli on the bare glass and superhydrophobic film after incubation, green and red fluorescence indicate alive and dead E. coli, respectively. (b) Change diagram of blood droplet staying on the superhydrophobic film for 1 h, with the comparison diagram of the film before and after removing blood droplet. (c) Blood drops were placed on the superhydrophobic film for 1 h and then slid. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley (2020). (d) Diagram of the preparation process of PDMS/TA-Mn+/PI nanofiber membrane. (e) Surface SEM micrographs of PDMS/Ta-Al3+/PI membrane, where the inset displays water droplets on the surface. (f) Antibacterial activity of the as-prepared membrane against E. coli (left) and B. sub (right). M0: pristine PI membrane, M1: PDMS/TA-Ag+/PI, M2: PDMS/TACu2+/PI, M3: PDMS/TA-Al3+/PI, and M4: PDMS/TA-Ti4+/PI. (g) Schematic demonstration of the biocidal functions of the membrane by releasing metal ions and TA. (d–g) Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Elsevier (2019).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Preparation process diagram of superhydrophobic material. (b) WCA of superhydrophobic material with different liquid food. (c) Comparison photograph of the honey dumping process in the superhydrophobic cup (left) and control cup (right). (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Elsevier (2018).	 

 	Fig. 17  Current challenges and future trends in the field of EFSMs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
