Recent progress in solar cells based on one-dimensional nanomaterials  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE03853C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE03853C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1139-1159Recent progress in solar cells based on one-dimensional nanomaterials

        
          
            Hao 
            Sun
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jue 
            Deng
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Longbin 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Fang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Huisheng 
            Peng
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Molecular Engineering of Polymers, Department of Macromolecular Science, and Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China. E-mail: penghs@fudan.edu.cn
Received 
      7th December 2014
    , Accepted 2nd February 2015First published on 3rd February 2015AbstractTo develop solar cells with high power conversion efficiencies is critical for the sustainable development of human society, but remains a challenge. It is well recognized that rapid charge separation, transport, and collection are beneficial for highly efficient solar cells and require the optimization of the microscopic structures and morphologies. One-dimensional nanomaterials favor charge transport and collection obtained from large specific surface areas and a one-dimensional configuration, which are properties widely used in the fabrication of solar cells. In this review, the recent progress in high-performance solar cells based on one-dimensional nanomaterials is comprehensively described, with an emphasis on the most explored metals, metal oxides, carbon and conductive polymers. The impact of the one-dimensional structure on device performance is highlighted to elucidate the advantages of such nanomaterials. The future development of one-dimensional nanomaterials towards next-generation solar cells is finally summarized.Hao SunHao Sun received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2012. He is currently a Ph.D. student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the use of carbon nanomaterials in energy conversion and storage.Jue DengJue Deng received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2013. He is currently a graduate student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the use of carbon nanomaterials in multifunctional energy devices.Longbin QiuLongbin Qiu received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2011. He is currently a Ph.D. student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the synthesis of carbon nanomaterials and their applications in dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells.Xin FangXin Fang received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2012. He is currently a graduate student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the synthesis of carbon nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage.Huisheng PengHuisheng Peng is currently a professor at the Department of Macromolecular Science and Laboratory of Advanced Materials at Fudan University, China. He received his B.E. in Polymer Materials at Donghua University in China in 1999, M.S. in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China, in 2003 and Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at Tulane University, USA, in 2006. He then worked at Los Alamos National Laboratory before joining Fudan University in 2008. His work focuses on the development of miniature fiber-shaped solar cells, lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, and he has published over 110 peer-reviewed papers.

Broader context
With the persistently growing demand for harvesting abundant and clean solar energy, increasing attention is being paid to developing efficient solar cells to address the energy crisis arising in recent years. Material optimization is considered to be a key method to improve the charge separation, transport, and collection in solar cells, resulting in a better device performance. One-dimensional nanomaterials share the combined advantages of rapid charge transport and collection, due their large specific surface areas and one-dimensional configuration, and thus are widely used to build efficient solar cells. Herein, we systematically review the recent progress in the fabrication of efficient solar cells based on one-dimensional nanomaterials, in particular, discussing metals, metal oxides, carbon and conductive polymers as representative nanomaterials. We also present the impact of the one-dimensional configuration on device performance, and give a perspective on the use of one-dimensional nanomaterials in future solar cells.

1. Introduction
The energy crisis has become one of the most serious problems threatening the future development of human society. With the eventual exhaustion of non-renewable fossil fuels, more and more attention is being paid to develop renewable and environmentally friend energy sources, e.g., wind, geothermal, tidal and solar energy. Solar energy is well recognized as one of the most promising choices to meet the enormous energy demand in the future. To this end, developing efficient solar cells with high power conversion efficiency (PCE) is highly demanded. Efficient charge separation, transport and collection processes are beneficial for the improvement of PCE, which requires the optimization of both the material and configuration.1–3 On this account, one-dimensional nanomaterials offer various advantages based on their unique one-dimensional configuration, which enables rapid charge transport along the axial direction. Furthermore, the nanoscale effect provides a large specific surface area and other fascinating properties, making them suitable for efficient solar cells. To date, various advances have been made using one-dimensional nanomaterials for photovoltaic applications. Herein, recent advances in third-generation solar cells based on one-dimensional nanomaterials, including dye-sensitized solar cells, polymer solar cells, and perovskite solar cells, are systematically reviewed. Three representative one-dimensional nanomaterials, i.e., metals and metal oxides, carbon, and conductive polymers, are discussed. The impact of the one-dimensional structure on the device performance is highlighted to elucidate the advantages of the one-dimensional configuration in efficient charge separation, collection, and transport. The outlook for one-dimensional nanomaterial-based solar cells is provided at the end of the review.
1.1. Structure and working mechanism of the three kinds of solar cells
For the convenience of the current discussion, the principles of dye-sensitized solar cells, polymer solar cells, and perovskite solar cells are first summarized here. The structure and working mechanism of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have already been described in many reviews.4–6 A typical configuration of DSC exhibits a sandwich structure, as developed by Grätzel and co-workers. Two electrodes—a photoanode and counter electrode—are placed in parallel and separated by an electrolyte. Transparent conducting glass with fluorine-doped tin dioxide (FTO) or indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) on one side usually serves as the substrate for the deposition of a thin film of a mesoporous semiconductor oxide. The counter electrode is deposited with a catalytic layer, such as platinum or carbon materials. After the photoanode is covered with dye molecules, the electrolyte is injected in and the two electrodes are sealed. When the cell is under illumination, the dye molecules capture photons and then inject electrons into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Electrons migrate through the semiconductor layer and travel through the external circuit. The route for electron transport inside the cell is closed by the redox cycle in the electrolyte. The triiodide ions, i.e., the hole conductors, obtain electrons and are reduced to iodide ions at the counter electrode. The iodide ions release electrons to regenerate the oxidized dye molecules afterwards. In these processes, charge injection and transport are always accompanied by charge recombination, which decays the output performance of the DSC.
A typical polymer solar cell contains three parts, i.e., an anode (modified with a hole transport material, such as PEDOT:PSS and MoO3), a cathode (modified with an electron transport material, such as TiO2), and an active layer (containing an electron donor and accepter) (Fig. 1b). The preparation of each layer can be achieved through a solution process in sequence. The hole transport materials are beneficial for hole selecting transport and electron transport blocking, while the electron transport materials are beneficial for electron selecting transport and hole blocking to improve charge collection. To enhance the light harvesting and carrier separation, the active layer is constructed into a separated interpenetrating network at the nanoscale, due to a relatively short carrier diffusion length of the active materials. During light absorption and excitation, the excitons, which are tightly bonded electron–hole pairs in the active layer, are transferred to the interface of the donor and acceptor, followed by separating into electrons and holes and then collected at the electrodes. The crystallinity of the active layer and the size of nanoscale phase are considered to be vital for carrier generation, transport, and separation, which together determine the efficiency of the devices.7–10
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the structures of a typical: (a) dye-sensitized solar cell, (b) polymer solar cell, and (c) perovskite solar cell. 
A perovskite solar cell has been produced with perovskite materials as a light harvester.11,12 To achieve this, a relatively thin layer of mesoporous TiO2 film is deposited on the top of a compact layer (as a blocking layer) on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) glass substrate. The blocking layer prevents direct electrical contact between the TCO and the hole transporting material, which reduces charge recombination at the interface. An absorber layer is formed by adsorbing a monolayer of a sensitizer on the mesoporous TiO2 layer, and the solution of the hole transporting material then infiltrates into the pores, which is critical for the transfer of the holes to the hole transporting material, followed by electron injection into the TiO2 film. As a result, a thin photoanode layer is a prerequisite to facilitate pore filling and to generate a suitable diffusion length to restrain charge recombination. Finally, a thin film of a metal (Au or Ag) counter electrode is deposited to collect the generated charges (Fig. 1c).
1.2. Advantages and contributions of one-dimensional nanomaterials to solar cells
The one-dimensional configuration and nanomaterial characteristics make one-dimensional nanomaterials very promising as building blocks to enhance the performance of solar cells. Herein, a general perspective on the advantages and contributions of one-dimensional nanomaterials to solar cells is provided.

1.2.1. Balance between transparency and conductivity. 
Transparent conductive electrodes are widely used in the fabrication of various solar cells, where the transparency and electrical conductivity are two important factors that help determine the device performance. A high transparency represents less loss of incident light, while a low resistance means a lower internal resistance of the solar cell. The trade-off between the transparency and resistance has always been a problem. A thinner transparent conductive layer will demonstrate higher transparency, but the sheet resistance will also be increased. A thicker transparent conductive layer shows lower sheet resistance, but the high transparency has to be sacrificed. One-dimensional nanomaterials, including Ag and Cu nanowire networks, not only provide fast charge transport, but also offer enough interspace among the nanowires for the penetration of incident light, which can strike an excellent balance between the two factors. To date, a high transmittance of over 90% and a low electrical resistance of ∼10 Ω □−1 have been achieved based on Ag nanowires, which are comparable to ITO under the same conditions.13,14 Thus, one-dimensional nanomaterials have been widely investigated as transparent conductive electrode materials to enhance the performance of solar cells.


1.2.2. High specific surface area. 
The interface between the two phases has always been considered to be crucial for various systems, and not just limited to photovoltaic conversion. Larger specific areas enable sufficient charge generation, separation, and collection, which lead to higher device performance.15 Compared with conventional bulk materials, materials in the nanoscale have demonstrated much larger specific surface areas and with higher interacting efficiencies, and thus are favorable for performance enhancement. Although the specific surface areas of one-dimensional nanomaterials are generally lower than their zero-dimensional counterparts, some strategies can be adopted to overcome this problem. One representative example is the roughened hierarchical structure of TiO2/ZnO nanowires, which takes the advantage of both dye adsorption and fast electron transportation to enhance the device performance.


1.2.3. Direct charge transport path. 
For nanoparticles, their electrical resistance is generally high, due to the existence of many grain boundaries, which restrain the rapid charge transport.16,17 A one-dimensional configuration provides a direct charge transport path and decreases the electrical resistance, compared with nanoparticles. TiO2 nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes have been widely investigated as promising photoanode materials to replace conventional TiO2 nanoparticles for efficient DSCs.


1.2.4. Oriented structure. 
The assembly method of nanomaterials is considered to be very important to extend their physical properties from the nanoscale to the macroscopic scale. Oriented structures have been proven to efficiently improve the mechanical and electrical properties of nanomaterials on the oriented direction, and are favorable for improving device performance.18 An anisotropic configuration is a necessary factor for the formation of an oriented structure. To this end, one-dimensional nanomaterials have demonstrated large potential to be assembled into highly oriented structures with much improved properties and device performance. To date, oriented one-dimensional metal oxides, carbon, and polymer nanomaterials have all been prepared and utilized in high performance solar cells, and this will be discussed in the corresponding section.

2. One-dimensional metals and metal oxides
2.1. Metals
Transparent, flexible, and low-cost conducting electrodes are highly desired with the huge increase in flexible and large-scale photovoltaic devices. Traditional transparent conductive oxides (TCO) can barely satisfy the varied requirements for the many flexible applications, due to their fragile properties, as well as high cost. Alternately, one-dimensional metal nanomaterials, such as silver and copper nanowires, exhibit great potential as transparent and flexible electrodes, because of their intrinsic high conductivity and flexibility. In this section, one-dimensional metal nanomaterials aimed at enhancing the PCE are discussed.

2.1.1. Silver nanowires. 
With their high conductivity and suitable work function, silver materials have been widely used in photovoltaic devices. However, Ag nanoparticles are an inferior choice, due to the difficult in achieving both high optical transmittance and electrical conductivity in the resulting electrode. Fortunately, when the zero-dimensional nanoparticles are replaced by one-dimensional nanowires, the transmittance is largely enhanced at the same high conductivity, e.g., a transmittance of over 90% and a low electrical resistance of ∼10 Ω □−1, which are comparable to ITO under the same conditions13,14 (Fig. 2a). This improvement is ascribed to the one-dimensional configuration that favors the formation of a network structure, and as the space in the nanowire network increases the optical transparence (Fig. 2b). Transparent network electrodes based on Ag nanowires have been explored for dye-sensitized and polymer solar cells.
 Fig. 2  (a) Ag nanowire film coated on a poly(ethylene terephthalate) substrate. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of Ag nanowires (inset: a Ag nanowire ink in ethanol) (reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) High-speed camera image of an electrohydrodynamic spray (reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
A solution process, such as the spray deposition of Ag nanowires, is typically used to fabricate flexible electronics aimed at large-scale production (Fig. 2c and d).13,19–21 Conventional solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells require a sintering treatment at 450 °C, which is too high for most plastic substrates, to achieve flexible solar cells. Therefore, a Ag nanowire/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) electrode has been made by a spray process to fabricate solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells at low temperatures.22,23 Ag nanowires fabricated this way were able to achieve a low sheet resistance without annealing, while PEDOT:PSS was used to reduce the contact resistance and enhance the lateral charge transport. Ag nanowires can also be directly coated onto polymer substrates to fabricate flexible devices, achieving a PCE of 5.02%, which is comparable to that of its glass substrate-based counterpart.13
Besides serving as transparent electrodes, Ag nanowires can also be used in building an efficient electron acceptor layer of polymer solar cells. Kim et al. embedded Ag nanowires in P3HT:PCBM films, which served as electron acceptors to enhance the performance of the hybrid solar cells.24 Moreover, the excellent plasma properties of Ag in the visible spectra engender surface plasma resonance, which efficiently increases light absorption. Kang et al. added periodic Ag nanowire gratings in polymer solar cells.25 One Ag layer was continuous as a top electrode, and the other Ag layer on the glass was made into a periodic structure to couple the incident plane wave to the surface plasma waves. The photovoltaic performance was enhanced by 35% under non-polarized light illumination, compared with the ITO-based device.


2.1.2. Copper nanowires. 
The transparent conducting electrode based on Cu nanowires is another superior substitution of ITO (Fig. 3a and b).26–28 The abundancy and low cost of Cu nanowires have motivated investigations of their applications in both dye-sensitized and polymer solar cells. Exciting results, including a sheet resistance of 100 Ω □−1 and transmittance of 95%, have been achieved.29 However, the oxidation of copper undermines the stability and the essential annealing process in H2 hinder their applications. To this end, some efforts have been made to improve the stability and to simplify the fabrication process of Cu nanowires. For instance, Cu nanowires were incorporated into conductive PEDOT:PSS and baked stepwise to prevent degradation,27 and achieved a PCE of 3.1% compared with 4.0% based on a conventional ITO substrate. Furthermore, to prevent oxidation, Ni was deposited on Cu nanowires and acetic acid treatment replaced the hydrogen annealing. The achieved PCE of 4.9% was comparable to that based on Ag nanowires (Fig. 3c).30
 Fig. 3  (a) A bent Cu nanowire film connecting an electrical circuit with a battery pack and a light-emitting diode (reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). (b) SEM image of Cu nanowires (reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). (c) Schematic diagram of the nanowire-based polymer solar cell (reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 

2.2. Metal oxides
Metal oxide nanomaterials have been widely used as semiconductors in solar cells. One-dimensional metal oxide nanostructures, including nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, and nanobelts, exhibit unique properties and have thus attracted intensive investigation. In this section, one-dimensional titanium oxide and zinc oxide are described and highlighted for their application in solar cells in a number of demonstrations.

2.2.1. Titanium dioxide. 
TiO2 nanofibers. 
It is well recognized that the morphology of the semiconducting thin film is critical for device performance. TiO2 nanoparticles are widely used in dye-sensitized, polymer and perovskite solar cells. However, to a certain extent, they exhibit some shortcomings, such as the numerous grain boundaries, surface defects and trap states that hinder electron transport among the particles, leading to a very high recombination. One-dimensional TiO2 nanomaterials have successfully solved this problem by improving the charge transport with straight pathways and enhancing light harvesting by light scattering.
Electrospinning represents a simple and economical method to synthesize nanofibers, which is also compatible with doping, modification, morphology control and scale-up production. After tackling the poor adhesion of nanofibers on substrates by calcination, recent studies have aimed at preparing delicate nanofibers to enhance the PCE.31 Yang et al. incorporated carbon nanotubes into TiO2 through an electrospinning process (Fig. 4a).32 The resulting dye-sensitized solar cell with this hybrid film as a photoanode showed a PCE of up to 10.24%, with a high short-circuit current density and fill factor of 18.53 mA cm−2 and 0.74, respectively. This remarkable PCE was attributed to the enhancement of charge transport by introduction of the carbon nanotubes.
 Fig. 4  (a) Mechanism of electron transport across TiO2 with the assistance of MWCNTs (reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (b) Schematic of dye-sensitized solar cells based on multiscale porous TiO2 nanofibers (reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic of the fabrication procedure and SEM images of the bilayer TiO2 nanofiber photoanode (reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). 
The enhanced charge transport of TiO2 nanofibers was, however, at the cost of reducing the specific surface area. To this end, the synthesis of porous TiO2 nanofibers can well overcome this shortcoming. Lin et al. synthesized wormhole-like mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanofibers using room temperature ionic liquids as mesopore-forming templates. The obtained porous TiO2 nanofibers combined the merits of mesoporous materials and a one-dimensional structure, which was beneficial to dye absorption and charge transport, resulting in a PCE of 5.6%.33 Another hollow fiber even utilized the inner surface based on natural cellulose fibers as templates. A longer photoinjected electron lifetime with a high surface area boosted the PCE to 7.2% in the resulting dye-sensitized solar cell.34 In addition, SiO2 nanoparticles with various sizes also represent effective templates. After etching the electrospun SiO2/TiO2 hybrid fiber, the surface area of TiO2 nanofibers with multi-sized pores showed a nine-fold increase, compared with bare TiO2 nanofibers, ensuring sufficient dye adsorption and electrolyte contact. As a result, the resulting devices exhibited PCEs up to 8.5% (Fig. 4b).35
It is well recognized that having a reasonable control on the device architectures can significantly promote the photovoltaic performance.36 For example, as light scattering materials, thicker TiO2 nanofibers exhibit better light scattering ability, while longer and thinner nanofibers absorb more dye molecules, due to their larger specific area.37,38 Yang et al. designed an innovative bilayer TiO2 nanofiber-based DSC, which combined both small and large diameter TiO2 nanofibers (Fig. 4c).38 The small nanofibers with a diameter of 60 nm were used for dye absorption, while the large nanofibers with a diameter of 100 nm worked as light scattering materials. This architecture was able to trap more light and promote improved device performance.
Besides the applications in DSCs, TiO2 nanofibers can also be used to build high-performance perovskite solar cells. The porosity of the electrospun nanofiber network after TiCl4 treatment provides a large surface area for compact contact with CH3NH3PbI3 and favors direct electron collection.39 By combining the high absorption coefficient of perovskite materials with high charge transport from porous TiO2 nanofibers, an all-solid-state perovskite solar cell showed a high PCE of 9.8%.
Oriented TiO2 nanowires. 
Many methods including sol–gel,40 hydrothermal,41 and the thermal evaporation method42 have recently been developed to synthesize oriented TiO2 nanowires. Compared with a randomly dispersed TiO2 nanofiber network, the oriented organization of TiO2 nanowires can enhance the electron transport along the axial direction. As a result, when TiO2 nanowires are used for solar cells, high PCEs can be achieved.
The structure of TiO2 nanowires also plays a critical role on the photoelectric performance of the resulting photovoltaic device. For instance, the formation of a single crystal in TiO2 is recognized to reduce the probability of the trapping state, increase electron transport, and suppress charge recombination for high PCEs.43,44 For the rutile TiO2 nanowire array with the (001) face along the oriented direction, the diffusion length of free carriers was discovered to be five times shorter than that in TiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 5a–c).36,45 However, the smooth surface of single crystal TiO2 nanowires is unfavorable for the dye absorption, which may lower the PCE of the dye-sensitized solar cell. A general and effective solution has been provided by modifying the nanowires for higher specific surface areas to improve the dye absorption and electrolyte diffusion. A synergistic interaction between titanium trichloride and octanoic acid was found to increase the surface area,46 and TiO2 nanowire arrays could also be modified with a thin Nb2O5 layer to reduce the surface recombination and shift the conduction band edge.47 The TiO2 nanowires can also be etched into bunched secondary nanowires with much smaller diameters, and the resulting dye-sensitized solar cell have displayed a PCE of 7.91% (Fig. 5d and e).48 Of course, denser TiO2 nanowire arrays synthesized with the assistance of acetic acid clearly have an increased specific surface area.49
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Cross-sectional SEM images of nanowire arrays on an FTO-coated glass substrate at low and high magnifications, respectively. (c) High resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the as-synthesized single crystal nanowire (reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (d) Scheme to prepare the porous rutile TiO2 nanowire array. (e) Morphological evolution of TiO2 nanowire by step 3 (reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Oriented TiO2 nanotubes. 
Oriented TiO2 nanotubes have also been widely studied as attractive one-dimensional materials for use in photovoltaic devices, due to similar reasons to those of oriented nanowires: (1) the fabrication is reliable with tunable structures; (2) the large surface area enhances the loading capability of photoactive materials; and (3) vertically oriented TiO2 nanotubes facilitate the charge separation and transport. Anodic oxidation represents the most widely investigated method to synthesize these TiO2 nanotubes. The length, diameter, doping, and modification of TiO2 nanotubes can be tuned by varying the experimental parameters, such as the applied voltage, growth time, and choice of electrolyte.
Vertically grown TiO2 nanotube arrays on Ti foils are typically used as photoanodes in dye-sensitized solar cells. The length, orientation degree, surface morphology, and crystallinity are critical to their photoelectric performance (Fig. 6a),50,51 and a lot of efforts have been made to optimize them. For instance, surface engineering can be accomplished by TiCl4 treatment,51 oxygen plasma exposure,52 and additional hydrothermal treatment.53,54 After these treatments, the TiO2 nanotubes were roughened with small rutile nanocrystals on the wall and at the top. The surface modification offered a high PCE of 7.24% (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of the highly ordered TiO2 nanotube array. Inset image, schematic illustration of highly ordered TiO2 nanotube array (reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotube arrays formed by subsequent hydrothermal processing. Inset image, SEM image at high magnification (reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (c) SEM and TEM images of the hierarchical one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructure. Inset image, TEM image at high magnification (reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). (d) Schematic structures and SEM images of TiO2 hyperbranched arrays. (e and f) Schematic illustration of light scattering and electron transport pathways within the simplified network of nanowire, branched nanowire and hyperbranched nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group). 
As sunlight cannot penetrate through a Ti substrate, the incident light must enter from the counter electrode side in a dye-sensitized solar cell. However, both the electrolyte and counter electrode impede the light absorption. Therefore, oriented TiO2 nanotubes have been transferred onto transparent substrates by ultrasonic or H2O2 treatment.55–57 However, the closed end of the TiO2 nanotubes results in a relatively short electron lifetime. Fortunately, a facile flaking process was applied to open their ends up to increase the PEC to 9.1%, compared with 5.3% for in the case of the closed ends nanotubes.57,58
TiO2 nanotube arrays can also serve as electron collection materials in perovskite solar cells. For instance, free-standing TiO2 nanotube arrays were synthesized through a two-step anodization process, and the device performance was found to strongly depend on the length of TiO2 nanotubes, as expected. Shorter nanotubes favored the charge transport, but reduced the adsorption of active materials, while longer nanotubes increased the adsorption, but lengthened the transport pathway. After a comparison study, the maximal PCE of 6.52% was found to occur at a length of 2.3 μm.
Hierarchical one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures. 
Hierarchical one-dimensional nanostructures typically display tree-like shapes with secondary, even tertiary, branches on the one-dimensional backbone, such as nanowires and nanotubes. The backbones provide efficient pathways for electron transport, while the branches offer high specific surface areas for dye loading. The hierarchical architectures also exhibit multiple interactions with the incident light for higher photovoltaic conversion efficiencies.
Hierarchical one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures have been typically realized by a hydrothermal method,59–64 and the PCEs of the resulting dye-sensitized solar cells ranged from 4% to 8%, i.e., higher than those based on TiO2 nanowires (Fig. 6c).59,60,62 According to this strategy, hyperbranched TiO2 nanostructures with branched short nanorods from secondary stems were designed to further enhance the collecting and transporting efficiency of photo-injected electrons (Fig. 6d). These secondary and tertiary branches also had enhanced light scattering, as verified by the higher monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. 6e). As a result, a higher PCE of 8.11% was achieved (Fig. 6f).64 Moreover, an oriented nanowire–nanosheet–nanorod hyperbranched array and ultra-long multi-layered anatase TiO2 nanowires promoted the PCE to 9.09% and 9.40%, respectively.65,66
Hybridizing one-dimensional nanostructure materials with high surface areas represents another strategy for achieving higher PCEs. Freestanding TiO2 nanotube arrays were modified onto TiO2 nanoparticles to extend the photoelectric lifetime by 237.5%, and resulted in a PCE of 8.80%.67 Dendritic microspheres were also used to replace nanoparticles to enhance the light scattering, but, to a certain degree, also scarified the specific surface area.68 When both branched hollow spheres and microspheres were deposited at the top of the hyperbranched nanowire arrays, the PCE reached 11.01%.66


2.2.2. Zinc oxide. 
One-dimensional ZnO nanomaterials have received extensive attention, due to both their higher electron mobility and longer electron lifetime, compared with TiO2. In particular, ZnO can be directly used to absorb dye molecules without annealing, which is generally required for the transformation of the crystal form in TiO2, to achieve high PCEs.
Oriented ZnO nanowires. 
Many approaches are available to synthesize ZnO nanowires,69 with the hydrothermal method being most explored, due to the availability of various substrates. For instance, oriented ZnO nanowire arrays were grown on stainless steel wires or meshes to fabricate flexible and transparent dye-sensitized solar cells, so that they were stable at working under illumination from both sides.70,71 However, the mismatch of energy levels between ZnO and stainless steel hindered the electron diffusion, resulting in a poor photovoltaic performance. Three-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cells with ZnO nanowire arrays grown on various substrates, including Kevlar fiber, optical fibers, and quartz slides, have also been produced (Fig. 7a and b).72–74 This three-dimensional fiber-shaped configuration enabled internal reflection at the interfaces, creating more opportunities for energy conversion. The PCE was enhanced sixfold compared with the illumination from the outside. Three-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cells using the planar quartz slide grown with ZnO nanowire arrays on both sides also guided the internal reflection and increased the charge collection, producing a PCE of 2.4%, but this needs to be further increased.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of a planar waveguide-nanowire integrated three-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cell (reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (b) A three-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cell composed of an optical fiber and ZnO nanowires grown vertically on the fiber surface (reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH). (c) SEM image of a four-layer assembly of ZnO nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (d) A polymer solar cell based on a P3HT/PC60BM bilayer (reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
To this end, four layers of ZnO nanowire arrays were synthesized through a multi-batch process to increase the PCE to 7%. The significant improvement was attributed to the higher specific surface area in the four-layered photoanode compared with the single-layered photoanode75 (Fig. 7c). The coating of a thin layer of semiconductors or insulators, such as TiO2,76,77 MgO,78 ZnS,79 ZnTe79 and ZrO2,80 was demonstrated to hinder carrier recombination and to increase dye absorption, producing a PCE up to 7.3%. It was also verified that the doping of Group III metals, including In, Ga, and Sn, onto ZnO nanowires enhances the device performance.81 Here, N- and P-doped ZnO exhibited the characteristic of p-type semiconductors.82,83
The high electron mobility in oriented ZnO nanowires provides them with promising applications in polymer solar cells that generally exhibit short exciton diffusion lengths. The oriented ZnO nanowires offer high interfaces for charge separation and provide continuous percolation pathways. In a bulk heterojunction solar cell, oriented ZnO nanowires are filled with poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as the photoactive layer through a slow drying process for the maximal ZnO/P3HT interface, while an electron acceptor, such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) or indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA), was introduced to form the bulk heterojunction blend.84 Here, ZnO serves as an electron conductor to promote electron transport (Fig. 7d).
Oriented ZnO nanowires have also been used in perovskite solar cells with high performance. For example, CH3NH3I and PbI2 were coated on FTO glass grown with oriented ZnO nanowires, and the perovskite-infiltrated ZnO nanorods showed a remarkable PCE of 11.13%. The high performance was ascribed to the efficient electron collection of the oriented ZnO nanowires.85
Hierarchical one-dimensional ZnO nanostructures. 
Hierarchical one-dimensional ZnO nanostructures show the same construction as TiO2. A re-nucleating process is mainly used to realize the formation of such hierarchical nanostructures. First, the primary ZnO nanowire arrays are grown on the substrate, and then various seeds or re-nucleating sites are introduced to the primary structure to grow the branches.
Several methods have been developed to synthesize branched ZnO nanorods on the stem, but the morphologies often vary, leading to different PCEs. For instance, branched ZnO nanowires were synthesized on FTO substrates via a solvothermal method.86 The short-circuit current density was increased due to the higher internal specific surface area, and the PCE reached 1.5%, almost twice of the ZnO nanowire array. Tree-like ZnO nanowires have also been synthesized via a hydrothermal method, and the PEC was five times that of vertical ZnO nanowires (Fig. 8a and b).87 The two-step electrodeposition process could be used to synthesize branched ZnO nanowire arrays with nanoporous layers for a PCE of 4.08%.88,89 Multi-layered ZnO nanowire arrays were made into a “caterpillar-like” structure that produced a high PCE of 5.20% (Fig. 8c and d).90
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration and SEM image of a ZnO nanowire forest. (b) J–V curves of dye-sensitized solar cells based on the ZnO nanowire forest (reprinted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (c) SEM image of a highly dense caterpillar-like ZnO nanowire array. (d) J–V curves for different layers of ZnO nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 

3. One-dimensional carbon nanomaterials
3.1. Carbon nanotubes
Since Iijima first elucidated the structure of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in 1991, both the scientific and industrial communities have been interested and involved in the development of CNTs in the past two decades.91 Considered as seamless cylinders wrapped in graphene sheets, CNTs comprise sp2 hybridized carbon atoms covalently bonded with each other. According to the number of graphene layers, CNTs can be categorized into single-walled and multi-walled CNTs. CNTs are well known for the intrinsic physical and chemical advantages, which have been well demonstrated in many related reviews.92–95 CNTs show excellent mechanical properties, with a high Young's modulus and a tensile strength in the ranges of 270–950 GPa and 11–63 GPa, respectively.96 CNTs also display excellent electronic properties. By varying its chiral structure, a single-walled CNT can be controlled to be metallic or semiconducting,97 where the metallic CNT shows superior capacity to carry an electric current density of 4 × 109 A cm−2, which is 1000 times higher than metal materials alone.98 For multi-walled CNTs, an electrical conductivity up to 105 S cm−1 has been achieved, as well as high current densities at the level of 106 A cm−2.99 With a high surface area and numerous exposed carbon atoms at their ends, CNTs exhibit superior catalytic activities, comparable to platinum in an iodine/triiodide redox couple—an important reaction for dye-sensitized solar cells.100 Their excellent mechanical, electronic, and catalytic properties enable CNTs to display unique advantages in fabricating efficient solar cells.

3.1.1. Transparent carbon nanotube films. 
Different from the conventional solar cells based on p–n junctions and light absorption by semiconductor materials, third-generation solar cells require at least one transparent electrode for incident light. Since the decrease in resistance will sacrifice the transmittance, a compromise has to be made to balance the sheet resistance and the transmittance of the transparent electrode. To date, FTO and ITO are still the most widely used transparent materials with a low sheet resistance of around 10 Ω □−1 and a high transmittance of over 90%.101 Their high electrical conductivity and one-dimensional nanostructure enable carbon nanotubes to serve as a novel transparent electrode material.
Bare CNT films, like buckypaper and aligned-CNT sheets, have been widely investigated to replace conventional transparent electrodes. Buckypaper is prepared by filtering the CNT dispersion to form a flexible and porous mat. Containing both semiconducting and metallic CNTs, the electrical conductivity ranges in the level of 103 S cm−1.102 With many efforts to improve the properties, the sheet resistance (∼500 Ω □−1) and the transmittance (85%) of buckypaper have already met the physical requirements of transparent electrodes.103 However, the area of the buckypaper is largely limited by the filtration equipment, especially for the continuous fabrication of large-sized solar cells.
To this end, various methods, including drop-casting, transfer-printing, spray-coating, and brush-painting, have been developed to satisfy practical applications.104–108 For instance, transparent single-walled CNT electrodes had been deposited on glasses by spray-coating,106 and the resulting films were found to be mechanically robust with high conductivities of 7694 ± 800 S cm−1. A low sheet resistance of 57 ± 3 Ω □−1 and a reasonable transmittance of 65% were also achieved. The CNT-based electrodes were further used to fabricate polymer solar cells by coating PEDOT:PSS, a blend of P3HT and PCBM, and LiF/Al on the CNT film. The resulting solar cell delivered a PCE of 2.2%, which was comparable with 2.3% when using an ITO-coated electrode. In addition, the CNT films could be made freestanding and flexible, which is not possible with ITO, but is highly desired in modern electronics, such as for portable and wearable electronic devices. Therefore, the CNT film may represent a promising candidate to replace ITO in the future.


3.1.2. Electrocatalytic carbon nanotube films. 
A conventional counter electrode of DSC, generally composed of a 2–3 nm layer of platinum deposited on a transparent conducting oxide layer, shows high activity in catalyzing the reduction of I3− in an electrolyte. CNT also shows superior catalytic activity, derived from the numerous defect-rich sites, besides a high electrical conductivity and large surface area. A lot of reports detail the comparable or even better photoelectric performance of CNT-based solar cells compared with platinum-based devices.109–113
The structure of CNTs plays a critical role in the performance of the resulting solar cell. Huang and co-workers compared DSCs with single-walled (diameter <2 nm, length 5–15 μm), double-walled (diameter <5 nm, length <20 μm), and multi-walled (diameter 20–40 nm, length 5–15 μm) CNTs as counter electrodes.111 The resulting solar cells based on single-, double-, and multi-walled CNT counter electrodes showed PCEs of 7.61%, 8.03%, and 7.06%, respectively. Therefore, the double-walled CNT displayed the best catalytic performance. As a control, the platinum counter electrode-based device showed a PCE of 8.49%, just slightly higher than the double-walled CNT.
Although double-walled CNTs demonstrate higher catalytic activity for the reduction of I3−, multi-walled CNTs are more widely used in the counter electrodes of DSCs, due to their simpler preparation and lower costs (single-walled CNT also show a high cost). A lot of efforts are being further made to modify multi-walled CNTs for better catalytic activities.112 Bamboo-like multi-walled CNTs with defect-rich edge planes and lower charge-transport resistances exhibited a PCE of 7.67%, comparable to that 7.83% based on a platinum counter electrode.
In randomly dispersed CNT networks, there are numerous boundaries, which produces a large contact resistance during charge transport and increases the series resistance of the device. In addition, surfactants are generally required to improve the dispersion of CNTs in solvents, which further increases the resistances of CNT films.92 To this end, aligned CNT films derived from spinable CNT arrays may provide a viable solution to this problem.109 An aligned CNT-based dye-sensitized solar cell showed a PCE of 4.18%, i.e., higher than the 3.24% of the random CNT film. After optimization, the PCE of the aligned CNT sheet can be further improved to 6.60%, even higher than the 5.27% of the platinum counter electrode. Besides aligned CNT sheets, aligned CNT films prepared by pressing vertically aligned CNT arrays along one direction have also been used as counter electrodes (Fig. 9a and b).110 The electrical conductivities of the resulting film in the normal direction and in plane were 104 and 102 S cm−1, respectively. A high PCE of 8.46% was achieved, which much exceeded the platinum value of 7.32% (Fig. 9c and d).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a penetrated and aligned CNT film. (b) SEM image of the CNT film from a side view. (c) Schematic illustration of the dye-sensitized solar cell with a penetrated and aligned CNT film as the counter electrode. (d) J–V curves of dye-sensitized solar cells using penetrated and aligned CNT films with different thicknesses and platinum films as the counter electrodes under AM1.5 illumination (reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V). 


3.1.3. Conducting carbon nanotube networks. 
As previously mentioned, the photoanode plays a key role in light absorption, charge collection, and diffusion in DSCs. TiO2 and ZnO are the most explored materials with a large bandgap (3.0–3.2 eV), but only in response to ultraviolet light. Therefore, photosensitive dyes are needed as sensitizers to increase the absorption in the visible region. To increase the uptake of dyes, porous films are constructed for large specific surface areas. Based on the similar strategy, many labs have tried to use CNTs as photoanode materials to replace metal oxides, but the PCEs are much lower than with conventional TiO2 or ZnO.114,115 However, the advantage of rapid charge transport along the length enables the CNT to act as promising reinforced moieties to improve the charge transport across the networks of metal oxides such as TiO2.116–119
A sol–gel process represents a general method used in the preparation of TiO2/CNT hybrid photoanodes.116 The introduction of CNTs has been found to enhance the roughness factor of the electrode from 834 to 1267 and also to enhance the charge recombination, which is beneficial for dye adsorption for high photocurrents. The PCEs increased with the increasing CNT content, and an optimal CNT weight percentage of 0.3% produced a PCE of 4.62%, i.e., higher than the 2.87% without CNTs. However, the PCE started to reduce with further increases of the CNT, e.g., 4.22% at the CNT weight percentage of 0.5, mainly due to the decreased short-circuit current that may result from the competing light absorption between the CNTs and dye.
Although CNTs have been widely studied as a promising material to improve photoanodes, a poor dispersion of CNTs in the TiO2-based matrix is a big challenge. To this end, pre-treatment of the CNTs is carried out to improve their dispersion. For instance, both O2 plasma-treated and chemically modified CNTs were incorporated within a TiO2 matrix as photoanodes.119 The former showed more uniform holes and rougher surfaces, giving higher dye adsorption and lower charge recombination (Fig. 10). As a result, the O2 plasma-treated CNT/TiO2 based photoanode exhibited a PCE of 6.34%, compared with 4.66% and 3.63% for the chemically modified CNTs and pristine TiO2, respectively.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration (left), SEM (middle), and TEM images (right) of the pristine TiO2, chemically modified-CNT/TiO2, and plasma-treated CNT/TiO2 hybrids (reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). 
Apart from the pre-treatment, the assembly of CNTs and metal oxides can be also used to optimize the structure. Multi-walled CNTs have been introduced inside TiO2 nanorods to perform as ideal electron transport “superhighways”.120 At a weight percentage of 0.1%, a high fill factor of 0.74 was achieved, offering a remarkable PCE of 10.24%. This structure design provided a general and effective method for developing photoanodes with high charge transport.


3.1.4. Carbon nanotube/polymer composites. 
CNTs have been introduced to enhance the PCE and lifetime of polymer solar cells.121 The large specific surface area offers a suitable microscopic morphology for exciton dissociation, while the high aspect ratio with high electrical conductivity creates percolation pathways for high carrier mobility and rapid charge transport to decrease the recombination, even at low doping levels. Kymakis and Amaratunga incorporated single-walled CNTs into the bulk heterojunction of polymer solar cells.122 At a low CNT concentration of below 1%, the resulting polymer solar cell displayed open-circuit voltages of 0.7–0.9 V. Compared with the bare polymer, the short-circuit current with the use of CNTs was increased by two orders of magnitude, and the fill factor also increased from 0.3 to 0.4. The photo-induced electron transfer at the polymer/CNT interface was considered to be the main reason for the above improvement.
Note that semiconducting single-walled CNTs with an n-type character favor charge transport and have been more widely explored for polymer solar cells.123 A lot of effort has been made to overcome the dispersion problem of CNTs. For example, a rapid charge transport was realized in a heterojunction comprising oriented millimeter-long, single-walled CNTs beneath a poly(3-hexylthiophene) layer (Fig. 11a).124 The maximal PCE for one CNT was calculated to be 3.82% (Fig. 11b), which was 50 to 100 times higher than for a blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) and single-walled CNTs. In addition, a covalent functionalization of the ends and defects of CNTs with thiophene moieties can also increase their dispersion in a poly(3-octylthiophene) matrix, resulting in a much improved performance.125
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of a planar heterojunction solar cell based on a P3HT film on laterally aligned single-walled CNTs. The device has a width, length, and height of 0.5 mm, 1 mm, and 15–260 nm, respectively, with the height depending on the thickness of P3HT. (b) PCE per nanotube of the devices as a function of the P3HT thickness. The red circles are the experimental results from the devices with P3HT thicknesses ranging from 15 nm to 260 nm, and the black squares are the results calculated from the kinetics Monte Carlo model (reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). 
PEDOT:PSS, the most commonly used hole extraction material, suffers from a short lifetime due to its humidity sensitivity and acidity, which cause the degradation of the active layer and ITO electrode. Increasing interest has been directed to developing efficient candidates to replace PEDOT:PSS. Among the possible alternatives, CNT-modified materials represent one of the most studied systems.126,127 For instance, transparent, highly percolated networks composed of region-regular P3HT-wrapped semiconducting single-walled CNTs served as the hole extraction layer to offer a PCE of 7.63%.126 As a comparison, a control device based on the PEDOT:PSS hole extraction layer demonstrated a PCE of 7.33% under the same conditions.

3.2. Carbon nanofibers
Carbon nanofibers resemble carbon nanotubes in a one-dimensional configuration.128 Carbon nanofibers show different diameters and lengths ranging from 10–500 nm and 0.5–100 μm, respectively. Previously, arc-discharge and laser-ablation methods have been developed to synthesize a mixture of carbon nanomaterials that then needed complex purifications to obtain the desired carbon nanofibers. Later, chemical vapor deposition was used to make pure carbon nanofibers for practical applications.129 Metal nanoparticles, including iron, cobalt, and nickel, were used to dissolve carbon and form carbides.130 A wide variety of precursors, such as methane, carbon monoxide, ethyne, and ethylene, have been used as carbon sources at a temperature range of 700–1200 °C.118,129,131 Electrospun polymer nanofibers, such as polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and pitches, can be also carbonized to synthesize carbon nanofibers, whose properties largely depend on the types of polymer solution and on the processing parameters.132,133
Direct measurements of the mechanical properties of individual carbon nanofibers so far remain unavailable. However, the ancestor of carbon nanofibers, i.e., vapor-grown carbon fiber, shows a tensile strength and modulus of 2.9 GPa and 240 GPa, respectively. The electrical resistance of carbon nanofiber grown at 1100 °C was measured to be 2 × 10−3 Ω cm−1, but has been further decreased to 5 × 10−5 Ω cm−1 after graphitization.134 Currently, due to their low longitudinal resistance, carbon nanofibers have been mainly explored as counter electrodes and photoanodes in DSCs.

3.2.1. Electrocatalytic carbon nanofiber films. 
Similar to CNTs, carbon nanofibers are mainly investigated as low-cost counter electrodes in DSCs. Electrospun carbon nanofibers produced a DSC that displayed a PCE of 5.5%, much lower than the 6.97% based on the platinum counter electrode.135 This difference can be attributed to a much higher series resistance of 15.5 Ω cm2 in the carbon nanofiber compared with 4.8 Ω cm2 for platinum, which thus produces a much lower fill factor. Based on the above phenomenon, a great improvement has been realized by incorporating platinum nanoparticles on to carbon nanofibers to reduce the series resistance to 3.16 Ω cm2.136 In this way, a much increased PCE of ∼8% has been achieved.
Although exciting achievements have been made, several problems are associated with electrospun carbon nanofibers. These include that the required high temperature (700–1200 °C) during carbonization is harsh to most substrates; the transfer process increases the complexity and may cause contamination or damage to the carbon nanofibers;136,137 and the random orientation of carbon nanofibers is a potential obstacle hindering fast charge separation and transport in the counter electrode. To solve these problems, vertically aligned carbon nanofibers have been synthesized at low temperatures.138 The series resistance of 29.74 Ω cm2 in the vertically aligned carbon nanofiber-based counter electrode was comparable to the 25.36 Ω cm2 of a platinum-based counter electrode. However, few studies have investigated their potential as counter electrodes.


3.2.2. Conducting carbon nanofiber networks. 
The low electrical resistance along the length direction has also enabled carbon nanofibers to be promising candidates for the fabrication of high performance photoanodes. Li and co-workers synthesized a vertically aligned carbon nanofiber array on a nanoneedle-textured anatase TiO2 film as an effective photoanode (Fig. 12).139 A rapid charge separation was achieved at the TiO2–carbon nanofiber interface, resulting in a relatively low, albeit encouraging, PCE of ∼1.09%.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of vertically aligned carbon nanofiber arrays coated with anatase TiO2 nanoneedles for DSC. (b) SEM image at a 45° perspective view of an as-fabricated vertically aligned carbon nanofiber array. (c) TEM image of a carbon nanofiber after coating with anatase TiO2 nanoneedles. (d) J–V curves of dye-sensitized solar cells using as-fabricated vertically aligned carbon nanofibers (black line) and TiO2-coated vertically aligned carbon nanofibers (blue line) as the photoanodes (reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society). 
For the future application of carbon nanofibers in DSCs, particularly as counter electrodes, an increase in PCE and a decrease in cost are two of the most important aims. Although the highest PCEs of carbon nanofiber-based DSCs have exceeded 8%, which is comparable to platinum-based DSCs, it is still lower than CNT-based DSCs. A general and effective route to enhance the PCE may lie in the incorporation of other materials, such as platinum nanoparticles. The synthesis of carbon nanofibers requires high temperature and a complex process, which are both unfavorable for scale-up applications. The high cost of carbon nanofibers, especially compared to its counterparts of platinum and CNTs, is also an obstacle to their practical applications. More efforts are needed to develop new synthetic methods to make carbon nanofibers under mild conditions.

4. One-dimensional polymer nanomaterials
The molecular structures of representative conducting polymers are shown in Fig. 13, including polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI), polythiophene (PTh), and poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV). By varying the dopants and doping levels, the conductivities of the above polymers can be changed from insulators to semiconductors. Assembling conducting polymers into a one-dimensional configuration offers a number of attractive advantages, including high conductivity, good electrochemical activity, large specific surface area, and short and direct pathways for charge transport, which increase the photovoltaic performance of resulting solar cells.
 Fig. 13  Molecular structures of representative conducting polymers. 
4.1. Synthesis of one-dimensional conducting polymers

4.1.1. Template-based method. 
The template method has been widely explored for various kinds of one-dimensional nanomaterials, including metals, organic semiconductors, and functional composites.140 In the case of conducting polymers, two main templates can be used during synthesis, i.e., hard and soft templates. In a hard template method, porous membrane materials, such as anodic aluminum oxide, particle track-etched membranes, and titanium dioxide nanotube arrays containing massive micro/nanopores, are the most explored templates. For instance, a variety of morphologies, including nanorods, nanofibers, and nanotubes of conducting polymers, such as PPy, PANI, PTh, PEDOT, and their derivatives, have been synthesized by chemical/electrochemical polymerization using these templates.141–144 In a typical synthesis, monomer solutions are penetrated into the pores or are coated around the surfaces of templates, and the resulting polymerizations take place in the channels. The uniform and aligned pores of hard templates offer an efficient approach to control the morphology and orientation of polymers. In addition, due to the good stability of the hard templates, the sizes of one-dimensional conducting polymers can also be easily tailored in various synthetic conditions, such as by a wide range of reaction temperature, time, and concentration.
Soft templates are generally made from highly ordered aggregates that have been formed by assembling amphiphilic molecules through hydrophilic–hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonds, or van der Waals forces, when their concentrations reach the critical micelle concentrations. Surfactants, liquid crystals, and amphiphilic copolymers can all be used to prepare micelles or reversed micelles in solution to guide the in situ polymerization and growth of conducting polymers based on nanostructured soft-templated micelles. After removing the soft templates, conducting polymer nanorods, nanofibers, or nanotubes can be readily prepared. Similar to the hard templates, the morphology and aspect ratio of the conducting polymer are determined by the assembled micelles that are tunable during preparation.
Despite their many advantages, the template methods also suffer from complicated preparation processes and harsh post-treatments to remove the templates, which may result in damage to the conducting polymers. In addition, it remains challenging to scale up at low cost. Furthermore, the introduced impurities are detrimental to the intrinsic properties of the conducting polymers. Alternately, some template-free methods have also been extensively investigated to overcome the above shortcomings.


4.1.2. Template-free method. 
Two main template-free processes have been developed based on self-assembly and electrospinning. Self-assembly has been realized by weak interactions among building blocks, such as by π–π stacking, dipole–dipole, hydrophobic, van der Waals, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic or ion–dipole interactions, to spontaneously form oriented structures. Through this method, one-dimensional nanostructured conducting polymers, including PPy, PANI, PEDOT, and their functionalized derivatives, have been successfully synthesized.145,146 For the electrospinning method, the basic equipment consists of three main parts: a high-voltage power supply, a spinneret, and an electrical conductive collector. A high electrical field is applied between the conducting polymer fluid in a syringe with a capillary tip and the conductive collection drum to prepare continuous nanofibers. The applied electrical field should be high enough to allow the electrostatic force to overcome the surface tension of the polymer solution, after which a liquid jet forms and moves towards the conductive collection electrode. With the movement of the liquid jet, the solvent evaporates (or the melt solidifies) and the polymer nanofibers are collected on the collector surface. The morphology and size of the nanofibers are controlled by the voltage applied, the viscosity, concentration, conductivity of the solution, solution surface tension, and by the distance and direction between the nozzle and the collector. Compared with the template-based synthesis and self-assembly, electrospinning is favorable for preparing nanofibers with high aspect ratios and aligned polymer nanofiber films. Therefore, electrospinning has been widely used to prepare nanofibers or nanocables of conducting polymers and their composites.147 For instance, electrospinning was used to prepare (poly[N-9′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)]) nanofibers for polymer solar cells.148 The nanofiber active layer exhibited 100% photoluminescence quenching, due to the small diameters of the nanofibers, indicating an efficient dissociation of excitons.

4.2. Representative conducting polymers

4.2.1. Polypyrrole. 
Polypyrrole (PPy) has been widely investigated due to high electronic conductivity, biocompatibility, and stability in both air and aqueous media.149 For instance, PPy nanorod networks synthesized through electrochemical polymerization have exhibited a high electrical conductivity of 40 S cm−1, which enables their use as an efficient counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells (Fig. 14). The electrocatalytic performance could be further enhanced by incorporating carbon nanoparticles. After the introduction of 10 wt% carbon nanoparticles, a reduced charge transport resistance and improved catalytic performance for the reduction of I3− to I− was achieved, where the interaction between the PPy nanorod networks and carbon nanoparticles accelerated the electron transport at the counter electrode. The resulting dye-sensitized solar cells displayed a PCE of 7.2%.150
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of PPy nanorods. (b) Schematic illustration of the triiodide reduction on PPy nanorod networks, which served as the counter electrode in the dye-sensitized solar cell (reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). 


4.2.2. Polyaniline. 
Polyaniline (PANI) has also been employed as a counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells, due to its remarkable electrocatalytic activity.151,152 It typically appears in a bulk material in use in solar cells. However, in the bulk form, the slow charge transport and low electrolyte penetration decrease its performance during use. To this end, the formation of PANI nanomaterials offers a large specific surface area and porosity, and, furthermore, the one-dimensional configuration is particularly promising for rapid charge transport during photovoltaic conversion. As a result, PANI nanofibers have been investigated as high-performance counter electrodes, and a PCE of 6.58% has been achieved, and can be further largely increased after optimization.153,154


4.2.3. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene). 
Bulk PEDOT has also been used as a counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells, and, furthermore, one-dimensional PEDOT nanomaterials have been demonstrated as high performance electrocatalysts.155,156 For instance, PEDOT nanofibers with diameters of 10–50 nm and high electrical conductivity (up to 83 S cm−1) synthesized by soft-template methods have produced a PCE of 9.2%, much higher than the 6.8% based on a bulk PEDOT counter electrode and even higher than the 8.6% of conventional platinum.157 It was also shown that PEDOT nanofibers could efficiently reduce I3− ions, to enhance both the current density and fill factor.
Apart from the application in dye-sensitized solar cells, PEDOT can also serve as a viable hole extracting material in polymer solar cells. For a network of PEDOT nanofibers, the formed porous structure offers a high interface and enhances both hole extraction and transport.158 A PEDOT nanofiber-modified ITO electrode was incorporated with a spin-coated P3HT-PCBM photoactive layer to fabricate polymer solar cells without annealing. Compared with the conventional spin-coated PEDOT-PSS of the same thickness, although the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current were the same, a 30% improvement in the fill factor was observed for the PEDOT nanofibers. This phenomenon was attributed to a higher hole extraction and transport in PEDOT nanofibers and better contact with the ITO electrode and photoactive layer.159


4.2.4. Polythiophene and its derivatives. 
Unlike the conducting polymers discussed above, polythiophene (PTh) and its derivatives are usually used as the photoactive layer to absorb photons in polymer solar cells. The semiconducting polymers absorb light for charge generation and separation at the interface with electrode buffer layers. To fabricate high performance polymer solar cells, the morphology of the photoactive layer containing the semiconducting polymers is a critical factor. There are numerous reports focusing on the optimization of this bulk heterojunction layer containing the polymer donor and acceptor in order to form a suitable micro-phase separation, which would enhance the carrier transport and favor a high current density and fill factor.160,161 An effective route to enhance the photoelectric performance of bulk heterojunction devices lies in the use of nanofiber networks that increase both the charge separation and transport.162
To better understand the enhancement of polymer solar cells with active nanofiber network layers, Sum et al. investigated the charge generation and recombination dynamics in P3HT-nanofibers using transient absorption spectroscopy. The spectra showed a more efficient charge generation in the nanofiber network compared with the control bulk samples. However, there was also a significant amount of non-geminate recombination in the nanofiber network, which could reduce the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current density.163 To increase the charge transport and to decrease the charge localization, an external electric field treatment of the active layer was conducted to align the randomly dispersed polymer chains to be perpendicular to the electrode. A 22.7% improvement in PEC and a 37.5% improvement in charge mobility were achieved after this treatment.164

5. One-dimensional nanomaterials for one-dimensional solar cells
Attributed to their unique advantages including flexibility, light weight, and weavability, one-dimensional solar cells have attracted intense attention over the past decade. Various kinds of solar cells, including dye-sensitized solar cells, polymer solar cells, and perovskite solar cells, have been developed with satisfactory performance. One-dimensional fiber electrodes are the heart of one-dimensional solar cells, and the mechanical and electrical properties of the fiber electrode plays a critical role in the photovoltaic performance. In the early stages, metal wires, including stainless steel wires, platinum wires, and titanium wires, were widely explored.165 However, the relatively low flexibility and high weight of the metal wires limited their practical applications. For some noble metal wires, such as platinum wires, the high cost during fabrication could not be ignored either. To this end, aligned CNT fibers assembled from numerous CNTs provides an effective solution (Fig. 15a).166 In this section, the applications of aligned CNT materials, mainly CNT fibers, are briefly described for one-dimensional solar cells.
 Fig. 15  (a) SEM image of a typical aligned CNT fiber (reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (b and c) Schematic illustration of the one-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cell using aligned CNT fibers as the counter electrode by the side and top views, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (d) Schematic illustration of the one-dimensional dye-sensitized solar using aligned CNT fibers as both the working and counter electrodes (reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
Aligned CNT fibers are generally drawn from spinnable CNT arrays that are synthesized via chemical vapor deposition.92,167,168 The obtained CNT fibers show high tensile strengths at the level of 102 to 103 MPa and electrical conductivities in the order of 102 to 103 S cm−1. Aligned CNT fibers were firstly used as photoanodes to fabricate planar DSCs.114 An aligned CNT fiber was incorporated with dye molecules through a solution process to replace TiO2. The resulting planar dye-sensitized solar cell showed PCEs ranging from 2.1% to 2.6%. Later, aligned CNT fibers were used to replace metal wires as the photoanodes to support dye-loaded TiO2 nanoparticles, with another aligned CNT fiber serving as the counter electrode, to produce a one-dimensional DSC (Fig. 15d).166 The PCE achieved was 2.94%. Basically, the relatively low conductivity in the CNT fiber is not favorable for photoanodes aimed at high-efficiency solar cells. Alternately, more efforts have been made to develop CNT fibers for efficient counter electrodes to reduce I3− ions in DSCs.169 For instance, an aligned CNT fiber was twisted onto a titanium wire perpendicularly grown with aligned titanium dioxide nanotubes on the outer surface, and served as the photoanode for the DSC (Fig. 15b and c). After optimization, the PCE of the resulting one-dimensional solar cell achieved 4.6%, which was even independent of the angle of incident light, due to the unique one-dimensional configuration in the device. Currently, a lot of investigations have been made to improve the PCE170,171 and stability172,173 and to introduce more functionalities113,174,175 in the CNT fiber-based one-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cells. The maximal PCE reported to date is 8.50% based on a liquid electrolyte.171 In most reports, the one-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cells are fabricated from liquid electrolytes, although some solid electrolytes have also been tried, but with much lower PCEs.
Aligned CNT fibers have also been used to fabricate one-dimensional polymer solar cells. For instance, an aligned CNT fiber and aligned TiO2 nanotube-modified Ti wire as two electrodes were twisted into a fiber-shaped polymer solar cell.176 By filling the TiO2 nanotubes with an active polymer layer, efficient exciton separation and electron transport were realized to produce efficient polymer solar cells that showed a PCE of 1.8%.177 Although the PCEs are lower than those of DSCs, the all-solid-state one-dimensional polymer solar cells shared a higher stability, compared to liquid-electrolyte-based DSCs.
As a special kind of solar cell, perovskite solar cells have attracted a great deal of interest, due to their all solid state and high efficiencies, which are particularly promising properties for one-dimensional photovoltaic devices aimed at practical applications. Fiber-shaped perovskite solar cells have just started to attract attention in recent years, and a recent attempt was successfully made to fabricate a perovskite solar cell by using CNT sheets as the transparent electrode and aligned TiO2 nanotubes as the electron transporting layer with a coaxial structure (Fig. 16).178 This perovskite solar cell displayed a PCE of 3.5%, which is currently acceptable but obviously much lower than its planar counterparts. A lot of effort is thus needed to optimize the cells for a higher PCE.
 Fig. 16  (a) Structure illustration of a one-dimensional perovskite solar cell. (b) J–V curve of a typical perovskite solar cell with an efficiency of 3.3%. (c and d) Cross-sectional SEM image of a one-dimensional perovskite solar cell at low and high magnifications, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
As discussed already, although encouraging achievements have been made using aligned CNT sheets or fibers as efficient electrodes in the fabrication of one-dimensional solar cells, the PCEs are still lower than the conventional planar devices, particularly for polymer and perovskite solar cells. To overcome this issue, more efforts are needed to further enhance the electrical conductivity of aligned CNT electrode materials to significantly improve both charge transport and collection, which may reduce the series resistance of the resulting devices. In addition, a second active phase, including of other one-dimensional inorganic nanomaterials and conducting polymers, may be also incorporated into aligned CNT fibers for higher catalytic capability.
6. Conclusion and prospective
The birth and burgeoning demand for dye-sensitized and polymer solar cells have renewed the interest in photovoltaics in the past two decades. Recently, the newest recruit to this field, i.e., perovskite solar cells, has boosted a staggering increase in performance, rejuvenating the race to efficiently harness the sunlight. It is often the case that an upgrade in performance is accompanied by an innovation in materials. One-dimensional materials, benefiting from their geometry configuration, stand out as promising candidates. Metals, metal oxides, carbonaceous materials, and conducting polymers have all been made into a one-dimensional configuration, spanning from nanowires, to nanofibers, nanorods and to nanotubes, which have all been carefully discussed in this review for their potential photovoltaic applications. Inheriting its intrinsic properties from these materials, the one-dimensional configuration introduces several advantages, such as efficient charge transport and collection, which can contribute to a better photovoltaic performance. As a penalty though, the one-dimensional configuration imposes a restriction on the specific surface area, which is detrimental to the uptake of active materials. Fortunately, this can be offset by the use of designed hierarchical structures. Moreover, one-dimensional carbonaceous materials, including carbon nanofibers and carbon nanotubes, can assemble into a one-dimensional yarn that is favorable for fiber-shaped solar cells.
One-dimensional materials have been widely utilized in applications in solar cells. Looking towards the future, there are still substantial opportunities in many areas, such as: (1) synthesizing new one-dimensional nanomaterials or modifying existing species to further improve the electronic properties for better photovoltaic performance. (2) Developing and enriching the synthetic methods of one-dimensional nanomaterials, and clarifying the synthesis parameters to accurately control the morphology and properties of the resulting materials, in order to efficiently and reliably fabricate high-performance photovoltaic devices. (3) Simplifying the fabrication process and reducing the fabrication cost. Current methods for the synthesis of one-dimensional nanomaterials are generally based on chemical vapor deposition, a hydrothermal method, or anodic oxidation, which requires rigorous conditions or specific equipment. Considering the practical applications of solar cells, it is critically important to simplify the fabrication process and to reduce the fabrication cost of one-dimensional nanomaterials, which calls for deep investigations and exploration in the future. (4) Fiber-shaped solar cells have recently attracted increasing attention and are proposed to be good candidates to power various portable and wearable electronic products, therefore with a high impact on modern life. One-dimensional nanomaterials have been identified as promising candidates for fiber electrodes, which play a key role in achieving both high PCE and stability, due to their combined high flexibility and electronic property based on the aligned nanostructures. A lot of effort can be directed toward pushing fiber-shaped solar cells forward.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by MOST (2011CB932503), NSFC (21225417), STCSM (12nm0503200), the Fok Ying Tong Education Foundation, the Program for Special Appointments of Professors at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning, and the Program for Outstanding Young Scholars from the Organization Department of the CPC Central Committee.
References
M. He, W. Han, J. Ge, Y. Yang, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2894–2902 CAS .
M. He, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17039–17048 RSC .
M. He, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1788–1796 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2338–2345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-C. Chen, H.-C. Tseng and C.-J. Ko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103316 CrossRef PubMed .
F.-C. Chen, C.-J. Ko, J.-L. Wu and W.-C. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2426–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653–5667 CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D'Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, D. S. You, K. Lim, S. Park, S. Jung, C. S. Kim, D. H. Kim, D. G. Kim, J. K. Kim and J. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4177–4184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, H. Phan, J. Liu, T. Q. Nguyen and T. T. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6900–6904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187–3200 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yum, P. Chen, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 699–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, T. Chen, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 539–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kim, Y. Won, K. Woo, C.-H. Kim and J. Moon, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1081–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-E. Park, S. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, E. Kim and J. Hwang, J. Mater Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14286–14293 CAS .
J.-Y. Wang, S.-Y. Yang, Y.-L. Huang, H.-W. Tien, W.-K. Chin and C.-C. M. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13569–13575 RSC .
J.-W. Lim, D.-Y. Cho, K. Eun, S.-H. Choa, S.-I. Na, J. Kim and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 69–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Margulis, M. G. Christoforo, D. Lam, Z. M. Beiley, A. R. Bowring, C. D. Bailie, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1657–1663 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kim, S.-H. Cha, S. C. Kim, M. Song, J. Lee, W. S. Shin, S.-J. Moon, J. H. Bahng, N. A. Kotov and S.-H. Jin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3319–3325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kang, T. Xu, H. J. Park, X. Luo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4378–4383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell, S. M. Bergin, Y. L. Hua, Z. Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3558–3563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4798–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jin, G. He, H. Zhang, J. Zeng, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10560–10564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ren, Y. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Fang, W. Weng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 7864–7869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. Stewart, A. R. Rathmell, L. Yan, S. Ye, P. F. Flowers, W. You and B. J. Wiley, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5980–5988 RSC .
V. Thavasi, G. Singh and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 205–221 CAS .
L. Yang and W. W. F. Leung, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1792–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Lin, Y. Y. Chen, Y. C. Lee and Y. W. Chen-Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13003–13012 CAS .
E. Ghadiri, N. Taghavinia, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and J.-E. Moser, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1632–1638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Hwang, C. Kim, H. Song, S. Son and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5287–5292 CAS .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, A. S. Nair, S. Yang, S. Peng and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12210–12212 RSC .
L. Yang and W. W. F. Leung, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4559–4562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dharani, H. K. Mulmudi, N. Yantara, P. T. T. Trang, N. G. Park, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and P. P. Boix, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1675–1679 RSC .
L. Miao, S. Tanemura, S. Toh, K. Kaneko and M. Tanemura, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 264, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Guo, M. Zhang and X. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Wu, H. C. Shih and W.-T. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Zhu, A. J. Frank, C. A. Grimes and T. E. Mallouk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 124, 2781–2784 CrossRef .
P. Sun, X. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Wang, C. Wang, J. Yang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6389–6393 RSC .
E. Barea, X. Xu, V. González-Pedro, T. Ripollés-Sanchis, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3414–3419 CAS .
M. Lv, D. Zheng, M. Ye, J. Xiao, W. Guo, Y. Lai, L. Sun, C. Lin and J. Zuo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1615–1622 CAS .
Q. Huang, G. Zhou, L. Fang, L. Hu and Z.-S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2145–2151 CAS .
S. Lee, I. J. Park, D. H. Kim, W. M. Seong, D. W. Kim, G. S. Han, J. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung and K. S. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7989–7995 CAS .
L.-L. Li, C.-Y. Tsai, H.-P. Wu, C.-C. Chen and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2753–2758 RSC .
J. Wang and Z. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 579–584 CrossRef .
M. Ye, D. Zheng, M. Lv, C. Chen, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3039–3044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ye, X. Xin, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3214–3220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-X. Lei, J.-Y. Liao, R. Zhang, J. Wang, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15228–15233 CAS .
Q. Chen and D. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6310–6314 CAS .
C.-J. Lin, W.-Y. Yu and S.-H. Chien, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1073–1077 RSC .
C.-T. Yip, M. Guo, H. Huang, L. Zhou, Y. Wang and C. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 448–450 RSC .
D. K. Roh, W. S. Chi, H. Jeon, S. J. Kim and J. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 379–386 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, B.-X. Lei, H.-S. Rao, Y.-F. Xu, Y.-F. Wang, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1352 Search PubMed .
L. Chu, L. Li, J. Su, F. Tu, N. Liu and Y. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4420 Search PubMed .
J.-Y. Liao, B.-X. Lei, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5750–5757 CAS .
F. Shao, J. Sun, L. Gao, S. Yang and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6824–6830 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, H.-S. Rao, H.-L. Feng, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 15–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, H.-L. Feng, H.-S. Rao, Y.-F. Xu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3968 CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6437–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, H. Kang, J. Yun, J. Lee, J. H. Park and S. Baik, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5088–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, J. H. Kim, Y. Zhao, D. Attard and S. X. Dou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 966–968 RSC .
S. C. Lyu, Y. Zhang, C. J. Lee, H. Ruh and H. J. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3294–3299 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Li, C. Bao, T. Yu and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5454–5460 RSC .
W. Wang, Q. Zhao, H. Li, H. Wu, D. Zou and D. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2775–2782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446–3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, C. Xu, S. Xu, C. Li, W. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2092–2096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weintraub, Y. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 9143–9147 CrossRef .
C. Xu, J. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8122–8125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lan, J. Bai, S. Masala, S. M. Thon, Y. Ren, I. J. Kramer, S. Hoogland, A. Simchi, G. I. Koleilat and D. Paz-Soldan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1769–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Bendall, L. Etgar, S. C. Tan, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. E. Welland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2903–2908 CAS .
N. O. Plank, H. J. Snaith, C. Ducati, J. S. Bendall, L. Schmidt-Mende and M. E. Welland, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 465603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schrier, D. O. Demchenko, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2377–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. O. Plank, I. Howard, A. Rao, M. W. Wilson, C. Ducati, R. S. Mane, J. S. Bendall, R. R. Louca, N. C. Greenham and H. Miura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18515–18522 CAS .
R. K. Joshi and J. J. Schneider, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5285–5312 RSC .
G. Yuan, W. Zhang, J. Jie, X. Fan, J. A. Zapien, Y. H. Leung, L. Luo, P. Wang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2591–2597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-P. Lu, J. Song, M.-Y. Lu, M.-T. Chen, Y. Gao, L.-J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1223–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. H. Koh, X. Yang, W. S. Chi, C. Park, J. W. Leem, B. Kim, S. Seo, Y. Kim and J. S. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301338 Search PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16567–16573 CAS .
H.-M. Cheng, W.-H. Chiu, C.-H. Lee, S.-Y. Tsai and W.-F. Hsieh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16359–16364 CAS .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, M. Guo, Y. Feng and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5776–5782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V.-M. Guérin and T. Pauporté, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2971–2979 Search PubMed .
M. McCune, W. Zhang and Y. Deng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3656–3662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Sun, H. Sun, H. P. Li and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5153–5176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Thostenson, Z. F. Ren and T. W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2001, 61, 1899–1912 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Yu, O. Lourie, M. J. Dyer, K. Moloni, T. F. Kelly and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2000, 287, 637–640 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. G. Wildoer, L. C. Venema, A. G. Rinzler, R. E. Smalley and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 391, 59–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong and S. Myung, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 207–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kaneto, M. Tsuruta, G. Sakai, W. Y. Cho and Y. Ando, Synth. Met., 1999, 103, 2543–2546 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, M. Yamaguchi, M. Kumagai and S. Yanagida, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 28–29 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Brennan, M. T. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472–485 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Aguirre, S. Auvray, S. Pigeon, R. Izquierdo, P. Desjardins and R. Martel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183104 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1853–1859 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dan, G. C. Irvin and M. Pasquali, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 835–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De, P. E. Lyons, S. Sorel, E. M. Doherty, P. J. King, W. J. Blau, P. N. Nirmalraj, J. J. Boland, V. Scardaci, J. Joimel and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 714–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. Yim, X. Wang, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Lee and J. C. Demello, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2310–2316 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. L. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. W. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Cho, K. Eun, S. H. Choa and H. K. Kim, Carbon, 2014, 66, 530–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Yang, T. Chen, R. X. He, G. Z. Guan, H. P. Li, L. B. Qiu and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5436–5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Yang, L. Li, H. J. Lin, Y. F. Luo, R. X. He, L. B. Qiu, J. Ren and H. S. Peng, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 549, 82–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Zhang, X. D. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. J. Yin and S. M. Huang, Microchim. Acta, 2011, 174, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1145–1149 CAS .
H. Sun, Z. Yang, X. Chen, L. Qiu, X. You, P. Chen and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 8434–8438 CrossRef .
T. Chen, S. T. Wang, Z. B. Yang, Q. Y. Feng, X. M. Sun, L. Li, Z. S. Wang and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed, 2011, 50, 1815–1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bissett, A. Barlow, C. Shearer, J. Quinton and J. G. Shapter, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2431–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Yen, Y. F. Lin, S. H. Liao, C. C. Weng, C. C. Huang, Y. H. Hsiao, C. C. M. Ma, M. C. Chang, H. Shao, M. C. Tsai, C. K. Hsieh, C. H. Tsai and F. B. Weng, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 375305 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Golobostanfard and H. Abdizadeh, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 191, 74–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, R. M. Dominguez and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 676–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Zhang, H. H. Niu, Y. Lan, C. Cheng, J. Z. Xu and X. K. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22025–22034 CAS .
L. J. Yang and W. W. F. Leung, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1792–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ratier, J. M. Nunzi, M. Aldissi, T. M. Kraft and E. Buncel, Polym. Int., 2012, 61, 342–354 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kymakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 112–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Li, V. Saini, E. Dervishi, V. P. Kunets, J. H. Zhang, Y. Xu, A. R. Biris, G. J. Salamo and A. S. Biris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 033110 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Ham, G. L. C. Paulus, C. Y. Lee, C. Song, K. Kalantar-zadeh, W. Choi, J. H. Han and M. S. Strano, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6251–6259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Nogueira, B. S. Lomba, M. A. Soto-Oviedo, C. R. D. Correia, P. Corio, C. A. Furtado and I. A. Hummelgen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18431–18438 CAS .
G. Dabera, K. Jayawardena, M. R. R. Prabhath, I. Yahya, Y. Y. Tan, N. A. Nismy, H. Shiozawa, M. Sauer, G. Ruiz-Soria, P. Ayala, V. Stolojan, A. Adikaari, P. D. Jarowski, T. Pichler and S. R. P. Silva, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 556–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chaudhary, H. W. Lu, A. M. Muller, C. J. Bardeen and M. Ozkan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1973–1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Meyyappan, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 213001 CrossRef .
K. P. De Jong and J. W. Geus, Catal. Rev., 2000, 42, 481–510 CAS .
N. M. Rodriguez, J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 3233–3250 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Tibbetts, M. L. Lake, K. L. Strong and B. P. Rice, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2007, 67, 1709–1718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Feng, N. Xie and J. Zhong, Materials, 2014, 7, 3919–3945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cavaliere, S. Subianto, I. Savych, D. J. Jones and J. Roziere, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4761–4785 CAS .
J. Heremans, Carbon, 1985, 23, 431–436 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, L. F. Zhang, Q. L. Chen, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Q. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3572–3577 CAS .
P. Poudel, L. F. Zhang, P. Joshi, S. Venkatesan, H. Fong and Q. Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4726–4730 RSC .
P. Joshi, Z. P. Zhou, P. Poudel, A. Thapa, X. F. Wu and Q. Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5659–5664 RSC .
S. M. Mahpeykar, M. K. Tabatabaei, H. Ghafoori-fard, H. Habibiyan and J. Koohsorkhi, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 435402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Liu, Y. T. Kuo, K. J. Klabunde, C. Rochford, J. Wu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1645–1649 CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fu, Y. Zhu, R. Tan and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1874–1877 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5260–5265 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Han and S. H. Foulger, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3092–3094 RSC .
S. I. Cho and S. B. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 699–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 963–975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2926–2932 CrossRef CAS .
A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5670–5703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, S. J. Yang, S. K. Kim, H. S. Choi and C. R. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2847–2854 RSC .
A. Fakhry, F. Pillier and C. Debiemme-Chouvy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9859–9865 CAS .
S. Peng, L. Tian, J. Liang, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 4, 397–404 Search PubMed .
J. Z. Chen, B. Li, J. F. Zheng, J. H. Zhao, H. W. Jing and Z. P. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4624–4630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ameen, M. S. Akhtar, Y. S. Kim, O. B. Yang and H.-S. Shin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4760–4764 CAS .
Q. Tang, H. Cai, S. Yuan and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 317–323 CAS .
X. Chen, Q. Tang and B. He, Mater. Lett., 2014, 119, 28–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Liu and H. Shimizu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5949–5956 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, X. Mei, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 143103 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Lee, K. Do, Y. W. Lee, S. S. Jeon, C. Kim, J. Ko and S. S. Im, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21624–21629 RSC .
J. H. Huang, Z. Y. Ho, D. Kekuda, C. W. Chu and K. C. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19125–19130 CAS .
E. Nasybulin, S. Wei, M. Cox, I. Kymissis and K. Levon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4307–4314 CAS .
K. Maturová, S. S. van Bavel, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 261–269 CrossRef .
J. G. Labram, E. B. Domingo, N. Stingelin, D. D. C. Bradley and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, D. L. Jacobs, Y. Che, H. Huang, B. R. Bunes, X. Yang and L. Zang, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1383–1390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kurniawan, T. Salim, K. F. Tai, S. Sun, E. J. Sie, X. Wu, E. K. L. Yeow, C. H. A. Huan, Y. M. Lam and T. C. Sum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18015–18022 CAS .
A. Solanki, B. Wu, T. Salim, E. K. L. Yeow, Y. M. Lam and T. C. Sum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11285–11291 CAS .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Yang and H. S. Peng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5031–5041 RSC .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Cai, F. Gong, Z. B. Yang, Z. S. Wang and H. S. Peng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2568–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Sun, Y. N. Zhang and L. X. Zheng, J. Nanomater., 2012, 506209 Search PubMed .
X. F. Zhang, Q. W. Li, T. G. Holesinger, P. N. Arendt, J. Y. Huang, P. D. Kirven, T. G. Clapp, R. F. DePaula, X. Z. Liao, Y. H. Zhao, L. X. Zheng, D. E. Peterson and Y. T. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4198–4201 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, H. G. Kia, Z. B. Yang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4623–4628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Pan, Z. B. Yang, H. P. Li, L. B. Qiu, H. Sun and H. S. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10622–10625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, J. E. Deng, X. L. Chen, Z. B. Yang, J. Ren and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2868–2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Li, Z. B. Yang, L. B. Qiu, X. Fang, H. Sun, P. N. Chen, S. W. Pan and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3841–3846 CAS .
H. Sun, H. P. Li, X. You, Z. B. Yang, J. Deng, L. B. Qiu and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 345–349 CAS .
H. Sun, X. You, J. Deng, X. L. Chen, Z. B. Yang, P. N. Chen, X. Fang and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6664–6668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Sun, H. Li and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2643–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, H. Li and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23655 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Wu, G. Guan, S. Pan, Y. Zhang, H. Li, J. Deng, B. Sun and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301750 Search PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Hao Sun	Hao Sun received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2012. He is currently a Ph.D. student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the use of carbon nanomaterials in energy conversion and storage.
Jue Deng	Jue Deng received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2013. He is currently a graduate student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the use of carbon nanomaterials in multifunctional energy devices.
Longbin Qiu	Longbin Qiu received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2011. He is currently a Ph.D. student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the synthesis of carbon nanomaterials and their applications in dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells.
Xin Fang	Xin Fang received his B.S. in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2012. He is currently a graduate student majoring in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China. His work focuses on the synthesis of carbon nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage.
Huisheng Peng	Huisheng Peng is currently a professor at the Department of Macromolecular Science and Laboratory of Advanced Materials at Fudan University, China. He received his B.E. in Polymer Materials at Donghua University in China in 1999, M.S. in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics at Fudan University, China, in 2003 and Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at Tulane University, USA, in 2006. He then worked at Los Alamos National Laboratory before joining Fudan University in 2008. His work focuses on the development of miniature fiber-shaped solar cells, lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, and he has published over 110 peer-reviewed papers.

Broader context
With the persistently growing demand for harvesting abundant and clean solar energy, increasing attention is being paid to developing efficient solar cells to address the energy crisis arising in recent years. Material optimization is considered to be a key method to improve the charge separation, transport, and collection in solar cells, resulting in a better device performance. One-dimensional nanomaterials share the combined advantages of rapid charge transport and collection, due their large specific surface areas and one-dimensional configuration, and thus are widely used to build efficient solar cells. Herein, we systematically review the recent progress in the fabrication of efficient solar cells based on one-dimensional nanomaterials, in particular, discussing metals, metal oxides, carbon and conductive polymers as representative nanomaterials. We also present the impact of the one-dimensional configuration on device performance, and give a perspective on the use of one-dimensional nanomaterials in future solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the structures of a typical: (a) dye-sensitized solar cell, (b) polymer solar cell, and (c) perovskite solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Ag nanowire film coated on a poly(ethylene terephthalate) substrate. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of Ag nanowires (inset: a Ag nanowire ink in ethanol) (reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) High-speed camera image of an electrohydrodynamic spray (reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A bent Cu nanowire film connecting an electrical circuit with a battery pack and a light-emitting diode (reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). (b) SEM image of Cu nanowires (reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). (c) Schematic diagram of the nanowire-based polymer solar cell (reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Mechanism of electron transport across TiO2 with the assistance of MWCNTs (reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (b) Schematic of dye-sensitized solar cells based on multiscale porous TiO2 nanofibers (reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic of the fabrication procedure and SEM images of the bilayer TiO2 nanofiber photoanode (reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Cross-sectional SEM images of nanowire arrays on an FTO-coated glass substrate at low and high magnifications, respectively. (c) High resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the as-synthesized single crystal nanowire (reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (d) Scheme to prepare the porous rutile TiO2 nanowire array. (e) Morphological evolution of TiO2 nanowire by step 3 (reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of the highly ordered TiO2 nanotube array. Inset image, schematic illustration of highly ordered TiO2 nanotube array (reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotube arrays formed by subsequent hydrothermal processing. Inset image, SEM image at high magnification (reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (c) SEM and TEM images of the hierarchical one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructure. Inset image, TEM image at high magnification (reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). (d) Schematic structures and SEM images of TiO2 hyperbranched arrays. (e and f) Schematic illustration of light scattering and electron transport pathways within the simplified network of nanowire, branched nanowire and hyperbranched nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of a planar waveguide-nanowire integrated three-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cell (reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (b) A three-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cell composed of an optical fiber and ZnO nanowires grown vertically on the fiber surface (reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH). (c) SEM image of a four-layer assembly of ZnO nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (d) A polymer solar cell based on a P3HT/PC60BM bilayer (reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration and SEM image of a ZnO nanowire forest. (b) J–V curves of dye-sensitized solar cells based on the ZnO nanowire forest (reprinted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (c) SEM image of a highly dense caterpillar-like ZnO nanowire array. (d) J–V curves for different layers of ZnO nanowire arrays (reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a penetrated and aligned CNT film. (b) SEM image of the CNT film from a side view. (c) Schematic illustration of the dye-sensitized solar cell with a penetrated and aligned CNT film as the counter electrode. (d) J–V curves of dye-sensitized solar cells using penetrated and aligned CNT films with different thicknesses and platinum films as the counter electrodes under AM1.5 illumination (reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V).	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration (left), SEM (middle), and TEM images (right) of the pristine TiO2, chemically modified-CNT/TiO2, and plasma-treated CNT/TiO2 hybrids (reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of a planar heterojunction solar cell based on a P3HT film on laterally aligned single-walled CNTs. The device has a width, length, and height of 0.5 mm, 1 mm, and 15–260 nm, respectively, with the height depending on the thickness of P3HT. (b) PCE per nanotube of the devices as a function of the P3HT thickness. The red circles are the experimental results from the devices with P3HT thicknesses ranging from 15 nm to 260 nm, and the black squares are the results calculated from the kinetics Monte Carlo model (reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of vertically aligned carbon nanofiber arrays coated with anatase TiO2 nanoneedles for DSC. (b) SEM image at a 45° perspective view of an as-fabricated vertically aligned carbon nanofiber array. (c) TEM image of a carbon nanofiber after coating with anatase TiO2 nanoneedles. (d) J–V curves of dye-sensitized solar cells using as-fabricated vertically aligned carbon nanofibers (black line) and TiO2-coated vertically aligned carbon nanofibers (blue line) as the photoanodes (reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  Molecular structures of representative conducting polymers.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of PPy nanorods. (b) Schematic illustration of the triiodide reduction on PPy nanorod networks, which served as the counter electrode in the dye-sensitized solar cell (reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) SEM image of a typical aligned CNT fiber (reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (b and c) Schematic illustration of the one-dimensional dye-sensitized solar cell using aligned CNT fibers as the counter electrode by the side and top views, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (d) Schematic illustration of the one-dimensional dye-sensitized solar using aligned CNT fibers as both the working and counter electrodes (reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Structure illustration of a one-dimensional perovskite solar cell. (b) J–V curve of a typical perovskite solar cell with an efficiency of 3.3%. (c and d) Cross-sectional SEM image of a one-dimensional perovskite solar cell at low and high magnifications, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
