Atomic-scale surface modifications and novel electrode designs for high-performance sodium-ion batteries via atomic layer deposition  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA02742G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02742G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10127-10149Atomic-scale surface modifications and novel electrode designs for high-performance sodium-ion batteries via atomic layer deposition

        
          
            Xiangbo 
            Meng
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. E-mail: xbmeng@uark.edu
Received 
      29th March 2017
    , Accepted 25th April 2017First published on 26th April 2017AbstractRenewable clean energies such as wind and solar power are limited by their intermittent operation nature and therefore their wide implementation urgently needs large-scale stationary electrical energy storage (EES) devices. State-of-the art lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are dominant in portable electronics and their next generation technologies hold great promise for transportation. In this context, the restricted reserves of lithium on earth make LIBs luxurious for large-scale stationary EES. As an alternative, sodium ions share a similar chemistry as lithium ions. In particular, sodium is very abundant and cost effective. To this end, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) are very promising in meeting the needs of large-scale EES devices. However, as LIBs still have many issues, SIBs also face many technical challenges in anodes, cathodes, electrolytes, and battery interfaces. To address these problems, a large variety of strategies has been investigated. In the past decade, atomic layer deposition (ALD) has first emerged as a new thrust for LIBs and recently in the past few years, ALD has also shown itself to be a very powerful technique in tackling technical issues in SIBs. Exclusively featuring its atomic-scale accuracy in material growth, unrivaled uniform and conformal deposition in any shaped substrates, crystallinity-tunability, and low temperature, ALD as a vapor-phase film deposition process remains to date the only route to tackle the interfacial issues by simply applying an ultrathin layer over battery electrodes. At the same time, ALD also distinguishes itself as an important avenue in searching for novel nanomaterials and solely enables optimizing materials in size, morphology, crystallinity, and composition. All these make ALD an irreplaceable tool in developing next-generation battery technologies. In this review, we summarize the updated advances of ALD in SIBs, covering atomic-scale surface modifications and novel electrode designs. The review is expected to stimulate more extensive and insightful studies on using ALD for high-performance SIBs.Xiangbo MengDr Xiangbo (Henry) Meng is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at University of Arkansas (Fayetteville, AR). His research focuses on developing novel nanoscale materials for energy applications such as rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, and catalysis. Dr Meng was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Energy Systems Division at Argonne National Laboratory (2012–2016) and in the Chemistry Division at Brookhaven National Laboratory (2011–2012). He earned two PhD degrees in Mechanical & Materials Engineering and Chemical & Biochemical Engineering from the University of Western Ontario (2005–2011). He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow and an awardee of several prestigious honors.
1. Introduction
The quick depletion of fossil fuels and the environmental issues associated with their combustion are posing a series of big challenges to our modern societies. In the search for feasible solutions, renewable clean energies are highly regarded, including wind, solar radiation, ocean, geothermal, biomass, hydrogen, and hydropower.1,2 The wide-scale implementation of these renewable energies needs cost-effective and efficient electrical energy storage (EES) systems. As one of the most successful electrochemical devices, rechargeable secondary batteries (RSBs) are very promising for tackling the intermittent nature of some renewable energy supplies (e.g., solar, wind, and ocean power).3 Over the past two decades, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been representing the latest success of commercial RSBs, providing much higher energy densities over their forerunners. Even with their dominance in portable electronics (e.g., cell phones and laptops), LIBs are still suffering from many technical issues in energy density, safety, cost, and long-term stability. At the same time, the growing market of portable electronics and widespread adoption of LIBs for electric vehicles have steeply increased the price of Li2CO3.4,5 Given the fact that lithium reserves are relatively limited and distributed unevenly, it is reasonable to foresee that lithium will run out completely in the future.4,5 In this context, it becomes imperative to develop battery systems independent of lithium. Consequently, there has recently been a continuously rising interest in battery systems using other alkali metal ions (e.g., Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Al3+).4,6–8 Among them, sodium is the second-lightest and smallest alkali metal next to lithium.4 In particular, sodium ions share a similar chemistry as lithium ions. Even so, there are substantial differences between sodium-ion and lithium-ion chemistry. It has been well documented that there are many more cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) or Na-ion batteries (NIBs) than for LIBs.9,10 On the other hand, many LIB anodes are not suitable for SIBs, such as graphite.11,12 Therefore, SIBs are still in their infancy and need many more research efforts.
SIBs at ambient temperature are not new, and they had been investigated as early as in the 1980s.13 However, SIBs faded from our interests, partially due to their lower energy densities than those of LIBs.4,9 Another important reason for the slow development of SIBs was the absence of suitable negative electrode materials, while there were many excellent choices for SIB cathodes.4 With the recently rising recognition of the limited resources of Li, research interests on SIBs have been re-ignited, particularly for stationary grid-scale energy storage.14 The current renaissance of SIBs also was credited to the discovery of hard carbon (i.e., non-graphitizable carbon, having a high reversible capacity of ∼300 mA h g−1)15,16 as SIB anodes. In comparison to the radius of Li ions (Li+, 0.76 Å), Na ions (Na+) have the radius of 1.02 Å. In other words, Na+ is 55% larger than Li+. In addition, sodium has a potential of −2.71 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), while lithium is −3.04 V vs. the SHE.4,5,17 Furthermore, sodium has a gravimetric capacity of 1166 mA h g−1, compared to the capacity of 3860 mA h g−1 for lithium.17 These apparently have determined lower energy densities of SIBs than those of LIBs. However, sodium minerals are much more abundant and available than lithium resources, and sodium is the fourth most abundant element in the earth's crust.5,18 This makes SIBs very promising candidates for stationary EES systems.
To date, there has been a variety of materials developed as electrodes of SIBs, as has been well summarized in many excellent review articles for cathodes4,5,14,18–24 and anodes.4,5,9,14,21,22,24–28 At the same time, research efforts also have been invested on new electrolytes of SIBs.22,29 SIB cathodes mainly include layered oxides, polyanionic compounds, Prussian blue analogues, and organic cathodes.4,24 SIB anodes cover carbon materials, alloys, metal oxides, metal sulfides, and organic compounds.4,9,24 Similar to LIBs, SIBs also are facing technical issues in energy density, stability, lifetime, and safety. In addressing these problems, various strategies are under intensive investigation. Among all the potentially viable solutions, recently atomic layer deposition (ALD) has emerged as a new research thrust and shown very strong multifunctional capabilities in achieving high-performance SIBs. In particular, ALD has been reported for SIBs in two major aspects: (i) precisely atomic-scale surface modifications of electrodes for accomplishing stable interfaces between the electrode and electrolyte in SIBs, and (ii) smartly designing SIB electrode materials with optimal size, morphology, crystallinity, and composition. Stimulated by the recent advances of ALD in addressing SIBs' challenges, we herein for the first time present this review with five parts. Following this introductory section, we subsequently give a concise description of ALD's unique mechanism as well as characteristics and a brief history of ALD in battery development. Then, we discuss in detail about ALD's exclusive capabilities in precisely atomic-scale modifying anodes and cathodes of SIBs in the third part, and highlight the recent outcomes of ALD in smartly designing electrode materials of SIBs in the fourth part. In the end, we remark the successes of ALD in SIBs and give some perspectives for future studies. With this review, we are hoping to timely inform peer researchers of the latest progresses of SIBs by ALD and expecting to boost more research enthusiasm and effort using ALD as a viable tool for long-term reliable SIB studies.
2. ALD's mechanism, characteristics, and brief history in batteries
Since its delivery in the 1970s,30 ALD now has become an extremely distinguished technique in a long list of applications. The list includes but is not limited to semiconductors,31 optoelectronics,32 photonics,33 catalysis,34 biomedical,35 surface engineering,36 corrosion and wear resistance,37,38 magnetics,39 and renewable energies.40–45 In terms of material varieties, ALD has enabled elements,31,46,47 metal oxides,48,49 metal nitrides,31 metal sulfides,50 metal fluorides,51,52 complex compounds,53–56 and others.57 In addition, ALD is very flexible in nanosynthesis for various structures ranging from nanoparticles to nanowires, nanotubes, nanofilms, and three-dimensional (3D) porous nanostructures.36,58,59 Furthermore, ALD also is particularly skillful in tuning material crystallinity and composition.49,54 Consequently, ALD is playing some irreplaceable roles in many areas, where atomic preciseness is critical such as high-efficiency catalysts of noble metals and fine tailoring of interfaces. All these features actually stem from ALD's unique mechanism and its resultant growth characteristics.
Many excellent reviews43,48,50 previously have exemplified the unique growth mechanism of ALD using some binary compounds, featuring two cyclic self-terminating half-reactions via ligand exchanges. Herein we illustrate the growth mechanism of ALD in a more general mode, supposing ML2 (M = metal and L = ligand) as a metal precursor and water as an oxygen precursor for a metal oxide (MO) (see Fig. 1). The overall reaction is as follows: ML2(g) + H2O(g) → MO + 2HL(g)(1)
 Fig. 1  Illustration of a general ALD process of metal oxides (MO) using ML2 (M = metal and L = ligand) and water as precursors. 
In the ALD process of MO, however, the overall reaction is divided into two half-reactions as follows: |-OH + ML2(g) → |-OML + HL(g)(2A) |-OML + H2O(g) → |-OM–OH + HL(g)(2B)where “|-” represents the substrate surface and “g” denotes the gas phase of the precursors (ML2 and H2O) and byproduct (HL). During the MO growth process of ALD, the first half-reaction (steps 1–3) occurs between ML2 and surface function groups of –OH, and produces a new layer of –ML bounded to oxygen with some release of HL as the byproduct. The second half-reaction (steps 4–6) is between –ML and H2O, and restores the substrate surface back to a full coverage of –OH with the release of the rest of the HL as the byproduct. After the second half-reaction, apparently the substrate surface is ready for another round of MO growth. Thus, ALD performs material growth in a cycle-by-cycle mode. The two half-reactions individually proceed and terminate automatically once their surface reactive sites (either –OH or –ML) deplete. To ensure no direct reactions between ML2 and H2O, a fully thorough purge is applied after each half reaction. By taking the time-dependent growth procedures, ALD enables the MO growth under an accurate control at the atomic level. This unique growth mechanism thereby distinguishes ALD from its counterparts such as traditional physical and chemical vapor deposition (i.e., PVD and CVD). Due to its surface-controlled feature, in addition, ALD processes are independent of substrate shapes. The ALD-resultant films therefore features their growth with unrivaled uniformity and conformality. In general, three parameters are critical for ALD growth characteristics and the properties of the resultant films, i.e., substrate, precursor, and temperature. Through careful selections of the three parameters, one can realize numerous materials with desirable size, morphology, crystallinity, and composition. Thus, ALD is a very powerful technique for new material design. For more details about ALD fundamentals, one can find them in many previous reviews.48,49,60–64
Since its first emergence in the 1970s, ALD ever experienced a slow progress in the 1990s.65,66 At the very beginning of the 21st century, ALD has been recognized as a new technique for nanoscience and nanotechnology67 and then has started its renaissance. In the past decade, ALD has gained more and more applications, as discussed at the beginning of this section. Among its widened applications, ALD's first practice in RSBs appeared in 2000, when V2O5 nanofilms68 were electrochemically investigated as LIB cathodes. However, until 2007 (ref. 69) and even later,70,71 more extensive studies on ALD for LIBs were reported for nanostructured electrodes and surface modifications of electrodes. In 2012, Meng et al.41 made the first comprehensive review on ALD's applications in LIBs. Since then, there has been an increasing interest in exploring ALD as a new tool for technical solutions to LIBs, accounting for over two hundred papers published in a relatively short time, covering electrodes, solid-state electrolytes, and surface modifications. Along with the efforts using ALD in LIBs, recently there also have been more and more studies for new battery systems beyond LIBs, such as lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries, lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries, and SIBs. The first report of ALD was exposed in 2012 for SIBs72 and in 2013 for Li–S batteries.73 A latest review74 by Yan et al. summarized the latest applications of ALD in Li–S batteries, but there still lacks a review on many important advances of ALD in SIBs. In the following parts, we focus on discussing the recent research efforts of ALD in SIBs in two ways: (i) atomic-scale surface modifications on anodes and cathodes, and (ii) atomic-scale design of electrode materials.
3. Atomic-scale surface modifications by ALD
Surface modification was first practiced by Amatucci and Tarascon75 on the LIB cathode of LiMn2O4 using various metal oxide coatings. Since then, a large number of studies have been conducted to improve the effects of surface coatings on both LIB anodes and cathodes.76–78 Traditionally surface coatings were applied on LIB electrode powders via a solution-based process such as sol–gel methods.77 This route usually produced a non-uniform and thick (several tens of nanometers to micrometers) film. In 2010, Jung et al.79,80 first reported that ALD-Al2O3 coatings enables remarkable improvement of both LIB anodes and cathodes with sub-nano coatings (<1 nm). In particular, for the first time, ALD enabled surface coatings directly on prefabricated LIB electrodes. This has not only made ALD suitable for mass production but also greatly reduced coating procedures and material wastes. Subsequently, many more ALD coatings have been revealed with dramatic enhancement of the performance of the coated LIB electrodes, as summarized in our previous review.41 It needs to be pointed out that in previous studies, ALD metal oxides have been widely used for coating LIB electrodes with water as one of the ALD precursors. It is well known that water even in trace amounts is very harmful to LIB performance and seriously degrades battery components (anodes, cathodes, and electrolytes). To date, however, there have been no reports on any side effects related to water from ALD deposition yet. It might be due to short doses of water during ALD processes and the ALD reactions of metal oxides performed thoroughly without water adsorption.
The successes of ALD coatings must have inspired the recent efforts for SIBs. To date, many different SIB anodes and cathodes have been investigated with ultrathin ALD coatings. In all the cases, ALD coatings exhibited extremely high effectiveness in suppressing the formation of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI), strengthening mechanical integrity of electrodes, and thereby improving SIBs' coulombic efficiency, sustainable capacity, and cyclability.
3.1. SIB anodes
There are many similarities between SIBs and LIBs in electrochemistry. Using the knowledge learned on LIBs, SIB cathodes have made significant progress.18,81 However, it is not right to simply suppose that LIBs and SIBs share the same knowledge for their anodes as well. Graphite as a commercial anode material of LIBs, for instance, did not perform well in SIBs, due to its extremely low capacity. Research on SIBs ever had experienced a difficult time in finding a high-capacity anode materials, until Stevens and Dahn15,16 reported their discovery on hard carbon. Recently, there is a lot of increased enthusiasm in alloying materials (e.g., Sn and SnO2), metal oxides, metal sulfides, and organic-based materials for SIB anodes. Similar to LIB anodes, SIB anodes suffer from many issues in SEI formation, volume change, structural transfer, and/or element dissolution. In dealing with these problems, ALD recently has presented itself a highly effective strategy with an ultrathin layer of metal oxide coatings. To date, Al2O3, TiO2, and HfO2 have been reported in the literature for modifying organic, alloy-based, conversion-based, and Na metal anodes via ALD.

3.1.1. ALD-Al2O3. 
• Organic anodes. 
Organic materials are promising in energy storage, featuring their abundance from biomass, ease in recycling, flexibility in their redox potential, and richness in chemical compounds.82 However, organic materials also face some hindrances, such as low conductivity, particle pulverization, and high solubility in organic electrolytes.82 Zhao et al.72 initiated the first investigation on organic materials as SIB anodes and they studied a commercially available material of Na2C8H4O4. Using ball-milling, Zhao et al. reduced the particle size from micrometers down to 50–600 nm and the resultant nanosized Na2C8H4O4 exhibited improved electrochemical performance than the commercial micro-powder in the voltage window of 0.1–2 V. During the first discharge process (see Fig. 2(a)), the nanosized Na2C8H4O4 showed a sharp voltage drop to 0.7 V, which was followed by a slope from 0.7 to 0.23 V with a capacity of 200 mA h g−1, and then a flat plateau at ∼0.29 V with a capacity of 270 mA h g−1. The latter was believed to be due to the insertion of two Na ions with a theoretical capacity of 255 mA h g−1. The corresponding first charge plateau was observed at 0.56 V, exhibiting a coulombic efficiency (CE) of 50.3%. Zhao et al.72 believed that the low CE of the first electrochemical cycle was mainly incurred by the large irreversible capacity of the sloped region, which formed a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) and disappeared in subsequent cycles. They further believed that the SEI was mainly due to the severe electrocatalysis of electrolyte decomposition by the electrode additive of Ketjen black (KB) and possibly by Na2C8H4O4 itself. Zhao et al. asserted that the distinct plateaus were ascribed to structural changes from Na2C8H4O4 to Na4C8H4O4 (see inset of Fig. 2(a)), in which two Na ions were bonded to the two carbonyl groups in Na4C8H4O4 during the Na insertion process. Aimed at mitigating the SEI formation, Zhao et al.72 applied ALD-Al2O3 coatings (using trimethylaluminum (TMA) and water as precursors) on the prefabricated nanosized Na2C8H4O4 electrodes for 20 (∼2 nm) and 50 (∼5 nm) cycles at 200 °C. ALD-Al2O3 is to date the most widely used surface coating material for LIBs.41 Zhao et al.72 revealed that the ALD-coated electrodes (denoted as ALD20 and ALD50) had much shorter sloped regions with capacities of 159 and 143 mA h g−1, respectively. In particular, the two coated electrodes did not show a decrease in reversible capacities. As a result, the CEs were increased to 62.5% and 60.6% for ALD20 and ALD50, respectively (see Fig. 2(a)). Therefore, they claimed that the ALD-Al2O3 coatings evidently mitigated the formation of the SEI. Furthermore, Zhao et al.72 also studied the uncoated and coated electrodes under different current rates from 0.05 to 2C (1C means performing a full insertion with 2 moles of Na ions into Na2C8H4O4 in 1 h). It was found that the ALD coatings are very effective in boosting the rate capability of the coated electrodes. Moreover, cycling at high current density did not permanently damage the structure of the electrodes, and the capacity could be fully restored when the rate was reduced to a low current rate. The beneficial effects of the ALD-Al2O3 coatings were further witnessed in the testing on long-term cyclability (see Fig. 2(b)). Starting from 258 mA h g−1 for the uncoated electrode, 282 mA h g−1 for ALD20, and 255 mA h g−1 for ALD50, the three electrodes had a capacity retention of 74.4%, 79.8%, and 82.7% after 50 electrochemical cycles, respectively. Thus, Zhao et al.72 asserted that the ALD-Al2O3 coatings improved this organic Na2C8H4O4 anode in the first CE, rate capability, and long-term cycling performance.
 Fig. 2  Effects of ALD-Al2O3 coatings on the organic anode of Na2C8H4O4.72 (a) The first discharge–charge profiles of the untreated anode, the ALD20 anode, and the ALD50 anode in the voltage window of 0.1–2.0 V, corresponding to the CE of 50.3%, 62.5%, and 60.6%, respectively (inset: the sodiation–desodiation mechanism of Na2C8H4O4). (b) The cycling performance of the untreated anode, the ALD20 anode, and the ALD50 anode under a current density of 0.1C in the voltage window of 0.01–2.0 V. Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
In a recent study by Luo et al.,83 another organic nanoscale anode material of 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone disodium salt (DHBQDS, Na2C6H2O4) was in situ synthesized by a one-step process (see Fig. 3(a)), in which the highly water-soluble DHBQDS and sodium alginate binder were mixed with carbon back (CB) into an aqueous slurry. After casting the slurry on a Cu foil, DHBQDS nanorods and nanosized sodium alginate were uniformly co-precipitated on the CB surface. Luo et al. confirmed that the co-existence of CB and the sodium alginate was essential to the formation of DHBQDS nanorods. The sodiation and desodiation of DHBQDS is suggested as follows: Na2C6H2O4 + 2Na+ + 2e− ↔ Na4C6H2O4(3)
 Fig. 3  Effects of ALD-Al2O3 coatings on the organic anode of Na2C6H2O4.83 (a) Illustration of the Na2C6H2O4 nanorod electrode preparation process. (b) The charge–discharge profiles of the Na2C6H2O4 nanorod electrode in the electrolyte of NaClO4 dissolved in FEC/DMC, at the current density of 50 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.8 and 2.5 V versus Na/Na+. (c) The charge–discharge profiles of the Na2C6H2O4 nanorod electrode coated with a 2 nm ALD-Al2O3 layer in the electrolyte of NaClO4 dissolved in FEC/DMC, at the current density of 50 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.8 and 2.5 V versus Na/Na+. Reproduced by permission of Elsevier. Copyright (2015) Elsevier Ltd. 
Compared to micro-sized DHBQDS, the nanorod electrodes exhibited much better cycling performance, possibly ascribed to their larger area, shorter ionic/electrical diffusion pathways, faster reaction kinetics, better accommodation of the volume change during electrochemical cycling, and alleviation of the particle pulverization. The DHBQDS nanorod electrodes were then tested in two electrolytes, i.e., 1 M NaClO4 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate (EC/DMC 1:1 by volume) or in fluoroethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate (FEC/DMC, 1:1 by volume). The effects of the two electrolytes on the first sodiation were observed. Luo et al.83 found that there was only one sodiation plateau at 1.2 V in the EC/DMC electrolyte while there was an extra sloping sodiation plateau centered at 1.4 V followed by the regular flat sodiation plateau at 1.2 V in the FEC/DMC electrolyte (see Fig. 3(b)). Luo et al.83 believed that, similar to the previous study on the organic Na2C8H4O4 anode by Zhao et al.,72 this extra sloping plateau should be responsible for the formation of a thick SEI. This was evidenced by a lower CE for the first electrochemical cycle and a larger overpotential of sodiation/desodiation plateaus in the FEC/DMC electrolyte. However, the formation of the SEI layer in the FEC/DMC electrolyte was verified being beneficial to the long-term cycling life, for the SEI layer could reduce the dissolution of DHBQDS nanorods and stabilize the electrode. At 50 mA g−1, as a result, the nanorod electrode in FEC/DMC performed better than the one in EC/DMC, accounting for a sustained capacity of 190 vs. 92 mA h g−1 after 240 electrochemical cycles. Furthermore, the DHBQDS nanorod electrode also showed excellent rate capability in the FEC/DMC electrolyte. Even so, the nanorod electrode still could be seen some dissolution with extended cycling. In order to prevent the DHBQDS nanorods from dissolution into the electrolyte, Luo et al.83 performed Al2O3 coatings of 10 (∼1 nm) and 20 (∼2 nm) ALD cycles on the nanorod electrodes. They found that the ALD coatings both inhibited the SEI formation (see Fig. 3(c) showing the case with a 2 nm ALD coating) and increased the CE to ∼100% for the two ALD-coated electrodes, compared to the CE of 94% for the bare DHBQDS nanorod electrode. More encouragingly, the reversible capacities of the DHBQDS nanorod electrodes with 1 and 2 nm Al2O3 layers remained 209 mA h g−1 and 212 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles, respectively. Both the improved CE and cycling life are attributed to the encapsulation of DHBQDS nanorod by the ALD-Al2O3 layers.
• Alloy anodes. 
Alloying-based anodes (e.g., Sn, SnO2, Sb, and P) are very attractive for SIBs, mainly due to their high capacities.9 One big challenge of alloy anode materials is their large volume change during sodiation and desodiation processes. The large volume change of alloy anodes is prone to lead to pulverization, subsequent loss of contact with the current collector and ultimately capacity fading. In coping with this issue, several general strategies have been fulfilled in previous studies, such as fabrication of nanostructured materials and addition of nanoscale carbon (e.g., graphene and carbon nanotubes). ALD recently has been explored for tackling this kind of challenges with alloy-based SIB anodes.84,85
Han et al.84 conducted a very interesting study in which ALD-Al2O3 was applied on Sn nanoparticles. In their work, Han et al. for the first time disclosed some significant roles of the ALD coatings in handling the huge volume changes of Sn anodes for improved electrochemical performance. ALD coatings have been utilized for alloy anodes (e.g., Si and SnO2) in LIBs and helped harvest dramatically improved performance.86,87 In SIBs, Sn has a theoretical capacity of 847 mA h g−1, but it is believed to experience a volume change up to 420% during sodiation and desodiation processes,88 even much more severe than in LIBs. The sodiation and desodiation of Sn can be interpreted using the following reaction:89 Sn + 3.75Na+ + 3.75e− ↔ Na3.75S(4)
In their study, Han et al.84 worked on Sn nanoparticles (SnNPs) attached on carbon nanofibers (CNFs), with and without ALD coatings (see Fig. 4(a–c)). They found that the uncoated Sn nanoparticles fell off from the CNFs (see Fig. 4(b and d)) while the 6 nm ALD-Al2O3 coated Sn nanoparticles remained on the CNFs stably without loss after 40 cycles (see Fig. 4(c and e)). In exploring the roles of the ALD-Al2O3 coating, Han et al.84 utilized in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to observe the volume evolutions of Sn nanoparticles and the roles of the ALD coating (see Fig. 4(f)). They disclosed that the ALD-coated Sn nanoparticles experienced volume changes up to 233% during sodiation and desodiation, but they all stably remained on CNFs without loss. In addition, they revealed that the Al2O3 layer irreversibly changed into a Na–Al–O layer during the first sodiation. A similar phase change previously has been reported for LIBs by Liu et al.,90i.e., Al2O3 coating changed into the Li–Al–O phase during the first lithiation. More importantly, Han et al.84 noticed for the first time that the Na–Al–O layer showed remarkable reversible stretch-ability during sodiation and desodiation cycles, similar to the inflation and deflation of a balloon. In other words, the Na–Al–O layer thinned when the Sn nanoparticles expanded upon sodiation and thickened when the Sn nanoparticles contracted upon desodiation. In the first three cycles, the Na–Al–O layer almost reversibly changed between 4.3 and 14.3 nm averagely with its surface area periodically swelling by an average of 67% calculated from the Sn nanoparticle core expansion. Han et al.84 asserted that the homogenous change of the Na–Al–O surface area without any noticeable fractures behaved like a reversible stretchable glue. Such a synergistic action between the Na–Al–O layer and the Sn nanoparticles effectively provided a dynamic mechanical protection for the Sn nanoparticles during electrochemical cycling. Consequently, the ALD-coated Sn anodes well outperformed the uncoated Sn anodes, accounting for 650 mA h g−1vs. 110 mA h g−1 in capacity and 93% vs. 32% in capacity retention after 40 electrochemical cycles. In their further effort to decipher the glue effect of the ALD-Al2O3 coating for the Sn nanoparticles, Han et al.84 employed chemomechanical simulations. For an uncoated Sn nanoparticle, they found that, at an overall volume change expansion of 61%, the debonding front reached the bottom of the interface between the Sn nanoparticle and CNFs and thereafter the Sn nanoparticle was fully detached from the CNFs and lost contact with the current collector (see the top row of Fig. 4(g)). For an ALD-coated Sn nanoparticle, the whole interface between the Sn nanoparticle and CNFs debonded at a volume expansion of 67%. However, the sodiated Sn nanoparticle was still securely wrapped by the mechanically durable Na–Al–O layer and thus could be further sodiated to an even larger volume (see the bottom row of Fig. 4(g)). These excellent results from Han et al.84 greatly advanced our understandings on the roles of ALD-Al2O3 coatings.
 Fig. 4  Roles of the ALD-Al2O3 coating in improving the cycling performance of Sn anodes in SIBs:84 (a) the hybrid materials of Sn nanoparticles on CNFs, (b) during sodiation and desodiation, a bare Sn nanoparticle debonds from the CNFs, (c) during sodiation and desodiation, the ALD-coated Sn nanoparticle remains on the CNFs. SEM images of the Sn anodes (d) without and (e) with ALD-Al2O3 coating after 40 sodiation–desodiation cycles. (f) In situ TEM observation on the first three sodiation and desodiation cycles of ALD-Al2O3 coated Sn nanoparticles. (g) FEM modeling of sodiation of Sn nanoparticles (top) without and (bottom) with an ALD coating. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
In a following work by Liu et al.,85 SnO2 was studied as an alloy-based anode in SIBs. SnO2 has been widely investigated as a very attractive LIB anode.91,92 In SIBs, SnO2 also is a promising anode material with a theoretical capacity of 1378 mA h g−1, following the electrochemical reactions below:89,93 SnO2 + 4Na+ + 4e− ↔ Sn + 2Na2O(5) Sn + 3.75Na+ + 3.75e− ↔ Na3.75S(6)
However, SnO2 has the same challenge like Sn, suffering a huge volume change of during sodiation and desodiation processes. Liu et al.85 synthesized a SnO2 nanocrystal layer on a carbon cloth (CC) using a hydrothermal method. The carbon cloth is composed of numerous carbon fibers that are intrinsically soft and porous. The resultant core–shell CC@SnO2 nanocomposites have a diameter about 5 μm uniformly while the SnO2 coating shell is ∼500 nm in thickness. The soft and porous carbon cloth also offered a high capacity for electrolyte absorption to facilitate the diffusion of the Na ions. In addition, Liu et al.85 coated the CC@SnO2 nanocomposites with two materials separately: 8.3 nm thick Al2O3 by ALD and 7.8 nm carbon coating by a solution method. Electrochemical measurements confirmed that, at 0.1C (i.e., 134 mA g−1), the CC@SnO2 nanocomposites performed much better than a commercial SnO2 powder, accounting for the 30% capacity retention after 40 cycles vs. the 6% capacity retention after 10 cycles. Liu et al.85 believed that the soft and porous carbon cloth were very beneficial to the improved performance of SnO2, i.e., better accommodation to volume change. Furthermore, Liu et al. verified that both the ALD-Al2O3 coating and the solution-induced carbon coating further improved the performance of the CC@SnO2 nanocomposites. The former started from a capacity of 470 mA h g−1 and had a capacity retention of 80%, while the latter started from 522 mA h g−1 and had a capacity retention of 60% after 100 cycles. In particular, the ALD-coated electrode had a capacity of 377 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, 63 mA h g−1 higher than that of the carbon-coated electrode. SEM (scanning electron microscopy) analysis disclosed that the carbon coated CC@SnO2 fibers had some agglomeration and SnO2 loss after 100 cycles. In comparison, the conformal coating of the ALD-Al2O3 remained after electrochemical cycling, i.e., the ALD-Al2O3 coating prevented the CC@SnO2 from mechanical degradation. This again verified that the ALD-Al2O3 coating is a very viable route for improving SIB performance.
• Conversion-based anodes. 
Conversion-based electrodes represent a large class of materials for SIBs. Inspired by the facts that defects such as oxygen vacancies (OVs) often dominate the electric and chemical properties of transition-metal oxides, Xu et al.94 in a recent work developed one type of MoO3−x nanosheets using a solvothermal route. The MoO3−x nanosheets exhibited intense blue color (denoted as b-Mo), in comparison to the white color of the MoO3 counterpart (denoted as w-Mo). Xu et al.94 confirmed that the b-Mo had an increased electric conductivity and an improved Na-ion diffusion coefficient deriving from the existence of oxygen vacancies. Electrochemical measurements were conducted on both the b-Mo and w-Mo electrodes. In addition, ALD-Al2O3 coatings were applied on both the b-Mo and w-Mo anodes as well. Xu et al.94 disclosed that the bare b-Mo performed higher capacities over the bare w-Mo. With ALD coatings, Xu et al.94 found that the coated anodes displayed even higher capacities and better retention over the uncoated anodes. After 100 electrochemical cycles, the b-Mo anode coated with 8-cycle (∼0.8 nm) ALD-Al2O3 showed the highest sustainable capacity of 283.9 mA h g−1 over all the bare b-Mo and w-Mo electrodes and the 4-cycle Al2O3 coated b-Mo and w-Mo electrodes. In the study, Xu et al.94 believed that the ALD coating layers acted as a mechanically stable substitute for the SEI to suppress electrolyte decomposition and inhibit the formation of a thick SEI, and thus promoted the function of the oxygen vacancies under deep-discharge conditions.
• Na metal anodes. 
In the latest efforts for SIB anodes, Na metal also is among the search list. Not just for SIBs, Na metal could also be used for Na–O2 batteries and other sodium batteries, having a theoretical capacity of 1165 mA h g−1.95 Similar to the challenges with Li metal as anodes,17 there are even much more severe technical issues with Na metal as anodes. This is due to the high reactivity of Na metal with traditional electrolytes such as various carbonates96,97 to form a SEI layer. To make it worse, the formed SEI could not effectively passivate the Na metal from liquid electrolytes upon repeated plating and stripping cycles. Consequently, the unstable SEI layer on Na metal inevitably leads to low CE and eventually Na dendrite growth.17 A large variety of strategies has been developed for tackling the challenges with Li metal and recently ALD has emerged as a new route by applying thin coatings over Li metal.98–100 Similarly, two latest studies101,102 both applied ALD-Al2O3 coatings on Na metal to form an artificial SEI layer in order to inhibit the corrosion of Na metal anodes and dendrite growth (see Fig. 5(a and b)). Considering the low melting point of Na metal at ∼98 °C, Luo et al.101 and Zhao et al.102 deposited ALD-Al2O3 films on Na metal at 75 and 85 °C, respectively. Luo et al. utilized TMA and plasma O2 as the ALD precursors while Zhao et al. used TMA and H2O instead. Luo et al. investigated the cycling performance of the bare and coated Na metal anodes in Na/Na symmetric cells. They set each plating/stripping cycle for 30 min. At a constant current of 0.25 mA cm−2, the ALD-coated Na/Na symmetric cells exhibited a much smaller voltage range in 450 h (900 plating/stripping cycles) (see Fig. 5(c–e)). This indicated the improved stability of Al2O3-coated Na metal during plating/stripping processes of Na. In contrast, the voltage hysteresis gradually increased in the bare Na/Na cell and ultimately the cell failed (see Fig. 5(c–e)). Luo et al.101 attributed the improved stability of the ALD-coated Na metal to the formation Na–Al–O during the first sodiation and the resultant Na–Al–O could conduct Na ions in subsequent cycles. Luo et al.101 further performed measurements of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and the results revealed that the bare Na/Na cell showed increasing impedance with electrochemical cycling (see Fig. 5(f)) while the coated Na/Na cell could maintain its initial impedance during the whole process (see Fig. 5(g)). The EIS results further support that the natural SEI formed in the bare Na/Na cell could not protect the Na metal while the ultrathin 2.8 nm ALD-Al2O3 coating as an artificial SEI layer could effectively prevent the Na metal from corrosion and dendrite growth with a prolonged cycle life and stable cell impedance. Luo et al.101 also conducted SEM observation on the cycled Na metal (see Fig. 5(h and i)) and the SEM images revealed very evident dendrite structures on the bare Na metal while a smooth surface with the ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal. By disassembling the 450 h cycled bare Na/Na cell, in addition, they also noticed that the cell dried out totally. This well supported the increasing voltage hysteresis and impedance of the uncoated cell. In contrast, the ALD-coated Na/Na cell still was wet after a 450 h cycling. Luo et al.101 also disclosed that, with increasing current densities, the bare Na/Na cells were more prone to present voltage hysteresis at much earlier times while the coated Na/Na cells remained stable in all the cases. In another work by Zhao et al.,102 they studied the cycling performance of symmetric cells in an ether electrolyte, instead of the carbonate electrolyte used by Luo et al.101 Consistent with the observations of Luo et al.,101 Zhao et al.102 similarly disclosed that, at a current density of 3 mA h cm−2, the bare Na/Na symmetric cell was much easier to suffer voltage fluctuations with increased voltages. In contrast, the 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na/Na cell exhibited very stable cycling performance and maintained a 20 mV voltage for 100 h (100 electrochemical cycles) (see Fig. 5(j)). Increasing the current density from 3 to 5 mA h cm−2, the fluctuations in voltage profiles were even more severe for the bare Na/Na cell and the cell lifetime was shortened as well (see Fig. 5(k)). The 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na/Na cell, however, was very stable with a voltage of ∼40 mV in 100 electrochemical cycles. These results strongly indicate that the ultrathin ALD-Al2O3 coating dramatically improved the Na metal's stability by forming an artificial SEI film. Zhao et al.102 further clarified the effects of ALD coating thickness and found that a 10-cycle ALD coating was not sufficient to protect Na metal to achieve a long-term stability while a 50-cycle ALD coating increased the voltage and hysteresis. Thus, they believed that a 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coating was optimal in their study. With the optimal coating thickness (i.e., 25 ALD-cycles), the coated Na/Na cell showed superior plating/stripping performance with a superlong lifetime over 500 cycles at the current density of 3 mA cm−2 (see Fig. 5(l)). Using SEM, Zhao et al.102 also observed that the uncoated Na metal formed moss-like dendrite structures while the ALD-coated Na metal exhibited some island-like but much smoother structures. The island-like structures were presumably due to the uniform and dense Al2O3 coating, which inhibited moss-like dendrite growth. XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) results further revealed that the bare Na metal after 50 electrochemical cycles was rich in organic products including RCH2ONa and inorganic products including Na2O, NaF, Na2SO3, and Na2SO4. In sharp contrast, the ALD-coated Na metal after 50 electrochemical cycles still showed the very evident features of Al2O3 while had dramatically reduced RCH2ONa, Na2O, and NaF. Zhao et al.102 asserted that the significant improvement of the coated cell was due to the effectively suppressed dendrite growth by the ultrathin ALD-Al2O3 coating.
 Fig. 5  Effect of ALD-Al2O3 coatings on Na metal anodes.101,102 (a) Illustration of repeated depositing/stripping cycles resulting in the formation of Na dendritic structures due to the unstable SEI in the carbonate electrolyte system. (b) Illustration of repeated depositing/stripping cycles for an ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal anode, showing stable cycling performance in the same carbonate electrolyte system. (c) Cyclic depositing/stripping process of symmetric cells with bare and ALD-coated Na anodes at a constant current density of 0.25 mA cm−2. Voltage profiles at (d) the first two cycles and (e) the 899th and 900th cycles. EIS spectra of symmetric cells of (f) bare Na metal and (g) ALD-coated Na metal. SEM images of (h) the 450 h cycled bare Na metal and (i) the 450 h cycled ALD-coated Na metal. (j) Comparison of the cycling stability of the 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal and the bare Na metal at a current density of 3 mA cm−2. (k) Comparison of the cycling stability of the 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal and the bare Na metal at a current density of 5 mA cm−2. (l) Long cycle life of the 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal at a current density of 3 mA cm−2. Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
• Understanding the roles of the ALD-Al2O3 coatings. 
As is clearly evidenced in the afore-discussed studies, ALD-Al2O3 coatings play some significant roles in enhancing the electrochemical performance of SIBs, in terms of sustainable capacity, coulombic efficiency, cycling lifetime, and suppression of Na dendrite growth.
Besides gaining an understanding from experimental data, researchers also have been getting insightful views from computational simulations. In an earlier study based on first-principles calculations for LIBs, Leung et al.103 pioneered the first estimate of the electron tunneling rate between an electrode and an EC molecule across an insulation oxide layer (e.g., LiAlO2). They found that, on a pristine Li (100) surface, liquid EC and even isolated adsorbed EC molecules underwent decomposition in picosecond time scales, dominantly releasing CO as the product. In contrast, even a 0.7 nm thick oxide layer slowed down electron transfer and showed an evident passivation effect on electrodes. Using in situ TEM, Liu et al. for the first time observed that an Al2O3 coating was transferred into a Li–Al–O system after the first lithiation in LIBs.90 The calculations of Jung and Han104 later predicted that Li3.4Al2O3 is the energetically most favorable composition after a layer of ALD-Al2O3 coating has been lithiated. All these predicted that ALD-Al2O3 coatings experience a phase transfer to a Li–Al–O system during lithiation and the resultant Li–Al–O system has improved ionic diffusion rate over the insulating Al2O3. Using in situ TEM for SIBs, Han et al.84 observed a similar phase transfer of ALD-Al2O3 coatings to a Na–Al–O system after the first sodiation and for the first time noticed that the resultant Na–Al–O coating showed a dynamic mechanical protection like a stretchable glue over SIB anodes. Based on calculations, Jung et al.105 also predicted that the amounts of Na ions present in the Al2O3 coating layer are 1.4 and 0.8 per each Al2O3 for the expanded and contracted Na–Al–O layers, respectively. Furthermore, Jung et al.105 revealed that Na-ion diffusivity in Al2O3 is much higher than that of Li ions, in spite of the larger radius of Na ions. In addition, Jung et al.105 believed that the bulk modulus of NaxAl2O3 is lower than that of Al2O3, indicating an elastic softening of Al2O3 during sodiation. In particular, Jung et al.105 asserted that the mechanism of Na-ion transport in the Al2O3 coating is Na-ion hopping between O-rich trapping sites via a Na–O bonding breaking and making process. Apparently, the theoretical calculations are largely consistent with the experimental studies in both LIBs and SIBs.
It particularly needs to be pointed out that the discovery of the phase transfer from an Al2O3 to a Na–Al–O system is very inspiring for approaching a better understanding, as well described by Han et al.84 This phase transfer should have occurred in all the Al2O3 coatings. This transfer has further ensured a simultaneous contraction and expansion of the Na–Al–O system with any volume changes of SIB anode materials, behaving like a stretchable nanoglue as denoted by Han et al.84 These simultaneous behaviors of the transferred Na–Al–O layer prevent electrochemical pulverization from occurrence or greatly mitigate such pulverization. Thus, the ALD coatings eliminate or dramatically reduce the material loss from the current collector. This apparently is one main role played by the ALD-Al2O3 coatings. On the other hand, the electrical insulating nature of the ALD-Al2O3 coating and the subsequent transferred Na–Al–O system should have effectively prevented or remarkably reduced electrons from contacting organic electrolytes. This decreases electrolyte decomposition for forming a SEI, and should be another major role exerted by the ALD-Al2O3 coatings. To summarize, therefore, there are at least two critical roles played by the ALD-Al2O3 coatings, i.e., (i) a volume-changeable glue-like film with excellent mechanical properties to prevent material loss and (ii) an electrical insulating but ionic conductive layer as an artificial SEI to reduce electrolyte decomposition. The two are essential for securing high capacity, long lifetime, high coulombic efficiency, and suppression of Na dendrite growth.


3.1.2. ALD-TiO2 and ALD-HfO2. 
In addition to Al2O3, TiO2 is another widely utilized coating material in LIBs.41 In SIBs, two anode materials have been investigated with ALD-TiO2 coatings for improved electrochemical performance, i.e., germanium (Ge)106 and MoS2.107,108
Ge is one of alloy-based materials, having a theoretical capacity of 954 and 369 mA h g−1 for LIBs109 and SIBs,110 respectively. Like other alloy-based materials, Ge suffers from a large volume change during sodiation and desodiation processes. Thus, various strategies have been developed for addressing this issue, such as nanostructured Ge, Ge-based nanoalloys, and Ge-based nanocomposites.28,111–113 Using an electrospinning method followed by ALD-TiO2, Wang et al.106 recently reported a unique nanostructured composite of Ge@graphene@TiO2 core–shell nanofibers as an anode material for both LIBs and SIBs. In comparison to Ge@graphene and pure Ge, the Ge@graphene@TiO2 performed the best cycle performance of 1050 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA h g−1 after 100 electrochemical cycles in LIBs and also exhibited the best rate capabilities under different current densities ranging from 100 mA g−1 to 1 A g−1. For SIBs, Ge theoretically enables to alloy with Na as follows:11 Ge + Na+ + e− → NaGe(7)
At a current density of 100 mA g−1, the Ge@graphene@TiO2 could sustain a capacity of 190 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with a high CE of ∼99% in SIBs, much better than those of the Ge@graphene and Ge anodes that showed rapid capacity fading. Furthermore, Wang et al.106 demonstrated that the Ge@graphene@TiO2 have the best rate capabilities in all the tested samples. They believed that the unique structures of the Ge@graphene@TiO2 are essential for the excellent performance. In the first place, graphene could accommodate the volume changes of Ge and release the stress of Ge during alloying. Graphene also acted as a conductive network to improve conductivity. Furthermore, the 5 nm ALD-TiO2 coating greatly promoted the cycle life of the Ge@graphene@TiO2 nanofiber electrode. The TiO2 coating ensured the structural integrity and suppressed SEI formation. Thus, both graphene and the TiO2 coating jointly formed a double-protection layer to overcome the damage due to the volume changes of Ge during the electrochemical processes.
MoS2 is a conversion-based anode material for both LIBs and SIBs, featuring its two-dimensional (2D) open framework structure with a spacious interlayer slab space of ∼6.2 Å. Thus, MoS2 may also allow Na ions with sufficient pathways to diffuse with ease. The overall reaction of MoS2 in SIBs can be described in the following reaction: MoS2 + 4Na+ + 4e− ↔ 2Na2S + Mo(8)
The product of Na2S may be another beneficial factor, for Na2S has better conductivity than Na2O produced from the conversion of metal oxides.114 MoS2 has a theoretical capacity of 678 mA h g−1 in SIBs. However, similar to all the other conversion materials, MoS2 suffers from a large volume change and low conductivity. In dealing with these issues, recently several studies107,108,115 were exposed with different nanostructured MoS2 for SIBs. Commonly, they all further applied ALD coatings for achieving high performance of MoS2. Ryu et al.107 synthesized vine-like MoS2 nanofibers using an electrospinning process, in hope of facilitating the reversible conversion reaction of MoS2. In comparison to the bulk MoS2, the MoS2 nanofibers did perform much better in less than 20 cycles under the same conditions, in terms of sustainable capacities. Thereafter, however, the MoS2 nanofibers showed rapid capacity fading. Ryu et al.107 noticed that the capacity fading of the MoS2 nanofibers was associated with some sulfur deposition onto the Na metal, indicating that there was some sulfur dissolution during the Na2S formation/decomposition process or from intermediate polysulfide species. Aimed at resolving this issue of S dissolution, Ryu et al.107 deposited a 4 nm thick TiO2 on the MoS2 nanofibers via ALD (using tetrakis(dimethylamino)titanium, TDMA-Ti and water as precursors). Consequently, the ALD-coated MoS2 nanofibers demonstrated a much higher capacity retention over the uncoated ones, accounting for 64% vs. ∼30%. The improvement in the cycling stability was believed due to the suppression of the S dissolution by the ALD-TiO2 coating. The latest work by Ren et al.108 reported flower-like MoS2 nanosheets as SIB anodes. They fabricated the 3D flower-like MoS2 nanosheets (see Fig. 6(a and b)) on carbon cloth via a hydrothermal method. Furthermore, Ren et al.108 deposited a layer of TiO2 coating on the MoS2 nanosheet electrode with different thicknesses of 0.5, 1, and 2 nm (see Fig. 6(c)). Electrochemical measurements disclosed that the coated electrodes performed much better than the uncoated electrode, in terms of sustainable capacity and capacity retention. After 150 electrochemical cycles, the uncoated electrode sustained 59% of its second cycle's capacity, while the coated electrodes maintained 75.8% (0.5 nm TiO2), 74.1% (1 nm TiO2), and 64% (2 nm TiO2), respectively (see Fig. 6(d)). Ren et al.108 asserted that the improvement was due to the synergistic effect of the composite materials and the passivation nature of the ALD TiO2 coatings by preventing pulverization of MoS2, protecting MoS2 from corrosion, and suppressing the formation of a SEI. In addition, the coated MoS2 electrodes exhibited better rate capabilities over the uncoated one (see Fig. 6(e)). In exploring the mechanism for the excellent electrochemical performance due to the ALD-TiO2, Ren et al.108 found that, after electrochemical cycling, the uncoated MoS2 completely lost its flower-like structure while all the coated MoS2 nanosheets still retained their flower-like structure very well. This well demonstrates the protective effect of the ALD-TiO2 coatings. In addition, the coated electrodes were not observed with SEI layers while the uncoated one showed very remarkable agglomeration. EIS measurement further revealed that the 0.5 nm TiO2 coated electrode exhibited the best Na-ion kinetics, supporting its best performance (see Fig. 6(d)). Ren et al.108 also disclosed that, at a higher current density of 500 mA g−1, the 1 nm coated electrode performed the best and showed the best Na-ion kinetics as well.
 Fig. 6  Effect of ALD-TiO2 coatings on flower-like MoS2 nanosheets.108 (a) SEM image of 3D MoS2 nanosheets. (b) High-resolution TEM image of MoS2 nanosheets. (c) High-resolution TEM image of MoS2 nanosheets coated by 2 nm ALD-TiO2. (d) Cycling performance at 200 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.01–2.5 V. (e) Rate capability of MoS2 anodes at different current densities of 50, 100, 200, 400, and 800 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.01–2.5 V. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 108. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
In another study by Ahmed et al.,115 the effect of ALD-HfO2 on MoS2 nanosheets was investigated. They deposited the ALD-HfO2 using tetrakis(dimethylamino)hafnium (TDMA-Hf) and water as precursors at 180 °C for 10 cycles (∼1 nm). After 50 electrochemical cycles, the uncoated electrode delivered a capacity of 435 mA h g−1 while the 1 nm HfO2-coated MoS2 electrode sustained a capacity of 636 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1. In terms of capacity retention, it was 91% for the coated electrode vs. 63% for the uncoated one. Ahmed et al.115 verified that the HfO2 coating served as a passivation layer at the anode and electrolyte interface, preventing MoS2 structural degradation and reducing the internal resistance by suppressing SEI formation. In addition, they also confirmed that the amorphous HfO2 allowed facile diffusion of Na ions.

3.2. SIB cathodes
In comparison to the many efforts in using ALD for modifying SIB anodes, as discussed above, there is only one work to date reported on a SIB cathode, Na2/3(Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13)O2 (i.e., MNC).116 MNC is one kind of P2-type Na-based layered oxide cathode materials for SIBs, experiencing capacity fading during the electrochemical process at a charge voltage over 4.3 V. In overcoming this challenge, some strategies have been investigated, such as element doping.117,118 ALD coatings have been widely utilized for various LIB cathodes, such as high voltage cathode LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4,119 Li-rich cathodes,120,121 and LiCoO2,122 and showed very promising improvement on their performance. Using ALD-Al2O3 coatings with 3 different cycles (2, 5, and 10), Kaliyappan et al.116 made the first attempt on the SIB cathode, MNC. Electrochemical results revealed that, at a current density of 1C, the 2-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated cathode (i.e., MNC-2) showed the highest sustainable capacity while the MNC-10 exhibited the highest CE in 100 electrochemical cycles. Thus, Kaliyappan et al.116 postulated that thicker ALD coatings might have inhibited the diffusion of Na ions into the MNC. After 100 cycles, the CE for the pristine MNC, MNC-2, MNC-5, and MNC-10 is 84%, 89%, 94%, and 98%, respectively. Kaliyappan et al.116 believed that the ALD coatings have helped suppress the structural phase transfer of the MNC at voltages above 4.2 V and stabilize SEI formation. This clearly demonstrates that ALD remains a viable and facile route for improving SIB cathodes' performance.
To facilitate readers to secure updated research outcomes of ALD coatings in SIBs, Table 1 summarizes all the studies to date on SIB anodes and cathodes.
Table 1 ALD coatings on various SIB anodes and cathodesa




Coatings
Electrodes
ALD parameters
Electrolytes
Voltage
Roles of coatings
Ref.





a Note: PC – propylene carbonate; DEC – diethyl carbonate; DEGDME – diethylene glycol dimethyl ether.





Al2O3
Na2C8H4O4
200 °C, TMA + H2O, 2–5 nm
1 M Na[N(SO2F)2] in 4:6 EC/DEC
0.1–2 V
Improving mechanical integrity

72



Suppressing SEI formation


Na2C6H2O4
150 °C, TMA + H2O, 1–2 nm
1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DMC or 1:1 FEC/DMC
0.8–2.5 V

83



Sn
150 °C, TMA + H2O, 6–15 nm
1 M NaPF6 in 1:1 EC/DEC
0.02–1.5 V

84



SnO2
90 °C, 8.3 nm
1 M NaPF6 in PC with 5% FEC
0.05–2.5 V

85



MoO3−x
300 °C, TMA + H2O, 0.4–0.8 nm
1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 PC/EC
0.01–3 V

94



Na
75 °C, TMA + plasma O2, 2.8 nm
1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DEC
Symmetric cells

101



Na
85 °C, TMA + H2O, 2.5 nm
1 M NaSO3CF3 in DEGDME
Symmetric cells

102



TiO2
Ge
180 °C, TTIP + H2O, 5 nm
1 M NaClO4 in 6:4 EC/DMC
0.01–2.7 V

106



MoS2
150 °C, TDMA-Ti + H2O, 4 nm
1 M NaClO4 in PC
0.01–3.0 V
Improving mechanical integrity

107



Suppressing SEI


MoS2
75 °C, TiCl4 + H2O, 0.5–2 nm
1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DMC
0.01–2.5 V
Mitigating S dissolution

108



HfO2
MoS2
180 °C, TDMA-Hf + H2O, 1 nm
1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DMC
0.005–3.0 V

115



Al2O3
MNC
85 °C, TMA + H2O, 0.2–1 nm
1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DEC
2.0–4.5 V
Suppressing phase transfer

116



Stabilizing SEI formation




4. Atomic-scale electrode designs by ALD
In addition to atomic-scale modifying SIB electrodes as discussed above, ALD also is very skillful in smartly nanostructuring materials as SIB electrodes. In this regard, a number of previous studies has reported a large variety of novel nanostructures via ALD as anodes and cathodes in LIBs and other battery systems.36,41,43,44,123–125 As a newly emerged area of ALD in SIBs, so far there have only been two studies reported in the literature for nanostructuring SIB anodes.126,127 Despite this, however, the limited studies have shown a great potential for ALD to provide new materials as SIB electrodes. In particular, Liu et al.126 synthesized nanostructured sodium titanates with an ultra-long cycling life and Zhou et al.127 fabricated phase-controlled nanoscale TiO2 for exploring the influence of their orderliness of atomic arrangement toward enhanced Na storage.
Using sodium tert-butoxide (NTB, i.e., NaOtBu or NaOC(CH3)3), TTIP, and water, Liu et al.126 for the first time developed an ALD process for several nanostructured sodium titanates (see Fig. 7(a–d)) in a highly tunable mode. ALD enabled smart control of the ternary compounds with a variety of compositions. The strategy lies in combining two individual cyclic ALD processes for Na–O (using NTB and water) and Ti–O (using TTIP and water) with tunable cycle ratios. Selecting the deposition temperature in the range of 200–275 °C, Liu et al.126 studied the ALD growth by sequentially dosing NTB–water–TTIP–water. The resultant films showed an amorphous phase, denoted as A-NaTiO. Applying an annealing process to the resultant films in air, the researchers then observed some XRD (X-ray diffraction) peaks starting from 400 °C. Moreover, a further increase in the annealing temperature led to much stronger XRD peaks. At 900 °C, Liu et al.126 received Na0.23TiO2 crystals. Their subsequent investigation studied the electrochemical performance of both the amorphous A-NaTiO and the crystalline Na0.23TiO2 deposited on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs) in the voltage window of 0.1–2.5 V. It was found that the A-NaTiO performed much better than the crystalline Na0.23TiO2. The former reached a stabilized capacity of ∼140 mA h g−1 after the first 20 electrochemical cycles while the latter only had a stable capacity of 28 mA h g−1 after the first 50 cycles (see Fig. 7(e)) at a current density of 10 mA g−1. In addition, the amorphous A-NaTiO also showed a higher rate capability over the crystalline Na0.23TiO2 (see Fig. 7(f)). At a high current density of 500 mA g−1, furthermore, the capacity of the amorphous A-NaTiO stabilized at 114 mA h g−1 from the 100th cycle to the 3500th cycle (see Fig. 7(f)). Liu et al.126 believed that the excellent electrochemical performance of the A-NaTiO lies in: (i) uniform thin films over N-CNTs for short Na-ion pathways, (ii) the highly conductive N-CNT substrates for rapid electron transport, and (iii) the amorphous phase of the A-NaTiO for better accommodation of structural distortion. This study demonstrated ALD being a smart and precise material design route for SIBs.
 Fig. 7  ALD fabrication of sodium titanates.126 (a) One ALD cycle consists of a sequential pulse of NaOtBu, H2O, TTIP, and H2O, with a N2 gas purge after each pulse. By repeating the above sequence in a cyclic manner, the uniform and conformal sodium titanate films (blue) are deposited on (b) nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs), (c) a Si wafer, and (d) an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template (surface polished with sandpapers). (e) Cycling performance of A-NaTiO and crystalline NaTiO (c-NaTiO) at a current density of 10 mA g−1, (f) rate capability of A-NaTiO and C-NaTiO at current densities of 20–2000 mA g−1, and (g) a long-cycle life of A-NaTiO at 500 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another study,127 Zhou et al. particularly studied the influence of atomic arrangement of materials on SIB electrochemical performance using ALD, in order to design ideal electrodes. They insisted that understanding the relationship between atomic ordering degree and battery performance is of importance for systematically adjusting and finally extending the design principle to some traditional electrodes for highly effective energy storage.127 To obtain very accurate insight into the effects of atomic arrangement, Zhou et al.127 emphasized two factors that should be met simultaneously. First, the studied electrode should be free of conductive additives and polymeric binders. Second, the morphologic features of materials with different atomic ordering should be identical to avoid extra influence from the surface area, electron/ion diffusion length, and so on. To this end, Zhou et al.127 identified ALD as being the ideal tool, ascribed to its atomic-scale accuracy in material growth, crystallinity-controllability, excellent uniform and conformal deposition, and low deposition temperature. Using ALD, Zhou et al.127 infiltrated a layer of 20 nm thick amorphous TiO2 film (using TiCl4 and water as precursors) over the self-assembled polystyrene spheres (PSs) on Ti substrates at 70 °C. Then, Zhou et al.127 immersed the as-received sample into tetrahydrofuran (THF) for 48 h in ambient air for removing the template PS via dissolution (Fig. 8(a)). Thereafter, post-heating processes were applied at different temperatures for changing the order degree of atomic arrangement. Consequently, Zhou et al.127 achieved anatase TiO2 at 350 °C. An annealing at 250 °C did not totally change the amorphous TiO2 into anatase TiO2, but Raman spectra proved that the atomic arrangement had become more ordered. Zhou et al.127 denoted the sample without annealing as disordered (DO), the sample annealed at 250 °C as partially ordered (PO), and the sample annealed at 350 °C as long-range ordered (LO) (Fig. 8(b–d)). Electrochemical investigation of the three samples revealed that, at a low current density of 50 mA g−1, the capacities of DO and LO remained 171 and 202.9 mA h g−1 after 200 electrochemical cycles (Fig. 8(e)). It is easy to conclude that the stability of LO was comparatively better at the current density of 50 mA g−1. Increasing the current density to 500 mA g−1 (Fig. 8(f)) and 2000 mA g−1 (Fig. 8(g)), however, all the three samples showed excellent stability. A comparison of rate performance (Fig. 8(h)) further confirms the evolution of the capacities with cycling. Based on the results, the researchers concluded that: (i) the disordered TiO2 shows a better performance in both capacities and stability at high rates; (ii) the long-range order TiO2 exhibits excellent long-term stability at low rate; and (iii) the partially ordered TiO2 possesses medium electrochemical performance between LO and DO. Thus, Zhou et al.127 confirmed that the degree of atomic order indeed played a visible role in SIB performance. Based on a further analysis on the cycling behaviors of the three samples, the team concluded that the disordering at the surface is beneficial for the faradaic contribution from surface process. The disordered atomic arrangement at the surface provided a rough surface at atomic level, which could improve the attraction to Na ions. At the same time, some side reactions with the electrolyte may also become easier. They further asserted that the disordering in bulk results in better ion diffusion but worse electron transport. Therefore, following this rule, strategies for further enhancing the electrochemical Na storage of TiO2 should concentrate on the surface reconstruction and electrolyte choice to promote the long-term stability and rate performance.
 Fig. 8  Effects of the orderliness of atomic arrangement on sodium storage.127 (a) Schematic illustration of the ALD fabrication processes. Half of the top layer is peeled off in the scheme to illuminate the inner details. Characterization by (b) temperature dependence of XRD patterns, (c) Raman spectra, and (d) XPS spectra. (e–g) Cycling performance of DO, PO, and LO at different current densities: (e) 50, (f) 500, and (g) 2000 mA g−1. (h) Rate capability of DO, PO, and LO. Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
Apparently, the afore-discussed studies via ALD are very encouraging in smartly designing optimized electrodes. In addition, these studies have demonstrated that ALD is a powerful tool for fine-tuning exceptional electrode materials at the atomic scale. Thus, ALD opens another door in searching for solutions to advanced energy storage devices.
5. Summary and outlooks
The aim of this review was to provide a timely summary of the recent advances in ALD for SIBs, and in so doing to stimulate and inspire scientists and engineers to push the technology even further for addressing the most challenging issues in SIBs. As introduced in the Introduction, modern societies are facing serious energy shortages and environmental issues. The wide-scale implementation of renewable clean energies urgently need cost-effective and long-term reliable EES devices for smart grids. In this context, SIBs as an alternative to LIBs are one of the ideal candidates and hold great promise. Compared to lithium, sodium is much more abundant and cost-effective. Another merit of SIBs lie in their similarity to LIBs in chemistry, though not totally. In this regard, SIB cathodes have made much progress. It appears that more SIB anodes are needed. In spite of the many advances in SIBs, however, there do still exist many issues in SIBs. Commonly, for instance, the interfaces between the electrode and electrolyte remain as one of the most notorious troubles. In addition, we still need to further develop and perfect anodes, cathodes, and electrolytes. All these require more efforts to make SIBs commercially available. In addressing the technical issues with SIBs, recently ALD has emerged as a new thrust and showed very strong potential in surface modifications and electrode designs.
The uniqueness of ALD lies in its atomic-scale accurate material growth, fine-tunability in material crystallinity, flexibility in material morphology, ease in composition controllability, unrivalled uniform and conformal deposition, and low-temperature operation. These characteristics have ensured ALD an irreplaceable position in battery development. It needs to be pointed out that ALD has been widely recognized to date as the only technique enabling a large variety of atomic-scale coatings directly applied on battery electrodes. In particular, more and more studies confirmed that the atomic-scale coatings by ALD are very efficient in tackling interfacial issues in batteries, through inhibiting SEI formation, mitigating electrochemical pulverization, suppressing structural transfer, restraining element dissolution, and preventing alkali metal dendrite growth. Apparently, the many roles played by ALD deserve a more extensive investigation for uncovering the underlying secrets. It is very encouraging that the recent studies have made many advances. For instance, the work by Han et al.84 revealed that ALD coatings could behave like a glue by simultaneously expanding and contracting with electrode materials during sodiation and desodiation, but free of any evident fractures. This finding is particularly useful for scientists to develop new coating materials to tackle battery interfaces. As discussed in the review, so far, there have only been limited studies conducted for ALD coatings and thus there is a large space for further investigation. On the other hand, ALD also is very valuable for designing novel electrode materials for the most optimal conditions in size, morphology, crystallinity, and composition. In this aspect, the work by Zhou et al.127 is very inspiring. For the first time, Zhou et al.127 smartly utilized ALD's characteristics and clearly demonstrated the significance of material crystallinity for SIB anodes. To gain a full understanding on the influence of atomic arrangement, however, further research should be conducted. Given the limited work reported for SIB electrodes by ALD, in addition, we believe that many more materials that are exciting will be delivered in the future studies.
For future studies, we foresee there will be many more advances in ALD for SIBs as well as other battery technologies. In particular, the new advances of ALD in SIBs are expected in the following aspects.
5.1. All-solid-state batteries

5.1.1. Solid-state ceramic electrolytes. 
The use of solid ceramic electrolytes, since the first prototype128 in 1969 in place of traditional liquid organic electrolytes, has long been expected to pave a viable way to address the safety issues of rechargeable secondary batteries.129 The resultant all-solid-state batteries have been widely regarded as the safest batteries, because they are free of leakage, volatilization, or flammability.130–132 Thus, recently there has been increasing interest in all-solid-state SIBs as well as lithium batteries. Very encouragingly, Hayashi et al.133 reported a cubic Na3PS4 crystal with a superionic conductivity of >10−4 S cm−1 at ambient temperature, fabricated by a ball milling method. In a later study, Chu et al.134 further improved the ionic conductivity to >1 mS cm−1 by doping Cl into tetragonal Na3PS4, resulting in t-Na3−xPS4−xCl.
In pursuing solid-state batteries, ALD recently has demonstrated exceptional capabilities in atomic-scale fine-tuning compositions of complex compounds in LIBs for securing the optimized ionic conductivity, and fabricated a variety of solid-state inorganic electrolytes, such as LiAlOx,119,120,135 Li3PO4,136–138 Li2.0SiO2.9,139 LiTaO3,140 LiPON,141–143 LixAlySizO,144 and LixAlyS.100 Using ALD, in the latest work Pearse et al.143 demonstrated a solid-state LIB battery consisting of a LiCoO2 cathode, an ALD-deposited Li2PO2N solid electrolyte, and a Si anode (see Fig. 9). Compared to other traditional thin film methods (e.g., sputtering), ALD particularly features its ability to form high-quality and pinhole-free layers at very small thickness. This makes ALD feasible to deposit much thinner nanoscale films as solid-state electrolytes, as demonstrated by Pearse et al.143 Given the facts that ALD has just emerged in SIBs recently and that there is much dramatically increased enthusiasm in ALD's highly tunable capability in complex compounds, it is expected that there will be new superionic Na-containing solid electrolytes developed for SIBs by ALD.
 Fig. 9  Electrochemical characterization of LiCo2O/Si-based solid-state batteries.143 (a) Cyclic voltammetry at 5 mV s−1 of a 500 nm LiCo2O/90 nm LiPON/80 nm Si battery stack between 2 and 4.4 V. (b) Rate performance of the battery. (c) Cycling stability of a cell at 300 μA cm−2. (d) Charge retention over 12 h of a sample with a 400-cycle (30 nm) LiPON solid electrolyte. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 


5.1.2. Electrode/electrolyte interfacial tailoring. 
In this work, it has been well demonstrated and summarized that, through applying ultrathin surface coatings on electrodes, ALD can tailor the interface between an electrode and liquid electrolyte in SIBs. Along with solid-state electrolytes, there also have been interfacial issues hindering their applications in batteries. The solid and hard character of inorganic materials prevents wet and soft interfaces in solid-state batteries, and there is an interfacial phase formed at the interface.145 The properties of the interfacial phase are highly dependent on the nature of the electrode and the solid-state electrolyte.145 Along with the development of solid-state electrolytes with their ionic conductivities comparable to or higher than those of their liquid counterparts, it is equally important to enhance the interfacial properties of solid-state batteries for ultimately accomplishing high-rate capability of solid-sate batteries. As illustrated in Fig. 9(c), only 50% of the theoretical capacity of the LiCoO2 (69 μA cm−2 μm−1) could be realized, partially due to the interfacial issues. In LIBs, a variety of materials has been studied and interposed as buffer layers at the interfaces between solid electrolytes and electrodes, such as Li4Ti5O12, LiNbO3, LiTaO3.146,147 The buffer layers are required to be electronically insulating but ionically conducting.147 These buffer layers have been used to reduce the interfacial resistance and therefore boost the performance of solid-state batteries. It needs to be pointed out that the buffer layers may not be the same for an anode and a cathode. A buffer layer should be resistive to oxidization for cathodes or resistive to reduction for anodes.146 Traditionally, approaches for interposing buffer layers typically include ball milling, PVD, spinning coating, and solution-based methods.146,148 In a recent study by Goodenough et al.,149 they demonstrated that an interlayer interposed between the Na metal and the ceramic Na1+3xZr2(P1−xSixO4)3 (x ∼ 2/3) solid electrolyte could dramatically lower the interfacial resistance and successfully suppress unwanted dendrite formation.
In comparison to the conventional techniques, ALD apparently shows many superior benefits, such as atomic-scale controllability, excellent uniform and conformal coverage over planar and high-aspect-ratio substrates, low temperature, and highly tunable crystallinity and composition. In particular, ALD exclusively distinguishes its capability enabling ultrathin coatings on either active materials or prefabricated electrodes.41 Recently, Woo et al.150,151 studied the effects of the ALD Al2O3 coatings on solid-state Li batteries consisting of LiCoO2/Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4/77.5Li2S–22.5P2S5/Li, in which the Al2O3 coatings of 2–10 ALD cycles (0.2–1.0 nm) were deposited on the LiCoO2 powders. The ALD-coated LiCoO2 powders then were treated at 400 °C for 14 hours. Woo et al.150,151 disclosed that the Al2O3 coatings of 2 and 4 ALD cycles dramatically improved the electrochemical performance of the LiCoO2 cathodes while thicker Al2O3 coatings (i.e., 6 and 10 ALD cycles) worsened the LiCoO2 performance in the solid-state Li batteries. In particular, the solid-state Li batteries with 2 and 4 ALD cycles could maintain 90% of their initial discharge capacities after the 25th cycle whereas the battery with uncoated LiCoO2 could remain only 75% of the initial discharge capacity. Based on EIS measurements and interfacial analyses, Woo et al. confirmed150,151 that the Al2O3 coatings of 2 and 4 ALD cycles improved the interfacial stability. They also believed that, in comparison, the electronically insulating properties of thick ALD Al2O3 coatings (i.e., 6 and 10 ALD cycles) underlay the worsened LiCoO2 performance. These indicate that ALD will provide promising solutions in tuning interfacial properties of all-solid-state SIBs as well as other solid-state batteries.

5.2. Flexible batteries
Flexible electronics have emerged and promise many potential applications,152 such as healthcare, automotive, human–machine interfaces, mobile communications, and computing platforms. In flexible electronics, flexible batteries take a critical role and require flexible components (i.e., anodes, cathodes, electrolytes, and separators).153–155 In addition to flexibility, flexible batteries are lightweight, portable, and exceptional in power and energy density. There are many different types of flexible batteries, including alkaline batteries, all-polymer batteries, polymer lithium–metal batteries, and LIBs.155 In the latest studies, many advances also have been made in flexible Li–S batteries156,157 and SIBs.158–160 In this regard, ALD has demonstrated great potential for fabricating novel self-supporting flexible electrodes for LIBs. The recent work by Pearse et al.143 demonstrated a flexible solid-state battery via ALD (see Fig. 10). The main electrode materials for flexible batteries to date are primarily based on carbon materials such as CNTs and graphene. Based on graphene nanosheets (GNS), ALD has delivered many different types of flexible nanocomposites such as GNS–SnO2 (ref. 91 and 161) and GNS–TiO2.162,163 Based on CNTs, there are CNT–SnO2,164 CNT–TiO2,165 CNT–Fe2O3,166 CNT–Li4Ti5O12,55 CNT–GaSx,125 CNT–Cu2S,124 and CNT–V2O5 (ref. 167) fabricated by ALD. Benefiting from its feasibility at low growth temperature, ALD also enables flexible electrodes using nanocellulose168 and tobacco mosaic virus (TMV).169 In addition, ALD features its ability in accurately controlling material size and crystallinity for optimized electrochemical performance.55,91,161–165,170 All these offer many more promising candidate electrodes for flexible SIBs.
 Fig. 10  Proof-of-concept flexible solid-state battery demonstrated by ALD on a polymer substrate.143 (a) Photographs of a sample, both unflexed and flexed, with an array of solid state cells. (b) Schematic of the battery chemistry utilized. (c) Cyclic voltammetry of a LiV2O5/LiPON/Si couple. (d) Cycling stability of the battery stack shown in (b) on a polyimide substrate. The sample was removed after the 11th cycle and flexed 10 times around a 1 cm bending radius rod before being replaced and cycled further (inset: the typical charge/discharge profiles). Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
5.3. 3D microbatteries
Microbatteries are essential for a large number of autonomous devices in a large range of applications, such as implantable medical devices, remote sensors, miniature transmitters, “smart” cards, backup power for PC memory, and micro/nano-electromechanical-system (M/NEMS).171–173 2D thin film lithium-ion microbatteries (TF-LIMBs) are to date the most advanced technology, providing 2–3 times higher areal capacity over their forerunners. With the continuous scaling-down of semiconductors, 2D TF-LIMBs are limited by their footprint area and facing challenges to offer higher capacities over 0.5 mA h cm−2.174 The best commercial 2D TF-LIMBs can only offer a reversible capacity of 0.133 mA h cm−2.175 In this context, 3D microbatteries have been proposed, by taking advantage of the third dimension, height, to increase the amount of electrode material within a given footprint area and thus increase the areal capacity targeted at 10 mA h cm−2.174 In the past decade, there has been a huge amount of research effort in developing 3D-LIMBs, but most of the studies are only about nanostructured electrodes in liquid electrolytes, i.e. half cells. One of major hurdles is lacking a technique to fulfill conformal multilayered coatings over high-aspect-ratio (HAR) structures required for 3D microbatteries. A 3D solid-state microbattery requires an in situ infiltration of a solid-state electrolyte on electrodes, which should have high ionic conductivity and low electrical conductivity. On the other hand, the capacities of LIMB electrode materials developed so far are limited. This badly impedes LIMBs from further improving their areal capacities in order to achieve a capacity of nearly 10 mA h cm−2. The highest capacity of the reported 3D-LIMBs to the best is less than 3 mA h cm−2.171,176 The third hurdle lies in high ionically conductive solid-state electrolytes via a thin film technique capable of conformal coatings. ALD has demonstrated its distinguished ability for coating conformal films over 3D structures with a HAR up to 1000:1.177 Also considering its other exceptional merits, ALD has stood out as a featured strategy for 3D microbatteries.71 On this aspect, a team recently has achieved a great progress with ALD and made a prototype of 3D microbatteries,178 though a liquid electrolyte was still used in the battery. It is expected that future studies will ultimately accomplish high-energy 3D all-solid-state microbatteries using ALD.
5.4. Advances in fundamental understanding
As discussed above, ALD can dramatically improve batteries' performance by material-nanostructuring, size-control, crystallinity-optimization, interfacial tailoring, and new material search. To gain a better understanding on the roles of ALD-resultant surface coatings and battery components, it is necessary to employ advanced contemporary characterization and simulation tools. In situ TEM is one of powerful instruments and, as demonstrated in this review, its utilization has clearly revealed very valuable information on ALD surface coatings by time-resolved images during the sodiation and desodiation processes. In addition, the significant contributions of in situ TEM also have been witnessed in many other studies for advanced LIBs and SIBs.90,179–183 At the same time, there have been an increasing enthusiasm in using in situ synchrotron- and neutron-based techniques for probing electrochemical mechanisms of various batteries.184–190 These techniques can also provide researchers with time-resolved data of structurally phase transformation and morphological changes. Besides these experimental methods, computational simulation techniques also are very insightful in explaining electrochemical phenomena and searching for new solutions of battery technologies.191–194 The combination of these different techniques will definitely provide us insightful data, greatly advance our understanding on many fundamental phenomena, and therefore help design high-performance SIBs and other battery systems.
In short, since around 2010, there have been more and more studies in exploring the ALD's capabilities for advanced battery technologies. On one hand, ALD has exhibited tremendous potential for new materials as battery components including anodes, cathodes, and electrolytes. On the other hand, ALD has demonstrated an unrivaled power in atomic-scale tailoring interfaces between an electrode and electrolyte for accomplishing high performance. Ascribed to its unique characteristics, furthermore, ALD has great competence for many more battery prototypes (e.g., all-solid-state batteries, flexible batteries, and 3D microbatteries), awaiting future exploration. Owing to its atomic-preciseness and highly tunable growth, in addition, ALD also has proved itself an ideal tool in providing optimal materials to facilitate fundamental investigation for gaining insightful understanding and therefore directing new battery designs. All these together render ALD an important tool for new battery technologies, but its capabilities need to be further explored in future studies.
Acknowledgements
X. M. acknowledges partial support from the Center for Advanced Surface Engineering, under the National Science Foundation Grant No. IIA-1457888 and the Arkansas EPSCoR Program, ASSET III. X. M. also appreciates the financial research support from University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA.
References
I. Dincer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 157–175 CrossRef .
M. G. Salameh, Appl. Energy, 2003, 75, 33–42 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D.-Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jian, W. Luo and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11566–11569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, F. Shen, C. Bommier, H. Zhu, X. Ji and L. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 231–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, D. H. Lee and Y. S. Meng, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2013, 6, 1330001 CrossRef .
V. L. Chevrier and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1011–A1014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, Y. Matsuura, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, W. Murata and S. Kuze, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 21, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, J.-J. Braconnier, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3, 165–169 CrossRef .
S. Guo, J. Yi, Y. Sun and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2978–3006 CAS .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A803–A811 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. Wang, F. Ding, X. Chen, E. Nasybulin, Y. Zhang and J.-G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 CAS .
H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 CAS .
R. J. Clément, P. G. Bruce and C. P. Grey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2589–A2604 CrossRef .
M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, G. Singh and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 81–102 CAS .
L. Huang, J. Cheng, X. Li and B. Wang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 6295–6307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3431–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fang, Y. Huang, W. Zhang, J. Han, Z. Deng, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501727 CrossRef .
H. Kim, H. Kim, Z. Ding, M. H. Lee, K. Lim, G. Yoon and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600943 CrossRef .
E. Irisarri, A. Ponrouch and M. R. Palacin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2476–A2482 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu and J. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2393–A2405 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Luo, W. Qiu, P. Liu and Y. Tong, Carbon, 2016, 98, 162–178 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, K.-H. Ha, S. M. Oh and K. T. Lee, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 11980–11992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vignarooban, R. Kushagra, A. Elango, P. Badami, B. E. Mellander, X. Xu, T. G. Tucker, C. Nam and A. M. Kannan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 2829–2846 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Suntola and J. Antson, Method for producing compound thin films, US Pat., 4,058,430,  1977 .
H. Kim, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.--Process., Meas., Phenom., 2003, 21, 2231–2261 CrossRef CAS .
L. Niinistö, M. Nieminen, J. Päiväsaari, J. Niinistö, M. Putkonen and M. Nieminen, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1443–1452 CrossRef .
L. E. Aygun, F. B. Oruc, F. B. Atar and A. K. Okyay, IEEE Photonics J., 2013, 5, 2200707 CrossRef .
B. J. O'Neill, D. H. K. Jackson, J. Lee, C. Canlas, P. C. Stair, C. L. Marshall, J. W. Elam, T. F. Kuech, J. A. Dumesic and G. W. Huber, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1804–1825 CrossRef .
S. A. Skoog, J. W. Elam and R. J. Narayan, Int. Mater. Rev., 2013, 58, 113–129 CrossRef CAS .
M. Knez, K. Nielsch and L. Niinistö, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3425–3438 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Mayer, J. W. Elam, S. M. George, P. G. Kotula and R. S. Goeke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2883–2885 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Kilbury, K. S. Barrett, X. W. Fu, J. Yin, D. S. Dinair, C. J. Gump, A. W. Weimer and D. M. King, Powder Technol., 2012, 221, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
P. Alejandro, L. P. Juan, C. D. Juliano and E. Juan, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 345709 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, Z. Luo, C. Li and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7469–7484 RSC .
X. Meng, X.-Q. Yang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3589–3615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, X. Li, S. K. Karuturi, D. W. Fam, H. Fan, S. Shrestha, L. H. Wong and A. I. Tok, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 064001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, X. Wang, D. Geng, C. Ozgit-Akgun, N. Schneider and J. W. Elam, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 133–154 RSC .
X. Meng and J. W. Elam, ECS Trans., 2015, 69, 39–57 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 020501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Lim, A. Rahtu and R. G. Gordon, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 749–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hämäläinen, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 786–801 CrossRef .
R. L. Puurunen, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 121301 CrossRef .
V. Miikkulainen, M. Leskelä, M. Ritala and R. L. Puurunen, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 021301 CrossRef .
N. P. Dasgupta, X. Meng, J. W. Elam and A. B. F. Martinson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 341–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ylilammi and T. Ranta-aho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 1278–1284 CrossRef CAS .
M. Putkonen, A. Szeghalmi, E. Pippel and M. Knez, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14461–14465 RSC .
C. Platzer-Björkman, T. Törndahl, D. Abou-Ras, J. Malmström, J. Kessler and L. Stolt, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044506 CrossRef .
E. Thimsen, S. C. Riha, S. V. Baryshev, A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3188–3196 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Meng, J. Liu, X. F. Li, M. N. Banis, J. L. Yang, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7285–7288 RSC .

          C. Bugot, C. Broussillou, A. Sorba, L. Parissi, N. Schneider, D. Lincot and F. Donsanti, Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), IEEE, 42nd edn,  2015, pp. 1–6,  DOI:10.1109/PVSC.2015.7356413 .
R. M. Costescu, D. G. Cahill, F. H. Fabreguette, Z. A. Sechrist and S. M. George, Science, 2004, 303, 989–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, H. B. R. Lee and W. J. Maeng, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2563–2580 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Liu, X. L. Li, S. K. Karuturi, A. I. Y. Tok and H. J. Fan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1522–1528 RSC .
C. Detavernier, J. Dendooven, S. P. Sree, K. F. Ludwig and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5242–5253 RSC .
K. Bernal Ramos, M. J. Saly and Y. J. Chabal, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 3271–3281 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leskelä and M. Ritala, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 409, 138–146 CrossRef .
T. Suntola, Mater. Sci. Rep., 1989, 4, 261–312 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. N. Parsons, J. W. Elam, S. M. George, S. Haukka, H. Jeon, W. M. M. Kessels, M. Leskelä, P. Poodt, M. Ritala and S. M. Rossnagel, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31, 050818 Search PubMed .
R. L. Puurunen, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2014, 20, 332–344 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mikko and L. Markku, Nanotechnology, 1999, 10, 19 CrossRef .
J. C. Badot, S. Ribes, E. B. Yousfi, V. Vivier, J. P. Pereira-Ramos, N. Baffier and D. Lincot, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 485–488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Snyder, S. A. Trebukhova, B. Ravdel, M. C. Wheeler, J. DiCarlo, C. P. Tripp and W. J. DeSisto, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim, T. H. Han, J. Kim, H. Gwon, H. S. Moon, S. W. Kang, S. O. Kim and K. Kang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1085–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. M. Knoops, M. E. Donders, L. Baggetto, M. C. M. van de Sanden, P. H. L. Notten and W. M. M. Kessels, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 333–344 CAS .
L. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, Z. Zhou, M. Armand and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 962–965 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. T. Lee, D. C. Lee, A. Magasinski, W. I. Cho and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1308–1315 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan, X. Li, Z. Bai, X. Song, D. Xiong, M. Zhao, D. Li and S. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 338, 34–48 CrossRef CAS .

          G. G. Amatucci and J. M. Tarascon, Rechargeable battery cell having surface-treated lithiated intercalation positive electrode, US Pat., 5,705,291,  1998 .
L. J. Fu, H. Liu, C. Li, Y. P. Wu, E. Rahm, R. Holze and H. Q. Wu, Solid State Sci., 2006, 8, 113–128 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Myung, K. Amine and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7074–7095 RSC .
J. Q. Zhao and Y. Wang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 1049–1058 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, A. C. Dillon, M. D. Groner, S. M. George and S. H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A75–A81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, L. A. Riley, S. H. Kang, A. C. Dillon, M. D. Groner, S. M. George and S. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2172–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-Gonzalez and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribiere, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, J. Wang, X. Fan, Y. Zhu, F. Han, L. Suo and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 537–545 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Han, Y. Liu, Z. Jia, Y. C. Chen, J. Y. Wan, N. Weadock, K. J. Gaskell, T. Li and L. B. Hu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 139–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Fang, M. Ge, J. Rong, C. Shen, A. Zhang, H. A. Enaya and C. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Lotfabad, P. Kalisvaart, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, M. Kupsta, B. Farbod and D. Mitlin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2504–2516 CAS .
D. Wang, J. Yang, J. Liu, X. Li, R. Li, M. Cai, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2306–2312 CAS .
L. Xiao, Y. Cao, J. Xiao, W. Wang, L. Kovarik, Z. Nie and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3321–3323 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Ding and D. Mitlin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1657–1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. S. Hudak, D. L. Huber, S. J. Limmer, J. P. Sullivan and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4188–4194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Li, X. B. Meng, J. Liu, D. S. Geng, Y. Zhang, M. N. Banis, Y. L. Li, J. L. Yang, R. Y. Li, X. L. Sun, M. Cai and M. W. Verbrugge, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1647–1654 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11444–11502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Lu, C. Ma, J. Alvarado, T. Kidera, N. Dimov, Y. S. Meng and S. Okada, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Zhou, X. Wang, C. Wang, L. Liang, F. Grote, M. Wu, Y. Mi and Y. Lei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8768–8771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis and L. F. Nazar, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 168–177 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Kozen, C.-F. Lin, A. J. Pearse, M. A. Schroeder, X. Han, L. Hu, S.-B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and M. Noked, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5884–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kazyak, K. N. Wood and N. P. Dasgupta, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6457–6462 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, X. Meng and J. W. Elam, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 858–863 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, C.-F. Lin, O. Zhao, M. Noked, Y. Zhang, G. W. Rubloff and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601526 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. V. Goncharova, A. Lushington, Q. Sun, H. Yadegari, B. Wang, W. Xiao, R. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1606663,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201606663 .
K. Leung, Y. Qi, K. R. Zavadil, Y. S. Jung, A. C. Dillon, A. S. Cavanagh, S. H. Lee and S. M. George, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14741–14754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Jung and Y.-K. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2681–2685 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Jung, H.-J. Kim, J. W. Choi and Y.-K. Han, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6559–6563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Fan, D. Gong, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang and B. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1104–1111 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Ryu, J. W. Jung, K. Park, S. J. Kim and I. D. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10975–10981 RSC .
W. Ren, W. Zhou, H. Zhang and C. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 487–495 CAS .
L. Ji, Z. Lin, M. Alcoutlabi and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2682–2699 CAS .
L. Baggetto, J. K. Keum, J. F. Browning and G. M. Veith, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 41–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yue, Y. Yu, S. Sun, X. He, B. Chen, W. Lin, B. Xu, M. Zheng, S. Wu, J. Li, J. Kang and L. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1386–1392 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Abel, Y.-M. Lin, T. de Souza, C.-Y. Chou, A. Gupta, J. B. Goodenough, G. S. Hwang, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18885–18890 CAS .
P. R. Abel, M. G. Fields, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15860–15867 CAS .
Y. K. Startsev, A. A. Pronkin, I. A. Sokolov and I. V. Murin, Glass Phys. Chem., 2011, 37, 263–282 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ahmed, D. H. Anjum, M. N. Hedhili and H. N. Alshareef, Small, 2015, 11, 4341–4350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kaliyappan, J. Liu, A. Lushington, R. Li and X. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2537–2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Z.-G. Wu, T. Zhang, Y.-P. Deng, J.-T. Li, X.-D. Guo, B.-B. Xu and B.-H. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bucher, S. Hartung, J. B. Franklin, A. M. Wise, L. Y. Lim, H.-Y. Chen, J. N. Weker, M. F. Toney and M. Srinivasan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2041–2051 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, X. B. Meng, J. W. Elam, S. Q. Hao, C. Wolverton, C. Kim and J. Cabana, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3128–3134 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bloom, L. Trahey, A. Abouimrane, I. Belharouak, X. F. Zhang, Q. L. Wu, W. Q. Lu, D. P. Abraham, M. Bettge, J. W. Elam, X. B. Meng, A. K. Burrell, C. M. Ban, R. Tenent, J. Nanda and N. Dudney, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Meng, J. W. Elam and I. Belharouak, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 268, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, J. Liu, X. B. Meng, Y. J. Tang, M.
N. Banis, J. L. Yang, Y. H. Hu, R. Y. Li, M. Cai and X. L. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 57–69 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, D. J. Comstock, T. T. Fister and J. W. Elam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10963–10972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, S. C. Riha, J. A. Libera, Q. Wu, H.-H. Wang, A. B. F. Martinson and J. W. Elam, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Meng, K. He, D. Su, X. F. Zhang, C. J. Sun, Y. Ren, H. H. Wang, W. Weng, L. Trahey, C. P. Canlas and J. W. Elam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5435–5442 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. N. Banis, B. Xiao, Q. Sun, A. Lushington, R. Li, J. Guo, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24281–24288 CAS .
M. Zhou, Y. Xu, J. Xiang, C. Wang, L. Liang, L. Wen, Y. Fang, Y. Mi and Y. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600448 CrossRef .
C. C. Liang and P. Bro, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 1322–1323 CrossRef .
J. Li, C. Ma, M. Chi, C. Liang and N. J. Dudney, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401408 CrossRef .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama, K. Kawamoto and A. Mitsui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 856 CrossRef PubMed .
I.-H. Chu, C. S. Kompella, H. Nguyen, Z. Zhu, S. Hy, Z. Deng, Y. S. Meng and S. P. Ong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Comstock and J. W. Elam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1677–1683 CAS .
J. Hamalainen, J. Holopainen, F. Munnik, T. Hatanpaa, M. Heikkila, M. Ritala and M. Leskela, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A259–A263 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Huang and J. Luo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7786–7798 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Liu, Q. Sun, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 504007 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hamalainen, F. Munnik, T. Hatanpaa, J. Holopainen, M. Ritala and M. Leskela, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 01A106 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, M. N. Banis, X. F. Li, A. Lushington, M. Cai, R. Y. Li, T. K. Sham and X. L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20260–20267 CAS .
A. C. Kozen, A. J. Pearse, C.-F. Lin, M. Noked and G. W. Rubloff, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5324–5331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nisula, Y. Shindo, H. Koga and M. Karppinen, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6987–6993 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Pearse, T. E. Schmitt, E. J. Fuller, F. El-Gabaly, C.-F. Lin, K. Gerasopoulos, A. C. Kozen, A. A. Talin, G. Rubloff and K. E. Gregorczyk, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3740–3753 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Perng, J. Cho, S. Y. Sun, D. Membreno, N. Cirigliano, B. Dunn and J. P. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9566–9573 CAS .
T. Kobayashi, A. Yamada and R. Kanno, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5045–5050 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, N. Ohta, L. Zhang, K. Fukuda, I. Sakaguchi, R. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7538–7541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tatsumisago, M. Nagao and A. Hayashi, Journal of Asian Ceramic Societies, 2013, 1, 17–25 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, Y. Li, S. Xin and J. B. Goodenough, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 52–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Woo, J. J. Travis, S. M. George and S.-H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A344–A349 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Woo, J. E. Trevey, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. S. Choi, S. C. Kim, S. M. George, K. H. Oh and S. H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1120–A1124 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nathan, A. Ahnood, M. T. Cole, S. Lee, Y. Suzuki, P. Hiralal, F. Bonaccorso, T. Hasan, L. Garcia-Gancedo, A. Dyadyusha, S. Haque, P. Andrew, S. Hofmann, J. Moultrie, D. Chu, A. J. Flewitt, A. C. Ferrari, M. J. Kelly, J. Robertson, G. A. J. Amaratunga and W. I. Milne, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1486–1517 CrossRef .
S.-Y. Lee, K.-H. Choi, W.-S. Choi, Y. H. Kwon, H.-R. Jung, H.-C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414–2423 CAS .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
Y. Hu and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10712–10738 CAS .
J. Jin, Z. Wen, G. Ma, Y. Lu, Y. Cui, M. Wu, X. Liang and X. Wu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2558–2560 RSC .
J. Song, Z. Yu, T. Xu, S. Chen, H. Sohn, M. Regula and D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8623–8627 CAS .
X. Xiong, W. Luo, X. Hu, C. Chen, L. Qie, D. Hou and Y. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Zhu, Z. Hu, Q. Zhao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5892–5896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. Hu, Small, 2015, 11, 3822–3829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, D. Geng, J. Liu, M. N. Banis, Y. Zhang, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18330–18337 CAS .
X. B. Meng, D. S. Geng, J. A. Liu, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 165602 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, X. Li, W. Li, X. Meng, Y. Yu and X. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 57, 43–47 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, Y. Zhong, Y. Sun, M. N. Banis, R. Li and X. Sun, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1133–1144 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Meng, M. N. Banis, D. S. Geng, X. F. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Y. Li, H. Abou-Rachid and X. L. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 132–140 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, M. Ionescu, M. Banis, Y. Zhong, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. Sun, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 1207–1218 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chen, H. L. Zhu, Y. C. Chen, Y. Y. Shang, A. Y. Cao, L. B. Hu and G. W. Rubloff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7948–7955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Korhonen, P. Hiekkataipale, J. Malm, M. Karppinen, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1967–1974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gerasopoulos, X. L. Chen, J. Culver, C. S. Wang and R. Ghodssi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7349–7351 RSC .
X. Meng, Y. Zhang, S. Sun, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12321–12330 RSC .
D. Golodnitsky, V. Yufit, M. Nathan, I. Shechtman, T. Ripenbein, E. Strauss, S. Menkin and E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 281–287 CrossRef CAS .
K. Edström, D. Brandell, T. Gustafsson and L. Nyholm, Interface, 2011, 20, 41 Search PubMed .
M. Nathan, Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol., 2010, 11, 404–410 CAS .
T. S. Arthur, D. J. Bates, N. Cirigliano, D. C. Johnson, P. Malati, J. M. Mosby, E. Perre, M. T. Rawls, A. L. Prieto and B. Dunn, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 523–531 CrossRef CAS .
D. Golodnitsky, M. Nathan, V. Yufit, E. Strauss, K. Freedman, L. Burstein, A. Gladkich and E. Peled, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 2811–2819 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nathan, D. Golodnitsky, V. Yufit, E. Strauss, T. Ripenbein, I. Shechtman, S. Menkin and E. Peled, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2005, 14, 879–885 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Elam, D. Routkevitch, P. P. Mardilovich and S. M. George, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3507–3517 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, E. I. Gillette, X. Chen, A. J. Pearse, A. C. Kozen, M. A. Schroeder, K. E. Gregorczyk, S. B. Lee and G. W. Rubloff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1031–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Huang, L. Zhong, C. M. Wang, J. P. Sullivan, W. Xu, L. Q. Zhang, S. X. Mao, N. S. Hudak, X. H. Liu, A. Subramanian, H. Fan, L. Qi, A. Kushima and J. Li, Science, 2010, 330, 1515–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Wang, X. H. Liu, S. X. Mao and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5897–5902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gu, A. Kushima, Y. Shao, J.-G. Zhang, J. Liu, N. D. Browning, J. Li and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5203–5211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, F. Lin, Y. Zhu, X. Yu, J. Li, R. Lin, D. Nordlund, T.-C. Weng, R. M. Richards, X.-Q. Yang, M. M. Doeff, E. A. Stach, Y. Mo, H. L. Xin and D. Su, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5755–5763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ge, Y. Lu, P. Ercius, J. Rong, X. Fang, M. Mecklenburg and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 261–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. M. Kiss, D. H. Larsson, F. Yang and P. Pianetta, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 117, 29–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. Strobl, I. Manke, N. Kardjilov, A. Hilger, M. Dawson and J. Banhart, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 243001 CrossRef .
P. Guttmann, C. Bittencourt, S. Rehbein, P. Umek, X. Ke, G. Van Tendeloo, C. P. Ewels and G. Schneider, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Bertsch and D. B. Hunter, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1809–1842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Masquelier, Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top., 2012, 213, 213–224 CrossRef CAS .
I. Antonella, P. Alexis, A. Laurent, A. Giuliana and S. Lorenzo, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 144004 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, L. Zhao, H. Pan, X. Lu, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand, Y. Ikuhara, L. Chen and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1870 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Islam and C. A. J. Fisher, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 185–204 RSC .
Y. Wang, W. D. Richards, S. P. Ong, L. J. Miara, J. C. Kim, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Urban, D.-H. Seo and G. Ceder, npj Computational Materials, 2016, 2, 16002 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ceder, M. Doyle, P. Arora and Y. Fuentes, MRS Bull., 2011, 27, 619–623 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Xiangbo Meng	Dr Xiangbo (Henry) Meng is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at University of Arkansas (Fayetteville, AR). His research focuses on developing novel nanoscale materials for energy applications such as rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, and catalysis. Dr Meng was a postdoctoral research fellow in the Energy Systems Division at Argonne National Laboratory (2012–2016) and in the Chemistry Division at Brookhaven National Laboratory (2011–2012). He earned two PhD degrees in Mechanical & Materials Engineering and Chemical & Biochemical Engineering from the University of Western Ontario (2005–2011). He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow and an awardee of several prestigious honors.
ML2(g) + H2O(g) → MO + 2HL(g)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of a general ALD process of metal oxides (MO) using ML2 (M = metal and L = ligand) and water as precursors.	 
|-OH + ML2(g) → |-OML + HL(g)	(2A)
|-OML + H2O(g) → |-OM–OH + HL(g)	(2B)

 	Fig. 2  Effects of ALD-Al2O3 coatings on the organic anode of Na2C8H4O4.72 (a) The first discharge–charge profiles of the untreated anode, the ALD20 anode, and the ALD50 anode in the voltage window of 0.1–2.0 V, corresponding to the CE of 50.3%, 62.5%, and 60.6%, respectively (inset: the sodiation–desodiation mechanism of Na2C8H4O4). (b) The cycling performance of the untreated anode, the ALD20 anode, and the ALD50 anode under a current density of 0.1C in the voltage window of 0.01–2.0 V. Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 
Na2C6H2O4 + 2Na+ + 2e− ↔ Na4C6H2O4	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Effects of ALD-Al2O3 coatings on the organic anode of Na2C6H2O4.83 (a) Illustration of the Na2C6H2O4 nanorod electrode preparation process. (b) The charge–discharge profiles of the Na2C6H2O4 nanorod electrode in the electrolyte of NaClO4 dissolved in FEC/DMC, at the current density of 50 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.8 and 2.5 V versus Na/Na+. (c) The charge–discharge profiles of the Na2C6H2O4 nanorod electrode coated with a 2 nm ALD-Al2O3 layer in the electrolyte of NaClO4 dissolved in FEC/DMC, at the current density of 50 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.8 and 2.5 V versus Na/Na+. Reproduced by permission of Elsevier. Copyright (2015) Elsevier Ltd.	 
Sn + 3.75Na+ + 3.75e− ↔ Na3.75S	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Roles of the ALD-Al2O3 coating in improving the cycling performance of Sn anodes in SIBs:84 (a) the hybrid materials of Sn nanoparticles on CNFs, (b) during sodiation and desodiation, a bare Sn nanoparticle debonds from the CNFs, (c) during sodiation and desodiation, the ALD-coated Sn nanoparticle remains on the CNFs. SEM images of the Sn anodes (d) without and (e) with ALD-Al2O3 coating after 40 sodiation–desodiation cycles. (f) In situ TEM observation on the first three sodiation and desodiation cycles of ALD-Al2O3 coated Sn nanoparticles. (g) FEM modeling of sodiation of Sn nanoparticles (top) without and (bottom) with an ALD coating. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 
SnO2 + 4Na+ + 4e− ↔ Sn + 2Na2O	(5)
Sn + 3.75Na+ + 3.75e− ↔ Na3.75S	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Effect of ALD-Al2O3 coatings on Na metal anodes.101,102 (a) Illustration of repeated depositing/stripping cycles resulting in the formation of Na dendritic structures due to the unstable SEI in the carbonate electrolyte system. (b) Illustration of repeated depositing/stripping cycles for an ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal anode, showing stable cycling performance in the same carbonate electrolyte system. (c) Cyclic depositing/stripping process of symmetric cells with bare and ALD-coated Na anodes at a constant current density of 0.25 mA cm−2. Voltage profiles at (d) the first two cycles and (e) the 899th and 900th cycles. EIS spectra of symmetric cells of (f) bare Na metal and (g) ALD-coated Na metal. SEM images of (h) the 450 h cycled bare Na metal and (i) the 450 h cycled ALD-coated Na metal. (j) Comparison of the cycling stability of the 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal and the bare Na metal at a current density of 3 mA cm−2. (k) Comparison of the cycling stability of the 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal and the bare Na metal at a current density of 5 mA cm−2. (l) Long cycle life of the 25-cycle ALD-Al2O3 coated Na metal at a current density of 3 mA cm−2. Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 
Ge + Na+ + e− → NaGe	(7)
MoS2 + 4Na+ + 4e− ↔ 2Na2S + Mo	(8)

 	Fig. 6  Effect of ALD-TiO2 coatings on flower-like MoS2 nanosheets.108 (a) SEM image of 3D MoS2 nanosheets. (b) High-resolution TEM image of MoS2 nanosheets. (c) High-resolution TEM image of MoS2 nanosheets coated by 2 nm ALD-TiO2. (d) Cycling performance at 200 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.01–2.5 V. (e) Rate capability of MoS2 anodes at different current densities of 50, 100, 200, 400, and 800 mA g−1 in the voltage window of 0.01–2.5 V. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 108. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 


Al2O3	Na2C8H4O4	200 °C, TMA + H2O, 2–5 nm	1 M Na[N(SO2F)2] in 4:6 EC/DEC	0.1–2 V	Improving mechanical integrity	
72

Suppressing SEI formation
Na2C6H2O4	150 °C, TMA + H2O, 1–2 nm	1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DMC or 1:1 FEC/DMC	0.8–2.5 V	
83

Sn	150 °C, TMA + H2O, 6–15 nm	1 M NaPF6 in 1:1 EC/DEC	0.02–1.5 V	
84

SnO2	90 °C, 8.3 nm	1 M NaPF6 in PC with 5% FEC	0.05–2.5 V	
85

MoO3−x	300 °C, TMA + H2O, 0.4–0.8 nm	1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 PC/EC	0.01–3 V	
94

Na	75 °C, TMA + plasma O2, 2.8 nm	1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DEC	Symmetric cells	
101

Na	85 °C, TMA + H2O, 2.5 nm	1 M NaSO3CF3 in DEGDME	Symmetric cells	
102

TiO2	Ge	180 °C, TTIP + H2O, 5 nm	1 M NaClO4 in 6:4 EC/DMC	0.01–2.7 V	
106

MoS2	150 °C, TDMA-Ti + H2O, 4 nm	1 M NaClO4 in PC	0.01–3.0 V	Improving mechanical integrity	
107

Suppressing SEI
MoS2	75 °C, TiCl4 + H2O, 0.5–2 nm	1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DMC	0.01–2.5 V	Mitigating S dissolution	
108

HfO2	MoS2	180 °C, TDMA-Hf + H2O, 1 nm	1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DMC	0.005–3.0 V	
115

Al2O3	MNC	85 °C, TMA + H2O, 0.2–1 nm	1 M NaClO4 in 1:1 EC/DEC	2.0–4.5 V	Suppressing phase transfer	
116

Stabilizing SEI formation

 	Fig. 7  ALD fabrication of sodium titanates.126 (a) One ALD cycle consists of a sequential pulse of NaOtBu, H2O, TTIP, and H2O, with a N2 gas purge after each pulse. By repeating the above sequence in a cyclic manner, the uniform and conformal sodium titanate films (blue) are deposited on (b) nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs), (c) a Si wafer, and (d) an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template (surface polished with sandpapers). (e) Cycling performance of A-NaTiO and crystalline NaTiO (c-NaTiO) at a current density of 10 mA g−1, (f) rate capability of A-NaTiO and C-NaTiO at current densities of 20–2000 mA g−1, and (g) a long-cycle life of A-NaTiO at 500 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effects of the orderliness of atomic arrangement on sodium storage.127 (a) Schematic illustration of the ALD fabrication processes. Half of the top layer is peeled off in the scheme to illuminate the inner details. Characterization by (b) temperature dependence of XRD patterns, (c) Raman spectra, and (d) XPS spectra. (e–g) Cycling performance of DO, PO, and LO at different current densities: (e) 50, (f) 500, and (g) 2000 mA g−1. (h) Rate capability of DO, PO, and LO. Reproduced by permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Electrochemical characterization of LiCo2O/Si-based solid-state batteries.143 (a) Cyclic voltammetry at 5 mV s−1 of a 500 nm LiCo2O/90 nm LiPON/80 nm Si battery stack between 2 and 4.4 V. (b) Rate performance of the battery. (c) Cycling stability of a cell at 300 μA cm−2. (d) Charge retention over 12 h of a sample with a 400-cycle (30 nm) LiPON solid electrolyte. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Proof-of-concept flexible solid-state battery demonstrated by ALD on a polymer substrate.143 (a) Photographs of a sample, both unflexed and flexed, with an array of solid state cells. (b) Schematic of the battery chemistry utilized. (c) Cyclic voltammetry of a LiV2O5/LiPON/Si couple. (d) Cycling stability of the battery stack shown in (b) on a polyimide substrate. The sample was removed after the 11th cycle and flexed 10 times around a 1 cm bending radius rod before being replaced and cycled further (inset: the typical charge/discharge profiles). Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
