Nature-inspired salt resistant bimodal porous solar evaporator for efficient and stable water desalination   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00945K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00945K
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558-1567Nature-inspired salt resistant bimodal porous solar evaporator for efficient and stable water desalination†

        
          
            Shuaiming 
            He‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Chaoji 
            Chen‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yudi 
            Kuang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruiyu 
            Mi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Pei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Weiqing 
            Kong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wentao 
            Gan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hua 
            Xie
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Emily 
            Hitz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Jia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xi 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Amy 
            Gong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianming 
            Liao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Li
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyong Jason 
            Ren
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Bao 
            Yang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Siddhartha 
            Das
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Liangbing 
            Hu
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA. E-mail: binghu@umd.edu
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA
cDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
dState Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China
Received 
      23rd March 2019
    , Accepted 15th April 2019First published on 15th April 2019AbstractThe shortage of clean water is one of the predominant causes of human mortality, especially in remote rural areas. Currently, solar steam generation is being adopted as an efficient, sustainable, and low-cost means for water desalination to produce clean water. However, preventing salt accumulation during operation while maintaining long-term stability and a rapid evaporation rate is a critical challenge that needs to be urgently addressed to further facilitate the practical applications of solar desalination, especially for desalinating high-salinity brine. Here, we demonstrate that a bimodal porous structure (e.g., balsa wood) can serve as an efficient and stable solar vapor generator for high-salinity brine desalination. Taking advantage of the inherent bimodal porous and interconnected microstructures of balsa wood, rapid capillary transport through the microchannels and efficient transport between the micro- and macrochannels through ray cells and pits in the bimodal evaporator can lead to quick replenishment of surface vaporized brine to ensure fast and continuous clean water vapor generation. The bimodal evaporator demonstrates a rapid evaporation rate of 6.4 kg m−2 h−1 under 6 suns irradiation and outstanding long-term stability for desalination of high salinity brine. The large vessel channels play a critical role in preventing salt from accumulating, as evidenced by controlled experiments with large vessels either blocked in the bimodal evaporator (balsa evaporator) or absent in a unimodal evaporator (e.g., cedar wood) whose porous structure occurs naturally without large vessels. Both approaches demonstrate severe salt accumulation during solar desalination due to a lack of sufficient brine replenishment from the bulk solution beneath. With its unique bimodal porous and interconnected microstructure configuration obtained by a facile and scalable fabrication method, our bimodal porous structured evaporator device represents an efficient, stable, low-cost, and environmentally friendly solar vapor generator for high-salinity brine desalination.

Broader context
Water shortage is one of the biggest concerns in the development of our modern human society. Multiple desalination technologies, like reverse osmosis and multiple-effect distillation, have been developed in the past decades to increase the supply of clean water. However, many countries and regions with an arid climate still cannot afford to use these new technologies for generating clean water due to the limitations of high energy consumption and the requirement of sophisticated infrastructure. Solar desalination holds great promise for generating vast amounts of clean water by using abundant solar energy and seawater resources. However, large amounts of salt can accumulate on the surface of various solar desalination devices during long-term continuous desalination operation, which will gradually deteriorate device performance. Here, we demonstrate that a nature-inspired salt-resistant bimodal evaporator with a 3D interconnected and porous microstructure can be used for long-term stable and efficient high salinity brine desalination with a rapid evaporation rate of 6.4 kg m−2 h−1 under 6 suns irradiation. In addition, this environmentally-friendly, low-cost, and salt-rejection approach holds great potential for practical applications, especially in remote rural areas.

Introduction
The scarcity of safe drinking water is one of the most formidable global challenges of human society.1–4 Water desalination is regarded as one of the most cost-effective ways to increase potable water supplies.5–9 In recent years, tremendous advancements have been achieved in the development of water desalination industries.10–12 For example, reverse osmosis (RO), as one of the most widely adopted water desalination technologies, has a recovery rate of about 50% for water desalination while consumes as little as 2 kW h m−3.13–15 However, this technology is still unavailable in most underdeveloped countries due to the requirement of sophisticated infrastructure, large installations, and high energy consumption.16–18 Furthermore, as the feedwater salinity becomes higher, the operating pressure, scaling/fouling probability, and the fuel consumption of the RO system increase significantly.4,14,19 In communities that rely on seawater for potable water supply, the desalination industry generates large amounts of high-salinity brine.20 However, severe environmental and ecological impacts can be created when these high-salinity brines are discharged directly into receiving water bodies without effective treatment.21
Currently, solar-driven water desalination is becoming one of the most promising techniques to augment clean water supplies due to the abundance of solar energy and seawater as well as its negligible carbon footprint, especially for remote areas that lack electricity or infrastructure.22–28 To promote the further development of direct solar desalination, great efforts have been made to improve the light-to-heat conversion efficiency, extend the device lifetime, and lower the cost of solar desalination.29–39 However, for the majority of previous solar desalination devices, while clean water vapor is generated, large amounts of salt may accumulate on the surface even in a low-salinity environment. These deposited salts can severely affect the adsorption efficiency of incident sunlight and even clog the water path.40–42 As a result of the clog, the photothermal conversion efficiency and water vapor generation rate of the device is significantly decreased. Thus, salt accumulation in the solar desalination device is a substantial challenge in developing high-efficiency and stable solar evaporator.
To address this issue, innovative strategies have been proposed, some of which utilize hydrophobic interfaces to impede salt accumulation in a relatively low-salinity environment.43,44 Despite the effectiveness in preventing salt from accumulating, the evaporation efficiency remains relatively low due to the unsatisfactory thermal insulation of the thin film structure. Besides the noted performance limitations, the material cost is also relatively high, which is undesirable for practical applications. In addition, most of the previous research was performed using low-salinity brine, while high-salinity brine (>10%) was not considered.22–24,30 In general, it is more challenging to continuously and efficiently desalinate high-salinity brine. For water desalination plants, it requires more energy to desalinate high-salinity brine.4 For traditional solar evaporators, it is easier for high-salinity brines to reach saturation and form salt crystals on the surface of the evaporator in comparison with low-salinity brine, causing the evaporation efficiency to decrease with increasing water salinity.45,46
Here we demonstrate a salt-accumulation-free solar evaporator for continuous, stable, and high-efficiency high-salinity water desalination by using a surface-carbonized bimodal porous wood membrane. As a proof-of-concept, we select balsa wood for its unique bimodal porous and 3D interconnected microstructure where larger vessel channels ranging in diameter from 180 to 390 μm coexist alongside much more narrow tracheid channels, which range in diameters from 18 to 39 μm. Through a surface carbonization process, we use balsa wood as the starting material to demonstrate a salt-rejecting solar desalination device. In the naturally occurring bimodal porous structure of the wood, fast water diffusion and convection as well as capillary pumping of the microchannels in the device lead to quick replenishment of surface vaporized brine to ensure a continuous and fast water vapor generation. The salinity of the brine in the narrow tracheids is increased due to rapid water evaporation during solar desalination. Even though the tracheids are too narrow to allow for sufficient brine replenishment, the high concentration brine gradually diffuses to the surrounding large vessel channels through the pits, nanopores and ray parenchyma cells. Nearby vessel channels help to avoid the formation of salt crystals on the surface of the evaporator due to their increased capacity for salt exchange with the bulk brine (Fig. 1a). A rapid evaporation rate of 6.4 kg m−2 h−1 with outstanding stability and durability can be obtained under 6 suns irradiation. In a control experiment where the large vessel channels of balsa are blocked by polydimethylsiloxane (denoted as the PDMS/balsa evaporator) while the tracheids are completely open for brine transport, severe salt accumulation can be observed on the surface of PDMS/balsa device, confirming the importance of the bimodal porous microstructure for long-term, efficient, and accumulation-resistant solar desalination (Fig. 1b). With unique natural 3D interconnected bimodal porous microstructure configuration obtained by easily scalable fabrication method, our bimodal porous balsa wood device supplies an efficient, stable, low-cost and environmentally friendly solar vapor generator for high-salinity brine desalination.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustrating the microstructures and working principle of the bimodal porous balsa wood as an efficient, stable, scalable, environmentally friendly and low-cost evaporator for high salinity brine desalination. The wide vessel channels can ensure sufficient brine replenishment at the top surface during clean water vapor generation and effective transverse brine diffusion through pits and ray cells (from narrow tracheids to large vessel channels, as shown by the white curved arrows) can also help avoid salt accumulation on the surface. (b) Schematic shows the fouling mechanism of a control sample (PDMS/balsa), where severe deterioration of the device performance is attributed to the lack of sufficient brine replenishment caused by the PDMS blocking the wide vessel channels. 

Fig. 2a shows the digital images of natural balsa wood (left) and surface carbonized bimodal evaporator (right, salt-resistant balsa evaporator) before use. The top layer of the natural wood takes on an intense black color after surface carbonization treatment. The surface carbonized layer has a thickness of about 2.5 mm and can effectively absorb incident light and transform solar energy into thermal energy for brine desalination. The natural balsa wood layer underneath can rapidly pump brine upward to the surface carbonization layer by capillary action, which ensures continuous brine pumping upward and all the microchannels of bimodal wood are filled with artificial brine water during solar desalination. Analysis of the FT-IR spectra of the bimodal wood indicates that the wide peak of natural wood ranges from 300–3500 cm−1 almost disappears after carbonization treatment, which is attributed to the formation of CO groups in the carbonization layer (Fig. S1, ESI†).47 X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the two layers shows that the crystallinity of the carbonized wood at the surface is significantly greater than that of natural wood (Fig. S2, ESI†). The unique microstructure of the bimodal evaporator is illustrated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Note that the 3D interconnected porous structure of natural balsa wood is well-preserved after carbonization, which ensures fast brine and vapor transport during solar desalination (Fig. 2c–g). Fig. 2c–g and Fig. S3–S7 (ESI†) show that balsa wood cells are mainly made up of comparatively narrow tracheids (18–39 μm) and large vessel channels (180–390 μm), which are well-aligned along the tree growth direction and function as pathways for brine transport during solar desalination. Specifically, compared with other types of wood (like basswood, pine, etc.), the vessel channels of balsa wood are much larger in diameter (∼180–390 μm vs. 30–65 μm), which ensures sufficient brine supply upward during desalination (Fig. 2c–e and h).48,49 Helping to facilitating even further the excellent transport of water and salt, numerous micro-sized pits (∼1–2 μm) and nanopores can be found on the cell walls of the microchannels within the bimodal evaporator (Fig. 2g and Fig. S3, ESI†). Numerous aligned parenchyma cells are arranged radially outward through the device and periodically penetrate these microchannels (Fig. 2d, f and Fig. S4–S6, ESI†). These pits, nanopores and ray parenchyma cells closely connect the adjacent microchannels and enable lateral brine transport, diffusion and convection during solar desalination. All these unique microstructural characteristics are highly critical for the bimodal evaporator to avoid salt accumulation on the top surface during solar desalination. We further investigated the hydrophilicity of the natural wood layer and the bimodal wood surface (i.e., the surface carbonized layer) under working (wet) conditions. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†), both the natural wood layer and surface carbonized layer are hydrophilic under working conditions, thus fast brine replenishment can be guaranteed to avoid salt crystal formation during operation.
 Fig. 2  Structural characterizations of the bimodal evaporator. (a and b) Digital images of natural balsa and the salt-resistant bimodal evaporator. (c) 3D SEM image shows numerous well-aligned vessel channels and tracheids in the bimodal evaporator. (d) Top view SEM image shows numerous wide vessel channels and comparatively narrow tracheids along the tree growth direction. These smaller microchannels ensure sufficient brine supply during desalination. (e) Magnified SEM image of d shows one wide vessel channel is surrounded by numerous tracheids. Lateral brine diffusion and convection due to salt concentration gradients that occur during desalination (as shown by the green arrows) can be accomplished through the pits, ray parenchyma cells and nanopores between the vessel channels and neighboring tracheids. (f) SEM image shows ray cells periodically penetrate the microchannels, these ray cells help transverse brine transport. (g) Magnified SEM image of one wide vessel channel, numerous pits are present on the cell walls, which can also help lateral brine transport. (h) Size distribution of the vessel channels and tracheids. 
The absorbances of natural balsa and the bimodal evaporator were measured with an ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrometer equipped with an integrating sphere. The hierarchically porous microstructure of the bimodal evaporator is favorable for elongating the optical path to promote the absorption of incident light and reducing reflection. The surface carbonized bimodal evaporator has a broadband absorbance of approximately 97% weighted by standard solar spectrum (AM 1.5G) (Fig. 3a). The absorbance of the bimodal evaporator is much higher than that of the natural wood, especially in the visible range. The high absorbance of the bimodal evaporator can help transform solar energy into thermal energy efficiently. The surface maximum temperature of the evaporator was further measured by a thermometer. We further tested the temperature changes on the top surface of the evaporator and in the bulk brine solution beneath the evaporator upon light exposure. Our results indicate that the stabilized temperature on the top surface of the evaporator and in the brine solution increase with the light intensity. Note that the temperature in the brine solution is much lower than the top surface of our bimodal evaporator, which is due to the excellent light absorption and thermal insulation properties of the device (Fig. 3b). We further measured the thermal conductivity of the bimodal evaporator. Results show that the natural balsa wood exhibited a very low thermal conductivity of 0.22 W m−1 K−1, which can help decrease thermal loss during the solar desalination (Fig. S9, ESI†). The excellent thermal localization effect is mainly attributed to the low thermal conductivity of the bimodal evaporator, which can function as thermal barrier in the process of long-term solar desalination.
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorption spectra of natural balsa and the bimodal wood. (b) The stabilized temperature on the top surface of the bimodal evaporator and in the underlying bulk brine solution at different incident illumination intensities. (c) The stable evaporation rates of the bimodal porous wood evaporator under various light illumination intensities. (d) The stable evaporation efficiencies of the bimodal wood evaporator under various light illumination intensities from 1–6 suns. (e) The evaporation rates and corresponding evaporation efficiencies as a function of irradiation time of the bimodal wood evaporator under 6 sun illumination intensity. (f) The salinity changes of the brine samples before and after solar desalination. 
Note that it is difficult to continuously desalinate high concentration brine by conventional desalination techniques like reverse osmosis, due to the need for high osmotic pressure, which requires high energy consumption. Beside the energy demands, salt accumulation on the surface also tends to occur easily and thus negatively affect the long-term stability of the conventional solar desalination device performance. Here, a high concentration artificial brine (15 wt%) was used to demonstrate the long-term solar desalination capability of our bimodal evaporator. Fig. 3c and d illustrate the calculated stable evaporation rates (E.R.) and energy conversion efficiencies of the bimodal porous evaporator under various illumination intensities. Results show that the E. R. increases from ∼0.80 kg m−2 h−1 at 1 kW m−2 to ∼6.4 kg m−2 h−1 at 6 kW m−2 (Fig. 3c). And the evaporation efficiency increases from ∼57% (1 kW m−2) to around 78% (6 kW m−2) with the increase of optical concentration (Fig. 3d). The E. R. values enhanced rapidly in the initial 30 min, then slowed to a stable state after 1 h under 6 suns illumination, and the fast evaporation rate remains nearly unchanged during 7 hours of continuous operation (Fig. 3e). The long-term stable and efficient desalination performance of the device is mainly attributed to its inherent 3D interconnected porous and bimodal microstructures. To further examine the solar desalination performance of the bimodal evaporator, we measured the concentration of Na+ of the clean water collected from the condensation chamber by conductometric titration. Results reveal that the salinities of the brine samples were significantly decreased by about four orders of magnitude after desalination (Fig. 3f), resulting in a salinity much lower than the maximum allowable values defined by the Word Health Organization (1‰) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (0.5‰) for drinking water quality standards.50 Furthermore, the bimodal evaporator is light enough and can float on the surface of brine during desalination operation, which can help protect agricultural land and natural ecosystem from being utilized for energy-water nexus production (Fig. S10 and S11, ESI†).
As shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†), the evaporation rate of the unimodal cedar decreased significantly as the salt concentration increased (based on 7 h continuous desalination), while the evaporation rate of our bimodal evaporator reduced very slightly with the increase of salt concentration. We further carried out solar desalination testing under low light intensity. As shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†), the evaporation efficiency decreases slightly under low light intensity (∼53.4% at 0.5 kW m−2). The effect of salt concentration on the evaporation rates of the bimodal evaporator and the control sample (unimodal cedar) under 6 suns illumination were also investigated.
To study the device in more realistic conditions, we further investigated the desalination performance of the bimodal evaporator using actual seawater samples collected from the Chesapeake Bay in Maryland. The salinity of the samples was ∼1.1 wt%. As shown in Fig. S14(a) (ESI†), the evaporation rate of our bimodal evaporator increases during the first 30 minutes of operation, and then remains stable in the following hours. Furthermore, the evaporation rate and energy-conversion efficiency of our device increases with the solar flux, in which the evaporation rate increases from 0.38 kg m−2 h−1 at 0.5 kW m−2 to 6.63 kg m−2 h−1 at 6 kW m−2, and the energy-conversion efficiency increases from 54.6% to 79.5% (Fig. S14(b), ESI†). Moreover, our bimodal evaporator also shows excellent stable desalination performance over 100 h of continuous operation (Fig. S14(c), ESI†). We also tested the concentration changes of Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Mg2+ in the seawater samples before and after distillation using inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Fig. S15 (ESI†) shows that the concentrations of Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Mg2+ reduce significantly after the desalination process.
To testify the critical roles of the large vessel channels for the long-term stable solar desalination, two control samples including the bimodal evaporator with the large vessel channels blocked by PDMS while the tracheids are left completely open (PDMS/balsa evaporator) and bilayer cedar wood with a comparatively uniform pore size distribution (the unimodal evaporator) are adopted for solar desalination test. After the infiltration of PDMS, the wide vessel channels are blocked (marked with red color circle), while the tracheids (∼18–39 μm) are completely open for brine transport during desalination (Fig. 4a–c and Fig. S16, ESI†). Note that the light absorption of PDMS/balsa wood is almost the same with that of bimodal wood without PDMS infiltration. Another control sample is surface-carbonized cedar wood (Fig. 4d). Unlike the unique bimodal porous structure of balsa wood, we did not observe any wide microchannels within the device (Fig. 4e and Fig. S17, ESI†). Statistical analyses results indicate that the pore size of the unimodal evaporator (cedar) is comparatively uniform (∼21–33 μm) (Fig. 4f). We can also observe a similar network of numerous pits and ray cells that connect and penetrate, respectively, the microchannels in the unimodal evaporator (Fig. S17, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Digital image of control sample: PDMS/balsa evaporator. (b and c) Side view and top view SEM images of the PDMS/balsa evaporator show the wide vessel channels are completely blocked by PDMS (marked with red dashed line), while the narrow tracheids are wide open and for brine transport during solar desalination. (d) Digital image of the other control sample: unimodal evaporator (cedar evaporator). (e) Top view SEM image of the unimodal evaporator (cedar), a uniform pore size distribution can be observed. (f) The pore size distribution of the microchannels in the unimodal evaporator (cedar). (g) The evolution of the evaporation rate of the bimodal evaporator and the unimodal evaporators (PDMS/balsa and cedar evaporators). (h) Solar endurance measurement results of the bimodal evaporator, it was exposed to 2 suns for 20 days, with 7 h per day, the insets show no salt on the surface of the bimodal evaporator, while severe salt accumulation can be observed on the surface of the unimodal evaporator. (i) The evolution of absorbance of the bimodal evaporator and PDMS/balsa evaporators. (j) Top view SEM image of the bimodal evaporator after cycling for 20 d. (k) Top view SEM image of PDMS/balsa evaporator after 45 min of solar irradiation (2 suns). 
The evolution of the E. R. for the bimodal evaporator and the unimodal evaporators (PDMS/balsa and cedar evaporator) over time under 6 suns were depicted in Fig. 4g. Results reveal that the E. R. of bimodal evaporator is almost unchanged (around 6.4 kg m−2 h−1) under 6 suns illumination intensities for 7 h. We do not observe any salt accumulation on the surface of the bimodal evaporator under 6 suns illumination for 7 h (Fig. S18, ESI†). On the contrary, after 7 h continuous solar illumination, the E. R. value of the unimodal evaporator and PDMS/balsa evaporator slows down over time and decreased by about 18% and 29%, respectively, which is due to the severe accumulation of salt on the surface of the two control samples (Fig. 4g and Fig. S19, S20, ESI†). For the PDMS/balsa evaporator, once the brine in areas close to trachieds reaches its saturated point during operation, whereas the replenishment of brine from the wide vessel channels is restricted, salt crystals can begin to form and severe salt agglomeration can occur. For the unimodal evaporator (cedar evaporator), the microchannels are too narrow to provide sufficient brine replenishments to prevent the formation of salt crystals. The severe salt accumulations on the surface of the unimodal evaporators (PDMS/balsa and cedar evaporator) are primarily caused by the lack of sufficient brine replenishments for the loss of large amounts of brine by evaporation. In contrast, the wide vessel channels in the bimodal evaporator can provide sufficient brine replenishments to effectively avoid the problem of salt accumulation. The numerous large vessel channels in the bimodal evaporator play an important role in avoiding the formation of salt crystal during solar desalination. Since the diameter of the vessel channels is wide enough (∼180–390 μm) to continuously pump brine upward to replenish the loss of brine on the top surface, salt crystal would not form in areas close to the vessel channels. In our bimodal evaporator, pits, ray cells, nanopores and hydrophilic cellulose nanofibers can help lateral brine transport from wide vessel channels to narrow tracheids to replenish the loss of brine in the top surface areas close to tracheids timely during solar desalination.
The cycling performance of the bimodal wood is also demonstrated. The E. R. value of the bimodal evaporator was almost unchanged (∼1.7 kg m−1 h−1) when it was exposed to 2 suns for 20 days, with 7 h per day (Fig. 4h). We further analyzed the light absorbance changes of the bimodal evaporator and PDMS/balsa, we can find that the light absorbance decreased a lot compared with that of the bimodal evaporator after 7 h consecutive work (Fig. 4i). The accumulated salts severely hinder the conversion of solar energy into heat energy, thus deteriorate the device performance. We did not observe any salt crystal formation on the surface and in the wood channels of the bimodal evaporator by SEM analyses (Fig. 4j and Fig. S21, S22, ESI†). In contrast, SEM analyses reveals that numerous salt crystals can be observed on the surface of the PDMS/balsa during solar desalination (Fig. 4k and Fig. S23–S26, ESI†).
To further evaluate the stability of our bimodal evaporator, we immersed the device in actual seawater (collected from the Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, with an average salinity of ∼1.1 wt%) for 60 days and tested its evaporation rate under one sun illumination. Our results show that the evaporation rate remains almost unchanged after 60 days (Fig. S27, ESI†). The anti-fouling capability of our bimodal evaporator during practical applications was further investigated by introducing a fatty acid (caprylic acid) as a model contaminant into the 15% brine before desalination. Fig. S28 (ESI†) shows that the evaporation rate of our bimodal evaporator remains stable even after introducing the caprylic acid. This can be explained by the concentration gradient of the compound between the large-sized vessel channels and the narrow tracheids during desalination, which can drive the fast diffusion or transport of caprylic acid from the narrow tracheids to the large-sized vessel channels and avoid the accumulation of caprylic acid on the top surface of the device. Thus, our evaporator shows strong crystalline salt and fatty acid anti-fouling capabilities during long-term testing, which is of great importance for practical applications. Furthermore, we carried out total organic carbon (TOC) and total inorganic carbon (TIC) analyses for the bulk brine solution beneath the evaporator after the device ran for 1 and 5 days (7 hours per day, 1 sun illumination), as well as the condensed water vapor. The bimodal evaporator (15 mm × 15 mm × 4.5 mm) was left floating on the bulk brine solution (500 mL) after working for 7 h each day. As shown in Fig. S29 (ESI†), the TOC and TIC values of the water samples are very low, which indicates that our system did not introduce contaminants during operation.
The bimodal porous balsa wood also exhibits excellent simultaneous salt-rejection and clean water generation capability under long-term solar illumination. As shown in Fig. 5a–f, 1 gram of solid NaCl was added directly on the top surface of the wood evaporator. Interestingly, all the added salt crystals gradually dissolve back to the bulk brine solution after 7 h of light illumination (the illumination intensity is 2 suns). The excellent salt-rejecting capability of the bimodal evaporator is mainly due to the following reasons. Firstly, the added solid salt can quickly dissolve and form brine solution with very high salinity at the top surface of the wood evaporator. Thus, the brine on the surface is close to its saturation point due to the added salts while the bulk brine is still unsaturated. Considering the higher the salinity of the brine, brine with a higher salinity is denser, so the more concentrated brine on the top surface gradually sinks to the comparatively low salinity brine of the bulk underneath under the effects of gravity. The salts on the wood surface can also dissolve back into the bulk brine by diffusion and convection due to the large concentration differences, which can be further illustrated by a mathematical calculation (please see the scaling calculations in the ESI† for details). Secondly, the diffusion and convection caused by the concentration differences between the top surface and the bulk brines underneath also contributes to the salt-rejecting capability of the device. The diffusion and convection traces of the concentrated brines from the bimodal evaporator to the brine underneath were vividly captured in Fig. 5g. This salt-rejecting experiment demonstrates that the bimodal evaporator can dissolve additional deposited salts and generate clean water vapors simultaneously under long-term continuous sunlight illumination.
 Fig. 5  (a–f) Time-elapse snapshots show salt rejection from the surface of bimodal evaporator under 2 suns illumination. Enough salts (NaCl) were put on the top surface to examine its salt rejection ability. The bimodal porous balsa wood is floating on the brine solutions. This experiment demonstrates the bimodal porous balsa wood can effectively reject extra salts while producing clean water vapor. (g) A digital image (the bottom view of the bimodal evaporator) reveals that the visualized salt rejection process of the device. The salinity of the brine on the surface of the device becomes higher due to gradually dissolution of the added solid salt, higher salinity brine can diffuse or sinks to the lower salinity brine underneath. 
The bimodal pore structure plays a key role in achieving both high evaporation efficiency and salt-rejecting capability. The influence of pore structure on evaporation efficiency and salt-rejecting capability need to be carefully balanced. In our bimodal porous device, on the one hand, pores, especially large pores (i.e., vessels) show very limited negative influence on the light absorption effect owning to the channel structure where light can be trapped via multiple reflection inside the channels. On the other hand, the heat localization capability of the bimodal evaporator is not sacrificed even large vessels exist owing to the low thermal conductivity of the wood matrix. These two structural benefits along with the salt-rejecting capability imparted by the bimodal porous structure position our bimodal evaporator as a promising candidate for practical desalination from seawater and other high-concentration brines. In addition, our bimodal evaporator features a potentially low cost due to both the abundant, renewable, and cost-effective wood raw material and facile surface carbonization processing (see Table S1, ESI†).51
Conclusion
In conclusion, we demonstrate that the bimodal evaporator (e.g. balsa evaporator) with a 3D interconnected porous microstructure can effectively address the problem of salt accumulation during long-term solar desalination. The unique bimodal porous microstructure plays a key role in the long-term yet efficient brine desalination. Specifically, rapid capillary pumping of the large vessel channels as well as water diffusion and convection between the microchannels in the hydrophilic wood evaporator lead to quick replenishment of surface vaporized brine to avoid salt accumulation thus ensuring fast and continuous clean water vapor generation. A rapid evaporation rate of 6.4 kg m−2 h−1 was obtained under 6 suns irradiation with outstanding stability and durability in a high-salinity (15 wt%) brine. Moreover, this wood evaporator can effectively reject surplus salt while concurrently preserving rapid and stable evaporation rates. In contrast, for the unimodal evaporator (e.g., cedar) with a comparatively uniform pore size distribution, numerous salt crystals gradually accumulate on its surface under the same solar illumination, which severely deteriorate the device performance. Benefiting from the earth-abundant raw material, easily scalable preparation method, high evaporation efficiency, and salt rejecting capability, our bimodal evaporator holds great promise for sustainable and scalable clean water production from a variety of water sources, especially those with a high salinity.
Methods
Sample preparation
First, a wood log was cut perpendicular to the wood growth direction to obtain the wood blocks (15 × 15 × 4.5 mm3). The wood blocks were subsequently pressed on a hot plate at 500 °C to form a thin, uniform carbonized layer. The thickness of the carbonized layer is controlled by the carbonization time. Typically, a thin, surface carbonized layer of ∼2 mm can be formed by a carbonization time of 25 s. After carbonization, 2000 grit sandpaper was used to carefully polish the top surface carbonized layer, and then the residual carbon was removed by compressed air.
Characterization
A scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi SU-70) was adopted to analyze the morphologies of the samples. A Thermo Nicolet NEXUS 670 FT-IR was used to measure the FT-IR spectrum. XRD patterns were obtained using a Rigaku Ultima III equipped with a curved detector (40 kV, 30 mA, Cu Kα radiation, λ = 1.5406 Å). The salt concentration in the seawater before and after desalination was tested by ICP-MS (Agilent, 7700X). The TOC of the water samples was determined via the Hach® TOC Method 10129.
Solar desalination experiments
The solar desalination experiments were carried out with a standard solar simulator (Newport Oriel 69907). The solar intensity on the surface of wood was tested using a power meter (Newport, 1916-R). The bimodal porous wood sample was placed in a glass chamber filled with artificial brine (15 wt% NaCl simulated brine). The mass of the water loss during evaporation is accurately measured by a calibrated electronic balance (Cotizen CX301) with an accuracy of 0.1 mg. The temperature of the top surface of the partially carbonized wood was tested using a thermocouple (Omega HH74K). The photothermal conversion efficiency (η) of the bimodal evaporator can be calculated by the following equation:52,53η = ṁhLV/Coptqiin which ṁ represents the evaporation rates under illumination calculated by subtracting the evaporation rates under dark field from the measured evaporation rates under illumination, hLV is the total enthalpy of the liquid–vapor phase transition, including the sensible heat, Copt stands for the optical concentration, and qi is the nominal solar irradiation. The evaporation rates of the bimodal evaporator under dark fields are shown in Fig. S30 (ESI†). The room temperature was ∼17 °C and the relative humidity was ∼55%.
Optical measurements
The transmittance (T) and reflectance (R) spectrum was measured with a UV-vis Spectrometer Lambda 35 from 250–2500 nm (PerkinElmer, USA) equipped with an integrating sphere. The absorbance spectra (A) was calculated based on the transmittance (T) and reflectance (R) obtained (A = 1 − T − R).
Thermal conductivity measurement
The thermal conductivities were measured by a steady-state method. The sample is sandwiched between two Al blocks. A 465 nm blue laser beam is used as the power input on the upper Al blocks. The thermal conductivity of the Al blocks is measured to be around 206 W m−1 K−1, which is high enough to distribute the heat flux uniformly. The lower Al block is put on a metal heat sink. Thermal interface material is applied to all contacting surfaces to minimize the influence of contact thermal resistance. A FLIR Merlin MID IR camera is used to capture the temperature distribution of the Al blocks and sample. The resolution of the IR camera is 320 × 256 pixels. When the heat flux flows through the sample, there is a temperature difference which is directly related with the thermal conductivity of the sample based on Fourier's law. A finite element model based on ANSYS which takes thermal radiation, natural convection and conduction into account is used to process the temperature data and obtain the thermal conductivities.
Author contributions
L. Hu, S. He, and C. Chen conceived the idea. S. He carried out the brine desalination experiments. Y. Kuang created the 3D illustrations. Y. Liu, R. Mi provided characterization via SEM. Y. Pei and B. Yang measured the thermal conductivity. W. Kong, W. Gan and C. Jia helped prepare PDMS/balsa sample. H. Xie carried out XRD analyses. X. Chen and Z. Ren tested the salt ion concentrations in seawater. S. Das conducted the mathematical calculations. J. Liao and J. Li heled analyze the water contaminants. L. Hu, S. He, and C. Chen collectively wrote the paper. E. Hitz revised the manuscript. All authors commented on the final manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This project is currently not funded by any agencies. We acknowledge the support of the Maryland Nanocenter, its Surface Analysis Center and AIMLab. S. He would like to acknowledge the financial support of Guangzhou Elites Scholarship Council (JY201610).
References
A. F. Van Loon, T. Gleeson, J. Clark, A. I. Van Dijk, K. Stahl, J. Hannaford, G. Di Baldassarre, A. J. Teuling, L. M. Tallaksen and R. Uijlenhoet, Nat. Geosci., 2016, 9, 89 CrossRef .
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schewe, J. Heinke, D. Gerten, I. Haddeland, N. W. Arnell, D. B. Clark, R. Dankers, S. Eisner, B. M. Fekete and F. J. Colón-González, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 3245–3250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, S. H. Ko, K. H. Kang and J. Han, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Surwade, S. N. Smirnov, I. V. Vlassiouk, R. R. Unocic, G. M. Veith, S. Dai and S. M. Mahurin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 459–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mi, Science, 2014, 343, 740–742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suss, S. Porada, X. Sun, P. Biesheuvel, J. Yoon and V. Presser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2296–2319 RSC .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16018 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kalogirou, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2005, 31, 242–281 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Tufa, E. Curcio, E. Brauns, W. van Baak, E. Fontananova and G. Di Profio, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 496, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
N. Voutchkov, Desalination, 2018, 431, 2–14 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Gude, Desalin. Water Treat., 2011, 36, 239–260 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and N. Y. Yip, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 2242–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Klaysom, T. Y. Cath, T. Depuydt and I. F. Vankelecom, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6959–6989 RSC .
K. P. Lee, T. C. Arnot and D. Mattia, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 370, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, X. Lai, Z. Liu and W. Liu, Energy, 2018, 152, 896–905 CrossRef .
T. Hillie and M. Hlophe, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Mericq, S. Laborie and C. Cabassud, Water Res., 2010, 44, 5260–5273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Miller, H. Shemer and R. Semiat, Desalination, 2015, 366, 2–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lattemann and T. Höpner, Desalination, 2008, 220, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, G. Piao, D. S. Han, H. K. Shon and H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 344–353 RSC .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
G. Xue, Q. Chen, S. Lin, J. Duan, P. Yang, K. Liu, J. Li and J. Zhou, Global Challenges, 2018, 1800001 CrossRef .
P.-F. Liu, L. Miao, Z. Deng, J. Zhou, H. Su, L. Sun, S. Tanemura, W. Cao, F. Jiang and L.-D. Zhao, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 8, 166–173 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang and S. Singamaneni, Joule, 2017, 1, 429–430 CrossRef .
D. Ghim, Q. Jiang, S. Cao, S. Singamaneni and Y.-S. Jun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 949–957 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xue, K. Liu, Q. Chen, P. Yang, J. Li, T. Ding, J. Duan, B. Qi and J. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15052–15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Tian, K. K. Liu, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9400–9407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, Y. Shi, R. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Jin and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28517–28524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Finnerty, L. Zhang, D. L. Sedlak, K. L. Nelson and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11701–11709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Song, D. Ji, C. Li, A. Cheney, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, B. Chen and J. Gao, Global Challenges, 2017, 1, 1600003 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
S. MohammadáSajadi and S. HiáWang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15227–15234 RSC .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Finnerty, L. Zhang, D. L. Sedlak, K. L. Nelson and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11701–11709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. Song, S. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, J. Wan, D. Kirsch, L. Xu, Y. Wang and T. Gao, Chem, 2018, 4, 544–554 CAS .
J. Song, C. Chen, S. Zhu, M. Zhu, J. Dai, U. Ray, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li and N. Quispe, Nature, 2018, 554, 224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jia, F. Jiang, P. Hu, Y. Kuang, S. He, T. Li, C. Chen, A. Murphy, C. Yang and Y. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7362–7370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
World Health Organization (WHO). Safe Drinking-Water from Desalination (WHO, 2011), http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/70621/1/WHO_HSE_WSH_11.03_eng.pdf.
H. Liu, C. Chen, G. Chen, Y. Kuang, X. Zhao, J. Song, C. Jia, X. Xu, E. Hitz, H. Xie, S. Wang, F. Jiang, T. Li, Y. Li, A. Gong, R. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701616 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 701756 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00945k‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Water shortage is one of the biggest concerns in the development of our modern human society. Multiple desalination technologies, like reverse osmosis and multiple-effect distillation, have been developed in the past decades to increase the supply of clean water. However, many countries and regions with an arid climate still cannot afford to use these new technologies for generating clean water due to the limitations of high energy consumption and the requirement of sophisticated infrastructure. Solar desalination holds great promise for generating vast amounts of clean water by using abundant solar energy and seawater resources. However, large amounts of salt can accumulate on the surface of various solar desalination devices during long-term continuous desalination operation, which will gradually deteriorate device performance. Here, we demonstrate that a nature-inspired salt-resistant bimodal evaporator with a 3D interconnected and porous microstructure can be used for long-term stable and efficient high salinity brine desalination with a rapid evaporation rate of 6.4 kg m−2 h−1 under 6 suns irradiation. In addition, this environmentally-friendly, low-cost, and salt-rejection approach holds great potential for practical applications, especially in remote rural areas.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustrating the microstructures and working principle of the bimodal porous balsa wood as an efficient, stable, scalable, environmentally friendly and low-cost evaporator for high salinity brine desalination. The wide vessel channels can ensure sufficient brine replenishment at the top surface during clean water vapor generation and effective transverse brine diffusion through pits and ray cells (from narrow tracheids to large vessel channels, as shown by the white curved arrows) can also help avoid salt accumulation on the surface. (b) Schematic shows the fouling mechanism of a control sample (PDMS/balsa), where severe deterioration of the device performance is attributed to the lack of sufficient brine replenishment caused by the PDMS blocking the wide vessel channels.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural characterizations of the bimodal evaporator. (a and b) Digital images of natural balsa and the salt-resistant bimodal evaporator. (c) 3D SEM image shows numerous well-aligned vessel channels and tracheids in the bimodal evaporator. (d) Top view SEM image shows numerous wide vessel channels and comparatively narrow tracheids along the tree growth direction. These smaller microchannels ensure sufficient brine supply during desalination. (e) Magnified SEM image of d shows one wide vessel channel is surrounded by numerous tracheids. Lateral brine diffusion and convection due to salt concentration gradients that occur during desalination (as shown by the green arrows) can be accomplished through the pits, ray parenchyma cells and nanopores between the vessel channels and neighboring tracheids. (f) SEM image shows ray cells periodically penetrate the microchannels, these ray cells help transverse brine transport. (g) Magnified SEM image of one wide vessel channel, numerous pits are present on the cell walls, which can also help lateral brine transport. (h) Size distribution of the vessel channels and tracheids.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorption spectra of natural balsa and the bimodal wood. (b) The stabilized temperature on the top surface of the bimodal evaporator and in the underlying bulk brine solution at different incident illumination intensities. (c) The stable evaporation rates of the bimodal porous wood evaporator under various light illumination intensities. (d) The stable evaporation efficiencies of the bimodal wood evaporator under various light illumination intensities from 1–6 suns. (e) The evaporation rates and corresponding evaporation efficiencies as a function of irradiation time of the bimodal wood evaporator under 6 sun illumination intensity. (f) The salinity changes of the brine samples before and after solar desalination.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Digital image of control sample: PDMS/balsa evaporator. (b and c) Side view and top view SEM images of the PDMS/balsa evaporator show the wide vessel channels are completely blocked by PDMS (marked with red dashed line), while the narrow tracheids are wide open and for brine transport during solar desalination. (d) Digital image of the other control sample: unimodal evaporator (cedar evaporator). (e) Top view SEM image of the unimodal evaporator (cedar), a uniform pore size distribution can be observed. (f) The pore size distribution of the microchannels in the unimodal evaporator (cedar). (g) The evolution of the evaporation rate of the bimodal evaporator and the unimodal evaporators (PDMS/balsa and cedar evaporators). (h) Solar endurance measurement results of the bimodal evaporator, it was exposed to 2 suns for 20 days, with 7 h per day, the insets show no salt on the surface of the bimodal evaporator, while severe salt accumulation can be observed on the surface of the unimodal evaporator. (i) The evolution of absorbance of the bimodal evaporator and PDMS/balsa evaporators. (j) Top view SEM image of the bimodal evaporator after cycling for 20 d. (k) Top view SEM image of PDMS/balsa evaporator after 45 min of solar irradiation (2 suns).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–f) Time-elapse snapshots show salt rejection from the surface of bimodal evaporator under 2 suns illumination. Enough salts (NaCl) were put on the top surface to examine its salt rejection ability. The bimodal porous balsa wood is floating on the brine solutions. This experiment demonstrates the bimodal porous balsa wood can effectively reject extra salts while producing clean water vapor. (g) A digital image (the bottom view of the bimodal evaporator) reveals that the visualized salt rejection process of the device. The salinity of the brine on the surface of the device becomes higher due to gradually dissolution of the added solid salt, higher salinity brine can diffuse or sinks to the lower salinity brine underneath.	 
η = ṁhLV/Coptqi
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00945k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
