Understanding the solvent-assisted crystallization mechanism inherent in efficient organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA05635C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA05635C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20454-20461Understanding the solvent-assisted crystallization mechanism inherent in efficient organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Dinghan 
            Shen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Cai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ming 
            Peng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yingzhuang 
            Ma
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lixin 
            Xiao
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Dechun 
            Zou
          
        
      *ac
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, Department of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China. E-mail: xiao66@pku.edu.cn
cBeijing Institute of Nanoenergy and Nanosystems, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
Received 
      21st October 2014
    , Accepted 22nd October 2014First published on 30th October 2014Abstract
N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) has been shown to be an efficient precursor solvent for the one-step deposition of perovskite thin films in photovoltaic applications. Here, the specific advantage DMF introduces during the perovskite crystallization process is elucidated through comparison with dimethylacetamide (DMAc), one of its homologues. The unique presence of a DMF-induced intermediate phase was verified for the first time and its positive functions to inhibit uncontrolled perovskite precipitation and facilitate homogeneous nucleation were demonstrated. When combined with a double blocking layer structure to prevent shunting, our planar heterojunction (PHJ) perovskite solar cells achieved a high power conversion efficiency of up to 13.8%. Our results uncover the origin of the widespread adoption of DMF in perovskite thin film deposition, and represent a helpful step towards judicious perovskite morphological control.
Introduction
Photovoltaic devices based on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have captured increasing attention in recent years because of their widely recognized advantages, such as promising power conversion efficiency (PCE), low cost and solution processability.1–5 Among these, lead halide perovskites represented by CH3NH3PbX3 (X = I, Cl, Br) have witnessed especially rapid progress, due to their appealing intrinsic properties which include the following: (1) high and constant light absorption in a broad range from visible to the near-infrared region; (2) through selective substitution of the metal,6–8 organic cations9,10 or halogens within the perovskite structure, band gap properties can be directly tuned; and (3) perovskites are capable of transporting both holes and electrons in long and similar diffusion lengths.11 Furthermore, the balanced transport properties12 of perovskites for both electrons and holes laid the foundation for efficient carrier collection in planar heterojunction (PHJ)-structured solar cells. With several interfacial optimization strategies and a carefully controlled fabrication atmosphere, a PHJ device efficiency of 19.3% has been achieved in a one-step solution route,5 demonstrating the tremendous potential inherent in this type of simple device structure. In addition to their rapidly boosting photovoltaic performance, perovskite solar cells are also endowed with solution-processable properties, which greatly decrease the manufacturing cost and broaden the scope of their potential applications13 for future industrialization.
One-step deposition of perovskite serves as a promising low-cost and facile route towards high-performance perovskite solar cells.14,15 Although other fabrication methods, such as two-step sequential deposition16 and dual-source vapor deposition17 are also adopted to fabricate highly efficient devices, they suffer from several limitations such as relatively complicated fabrication steps and comparatively higher cost. Compared to the above processes, one-step deposition distinguishes itself by its simplicity of fabrication procedure and low cost. However, the uncontrolled precipitation of perovskite crystals has been addressed as the key issue of one-step deposition.18,19 Fundamentally, poor control over the crystallization process stems from two main aspects: (1) significant dewetting occurs due to the unstable or metastable nature of the solid film during the drying and annealing process;20 and (2) poor control over the perovskite crystal growth, in this case, the intercalation of organic moieties into the inorganic framework.16 These problems can considerably restrict the controllability of the crystallization process and lead to perovskite thin films with large surface undulation and low coverage. Poor coverage of perovskite not only reduces the light absorption, it also undermines the uniformity of the active layer and increases the carrier recombination rate, further causing a drop in both device efficiency and reproducibility.18 Thus, optimizing the perovskite film coverage and morphology in a one-step route is a matter of great concern. Snaith et al. have investigated the influence of fabrication conditions, such as precursor solution concentration, annealing temperature and substrate thickness, in minimizing the dewetting of solid films, and a PCE up to 11.4% was achieved for optimized devices.21 Besides, by partially substituting I− with Cl− in the precursor solution, lattice distortions are found to be induced during the crystallization process, which tend to encourage a lower crystal growth rate and further contribute to improved perovskite coverage.22 Furthermore, Cl− doping significantly increases the hole/electron diffusion length inside the active layer.11 In addition, the utilization of certain solution additives (1,8-diiodooctane or NH4Cl) is also discovered to benefit the perovskite film homogeneity and crystallinity.23,24 Overall, controlling the crystallization kinetics serves as one of the most important strategies to optimize perovskite thin films.
Previous studies showed that the selection of the precursor solvent is vital in determining the perovskite morphology.25–29 Generally, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),26,27 γ-butyrolactone,30 dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)4,25 and mixed solvents28 have been applied in the one-step deposition method. However, the film coverage, uniformity and morphology are found to vary significantly from one to another. Recent reports also revealed that even with the same precursor solvent, through a modified fabrication procedure in terms of solvent treatment, film morphologies with sharp differences could be obtained.4,27 Thus, a deeper understanding of the solvents' functions in perovskite crystallization is urgently needed. Under normal circumstances, the solvent functions as a carrier for dissolving solid reactants. Its boiling point and dissolving capacity are always regarded as the main factors that have an impact on the resulting films. In this work, we found a special function of DMF as the perovskite precursor solvent in one-step deposition. Through careful comparison with dimethylacetamide (DMAc), a homologue of DMF, we elucidated the unique presence of a DMF-induced intermediate phase during perovskite crystallization. Detailed characterizations of the intermediate phase were further conducted to elucidate its concrete functions. We discovered that because of the presence of solvent in the DMF-induced precursor film, the precipitation of perovskite crystals was significantly inhibited before heat treatment. Additionally, fixed interplanar distances existing in the intermediate phase were found to promote homogeneous nucleation and adjust the perovskite growth rate. Thus, a relationship between the presence of the DMF-induced intermediate phase and the controllability of the perovskite crystallization process was established. In addition, a double blocking layer structure was utilized in our PHJ devices to prevent shunting. It was surprisingly found that pinholes in the active layer could be largely avoided by selective choice of the precursor solvent and crystallization substrate, which further gave rise to improved device efficiency. Ultimately, via one-step deposition of a DMF-based precursor solution, a PCE of 13.8% with a fill factor (FF) of above 70% was achieved free from any additives or special treatment.
Results and discussion
To gain a better insight into the perovskite crystallization process and directly observe its film coverage, we adopted the planar heterojunction (PHJ) configuration of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au for all devices. The perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) active layers were fabricated via one-step spin-coating of the precursor solutions based on a single solvent. It has to be mentioned that approximately 30% of our initially fabricated devices turned out to be short-circuited (15 short-circuited devices from 53 total devices). We attributed this to the inevitable voids or film defects with various sizes on the blocking layer surface (Fig. S1a†). Due to these pores, direct contact between FTO and hole transport material (HTM) may happen within the area where the substrate was not fully covered by the perovskite thin film. Therefore, a high probability of short-circuited devices can be expected. To solve this problem, we applied a double blocking layer structure to our devices. Because of its more effective prevention of FTO exposure to HTM, the percentage of devices suffering from shunting was substantially reduced (only 3 short-circuited devices from 71 total devices). To guarantee the reproducibility of the device performance, we utilized the double blocking layer in subsequent investigations.
Impact of the precursor solvent on the perovskite morphology

Fig. 1a shows the surface SEM image of the perovskite film based on DMF precursor solution. Surprisingly, full coverage of perovskite film was obtained without any additives or special treatment (Fig. 1a). This result was quite different from reported studies, in which pinholes always exist in perovskite films fabricated through one-step deposition methods.20,22,24 We speculated that utilizing DMF as the precursor solvent may be especially suitable to achieve high perovskite coverage. In this regard, we further employed DMAc, a homologue of DMF, as the perovskite precursor solvent to explore the specific features DMF may possess. It should be noted that DMAc shares very similar chemical properties (aprotic solvents, relatively good electron-pair donor properties, Ds = 24 for both solvents31) with DMF except for its larger molecular size. According to previous works, the solvent of the precursor solution affects perovskite morphology in two fundamental aspects: (1) owing to the dewetting process of the unstable solid film upon annealing, slow-evaporating solvents play a negative role in obtaining high-coverage perovskite film;21 and (2) solvents with better solubility can produce perovskite precursors with higher concentrations, which may increase the perovskite layer thickness and reduce the possibility of forming pinhole structures.25 In this case, the perovskite thin films based on DMAc are expected to exhibit analogous coverage and morphology to those of DMF because of their highly similar boiling point and solubility. However, as illustrated in Fig. 1c, the perovskite thin films based on DMAc precursor solution demonstrated much lower perovskite coverage (∼70%) with evident pores under identical experimental conditions. AFM was further performed to characterize the surface undulation of the perovskite films. DMAc-based film also exhibited much higher root-mean roughness than DMF-based film, as illustrated in Fig. 1b and d. Correspondingly, DMF- and DMAc-based PHJ devices also exhibited different photovoltaic performances (Table 1). To interpret this abnormal phenomenon, we reasonably deduced that in addition to boiling point and solubility, DMF may exert other effects that influence perovskite crystallization and improve film coverage.
 Fig. 1  (a), (c) Surface SEM images and (b), (d) AFM images (20 μm × 20 μm) of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite layers obtained from one-step deposition of (a), (b) DMF-based precursor; (c), (d) DMAc-based precursor. 
Table 1 Performances of PHJ solar cells from the same batch of devices under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2)







V
oc (V)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
PCE (%)





Based on DMF precursor



Highest
0.91
71.0
19.8
12.7


Average
0.86
60.4
20.2
10.5






Based on DMAc precursor



Highest
0.82
61.8
19.9
10.1


Average
0.77
51.9
19.8
7.8




Tracking of solvent molecules inside the precursor film
Further investigation of DMF's satisfactory aspects as the precursor solvent requires careful tracking of DMF molecules inside the precursor film. Fig. 2 shows the infrared absorption spectra of the powders isolated from DMF- and DMAc-induced precursor films (without annealing). In the infrared spectrum of the DMF-induced precursor film, the two strong bands located at 1432 and 1385 cm−1 could be assigned to symmetrical and asymmetrical C–H bending vibrations, respectively (Fig. 2b). However, these characteristic bands were much weaker in DMAc-induced precursor film as distinctly shown in the magnified spectra inserted in Fig. 2. Moreover, these peaks were also absent in the infrared spectra of CH3NH3I, PbI2 and PbCl2 isolated powders (Fig. S3†). After excluding the possibility of miscellaneous peak interference, we confirmed the presence of DMF molecules inside its precursor film before heat treatment. Remarkably, no CO absorption band of DMF was detected in the infrared spectrum of its precursor film. We ascribed this result to a broad band located at 1627 cm−1 introduced by PbI2 (Fig. S3b†) in the precursor film. This band was located close to the characteristic peak of CO bonding from DMF (1668 cm−1, Fig. S3e†) and may well overlap with this peak. Comparatively, the characteristic absorptions of DMAc (1631 cm−1, 1401 cm−1, Fig. S3d†) in its precursor film were extremely weak (Fig. 2a), indicating that DMF exists in its precursor film in much larger amounts than in DMAc's case.
 Fig. 2  FTIR spectra (from 4000 cm−1 to 400 cm−1) of (a) DMAc-induced precursor film; (b) DMF-induced precursor film. In addition, corresponding spectra ranging from 1450 cm−1 to 1350 cm−1 are specifically amplified to reveal the details of the C–H bending vibration peaks inside the isolated powders. 
To elucidate the role of DMF in the corresponding precursor film, we further characterized the evolution of its content inside the solid film via infrared absorption spectroscopy. We annealed the DMF-induced precursor films at 100 °C under identical conditions. Three representative samples with various annealing times (0.5 min, 5 min, 20 min) were collected, and their infrared spectra are shown in Fig. S2.† Synchronous attenuation of the symmetrical and asymmetrical C–H bending peaks from DMF solvent molecules was clearly observed with the extension of annealing time. After annealing at 100 °C for 20 min, these characteristic absorptions almost disappeared based on the infrared spectrum, indicating the disappearance of DMF molecules inside the solid film.
Structure of the DMF-induced intermediate phase
To understand the specific effects of DMF involvement on perovskite crystallization, we employed X-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine the crystalline structure where DMF molecules reside.
The XRD peak positions of CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x in our work were consistent with the known patterns for the tetragonal perovskite structure,15 as illustrated in Fig. 3b-1. The strong reflections centered at 14.8° and 29.1° originate from lattice planes in the (110) and (220) directions, respectively. The DMF-induced precursor film without annealing was then characterized using XRD, and the reflection pattern is presented in Fig. 3a-1. A strong peak appeared at 7.94°, which could not be assigned to any crystal planes of pure PbCl2 (Fig. S4b†), PbI2 (Fig. 3a-3), CH3NH3I (Fig. S4a†) or perovskite lattices. Therefore, this peak may relate to the presence of DMF molecules. A similar peak has been reported previously, but its exact crystal structure remains unknown.5,32 Considering that the solubility of PbI2 in DMF is much higher than that of PbCl2,33 we believe that most Pb2+ should form bonds with I−, rather than Cl−, in DMF-based precursor solution. As a result, the majority of Pb2+ is expected to precipitate in the form of PbI2 during spin-coating of the precursor solution. This conclusion could be further evidenced by the yellow color (the color of PbI2 crystals) of the precursor film, rather than a white color (the color of PbCl2 crystals). According to previous reports,34,35 the lower angle (7.94° in this case) compared to the diffraction peak of the pure PbI2 (001) plane (12.66°, Fig. 3a-3) could be attributed to the occurrence of lattice expansion within a PbI2 layered structure. Considering the major presence of PbI2 crystals inside the precursor film, the reflection peak centered at 7.94° could be assigned to the (001) crystal plane of expanded PbI2 lattices, most likely caused by the intercalation of specific substances.
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of (1) DMF-induced precursor film; (2) PbI2 film obtained from spin-coating its DMF solution; (3) pure PbI2 powder; (4) formed perovskite film exposed to DMF vapor for several minutes. The differences between the positions of the PbI2 (001) peak indicate the intercalation of different groups. (b) XRD spectra of (1) formed perovskite film; (2) DMAc-induced precursor film before annealing. Corresponding peaks of the tetragonal perovskite structure can be clearly observed in the DMAc-induced precursor film. 
In order to determine the concrete composition of the intercalating groups, we conducted XRD studies of pure PbI2 powder and PbI2 thin film spin-coated from its DMF solutions for comparison. The XRD patterns are shown in Fig. 3a. Based on the Bragg formulation of X-ray diffraction, the magnitude of the unintercalated PbI2 lattice translation vector along the c axis is approximately 6.98 Å, while in the DMF-induced PbI2 solid film, the reflection peak corresponding to the (001) plane of PbI2 crystals shifted to 9.44° (Fig. 3a-2). Accordingly, the translation vector along the c axis increases to 9.41 Å; this finding demonstrates that DMF molecules have intercalated into the PbI2 interlayer space, thereby forming the PbI2–DMF complex.36 Further spin-coating of the perovskite precursor solution under identical circumstances demonstrated the peak centered at 7.94° mentioned above. This result indicates that the translation vector of the PbI2 (001) crystal plane further increases to 11.18 Å. Thus, it can be expected that both CH3NH3+ and DMF molecules have intercalated into the interlayer space of the PbI2 lattice, leading to the formation of a DMF-induced intermediate phase. In addition, no perovskite diffraction peaks appeared in DMF-induced precursor film, indicating that perovskite crystallization did not start before thermal annealing. In contrast, relatively strong reflections at 14.8° and 29.2° emerged in the XRD patterns of DMAc-induced precursor film, whereas the peak centered at 7.99° was quite weak (Fig. 3b-2). Therefore, it could be verified that in the case of DMAc-induced precursor film, only a negligible trace of solvent intercalated into the PbI2 crystal lattice and the reaction between CH3NH3I and PbI2 had already started before annealing to form perovskite.
Role of the intermediate phase in perovskite nucleation and growth
To correlate the improved morphology of DMF-based perovskite films with the existence of a DMF-induced intermediate phase, it is essential to establish a solvent-assisted perovskite crystallization mechanism. In DMF-based crystallization, the excess solvent evaporates from the precursor film during spin-coating, whereas the PbI2 crystals precipitate to form the layered structure. Simultaneously, residual DMF molecules still exist inside the solid film. These molecules intercalate into the PbI2 interlayer space with CH3NH3+, resulting in the expansion of the PbI2 lattice and a larger spacing between each layer. Thus, a DMF-induced intermediate phase comes into being. It was known that Pb2+ in the PbI2 lattice could coordinate with DMF molecules via the formation of Pb–O bonding, leading to the formation of PbI2·DMF crystals.36 To confirm the presence of similar strong forces between PbI2 and DMF in the DMF-induced intermediate phase, we further exposed formed perovskite thin film to DMF vapor at a relatively high concentration. After several minutes, the color of the thin film changed from dark brown to white. Moreover, XRD studies revealed that the strong diffraction peak centered at 7.91° emerged again (Fig. 3a-4), indicating the reappearance of the DMF-induced intermediate phase. These findings suggest that the perovskite films are extremely unstable when exposed to a high concentration of DMF vapor. We deduced that this is because DMF molecules in the form of a gas can substitute CH3NH3+ inside the already formed perovskite crystal structure and they again intercalate into the PbI2 interlayer space to form the intermediate phase. It further demonstrates that at room temperature, relatively strong interactions should exist between DMF and Pb2+ within the intermediate crystal structure, which, we believe, guarantee the stability of the DMF-induced intermediate phase before heat treatment.
Furthermore, we propose that DMF could enhance the controllability of the perovskite crystallization and encourage homogeneous nucleation. As confirmed by XRD studies, the presence of the DMF-induced intermediate phase suppresses the precipitation of perovskite crystals before thermal annealing. This finding may be ascribed to the ability of DMF, acting as a polar solvent, to reduce the effective internal charge of CH3NH3+, as well as the competitive bonding forces existing between DMF and the Pb–I network. These influences can both result in the effect of charge screening and effectively prevent the intercalation of organic moieties into the PbI2 framework.35 In addition, the presence of a strong PbI2 (001) diffraction peak within the XRD spectrum of DMF-based precursor film, which is much weaker in DMAc's case, suggests that the I–Pb–I layered structure of the PbI2 crystals with the near-octahedron [PbI6]4− as its basic building block remains intact in DMF-induced precursor film (Fig. 4). While upon heating at 100 °C, DMF molecules inside the precursor film tend to evaporate and, within approximately 20 minutes, the majority of DMF molecules are shown to be removed from the DMF-induced intermediate phase (Fig. S2†). Meanwhile, the reaction between CH3NH3+ and PbI2, namely, the formation of perovskite, is able to take place following the release of DMF. We believe that the combination of a fixed interplanar spacing (11.18 Å) and the simultaneous formation of perovskite crystals from layer to layer can give rise to similar reactant concentrations between each layer and accordingly an identical perovskite crystallization rate upon the disappearance of the intermediate phase. This mechanism, could encourage homogeneous nucleation and promote the uniformity of perovskite thin films.
 Fig. 4  Schematic models of (a) layered PbI2 parent lattice with an interplanar distance of 6.98 Å; (b) the formation process of the DMF-induced intermediate phase: DMF molecules intercalate into the layered structure and induce PbI2 lattice expansion along the c axis; (c) solvent-induced controllable crystallization of perovskite along with the release of DMF molecules. 
On the other hand, considering the temporary coordination between DMF and the inorganic lattice, as well as the expansion of the original PbI2 network, we suppose that a barrier of uncontrolled perovskite precipitation will be induced because additional crystallization driving forces are required to overcome the increased internal energy and configurational entropy of the DMF-induced intermediate phase.23 The presence of this barrier is able to positively adjust the perovskite crystallization rate and facilitate anisotropic growth. To further confirm this function of the intermediate phase, we compared the color evolutions of both DMF- and DMAc-induced precursor films upon annealing at 100 °C. Consequently, an obviously slower rate of color transformation of the precursor film from yellow (before annealing) to black (the evidence of perovskite formation) was observed in DMF's case (Fig. S6†). Moreover, the color of DMF-induced precursor film appeared to be yellow throughout the first 20 minutes of heat treatment, which could be naturally related to the duration of DMF's temporary presence in the precursor film. These findings indicate the role of the DMF-induced intermediate phase to encourage prolonged perovskite growth. The above analysis agrees well with the SEM images of the resulting films (Fig. 5), in which DMF-based samples exhibited much better film interconnectivity than DMAc-based samples. In addition, our findings are consistent with a previous report that the interaction existing between solvent molecules and the PbI2 crystal lattice could lead to more uniform thin films.29
 Fig. 5  Top-view SEM images of (a) DMF-based perovskite film, showing good interconnectivity; (b) DMAc-based perovskite film, exhibiting poor interconnectivity. 
On the contrary, the diffraction peak at 7.99° within the XRD patterns of DMAc-induced precursor film is extremely weak. We speculate that this may be because more space is needed for DMAc to coordinate with the PbI2 network than for DMF.31 Confirming the origin of DMF's intercalation into the PbI2 lattice requires further investigation and is beyond the scope of this research. Furthermore, contact and reaction between CH3NH3+ and PbI2 already occur even before thermal annealing. We attributed the appearance of the perovskite diffraction peaks in DMAc-induced precursor film to the weak interaction between PbI2 and the precursor solvent, which causes supersaturation of CH3NH3+ around the PbI2 crystal lattice and further results in the rapid precipitation of the perovskite crystals. Moreover, a specific structure was formed as long as these crystallites appeared; thus, minimal space is available for organic moieties to diffuse within the crystal lattice.37 In short, due to the absence of most solvent molecules between PbI2 (001) lattice planes, both the quick precipitation of perovskite and different reaction rates at different film locations are expected to occur. These problems would lead to poor control over perovskite crystallization, which is the most critical disadvantage of one-step deposition and greatly impairs the homogeneity of the resulting films (Fig. 5b).
The presence of the DMF-induced intermediate phase inhibits the uncontrolled precipitation of perovskite crystals without annealing and modulates their growth rate. This phase allows the perovskite crystallization process to be much more controllable in a one-step deposition route, and facilitates the formation of more uniform thin films. Thus, we correlated the utilization of DMF as the perovskite precursor solvent with corresponding perovskite films with much higher coverage and better homogeneity.
The effect of crystallization substrate
Ultimately, by utilizing the double TiO2 blocking layer structure mentioned above as the crystallization substrate, and with careful selection of the precursor solvent and fabrication atmosphere (control of DMF vapor pressure), a device efficiency of 13.8% was achieved with a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 21.4 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.91 V, and a FF of 71.3%. Remarkably, compared to devices based on a single coating of blocking layer, a sharp increase in FF from 55.5% to 78.5% was observed and we attributed the rise in FF to the realization of a pinhole-free perovskite film (Fig. 1a). In contrast, voids with various sizes exist in the perovskite films formed on a single-coating substrate (Fig. S5a†). Since a scaffold layer is absent in PHJ perovskite solar cells, the chances are high that any pinholes in the perovskite film can lead to direct contact between the TiO2 blocking layer and spiro-OMeTAD. These contacts function as a parallel diode in the solar cell and result in decreased Voc and FF,38 which is in conformity with our device performance statistics (Fig. 6a). Besides, the rise in FF could also be ascribed to the closer contact between the TiO2 blocking layer and perovskite crystals, as demonstrated by the smoother surface of the double compact layer shown in Fig. S1.† The current–voltage curve of the PHJ device with the highest FF is illustrated in Fig. 6b. Our results reveal that the FF of planar-structured perovskite solar cells was very sensitive to the presence of only a small quantity of pinholes on the active layer surface. Through simply cutting down these surface defects, and therefore shunting paths between the blocking layer and HTM, an FF as high as 78.5% can be achieved.
 Fig. 6  Current–voltage measurements of (a) corresponding best-performing devices based on single/double blocking layer deposition; (b) PHJ solar cell based on double blocking layer structure with the highest fill factor. 
Our findings were in accordance with previous reports showing that the presence of a similar solvent-induced intermediate phase during perovskite crystallization is favorable for the formation of uniform perovskite thin films.4 The present work revealed the special advantages that DMF possesses as perovskite precursor solvent in traditional one-step deposition due to the existence of a DMF-induced intermediate phase. Moreover, considering the reversible nature of DMF molecules' intercalation into and removal from the PbI2 inorganic framework, we speculated that the formation of the DMF-induced intermediate phase may be highly sensitive to the ambient DMF vapor pressure. Remarkably, this conjecture was consistent with several studies showing that the incorporation of either a gas or a solvent with poor solubility during spin-coating could improve the homogeneity of resulting perovskite films.4,39 We further propose that the interference of a low-solubility atmosphere may well increase the evaporation rate of excess DMF from its precursor film and facilitate the formation of the solvent-induced intermediate phase, whose ability to promote more homogeneous thin films has been attested in this work. However, further investigations should be performed to confirm the relationship between various experimental conditions (atmosphere, poor solubility, substrate temperature) and the formation of the DMF-induced intermediate phase. It should be noted that determining feasible strategies to precisely control the existence of this intermediate phase should be critical.
Conclusions
In summary, we associated the temporary presence of DMF inside its precursor film with better perovskite morphology by elucidating the specific functions of a DMF-induced intermediate phase. We found that DMF molecules tend to intercalate into the interlayer space of the PbI2 layered structure along with CH3NH3+ before annealing and lead to PbI2 lattice expansion along the c axis. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to uncover the structure of the crystalline intermediate phase existing in DMF-induced precursor film. Moreover, we demonstrated that the involvement of DMF could significantly inhibit the precipitation of perovskite crystals at room temperature because of the strong interactions existing between DMF and the PbI2 lattice. Moreover, constant interplanar expansion induced by the intermediate phase was proposed to favor homogeneous nucleation and adjust the perovskite growth rate. On the contrary, only a negligible amount of DMAc was present in the corresponding precursor film, resulting in the rapid precipitation of perovskite crystals and low coverage of the thin films with poor interconnectivity. In conjunction with a double blocking layer structure in our PHJ devices to prevent shunting, full coverage of perovskite was obtained based on a DMF precursor solution, leading to a best device efficiency of 13.8% and a fill factor as high as 78.5%. This work may shed light on the perovskite crystallization mechanism and open up a promising avenue for more efficient perovskite photovoltaics.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (no. 2011CB933300), the Ministry of Education of China (no. 20120001140010), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 91333107), and Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, and the SRFDP & RGC ERG Joint Research Scheme (Project no. M-HKBU209/12).
Notes and references
M. D. McGehee, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 845–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Roldán-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Soriano, G. Mínguez Espallargas, A. Garcia, P. Reinecke, T. Kroyer, M. I. Dar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 994 Search PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, C. Duyen Hanh, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, P. W. Liang, C. C. Chueh, C. Y. Liao and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6454–6460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-J. Seol, A.-N. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4991–4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379 CAS .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jeong-Hyeok, K. Hui-Seon and P. Nam-Gyu, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081510 CrossRef PubMed   (081518 p.).
L. Martiradonna, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 778 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Thompson, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2012, 42, 399–434 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. De Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zuo and L. Ding, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9935–9938 RSC .
B. Conings, L. Baeten, C. De Dobbelaere, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2041–2046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Jeng, Y.-F. Chiang, M.-H. Lee, S.-R. Peng, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen and T.-C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-B. Kim, H. Choi, J. Jeong, S. Kim, B. Walker, S. Song and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6679–6683 RSC .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 CAS .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, P. Qin, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11586–11590 CAS .
I. Persson, K. Lyczko, D. Lundberg, L. Eriksson and A. Placzek, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 1058–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Tan, D. T. Moore, M. Saliba, H. Sai, L. A. Estroff, T. Hanrath, H. J. Snaith and U. Wiesner, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4730–4739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Huheey, Inorganic Chemistry Principles of Structure and Reactivity, HarperCollinsCollege, 4th edn,  1993 Search PubMed .
V. Mehrotra, S. Lombardo, M. O. Thompson and E. P. Giannelis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 5786–5790 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, P. K. Kanaujia, W. Niu, J. J. Baumberg and G. V. Prakash, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10238–10247 CAS .
A. Wakamiya, M. Endo, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and Y. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 711–713 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhenhua, L. Hui, T. Yongbing, H. Xing, D. Ho and L. Chun-Sing, Mater. Res. Express, 2014, 1, 015034 CrossRef   (015010 p.).
P. Docampo and H. J. Snaith, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 225403 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta05635cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a), (c) Surface SEM images and (b), (d) AFM images (20 μm × 20 μm) of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite layers obtained from one-step deposition of (a), (b) DMF-based precursor; (c), (d) DMAc-based precursor.	 


Based on DMF precursor

Highest	0.91	71.0	19.8	12.7
Average	0.86	60.4	20.2	10.5


Based on DMAc precursor

Highest	0.82	61.8	19.9	10.1
Average	0.77	51.9	19.8	7.8

 	Fig. 2  FTIR spectra (from 4000 cm−1 to 400 cm−1) of (a) DMAc-induced precursor film; (b) DMF-induced precursor film. In addition, corresponding spectra ranging from 1450 cm−1 to 1350 cm−1 are specifically amplified to reveal the details of the C–H bending vibration peaks inside the isolated powders.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of (1) DMF-induced precursor film; (2) PbI2 film obtained from spin-coating its DMF solution; (3) pure PbI2 powder; (4) formed perovskite film exposed to DMF vapor for several minutes. The differences between the positions of the PbI2 (001) peak indicate the intercalation of different groups. (b) XRD spectra of (1) formed perovskite film; (2) DMAc-induced precursor film before annealing. Corresponding peaks of the tetragonal perovskite structure can be clearly observed in the DMAc-induced precursor film.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic models of (a) layered PbI2 parent lattice with an interplanar distance of 6.98 Å; (b) the formation process of the DMF-induced intermediate phase: DMF molecules intercalate into the layered structure and induce PbI2 lattice expansion along the c axis; (c) solvent-induced controllable crystallization of perovskite along with the release of DMF molecules.	 

 	Fig. 5  Top-view SEM images of (a) DMF-based perovskite film, showing good interconnectivity; (b) DMAc-based perovskite film, exhibiting poor interconnectivity.	 

 	Fig. 6  Current–voltage measurements of (a) corresponding best-performing devices based on single/double blocking layer deposition; (b) PHJ solar cell based on double blocking layer structure with the highest fill factor.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta05635c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
