A highly stable, efficient visible-light driven water photoelectrolysis system using a nanocrystalline WO 3 photoanode and a methane sulfonic acid ele ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR11573E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11573E
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1553-1556Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA highly stable, efficient visible-light driven water photoelectrolysis system using a nanocrystalline WO3 photoanode and a methane sulfonic acid electrolyte†

        
          
            Renata 
            Solarska
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Rafał 
            Jurczakowski
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jan 
            Augustynski
          
        
      *
      Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: rsolarska@chem.uw.edu.pl; Jan.Augustynski@unige.ch;  Fax: +48 22 822 5996;   Tel: +48 22 822 0211
Received 
      24th October 2011
    , Accepted 6th January 2012First published on 30th January 2012AbstractNanostructuring of semiconductor films offers the potential means for producing photoelectrodes with improved minority charge carrier collection. Crucial to the effective operation of the photoelectrode is also the choice of a suitable electrolyte. The behaviour of the nanostructured WO3 photoanodes in methane sulfonic acid solutions, which allow one to obtain large, perfectly stable visible-light driven water splitting photocurrents, is discussed. The important effect of the electrolyte concentration upon the current distribution and the related photocurrent losses within the nanoporous photoelectrodes is pointed out.
N-Type semiconducting tungsten trioxide, WO3, has been investigated since mid-seventies for the application in photoelectrochemical devices1–5 as a possible alternative to titanium dioxide, TiO2, photoanodes, which are sensitive only to light in the near-UV range.6,7 Due to its band-gap energy of 2.5–2.7 eV, depending on the preparation procedure and the crystalline structure, WO3 is in fact capable of absorbing not only the near-UV but also the visible blue portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. However, the water oxidation photocurrents reported for the single-crystal2 and continuous polycrystalline film WO3 photoanodes1,3–5 were adversely affected by the low absorption coefficients for photons with energies close to the band-gap.8 Due to the indirect band-gap transition in WO3, the resulting optical pathways corresponding to visible wavelengths are, in fact, at least an order of magnitude longer than the hole diffusion length in this material which is of about 0.15 microns.2
The charge collection efficiency was significantly improved by the introduction of porous, nanocrystalline film photoanodes consisting of a network of WO3 particles with sizes in the range of tens of nanometres, i.e. smaller than the hole diffusion length.9,10
The fact that such nanostructured films, represented in a typical scanning electron micrograph (SEM) in Fig. 1, can be largely permeated by the electrolyte reduces to a large extent the electron–hole (e−–h+) recombination in the course of visible-light driven photo-oxidation reactions.
 Fig. 1  
SEM image of a 2.5 μm thick nanostructured WO3 film deposited on the FTO substrate. The picture was recorded with use of the Everhart–Thornley SE detector. 
Nanocrystalline WO3 films were synthesized using an aqueous sol–gel method developed in the author's laboratory.9,10 The employed precursor consisted of (poly)tungstic acid, freshly prepared by elution of a solution of Na2WO4 through the cation exchange column, and of an organic additive, low molecular weight polyethylene glycol (PEG) 300. To insure high porosity of the final films the precursor contained an excess of PEG, corresponding to the WO3/PEG ratio of 0.4–0.6 w/w. Conductive glass plates (Pilkington Glass, resistance 8–10 Ω per square) bearing an overlayer of F-doped SnO2 (FTO) were used as substrates. The colloidal precursor was deposited onto the FTO substrate using the doctor-blade technique, dried in air at 100 °C and, subsequently, the sample was annealed in flowing oxygen at 550 °C for 30 min. The thickness of individual WO3 layers was between 0.35 and 0.45 μm; thicker films were formed by sequential applications of the precursor and the annealing.
The method allows formation of highly crystalline films with monoclinic structure (m-WO3).10 In all experiments described below, the WO3 photoanode was associated in the photoelectrolysis cell (PEC) with a hydrogen generating platinum cathode.
Although tungsten trioxide exhibits high chemical stability and resistance to the photocorrosion in acidic, including strongly acidic, aqueous solutions, the choice of the suitable supporting electrolyte for water splitting, insuring ionic conductivity within the PEC, is more than trivial. For example, an extensive photoelectrolysis conducted in sulfuric acid (H2SO4) under simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination leads to the formation at the nanostructured (NS) WO3 photoanode of a significant amount of persulfates (S2O82−) detected by means of iodometric titration and subsequently identified in the solution by Raman spectroscopy.11 In a similar way, oxygen is no more the only photo-oxidation product in perchloric acid (HClO4) solutions where, in addition, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is formed. The evident consequence of the peroxides formation in both electrolytes is the progressive deactivation of the NS WO3 photoanodes observed during prolonged photoelectrolysis runs. As shown in Fig. 2a, the deactivation occurs much more rapidly in a HClO4 solution than in a H2SO4 solution. This means that, quite generally, the large photocurrent efficiencies observed during brief experiments (in particular, in these two electrolytes) which serve, e.g., to obtain photocurrent–voltage plots, might, in fact, provide quite misleading indications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Plots of the photocurrent density as a function of time for 2.5 μm thick nanostructured WO3 electrodes in (●) 1 M CH3HSO3, (■) 3 M H2SO4, and (◆) 1 M HClO4 solutions, exposed to simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination under an applied potential of 1 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE); (b) photocurrent vs. time plot for the WO3 electrode irradiated with 300 mW cm−2 Ar-ion laser light in 1 M CH3HSO3 at a potential of 1 V vs. RHE. Both electrodes had a ca. 0.8 cm2 surface area. 
The fact that the described deactivation of the NS WO3 photoanodes observed in H2SO4 and HClO4 electrolytes is reversible, i.e. the initial photoactivity can be, for example, restored by a cathodic reduction pulse, suggests the formation of a surface blocking layer as a possible explanation. Such a blocking layer, due to the accumulation of tungsten peroxide species at the surface, is expected to slow down the kinetics of the charge transfer reactions and possibly also induces the e−–h+ recombination at the surface of the NS WO3 photoelectrode.
Since the observed deactivation of the NS WO3 photoanode rules out both H2SO4 and HClO4 solutions as viable electrolytes for the water splitting devices, we tested a large number of alternative electrolytes able to ensure stable, long-term operation of the PEC. Herein we describe the behaviour of the NS WO3 electrodes in methane sulfonic acid (CH3HSO3) solutions—an electrolyte which allows one to avoid the deactivation of the photoanode during long-term photoelectrolysis runs (see Fig. 2a).
In fact, besides a decrease during the initial photoelectrolysis period, no further changes in the photocurrents were observed all over the test. The stability of the WO3 electrode in 1 M CH3HSO3 solutions was also proven through an accelerated test performed under intense (ca. 300 mW cm−2) argon ion laser, near-UV irradiation. As shown in Fig. 2b, the saturation water oxidation photocurrent of ca. 3.8 mA cm−2 remained stable over a 14 h long electrolysis run and subsequent sequences (not shown), after reactivating the laser. In order to confirm the chemical stability of the CH3HSO3 electrolyte, several solutions were analysed by Raman spectroscopy after being subjected to prolonged photoelectrolyses at a NS WO3 photoanode. Comparison of the Raman spectra (Fig. S1†) of the fresh 1 M CH3HSO3 and of the same solution having served as electrolyte for a continuous 65 h long photoelectrolysis run under the AM 1.5 illumination did not reveal any new bands which might indicate possible chemical changes. The long-term stability of relatively large surface area (4 cm2) NS WO3 film photoanodes in 3 M CH3HSO3 electrolyte was further confirmed by a 144 h long photoelectrolysis test performed under simulated AM 1.5 light and an imposed bias voltage of 1.2 V in the laboratories of our NanoPEC project partner.12 Besides the periodic variations related to the temperature changes, the photocurrents remained remarkably stable over the test. There was no perceptible difference between the photocurrent–voltage (Iph–E) plots recorded at the beginning and at the end of the experiment.

Fig. 3a displays a typical Iph–E plot for a ca. 2.5 μm thick NS WO3 photoanode, measured in 3 M CH3HSO3 under simulated solar AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2). The curve rises first slowly from the onset potential of 0.45 V versusRHE, and then more steeply to reach 2.7 mA cm−2 at 1 V vs. RHE, i.e. below the thermodynamic potential of oxygen evolution (1.23 V).
 Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent–voltage plot for (●) 2.5 μm and (■) 1.4 μm thick NS WO3 films measured in 3 M CH3HSO3 electrolyte under simulated AM 1.5 light. (b) Solar to chemical energy conversion efficiency calculated from the Iph–E curve represented in (a). 
The maximum energy conversion efficiency of water photoelectrolysis, η, calculated on the basis of the above photocurrent–potential data, defined as:  where E is the applied potential vs. RHE, Iph is the measured photocurrent density and Psun is the incident power of the simulated AM 1.5 irradiation, was 0.8% attained at a potential of 0.8 V.
However, the portion of incident photons from solar irradiation converted into hydrogen may be substantially increased by associating the photoelectrolysis cell with an appropriate photovoltaic (PV) cell. It is to be recalled in this connection that, due to the particular precursor composition and the high temperature (550 °C) annealing, the NS WO3 films adopt marked preferential orientation of the 200, 020 and 002 faces of crystallites parallel to the FTO substrate,10 which provides a possible explanation for the good transparency of those films to wavelengths that exceed the absorption edge of m-WO3 (550 nm).10 This opens the possibility to couple the PEC featuring the NS WO3 photoanode with a PV cell intended to provide the bias voltage required to drive the water splitting. In such a tandem device, the PV cell placed behind the PEC (i.e. behind the back face of the photoanode) will absorb the large part of the visible spectrum transmitted by the WO3 film.11,13 Assuming the operating voltage of the PV cell close to 1 V (i.e. below the theoretical voltage of water oxidation in the dark of 1.23 V) the tandem cell may produce hydrogen with an efficiency of 3.3%.
The effective operation of a porous nanocrystalline photoelectrode imposes an additional requirement with regard to the chosen electrolyte—which is the high ionic conductivity. The problem is particularly acute for relatively thick nanoporous films, such as the NS WO3 photoanodes consisting of ca. 50 layers of superimposed nanoparticles, which may be wholly permeated by the electrolyte. Consequently, in spite (and because) of their large surface area, the performance of the NS WO3 photoanodes may be limited by the geometry of the nanostructure. In such a case, the insufficient ionic conductivity within the pores results in the uneven current and potential distribution across the electrode. This will affect, more particularly, the response of the NS WO3 photoanodes to visible wavelengths, close to the absorption edge of the semiconductor, having long optical pathways extending to the substrate of the electrode. One may also expect that, due to the multiple heat treatments causing sintering of the WO3 nanoparticles, the porosity of the film decreases going towards the back contact.

Fig. 4a shows the Nyquist plots of impedance for an illuminated NS WO3 film electrode, recorded in two CH3HSO3 solutions of largely differing concentrations at an applied potential of 0.7 V vs. RHE. The complex plane plots are characterized by a high frequency capacitive arc followed by a line at 45° visible in the inset of Fig. 4a. At lower frequencies a new arc appears due to the charge transfer between the NS WO3 electrode and the electrolyte solution. Bode-modulus and Bode-phase angle of the impedance are shown in Fig. S2†. The impedance of the nanoporous semiconductor|electrolyte system can be described with a double-channel transmission line, which represents ohmic drops within the electrode material and in the solution.14 However, assuming negligible resistance of the electrode material spectra can be fitted to a single transmission line as shown in Fig. S3†. The reproduced spectra are shown in Fig. 4a and S2† with continuous line. As a result of fitting one may obtain the evolution of resistances contributing to the total resistance of the electrodeRtotal. The latter allows us to compare the results of impedance analysis with dc measurements as its reciprocal value is simply the derivative of the steady-state Iph–E curve. From Fig. 4a it follows that Rtotal is largely controlled by the charge transfer resistance, Rct,WO3. The latter parameter in the admittance form, 1/Rct,WO3, is plotted in Fig. 4b as a function of the electrode potential and solution conductivity. The larger values of the 1/Rct,WO3 (marked in red) result in higher slopes of the Iph–E curves. This is, in fact, observed in Fig. 4c, which shows photocurrent–voltage plots for the same NS WO3 electrode exposed to the AM 1.5 illumination in a series of CH3HSO3 solutions of different concentrations. Comparison of Fig. 4b and c shows that in solutions of lower specific conductivities the slope of the Iph–E dependence is lower and shifted to more positive potentials. Actually, the maximum photocurrent–potential slope is obtained for a solution having a specific conductivity of ca. 200 mS cm−1 and further increase in the electrolyte concentration does not lead to a significant improvement of the electrode performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Nyquist plots for a ca. 1.4 μm thick NS WO3 film electrode exposed to the simulated AM 1.5 solar light in 1 M (○) and 0.04 M (□) CH3HSO3 solutions at a potential of 0.7 V vs. RHE. Experimental points were fitted to the equivalent circuit (cf. Fig. S3†)—continuous line. (b) Admittance of the charge transfer of the NS WO3 film, 1/Rct,WO3, as a function of the electrode potential and the solution conductivity. Admittance values, mentioned on the right, are given in Ω−1 cm−2. (c) A series of photocurrent–voltage plots for the same electrode (1.4 μm thick NS WO3 film photoanode) illuminated with AM 1.5 light in CH3HSO3 solutions of various concentrations, respectively, 2 M, 1 M, 0.5 M and 0.04 M. 
The additional feature observed in Fig. 4c is that also the photocurrent plateau is affected by the solution conductivity. The photocurrent decreases already significantly in the case of 0.5 M CH3HSO3 and drops down dramatically in the 0.04 M electrolyte.
These results indicate clearly that the actual photoelectrochemical performance of porous electrodes may be easily underestimated when the experiments are carried out in the electrolytes of low conductivities, due to the fact that only the outermost portion of the film contributes actually to the photocurrent.
The first step towards implementation of the photoelectrochemical device is the selection of a photoelectrode/electrolyte system guaranteeing stable, long-term performance. Although the described nanostructured WO3 photoanode does not allow unassisted water splitting, its good Iph–E behaviour in the CH3HSO3 electrolyte, consistent with a low extent of the e−–h+ recombination, results in sizeable energy conversion efficiency. By combining such a photoelectrolyser with a photovoltaic cell providing the bias (ca. 1 V) required to split water, solar energy can be converted into hydrogen with an efficiency exceeding 3%. The important effect of the electrolyte conductivity upon the performance of the nanoporous photoelectrodes is pointed out.
Acknowledgements
We thank the European Commission (project NanoPEC—Nanostructured Photoelectrodes for Energy Conversion, contract number 227179) for financial support. R.S. acknowledges the Foundation for Polish Science for the support through Homing Grant (HOM/2009/12A, B).
Notes and references
G. Hodes, D. Cahen and J. Manassen, Nature, 1976, 260, 312 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Butler, R. D. Nasby and R. K. Quinn, Solid State Commun., 1976, 19, 1011 CrossRef CAS ; 
          M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 48, 1914 Search PubMed.
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 215 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gissler and R. Memming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1710 CrossRef CAS .
M. Spichiger-Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Appl. Phys., 1983, 54, 6061 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
C. Stalder and J. Augustynski, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2007 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Deb, Philos. Mag., 1973, 27, 801 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Ulmann, C. Santato, J. Augustynski and V. Shklover, in Electrode Materials and Processes for Energy Conversion and Storage, ed. S. Srinivasan, S. Mukerjee and J. McBreen, The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ,  1997, p. 328 Search PubMed .
C. Santato, M. Odziemkowski, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10639 CrossRef CAS .
J. Augustynski, R. Solarska, H. Hagemann and C. Santato, Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng., 2006, 6340, 63400J-1 Search PubMed .
Personal communication, A. Mendes, Faculty of Engineering University of Porto.
B. D. Alexander, P. J. Kulesza, I. Rutkowska, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2298 RSC .
J. Bisquert, M. Gratzel, Q. Wang and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11284 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, Raman spectra of methane sulfonic acid, impedance measurements of WO3 electrodes in methane sulfonic acid and schema of a circuit used for impedance fitting. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11573eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  
SEM image of a 2.5 μm thick nanostructured WO3 film deposited on the FTO substrate. The picture was recorded with use of the Everhart–Thornley SE detector.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Plots of the photocurrent density as a function of time for 2.5 μm thick nanostructured WO3 electrodes in (●) 1 M CH3HSO3, (■) 3 M H2SO4, and (◆) 1 M HClO4 solutions, exposed to simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination under an applied potential of 1 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE); (b) photocurrent vs. time plot for the WO3 electrode irradiated with 300 mW cm−2 Ar-ion laser light in 1 M CH3HSO3 at a potential of 1 V vs. RHE. Both electrodes had a ca. 0.8 cm2 surface area.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent–voltage plot for (●) 2.5 μm and (■) 1.4 μm thick NS WO3 films measured in 3 M CH3HSO3 electrolyte under simulated AM 1.5 light. (b) Solar to chemical energy conversion efficiency calculated from the Iph–E curve represented in (a).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Nyquist plots for a ca. 1.4 μm thick NS WO3 film electrode exposed to the simulated AM 1.5 solar light in 1 M (○) and 0.04 M (□) CH3HSO3 solutions at a potential of 0.7 V vs. RHE. Experimental points were fitted to the equivalent circuit (cf. Fig. S3†)—continuous line. (b) Admittance of the charge transfer of the NS WO3 film, 1/Rct,WO3, as a function of the electrode potential and the solution conductivity. Admittance values, mentioned on the right, are given in Ω−1 cm−2. (c) A series of photocurrent–voltage plots for the same electrode (1.4 μm thick NS WO3 film photoanode) illuminated with AM 1.5 light in CH3HSO3 solutions of various concentrations, respectively, 2 M, 1 M, 0.5 M and 0.04 M.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, Raman spectra of methane sulfonic acid, impedance measurements of WO3 electrodes in methane sulfonic acid and schema of a circuit used for impedance fitting. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11573e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
