Plasmon-induced absorption of blind chlorophylls in photosynthetic proteins assembled on silver nanowires   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR03866F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR03866F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10475-10486Plasmon-induced absorption of blind chlorophylls in photosynthetic proteins assembled on silver nanowires†

        
          
            Marcin 
            Szalkowski‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Julian David 
            Janna Olmos‡
bc, 
      
        
          
            Dorota 
            Buczyńska
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sebastian 
            Maćkowski
          
        
      *ad, 
      
        
          
            Dorota 
            Kowalska
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Joanna 
            Kargul
          
        
      *b
aInstitute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics, Nicolaus Copernicus University, ul. Grudziądzka 5, 87-100 Toruń, Poland. E-mail: mackowski@fizyka.umk.pl
bCentre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, ul. Banacha 2C, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: j.kargul@uw.edu.pl
cFaculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, ul. Miecznikowa 1, 02-096, Warsaw, Poland
dBaltic Institute of Technology, al. Zwycięstwa 96/98, Gdynia, Poland
Received 
      31st May 2017
    , Accepted 2nd July 2017First published on 4th July 2017AbstractWe demonstrate that controlled assembly of eukaryotic photosystem I with its associated light harvesting antenna complex (PSI-LHCI) on plasmonically active silver nanowires (AgNWs) substantially improves the optical functionality of such a novel biohybrid nanostructure. By comparing fluorescence intensities measured for PSI-LHCI complex randomly oriented on AgNWs and the results obtained for the PSI-LHCI/cytochrome c553 (cyt c553) bioconjugate with AgNWs we conclude that the specific binding of photosynthetic complexes with defined uniform orientation yields selective excitation of a pool of chlorophyll (Chl) molecules that are otherwise almost non-absorbing. This is remarkable, as this study shows for the first time that plasmonic excitations in metallic nanostructures can not only be used to enhance native absorption of photosynthetic pigments, but also – by employing cyt c553 as the conjugation cofactor – to activate the specific Chl pools as the absorbing sites only when the uniform and well-defined orientation of PSI-LHCI with respect to plasmonic nanostructures is achieved. As absorption of PSI alone is comparatively low, our approach lends itself as an innovative approach to outperform the reported-to-date biohybrid devices with respect to solar energy conversion.
1. Introduction
Technological and societal development that has been taking place in the last decades, and the resulting continuously growing energy demand, combined with limited fossil fuel resources, can arguably be viewed as one of the major challenges for mankind. In this respect, conversion of solar energy into fuel is considered as one of the most sustainable solutions. From this perspective, it has been postulated that naturally evolved photosynthetic complexes, comprising light-absorbing molecules, mainly (bacterio)-chlorophylls (Chls) and carotenoids (Cars), can be considered as highly optimized macromolecular machines for solar energy conversion.1–3 High overall efficiency, which characterizes these biomolecules, stems from evolution-optimized and highly controlled spatial arrangement of all the cofactors, which determines interactions and defines energy and electron transfer pathways. This robust and fully reproducible structure, assured by the protein scaffold, has enabled application of photosynthetic complexes as the building blocks of biohybrid solar-to-fuel and solar cell nanodevices.2,4–6 It is interesting to note that a capability of the protein matrix to bind molecules in a specific way that is ‘programmed’ in its structure, opens the possibility to design mutants equipped with different components characterized by similar structure and function as the wild type. There are numerous examples of genetic modifications of proteins7,8 aimed at achieving desired properties, for example ability to build an interface with various nanostructures. This approach, used to link photosynthetic proteins with functionalized metallic surfaces,9,10 has been particularly effective for photosystem I (PSI) complex, which is one of the two main photosynthetic complexes responsible for the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy in oxygenic photosynthesis.
PSI is a pigment–protein complex present in the photosynthetic membranes of algae, plants, and cyanobacteria. Its role in photosynthesis concerns both harvesting of solar energy through the highly developed light harvesting antenna systems (LHCI in algae and higher plants) and subsequent charge separation and charge transfer in its reaction center (RC).9,11 At the heart of PSI is the primary electron donor, the special pair of Chl a molecules that form the P700 RC. Absorption of light quanta by P700 leads to transmembrane electron transfer through a highly ordered branched chain of the redox-active cofactors including Chls a, phylloquinones and [4Fe–4S] clusters.9 Therefore, in any biohybrid assembly the orientation of PSI with respect to various nanostructures or surfaces is of paramount importance. PSI is a nearly perfect solar energy-converting molecular machine with a quantum efficiency close to 100%, defined as the ratio between captured photons and electron–hole pairs.9 Thus, a highly robust PSI-LHCI complex is often considered as a viable working module of future solar cells and has been widely applied in biohybrid solar cells generating photocurrents as high as 4.15 mA cm−2 under standard illumination.3,9,12,13 We have shown recently that it is possible to fabricate photoelectrodes composed of a layer of PSI-LHCI complex attached to a narrow band gap semiconductor (hematite).4 Such an architecture reproducibly yielded photocurrents in the μA cm−2 range, although only limited control of orientation of the photosynthetic complex on the electrode surface was achieved. Nevertheless, this type of a biohybrid device provided not only electrical energy, but more importantly, allowed for sustained molecular hydrogen production when built into a photoelectrochemical cell.4
In general, for the biohybrid photosynthesis-based solar energy technology to become viable, it is essential to maximize energy capture, transfer, and its conversion into photocurrent with substantial reduction of any wasteful, back reactions. Numerous methods for increasing the efficiency of (bio)solar cells have been used, such as optical condensation of solar radiation,14 preparation of highly-organized sandwich-like nanostructures10,15,16 or application of different electrode materials, such as gold17 or graphene18–20 for improved charge transport from/into the photoactive layers. For biomimetic systems employing natural photosynthetic complexes, excellent progress has been made on increasing their optical and photochemical efficiencies by means of nanoengineering electromagnetic interactions at the nanoscale.5,21–24 This can be achieved by coupling them with metallic nanoparticles. For metallic nanoparticles with sizes comparable to the wavelength of incoming photons, localized plasmon resonance events occur, and these can be used for modifying the optical properties of photoactive molecules located in their vicinity. In particular, the efficiency of both absorption and emission can be influenced by plasmonic interactions,2,25 as well as intra-molecular energy transfer.26 The actual net result of rather complex interaction between photoactive molecules and plasmon excitations, strongly depends on several parameters, such as the distance between them, their geometrical arrangement, and spectral relations.25,27–31 It has also been shown that in the case of multi-chromophoric systems, such as natural photosynthetic complexes, plasmon excitations in metallic nanoparticles can activate emission of otherwise non-emitting Chl molecules.21 This opens up a unique possibility to apply metallic nanostructures as highly advanced tools for tailoring function of naturally evolved pigment–protein complexes, especially in the context of construction of solar-to-fuel, solar cell and biosensor devices.
In this report we show that a controlled assembly of the PSI-LHCI complex on silver nanowires (AgNWs) leads to the spectacular improvement of the Chl absorption of the PSI-LHCI complex. This is perhaps the first demonstration of specific attachment of natural photosynthetic complexes on plasmonically active metallic nanostructures. By orienting the PSI-LHCI complex via His-tagged cytochrome c553 biofunctionalization of AgNWs we activated absorption of a pool of Chls that not only harvest light rather poorly in the native state, but also when deposited randomly on AgNWs, exhibit minute increase of absorption. Comprehensive spectroscopic studies, including high-resolution fluorescence imaging, show clearly the scale of the improvement and allow for its quantitative estimation. In addition, time-resolved fluorescence measurements indicate almost complete homogeneity of the nanostructure fabricated using the His-tag bioconjugation, in contrast to the randomly oriented sample. Thus, specific and spatially oriented attachment of photosynthetic complexes to AgNWs results not only in substantial enhancement of absorption due to plasmon excitations, but also in uniformity of the interaction, which is essential for improving functionality of such hybrid assemblies as efficient solar energy conversion devices.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Spectral properties
In contrast to its cyanobacterial counterpart, which often forms trimeric9 and sometimes dimeric and tetrameric oligomers,38 eukaryotic PSI-LHCI is always a monomer. Eukaryotic PSI is surrounded by an external crescent-like LHCI antenna system composed of 4–9 Lhca/Lhcr subunits that are asymmetrically located on the PsaF/PsaJ side of the core complex.9 In higher plants, PSI-LHCI complex comprises a total of 157–159 Chl molecules,39,40 which build the light-harvesting antenna system and charge separation P700 center. The higher plant PSI-LHCI X-ray structure displays four outer light-harvesting clusters in the LHCI belt.11,39,40 The structure also reveals up to 35 Cars which play essential roles both in light harvesting and photoprotection.11,39
Absorption spectrum of the C. merolae PSI-LHCI complex (Fig. 1, black line) consists of several broad bands corresponding to different pigments present in its structure. The strong bands in the UV and blue regions are associated with a Chl a Soret band. The second strong absorbing band is located in the red and near IR range and is associated with the Qy band of Chl a. Absorption of other light-harvesting components of PSI-LHCI, mainly Cars, can be linked to a smaller absorption band in the green part of a visible range. The absorption spectrum presented Fig. 1 describes PSI-LHCI in an aqueous buffer solution, without any influence of external sources on its molecular energy transfer system. The emission spectrum (red line) originates from the first excited state of Chl a. In addition to the strong band at 678 nm, a less intense red-shifted band is also present, which is associated with the so-called red Chls characterized by the lower excited state energy compared to other Chls present in the complex.41–43
 Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of an aqueous suspension of AgNWs (blue) and buffer suspension of the PSI-LHCI complex (black). The emission spectrum of PSI-LHCI suspension upon excitation at 405 nm is displayed in red. 
In fact, the presence of the red Chls, that are responsible for the red-shifted absorption band as compared to the primary donor P700, is one of the most characteristic spectral features of the PSI complex. The pool of red Chls is small, yet it strongly affects the energy transfer and trapping in the PSI reaction center. Numerous studies have shown that the red Chls are crucial in maintaining efficient energy equilibration within the PSI complexes and serve as intermediate reservoirs/energy traps that funnel excitation energy toward the RC to increase its quantum efficiency.44 The red Chls often form excitonically coupled dimers that are primarily located in the LHCI subunits.39,45,46 A fraction of this pool has also been postulated to be located at the interface of the PsaA/PsaB heterodimer and the subunits PsaL and PsaM.47–49
The extinction spectrum of the AgNWs in an aqueous solution is shown for comparison (Fig. 1, blue line). A broad peak originating from plasmon excitations overlaps well with the Chl a Soret band, and its long tail covers nearly the whole absorption spectrum of the PSI-LHCI complex. This overlap may lead to significant influence of plasmon excitations in AgNWs on the optical properties of the photosynthetic complex in a hybrid PSI-LHCI/AgNW nanostructure. However, in the actual biohybrid nanostructure a red shift of the plasmon resonance is expected due to the presence of proteins that change the local dielectric constant.21
2.2. Assembling hybrid nanostructures
In this study, in order to elucidate the impact of geometry on the interactions between photosynthetic complexes and silver nanowires, we fabricated three distinct hybrid nanostructures, as shown schematically in Fig. 2. The first sample (Fig. 2a) was a thin layer of randomly oriented PSI-LHCI complexes on a glass substrate, encapsulated within a polymer matrix of PVA with thickness comparable to a monolayer of proteins. This sample was our reference, since it featured no plasmonic effects. The other two samples consisted of functionalized AgNWs and PSI-LHCI complexes. One of the samples (labelled PSI-LHCI+AgNWs, shown in Fig. 2b) consisted of PSI-LHCI complexes that were physisorbed in random orientation on AgNWs placed on the glass substrate. In this case no control over the distance and orientation between PSI-LHCI and AgNWs, which plays a critical role in plasmonic interaction, is achieved. The third sample, shown in Fig. 2c (PSI-LHCI@AgNWs), features the highest degree of ordering of the biological components of the hybrid nanostructure. In this case, Ni-NTA-functionalized AgNWs were coated with a His6-tagged cyt c553 (a natural electron donor to P700+ RC) monolayer prior to hybridization with the PSI-LHCI complex that is known to site-specifically interact with cyt c553 through its donor side, in the proximity of the P700 RC and the PsaF core subunit.50 In this way, a highly uniform and ordered PSI-LHCI monolayer was engineered that exhibited controlled ‘PSI donor side-to-AgNWs’ orientation and constant distance between PSI and the surface of AgNWs.
 Fig. 2  Architecture of investigated samples: (a) PSI-LHCI layer spin-casted on a glass substrate, (b) a layer of PSI-LHCI complexes deposited randomly onto the Ni-NTA-functionalized AgNWs, and (c) PSI-LHCI complexes bioconjugated with the Ni-NTA-functionalized AgNWs via a His-tagged cyt c553. Note, that the diagrammatic representations are not to scale. 
It is important to note that in such highly ordered configuration, the distance between the components is most likely to be constant and uniform. A short distance between the interacting components is one of the key parameters that drive strong plasmonic interactions.22,23 Typical distances that are effective for plasmonic interactions range from a few nm to several tens of nm.22 Considering the maximum dimensions of the cyt c553 structure,51 edge-to-edge distance from the haem group to P700 (14 Å,50) and the maximum calculated thickness of the Ni-NTA (28 Å), we estimate the maximum distance between AgNWs surface and the P700 special pair to be approximately 70 Å, which fits well within the range of distances suitable for strong plasmonic interactions.21–23 As shown by fluorescence imaging described below, combining the tight control of both the distance and orientation, it was possible to tune selectively the optical properties of a subpopulation of fluorophores enclosed within the PSI-LHCI structure, leading to significant amplification of plasmonic interactions.
2.3. Optimization of PSI-LHCI attachment to silver nanowires
Before evaluating the strength of plasmonic interactions between functionalized AgNWs conjugated with both cyt c553 and PSI-LHCI complexes, we first established the conditions required for complete bioconjugation. To this end, we inspected fluorescence of PSI-LHCI complexes at fixed times of 10, 30 and 60 min after mixing with AgNWs. Examples of typical fluorescence maps obtained for such mixtures using excitation wavelength of 405 nm are displayed in Fig. 3. In all cases we found clearly visible, elongated objects corresponding to the AgNWs. Emerging of fluorescence emission exactly at locations of the nanowires strongly suggests that: (1) PSI-LHCI complexes attach to AgNWs, and (2) the fluorescence is not quenched. This is the first demonstration of such an effect, as in other reports conjugating photosynthetic complexes directly with metallic nanostructures resulted in significant fluorescence quenching.52
 Fig. 3  Fluorescence intensity maps the PSI-LHCI complexes conjugated with AgNWs measured for 405 nm excitation over a (a) 10 min (b) 30 min and (c) 60 min incubation period. Corresponding fluorescence intensity cross-sections are shown on the right. 
Furthermore, we observed qualitative differences in the fluorescence intensity distribution along the nanowires depending on the incubation time interval applied. In the case of the sample examined 10 min after mixing (Fig. 3a) fluorescence intensity along the AgNW was rather inhomogeneous. A cross-section of the fluorescence intensity extracted along the nanowire (black line) and corresponding background level (red line), shown in Fig. 3a (right), confirm the presence of strong fluctuations of PSI-LHCI fluorescence intensity, presumably due to non-uniform distribution of the PSI-LHCI complexes along the AgNWs. In addition, the PSI-LHCI emission intensity at the ends of AgNWs is significantly higher, as frequently observed for emitters coupled with metallic nanowires,53 and attributed to higher scattering of plasmons at the ends of the nanowires.
The results of analogous experiments conducted for the samples prepared with 30 and 60 min time intervals are displayed in Fig. 3b and c, respectively. With an increase of incubation time the images feature significantly better distribution of PSI-LHCI complexes on AgNWs, as evidenced by cross-sections along the AgNWs. Furthermore, the measured intensity of fluorescence was also higher for the samples measured after 30 and 60 min incubation periods, indicating a higher yield of the PSI-LHCI complexes bound to AgNWs. As the fluorescence maps showed more homogeneous emission intensity of PSI-LHCI after a 60 min incubation period, we concluded that within this timeframe the conjugation reached saturation, as there was a finite number of Ni2+ cations on functionalized AgNWs that were capable to link PSI-LHCI complexes via the His6-tagged cyt c553 monolayer. Based on the data, in subsequent experiments we used preparations obtained within 60 min incubation time.
2.4. Evaluation of plasmon enhancement of PSI-LHCI–AgNWs hybrid nanostructures
The key result that emphasizes the importance of controlled arrangement of photosynthetic proteins on plasmonically active nanostructures, in this case AgNWs, concerns spectrally resolved fluorescence imaging. Indeed, we measured 50 fluorescence intensity maps for each of the three nanostructures described previously: the PSI layer on a glass substrate, PSI-LHCI+AgNWs with no specific conjugation, and PSI-LHCI@AgNWs, where the photosynthetic complexes were specifically ordered on AgNWs. We first measured fluorescence image of a 100 × 100 μm2 area for 535 nm, and subsequently for 405 nm excitation wavelengths. Afterwards, a transmission image was taken in order to verify the positions of the AgNWs. In this way we were able to collect statistically relevant datasets, where fluorescence intensities could be directly compared for the two different excitation wavelengths applied to the same AgNWs. A similar approach was implemented for the PSI-LHCI complexes on a glass substrate in order to determine spectral relations for PSI-LHCI completely decoupled from any metallic nanostructures.

Fig. 4 shows representative fluorescence images obtained for both PSI-LHCI+AgNWs (Fig. 4a and c) and PSI-LHCI@AgNWs (Fig. 4b and d) nanostructures for excitation wavelengths of 405 nm and 535 nm. In each case the same nanowire was measured. In addition, Fig. 4e and f displays the intensity cross sections extracted from this data. When comparing the profiles obtained for excitation at 405 nm (black lines), we found no significant difference between the intensities collected along the nanowires. Fluorescence intensity measured at the ends of AgNWs was around 3-fold higher than along AgNWs, nonetheless it was comparable for both structures.
 Fig. 4  Fluorescence imaging obtained for PSI-LHCI+AgNWs (left column) and PSI-LHCI@AgNWs (right column) structures. The images were obtained for the same nanowire in each structure for the excitation wavelength of 405 nm (a and b, respectively), and 535 nm (c and d, respectively). The cross sections along the nanowires are displayed in (e) and (f) for PSI-LHCI + AgNWs and PSI-LHCI@AgNWs, with black and red lines corresponding to excitation at 405 nm and 535 nm, respectively. 
In contrast, the results of an analogous experiment performed with 535 nm excitation (red lines in Fig. 4e and f), point towards a dramatic difference between the two hybrid architectures. In the case of the PSI-LHCI + AgNWs sample (Fig. 4e), where no conjugation is present, the fluorescence intensity at the ends and along AgNWs was much lower as compared to 405 nm excitation. This approximately reflects the ratio between absorption of the PSI-LHCI complex at these two wavelengths. Remarkably, specific orientation of PSI-LHCI on AgNWs via cyt c553 (Fig. 4f) results in similar fluorescence intensities for both 405 nm and 535 nm excitations. This comparison suggests that control over the spatial arrangement of photosynthetic complexes on AgNWs can yield substantial changes of the optical properties of PSI-LHCI that can next be exploited in solar-to-fuel and biosolar cell device architectures.
As a side effect, it is also instructive to comment on the differences in the background levels (defined as intensities obtained for the areas away from the AgNWs) represented by dashed lines in Fig. 4e and f. For the PSI-LHCI+AgNWs sample, the background intensities, associated with emission of PSI-LHCI complexes that are not coupled to AgNWs, were different for the two excitation wavelengths in the same way as for the photosynthetic complexes deposited along the AgNWs. In the case of PSI-LHCI@AgNWs sample the background level, which is similar for the two excitation wavelengths, indicates just the dark current of the detection system, as there are no PSI-LHCI complexes present away from the AgNWs.
Universal character of substantial modification of the optical properties of the natural photosynthetic complex PSI-LHCI induced by coupling it specifically to plasmon excitations in silver nanowires, is further confirmed by statistical analysis. We determined the average fluorescence intensities both along and at the ends of AgNWs for approximately 50 single nanowires for the two wavelengths of 405 nm and 535 nm. For the analysis we considered only single, well-separated AgNWs.
The results obtained for the PSI-LHCI + AgNWs sample excited at 405 nm and 535 nm are shown in Fig. 5b and in Fig. 5e, respectively. Fluorescence intensities measured for 535 nm excitation were substantially lower than those obtained for 405 nm excitation. The relation between these intensities is slightly less than determined for a thin layer of PSI-LHCI complexes on a glass substrate (Fig. 5a and d, respectively), as summarized in Table 1. In fact, fluorescence intensities determined for PSI-LHCI layer on glass excited at 405 nm were 6-fold stronger than for 535 nm excitation, which roughly reflects the difference in absorption. At the same time, fluorescence intensities of PSI-LHCI complexes in the PSI-LHCI + AgNWs sample were strongly enhanced due to their plasmonic interaction with AgNWs. Namely, the enhancement factors of ∼12–16 and 4–5 were estimated for the PSI-LHCI + AgNWs sample (Fig. 5b and e, red bars) at the ends of AgNWs (filled) and along the AgNWs (empty), respectively. Thus, the enhancement of fluorescence emission exhibits a relatively weak dependence on the excitation wavelength applied to the structure with random orientation of PSI-LHCI on AgNWs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Histograms of fluorescence intensity for the PSI-LHCI layer on glass, (b) PSI-LHCI + AgNWs, and (c) PSI-LHCI@AgNWs structures following excitation at 405 nm. Analogous results measured for excitation at 535 nm are shown in panels (d)–(f). Intensities along the nanowires and at their ends are shown in empty and filled bars, respectively. 
Table 1 Average values of emission intensity of PSI-LHCI on glass, PSI-LHCI + AgNWs, and PSI-LHCI@AgNWs structures obtained for the excitation wavelengths of 405 nm and 535 nm. Respective enhancement factors, calculated with the assumption that PSI-LHCI forms a monolayer on glass, are given in brackets. The bottom row contains calculated ratios of the average emission intensity measured for 405 nm and 535 nm




 
PSI-LHCI
PSI-LHCI + AgNWs
PSI-LHCI@AgNWs


Along the AgNWs
At the ends of AgNWs
Along the AgNWs
At the ends of AgNWs




<I405em>
446.0
1755.0 (3.9)
5538.0 (12.4)
1605.0 (3.6)
5756.0 (12.9)


<I535em>
70.0
340.0 (4.9)
1104.0 (15.8)
866.0 (12.4)
3305.0 (47.2)


<I405em>/<I535em>
6.4
5.2
5.0
1.9
1.7




The specific and controlled attachment of PSI-LHCI complexes to AgNWs via cyt c553 qualitatively and quantitatively changes the optical response of the hybrid nanostructure to the incoming light. As shown in Fig. 5c and f (black bars), in the case of the highly ordered PSI-LHCI monolayer oriented with its donor (P700) side towards the cyt c553 and AgNWs, we observed a remarkable increase in fluorescence intensity upon illumination with 535 nm, i.e. the wavelength that is almost not absorbed by the native PSI-LHCI complex. In fact, the fluorescence intensity measured for 535 nm excitation indicates over 3-fold enhancement as compared to PSI-LHCI + AgNWs structure. At this wavelength the enhancement factors of ∼47 and 12 were determined for the PSI-LHCI@AgNWs nanostructure at the ends (filled) and along the AgNWs (empty), respectively (see Table 1). Importantly, the observed changes cannot be ascribed to direct excitation via cyt c553, as described in ESI.†
Averaged fluorescence intensities, calculated ratios of fluorescence intensities, and enhancement factors obtained for both excitation wavelengths, are summarized in Table 1. It is clear that the determined ratios of averaged emission intensities <I405em>/<I535em>(averaged fluorescence intensity of PSI-LHCI for the spectral range of (670 ± 5) nm excited at 405 nm and 535 nm, respectively) for the sample of PSI-LHCI + AgNWs (5.2 and 5.0 for fluorescence intensity along the nanowires and at the AgNWs ends, respectively) are comparable to the analogous result obtained for the plasmon-free PSI-LHCI sample on glass (6.4). In contrast, for the PSI-LHCI@AgNWs sample, fluorescence intensity ratios (1.9 and 1.7) are much lower compared to other two samples. We also would like to point out that the specific orientation of PSI-LHCI complexes on silver nanowires is the key in obtaining this result, as shown by the outcome of another control experiment, where silver nanowires were added to the mixture of PSI-LHCI and cyt c553. As shown in the ESI,† for such a sample a ratio between fluorescence intensity excited at 405 nm and 535 nm is equal to 5.7, thus is very similar to the optical properties of the structures in which the photosynthetic complexes were not specifically conjugated with plasmonically active AgNWs in a controlled manner. Moreover, no significant differences were detected for the calculated ratios for fluorescence intensity along the AgNWs and at their ends, regardless of the spatial arrangement of the sample analyzed.
Measurements of fluorescence intensity are in general not sufficient alone to determine the complex nature of the observed phenomena. Such information can be obtained by employing time-resolved fluorescence decay measurements which give an insight into excited state dynamics but also spatial arrangement of the proteins relative to the AgNW structure. To this end, we examined the kinetic components of the PSI-LHCI fluorescence decay upon 485 nm excitation of the 3 samples differing in the spatial organization and order of the fluorophores on AgNWs. Fig. 6 shows the representative normalized fluorescence decay curves (dots) as well as bi-exponential fits (lines). Fluorescence intensity decay of the PSI-LHCI layer on glass (green) exhibits bi-exponential behavior, with the fast and slow components (0.35 ns and 4.1 ns). Interaction of PSI-LHCI with plasmonic excitations in AgNWs qualitatively changes the kinetics of fluorescence. In the case of the physisorbed sample (PSI-LHCI + AgNW, red line in Fig. 6), where no control over the distance between the protein and AgNWs is present, we can expect either fluorescence quenching for the complexes that are in the proximity of AgNWs, as well as substantially weaker interaction for the complexes that are more distant. This inhomogeneity results, on one hand, in measurable shortening of the fluorescence decay, while on the other hand, the presence of substantial contribution characterized with long decay constant. In fact, the decay curve displayed in Fig. 6 measured for the physisorbed sample can be well-fitted by three decay constants, and the values are equal to 0.2, 0.8, and 4 ns. The longest component can be ascribed to PSI-LHCI complexes that are not interacting with plasmon excitations in silver nanowires. Such complexes will always be present in a sample prepared by spin-coating photosynthetic complexes on silver nanowires previously deposited on a substrate. While the shortest decay constant can be ascribed to the PSI-LHCI complexes whose fluorescence is quenched due to non-radiative energy transfer from chlorophylls to silver nanowires, the medium decay time is a result of averaging across complexes that couple with varied degree with plasmon excitations in silver nanowires. The latter is direct evidence of inherent inhomogeneity of the physisorbed sample. In contrast, the bioconjugated nanostructure (PSI-LHCI@AgNWs, black line in Fig. 6), seems to exhibit the fast component of the fluorescence decay, with the slow component significantly diminished. In fact, the decay constants obtained from fitting are 0.35 and 1.3 ns, respectively. Thus, this fast decay component features no measurable shortening over the kinetics obtained for PSI-LHCI on glass. These observations prompted us to suggest that: (1) for the ordered nanostructure the fluorescence enhancement can be mainly attributed to the increase of absorption cross-section of PSI-LHCI, and (2) most of the PSI-LHCI complexes attached to AgNWs interact in a similar way with plasmonic excitations, as expected for such a uniform structure.
 Fig. 6  Fluorescence decay curves measured with the excitation at 485 nm for PSI-LHCI layer on glass (green), PSI-LHCI physisorbed on AgNWs (red), and PSI-LHCI bioconjugated with AgNWs (black) together with fitted decay curves and residual plots. 
The results of fluorescence imaging described in this work clearly show marked differences in the spectral response of biohybrid nanostructures depending on the geometry and ordering of the PSI-LHCI complex with respect to AgNWs. The PSI-LHCI + AgNWs configuration consists of randomly oriented PSI-LHCI on AgNWs, which leads to non-specific interactions between the complexes and plasmonically active metallic nanoparticles. Namely, for each PSI-LHCI located in the vicinity of nanowires different subpopulations of cofactors can interact in a haphazard way due to variable distances and geometrical orientation with respect to the AgNWs. Such randomization would lead to fluorescence dynamics similar to the one observed for PSI-LHCI + AgNWs structure, where contributions from partially quenched, enhanced, or unaffected PSI-LHCI complexes are intertwined. It is also plausible, that in some cases the effects may simply average out.
The situation is totally different when we consider the specifically conjugated sample, whereby orientation of the PSI-LHCI complexes and their distance from the nanowires are tightly controlled, consistent and reproducible. For such a highly ordered hybrid system, all the PSI-LHCI complexes interact with plasmon excitations/oscillations in a similar way. It means that the same subpopulations of PSI-LHCI cofactors are affected by plasmons in a similar way, leading to the overall enhancement. It should be noted that the size of PSI-LHCI complex (140 Å × 40 Å,39) is comparable to the scale of plasmonic interactions. It means that even inside one PSI-LHCI complex some fluorophores can be quenched, while other subpopulations can undergo fluorescence enhancement. Similarly, some PSI-LHCI complexes are likely to comprise a subpool of cofactors that interact effectively with plasmon excitations, whilst other pools may not be coupled due to a larger distance from the AgNWs. Furthermore, due to interactions with plasmon excitations, an entirely new map of energy transfer pathways may be established leading to the novel optical properties of the biohybrid nanosystem. In particular, the efficiency of light-harvesting can be enhanced or the absorption spectral range can be altered. Indeed, in this study, we found a considerable increase of fluorescence intensity for excitation at 535 nm, i.e. in the spectral range that is optically nearly inactive for the PSI-LHCI complex in vivo.
In this work we show that the interaction of PSI-LHCI with plasmons on AgNWs results in a significant extension of the effective absorption cross-section of the PSI-LHCI antenna. It is important to note that illumination of PSI above 500 nm populates the so-called red Chls which form energy traps mainly in the LHCI antenna, but also in the PSI core.39,47 We can thus conclude that in the PSI-LHCI complexes that are specifically oriented with their donor side towards the AgNWs, the absorption cross section of the red Chls is likely to be enhanced. Our analyses clearly indicate that such plasmon-induced tuning of optical properties of the PSI-LHCI emitter is not possible when a low order and random orientation of the complexes and cofactors within occur.
3. Conclusions
We accomplished specific conjugation of functional photosynthetic complexes on plasmonically active metallic nanowires. Our work showed that the control of distance and orientation of PSI-LHCI complexes with respect to the AgNWs allows for selective and concerted excitation of fluorophore subpopulations yielding the novel fluorescence properties of this complex. Tuning of these subpopulations, in particular a sub-pool of red Chls, results in an increased functionality of the PSI-LHCI complex, i.e. it is possible to substantially extend its active absorption spectral range by oriented plasmonic interactions. Interactions with plasmon excitations can thus be considered as a powerful tool for “nature improving”, in particular in the context of constructing efficient biosolar cells, solar-to-fuel devices, biosensors and other (bio)medical devices. Importantly, the native electron donor of PSI, cyt c553, was employed for the first time as the bioconjugating protein that allowed for a uniform orientation of the PSI-LHCI complex, with its donor (P700) side towards the plasmonic nanostructure. In this way, we applied oriented nanostructuring of PSI-LHCI complexes to enhance the specific plasmonic interactions that improved absorption of PSI-LHCI, thereby paving the way towards significant advances in the application of this remarkably efficient solar light converter in a viable artificial leaf.
4. Experimental section
4.1 PSI-LHCI purification and AgNW preparation
The PSI-LHCI complex from an extremophilic red microalga Cyanidioschyzon merolae was purified as described previously.4 The concentration of the stock solution of PSI was 1.2 mg mL−1 Chl a suspended in buffer A composed of 40 mM HEPES, 3 mM CaCl2, 0.03% DDM, pH 8.0. Preparation of AgNWs by a wet-chemistry method was described elsewhere.32 A typical length of the nanowires was 20–40 μm, while their diameter was about 100 nm, as evidenced by scanning electron microscopy.
4.2 Cloning and expression of cyt c553 in E. coli
Genomic DNA from C. merolae was used as a template for polymerase chain reaction to amplify the petJ gene encoding cyt c553 protein (annotated CMV193C in the C. merolae gene database; http://merolae.biol.s.u-tokyo.jp/db/). The original petJ sequence was subcloned into pET28b-(+) vector (Invitrogen) together with a 10AA linker peptide between the petJ sequence and the C-terminal His6-tag. The sequence of the linker peptide is: GSGSGSGSLE. The entire construct was excised with NcoI and PstI and sub-cloned into a pBAD/HisA expression vector (Invitrogen) using the same restriction enzymes, then transformed into the E. coli strain DH5α. The correct orientation and sequence of the petJ::pBAD/HisA construct was confirmed by the restriction analysis and DNA sequencing. A specialized constitutively expressed vector pEC86 comprising a multiple gene cassette for cyt c type haem group maturation enzymes (a gift from Prof. A. Szczepaniak, Wrocław Univ.),33 was co-transformed with the pBAD/HisA recombinant vector (Thermo Scientific) into the expression host strain E. coli TOP10 (Thermo Scientific). Expression cultures were supplemented with 30 μg per μL chloramphenicol, 100 μg per μL ampicillin and grown from overnight saturated pre-cultures (1:100 volume ratio) to OD600 ∼ 0.4. The cultures were then supplemented with 100 mg L−1 Fe2SO4 and 17 mg L−1 δ-aminolevulinic acid, and gene expression was induced with 0.2% arabinose overnight. The cells were harvested at 4000g for 15 min at 15 °C and then chilled on ice for 20 min.
4.3 Purification of cyt c553

E. coli cells were resuspended in 100 mM phosphate buffer composed of 100 mM Na2HPO4, 18 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.5, supplemented with 20 mM imidazole, 25% glycerol (w/v), 30 μM PMSF and 20 μg of DNase I per mL of suspension. Cells were ruptured by vigorous agitation with 0.1 mm glass beads in a Bead Beater (BioSpec) using 18 cycles of 45 s and interim 4 min. cooling-off periods. Cell lysate was separated from beads by vacuum filtration. Cell debris was removed by ultracentrifugation for 45 min at 100000g at 4 °C. After centrifugation samples were filtered with 0.2 μm disposable filtering units (Millipore) and applied on an HPLC preparative Ni2+-nitrilo-triacetic acid (Ni-NTA) HisTrapTM HPLC column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min−1. The specifically bound proteins were washed for 30 min at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min−1 with 50 mM imidazole in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) and then eluted with a linear gradient of 50–420 mM imidazole in the same buffer. The column was further washed with 500 mM imidazole in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) for 30 min. Elution and final washing steps were done at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min−1. Elution of cyt c553 fractions was monitored at 416 nm, 521 nm and 553 nm, corresponding to the absorption peaks of reduced cyt c553. Cyt c553-containing fractions were pooled and concentrated in the VIVASPIN-2 devices (3000 MWCO, Sartorius-Intec, Poland) and re-suspended in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) supplemented with 25% glycerol (w/v). Glycerol was subsequently removed for all protein samples employed for the AgNW bioconjugation. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method34 using bovine serum albumin as a standard. Purity of the protein samples was verified on a 16% Tris-Tricine SDS-PAGE gels using an optimized protocol.35 Cyt c553 concentration was determined spectroscopically using extinction coefficient of 24.1 mM−1 (ref. 36) and employing redox difference spectroscopy (ΔA553red-ox). The stock solution of cyt c553 was 125 μM and was diluted in 10 mM phosphate buffer (10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.5), prior to conjugation with AgNWs.
4.4 Modification of AgNWs surface
Chemical modification of AgNW was based on modification of the gold surface with the NTA monolayer via sulphur atoms linkers, and bonding Ni2+ cations as the outer layer.37 In the first step, 250 μL of AgNWs aqueous solution (characterized by OD380 of 8.0) was centrifuged and rinsed with DMSO (HPLC grade). The AgNWs were exposed to a solution of 1 mg mL−1 dithiobis(succinimidylpropinate) in DMSO for 60 min. Subsequently, AgNWs solution was centrifuged and rinsed in 0.5 M K2CO3 buffer (pH 9.8), and then 150 mM of Nα′,Nα′′-bis(carbomethyl)-L-lysine was added and incubated for 90 min. The whole procedure described above was performed under anaerobic conditions (in the home-built glovebox). The AgNWs solution was centrifuged and rinsed once more in ultrapure distilled water (Fluka) and incubated for 60 min in 5 mM NiSO4. All the chemicals used were of high purity and purchased from Sigma Aldrich.
4.5 Sample preparation
Three samples were prepared with different geometries. All the following procedures were conducted at RT. For preparation of the reference sample, PSI-LHCI complexes (0.12 μg mL−1 Chl a) were enclosed within a polymer matrix of 0.05% aqueous polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and spin-casted on a glass substrate. Such a low concentration of PVA allows for forming a layer of PSI complexes. For preparation of the physisorbed sample (PSI-LHCI + AgNWs) functionalized AgNWs were first mixed with buffer suspension of PSI-LHCI complexes (0.12 μg mL−1 Chl a) in 0.05% PVA and then spin-coated on a glass substrate. For the generation of bioconjugated sample (PSI-LHCI@AgNWs) Ni-NTA-functionalized AgNWs were incubated for 60 min with 90 μg mL−1 of cyt c553 resuspended in buffer A, pH 8.0. The bioconjugated AgNWs were centrifuged and rinsed 3 times in buffer A to remove any unbound protein, then incubated with the PSI-LHCI complex (12 μg mL−1 Chl a) for 60 min. The sample was rinsed 3-fold in buffer A to remove any unbound PSI, followed by resuspension in 0.05% PVA and spin-coating on a glass substrate.
4.6 Optical characterization and fluorescence microscopy
Absorption and extinction spectra were measured using a Varian Cary 50 spectrophotometer. Emission spectra were collected with a Horiba Jobin Yvon Fluorolog 3 spectrofluorimeter. The fluorescence intensity maps were measured using a Nikon Eclipse Ti-U body-based wide-field fluorescence microscope with the Nikon Plan Apo immersion oil objective lens (100×, NA of 1.4). This setup employs the Andor iXon3 Du-888 EMCCD camera as a detector, cooled to −75 °C in order to minimize dark counts contribution in collected signals, together with a T650LPXR dichroic mirror (Chroma) as well as FELH0650 (Thorlabs) and FB670-10 (Thorlabs) optical filters. Fluorescence intensity maps measurements were conducted using two excitation wavelengths of 405 nm and 535 nm, provided by LED illuminators, both normalized to generate the 100 μW beam. Both LED illuminators were equipped with optical filters (FB405-10 and FEL0600, respectively; Thorlabs). In order to perform comparative analysis of results collected for both excitation wavelengths, for each area of the samples analyzed a set of consecutive measurements was performed. Firstly, fluorescence intensity frame excited at 535 nm was taken followed by collection of the fluorescence signals from the same area of the sample, using excitation at 405 nm. Additionally, in the case of samples containing AgNWs, a picture of chosen sample area was taken in transmission mode in order to check correlation between the position of nanowires and spatial arrangement of emitting regions.
Time-resolved fluorescence measurements were performed using a home-built confocal fluorescence microscope. The excitation laser of 485 nm in a pulsed mode with a repetition rate of 20 MHz and average power of 48 μW was used. Gaussian beam of the laser was achieved using a spatial filter with a 25 μm pinhole. The laser was focused on the sample using a microscope oil objective 60×, NA = 1.49 (Nikon). The sample was placed on a piezoelectric translation stage, which enabled a continuous movement with respect to the excitation laser beam. The emission was filtered by a long pass filter HQ655LP (Chroma) and extracted with a bandpass filter HQ675/20 (Chroma). The time-correlated single photon counting technique was used to measure dynamics of the fluorescence. The setup combines an SPC-150 module (Becker & Hickl) with fast avalanche photodiode (idQuantique id100-50) as a detector and gives the temporal resolution of 100 ps.
Acknowledgements
MS, DB, DK and SM: Research was supported by DEC-2013/11/B/ST3/03984 and 2016/21/B/ST3/02276 projects from the National Science Center of Poland. JDJO and JK are funded by the National Science Center of Poland (grants no. UMO-2013/11/N/NZ1/02390 and UMO-2014/15/B/NZ1/00975). JK and SM acknowledge funding from the Polish National Centre for Research and Development (grant no. DZP/POLTUR-1/50/2016). SM acknowledges support from the project 3/DOT/2016 from City of Gdynia. We thank Prof. A. Szczepaniak (Wrocław University, Poland) for the pEC86 vector comprising a multiple gene cassette for cyt c type haem maturation. T. Krupnik (Univ. of Warsaw) is acknowledged for his assistance with pilot cloning and expression studies of cyt c553. Prof. Dariusz Bartosik (Univ. of Warsaw) is gratefully acknowledged for providing the pBAD/HisA vector and host E. coli strain TOP10, and for his advice during the early cyt c553 expression studies. M. Twardowska is acknowledged for assistance in time-resolved fluorescence experiments.
References
R. Cogdell, Trends Biotechnol., 1998, 16, 521 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mackowski, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 193102 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Janna Olmos and J. Kargul, Acta Soc. Bot. Pol., 2014, 83, 423 CrossRef .
K. Ocakoglu, T. Krupnik, B. van den Bosch, E. Harputlu, M. P. Gullo, J. D. J. Olmos, S. Yildirimcan, R. K. Gupta, F. Yakuphanoglu, A. Barbieri, J. N. H. Reek and J. Kargul, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7467 CrossRef CAS .
M. Szalkowski, K. U. Ashraf, H. Lokstein, S. Mackowski, R. J. Cogdell and D. Kowalska, Photosynth. Res., 2016, 127, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mackowski, S. Wörmke, A. J. Maier, T. H. P. Brotosudarmo, H. Harutyunyan, A. Hartschuh, A. O. Govorov, H. Scheer and C. Bräuchle, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Crounse, R. P. Feldman and R. K. Clayton, Nature, 1963, 198, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
R. Theiler, F. Suter, H. Zuber and R. J. Cogdell, FEBS Lett., 1984, 175, 231 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kargul, J. D. Janna Olmos and T. Krupnik, J. Plant Physiol., 2012, 169, 1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Stieger, S. C. Feifel, H. Lokstein and F. Lisdat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15667 RSC .
A. Ben-Shem, F. Frolow and N. Nelson, Nature, 2003, 426, 630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Janna Olmos and J. Kargul, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol., 2015, 66, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Shah, W. R. Henson, T. S. Chadha, G. Lakin, H. Liu, R. E. Blankenship and P. Biswas, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Akbarzadeh and T. Wadowski, Appl. Therm. Eng., 1996, 16, 81 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Ciesielski, C. J. Faulkner, M. T. Irwin, J. M. Gregory, N. H. Tolk, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4048 CrossRef CAS .
L. Frolov, O. Wilner, C. Carmeli and I. Carmeli, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 263 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Gizzie, G. LeBlanc, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9328 CAS .
E. Darby, G. LeBlanc, E. A. Gizzie, K. M. Winter, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. LeBlanc, K. M. Winter, W. B. Crosby, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301953 CrossRef .
S. C. Feifel, K. R. Stieger, H. Lokstein, H. Lux and F. Lisdat, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12188 CAS .
N. Czechowski, H. Lokstein, D. Kowalska, K. Ashraf, R. J. Cogdell and S. Mackowski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 43701 CrossRef .
E. Wientjes, J. Renger, A. G. Curto, R. Cogdell and N. F. van Hulst, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4236 CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Friebe, J. D. Delgado, D. J. K. Swainsbury, J. M. Gruber, A. Chanaewa, R. van Grondelle, E. von Hauff, D. Millo, M. R. Jones and R. N. Frese, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 285 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Biochem., 2001, 298, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, E. V. Shevchenko and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bharadwaj and L. Novotny, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 14266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schmidt and S. Mackowski, Open Phys., 2011, 9, 562 CAS .
M. Kajetan Schmidt, S. Mackowski and J. Aizpurua, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 1017 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lal, J. H. Hafner, N. J. Halas, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Zhang, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander and H. Xu, Small, 2011, 7, 593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Yin, B. T. Mayers, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4736 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bialek, S. Krzywda, M. Jaskolski and A. Szczepaniak, FEBS J., 2009, 276, 4426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Bradford, Anal. Biochem., 1976, 72, 248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schägger, Nat. Protoc., 2006, 1, 16 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Díaz, F. Navarro, M. Hervás, J. A. Navarro, S. Chávez, F. J. Florencio and M. A. De la Rosa, FEBS Lett., 1994, 347, 173 CrossRef .
K. Ataka, F. Giess, W. Knoll, R. Naumann, S. Haber-Pohlmeier, B. Richter and J. Heberle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, D. A. Semchonok, E. J. Boekema and B. D. Bruce, Plant Cell, 2014, 26, 1230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, M. Suga, T. Kuang and J.-R. Shen, Science, 2015, 348, 989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mazor, A. Borovikova and N. Nelson, eLife, 2015, 4, e07433 Search PubMed .
J. B. Nieder, R. Bittl and M. Brecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Byrdin, I. Rimke, E. Schlodder, D. Stehlik and T. A. Roelofs, Biophys. J., 2000, 79, 992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. O. Pålsson, C. Flemming, B. Gobets, R. van Grondelle, J. P. Dekker and E. Schlodder, Biophys. J., 1998, 74, 2611 CrossRef .
M. Werst, Y. Jia, L. Mets and G. R. Fleming, Biophys. J., 1992, 61, 868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Croce and H. van Amerongen, Photosynth. Res., 2013, 116, 153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Ihalainen, P. E. Jensen, A. Haldrup, I. H. M. van Stokkum, R. van Grondelle, H. V. Scheller and J. P. Dekker, Biophys. J., 2002, 83, 2190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jordan, P. Fromme, H. T. Witt, O. Klukas, W. Saenger and N. Krauss, Nature, 2001, 411, 909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Zazubovich, S. Matsuzaki, T. W. Johnson, J. M. Hayes, P. R. Chitnis and G. J. Small, Chem. Phys., 2002, 275, 47 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rätsep, T. W. Johnson, P. R. Chitnis and G. J. Small, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 836 CrossRef .
F. Sommer, F. Drepper, W. Haehnel and M. Hippler, J. Biol. Chem., 2006, 281, 35097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yamada, S. Y. Park, H. Shimizu, Y. Koshizuka, K. Kadokura, T. Satoh, K. Suruga, M. Ogawa, Y. Isogai, T. Nishio, Y. Shiro and T. Oku, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr., 2000, 56, 1577 CrossRef CAS .
I. Carmeli, I. Lieberman, L. Kraversky, Z. Fan, A. O. Govorov, G. Markovich and S. Richter, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kowalska, B. Krajnik, M. Olejnik, M. Twardowska, N. Czechowski, E. Hofmann and S. Mackowski, Sci. World J., 2013, 2013, 1 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr03866f‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of an aqueous suspension of AgNWs (blue) and buffer suspension of the PSI-LHCI complex (black). The emission spectrum of PSI-LHCI suspension upon excitation at 405 nm is displayed in red.	 

 	Fig. 2  Architecture of investigated samples: (a) PSI-LHCI layer spin-casted on a glass substrate, (b) a layer of PSI-LHCI complexes deposited randomly onto the Ni-NTA-functionalized AgNWs, and (c) PSI-LHCI complexes bioconjugated with the Ni-NTA-functionalized AgNWs via a His-tagged cyt c553. Note, that the diagrammatic representations are not to scale.	 

 	Fig. 3  Fluorescence intensity maps the PSI-LHCI complexes conjugated with AgNWs measured for 405 nm excitation over a (a) 10 min (b) 30 min and (c) 60 min incubation period. Corresponding fluorescence intensity cross-sections are shown on the right.	 

 	Fig. 4  Fluorescence imaging obtained for PSI-LHCI+AgNWs (left column) and PSI-LHCI@AgNWs (right column) structures. The images were obtained for the same nanowire in each structure for the excitation wavelength of 405 nm (a and b, respectively), and 535 nm (c and d, respectively). The cross sections along the nanowires are displayed in (e) and (f) for PSI-LHCI + AgNWs and PSI-LHCI@AgNWs, with black and red lines corresponding to excitation at 405 nm and 535 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Histograms of fluorescence intensity for the PSI-LHCI layer on glass, (b) PSI-LHCI + AgNWs, and (c) PSI-LHCI@AgNWs structures following excitation at 405 nm. Analogous results measured for excitation at 535 nm are shown in panels (d)–(f). Intensities along the nanowires and at their ends are shown in empty and filled bars, respectively.	 


<I405em>	446.0	1755.0 (3.9)	5538.0 (12.4)	1605.0 (3.6)	5756.0 (12.9)
<I535em>	70.0	340.0 (4.9)	1104.0 (15.8)	866.0 (12.4)	3305.0 (47.2)
<I405em>/<I535em>	6.4	5.2	5.0	1.9	1.7

 	Fig. 6  Fluorescence decay curves measured with the excitation at 485 nm for PSI-LHCI layer on glass (green), PSI-LHCI physisorbed on AgNWs (red), and PSI-LHCI bioconjugated with AgNWs (black) together with fitted decay curves and residual plots.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr03866f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
