Liquid metals: an ideal platform for the synthesis of two-dimensional materials   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS01166A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS01166A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1253-1276Liquid metals: an ideal platform for the synthesis of two-dimensional materials†

        
          
            Patjaree 
            Aukarasereenont
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abigail 
            Goff
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chung Kim 
            Nguyen
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chris F. 
            McConville
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Aaron 
            Elbourne
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ali 
            Zavabeti
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Torben 
            Daeneke
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia
bSchool of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia. E-mail: Torben.Daeneke@rmit.edu.au
cInstitute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3216, Australia
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia
Received 
      20th December 2021
    First published on 2nd February 2022AbstractThe surfaces of liquid metals can serve as a platform to synthesise two-dimensional materials. By exploiting the self-limiting Cabrera-Mott oxidation reaction that takes place at the surface of liquid metals exposed to ambient air, an ultrathin oxide layer can be synthesised and isolated. Several synthesis approaches based on this phenomenon have been developed in recent years, resulting in a diverse family of functional 2D materials that covers a significant fraction of the periodic table. These straightforward and inherently scalable techniques may enable the fabrication of novel devices and thus harbour significant application potential. This review provides a brief introduction to liquid metals and their alloys, followed by detailed guidance on each developed synthesis technique, post-growth processing methods, integration processes, as well as potential applications of the developed materials.
Patjaree Aukarasereenont
Patjaree Aukarasereenont is a PhD candidate at RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia, and a member of the ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies (FLEET). Prior to commencing her candidature in 2020, she received her BEng (Mechanical Engineering) from Kasetsart University, Thailand, and MEng (Micro-nano Engineering) from RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. Her PhD research focuses on the fabrication of transparent and flexible electronics based on 2D materials synthesised via liquid metal chemistry.
Abigail Goff
Abigail Goff received her Bachelor of Science and Honours Degree in Chemistry in 2018/2019 from Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne Australia. She is currently undertaking her PhD at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology in Chemical engineering, examining the use of liquid metals as reaction platforms for the growth and exfoliation of self-limiting 2D metal oxides for use in low-energy logic-based devices.
Chung Kim Nguyen
Chung Kim Nguyen received his MEng degree in Chemical Engineering from Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT) in 2014. He is currently a PhD candidate in the School of Engineering, RMIT University. His research interests mainly focus on the chemistry of liquid metals and 2D materials synthesis for use in electronic applications.
Aaron Elbourne
Dr Aaron Elbourne is a Research Fellow within the School of Science at RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. He is currently the recipient of a Jack Brockhoff Foundation Early Career Medical Research Fellowship and an Australian Research Council Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA). He obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 2017 from The University of Newcastle, Australia under the supervision of Professor Erica J. Wanless. He began his postdoctoral fellowship in February of 2017. His research interests involve high-resolution atomic force microscopy, ion adsorption, solid–liquid interfaces, bio-interfaces, nanomaterials, liquid metals, and antimicrobial technologies.
Ali Zavabeti
Dr Ali Zavabeti is a McKenzie Fellow at the University of Melbourne, department of chemical engineering. He obtained his BEng (Hons) and MEngSc (Res) from Monash University before receiving his PhD award from RMIT University in Australia. He worked as a research fellow for the ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies (FLEET) before joining the University of Melbourne. His primary research focus is on surface and interfacial sciences, nanoelectronics, two-dimensional oxides and liquid metals.
Torben Daeneke
Dr Torben Daeneke received his PhD in Chemistry from Monash University, Australia in 2012. After graduating he held postdoctoral appointments at the CSIRO and at RMIT University (Australia). In 2015 he received an RMIT Vice Chancellor's postdoctoral fellowship. In 2018 he joined RMIT's School of Engineering as a faculty member and is now an Associate Professor. Dr Daeneke has authored over 100 peer-reviewed journal articles in areas such as materials for electronic devices, the chemistry of liquid metals, catalysis and 2D materials. In recent years he has developed novel techniques for the synthesis of functional materials using liquid metal solvents.

Key learning points
(1) Theoretical concepts behind the oxide formation on liquid metal surface and brief overview of metal selection for liquid metal alloy synthesis.
(2) Walkthrough of each developed liquid metal-based synthesis approach for two-dimensional materials synthesis and available post-growth processing methods used to convert oxide materials derived from liquid metals to other compounds.
(3) Integration of two-dimensional materials synthesized via liquid metal-based approaches.
(4) Current and possible future applications of the synthesized materials.
(5) Prospects and challenges of the liquid metal-based synthesis platform.

1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) metal oxides are an exciting class of low-dimensional materials that have unique characteristics and represent promising candidates for a wide range of device applications in electronics, optoelectronics, sensing, and energy storage.1–3 To date, several approaches have been employed to obtain these materials, including mechanical exfoliation, vapor phase techniques, and solution-based synthesis. However, these methods possess limitations and are complex to scale and optimise, hence alternative approaches should be considered. Recently, a simple synthesis technique involving liquid metals has been demonstrated to effectively isolate 2D metal oxides.4 The term liquid metals, for the purpose of this review, covers metals and metal alloys present in liquid form below approximately 350 °C which includes several post-transition elements, group 12 elements, and their alloys (see Fig. 1a). Following the Cabrera–Mott oxidation model depicted in Fig. 1b,5 an ultrathin oxide layer forms on liquid metal surfaces once it is exposed to ambient atmosphere. This oxide skin is weakly attached to its parent metal, resulting in an ease of exfoliation onto desired substrates. Other 2D material compounds are also accessible by performing subsequent post-processing on the obtained oxides.6,7 The use of liquid metals and liquid metal alloys as reaction platforms for the synthesis of 2D metal oxides is gaining popularity due to the relative simplicity of the process and the ability to create large, ultra-thin materials with minimal defects.8 Furthermore, liquid metal-based techniques enable the synthesis of a range of materials including naturally stratified, non-layered and amorphous compounds, thereby significantly expanding the available compound family of 2D materials. The synthesised materials can then be exploited in a variety of applications. This tutorial review introduces liquid metal-based synthesis techniques that have been developed to date as a guide for researchers looking for alternative and novel synthesis methods for creating 2D materials. The fundamentals of liquid metals will be discussed first, followed by a walkthrough of each developed technique. Furthermore, post-processing methods that can be applied to convert oxides into other compounds such as phosphates, sulphides, and nitrides will be discussed. The assembly of liquid metal derived 2D materials into heterostructures for potential device applications will then be reviewed. Following this, we present recently demonstrated as well as possible future applications of liquid metal-based 2D materials. Finally, the conclusion section will discuss the challenges and future aspects of liquid metal-based synthesis methods.
 Fig. 1  (a) Selected liquid metal base elements with their atomic number and melting temperature. (b) Cabrera–Mott oxidation occurs at the surface of liquid metals in the presence of oxygen.5 Electrons from the metal tunnel through the growing oxide shell, resulting in a self-generated electric field called the Mott field. This field promotes the diffusion of metal and oxygen ions into the oxide shell, leading to oxide growth. As the oxide becomes thicker, the field strength reduces until ion diffusion ceases. Note: (b) Reproduced from ref. 9 and 29 with permission from © 2020 Elsevier Inc. and © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021, respectively. 
2. Fundamentals of liquid metals
In contrast to other liquids, liquid metals exhibit metallic bonding inside their bulk phase, which is characterised by highly delocalised valence electrons that are responsible for the electronic properties of molten metals.9,10 The loss of valence electrons results in the formation of metal ions that are arranged without long-range order, which is contrary to the regular atomic arrangements observed in solid metals. Strong coulombic forces maintain the local charge neutrality within the assembly of ions and electrons, while both charged entities remain fluid. The formation of partially or fully isolated particles such as free ions or electrons is unfavourable and therefore coulombic forces result in a well-defined boundary on the surface of liquid metals.10,11 The surface of liquid metals is frequently described as atomically flat due to the high surface tension, resulting in an ideal growth environment for creating ultrathin 2D materials. One can also consider alloying two or more liquid metal elements for synergic enhancement of physical and chemical properties of the alloy mixture as well as the exploration of more materials. Metal solubility, which is exponentially dependent on temperature in the dilute solution regime, needs to be taken into account when it comes to producing alloys.12 Other material properties contributing to the solubility include: the atomic diameter; crystal structures; valency; as well as electronegativity; which should all be as similar as possible for the constituent metals.8
2.1 Surface tension
The high surface tension of liquid metals is one of their key attributes and can be calculated from the difference between the heat of evaporation and the total pairwise atomic interactions inside the bulk or through modelling of atomic interactions.13–15 Experimentally, it can be measured from the contact angle between a droplet and a surface16,17via the pendant drop methods18,19 and can be modulated through electrochemical methods.20 However, measuring the contact angle of liquid metal droplets with non-reactive surfaces was found to significantly underestimate the surface tension due to the formation of an oxide layer in air.21 The lower apparent surface tension arises due to surface oxidation and results in a higher wetting ability. This indicates significant interactions between the native oxide and solid interfaces, suggesting that selective transfer of surface oxides onto different substrates may be possible.
In liquid alloys, surface layering may also occur, which is limited to a few atomic diameters on the surface.11,22,23 Surface layering occurs on molten alloys as a response to the abrupt termination of the metallic phase and serves to reduce surface tension, causing the metal with the lower surface tension to dominate the interface.24 This phenomenon has been observed in a number of binary alloys, including eutectic gallium indium (EGaIn) where, after in situ sputtering in vacuum, the top surface became significantly indium enriched, even though it is the minority component of the bulk alloy.25,26 Interestingly, the oxide layer that forms on the surface of EGaIn is found to be composed of gallium oxide.27,28 The preferential growth of gallium oxide is due to the more favourable Gibbs free energy of oxide formation for gallium when compared with indium. By exploiting this concept, elements with thermodynamically more favourable oxide formations can be alloyed into gallium-based liquid metals to produce oxides of the dissolved elements.4,29 Thus, adding metallic solutes to a molten metal can substantially modify interfacial layering and the composition of the surface oxide.
2.2 Surface oxidation
Surface oxides are known to form spontaneously on the surface of liquid metals in the presence of ambient atmosphere, as well as other oxygen containing environments.26 The surface oxide growth is a self-limiting reaction at low to moderate temperatures and can be described by the Cabrera–Mott process.5 The theory developed by Cabrera and Mott describes initially rapid growth kinetics where a few monolayers of oxide form nearly instantaneously upon exposure to molecular oxygen.5 After the formation of an initial oxide layer, electrons from the metallic bulk ionise surface adsorbed oxygen via a tunnelling process, resulting in the formation of an electric field gradient across the oxide layer. This electric field (Mott field), which is defined by the work function of the metal and the ionised oxygen species, drives ion migration into the oxide layer and thus promotes growth. As the oxide layer becomes thicker, the field strength is reduced, resulting in self-termination of the process and a final oxide thickness of a few nanometres. The oxide properties, such as thickness and oxidation kinetics, can be controlled by reducing the oxygen partial pressure or via surface functionalisation.30–32
The interfacial force between the oxide skin and its parent liquid metal is weak, allowing the straightforward isolation of this surface oxide as well as the exploitation of these naturally occurring ultrathin interfacial compounds.8,33 A minimum of the electron density distribution at the boundary between the liquid Ga surface and the oxide has been observed in previous work, indicating the absence of covalent bonds.34 The nonpolar nature of liquid metals also limits non-covalent interactions, and a combination of these two effects results in the weak attachment of native surface oxides to their molten parent metal.34,35
The formation of preferential surface oxides from binary liquid metal alloys may be predicted using a combination of thermodynamic equations.29 In the selected alloy system at temperatures ranging from 298 to 773 K, the enthalpies of formation (ΔHf) of solute metal (m), metal solvent (s), and each possible metal oxide (mo) were first calculated using the following expression; (1)where  is the Gibbs free energy of formation under standard state conditions (kJ mol−1), T is the temperature (K), and S° is the entropy under standard state conditions (kJ K−1). The obtained enthalpies of formation of the solute metal (ΔHf(m)) and metal solvent (ΔHf(s)) were multiplied by their corresponding alloy ratio [m] and [s], extracted from the phase diagrams, respectively. The summation of both values then resulted in the enthalpy of alloy formation (ΔHa) as shown below. (2)
Subsequently, the enthalpy of combustion (ΔHcomb) for each possible metal oxide produced from the alloy system can be calculated with the following equation: ΔHcomb = AΔHf(mo) − (BΔHf(O2) × CΔHa)(3)where A, B, and C represent the stoichiometric coefficients for the metal oxide, oxygen, and the metal or solvent based on which metal oxide ΔHcomb is being calculated, respectively. Finally, by replacing ΔHf with ΔHcomb and rearranging eqn (1), the Gibbs free energy of combustion (ΔGalloy) for each oxide can be determined before comparing the values to identify the one that will preferentially form. Note that the entropy is no longer under standard state conditions. The prediction utilising these equations helps minimising trial and error and allows for the selection of the ideal metal solvent. Recent examples of this approach include Sb, which when alloyed with Ga, leads to the formation of Ga2O3. However, if alloyed with Bi, the predominant oxide formed is Sb2O3.36Eqn (3) does not take into account the effect of O2 concentration or possible formation of mixed oxides, as is seen when an alloy of In–Sn is used to print 2D indium-tin oxide (ITO).37 As such, a deeper understanding of the thermodynamic properties of liquid metal alloy interfaces should be developed.
3. Synthesis methods
3.1 Liquid metal alloy synthesis
Although low melting point metals can be utilised as unitary element, alloying with other metals allows us to expand our knowledge of liquid metal chemistry further and to isolate a wider range of 2D metal oxides. Liquid metals with low melting points can act as solvents into which other higher melting temperature metals may be alloyed. The solubility of liquid metals can be estimated prior to the alloying process using published solubility parameters and phase diagrams of the relevant system. Either employing induction furnaces and inert atmosphere arc systems or mechanical grinding with a mortar and pestle in an inert atmosphere has been found to be effective when it comes to producing alloys.4,38,39 For many metal systems, the grinding process removes any pre-existing oxide skins and facilitates wetting between the solid solute and the liquid solvent metal, while also increasing the surface area.
3.2 Two-dimensional metal oxides from liquid metal-based synthesis techniques
Two-dimensional (2D) metal oxides can be isolated through various liquid metal-based techniques, including printing (touch,4 squeeze,6,37 or blade print40–45 techniques), liquid phase growth and exfoliation (including sonication46 and bubbling4,47,48 methods), and surface templated growth of materials on liquid metal surfaces.49,50 The liquid metal printing processes may also be used to assist the synthesis of heterostructures which will be discussed later in this review.51,52
Other 2D compounds may also be synthesised as the smooth surface of the liquid allows for the synthesis of low-defect materials.53 Their high conductivity, non-polar nature, and the existence of a large number of free electrons and ions within the bulk are also useful as the liquid metal can be used to reduce precursor materials to form ultrathin surface skins,49,50 and the weak forces between the bulk liquid and the solid surface materials allow for these skins to be removed with ease.8
The resulting 2D materials are shown to be ultra-thin (<5 nm) with high consistency in thicknesses47,54,55 and laterally large reaching centimetre scale,6,56 making these techniques ideal alternatives to more established epitaxial approaches such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),57 and mechanical exfoliation.58 The liquid metal-based methods also offer simple and fast synthesis routes for fabricating large area 2D materials, while most conventional methods require longer growth times and relatively high operating temperatures.59–61 Furthermore, most liquid metal-based syntheses are substrate independent,37,45 which is a remarkable advantage over conventional growth methods that require lattice-matched substrates.62,63 As such, by using the synthesis approaches presented herein, a wide range of 2D metal oxides and other 2D materials including some that would otherwise be impossible to synthesise, due to their non-layered natures, are suddenly quite realisable.8 A video showing the different deposition techniques in detail is available as digital ESI,† online (Vid. S1).

3.2.1 Touch and squeeze printing. 
The oxides grown via the Cabrera–Mott process are easily removed by a process known as touch printing. This is carried out by gently touching the surface of a liquid metal droplet with an appropriate substrate allowing the oxide to be transferred (Fig. 2a). As the adhesive forces between the liquid and oxide are weak, transfer of the 2D sheet from the bulk liquid metal is readily possible.4,8 In the touch-printing process, a droplet of liquid metal is placed on a glass slide on a hotplate and is heated to its melting point. Non-uniform pre-existing oxides that could also contain contamination will initially dominate the surface and should be removed, allowing for a fresh and clean oxide layer to grow. A substrate that has been pre-heated on the hotplate is then brought into contact with the surface of the oxide-coated liquid metal before being lifted off smoothly.4 Substrate pre-heating is required, since pressing a cold substrate against a liquid metal may freeze the alloy, reducing the flexibility required during transfer. Fig. 2(b–e) depict a touch-printed 2D Bi2O3 nanosheet that was isolated from molten Bi and transferred onto substrates for different characterisations.64 During touch printing, liquid metals should rest on a steady surface to avoid wrinkles in the 2D skin that can form due to vibrations and shaking of the liquid metal surface. Synthesis can also be achieved in reverse, where the liquid metal dropped from a syringe, touches a substrate lying underneath. Previous work has demonstrated this technique to synthesise 2D β-Ga2O3 using liquid EGaIn.65
 Fig. 2  (a) Touch-printing process. A metal is heated to its melting temperature and an oxide skin rapidly forms on the droplet surface following the Cabrera–Mott mechanism. This oxide layer is subsequently exfoliated by gently touching the surface with a substrate. Ultrathin Bi2O3 sheets exfoliated from liquid Bi via the touch-printing method. (b) AFM image with the inset shows the step-height profile, (c) low-, (d) high-resolution TEM images and (e) the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) image.64 (f) Squeeze-printing process. A relatively small liquid metal droplet is placed between two substrates. Force is applied to squeeze the molten metal resulting in ultrathin oxide sheets being obtained on both substrates. (g) AFM morphology and (h) low-resolution TEM image of monolayer ITO obtained from liquid In–Sn alloy utilising the squeeze-printing technique.37 (i) An AFM image of squeeze-printed 2D Ga2O3 isolated from liquid Ga and (j) the height profiles collected at 56 locations from 5 different Ga2O3 sheets showing high consistency in layer thicknesses due to the Cabrera–Mott reaction.52 Note: (b–e) Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018. (g and h) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2020. (i and j) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
In a similar way, squeezing the droplet between two substrates allows the oxide skin to spread out and attach to both substrates (Fig. 2f).6,37 A substrate is placed on a hotplate and warmed to the melting point of the chosen liquid metal. A droplet of liquid metal (smaller than that is used in touch-printing) is then placed on the substrate, allowed to fully oxidise before a second warmed substrate is placed on top and gently pressed downward, allowing the oxides to be transferred onto both substrates. During the squeeze-printing process, the oxide skin may form cracks, however, any gaps in the surface skin are filled due to the near instantaneous Cabrera-Mott re-oxidation.5,66 As such, the self-healing of the interfacial oxide enables the growth of larger sheets when compared to the touch printing method. The method results in two laterally large 2D metal oxide flakes that are attached to both substrates via van der Waals forces.6,37,52 Examples of ultrathin ITO37 and Ga2O352 derived from a liquid In-Sn alloy and molten Ga, respectively, are presented in Fig. 2(g–j). The remaining bulk liquid metal forms spherical droplets after the substrates are separated due to the high surface tension of the liquid metal. These residual droplets are easily removed, as shown in Vid. S1 (ESI†).6,37
Work has previously been done to examine the surface properties of EGaIn, specifically the elasticity of the oxide skin, whose critical surface stress was found to be ∼0.5 N m−1.26 As the touch-printing process requires a simple touching motion of the substrate to the liquid metal, the force applied should remain within the elastic region to retain the droplet shape and avoid damaging the 2D flakes. This method results in the formation of a 2D sheet of similar size to that of the droplet used. The squeeze printing method, however, utilises the critical stress and the ability of the liquid metal to rapidly re-oxidise upon fracturing and allows for a much larger flake in comparison to the size of the droplet used. In one such endeavours, the ideal force applied to squeeze-print centimetre-sized ITO from a 9 mg droplet of In–Sn alloy was monitored and found to be 2.4 ± 0.5 N.37
In some circumstances, the liquid metal may freeze on the substrate after printing, resulting in a metallic residue which should be removed via a cleaning procedure using warm alcohol and a cotton bud, which was found to be highly effective (see Vid. S1, ESI†).6,7 Alternatively, metal inclusions can be removed via selective etching. Iodide–triiodide (I−/I3−) solutions have been found to effectively remove indium inclusions when 2D ITO was etched overnight.37 When touch-printing is used, cleaning may be avoided if the substrate is heated on a second hotplate to a higher temperature to prevent freezing upon contact with the liquid metal.
Certain liquid metal and liquid metal alloys may also respond differently to the O2 concentration. For example, liquid tin oxidises rapidly in ambient conditions to form multiple layers of oxide consisting of a thin SnO sheet that is covered with SnO2 scales.67 To avoid thicker flakes or mixed oxides, reactions using liquid metal such as Sn, Bi, and Zn should be performed in an environment where the O2 level is well controlled. Improved outcomes have been reported when employing a graphite nozzle to effectively remove and trap pre-existing surface impurities that may be present. The nozzle is used to press downward onto the liquid metal, resulting in a small droplet that emerges on its surface. This limited area was then exposed to a dilute O2 in N2 mixture from which high quality 2D SnO layers were easily exfoliated via touch-printing.68
The touch and squeeze printing methods have been used extensively in the fabrication of various 2D metal oxides showing the versatility of the method. Oxides of high melting temperature metals such as Gd, Al, and Hf have been produced at near room temperature after alloying with liquid Ga and subsequent touch-printing.4 Centimetre-sized two-dimensional sheets of ITO have also been squeeze-printed from In–Sn alloy which were then incorporated into capacitive touch screens (Fig. 2g and h).37


3.2.2 Blade coating and roll transfer. 
Blade coating is another alternative to the touch- and squeeze-printing techniques.40,44 Several studies have reported different ways to perform this method, including brushing,41 tape printing,42,43 and roll transfer.45 Nevertheless, they share a similarity in concept whereby a liquid metal is being moved across the substrate and leaves behind an oxide skin which is only weakly attached to the parent liquid metal. The initial step is similar to the first two methods described, placing a metal pellet on a substrate before applying heat to melt it and allow an oxide layer to form. The next step of moving the liquid metal across the substrate is implemented differently for each approach. For the blade coating process, any clean simple tool such as a piece of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) can be utilised as a ‘squeegee’ to scrape the droplet along the surface of the substrate (see Fig. 3a).40,44,69
 Fig. 3  (a) Blade-coating technique. A liquid metal droplet is scraped with a ‘squeegee’ across a substrate allowing an oxide layer to attach to the surface. (b) AFM morphology of Ga2O3 nanosheet synthesised from liquid Ga through blade-coating (the inset is the height profile).44 (c) An optical microscopy image of 2D Ga2O3 as a result of ‘brushing’ liquid Ga across a SiO2 substrate.41 (d) Tape-printing method. A liquid metal is placed on a tape which is subsequently slid across a PDMS surface to print an oxide layer. The PDMS is then used as a stamp to transfer the 2D oxide onto another substrate. (e) SEM image and (f) AFM image with the step height profile inset of a tape-printed Ga2O3 nanosheet. (g) High-resolution TEM image with the corresponding SAED pattern of the synthesised Ga2O3.43 Note: (b) Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission. (c) Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from © 2019 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society. 
However, one should always be aware of the potential for introducing undesired cracks into the synthesised 2D sheets, which has been observed in previous work.40 Brushing, on the other hand, is carried out by placing the substrate with fully oxidised liquid metal on it facing down, followed by gently brushing on to another substrate.41 Ultrathin Ga2O3 sheets synthesised via the blade coating44 and brushing41 are presented in Fig. 3b and c, respectively.
A combination of synthesis and transfer has been proposed via tape-printing (Fig. 3d) where the liquid metal is first dropped on a tape surface and subsequently slid on PDMS leaving a trace of oxide. Next, by utilising PDMS as a stamp, the oxide is transferred onto a desired substrate.42,43Fig. 3(e–g) elucidate characterisations of 2D tape-printed Ga2O3 sheet.43 As for the roll transfer method, a glass pipette is used to roll a liquid metal droplet across the surface of a substrate imitating the act of writing with a pen as depicted in Fig. 4a.45 This technique was utilised to synthesise 2D β-TeO2 from molten Se–Te chalcogen mixture shown in Fig. 4(b–f).45 For all of these methods, any liquid metal residue could subsequently be removed either physically with tweezers, or by a suitable cleaning process as mentioned in the previous section. Alternatively, it was reported that an iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) solution could be used as an etchant to clean 2D ITO deposited on both glass and quartz.37 These versatile methods are beneficial in order to explore various 2D materials as well as their different structures and compounds. For example, crystalline Ga2O3 can be synthesised at 200 °C44 or by further annealing amorphous Ga2O3 obtained at room temperature.41,43 Oxide conversions (see the section on Post-processing) also allow synthesis of other compounds e.g. nitrides and sulphides, where some materials are non-layered and thus not accessible through other more conventional deposition methods.40,42
 Fig. 4  (a) Roll-transfer method. A glass pipette or a glass rod is utilised to roll a liquid metal droplet across a substrate surface mimicking handwriting, resulting in a 2D oxide sheet being deposited onto the substrate. (b) An optical microscopy image of ultrathin 2D β-TeO2 printed from liquid Se–Te alloy onto a SiO2 substrate via the roll-transfer approach. (c) Low-resolution TEM image, (d) high-resolution TEM image, and (e) selected area diffraction pattern of the material synthesised onto a TEM grid. (f) An AFM image of the exfoliated 2D β-TeO2.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2021. 
These dry printing processes may also be used to print multiple layers and heterostructures where an initial printed 2D metal oxide is followed by a second print of a second layer. For instance, double-layer ITO37 and β-TeO245 (Fig. 5j) have been produced through multi squeeze-printing and roll transfer, respectively. In the latter, printing of the oxide onto a variety of substrates was demonstrated in Fig. 5(a–i), indicating the versatility of the method. A heterostructure made of individual SnO and In2O3 layers has also been created via a double touch printing process, creating semiconductor junctions that can be applied in photodetection applications.51
 Fig. 5  (a–i) Printed 2D β-TeO2 on a variety of substrates where X indicates the location of the flake and I–IX represent quartz, glass, 100 nm Pt on Si, Si, 300 nm Al2O3 on Si, sapphire, GaAs, mica, and 300 nm SiO2 on Si substrates, respectively. (j) The result from multi-printing of 2D β-TeO2 on 300 nm SiO2via roll-transfer.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2021. 


3.2.3 Liquid phase synthesis of 2D metal oxides, including sonication and bubbling. 
In spite of scalable and high-quality 2D sheets being reliably obtained on a substrate from the aforementioned methods, in some applications, a different approach is required. For example in catalysis, batteries, certain sensors, and reinforcing polymer fillers, larger quantities of nanomaterials in liquid suspension that can be further processed are preferred. Therefore, solution-based synthesis methods have also been introduced to create novel 2D materials from liquid metal and liquid metal alloys.
As a process, sonication can be used to create nanoparticles composed of a metal core and an ultrathin oxide shell.46 In this process, bulk droplets are submerged in water and are then heated and sonicated to create a dispersion of liquid metal micro- and nano-droplets that subsequently react to form a hydrated oxide skin, as elucidated in Fig. 6a. If these nanoparticles are allowed to age in the aqueous solution (for example overnight), it has been shown that for sonicated EGaIn nanoparticles, the oxidation by water will dominate and the Ga2O3 oxide skin will be converted into GaOOH.70 Process parameters such as the sonication source (probe30vs. bath71), probe amplitude, process times30,72 and temperature46,73 may all be varied to alter the shape,46,72 size,46 and thickness30,46 of the produced nano-structures. The incorporation of compounds such as lysozyme72 or different thiols30 may also be used to stabilise and control the different materials produced. Increasing the sonication time was found to lead to cracking of the surface oxides followed by delamination into suspension, allowing for the production of oxide sheets that may be drop-cast onto substrates or used in colloidal suspension. This process is self-repeating, since once the initial oxide layer detaches from the liquid metal surface, a new oxide skin forms.46Fig. 6(b–d) shows an example of Ga2O3 nanoflakes obtained from liquid EGaIn submerged in DI water followed by sonication.46
 Fig. 6  (a) Sonication process where liquid metal is placed in water or another solution, resulting in nanomaterials in liquid suspension. (b) SEM image, (c) HRTEM micrograph, and (d) AFM image with the inset featuring height profile of Ga2O3 nanoflakes.46 (e) Bubbling technique. Pressurised air is injected into the liquid metal ‘pool’ submerged in a selected solution, creating air bubbles in which metal oxide is formed at the bubble surfaces. The oxides accumulate in the solution and can be further processed. AFM images and TEM characterisation including SAED pattern and HRTEM images of (f) Ga2O3 and (g) HfO2 derived from the bubbling method.4 Note: (b–d) Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f and g) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission. 
2D metal oxides can also be produced using a bubbling technique, where a pool of liquid metal or liquid metal alloy is submerged under a suitable solvent solution before the air is injected into the bulk liquid metal to create a stream of gas bubbles.4 The gas bubbles expand within the bulk metal and the O2 reacts at the bubble-liquid metal interface to form oxide skins following the Cabrera–Mott process.5 These bubbles, and the oxides grown at their interface, rise into the solution where the solvent collects the oxide,74 producing 2D sheets with lateral dimensions in the nano-48 and micro-47 meter regime. The bulk liquid metal and larger particulates are then allowed to fall out of suspension before the dispersed 2D sheets can be removed and drop-cast onto substrates or are otherwise utilised.4Fig. 6e depicts the process of liquid metal bubbling where Fig. 6(f–g) present ultrathin Ga2O3 and HfO2 synthesised from this method. The solution chosen to suspend the droplet may also be tailored. For example, 2D TiO2 and CoO were synthesised from liquid Ga alloyed with Ti47 and Co,48 respectively. Both alloys were suspended in hydrochloric acid which dissolves Ga2O3 that may form rapidly on the alloy surface, enabling TiO2 and CoO to grow. Recent works also demonstrated the use of polyol solvents and molten salt as a dispersion solvent which enables working with higher melting point liquid metals and liquid metal alloys (above 100 °C) such as elemental Sn and Sn–Bi.75,76


3.2.4 Liquid metal as a redox reaction platform for 2D metal oxide self-deposition. 
Liquid metals may also be used as redox reaction platforms where precursor materials react with the liquid metal and are subsequently reduced to form a surface skin as depicted in Fig. 7a.49,50,77 This method is ideal for 2D metal oxides and other 2D materials, whose precursor metal solubility in liquid metal is low. Therefore, instead of alloying the precursor metal with a liquid metal, a precursor compound is solubilised in a traditional solvent which is then brought into contact with the bulk liquid metal. The liquid metal then reduces the solubilised precursor at its surface, and the resulting ultrathin sheets may be removed via sonication for drop-casting. Prior to suspension in precursor solution, EGaIn, the most prevalent selected liquid metal alloy used in many published works, is usually washed with HCl to dissolve the native oxide skin and create a surface potential at the electrical double layer (EDL). The surface electrons within EGaIn, and the ions within the EDL are then able to reduce the precursor material to form a surface skin at the liquid metal interface. This self-deposition method has been successful in creating materials such as hydrated MnO2 monolayers,49 2D MoS2,50 and MoO2 layers.77
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustrating the synthesis of 2D MoS2 exploiting a redox reaction that occurs on the liquid EGaIn surface which is submerged in an aqueous solution of (NH4)2MoS4. The MoS2 nanosheet that formed on the EGaIn surface is then exfoliated via other liquid metal synthesis techniques such as sonication or touch-printing. (b) AFM morphology and (c) HRTEM image of the synthesised 2D MoS2 nanosheet.50 Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Hydrated MnO2 monolayers, for example, can be grown utilising aqueous solutions of KMnO4. If a droplet of EGaIn is then immersed in this solution, the KMnO4 is reduced to MnO2. When the sample was left to develop and age for a week, the weakly attached sheet of 2D oxide could be removed by gently shaking the vial leading to self-detachment. Alternatively, the EGaIn droplet could be sonicated in different concentrations of KMnO4 to form particles, upon which 2D MnO2 flakes formed in a process similar to that shown in sonication and bubbling based oxide synthesis (Fig. 7a).49 The oxides grown via a galvanic replacement reactions detach from the liquid metal bulk and become suspended in the permanganate solution. This can subsequently be drop cast onto substrates for analysis or device fabrication. The flakes synthesised using the sonication method were found to be more rigid and contained minimal wrinkling, unlike the single monolayer grown in the week-long experiment which was only ∼ 1 nm thick, porous, and slightly wrinkled. The wrinkling effect was attributed to the self-delamination process and minimal sheet thickness.49 To obtain 2D MoS2, an aqueous (NH4)2MoS4 solution was used to react with liquid EGaIn. The alloy immediately reduced the precursor at its surface to form a MoS2 layer that encompassed the droplet. The droplet was then washed multiple times to remove the precursor solution and prevent further growth. It was then dried before the 2D sheet was extracted using a piezoelectric nano-positioning setup as shown in Fig. 7a, which aids in the touch printing of the sulphide sheet onto a substrate (Fig. 7b and c).50 Immersing an EGaIn droplet in a Na2MoO4 solution provided a uniform layer of H2MoO3 on the surface of the alloy through a similar reaction concept.77 The piezo-stage was then employed to touch-print the H2MoO3 layer onto a substrate. Subsequent thermal annealing or exposure to a laser can then help converting the material to crystalline MoO2, and selected area patterns can be created directly in specific areas of the materials.
In the case of synthesising MoS2, the [MoS4]2− replaces the anions within the EDL and reacts with H+ ions to form MoS3 before being reduced to MoS2.50 In the case of MnO2, MnO4− ions are reduced by the Ga at the surface of EGaIn to hydrated MnO2 and Ga3+ to form [Ga(OH)4]− ions that are soluble, preventing the formation of a Ga2O3 surface skin.49 In most cases the liquid metal functions both as a smooth template and as a reducing agent and hence is not a catalyst. As such, the molten metal is usually oxidised, leading to the release of ions into the solvent.
The EDL of the liquid metal droplet provides an ideal reaction environment for the reduction of the precursor material to a 2D surface skin. The droplet itself provides an ultra-smooth platform for this growth process to take place and results in the desired material. The length of time in suspension, sonication time, as well as concentration of the precursor solution all affect the thickness, porosity, and size of the materials produced and can be tailored to suit the needs of the experiment. For example, MnO2 tends to be used in dye degradation and photocatalysis49 where a high surface area is desired. MoS2 on the other hand, is a transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) that is used in optoelectronics50 and therefore, a single complete flake may be more desirable for device applications.
Another self-deposition method used involves suspending a droplet of liquid metal (Ga or Galinstan) from a syringe as the working electrode in a three-electrode setup. This type of setup was used to synthesise GaOOH nanoparticles. The potential was varied to allow for crystal formation and subsequent ejection from the liquid metal into a sodium nitrate/sodium hydroxide solution of varying pH, which aided in the tailoring of particle size and shape.78 This method differs from the previous two examples as the source of the synthesised material is the liquid metal and not the solution it was suspended in. It also produces crystalline oxyhydroxide nanoparticles and not 2D metal oxide sheets in contrast to other synthesised materials discussed here, however, the approach may useful for the synthesis of other 2D materials in the future.26 More recently, an electrochemically actuated liquid metal pump setup has been demonstrated for the synthesis of colloidal bismuth oxides from dilute gallium bismuth alloys. The induced surface flow has been shown to effectively delaminate the formed surface compounds, enabling the production of larger quantities of material.79

3.3 2D materials beyond oxides
The self-deposition method discussed above allows for the selection of different precursor materials, which enables the synthesis of different materials at the bulk liquid metal interface, including two-dimensional metal oxides,49 sulphides,50 hydroxides,78 and other 2D materials. Various 2D materials can also be grown directly from the liquid metal. One such approach involves altering the reaction environment, which enables the synthesis of materials such as metal sulphides when using an anoxic H2S environment (Fig. 8a–c),80 or metal nitrides in the presence of NH3 (Fig. 8d–f).81 Alternatively, other 2D materials may be synthesised by first printing a 2D metal oxide and then converting it to other materials via any number of post- processing steps. These methods will be discussed further in the following sections of this tutorial review.7,55,56
 Fig. 8  (a) Touch-printing of 2D SnS from liquid Sn in the presence of 50 ppm H2S gas at 350 °C with (b) dark field TEM image and (c) AFM image (the inset featuring the height profile corresponds to the yellow line).80 (d) The synthesis of GaN nanosheets from liquid Ga exposed to an NH3 environment. (e) AFM image with the corresponding thickness profile and (f) low-resolution TEM image of the synthesised 2D GaN.81 Note: (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from © 2018 American Chemical Society. 
4. Post-growth processing
Since liquid metals can be used as a platform to produce 2D metal oxides, they also provide a synthesis route to access pnictogenide and chalcogenide compounds via post-growth processing treatments. Metal pnictogenides (nitrides, phosphides, arsenides and antimonides) and metal chalcogenides (sulphides, selenides and tellurides) are important members of the larger family of 2D materials. These materials are expected to play a significant role in the future of high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices, with their high carrier mobilities, tunable bandgaps, and many exotic properties – such as giant valley splitting, topological states and giant piezoelectricity – making them highly versatile for a range of device applications.82–92 The approaches developed here have enabled the synthesis of numerous ultrathin semiconductors featuring tenuity down to a few unit cells while also featuring lateral dimensions reaching centimetres. Furthermore, these methods provide access to a range of 2D materials that do not naturally crystallise in a stratified structure and are thus inaccessible via conventional methods.6,7,40,42,43,54–56,93
4.1 Vapor phase anion exchange
Conventional 2D metal oxides derived from the liquid metal-based methods can be converted into desired 2D crystals via high-temperature tube furnace-based conversions.6,40,42,43,54–56,93 The setup consists of three main components: a temperature programmable tubular furnace, a quartz process tube with two ceramic heat isolation blocks, and a carrier gas controller resembling conventional chemical vapor deposition equipment. In the first step, 2D metal oxides prepared on preferred substrates are placed upside-down on a ceramic boat to avoid the accumulation of unwanted compounds on the synthesised nanosheets, while precursor materials are placed upstream with respect to the oxide samples.6,40,54,55 The reaction tube is then evacuated or purged with an inert gas flow to remove oxygen and moisture.6,40,43,54–56,93 A schematic of the vapor phase anion exchange set-up is illustrated in Fig. 9a. In order to achieve uniform 2D structures with minimal cracks, the heating rate is kept at ∼10 °C min−1 and the system allowed to cool naturally to room temperature after the reaction.6,43,55,93 In most cases, nitrogen (N2) or argon (Ar) – with a flow rate of 50–100 sccm – is utilised as a carrier gas.6,40,43,55,56,93 The transformation into another 2D compound occurs when the 2D metal oxide reacts at high temperatures with the chosen vaporised species. The reaction involves the anion exchange and the removal of oxygen species via the vapor phase. The process is also associated with the re-crystallisation of the nanosheets.6,54 Following synthesis, it is recommended that the 2D materials are kept in an inert atmosphere for prolonged storage in order to avoid re-oxidation.6,43,55
 Fig. 9  (a) A schematic of the vapor phase anion exchange process carried out in a tubular furnace. The 2D metal oxide reacts with the precursor material at high temperature resulting in an anion exchange reaction and subsequent oxygen removal. Optical microscopy image, AFM images and XPS spectra of 2D Ga2O3 (b–e, respectively) and 2D GaN (f–i, respectively) indicate a successful conversion with the ammonolysis reaction at 800 °C.6 Note: (b–i) Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from © 2018 American Chemical Society. 
To date, it has been reported that several metal sulphides have been synthesised using this technique.40,43,55,56,93 For example, gallium(II) sulphide (GaS) was successfully synthesised at a relatively low temperature using sulphur powder as a precursor.40 This approach involved an intermediate step of chlorination of 2D Ga2O3 to ease the subsequent sulphurisation. As-synthesised Ga2O3 layers were first exposed to fuming hydrochloric acid (HCl) to convert inert gallium oxide into more reactive gallium chloride, followed by the reaction with sulphur vapor at 300 °C for 90 min.40 Similarly, In2S3 could be synthesised by employing a bromide intermediate. Recently, direct sulphurisation of Ga2O3 films has been demonstrated without the halogenation step, revealing a temperature-dependent stoichiometry of gallium sulphide for this reaction. It was also reported that a reaction at 600 °C resulted in gallium(III) sulphide (Ga2S3)55 while one carried out at 800 °C resulted in gallium(II) sulphide (GaS) being formed.43 The direct sulphurisation process can be extended to produce 2D bismuth sulphide (Bi2S3) and 2D indium sulphide (In2S3).56,93 Importantly, by controlling the synthesis temperature, either ordered vacancies or random vacancies in 2D In2S3 nanosheets can be achieved resulting in remarkably different electronic characteristics of the final material.56
The chemical vapor deposition route can also be used to create 2D III-V semiconductors. Ultrathin gallium nitride (GaN) nanosheets were obtained via an ammonolysis reaction conducted at 800 °C as presented in Fig. 9(b–i).6,42,43 In earlier work, ammonia was generated from the decomposition of urea (CH4N2O) and then reacted with 2D Ga2O3 samples.6 However, later studies directly employed NH3 as the reagent.42,43 In the case of indium nitride (InN), 2D indium oxide (In2O3) nanosheets were treated with hydrobromic acid (HBr) fumes before the nitration process and N2/H2 (1%) mixture was used as the carrier gas.6 The use of anhydrous phosphoric acid (H3PO4) as a source material encouraged the growth of piezoelectric 2D gallium phosphate (GaPO4). This phosphatisation process was carried out at 300 °C.54 Interestingly, by altering the precursors, different 2D phosphorous compounds can be synthesised. In another study, sodium hypophosphite (NaH2PO2) was employed to transform thin Ga2O3 layers into 2D semiconducting gallium phosphide (GaP) at 800 °C in argon atmosphere.43
Despite being an efficient method of producing large-scale 2D metal pnictogenides and chalcogenides, the furnace-based methods still require relatively high-temperature processing, which prohibits the use of many substrates. In addition, gas phase conversions are often considered more hazardous and limit the choices of available precursors.
4.2 Solution-based method
In order to develop a well-controlled and less toxic pathway for post-growth processing of 2D metal oxides, a wet chemical approach has been investigated where In2O3 was converted to In2O3−xSx (Fig. 10a–d).7 A solution containing [S3]˙− radicals was prepared by mixing sulphur powder (S), sodium sulphide (Na2S), and 15-crown-5 ether (15C5) in dimethylformamide (DMF) under the exclusion of oxygen and water.7,94 The 2D In2O3 nanosheets were printed using molten indium metal and then immersed in the [S3]˙− solution. The reaction was carried out at 150 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere inside a glovebox.7 The use of the highly reactive trisulphur radical anion [S3]˙− was to enable sulphur insertion into the 2D metal oxides and partial oxide anion replacement at comparatively mild reaction conditions. While complete sulphurisation was not achieved, metal oxysulphides are increasingly being investigated for electronic applications and catalysis.95–97 This study not only highlights the compositional tunability of these 2D indium oxysulphide nanosheets, but also reveals a possible synthesis route for other 2D metal oxysulphide materials, including bismuth oxysulphide and tin oxysulphide. Other reactive species may also be used to significantly expand the library of 2D materials that are accessible via this furnace-free method, particularly if reactive pnictogen and chalcogen species are utilised.
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic of a solution-based post-processing method utilised to synthesise 2D In2O3−xSx. Ultrathin In2O3 obtained from squeeze-printing was submersed in a polysulphide solution allowing the sulphur insertion reaction to take place. (b) Optical image, (c) AFM image with the height profile inset, (d) low-resolution and high-resolution TEM images as well as indexed SAED pattern of the 2D In2O3−xSx.7 Note: Reproduced and edited from ref. 7 with permission from © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021. 
5. Integration of 2D materials for device applications
Stacking 2D material layers has been widely used to fabricate functional heterostructures where individual layers are held together by van der Waals (vdW) interactions.98–103 Over the past decade significant effort has been dedicated to study vdW heterostructures which have been demonstrated to exhibit unique physics and harbour exceptional properties which are not present in individual 2D materials.104–108 Integrating 2D materials derived from liquid metals into such heterostructures holds significant potential for studying new physical phenomena and enabling their practical application in devices that can be produced at scale due to the possibility of growing large lateral area 2D materials using liquid metals. Consequently, several assembly techniques have been established to fabricate such hetero-structures including direct synthesis atop of previously deposited 2D materials and deterministic transfer methods.109
Liquid metal-based synthesis methods offer an alternative platform to assemble 2D materials as well as integrate them into useful devices. By way of example, a 2D SnO/In2O3 vdW heterostructure photodetector was successfully developed through the liquid metal touch printing method.51 An ultrathin p-type SnO sheet was exfoliated from liquid Sn onto a SiO2 substrate, followed by the printing an n-type In2O3 nanosheet from molten In using the same procedure as illustrated in Fig. 11a. The method resulted in overlapping regions of SnO and In2O3 (see Fig. 11b), which was utilised to fabricate a photodetector – as shown in Fig. 15a–c in the later section. This p–n heterojunction was found to lead to a device featuring an impressive performance, clearly demonstrating that liquid metal-based synthesis methods are a promising alternative to conventional methods for creating 2D vdW heterostructures. The large-scale synthesis and relative ease of fabrication are clear advantages. In addition, the thicknesses of these synthesised materials are remarkably thin (only a few atomic layers) and reproducible when compared to those obtained via conventional methods.61,110–113 Challenges do, however, arise due to the manual nature of the process with variable flake sizes and inaccurate spatial deposition limiting this approach to only 2–3 subsequent layers. Future automation of the process may aid in rendering this approach more practical.
 Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication of a SnO/In2O3 heterostructure via a double touch-printing approach with (b) a corresponding optical image.51 (c) A deterministic transfer method using a PDMS stamp coated with a sacrificial layer of PPC to transfer 2D Ga2O3 onto monolayer WS2 for encapsulation purposes. (d) Optical image of the WS2/Ga2O3 heterostructure.52 Note: (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
As an alternative, several deterministic transfer techniques have been reported where a typical stage set-up equipped with an optical microscope is required to assist with the alignment and transfer.114 PDMS is commonly used as a viscoelastic stamp to support the 2D materials while being transferred. Amorphous polymer membranes such as polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), polycarbonate (PC), and poly–propylene carbonate (PPC) are often chosen for an optional sacrificial layer.114
A transfer method has been developed and used to fabricate WS2/Ga2O3 heterostructures, where the amorphous 2D Ga2O3 glass is evaluated as a passivation layer for photonic structures.52,115 Squeeze printing was carried out on a PDMS stamp coated with PPC resulting in an ultrathin and laterally large-area Ga2O3 sheet. The 2D Ga2O3 on the stamp was then aligned and brought into contact with the exfoliated WS2 on a SiO2 substrate using the transfer stage. After the surfaces were touched, the substrate was heated to release the Ga2O3 on PPC onto the SiO2 wafer to encapsulate the WS2. The sacrificial polymer was subsequently removed by washing in acetone, isopropyl alcohol and ethanol. A brief schematic describing the transfer technique as well as an optical image of the WS2/Ga2O3 heterostructure are presented in Fig. 11c and d, respectively. This study highlights the fact that Ga2O3 can serve as an alternative to hBN – which is currently the most common insulating material for 2D systems. One of the main advantages of using 2D Ga2O3 as an insulating material is the reproducible thickness of 2D Ga2O3 determined by the Cabrera–Mott oxidation process, overcoming a key limitation associated with the mechanical exfoliation process used for h-BN. Furthermore, the squeeze-printing synthesis process enables laterally large nanosheets to be isolated, that routinely reach centimetres, providing a pathway towards up-scaling and integrated device fabrication.
In order to apply this transfer technique to other 2D materials derived from a liquid metal, alternative transfer methods or sacrificial polymers should be considered. The relatively low melting point of Ga (29.76 °C) is beneficial when working with the temperature-sensitive PPC. Different sacrificial layers featuring higher temperature tolerance exceeding that of the target metal can also be considered. Alternatively, sheet pick-up methods may be employed where the 2D material is grown on a weakly interacting substrate and then delaminated using a PPC/PDMS stamp. One example of this approach includes the transfer of 2D TeO2 from a Si substrate to a SiO2 surface.45 Further work should be dedicated to developing these transfer techniques in order to provide access to high quality, laterally large heterostructures and multilayers. One interesting observation is the presence of vdW gaps between bilayer structures that are obtained via either direct or deterministic transfer approaches, as depicted in Fig. 12. This gap showcases the fact that the grown nano-sheets, even when not naturally stratified, maintain their two-dimensional nature when stacked. Furthermore, these vdW gaps may provide an opportunity to modify a number of the material properties through intercalation.116
 Fig. 12  Cross-sectional TEM images of (a) squeeze-printed monolayer and (b) bilayer ITO obtained from multi-printing.37 The images with high magnification in the insets show a distinct difference between monolayer and bilayer ITO with an observed vdW gap. (c) AFM image of 2D Ga2O3 transferred onto a SiO2 substrate with the describe technique utilising a PPC/PDMS stamp.52 In comparison to the as-synthesised Ga2O3 shown in Fig. 2i and d Ga2O3 after being transferred presented a pronounce vdW gap. Note: (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
6. Recent applications of 2D materials from liquid metal-based synthesis
2D materials synthesised via liquid metal-based techniques are increasingly being used to create functional devices and enable a whole range of new applications. The following section reviews these emerging fields of research while also highlighting several areas where 2D materials could fill critical capability gaps.
6.1 Field-effect transistors (FETs)
Field-effect transistors (FETs) are among the basic building blocks of electronic and optoelectronic devices. In essence, FETs fulfil the function of a switch, where adjusting the potential on one electrode, known as a gate, regulates current flow through the semiconducting layer located between a source and a drain electrode. 2D metal oxides are attractive for this application due to their robust chemical nature, high carrier mobilities and commonly wide bandgaps. A wide variety of liquid metal-derived 2D metal oxides and 2D materials have been synthesised and investigated as channel materials for FETs. Touch-printing of Ga2O3 followed by sulphurisation was demonstrated in an earlier reported study.40 This process produced GaS, which was then utilised as a semiconducting channel for FETs featured an average electron mobility and on/off ratio of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 150, respectively. The comparatively poor device performance of these early examples could be attributed to the intrinsically unfavourable electronic properties of GaS. However, the same approach was repeated in later work using elemental In to grow the 2D In2O3 which was then converted into In2S3. Here the best performing In2S3-FET exhibited an impressive electron mobility of 58 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an on/off ratio approaching 104.56 More recently, In2O3−xSx was successfully synthesised from liquid indium using squeeze printing, followed by a solvothermal sulphur insertion.7 The isolated 2D material was then employed in FETs featuring a maximum electron mobility of 44 cm2 V−1 s−1. Similarly, squeeze-printed Zn-doped In2O3 (IZO) obtained from an In–Zn alloy and employed in a FET featured an electron mobility of 87 cm2 V−1 s−1 (see Fig. 13a–c).117 These studies highlight that liquid metal derived nanosheets possess electronic properties that are defined by the fundamental nature of the synthesised material. While being comparatively simple, the printing methods can produce excellent semiconductors that may find application in practical devices. While many n-type metal oxides have been reported, there is generally a lack of high mobility p-type oxide materials. This results from the fact that most metal oxides feature valence band edges dominated by highly localised O 2p orbitals and this in turn leads to relatively low mobilities.118
 Fig. 13  Electronic applications. (a) AFM image of IZO with corresponding height profile inset. (b) Gate voltage and drain current transfer curve and (c) n-type I–V characteristic curves of the IZO-based FET.117 (d) SEM image of the FET with 2D β-TeO2 as a channel material. (e) Transfer and (f) characteristic curves (VD = −1 V) revealing p-type behaviour of the 2D β-TeO2 FET.45 (g) An optical microscopy image of ultrathin α-Sb2O3. (h) I–V curve obtained from conductive AFM tunnelling current through a point on the material indicating a competitive breakdown voltage. The inset shows data fitted utilising the Schottky emission model, which revealed the maximum dielectric constant of 84 for a 3 nm thick α-Sb2O3. (i) Dielectric constant-frequency characteristics of α-Sb2O3 measured from a Au/α-Sb2O3/p-GaAs device (inset) with a maximum extracted dielectric constant of 80.36 Note: (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2021. (g–i) Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society. 
Nevertheless, the discovery of high mobility p-type oxides could significantly advance the broader field of transparent electronics, enabling p–n junctions, as well as photovoltaic research where degenerately doped p-type oxides could provide improved ohmic contact to light absorbers.118 As such, liquid metal-based methods have recently been used to investigate p-type 2D metal oxides. The touch-printing method was exploited to exfoliate SnO from liquid Sn, resulting in an FET mobility 0.7 cm2 V−1 s−1.119 The isolated 2D p-type SnO was also integrated into a p-n heterojunction for photodetection applications, as previously mentioned (see Integration of 2D materials section). Another study also reported the use of 2D SnO as a semiconducting material for thin-film transistors (TFT) with a channel thickness of ∼1 nm.120 The device exhibited p-type characteristics with the mobility and on/off ratio of 0.47 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 106, respectively, confirming the findings of earlier work. The performance data extracted from these liquid metal-based SnO devices are competitive with 2D SnO FETs obtained via a conventional method.110,111 Furthermore, a low-power complementary inverter was also fabricated using p-SnO/n-SnO2 and p-SnO/n-In2O3 where all the materials used were derived from liquid metal touch-printing.120 It was observed that the p-SnO/n-In2O3 inverter provided lower power dissipation compared to the p-SnO/n-SnO2 device.120 Recent work also successfully isolated a novel p-type β-TeO2 from Se–Te chalcogen mixture through roll-transfer technique.45 This indicates that these methods produce materials that are not only compatible with metallic systems, but may also be applied to low melting mixtures of non-metals. The TeO2-FET featured a very high hole mobility of 232 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off ratio that exceeded 106 (Fig. 13d–f). The reason for this high performance is the structure of the valence band edge of TeO2, which is dominated by dispersed hybridised Te 5p–O 2p states.45,121 FET performances extracted from selected 2D materials-based devices, where the active materials were derived from the liquid metal-based syntheses, are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Selected 2D materials derived from the liquid metals and their application as semiconducting transistor channel materials




Synthesis
Material
Thickness (nm)
Bandgap (eV)
Charge carrier
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
On/off
Ref.




Blade coating
GaS
1.5
3.02
Electron

μ
FET = 0.2
150

40



Touch-printing
SnO
0.6
4.2
Hole

μ
FET = 0.7
20

119



Touch + sulphurisation
Ga2S3
2
2.1
Hole

μ
FET = 3.5
102

55



Touch + sulphurisation
In2S3
3.7
2.3
Electron

μ
FET = 58
104

56



Touch + sulphurisation
Bi2S3
2.5
2.3
Hole

μ
FET = 12.4
103

93



Squeeze-printing
IZO
1.59
3.51
Electron

μ
FET = 87
105

117



Roll-transfer
β-TeO2
1.5
3.7
Hole

μ
FET = up to 232
106

45



Touch-printing
SnO
1
—
Hole

μ
FET = 0.47
106

120



Squeeze + solution-based oxygen replacement
In2O3−xSx
2.2
3.33
Electron

μ
FET = up to 44
60

7



Squeeze + ammonolysis
GaN
1.3
3.5
Electron

μ
Hall = 21.5
—

6



Surface-confined nitridation
GaN
4.1
—
Electron

μ
FET = 160
106

81





Most reported FETs in this section were fabricated using a back-gated configuration, where a conductive p-type doped Si/SiO2 wafer is used as substrate. While this configuration is well suited for material characterisation purposes, the joint gate electrode prohibits the independent switching of multiple devices on a single wafer. To further improve device performance, and offer the opportunity to create integrated circuits, it is necessary to adjust the device design to enable multiple gates and optimise the electrode materials. This allows for improved contacts, as well as introduce doping in order to enable a wider variety of applications. Encapsulating 2D materials to protect them from further fabrication processes is equally important. Although hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is widely used as a protective layer, it has limitations in terms of the size and quality of the flakes of material.122 Recent work has proposed the use of large-area 2D Ga2O3 nanosheet derived from liquid Ga via squeeze printing as an alternative passivation material.52,115 The transfer method described earlier in the Integration of 2D materials section was utilised to transfer the 2D Ga2O3 onto exfoliated WS2. Results have shown that 2D Ga2O3 works well as a protective layer and could enhance optical performances, as shown in Fig. 14(a–c), rendering it a desirable alternative to hBN.52,115 Importantly, the 2D Ga2O3 can be used as a protective layer onto which thicker oxide layers were grown via conventional vapor phase deposition methods (Fig. 14d–f).52 As such, this technique may be well suited for creating top-gate structures for liquid metal-derived 2D semiconductors. Ultrathin α-Sb2O3 presented in Fig. 13g was also recently reported as a promising high dielectric constant (k) gate oxide material.36 This material was isolated via touch-print from a liquid Bi–Sb alloy. Conductive AFM analysis combined with electron energy loss spectroscopy revealed a maximum dielectric constant of between 80 to 84 (Fig. 13h–i).36 The material was then utilised as a top-gate dielectric for FETs. The α-Sb2O3 gate oxide demonstrated low leakage currents confirming the excellent dielectric properties and insulating capability of this material.
 Fig. 14  PL images of (a) an as-exfoliated monolayer WS2 and (b) WS2 capped with ultrathin Ga2O3 under large Gaussian laser spot excitation (25 μm) showing a homogeneous PL texture. The scale bar size is 5 μm. (c) PL spectra of the as-exfoliated WS2 and WS2/Ga2O3 heterostructure with laser intensity of 34 μW μm−2 at cryogenic temperature.52 (d) PL spectra of the as-exfoliated WS2 as well as WS2/Al2O3 heterostructure where Al2O3 was directly deposited onto the monolayer via electron beam evaporation with high electron beam energy. As a result of the deposition, the exciton PL was significantly suppressed. (e) Schematic of a monolayer WS2 capped with a protective layer of hBN (top) and Ga2O3 (bottom) prior to the direct electron beam evaporation of Al2O3 and (f) corresponding PL spectra.52 The results indicated that 2D Ga2O3 outperformed hBN in protecting the monolayer WS2. Note: Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
6.2 Photodetection
Wide bandgap 2D metal oxides also find roles in photodetection and with the aid of the liquid metal-based syntheses, several materials have been studied in this application space. Very recent work has successfully developed a visible-blind photodetector exploiting 2D ZnO exfoliated from liquid Zn using a touch-printing method.123 At a wavelength of 365 nm, this device exhibited high figures of merit and the material was also explored in an artificial optoelectronic synapse in which the promising results could pave the way to neuromorphic applications. A printed solar-blind photodetector was developed on a Ga2O3/p+–Si heterojunction (Fig. 15d–f).44 Crystalline Ga2O3 was synthesised via a blade coating method at 200 °C. The device showed maximum responsivity (R) and greatest quantum efficiency (EQE) of 44.6 A W−1 and 2.2 × 104% at the wavelength of 254 nm, respectively. A 2D MoS2/GaN van der Waals heterostructure photodetector was fabricated and possessed EQE of 764% and R of 328 A W−1 under 532 nm light illumination (Fig. 15g–i).42 The device was produced using a tape-printing approach to synthesise Ga2O3 followed by exposure to NH3 gas at 800 °C in a tube furnace to acquire GaN on SiO2/Si substrate. Subsequently, p-MoS2 was exfoliated from a bulk crystal using scotch tape, which was then transferred onto PDMS before being deposited onto the 2D GaN, creating a heterostructure system with photosensitivity in the visible region. Using GaS 2D sheet synthesised from molten Ga followed by sulphurisation was also explored in a series of phototransistors, where high on/off ratios of 170 and a photoresponsivity of 6.4 A W−1 were observed.40
 Fig. 15  Photodetection applications. (a) The ID–VD curves of the 2D p-SnO/n-In2O3 heterostructure operating under dark and light illumination at wavelengths of 280, 365, and 455 nm. The inset illustrates the device which was fabricated via multiple touch-printing as described in the previous section. (b) Photoresponsivity (R) at VD = 20 V of the individual SnO and In2O3 devices and the SnO/In2O3 heterostructure under three different illumination wavelengths (280, 365, and 455 nm). (c) The photocurrent responses as a function of time measured from the SnO/In2O3 p–n heterojunction at VD = −20 V under the three illumination wavelengths.51 (d) A schematic of the Ga2O3/Si heterostructure photodetector. (e) The I–V properties of the device excited with 254 nm and 365 nm (the inset) UV light sources and under dark condition suggesting no response to 365 nm wavelength. (f) Photoresponsivity and the efficiency of external quantum (EQE) under 254 nm UV light at different voltages.44 (g) Schematic representing a photodetector fabricated on 2D MoS2/GaN heterojunction. (h) The I–V characteristics showing the device provided good response to light illumination (532 nm and 365 nm). (i) The time-resolved photoresponse of the device under 365 nm light illumination revealing impressive switching behavior.42 Note: (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission. (g–i) Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from © 2020 American Chemical Society. 
6.3 Piezotronics and 2D flexible devices
2D piezoelectric materials have the ability to convert mechanical force into electricity and vice versa, which makes them both useful and intriguing for applications in the area of piezotronics. Although it is a well-known piezoelectric material, GaPO4 has not been intensively investigated in terms of its structure and electronic properties.124,125 With the liquid metal based touch-printing, followed by phosphatisation, ultrathin GaPO4 sheets were readily obtained.54 The material provides relatively high piezoelectricity and experimental values agreed well with theory, indicating its potential use in 2D piezotronics. Among group IV monochalcogenides, SnS has been theoretically predicted to possess a high piezoelectric coefficient.126 An experiment was carried out exposing liquid Sn in anoxic atmosphere (H2S and N2) to form a sulphide skin which was subsequently exfoliated onto a flexible substrate.80 The SnS-based piezoelectric nanogenerator was then fabricated and showed a large average voltage peak output of ∼150 mV at 0.7% strain. The 2D SnS featured a piezoelectric coefficient d11 of 26 pm V−1. Another example is PbO, which represents a promising alternative to lead zirconate titanate (PZT) as a piezoelectric material. The oxide layer formed on liquid Pb and was printed onto a substrate.127 The subsequent fabricated device revealed vertical piezoelectric coefficient d33 of 29.6 pm V−1 which is competitive with other 2D materials used in piezotronic systems.
Several piezoelectric devices are, by necessity, constructed on flexible substrates. However, the wider field of flexible electronics may well benefit more broadly from the use of liquid metal-derived 2D materials. The capability to deposit large area, 2D nanosheets that exceed several centimetres in size while still featuring excellent electronic properties is a crucial advantage of these techniques. Furthermore, the capability to grow 2D nanosheets at comparatively low temperatures enables the use of a wider range of flexible substrates. In a recent study large area 2D ITO was printed directly onto flexible polyimide substrates, introducing a new flexible conductive material with extraordinary transparency of 99.7% for a single layer.37 The same study also demonstrated the use of liquid metal printed 2D ITO in a capacitive touch screen prototype as shown in Fig. 16(a and b).37 Overall, these early prototype device structures indicate that liquid metal based techniques offer significant opportunities for transparent and flexible electronics.
 Fig. 16  (a) An image and schematic of the 2D ITO capacitive touch screen (left) and test pattern used for touch screen characterisation measuring the response to a touch by a metal pin (right). (b) Capacitive response maps showing high sensitivity of the fabricated capacitive touch screen.37 (c) A schematic illustration of the 2D Ga2S3-based gas sensor. (d) Normalised response factor of the gas sensor. In the presence of 10.7 ppm of NO2 gas at 150 °C, a response and recovery time of 215 s and 185 s, respectively, with a normalised response factor of 8.5% were obtained.55 (e) A schematic of a 2D SnO2 memtransistor with a cross-sectional TEM image of the ultrathin SnO2. (f) Simulated pattern recognition accuracy for a 8 × 8 pixel image in ideal numeric training (blue line) and the 2D SnO2-based memtransistor (VG from −2 to 10 V). The accuracy of the fabricated memtransistor was found to be ∼92.25%. The inset shows a three-layer neural network including 8 × 8 pre-neurons, 36 hidden neurons, and 10 output neurons, for pattern recognition simulation.129 Note: (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2020. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from © 2019 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society. 
6.4 Gas sensors
Electronic gas sensors typically rely on semiconducting materials that can be doped via surface adsorbed gaseous species, and the use of ultrathin materials has become increasingly prevalent due to their intrinsically high surface area to volume ratio. As such, it is not surprising that liquid metal derived compounds have found multiple applications in gas sensing. For example, 2D Ga2S3 has been synthesised by converting Ga2O3 derived from squeeze printing in a tube furnace at 600 °C using sulphur powder as a reagent.55 The material exhibited p-type characteristics and was applied to fabricate a series of NO2 gas sensors (Fig. 16c and d). A decrease in the device resistance was observed since the NO2 gas molecules act as electron donors, resulting in charge transfer to the 2D Ga2S3, after surface adsorption. The device showed excellent performance with a NO2 detection limit of 10.7 ppm at room temperature. The fastest response and recovery times of 215 and 185 s, respectively, where achieved when operating at elevated temperatures (150 °C). Similarly p-type SnO has been synthesised using liquid metal techniques, enabling the fabrication of an alternative NO2 gas sensor.119 Liquid metal-based methods have also been applied to synthesise Bi2Te3, a topological insulator, highlighting the remarkable versatility of these methods.128 In this case, the Bi2Te3 produced was also used for NO2 gas sensing applications, revealing an outstanding detection limit of 0.90 ppm and excellent selectivity when operating at near room temperature.
6.5 Other applications
Two-dimensional metal oxides and other 2D materials derived from liquid metals are extremely versatile and are increasingly utilised in a wide array of applications in addition to those mentioned above. For example, a 2D SnO-based lateral memristor was recently demonstrated using an adapted touch-printing method involving liquid Sn.68 In this work, molten Sn was extruded through a graphite nozzle in an oxygen-free environment resulting in a clean area that was then exposed to diluted O2 containing carrier gas. A flexible substrate with pre-patterned electrodes was then brought into contact to exfoliate the SnO from the liquid parent metal. After several mechanical bending tests, the device displayed high stability and durability as well as consistent memristive switching behavior.68 A 2D-SnO2 memtransistor that could be utilised in neuromorphic computing was also recently fabricated via a touch-printing method and is shown in Fig. 16(e and f).129 Impressive resistive switching results were obtained, while a high recognition accuracy of 92.25% indicated this approach to be a promising development in neuromorphic device fabrication. Another work also reported the isolation of SnOx nanosheets through a bubbling synthesis, which was then utilised for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction.75
Recent work also demonstrated the fabrication of antimicrobial fabrics with the aid of the reduction reaction method.130 The galvanic replacement occurs when a fabric coated with Ga particles is immersed in a CuSO4 precursor solution resulting in the growth of Cu crystals which strongly attached to the fabric. The coated fabric showed effective responses to contaminations and was reusable multiple times causing less Ga consumption. The exceptional results have shown potential in creating antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral surfaces for applications such as face masks. This highlights that the strategies involving the deposition of liquid metal derived 2D materials for healthcare products should be explored, potentially expanding the application range of developed compounds.
Other potential applications for the materials discussed in this tutorial review include photocatalysis,49 biosensors and131 spintronics,132 where the developed liquid metal-based approaches could provide a pathway to new 2D materials that may be suitable for these applications. Overall, liquid metal derived 2D materials hold the potential to supplement the already existing family of nanoscale materials while offering the capability to create 2D materials with reliable thickness and extraordinarily large lateral dimensions. As such, these methods may facilitate future upscaling and device manufacturing as well as contributing new materials for fundamental research.
7. Conclusions and outlook
As research into 2D materials is expanding, new synthesis routes need to be developed in order to overcome current limitations associated with lateral sizes, substrate specific deposition and inconsistent layer thicknesses. By exploiting oxidation phenomena that take place at the surface of liquid metals, new synthesis approaches have been developed that overcome many of these challenges. Over the past few years, several liquid metal-based methods have been developed which are presented in this tutorial review. While the majority of the work has focused on two-dimensional oxides, 2D materials beyond oxides have also been obtained either by directly introducing the liquid metal to a tailored anoxic environment or by conducting subsequent post-growth processing on previously isolated oxide sheets. The methods developed and described have been shown to successfully provide a wide range of large area, high crystalline quality, and uniform 2D materials. However, despite this rapid early progress, liquid metal chemistry is still in its infancy, requiring further research while offering significant potential for future discoveries.
To date, limited thermodynamic data is available for mixed oxides and more complex alloy systems, limiting the accuracy of predictive equations for preferential oxide growth. The physicochemical environment of the metal–air interface also remains poorly understood and further theoretical and experimental studies are required in order to support future progress. The development of fundamental knowledge in the surface chemistry and physics of liquid metals and liquid metal alloys is also needed. Investigation of properties such as surface wettability and interactions with various substrates as well as the mechanical properties of various interfacial oxides will be required to further improve these synthesis methods and ultimately reveal the key process parameters required to enable large scale automated 2D layer production. Developing a deeper knowledge will also lead to a more detailed understanding of the formations of defects, pinholes, metal inclusions, and wrinkles, and assist in either minimising their occurrence or controlling their formation specifically to exploit these particular features.
Future work should also focus on exploring different 2D materials, particularly those that are not experimentally accessible via other growth techniques. Gaining full control over a material's crystal structure, thickness, and composition may be possible by precisely controlling liquid metal alloy compositions, temperature, reaction times and the composition of the oxidising environment. Post-growth processing techniques have also been shown to be a powerful tool to enhance properties and broaden the scope of liquid metal chemistry. Future work should include mechanisms and pathways of introducing dopants into semiconducting 2D materials. One intriguing strategy could involve the chemical intercalation of multilayer structures.
The assembly of 2D layers to obtain high-quality heterostructures is also crucial to unlock the full potential of these materials. Further work should focus on developing a wider array of transfer techniques that work at different temperatures and facilitate reliable stacking of a vast array of liquid metal derived nanosheets. Different temperature-sensitive sacrificial polymers could be considered and ideally, contact-free transfer methods would be developed that minimise contamination.
Addressing these challenges as well as pursuing the successful integration of 2D materials into functional devices, will provide new pathways for many applications, including applications in transparent, flexible, and wearable electronics. Further applications are expected to be developed within the areas of catalysis; however, the vast array of accessible 2D materials that can already be synthesised is expected to enable further applications in many different areas.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
P. A., T. D. and C. K. N. acknowledge funding received from the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the DECRA scheme (DE190100100). P. A. and A. G. acknowledge additional scholarship support from the ARC Centre of Excellence FLEET (CE170100039). A. E. acknowledges funding received from the Jack Brockhoff Foundation (JBF grant no. 4655-2019-AE). A. Z. acknowledges the University of Melbourne for support through the McKenzie postdoctoral fellowship program.
Notes and references
T. Yang, T. T. Song, M. Callsen, J. Zhou, J. W. Chai, Y. P. Feng, S. J. Wang and M. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801160 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 387–440 RSC .
P. Kumbhakar, C. Chowde Gowda, P. L. Mahapatra, M. Mukherjee, K. D. Malviya, M. Chaker, A. Chandra, B. Lahiri, P. M. Ajayan, D. Jariwala, A. Singh and C. S. Tiwary, Mater. Today, 2021, 45, 142–168 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zavabeti, Z. Ou Jian, J. Carey Benjamin, N. Syed, R. Orrell-Trigg, L. H. Mayes Edwin, C. Xu, O. Kavehei, P. O’Mullane Anthony, B. Kaner Richard, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, Science, 2017, 358, 332–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cabrera and N. F. Mott, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1949, 12, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, K. A. Messalea, E. Della Gaspera, A. Elbourne, A. Jannat, M. Mohiuddin, B. Y. Zhang, G. Zheng, L. Wang, S. P. Russo, E. Dorna, C. F. McConville, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 104–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Nguyen, M. X. Low, A. Zavabeti, A. Jannat, B. J. Murdoch, E. Della Gaspera, R. Orrell-Trigg, S. Walia, A. Elbourne, V. K. Truong, C. F. McConville, N. Syed and T. Daeneke, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 11815–11826 RSC .
T. Daeneke, K. Khoshmanesh, N. Mahmood, I. A. de Castro, D. Esrafilzadeh, S. J. Barrow, M. D. Dickey and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4073–4111 RSC .
K. Zuraiqi, A. Zavabeti, F.-M. Allioux, J. Tang, C. K. Nguyen, P. Tafazolymotie, M. Mayyas, A. V. Ramarao, M. Spencer, K. Shah, C. F. McConville, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, K. Chiang and T. Daeneke, Joule, 2020, 4, 2290–2321 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. de Wijs, G. Pastore, A. Selloni and W. van der Lugt, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 75, 4480–4483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Regan, P. S. Pershan, O. M. Magnussen, B. M. Ocko, M. Deutsch and L. E. Berman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 15874–15884 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Yatsenko, N. A. Sabirzyanov and A. S. Yatsenko, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2008, 98, 062032 CrossRef .
R. A. Oriani, J. Chem. Phys., 1950, 18, 575–578 CrossRef CAS .
M. Keeney and J. Heicklen, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1979, 41, 1755–1758 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, M. Zeng and L. Fu, Matter, 2020, 3, 1477–1506 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, F. Liang, Z. Yang, S. Xu, X. Zhao, Y. Ding, Z. Lin and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, P. Thissen, G. Viner, D.-W. Lee, W. Choi, Y. J. Chabal and J.-B. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 179–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zavabeti, T. Daeneke, A. F. Chrimes, A. P. O’Mullane, J. Zhen Ou, A. Mitchell, K. Khoshmanesh and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Korenko and F. Šimko, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2010, 55, 4561–4573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, K. E. Daniels, A. Kiani, S. Rashid-Nadimi and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2021, 3, 2100024 CrossRef .
S. Handschuh-Wang, T. Gan, T. Wang, F. J. Stadler and X. Zhou, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 9017–9025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. W. Gibbs, Scientific Papers: Thermodynamics, Dover Publications,  1961 Search PubMed .
A. Martin, C. Du, B. Chang and M. Thuo, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 9045–9055 CrossRef CAS .
E. DiMasi, H. Tostmann, O. G. Shpyrko, P. Huber, B. M. Ocko, P. S. Pershan, M. Deutsch and L. E. Berman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 1538–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Dumke, T. A. Tombrello, R. A. Weller, R. M. Housley and E. H. Cirlin, Surf. Sci., 1983, 124, 407–422 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Dickey, R. C. Chiechi, R. J. Larsen, E. A. Weiss, D. A. Weitz and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Kwon, V. K. Truong, F. Krisnadi, S. Im, J. Ma, N. Mehrabian, T.-I. Kim and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2021, 3, 2000159 CrossRef .
J.-H. Fu, T.-Y. Liu, Y. Cui and J. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2001936 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goff, P. Aukarasereenont, C. K. Nguyen, R. Grant, N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, A. Elbourne and T. Daeneke, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 7513–7526 RSC .
Z. J. Farrell and C. Tabor, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 234–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tostmann, E. DiMasi, P. S. Pershan, B. M. Ocko, O. G. Shpyrko and M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 783–791 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, X. Wang and W. Rao, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 1093–1103 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Zheng and J. Liu, Front. Energy, 2012, 6, 311–340 CrossRef .
M. J. Regan, H. Tostmann, P. S. Pershan, O. M. Magnussen, E. DiMasi, B. M. Ocko and M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 10786–10790 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, J. Zhang and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Messalea, N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, M. Mohiuddin, A. Jannat, P. Aukarasereenont, C. K. Nguyen, M. X. Low, S. Walia, B. Haas, C. T. Koch, N. Mahmood, K. Khoshmanesh, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16067–16075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Datta, N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, A. Jannat, M. Mohiuddin, M. Rokunuzzaman, B. Yue Zhang, M. A. Rahman, P. Atkin, K. A. Messalea, M. B. Ghasemian, E. D. Gaspera, S. Bhattacharyya, M. S. Fuhrer, S. P. Russo, C. F. McConville, D. Esrafilzadeh, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 51–58 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, X. Bian, T. Wang and J. Wang, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 6340–6348 RSC .
C. Yang, Z. Liu, M. Yu and X. Bian, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 13303–13313 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Carey, J. Z. Ou, R. M. Clark, K. J. Berean, A. Zavabeti, A. S. R. Chesman, S. P. Russo, D. W. M. Lau, Z.-Q. Xu, Q. Bao, O. Kavehei, B. C. Gibson, M. D. Dickey, R. B. Kaner, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lin, W. Zheng, D. Zhang, Y. Li and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 2166–2173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Ma, J. Zhang, B. Leng and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47721–47728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Zhang, B. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Xu, L. Chen, L. Yang, X. Jin and B. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4568–4577 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. Lin, T.-Y. Liu, X.-Y. Zhu, W.-H. Yao and J. Liu, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2021, 5, 36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zavabeti, P. Aukarasereenont, H. Tuohey, N. Syed, A. Jannat, A. Elbourne, K. A. Messalea, B. Y. Zhang, B. J. Murdoch, J. G. Partridge, M. Wurdack, D. L. Creedon, J. van Embden, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, S. P. Russo, C. F. McConville and T. Daeneke, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, M. Mohiuddin, B. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. S. Datta, P. Atkin, B. J. Carey, C. Tan, J. van Embden, A. S. R. Chesman, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702295 CrossRef .
T. Alkathiri, N. Dhar, A. Jannat, N. Syed, M. Mohiuddin, M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, R. S. Datta, K. A. Messalea, B. Y. Zhang, M. W. Khan, A. Elbourne, N. Pillai, J. Z. Ou, A. Zavabeti and T. Daeneke, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4914–4917 RSC .
J. Crawford, A. Cowman and A. P. O'Mullane, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 29181–29186 RSC .
M. B. Ghasemian, M. Mayyas, S. A. Idrus-Saidi, M. A. Jamal, J. Yang, S. S. Mofarah, E. Adabifiroozjaei, J. Tang, N. Syed, A. P. O'Mullane, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901649 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M. Mayyas, J. Yang, J. Tang, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Han, A. Elbourne, T. Daeneke, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005866 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, S. Kuriakose, S. Walia, N. Syed, A. Jannat, B. Y. Zhang, F. Haque, M. Mohiuddin, T. Alkathiri, N. Pillai, T. Daeneke, J. Z. Ou and A. Zavabeti, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900007 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wurdack, T. Yun, E. Estrecho, N. Syed, S. Bhattacharyya, M. Pieczarka, A. Zavabeti, S.-Y. Chen, B. Haas, J. Müller, M. N. Lockrey, Q. Bao, C. Schneider, Y. Lu, M. S. Fuhrer, A. G. Truscott, T. Daeneke and E. A. Ostrovskaya, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeng, L. Li, X. Zhu and L. Fu, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 669–680 CrossRef CAS .
N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, J. Z. Ou, M. Mohiuddin, N. Pillai, B. J. Carey, B. Y. Zhang, R. S. Datta, A. Jannat, F. Haque, K. A. Messalea, C. Xu, S. P. Russo, C. F. McConville, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3618 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, N. Pillai, S. Kuriakose, S. Walia, A. Jannat, K. Xu, T. Alkathiri, M. Mohiuddin, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Z. Ou and A. Zavabeti, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4665–4672 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jannat, Q. Yao, A. Zavabeti, N. Syed, B. Y. Zhang, T. Ahmed, S. Kuriakose, M. Mohiuddin, N. Pillai, F. Haque, G. Ren, D. M. Zhu, N. Cheng, Y. Du, S. A. Tawfik, M. J. S. Spencer, B. J. Murdoch, L. Wang, C. F. McConville, S. Walia, T. Daeneke, L. Zhu and J. Z. Ou, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 827–834 RSC .
J. You, M. D. Hossain and Z. Luo, Nano Convergence, 2018, 5, 26 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y.-H. Pan, R. Yang, L.-H. Bao, L. Meng, H.-L. Luo, Y.-Q. Cai, G.-D. Liu, W.-J. Zhao, Z. Zhou, L.-M. Wu, Z.-L. Zhu, M. Huang, L.-W. Liu, L. Liu, P. Cheng, K.-H. Wu, S.-B. Tian, C.-Z. Gu, Y.-G. Shi, Y.-F. Guo, Z. G. Cheng, J.-P. Hu, L. Zhao, G.-H. Yang, E. Sutter, P. Sutter, Y.-L. Wang, W. Ji, X.-J. Zhou and H.-J. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Liu, T. Huang, M. Qiu, R. Zhang, W. Yang, J. He, X. Chen and N. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 41802–41809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, K. Liu, X. Chen, J. Feng, J. Yang, Z. Zhang, L. Liu, Y. Xia and D. Shen, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 840, 155585 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, J. Yu, X. Xiu, Q. Sun, W. Tang and B. Man, Vacuum, 2019, 167, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, W. Zhou, A.-Y. Lu, W. Fang, Y.-H. Lee, A. L. Hsu, S. M. Kim, K. K. Kim, H. Y. Yang, L.-J. Li, J.-C. Idrobo and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2784–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ji, Y. Zhang, T. Gao, Y. Zhang, D. Ma, M. Liu, Y. Chen, X. Qiao, P.-H. Tan, M. Kan, J. Feng, Q. Sun and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3870–3877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Messalea, B. J. Carey, A. Jannat, N. Syed, M. Mohiuddin, B. Y. Zhang, A. Zavabeti, T. Ahmed, N. Mahmood, E. Della Gaspera, K. Khoshmanesh, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15615–15623 RSC .
J. Lin, Q. Li, T.-Y. Liu, Y. Cui, H. Zheng and J. Liu, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1900271 CrossRef .
M. D. Dickey, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606425 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Atkin, R. Orrell-Trigg, A. Zavabeti, N. Mahmood, M. R. Field, T. Daeneke, I. S. Cole and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2102–2105 RSC .
D. J. Lee, S. Lee and D. Y. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 28437–28443 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cooke, L. Ghadbeigi, R. Sun, A. Bhattacharyya, Y. Wang, M. A. Scarpulla, S. Krishnamoorthy and B. Sensale-Rodriguez, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2020, 217, 1901007 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Creighton, M. C. Yuen, M. A. Susner, Z. Farrell, B. Maruyama and C. E. Tabor, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 12933–12941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Tang, J. Zhu, V. Sivan, B. Gol, R. Soffe, W. Zhang, A. Mitchell and K. Khoshmanesh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4445–4452 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Genzer and M. D. Dickey, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3832–3837 RSC .
L. Ren, J. Zhuang, G. Casillas, H. Feng, Y. Liu, X. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Du, L. Jiang and S. X. Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8111–8118 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Khan, C. Trlica, J.-H. So, M. Valeri and M. D. Dickey, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22467–22473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yuan, Z. Hu, Y. Zhao, J. Fang, J. Lv, Q. Zhang, Z. Zhuang, L. Gu and S. Hu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2916–2922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, T. Yuan, H. Li, Y. Qiu, W. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao and S. Hu, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 4795–4801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Mayyas, J. Yang, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Tang, M. Mousavi, J. Han, M. Ahmed, M. Baharfar, G. Mao, Y. Yao, D. Esrafilzadeh, D. Cortie and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 53181–53193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lertanantawong, J. D. Riches and A. P. O’Mullane, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 7604–7611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mayyas, K. Khoshmanesh, P. Kumar, M. Mousavi, J. Tang, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Yang, Y. Wang, M. Baharfar, M. A. Rahim, W. Xie, F.-M. Allioux, R. Daiyan, R. Jalili, D. Esrafilzadeh and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2108673 CrossRef .
H. Khan, N. Mahmood, A. Zavabeti, A. Elbourne, M. A. Rahman, B. Y. Zhang, V. Krishnamurthi, P. Atkin, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Yang, G. Zheng, A. R. Ravindran, S. Walia, L. Wang, S. P. Russo, T. Daeneke, Y. Li and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, K. Liu, J. Liu, T. Lv, B. Wei, T. Zhang, M. Zeng, Z. Wang and L. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16392–16395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, L. Gan, H. Li, Y. Ma and T. Zhai, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3968–3984 RSC .
R. Woods-Robinson, Y. Han, H. Zhang, T. Ablekim, I. Khan, K. A. Persson and A. Zakutayev, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 4007–4055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin and J. W. Connell, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6908–6939 RSC .
K. Zhang, Y. Feng, F. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11992–12022 RSC .
P. Miró, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6537–6554 RSC .
S. Das, J. A. Robinson, M. Dubey, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Schaibley, H. Yu, G. Clark, P. Rivera, J. S. Ross, K. L. Seyler, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16055 CrossRef CAS .
T. Norden, C. Zhao, P. Zhang, R. Sabirianov, A. Petrou and H. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4163 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 669–684 CrossRef .
R. Fei, W. Li, J. Li and L. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 173104 CrossRef .
K. A. Messalea, A. Zavabeti, M. Mohiuddin, N. Syed, A. Jannat, P. Atkin, T. Ahmed, S. Walia, C. F. McConville, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, N. Mahmood, K. Khoshmanesh and T. Daeneke, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2001131 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chivers and P. J. W. Elder, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5996–6005 RSC .
C. Larquet and S. Carenco, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meng, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang and F. Huang, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5768–5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Sarma, T. V. Vineesh, R. Kumar, V. Sreepal, R. Prasannachandran, A. K. Singh and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6753–6762 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Withers, O. Del Pozo-Zamudio, A. Mishchenko, A. P. Rooney, A. Gholinia, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, A. I. Tartakovskii and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, G.-H. Lee, Y. D. Kim, G. Arefe, P. Y. Huang, C.-H. Lee, D. A. Chenet, X. Zhang, L. Wang, F. Ye, F. Pizzocchero, B. S. Jessen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. A. Muller, T. Low, P. Kim and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 534–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S. F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, A. Yin, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Lee, G.-H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yankowitz, J. Xue, D. Cormode, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Jarillo-Herrero, P. Jacquod and B. J. LeRoy, Nat. Phys., 2012, 8, 382–386 Search PubMed .
M. S. Choi, G. H. Lee, Y. J. Yu, D. Y. Lee, S. H. Lee, P. Kim, J. Hone and W. J. Yoo, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1624 Search PubMed .
P. Nagler, M. V. Ballottin, A. A. Mitioglu, F. Mooshammer, N. Paradiso, C. Strunk, R. Huber, A. Chernikov, P. C. M. Christianen, C. Schüller and T. Korn, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1551 Search PubMed .
H.-W. Guo, Z. Hu, Z.-B. Liu and J.-G. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ogo, H. Hiramatsu, K. Nomura, H. Yanagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 032113 CrossRef .
K. J. Saji, K. Tian, M. Snure and A. Tiwari, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500453 CrossRef .
N. H. Kim, J. H. Myung, H. W. Kim and C. Lee, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2005, 202, 108–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, C. Y. Wang, C. C. Röhlig, V. Cimalla, T. Stauden and O. Ambacher, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 129, 467–472 CrossRef CAS .
R. Frisenda, E. Navarro-Moratalla, P. Gant, D. Pérez De Lara, P. Jarillo-Herrero, R. V. Gorbachev and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 53–68 RSC .

          M. Wurdack, E. Estrecho, S. Todd, C. Schneider, A. Truscott and E. Ostrovskaya, arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12383, 2021.
J. Wan, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, W. Bao, M. S. Fuhrer and L. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6742–6765 RSC .
A. Jannat, N. Syed, K. Xu, M. A. Rahman, M. M. M. Talukder, K. A. Messalea, M. Mohiuddin, R. S. Datta, M. W. Khan, T. Alkathiri, B. J. Murdoch, S. Z. Reza, J. Li, T. Daeneke, A. Zavabeti and J. Z. Ou, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 4045–4053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. D. Williamson, J. Buckeridge, J. Brown, S. Ansbro, R. G. Palgrave and D. O. Scanlon, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2402–2413 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, P. Atkin, R. Orrell-Trigg, A. Zavabeti, T. Ahmed, S. Walia, M. Liu, Y. Tachibana, M. Javaid, A. D. Greentree, S. P. Russo, R. B. Kaner and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10974–10983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Huang, Y. Tang, T.-Y. Yang, Y.-L. Chueh and K. Nomura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 52783–52792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, Z. Zhu, X. Hu, W. Zhou, X. Song, S. Zhang, K. Zhang and H. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8397–8403 RSC .
T. Knobloch, Y. Y. Illarionov, F. Ducry, C. Schleich, S. Wachter, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, T. Mueller, M. Waltl, M. Lanza, M. I. Vexler, M. Luisier and T. Grasser, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 98–108 CrossRef CAS .
V. Krishnamurthi, T. Ahmed, M. Mohiuddin, A. Zavabeti, N. Pillai, C. F. McConville, N. Mahmood and S. Walia, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100449 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yot, O. Cambon, D. Balitsky, A. Goiffon, E. Philippot, B. Capelle and J. Détaint, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 224, 294–302 CrossRef CAS .
P. Krempl, G. Schleinzer and W. Wallnöfer, Sens. Actuators, A, 1997, 61, 361–363 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Gomes, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 214103 CrossRef .
M. B. Ghasemian, A. Zavabeti, R. Abbasi, P. V. Kumar, N. Syed, Y. Yao, J. Tang, Y. Wang, A. Elbourne, J. Han, M. Mousavi, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19434–19443 RSC .
M. Mousavi, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Han, Y. Wang, R. Abbasi, J. Yang, J. Tang, S. A. Idrus-Saidi, X. Guan, M. J. Christoe, S. Merhebi, C. Zhang, J. Tang, R. Jalili, T. Daeneke, T. Wu, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and M. Mayyas, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 22, 100954 CrossRef .
C.-H. Huang, H. Chang, T.-Y. Yang, Y.-C. Wang, Y.-L. Chueh and K. Nomura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 52822–52832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Kwon, S. Cheeseman, A. Frias-De-Diego, H. Hong, J. Yang, W. Jung, H. Yin, B. J. Murdoch, F. Scholle, N. Crook, E. Crisci, M. D. Dickey, V. K. Truong and T.-I. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2104298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Liu, F. Wu, X. Cao, Z. Li, M. Alharbi, A. N. Abbas, M. R. Amer and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1170–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hashmi, K. Nakanishi, M. U. Farooq and T. Ono, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2020, 4, 39 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A demonstration of some synthesis techniques on a SiO2 substrate and TEM grid as well as cleaning process is available in Video. S1. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs01166aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Patjaree Aukarasereenont
	Patjaree Aukarasereenont is a PhD candidate at RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia, and a member of the ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies (FLEET). Prior to commencing her candidature in 2020, she received her BEng (Mechanical Engineering) from Kasetsart University, Thailand, and MEng (Micro-nano Engineering) from RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. Her PhD research focuses on the fabrication of transparent and flexible electronics based on 2D materials synthesised via liquid metal chemistry.

Abigail Goff
	Abigail Goff received her Bachelor of Science and Honours Degree in Chemistry in 2018/2019 from Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne Australia. She is currently undertaking her PhD at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology in Chemical engineering, examining the use of liquid metals as reaction platforms for the growth and exfoliation of self-limiting 2D metal oxides for use in low-energy logic-based devices.

Chung Kim Nguyen
	Chung Kim Nguyen received his MEng degree in Chemical Engineering from Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT) in 2014. He is currently a PhD candidate in the School of Engineering, RMIT University. His research interests mainly focus on the chemistry of liquid metals and 2D materials synthesis for use in electronic applications.

Aaron Elbourne
	Dr Aaron Elbourne is a Research Fellow within the School of Science at RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. He is currently the recipient of a Jack Brockhoff Foundation Early Career Medical Research Fellowship and an Australian Research Council Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA). He obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 2017 from The University of Newcastle, Australia under the supervision of Professor Erica J. Wanless. He began his postdoctoral fellowship in February of 2017. His research interests involve high-resolution atomic force microscopy, ion adsorption, solid–liquid interfaces, bio-interfaces, nanomaterials, liquid metals, and antimicrobial technologies.

Ali Zavabeti
	Dr Ali Zavabeti is a McKenzie Fellow at the University of Melbourne, department of chemical engineering. He obtained his BEng (Hons) and MEngSc (Res) from Monash University before receiving his PhD award from RMIT University in Australia. He worked as a research fellow for the ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies (FLEET) before joining the University of Melbourne. His primary research focus is on surface and interfacial sciences, nanoelectronics, two-dimensional oxides and liquid metals.

Torben Daeneke
	Dr Torben Daeneke received his PhD in Chemistry from Monash University, Australia in 2012. After graduating he held postdoctoral appointments at the CSIRO and at RMIT University (Australia). In 2015 he received an RMIT Vice Chancellor's postdoctoral fellowship. In 2018 he joined RMIT's School of Engineering as a faculty member and is now an Associate Professor. Dr Daeneke has authored over 100 peer-reviewed journal articles in areas such as materials for electronic devices, the chemistry of liquid metals, catalysis and 2D materials. In recent years he has developed novel techniques for the synthesis of functional materials using liquid metal solvents.

Key learning points
(1) Theoretical concepts behind the oxide formation on liquid metal surface and brief overview of metal selection for liquid metal alloy synthesis.
(2) Walkthrough of each developed liquid metal-based synthesis approach for two-dimensional materials synthesis and available post-growth processing methods used to convert oxide materials derived from liquid metals to other compounds.
(3) Integration of two-dimensional materials synthesized via liquid metal-based approaches.
(4) Current and possible future applications of the synthesized materials.
(5) Prospects and challenges of the liquid metal-based synthesis platform.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Selected liquid metal base elements with their atomic number and melting temperature. (b) Cabrera–Mott oxidation occurs at the surface of liquid metals in the presence of oxygen.5 Electrons from the metal tunnel through the growing oxide shell, resulting in a self-generated electric field called the Mott field. This field promotes the diffusion of metal and oxygen ions into the oxide shell, leading to oxide growth. As the oxide becomes thicker, the field strength reduces until ion diffusion ceases. Note: (b) Reproduced from ref. 9 and 29 with permission from © 2020 Elsevier Inc. and © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021, respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)
ΔHcomb = AΔHf(mo) − (BΔHf(O2) × CΔHa)	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Touch-printing process. A metal is heated to its melting temperature and an oxide skin rapidly forms on the droplet surface following the Cabrera–Mott mechanism. This oxide layer is subsequently exfoliated by gently touching the surface with a substrate. Ultrathin Bi2O3 sheets exfoliated from liquid Bi via the touch-printing method. (b) AFM image with the inset shows the step-height profile, (c) low-, (d) high-resolution TEM images and (e) the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) image.64 (f) Squeeze-printing process. A relatively small liquid metal droplet is placed between two substrates. Force is applied to squeeze the molten metal resulting in ultrathin oxide sheets being obtained on both substrates. (g) AFM morphology and (h) low-resolution TEM image of monolayer ITO obtained from liquid In–Sn alloy utilising the squeeze-printing technique.37 (i) An AFM image of squeeze-printed 2D Ga2O3 isolated from liquid Ga and (j) the height profiles collected at 56 locations from 5 different Ga2O3 sheets showing high consistency in layer thicknesses due to the Cabrera–Mott reaction.52 Note: (b–e) Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018. (g and h) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2020. (i and j) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Blade-coating technique. A liquid metal droplet is scraped with a ‘squeegee’ across a substrate allowing an oxide layer to attach to the surface. (b) AFM morphology of Ga2O3 nanosheet synthesised from liquid Ga through blade-coating (the inset is the height profile).44 (c) An optical microscopy image of 2D Ga2O3 as a result of ‘brushing’ liquid Ga across a SiO2 substrate.41 (d) Tape-printing method. A liquid metal is placed on a tape which is subsequently slid across a PDMS surface to print an oxide layer. The PDMS is then used as a stamp to transfer the 2D oxide onto another substrate. (e) SEM image and (f) AFM image with the step height profile inset of a tape-printed Ga2O3 nanosheet. (g) High-resolution TEM image with the corresponding SAED pattern of the synthesised Ga2O3.43 Note: (b) Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission. (c) Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from © 2019 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Roll-transfer method. A glass pipette or a glass rod is utilised to roll a liquid metal droplet across a substrate surface mimicking handwriting, resulting in a 2D oxide sheet being deposited onto the substrate. (b) An optical microscopy image of ultrathin 2D β-TeO2 printed from liquid Se–Te alloy onto a SiO2 substrate via the roll-transfer approach. (c) Low-resolution TEM image, (d) high-resolution TEM image, and (e) selected area diffraction pattern of the material synthesised onto a TEM grid. (f) An AFM image of the exfoliated 2D β-TeO2.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2021.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–i) Printed 2D β-TeO2 on a variety of substrates where X indicates the location of the flake and I–IX represent quartz, glass, 100 nm Pt on Si, Si, 300 nm Al2O3 on Si, sapphire, GaAs, mica, and 300 nm SiO2 on Si substrates, respectively. (j) The result from multi-printing of 2D β-TeO2 on 300 nm SiO2via roll-transfer.45 Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2021.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Sonication process where liquid metal is placed in water or another solution, resulting in nanomaterials in liquid suspension. (b) SEM image, (c) HRTEM micrograph, and (d) AFM image with the inset featuring height profile of Ga2O3 nanoflakes.46 (e) Bubbling technique. Pressurised air is injected into the liquid metal ‘pool’ submerged in a selected solution, creating air bubbles in which metal oxide is formed at the bubble surfaces. The oxides accumulate in the solution and can be further processed. AFM images and TEM characterisation including SAED pattern and HRTEM images of (f) Ga2O3 and (g) HfO2 derived from the bubbling method.4 Note: (b–d) Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f and g) Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustrating the synthesis of 2D MoS2 exploiting a redox reaction that occurs on the liquid EGaIn surface which is submerged in an aqueous solution of (NH4)2MoS4. The MoS2 nanosheet that formed on the EGaIn surface is then exfoliated via other liquid metal synthesis techniques such as sonication or touch-printing. (b) AFM morphology and (c) HRTEM image of the synthesised 2D MoS2 nanosheet.50 Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Touch-printing of 2D SnS from liquid Sn in the presence of 50 ppm H2S gas at 350 °C with (b) dark field TEM image and (c) AFM image (the inset featuring the height profile corresponds to the yellow line).80 (d) The synthesis of GaN nanosheets from liquid Ga exposed to an NH3 environment. (e) AFM image with the corresponding thickness profile and (f) low-resolution TEM image of the synthesised 2D GaN.81 Note: (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from © 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A schematic of the vapor phase anion exchange process carried out in a tubular furnace. The 2D metal oxide reacts with the precursor material at high temperature resulting in an anion exchange reaction and subsequent oxygen removal. Optical microscopy image, AFM images and XPS spectra of 2D Ga2O3 (b–e, respectively) and 2D GaN (f–i, respectively) indicate a successful conversion with the ammonolysis reaction at 800 °C.6 Note: (b–i) Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from © 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic of a solution-based post-processing method utilised to synthesise 2D In2O3−xSx. Ultrathin In2O3 obtained from squeeze-printing was submersed in a polysulphide solution allowing the sulphur insertion reaction to take place. (b) Optical image, (c) AFM image with the height profile inset, (d) low-resolution and high-resolution TEM images as well as indexed SAED pattern of the 2D In2O3−xSx.7 Note: Reproduced and edited from ref. 7 with permission from © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication of a SnO/In2O3 heterostructure via a double touch-printing approach with (b) a corresponding optical image.51 (c) A deterministic transfer method using a PDMS stamp coated with a sacrificial layer of PPC to transfer 2D Ga2O3 onto monolayer WS2 for encapsulation purposes. (d) Optical image of the WS2/Ga2O3 heterostructure.52 Note: (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Cross-sectional TEM images of (a) squeeze-printed monolayer and (b) bilayer ITO obtained from multi-printing.37 The images with high magnification in the insets show a distinct difference between monolayer and bilayer ITO with an observed vdW gap. (c) AFM image of 2D Ga2O3 transferred onto a SiO2 substrate with the describe technique utilising a PPC/PDMS stamp.52 In comparison to the as-synthesised Ga2O3 shown in Fig. 2i and d Ga2O3 after being transferred presented a pronounce vdW gap. Note: (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2020. (c) Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 13  Electronic applications. (a) AFM image of IZO with corresponding height profile inset. (b) Gate voltage and drain current transfer curve and (c) n-type I–V characteristic curves of the IZO-based FET.117 (d) SEM image of the FET with 2D β-TeO2 as a channel material. (e) Transfer and (f) characteristic curves (VD = −1 V) revealing p-type behaviour of the 2D β-TeO2 FET.45 (g) An optical microscopy image of ultrathin α-Sb2O3. (h) I–V curve obtained from conductive AFM tunnelling current through a point on the material indicating a competitive breakdown voltage. The inset shows data fitted utilising the Schottky emission model, which revealed the maximum dielectric constant of 84 for a 3 nm thick α-Sb2O3. (i) Dielectric constant-frequency characteristics of α-Sb2O3 measured from a Au/α-Sb2O3/p-GaAs device (inset) with a maximum extracted dielectric constant of 80.36 Note: (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2021. (g–i) Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

Blade coating	GaS	1.5	3.02	Electron	
μ
FET = 0.2	150	
40

Touch-printing	SnO	0.6	4.2	Hole	
μ
FET = 0.7	20	
119

Touch + sulphurisation	Ga2S3	2	2.1	Hole	
μ
FET = 3.5	102	
55

Touch + sulphurisation	In2S3	3.7	2.3	Electron	
μ
FET = 58	104	
56

Touch + sulphurisation	Bi2S3	2.5	2.3	Hole	
μ
FET = 12.4	103	
93

Squeeze-printing	IZO	1.59	3.51	Electron	
μ
FET = 87	105	
117

Roll-transfer	β-TeO2	1.5	3.7	Hole	
μ
FET = up to 232	106	
45

Touch-printing	SnO	1	—	Hole	
μ
FET = 0.47	106	
120

Squeeze + solution-based oxygen replacement	In2O3−xSx	2.2	3.33	Electron	
μ
FET = up to 44	60	
7

Squeeze + ammonolysis	GaN	1.3	3.5	Electron	
μ
Hall = 21.5	—	
6

Surface-confined nitridation	GaN	4.1	—	Electron	
μ
FET = 160	106	
81


 	Fig. 14  PL images of (a) an as-exfoliated monolayer WS2 and (b) WS2 capped with ultrathin Ga2O3 under large Gaussian laser spot excitation (25 μm) showing a homogeneous PL texture. The scale bar size is 5 μm. (c) PL spectra of the as-exfoliated WS2 and WS2/Ga2O3 heterostructure with laser intensity of 34 μW μm−2 at cryogenic temperature.52 (d) PL spectra of the as-exfoliated WS2 as well as WS2/Al2O3 heterostructure where Al2O3 was directly deposited onto the monolayer via electron beam evaporation with high electron beam energy. As a result of the deposition, the exciton PL was significantly suppressed. (e) Schematic of a monolayer WS2 capped with a protective layer of hBN (top) and Ga2O3 (bottom) prior to the direct electron beam evaporation of Al2O3 and (f) corresponding PL spectra.52 The results indicated that 2D Ga2O3 outperformed hBN in protecting the monolayer WS2. Note: Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Photodetection applications. (a) The ID–VD curves of the 2D p-SnO/n-In2O3 heterostructure operating under dark and light illumination at wavelengths of 280, 365, and 455 nm. The inset illustrates the device which was fabricated via multiple touch-printing as described in the previous section. (b) Photoresponsivity (R) at VD = 20 V of the individual SnO and In2O3 devices and the SnO/In2O3 heterostructure under three different illumination wavelengths (280, 365, and 455 nm). (c) The photocurrent responses as a function of time measured from the SnO/In2O3 p–n heterojunction at VD = −20 V under the three illumination wavelengths.51 (d) A schematic of the Ga2O3/Si heterostructure photodetector. (e) The I–V properties of the device excited with 254 nm and 365 nm (the inset) UV light sources and under dark condition suggesting no response to 365 nm wavelength. (f) Photoresponsivity and the efficiency of external quantum (EQE) under 254 nm UV light at different voltages.44 (g) Schematic representing a photodetector fabricated on 2D MoS2/GaN heterojunction. (h) The I–V characteristics showing the device provided good response to light illumination (532 nm and 365 nm). (i) The time-resolved photoresponse of the device under 365 nm light illumination revealing impressive switching behavior.42 Note: (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission. (g–i) Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from © 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) An image and schematic of the 2D ITO capacitive touch screen (left) and test pattern used for touch screen characterisation measuring the response to a touch by a metal pin (right). (b) Capacitive response maps showing high sensitivity of the fabricated capacitive touch screen.37 (c) A schematic illustration of the 2D Ga2S3-based gas sensor. (d) Normalised response factor of the gas sensor. In the presence of 10.7 ppm of NO2 gas at 150 °C, a response and recovery time of 215 s and 185 s, respectively, with a normalised response factor of 8.5% were obtained.55 (e) A schematic of a 2D SnO2 memtransistor with a cross-sectional TEM image of the ultrathin SnO2. (f) Simulated pattern recognition accuracy for a 8 × 8 pixel image in ideal numeric training (blue line) and the 2D SnO2-based memtransistor (VG from −2 to 10 V). The accuracy of the fabricated memtransistor was found to be ∼92.25%. The inset shows a three-layer neural network including 8 × 8 pre-neurons, 36 hidden neurons, and 10 output neurons, for pattern recognition simulation.129 Note: (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from © Springer Nature Limited 2020. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from © 2019 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from © 2021 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A demonstration of some synthesis techniques on a SiO2 substrate and TEM grid as well as cleaning process is available in Video. S1. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs01166a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
