A review: recent advances in preparations and applications of heteroatom-doped carbon quantum dots  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0DT01004A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0DT01004A
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 6915-6938A review: recent advances in preparations and applications of heteroatom-doped carbon quantum dots

        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Kou†
a, 
      
        
          
            Shicui 
            Jiang†
b, 
      
        
          
            Soo-Jin 
            Park
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Long-Yue 
            Meng
          
        
      *d
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Yanbian University, Park Road 977, Yanji 133002, Jilin Province, PR China
bMOE Key Laboratory of Biological Resources of Changbai Mountain &Functional Molecules, Yanbian University, Park Road 977, Yanji 133002, Jilin Province, PR China
cDepartment of Chemistry, Inha University, 100 Inharo, Incheon 22212, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sjpark@inha.ac.kr
dDepartment of Environmental Science, Department of Chemistry, Yanbian University, Park Road 977, Yanji 133002, Jilin Province, PR China. E-mail: lymeng@ybu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-(0)433-273-2014
Received 
      17th March 2020
    , Accepted 5th May 2020First published on 8th May 2020AbstractCarbon quantum dots (CQDs) are widely used in optoelectronic catalysis, biological imaging, and ion probes owing to their low toxicity, stable photoluminescence, and ease of chemical modification. However, the low fluorescence yield and monochromatic fluorescence of CQDs limit their practical applications. This review summarizes the commonly used approaches for improving the fluorescence efficiency of CQDs doped with non-metallic (heteroatom) elements. Herein, three types of heteroatom-doped CQDs have been investigated: (1) CQDs doped with a single heteroatom; (2) CQDs doped with two heteroatoms; and (3) CQDs doped with three heteroatoms. The limitations and future perspectives of doped CQDs from the viewpoint of producing CQDs for specific applications, especially for bioimaging and light emitting diodes, have also been discussed herein.
1. Introduction
Carbon quantum dots (CQDs), a novel nanomaterial with a size of less than 10 nm, were discovered in 2004, and the term “carbon quantum dots” was coined in 2006. Compared to traditional QDs, CQDs show good light resistance, biocompatibility, and low cytotoxicity.1–3 They have been successfully used for various applications such as ion probes,4,5 sensors,6–8 bioimaging,9,10 disease monitoring and diagnosis,11,12 fluorescent inks,13 and photoelectric catalysis.14,15 However, conventional preparation methods produce CQDs with low quantum yield, low utilization of visible light, and monochromatic fluorescence. Hence, these CQDs essentially emit blue light under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. This short-wavelength emission of CQDs reduces their penetration depth in biological tissues, which greatly limits their applications.16–19 Therefore, various efforts have been made to develop simple and feasible methods to regulate the physical and chemical properties of CQDs.
Functionalization, including surface passivation and heteroatom doping, is considered to be an efficient approach to tailor the properties of CQDs.20–25 However, the surface passivation process is cumbersome and most of the organic reagents or catalysts involved in it are strongly cytotoxic and environmentally toxic. Recently, heteroatom doping of CQDs has gained significant attention.26 Yang et al. carried out the first in vivo study using polyethylene glycol (PEG)-passivated CDs (emission at 650 nm) and ZnS-doped CDs (emission at 510 nm) for dual-color fluorescence imaging with good contrast.27 This method generates numerous conjugated intrinsic defects on the surface of CQDs to produce a red shift in their fluorescence. However, metal/transition metal atoms cause ineffective and non-uniform doping because of their larger radii than that of carbon atoms. The toxicity of metal ions is another major problem.
To overcome these limitations, non-metals have been used to dope CQDs.28–31 Unlike metal ions, non-metals can not only change the electronic structure of CQDs because of the similarity of their size with that of the carbon atom (C), but also result in uniform doping and produce structural defects. Moreover, the synthesis processes involving non-metal atom doping are relatively simple and effective.32 It has been reported that the doping of CQDs with N, P, S, B, and other elements to adjust the carbon frameworks and their surface chemical structures creates new excited energy potentials, thus improving the fluorescence quantum yields and inherent properties of the CQDs.
For example, Li et al. reported an electrochemical approach for obtaining N-doped graphene quantum dots (N-GQDs) with N enrichment using N-containing tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) in acetonitrile as the electrolyte to introduce N atoms in situ into the resulting GQDs.33 From the viewpoint of the significant quantum confinement and edge effects of 0D GQDs, doped GQDs with chemically bonded N atoms can significantly change their electronic properties and provide more active sites, demonstrating superior electrocatalytic ability. Unlike GQDs, the generated N-GQDs have the same electrochemical activity as that of the commercially available Pt/C catalyst, which performs oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in an alkaline medium. Therefore, N-GQDs can be used as metal-free ORR catalyst in fuel cells and for biomedical imaging and other optoelectronic applications, owing to their excellent luminescent properties. B atoms have a much lower electronegativity than C atoms. Consequently, B atoms doped in CQDs may lead to a positive charge distribution around C atoms, which is conducive to the adsorption of biomolecules. Ma et al. synthetized B-doped carbon quantum dots (B-CQDs) with precursors of citric acid (CA) as a C source and sodium tetraphenylborate (NaTPB) as a B source using the hydrothermal method.34 The obtained B-CQDs have a high quantum yield (42%) and good stability and good selectivity as fluorescent probes for the ultrasensitive detection of catechol (CC) by fluorescence quenching and detection of glutathione (GSH) by fluorescence recovery, without the use of any auxiliary biomolecules or labeled materials. S-doped CQDs (S-CQDs) with high fluorescence quantum yield can be used as probes without any modification for the fluorescence turn-off detection of Fe3+ over the concentration range of 1–500 μM with a detection limit of 0.1 μM.35 Compared to single non-metal-doped CQDs such as N-doped CQDs (N-CQDs), the CQDs co-doped with N and S exhibit high fluorescence quantum yield and longer wave-emission maximum. Incorporating an extra electron by N-doping (with phosphorus) improves the photophysical properties of N-CQDs. This N and P co-doping favors the formation of radiative relaxation pathways.36
Heteroatom-doped CQDs can be classified into three types: (1) CQDs doped with a single heteroatom; (2) CQDs doped with two heteroatoms; and (3) CQDs doped with three heteroatoms. This review discusses the commonly used methods for the preparation of single, two, and three heteroatom-doped CQDs along with the prospects for future research in this context.
2. Synthetic strategies for heteroatom-doped CQDs
Generally, the synthesis of CQDs with heteroatoms can be categorized as top-down and bottom-up routes. The former synthesizes CQDs by cracking or breaking carbonaceous substances through chemical, electrochemical, or physical methods. The heteroatoms have already been doped in the carbonaceous material or are doped in the process. Laser ablation, chemical oxidation, electrochemical oxidation, and arc discharge are the common top-down methods. In contrast, the latter is realized as the pyrolysis or carbonization of small organic molecules containing heteroatoms as precursors or progressive chemical fusion of small aromatic molecules. Bottom-up routes include direct pyrolysis, electrochemical carbonization, hydrothermal/solvent heat treatment, microwave radiation, templating, and strong acid oxidation.37–40 The top-down method offers the advantages of cheap raw materials, mass production, and simple operation. The oxygen-containing functional groups at the edges can promote the solubility and functionalization of doped CQDs. However, this method requires expensive experimental equipment and nonselective chemical cutting process that cannot accurately control the shape or size of the products. The bottom-up method has significant advantages in controlling the molecular weight and shape of carbon dots;41,42 therefore, methods such as the hydrothermal method, microwave radiation, and electrochemical carbonization are widely used. Zhou et al. prepared NS-CDs with a quantum yield of 43% through hydrothermal treatment using m-phenylenediamine (mPD) and concentrated sulfuric acid.43 The as-prepared CDs presented excitation-independent optical properties and dual emission (blue and yellow). This is because the co-doping effect of S and N changes the electronic structure and surface state of the CDs. Among them, yellow emission originates from the intrinsic conjugated electron emission of the NS-CDs, whereas blue emission originates from the surface energy trap emission. Tammina et al. used a microwave method to fabricate NP-CQDs in only 30 min at 700 W.44 Ethylenediamine and urea phosphate were used as raw materials for the synthesis of the NP-CQDs. NP-CQDs exhibited a high quantum yield of 44.2%. The hydroxyl, carboxyl, and amine functional groups present on the surface of the NP-CQDs caused their fluorescence quenching through hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking, and DA interactions. Li et al. used graphite rods as the carbon source and obtained P-GQDs with high P content through sodium phytate electrolysis. The resulting P-GQDs showed good monodispersity and spherical shape.40 However, the bottom-up method also has some disadvantages, such as complex synthesis process and strong tendency aggregation. However, these common drawbacks have recently been resolved. For example, to avoid the agglomeration of doped CQDs, cosurfactants or surfactants can be added to the solution.
3. CQDs doped with a single heteroatom
The doping of heteroatoms in the carbon framework has become the main strategy applied for adjusting the electronic, chemical, and optical properties of carbon nanomaterials. Compared with undoped CQDs, doped CQDs with highly electronegative atoms (e.g., N and S) usually cause blue-shifted PL emission; however, those doped with atoms of low electronegativity (e.g., P, B, and Se) result in a redshift.45 Generally, single heteroatom-doped CQDs are synthesized using the hydrothermal (or solvothermal synthesis), microwave, electrochemical, and ultrasonic synthesis methods. To prepare single heteroatom-doped CQDs (X-CQDs) via hydrothermal synthesis, thermally carbonized X-containing compounds used as the X precursors to inject electrons into the carbon lattice [Fig. 1].
 Fig. 1  The synthesis of CQDs with different raw materials. 
3.1. N-CQDs
N and C atoms are similar in size and structure and have five valence electrons, which can bond with other C atoms. Therefore, N-doping increases the surface-state defects of CQDs and improves their electronic properties and surface chemical reactivity by providing a large number of reactive groups (–OH, –COOH, –NC–, –CN, –NH2). These reactive groups in turn, increase the fluorescence quantum yield of CQDs.46–52
N-CQDs consist of three main types of N-containing functional groups: pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, and graphitic-N.53–55 The pyridinic- and pyrrolic-N bond with two C atoms (C–NC) in a hexagonal array. The pyrrolic-N bonds with two C atoms (C–NC) in a pentagonal arrangement. These heteroatoms may be located at the edge of N-CQDs, but can also be present inside the CQDs when replaced with vacancies.31 They may also form an array of three C atoms bonded to one N atom in sp2 configuration, forming graphitic-N inside the CQDs. Moreover, nitrogen oxides (NCH–OH/–N–CO, CN + –O–) and aminic nitrogen are mostly formed in N-doped CQDs. Table 1 lists the typical strategies used for synthesizing doped CQDs and their corresponding N precursors and quantum yields and the applications of the resulting CQDs.
Table 1 Methods of synthesis and performance parameters for CQDs doped with single element (N\S\P\B\Si\Se\F\I)




Fabrication
Materials
Quantum yield (%)
Exc/Em (nm)
Particle size(nm)
Surface doping
Applications
Ref.




Hydrothermal treatment
Orthophenylene diamine
28
420/477
1–2
N
Design and tailor optical–electronic properties of carbon nanostructures

57



Thioacetic acid
—
—
3.8–7.4
S
—

64



Maltitol and H2SO4
—
—
2.75
S
Bifacial dye-sensitized solar cells

71



Triethyl phosphonoacetate and phosphoric acid
—
—
3.5
P
Biosensing and bioimaging

68



Ethylenediamine and boric acid
50
340/430
1–6
B
LED convertors and live cell imaging reagents

72



Selenocystine
7.6
398/490
1–5
Se
As an antioxidant to protect the cells

74



Fluorinated graphene oxide
—
330/445
5.6
F
Solar cells, biosensors, and long-term cellular imaging

76



Degreasing cotton and hydrofluoric acid
—
340/428
3.25
F
UV photodetectors

77



Iodixanol and glycine
—
370/475
2.7
I
X-ray CT contrast agents

79



Microwave synthesis
Acetylacetone and NH3·H2O
51.61
380/420
<4.31
N
Illumination, electronic devices, and biosensing

58



Citric acid, boric acid and urea
10–15
350/450
2–6
B
Cell labeling, photodynamic therapy or various photonic applications.

71



Electrochemical synthesis
Sodium phytate
—
—
2–4
P
Biomedical and polymeric materials

40



Solvent-thermal method
Phosphorous tribromide and hydroquinone
25
—
5–15
P
Catalysis and photovoltaic device

5



Silicon tetrachloride and hydroquinone
19.2
—
7 ± 2
Si
Bioimaging application and multifunctional sensor

75



Thermal cutting
Fluorinated graphene
13.2
480/533
5.11
F
As a multimodal material in biomedical fields

78





N-CQDs were combined with Ag3PO4 to form N-CQD/Ag3PO4 composites for the degradation of methylene blue under visible-light irradiation.56 These composites nearly completely degraded MB (20 mg L−1) within 70 min under visible light irradiation, while only 78.8% of MO was degraded when pure Ag3PO4 was used as the photocatalyst. It is believed that the N-CQDs in the nanocomposites increase photocatalytic activity and stability, and facilitate the transfer of electrons from Ag3PO4, allowing the spatial separation of photogenerated charge carriers and inhibiting the reduction of silver ions.
To investigate the effect of surface atoms on the photoluminescence (PL) and photocatalytic activity of luminescent CQDs, Hu et al. tailored the surface groups of CQDs by heteroatom doping.57 The coexistence of O and N radicals in the CQDs resulted in strong PL, whereas the CQDs containing O and Cl radicals showed high photocatalytic activity. This can be attributed to the different degrees and directions of energy-band bending from the inner region to the surface of the CQDs caused by the O, N, and Cl. The coexistence of both upward and downward band bending, caused by the O and Cl radicals, respectively, in the CQDs created an internal electronic field, which facilitated carrier migration and the separation of electron–hole pairs. This improved the photocatalytic activity of the CQDs. These results can also be used for tailoring the optoelectronic properties of carbon nanostructures. He et al. carried out the microwave synthesis of N-CQDs.58 The organic polymer was heated at 160 °C, and transition carbon nanodot products were obtained when the microwave temperature was increased to 200 °C. Finally, stable N-CQDs were synthesized upon prolonged heating. The synthesis process involved intermolecular dehydration, polymerization, and carbonization, as shown in Fig. 2A. Fig. 2B shows the morphology and particle size distribution of the resulting N-CQDs. The N-CQDs had a maximum size of 4.31 nm (Fig. 2Ba and b) because of the loose structure of the polymer precursor and the particle size gradually decreased with an increase in temperature and increased with an increase in the reaction time (Fig. 2B). The obtained N-CQDs were used for ion detection and animal and plant cell fluorescence imaging owing to their low cytotoxicity, as shown in Fig. 2C.
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic diagram of formation process of N-CDs. (B) TEM images and the corresponding particle size distribution of (a) and (b) N-CDs160-1, (c) and (d) N-CDs200-1, (e) and (f) N-CDs200-2. (C) (a) Viability of BT-474 cells incubation with N-CDs of different concentrations; confocal fluorescence microphotographs of N-CDs labeled BT-474 cells under (b) bright field; (c) 405 nm excitation; (d) the merged image of (b) and (c).58 
CQDs, which are novel luminophores, have gained immense attention due to their highly tunable luminescence properties, excellent photostability, good solubility and biocompatibility, and ease of functionalization. Heavy metal ions are environmental pollutants and their detection has gained significant research attention because they are not biodegradable and are toxic to humans. Dong et al. prepared N-CQDs using a simple and efficient one-step strategy.59 The process involved the pyrolysis of ethanolamine in air for 7 min. Hydrogen peroxide was added to assist the pyrolysis process. The as-prepared N-CQDs showed excellent stability and excitation- and pH-dependent PL behavior.
Researches on properties of the N-CQDs have mainly focuced on photocatalytical processes and non-bio(sensors) (bio)sensing applications, but exploiting their properties in inactivation of microorganisms in air and water is scarce. Furthermore, N-CQDs have rarely been studied in (bio)sensing, where more methods/techniques should be involved.
3.2. S-CQDs
Compared to N-CQDS, S-CQDs are relatively difficult to synthesize because C–S bonds are difficult to form. The atomic radius of S is higher than that of C, and the C–S bond is 25% longer than the C–C bond. However, S and C show similar electronegativities, and the C–S bond does not provide significant charge transfer.60–62 Very few studies have been carried out on S-CQDs. However, mechanistic studies have revealed that the mismatch between the outermost S and C orbitals results in an uneven distribution of the spin density, conferring surface reactivity and catalytic properties to S-CQDs. S-doping alters the chemical properties of CQDs (Table 1).
S-CQDs with blue fluorescence were prepared by treating waste oil with concentrated sulfuric acid.63 S-doping successfully expanded the bandgap of CQDs at 3.28 eV, resulting in a blue shift. The luminescence intensity of the S-CQDs prepared using this method increased linearly over the pH range of 3–9, and hence were used in optical pH sensors. Bian et al. also prepared S-GQDs using this method.62 The resulting S-GQDs exhibited blue emission, excitation-independent PL behavior, monolayer-graphene thickness, and a uniform size of 2.5 nm, confirming the successful S-doping of the GQDs. By fluorescence quenching of the S-GQDs with Ag+, a direct fluorescence sensor with fast response, wide linear range, and low detection limit could be fabricated for sensitive detection of Ag+.
There have been a few reports on the synthesis of CQDs using high molecular weight organics with a large number of C atoms and their doping with other materials. However, in order to probe the feasibility of the synthesis of CQDs using low molecular weight organics, Dai et al. synthesized S-CQDs using thioacetic acid as a single precursor.64 The polymerization, nucleation, and growth of the S-CQDs were observed by changing the reaction temperature. In addition, owing to their energy storage and electron abundance, S-CQDs showed electrocatalytic properties when doped with metal atoms. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have gained immense attention due to their high conversion efficiency. Pt as the best counter electrode (CE) catalyst is limited in its practical applications because of high cost. Zhang et al. prepared S-CQDs/metal selenide CEs for DSSCs by electrodepositing S-CQDs onto metal selenide CEs.65 The presence of S-CQDs facilitated light harvesting and accelerated the transfer of electrons from the S-CQDs to the electrode, thus improving the catalytic activity of the CE under solar illumination. Hence, the resulting CEs with a maximum front efficiency of 9.15% and a rear efficiency of 6.26% could be used in bifacial DSSCs.
To establish less toxic QDs based ratiometric fluorescence probe, S-CDs were synthesized by microwave-assisted pyrolysis of ammonium citrate and L-cysteine, and then an intrinsic dualemitting ZnCdTe QDs were prepared by using S-CDs as capping ligands for the first time.66 The obtained S-CDs-ZnCdTe QDs showed the excellent stability and optical properties even under extreme ion strength, and it concluded two emissions at 425(intrinsic emission of S-CDs) and 605 nm (emission of QDs). Since guanine could efficiently quench the emission at 605 nm through excited state electron transfer or the aggregation of QDs, S-CDs-ZnCdTe QDs were successfully developed a highly sensitive and selective ratiometric fluorescence probe for guanine detection with the detection limit of 0.076 μmol·L−1. The fluorescence properties S-CQDs are affected by the specific configuration of S. Although S-CQDs have been rarely reported, they are promising candidates for catalysis applications owing to their outstanding electronic properties and surface chemical activity.63
3.3. P-Doped CQDs (P-CQDs)
Although the atomic radius of P is larger than that of C, P-doping can result in the formation of substituted defects in sp3 diamond films. Hence, P acts as an n-type donor and improves the photoelectric properties of CQDs. Moreover, P-doping can modify the electronic properties of CQDs and generates a large number of active sites,67 thus improving their fluorescence properties and stability (Table 1). Zhou et al. prepared P-CQDs via a solvothermal method using phosphorus bromide and hydroquinone (in various ratios) as the precursors.67 As P-doping regulated the emission band of CQDs, P-CQDs showed high fluorescence yield, and hence are used in photovoltaic devices. CQDs consist of two types of C atoms: sp2-hybridized C and sp3-hybridized C connected with oxygen-containing functional groups. P-doping increases the number of sp2-hybridized C atoms in CQDs, thus enhancing their visible fluorescence. The number of sp2-hybridized C atoms in P-CQDs increases with an increase in their P dopant concentration. Li et al. used graphite rods as the carbon source and obtained P-GQDs with a high P content through sodium phytate electrolysis.40 The electronegativity of P is less than that of C and the energy of the C–P bond is lower than that of the C–O bond. Hence, P-GQDs were widely used for scavenging free radicals, as shown Fig. 3. Although heteroatom-doped CQDs show improved fluorescence intensity, they mostly exhibit blue fluorescence. Hence, Li et al. synthesized P-CDs via a hydrothermal method in the presence of phosphoric acid.68 Aggregation-induced red shift emission (AIRSE) was observed for the first time because of the electron enrichment of the CQDs by P-doping. The emission wavelength of the P-CDs could be regulated within the range of 455–595 nm by varying the concentration of the solution.
 Fig. 3  The synthesis of P-CQDs by electrolytic method and their application in scavenging free radical. 
P-doping can efficiently separate the sp2 carbon clusters in CQDs. In P-CQDs, the defect sites and isolated sp2 carbon clusters co-exist together. Hence, the bandgap of P-CQDs can be effectively expanded from the UV to the visible light region, thus changing their emission from blue to green.
3.4. B-CQDs
N, P, and S are n-type dopants and can increase the electron concentration of CQDs. In contrast, B-doping confers different characteristics to CQDs.69 The B–C bond is 0.5% longer than the C–C bond, and the electronic deficiency of B creates a defect in the energy state of CQDs, which leads to emissions from the defects on the surface of the CQDs. These emissions cause a certain degree of chemical disturbance. Thus, B-doping can alter the optical properties of CQDs by generating a large number of active sites.70
B is incorporated into CQDs through a hydrothermal route to realize arc discharge in the vapor phase or to render them electrochemically active (Table 1). Based on this phenomenon, Bourlinos et al. microwave heat-treated CA, boric acid, and urea to produce spherical B-CQDs with olive-green color and a small size of 2–6 nm.71 As B-doping generates new electronic states, B-CQDs exhibit improved nonlinear optical response compared to that of CQDs. In addition, the absorption/emission spectra of B-CQDs are similar to those of inorganic QDs under UV excitation. Generally, CQDs exhibit excellent fluorescence and do not aggregate in dilute solutions because of their strong fluorescence quenching in these solutions. In order to investigate the solid-state fluorescence of CQDs, Shen et al. synthesized solid-state fluorescent B-CDs with a high quantum yield (50%) using a hydrothermal method.72 These CQDs were used in LED convertors and live cell imaging reagents. The solid-state fluorescence mechanism of the B-CQDs was elucidated as follows (1) B-doping generated electronic defects, which inhibited the charge transfer among the CDs caused by the interaction between the electron donor and the receptor. This charge transfer inhibition prevented the quenching of the CQDs caused by aggregation. (2) The H bond interactions produced by the surface B-OH group resulted in the aggregation of the CQDs. The nanodots appeared to be similar to those dispersed in the liquid. In addition, the CQDs consisted of a large number of negative groups, which caused electrostatic exclusion between the CQDs, thus preventing their excessive agglomeration. Therefore, B-CDs have great potential in the field of lighting and display. An exception was finished by Van Tam et al. synthesized B-GQDs by the hydrothermal treatment of glucose and boric acid.73 Because of the difference in the electronegativities of B and O, O2 was easily adsorbed on B atoms. Thus, the catalytic performance of B-GQDs is comparable to that of Pt/C (Fig. 4d and e). Fig. 4a shows the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results of the GQDs and B-GQDs with different B doping amounts. The spectra revealed that the B atoms were successfully incorporated into the carbon lattice of the GQDs. The high resolution C 1s spectrum of B-GQD could be deconvoluted into five peaks (Fig. 4c) corresponding to the C–B (284 eV), sp2 carbon CC (284.6 eV), C–O (285.4 eV), CO (286.6 eV), and O–CO (288 eV) bonds. The C–B peak was not observed in the case of the GQDs (Fig. 4b), indicating the successful incorporation of B atoms. With an increase in the B concentration of the precursors, the B concentration of the B-GQD catalysts increased along with their dipole moments and number of surface defects. This resulted in intense UV absorption of the B-GQDs. Thus, fluorescence transformation was achieved.
 Fig. 4  (a) The XPS survey scan of GQD and B-GQD with different boric acid concentration. High resolution C 1s XPS spectra of (b) the undoped GQD and (c) BGQD4. (d) Cyclic voltammogram of different G-BGQD composites at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) of different G-BGQD composites and commercial Pt/C catalyst. (f) G-BGQDs composite materials.73 
3.5. Selenium-doped CQDs (Se-CQDs)
Selenium as a vital trace element of human body plays a major role in biological processes. It exhibits excellent antioxidant defense and redox regulation owing to its unique electronegativity. Hence, Se-CQDs have gained immense attention for antioxidant applications in biosystems. Li et al. developed a facile method to synthesize Se-CQDs with green fluorescence (quantum yield 7.6%).74 The Se-CQDs were prepared using selenocystine via a hydrothermal treatment method and exhibited redox-dependent reversible fluorescence. Such synthetic Se-CQDs can remove reactive oxygen species (ROS) from biosystems, and hence act as an antioxidant to protect the cells from excessive ROS.
3.6. Silicon-doped CQDs (Si-CQDs)
Si belongs to the same group in the periodic table as C(IV). It can alter the electronic and structural properties of CQDs because of sp3-like bonding, creating a large number of active sites in the CQDs. Qian et al. prepared Si-CQDs by carrying out the solvothermal treatment of SiCl4 using hydroquinone with a quantum yield of up to 19.2%.75 Compared to CQDs, Si-CQDs showed a broad emission band, which is mostly blue-shifted. This could be attributed to the presence of a large number of Si–O groups in the conjugated carbon structure of Si-CQDs. This effect is the same as that of the P–O group in P-CQDs, as shown in Fig. 5B. The Si sites on the Si-QCDs can easily attract H2O2 through electron transfer among them, resulting in fluorescence quenching. The fluorescence can be recovered by H2O2 capture through melamine. This constituted a reversible “on–off–on” fluorescence sensing system, as shown Fig. 5A. There were two mechanisms to explain the fluorescence enhancement of CQDs by Si-doping. (1) Si-Doping generated a large number of isolated sp2 conjugated carbon clusters in CQDs, which act as fluorophores. These fluorophores enhanced the fluorescence of the CQDs. (2) Si-Doping created a large number of defect sites in the large conjugated carbon structure of CQDs, thus improving their fluorescence intensity.
 Fig. 5  (A) Detection of melamine based on Si-CQDs. (B) Fluorescence emission spectra of Si-CQDs, CQDs, and P-CQDs. (C) Effect of Si-CQDs on human HeLa cells.75 
3.7. Fluorine-doped CQDs (F-CQDs)
Florine is an important element used in the medical field owing to its easy incorporation into organic compounds (improve selectivity between drugs and receptor). Because of the large difference in the electronegativities of C and F, F-doping can effectively alter the chemical, structural, and electronic properties of CQDs, thus improving their fluorescence and magnetic and biological functions. Hence, F-CQDs exhibit great potential for medical applications.76–78
Sun et al. used a top-down strategy to prepare F-GQDs via a microwave and hydrothermal treatment method under acidic conditions.76 They employed fluorinated graphene oxide (FGO) nanosheets as the raw material. Compared to GQDs, the F-GQDs showed better photo- and pH-stabilities because of the protective mechanism of their surface-covered amino groups and the presence of F atoms, which acted as a protective shell. Thus, the F-GQDs could be used for applications such as solar cells, biosensors, and long-term cellular imaging. Ultrasonic liquid phase exfoliation is used to prepare F-GQDs. Zuo et al. first fabricated fluorinated carbon fibers (F-CFs) in the presence of HF and then synthetized F-GQDs by ultrasonic liquid phase exfoliation.77 The F atoms roughened the surface of the CFs and accelerated the exfoliation process, resulting in the formation of the F-GQDs via covalent bonds. Such synthetic CQDs exhibited high photoelectrical and excellent UV absorption properties, and hence are potential candidates for UV photodetectors.
Although there have been several reports on F-doping of CQDs, the magnetic applications of F-CQDs have been rarely investigated. Feng et al. reported an efficient method to synthesize F-GQDs with a low F/C atomic ratio of ∼0.03 via pyrolysis at 810 K by thermally cutting highly fluorinated graphene with a large number of structural defects.78 The obtained F-GQDs showed wavelength-dependent features and multicolor blue-to-green emissions. Moreover, the F-adsorbed atoms, which were located at the edges of the F-GQDs, introduced a paramagnetic center. The F-GQDs exhibited strong spin-half paramagnetism, and the number of local spins of F-GQDs was as high as about 7.33 × 1019 g−1 because of the presence of sp3-type defects and magnetic zigzag edges. Some magnetic measurements have shown that only a small number of GQDs obtained by oxidative cleavage exhibit paramagnetism because of saturated carboxylation at their edges. The doping of graphene with light elements such as F locally destroys the delocalized π-bonding network of the bipartite graphene lattice, thus generating magnetism.
3.8. Iodine-doped CQDs (I-CQDs)
Numerous studies have shown that I-CQDs can be used for biological imaging or as fluorescent probes for labeling living cells. However, the high osmotic pressure, short-time imaging, and non-specificity of I, limit its application as a contrast agent for computed tomography (CT) imaging. Therefore, to reduce the toxicity of I as a contrast agent and to prolong its blood circulation time, it is imperative to encapsulate the iodinated compound in a nanoparticle system such as CQDs or a compound having a conjugated polymer.79,80 Zhang et al. first designed a hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) approach for synthesizing dual-modal I-CDs as X-ray CT contrast agents (Fig. 6).79 The synthesis process involved the heating of glycine and iodixanol at 180 °C for 3 h. The resulting product showed good dispersibility and colloidal stability. Compared to traditional contrast agents, I-CDs were less toxic and also exhibited excellent PL properties and good biocompatibility. In particular, owing to the high atomic number of I, I-CDs give strong X-ray attenuation, which plays an important role in disease diagnosis.
 Fig. 6  Schematic synthesis of I-CQDs from the HTC of iodixanol and glycine and following application.79 
CQDs can be combined with I as a carrier for CT imaging agents to successfully achieve fluorescence/CT bimodal imaging because of their abundant surface groups. Su et al. had developed a facile method to synthesize bright luminescent I-CQDs via the hydrothermal treatment of CA and iohexol at 200 °C in an oil bath. The obtained I-CQDs exhibited an excitation-dependent PL behavior with a quantum yield of up to 18%.80 The bioimaging results indicated that I-CDs-C225, which can selectively enter cancer cells with EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) overexpression, was obtained by conjugating the antibody cetuximab to the surface of the I-CQDs using PEG diamine. Therefore, I-CQDs with good X-ray attenuation ability can provide a convenient and effective platform for the accurate diagnosis of tumor lesions in the near future. CQDs, as a fluorescent material, have good chemical stability. However, their fluorescence penetrates the tissues shallowly. Therefore, they are combined with I as a CT agent to realize real-time cancer monitoring.81,82
Researches on properties of the CQDs with a single heteroatom have mainly focuced on photocatalytical processes and non-bio(sensors) (bio)sensing applications, but exploiting their properties in inactivation of microorganisms in air and water is scarce. Compared with the non-bio(sensors) (bio)sensing applications of CQDs doped with a single heteroatom, more studies concerning the application in (bio)sensing are needed. Because of the small amount of research on the development of bio(sensors) based on X-CQDs, more methods/techniques should be involved in this area and researchers should be developing novel protocols for detection of cell lines, cancer biomarkers and disease.
4. Dual atom co-doped CQDs
The introduction of N causes CQDs to have rich edges, good crystal structure, and large surface area, which can provide good conductivity and edge active sites. N-doping in CQDs showed high performance in electrochemical and optoelectronic applications and bioimaging. CQDs co-doped with sulfur or phosphorus or boron CQDs co-doped with sulfur, phosphorus, or boron exhibit excellent biocompatibility and low toxicity, which can be used to detect ions in human blood, multicolor cell imaging, and DA.44,83,84
4.1. N and S co-doped CQDs (NS-CQDs)
Both S and N consist of lone pair electrons, and can cooperatively provide electrons, promote radiation recombination, and enhance the fluorescence quantum yield of CQDs,85 thereby endowing them with new properties (Table 2). N-CQDs show higher fluorescence intensity than CQDs. In contrast, S-CQDs show lower fluorescence intensity than CQDs, as revealed by the fluorescence spectra and possible luminescence mechanisms of CQDs, N-CQDs, and S-CQDs. This is because undoped CQDs exhibit the O-state, which produces a wide range of UV and visible light absorption bands and excitation-dependent emissions, corresponding to the distribution of different energy levels. N-doping produces a new surface state in CQDs, namely, the N-state. The electrons in this newly formed surface capture radiation and increase the fluorescence yield of CQDs.
Table 2 Methods of synthesis and performance parameters for CQDs doped with N\S




 
N\S precursor
C precursor
Method
PL color/size
Exc/Em (nm)
QY (%)
Applications
Ref.




1
Methionine
Acrylic acid
Hydrothermal, 200 °C, 12 h
Blue/2.3 nm
420/485
10.55
Fe3+ ions detection and temperature sensor.

87



2
Cysteine
Citric acid
Pyrolysis
Blue
346/415
67
Dual-mode colorimetric and fluorescent recovery sensors for CN–

123



3

L-Cysteine
Glycerol
Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 12 h
Blue/4.7 nm
350/440
15.2
A fluorescent sensor to determine fluazinam

88



4
Sulfuric acid

m-Phenylenediamine
Hydrothermal, 200 °C, 10 h
Yellow and blue/4.3 nm
—
43
Light conversion films and white-light-emitting diodes (WLED)

43



5
Ammonium persulfate/urea
Caffeine
Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 3 h
Blue/13 nm
370/426
69
Detection of Ag+

89



6

L-Cysteine
Citric acid
Hydrothermal, 200 °C, 3 h
Blue
355/450
57.2
Detection of methotrexate

91



7
Human fingernails sulfuric acid


Microwave irradiation, 400 W, 2 min
Blue/2.2 nm
—
—
Detection of SY and cell imaging agent

93



9
Methionine and ethylenediamine


Hydrothermal
blue, 5 nm
320/390
—
Detection of Fe3+

90





In the case of S-CQDs, the introduced S atoms eliminate the O-state, and the original surface state can be ignored. Therefore, S-CQDs show lower fluorescence intensity than CQDs. However, S-doping can lead to a greater red shift of the maximum emission wavelength. Thus, the synergistic effect of the N and S can improve the fluorescence quantum yield of CQDs and can produce light of different colors.85,86
So far, various methods have been used to prepare CQDs. These methods can be broadly divided into two categories: top-down and bottom-up. The hydrothermal method is considered to be the most direct and simple method to synthesize CQDs. Cui et al. used a one-pot hydrothermal method for synthesizing NS-CQDs using acrylic acid and methionine.87 The fast polymerization of acrylic acid was advantageous for the polymerization of CQDs during the formation process. The CQDs prepared using this approach can be used in temperature sensors because of their temperature sensitivity and fluorescence recoverability.
Fluazinam, a common fungicide, can cause damage to various organs of human body. Various methods have been developed for its detection. However, these methods are complicated and costly. CQDs are commonly used for fabricating sensors owing to their low cytotoxicity and biocompatibility, but they cannot selectively identify targets. Heteroatom doping, especially co-doping with N, can change the bandgap of CQDs to realize their chemical sensing applications. Zou et al. designed a fluorescent probe to selectively detect fluazinam using NS-CDs. NS-CDs with a quantum yield of 15.2% were prepared via a hydrothermal method using cysteine as the raw material.88 The characterization results indicated that the surface of the NS-CDs had many affinity sites, and fluazinam could be identified by intermolecular electrostatic force, π–π stacking, and hydrogen bonding, which quenched the fluorescence of the NS-CDs by internal filtration, as shown in Fig. 7. Dang et al. designed a probe based on NS-CDs for Ag+ detection in aqueous media.89 The NS-CDs with a high quantum yield (69%) were solid-state synthesized using a solid mixture of caffeine, urea, and ammonium persulfate. The combination of urea and ammonium persulfate accelerated the polymerization and carbonization of caffeine, resulting in the formation of large CDs with a large number of functional groups. The NS-CDs exhibited a red-shift in the PL emission and high quantum yield compared to that of the bare CDs. Similarly, Fe3+ was detected based on NS-CDs as an efficient fluorescent probe.90
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the sensitive fluorescence detection of fluazinam based on NS-CDs (represents-stacking effect; represents the hydrogen interaction; represents the interaction between the electron-rich groups and electron-deficient groups).88 
Methotrexate is a common drug for chemotherapy. Various methods are used for its detection. Among these methods, fluorescence spectroscopy is considered to be the most promising method owing to its simplicity and time-effectiveness. Zhao et al. fabricated NS-CQDs fluorescence probes based on the inner filter effect of NS-CQDs for detecting methotrexate in extracellular fluids and obtained satisfactory results.91 Li et al. synthesized chiral NS-CDs based on hydrothermal treatment of L (or D)-cysteine with fluorescence quantum yield of 41.26%.92 The fluorescence intensity and chirality of the obtained NS-CDs showed pH dependence, which contributed to carbonyl (amino)-related localized electronic states. Cellular energy metabolism experiments showed that treatment with L-NS-CDs increased the extracellular acidification rate of human bladder cancer T24 cells, while the D-NS-CDs did not change the basal level of glycolysis of T24 cells. Hence, this research implicated potential applications of the CDs in biomedicine.
Up to now, CQDs have been prepared using various sources of carbon sources such as biomass, chemical reagents, and fruits. Chatzimitakos et al. reported for the first time the use of human fingernails, which consist primarily of keratin, as a precursor for the synthesis of highly fluorescent NS-CDs with a quantum yield of 42.8% in 2 min by a microwave irradiation method.93 Based on the inner filter effect of NS-CDs and their static quenching between NS-CDs and sunset yellow, they are used as a fluorescent probe to detect sunset yellow excitation in food and beverages. Ding et al. synthesized NS-CDs with a quantum yield of 24% via the microwave method using 1,6-hexanediamine dihydrochloride and dimethyl sulfoxide as precursors.94 The optimal emission wavelength of the NS-CDs was 512 nm with green fluorescence, and was red-shifted gradually as the excitation wavelength aggrandized. It was further applied for the detection of MnO4− with a LOD of 0.34 μM based on the formation of complex by the reaction between NS-CDs and KMnO4−.
4.2. N and P co-doped CQDs (NP-CQDs)
Under normal conditions, CQDs emit blue light under UV radiation and have poor visible light absorption.95 Although green, yellow, and red light can also be emitted (in the visible region), this tunability has been achieved only in a few cases. The fluorescence emission of CQDs can be regulated by chemical surface modification and heteroatom doping. N as a common doping element is used as a co-dopant with P to synthesize CQDs with green fluorescence. This green emission arises from the defects induced by P and N co-doping near the Fermi level. These defects affect the degrees of polymerization and graphitization of CQDs, thus causing a red shift in their fluorescence96 (Table 3).
Table 3 Methods of synthesis and performance parameters for CQDs doped with N\P




 
N\P precursor
C precursor
Method
PL color/size
Exc/Em (nm)
QY (%)
Applications
Ref.




1
Adenosine 5′-triphosphate


Hydrothermal, 220 °C, 6 h
Blue/4.2–8.7 nm
320/408
43.2%
Detection of Fe3+

100



2

N-Phosphonomethyl aminodiacetic acid and ethylenediamine


Microwave-assisted thermolysis
Blue/3.3 nm
346/418
17.5%
Cellular imaging

83



3
4-Aminosalicylic acid and H3PO4


Solvothermal, 180 °C, 4 h
Bright green/4.75 nm
386/530
18.9%
Detection of nitrite and cells imaging

103



4
Ethylene diamine, phosphoric acid
Citric acid
Hydrothermal, 250 °C, 2 h
Green, red
340/430, 450/500
30%, 78%
FL and photoacoustic (PA) imaging of living tissue

96



5
Alendronate sodium


Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 20 h
Greenish blue/5 nm
330/420
35.0%
Detection of uranyl ion

102



6
Eleocharis dulcis


Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 5 h
Blue
380/458
11.2%
Fluorescent ink and detection for elemental Fe3+

104



7
Ethylenediamine and urea phosphate
Citric acid
Microwave, 700 W, 30 min
Blue, 2.7 ± 0.7 nm
350/441
44.2%
Detection of DA

44





Li et al. synthesized NP-CDs with low toxicity and excellent stability in high ionic strength media via the microwave-assisted thermolysis of N-phosphonomethyl aminodiacetic acid and ethylenediamine.83 Quantum dots (QDs) demonstrate effective quantum confinement in all three dimensions (x, y, z) of both the electron and the absorption and emission of QDs shifts to the longer wavelength region as the size of the dots gets larger, which has significant uses in the area of electronics and LEDs.97 The low energy consumption, ultra-thin device architectures, and processability on flexible substrates of organic LEDs (OLEDs) make them a cost-effective solution for lighting applications. Hindenberg et al. have demonstrated the suitability of a system based on a six-membered phosphorus heterocyclic ring as a solution-processable electroluminescent material for LEDs.98 Due to the non-planarity of the phosphorus center, these materials had excellent photophysical properties not only in solution but also in the solid state. In addition, they have high thermal stability at a temperature of 210 °C. So, polycyclic phosphorus materials proved to be suitable light emitting layers in OLED devices.
Up to now, many reports have focused on N-CQDs in order to improve the quantum yield of CQDs. P belongs to the same group in the periodic table as N. P-Doping is beneficial for low-energy electron transitions and to improve the fluorescence yield of CQDs. Zhang et al. developed a simple method to synthesize NP-CDs through a one-step microwave-assisted method in 140 s using ammonium citrate (AC) and phosphates. The resulting NP-CDs exhibited a high quantum yield of up to 62%.99 The formation mechanism of the NP-CDs could be elucidated as follows: AC formed a carbon core at the gas–liquid interface and the molecules around the carbon core diffused to the core to promote its growth. With an increase in temperature, the polymer carbon core gradually carbonized to form NP-CDs. The obtained NP-CDs with a large N content and a moderate P content showed excellent optical properties and thermal stability up to 180 °C. Hence, when combined with a UV chip, the NP-CDs with the CIE (Commission Internationale de L'Eclairage) chromaticity coordinates of (0.38, 0.35) and a corresponding color temperature of 4450 K could be used for fabricating white LEDs.
Fe3+ plays an important role in human body. Shangguan et al. reported an effective strategy for designing fluorescent nanoprobes to detect Fe3+.100 A strongly bright NP-CD-based probe was prepared via a hydrothermal approach at 220 °C using adenosine 5′-triphosphate as the precursor for Fe3+ detection. Fe3+ could be detected through the Fe–O–P bonds formed between Fe3+ and the NP-CDs. Compared to other CD-based Fe3+ sensors, the NP-CD probe exhibited strong fluorescence and excellent anti-interference ability with a detection limit of 0.33 μM. Accordingly, Li et al. reported a cost-effective route to synthesize NP-CDs using adenosine monophosphate (AMP). The obtained NP-CDs showed strong blue emission with a quantum yield up to 33.81%.101 The P-doping of the N-CDs improved their quantum yield.
It has been reported that P-CQDs can exhibit green fluorescence. N co-doping increases the fluorescence intensity of P-CQDs and causes double emission. Parvin et al. fabricated NP-CQDs with dual fluorescence (green and red) via a hydrothermal method using ethylene diamine, phosphoric acid, and CA.96 The quantum yields of NP-CDs were not affected by the pH and ionic strength and showed dual wavelength emission attributing to green and red fluorescence with the fluorescence quantum yields of 30% and 78%, respectively. This is because the N and P co-doping increased the degree of graphitization of the CQDs, causing a red shift in their fluorescence. Shamsipur et al. developed a facile route to synthesize NP-CQDs with bright greenish blue fluorescence using alendronate sodium as the single precursor containing N functional groups (primary amines) and bisphosphonate moieties.102 The former led to a high quantum yield of CDs (35%), whereas the latter resulted in the functionalization of the surface of CDs, enhancing the binding selectivity. Because of the existence and special response of bisphosphonate groups to UO22+, the NP-CQDs could sensitively detect UO22+s in water.
Previously, it was reported that N-CQDs exhibiting red, green, and yellow emissions can be prepared using 4-aminosalicylic acid as the precursor. Similarly, Zan et al. prepared green fluorescence NP-CQDs (quantum yield 18.9%) through a solvothermal method using 4-aminosalicylic acid as the precursor and H3PO4.103 The obtained NP-CQDs showed good photostability, low toxicity, and favorable biocompatibility, and hence could be used to detect NO2− with a detection limit of 3.3 nm. Bao et al. used a one-step hydrothermal method to fabricate multi-colored NP-CQDs by changing only the reaction temperature. They used eleocharis dulcis juice without any additive for the fabrication of the NP-CQDs.104 N, O, and P showed strong electron-withdrawing ability. Hence, N, O, and P co-doping passivated the active sites on the surface of CQDs and stabilized the excitons, thereby changing the electronic structure and increasing the recombination yield of the CQDs. Therefore, N, O, and P co-doped CQDs showed stable fluorescence even in high ionic strength environments or under various acidic or alkaline conditions.
Ag3PO4/NP-CQDs/rGH nanocomposites with 3D network space structure were prepared by decorating NP-CQDs onto silver phosphate united graphene hydrogel photocatalyst, which exhibited outstanding synergetic photocatalytic activity/stability effect for organic pollutants degradation.105 The excellent synergy effect, anti-photocorrosion and recyclability of these nanocomposites could be attributed to the NP-CQDs activation of the high-energy surface on Ag3PO4 and the acceleration of charge separation of NP-CQDs as an electron acceptor to prevent corrosion. On the other hand, the abundant hydrophilic functional groups in rGH helped the strong interfacial contact with binary catalysts, which made electron flow to rGH constantly. So far, most of the QDs reported have been synthesized using the hydrothermal method. Like NS-CQDs, the NP-CQDs can also generate dual fluorescence emission at different excitation wavelengths. However, the exact structure and emission mechanism of NP-CQDs are yet to be investigated.
4.3. N and B co-doped CQDs (NB-CQDs)
NS and NP dual doping have been employed to synthesize co-doped CQDs with high quantum yield. It has been reported that B and N, which have similar sizes, can be homogeneously doped into CQDs because their radius is similar to that of C. Some researchers have demonstrated that N and B not only dope the skeleton of CQDs effectively, but also form functional groups such as –COOH, –CONH, –OH, and boric acid on their surface106–108 (Table 4).
Table 4 Methods of synthesis and performance parameters for CQDs doped with N\B




 
Materials
C precursor
Method
PL color/size
Exc/Em (nm)
QY (%)
Applications
Ref.




1
EDA and sodium tetraborate, boric acid, manganese borate
CA
Hydrothermal, 160 °C 4 h
Blue/3.7 ± 0.2 nm
—
29.01%, 52.42%, 68.28%
Ensing and imaging of human umbilical vein endothelial cells

109



2
APBA


Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 4 h
Green/2.8 nm
490/540
25.9%
Detection of Cr(VI)

107



3
Aminophenylboronic acid (APBA)


Combustion
Green/2.5 nm
310/520
1.6%
Detection of Cu2+

106



5
2-Hydroxyphenylboronic acid and ethylenediamine


Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 12 h
Yellow–green
—
6.59%
Ink for writing on different paper and cell imaging

110



6
3-Aminophenylboronic acid


Hydrothermal, 160 °C, 8 h
Blue/2.1 nm
350/—
7%

p-NP determination in environmental water samples

111



7
Boric acid and urea
citric acid,
Microwave-assisted
Blue/20 nm
350/455
—
Detection of Sn4+ and Mo6+ ions

112





Ye et al. prepared NB-CDs modified borate with a fluorescent intensity of up to 68.28% using anhydrous CA and ethylenediamine (EDA) via a hydrothermal carbonization method.109 Since B facilitated the charge transfer in the excited state of CQDs, the fluorescence quantum yield of NB-CDs increased with an increase in their B content. They were exploited for detecting TNP because of the fluorescence resonance energy transfer between 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) and NB-CDs. Guo et al. developed a hydrothermal route to synthesize NB-CQDs exhibiting yellow–green emission.110 An increase in temperature resulted in a red shift in the fluorescence emission of the BN-CQDs and decreased their fluorescence intensity. Up to now, most of the NB-CQDs reported have been prepared using hydrothermal methods. The combustion treatment was reported to synthesize NB-CDs from aminophenylboronic acid (APBA).106 The obtained CDs presented high ionic strength, high resistance to photobleaching, and green fluorescence, and hence could be used to detect Cu2+ in water. Tian et al. also used APBA as a raw material for the large-scale synthesis of NB-CDs with green emission through a one-pot hydrothermal method, as shown in Fig. 8. The resulting NB-CDs showed fewer surface defects and a narrower particle size distribution and excitation-independent PL properties compared to CDs.107
 Fig. 8  The synthesis of NB-CQDs by hydrothermal method and sensing mechanism of Cr6+ and dopamine. 
Based on different fluorescence quenching mechanisms, CQDs are used for detecting various ions and specific chemicals for various biological and environmental applications. Xiao et al. designed a ‘turn-off’ fluorescent probe for the rapid detection of p-nitrophenol (p-NP)111 The NB-CQD-based probe was prepared via a one-step hydrothermal method at temperatures 160 °C using 3-aminophenylboronic acid as the single precursor without further modification. The NB-CQDs showed a narrow size distribution. Among all the isomers of NP, p-NP exhibited an absorption spectrum overlapping with the fluorescence excitation and emission spectra of NB-CQDs. Hence, NB-CQDs could efficiently detect p-NP because of their inner filter effect and the formation of dynamic covalent B–O bonds between the NB-CQDs and p-NP. Tabaraki et al. fabricated NB-CDs-based fluorescent turn-off probes to detect Sn4+ and Mo6+ with the detection limits of 150 nM and 132 nM, respectively.112 The incorporation of B (lower electronegativity) and N (higher electronegativity) into CQDs creates a unique electronic structure for the cooperative coupling effect between the heteroatoms, thus increasing the catalytic activity of the CQDs. Hence, NB-CQDs are a promising alternative to metal-based catalysts.
4.4. N and Se co-doped CQDs (NSe-CQDs)
CQDs have gained significant scientific attention owing to their adjustable emission wavelengths and surface functional groups. However, their low penetration limits their biological applications. N and S heteroatom doping is considered to be the most efficient approach to tune the properties of CQDs. Se is the same group with S, and its π orbitals are located at energy levels more positive than those of S and N. Hence, it shows a relatively narrow bandgap and long-wave excitation and emission.113 Therefore, N and S co-doping further tunes the optical properties of CQDs and expands their application range. Qu et al. developed a bottom-up method to synthesize NSe-CDs with a quantum yield of 52% using citric acid, ethylenediamine, and selenium power.113 Se-Doping generated a new surface state, namely, the Se-state, which is located at lower energy levels than those of the O- and N-states. The electrons trapped by this newly formed surface state can narrow the bandgap of CQDs from ∼3.59 to ∼2.48 eV (Fig. 9A). From Fig. 9C, it can be observed that NSe-CDs show a uniform size with a diameter ranging from 2.3 to 4.2 nm and an inter-plane distance of 0.24 nm, which is consistent with the (100) lattice spacing of graphene. Se and N co-doping expands the absorption region of CQDs from the UV to the visible-light region (∼497 nm). This effectively suppresses the auto-fluorescence of CQDs and improves their PL in the green emission region (Fig. 9B).
 Fig. 9  (A) The proposed energy-level diagram of the NSe-CDs. (B) PL emission spectra under different excitation wavelengths in the range of 460–540 nm (excitation wavelength interval 20 nm) of NSe-CDs (the insert shows a photograph of NSe-CDs solution under excitation wavelength of 497 nm). (C) (a) TEM image of NSe-CDs, inset: nanoparticles diameter histogram of NSe-CDs. (b) HRTEM image of NSe-CDs. (c) The corresponding Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) image of NSe-CDs.115 
The co-doping produces structural defects, which can increase the fluorescence yield, thus expanding the application range of CQDs. However, the mechanisms deduced from the optical properties of the co-doped CQDs generate vary, study of the detailed mechanism for photoluminescence will be highly significant. Although the doped CQDs with different colored PL properties are realized, including PL in the near-infrared region, the fluorescence intensity of CQDs decreases significantly when their emission peak is red-shifted. The QY improvement of the doped CQDs is challenging for their practical applications because the intensity of photoluminescence is very important for sensors. Meanwhile, systematic explorations are demanded in order to fully understand the safety of N-GQDs by studying their long term toxicity, cellular-uptake mechanism, intracellular and in vivo metabolic pathway, which is critical for applications of in vivo biosensing. In addition, the combination of CQD doping and CQD-based nanocomposites with other nanomaterials may open up new ways to systematically study the effect of structural parameters and chemical compositions on the catalytic performance of the electrocatalysts, thus extending their practical applications.
5. Three heteroatom-doped CQDs
Heteroatom-doped CQDs have been considered as one of the most practical strategies for improving quantum yield by adding more coordination sites and introducing additional defects. Dual-atom co-doping CQDs, such as N/S, N/B, N/P, and N/Se, have been intensively studied, whereas multi-doping has not been widely reported because of the complex processes and reaction conditions involved. Compared with dual-atom co-doping CQDs, the rich functional groups on the surface of the three atom-doped CQDs involve many excited states, among which the excited electrons in CQDs undergo inter-state converssion and radiative recombination, demonstrating various fluorescence emissions at different wavelengths. For example, N plays an important role in electronic modification owing to its comparable size with carbon. N-Doping introduces a new surface type, that can promote high-yield radiation recombination. The presence of sulfur enhances the effect of nitrogen atoms in doped-CQDs through a cooperative effect. Meanwhile, the introduction of a third element reduces the size of the CQDs and significantly improves the fluorescence quantum yield and performance, liking F-doping in carbon moiety improves ORR catalysis. This unique characteristic of doped CQDs provides several advantages in sensing and bioimaging. However, the role of particular elemental dopants in producing multicolor emissions in CQDs has yet to be addressed.114–116 Therefore, the large-scale production of multi-doped CQDs is highly challenging (Table 5).
Table 5 Methods of synthesis and performance parameters for triply doped CQDs




 
Materials
Surface doping
Method
PL color/size
Exc/Em (nm)
QY (%)
Applications
Ref.




1
Cucumber juice
N/S/P
Hydrothermal
Fron blue to green/<10 nm
—
—
Detection of Hg2+ ion.

114



2
Anthracite coal concentrated sulphuric acid and nitric acid
N/S/P
Wet chemical plus dialysis
Blue/1–7 nm
—
—
Detection of Pb2+

117



3
A customized ionic liquid multiwalled carbon nanotubes
N/S/F
Microwave treatment
Blue/2 nm
—
70%
Photocatalysis in solar cells, LED

115



4
Thiourea and 3-amino phenyl boronic acid citric acid
N/S/B
Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 6 h
Blue
—
28%
Detection of glucosamine

118



5
3-Aminobenzeneboronic acid and 2,5-diaminobenzenesulfonic acid
N/S/B
Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 8 h
Red/2.84 nm
520/605
11.6%
Detection of Ag+ ions and L-cysteine (L-Cys)

119



6
Egg powder and phosphorus acid
N/O/P
Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 8 h
Blue/3.1 ± 0.2 nm
360/443
11.1%
Detection of ovalbumin (OVA)

121





5.1. N–S–P co-doped CQDs (NSP-CQDs)
At present, N-CQDs have been extensively studied, but co-doping CQDs with N is still a huge challenge. Recently, environmentally friendly and inexpensive biomass materials have been used for the synthesis of CQDs. Wang et al. fabricated NSP-CDs using cucumber juice rich in O and N functional groups with limited P and S functional groups via a hydrothermal method without any additives.114 The fluorescence spectroscopy results showed that an increase in the reaction temperature red-shifted the maximum excitation and emission wavelengths of the NSP-CDs. Since the emission wavelength of the NSP-CDs varied with the reaction temperature, the NSP-CDs is formed into different sizes, shapes, and defects at different reaction temperatures, thus exhibiting blue, cyan, and green fluorescence. Doping atoms can change the coordination environment of ions. Xu et al. reported a simple method for designing fluorescent probes.117 They fabricated a NSP-GQD-based probe for Pb2+ detection using anthracite coal through a one-pot wet chemical and dialysis method. This simple oxidation process introduced N, P, and S atoms at the edges of the GQDs with the formation of functional groups.
5.2. N–S–F co-doped CQDs (NSF-CQDs)
Owing to their low cytotoxicity, size controllability, and narrow bandgap, CQDs are considered to be potential alternatives to traditional QDs for energy storage applications. The CQDs obtained using different preparation methods show different sizes. However, the addition of dopants promotes the formation of CQDs with small sizes and adjusts the bandgap of their electronic structure. Among the various dopants used, N modifies the electronic structure of CQDs, while F and S improve their electrocatalytic activity. Kundu et al. developed a facile route to synthesize highly luminescent NSF-GQDs via a microwave method using multiwalled carbon nanotubes in an ionic liquid medium without employing complex separation techniques. The NSF-GQDs so obtained showed great potential for catalysis and bio-imaging applications.115 This combined use of the ionic liquid and microwave heating accelerated the synthesis process of the GQDs and improved their PL quantum yield (70%) by modifying their electronic environment and reducing the size of the graphene portion.
5.3. N–S–B co-doped CQDs (NBS-CQDs)
N, S, and B, which appear adjacent to C in the periodic table, are common elements used for doping CQDs. These elements can change the optical properties of CQDs by adjusting their surface defects. Das et al. prepared NBS-CQDs using CA, thiourea, and 3-aminophenyl boronic acid in the weight ratio of 0.5:0.5:0.3 at 180 °C for 6 h.118 The resulting CQDs exhibited a high quantum yield of 28%. During the reaction, two cis-diol units and an amine group interacted with boric acid and a carbonyl group to increase the fluorescence intensity of the NBS-CQDs by limiting the intramolecular rotation of the luminescent center (Fig. 10A). Fig. 10B showed the successful incorporation of N, S, and B into the CQDs. At the excitation wavelengths of 240–280 nm (p–p*) and 310–330 nm (n–p*), the peak intensity changed and the peak position did not shift. However, when the excitation wavelength was varied from 330 to 560 nm, the λem showed a regular tendency, indicating that the NBS-CQDs had excitation-dependent properties (Fig. 10C). To date, this is the only QD-based sensor reported till date working in the visible region to detect nanomolar glucosamine (Fig. 10D). As a heavy toxic metal ion, Ag+ is harmful for the environment and human health. L-Cysteine (L-Cys) is associated with many diseases in humans. Hence, Huang et al. developed an efficient route to synthesize NBS-CDs showing strong red fluorescence through a hydrothermal approach using 3-aminobenzeneboronic acid and 2,5-diaminobenzenesulfonic acid at 180 °C.119 These CDs presented good optical properties, excellent biocompatibility, and low cytotoxicity. Ag+ quenched NBS-CDs and restored their fluorescence by interacting with L-Cys. This constituted an “on–off–on” sensor to visually detect Ag+ and L-Cys in cancer cells (HeLa cells and MCF-7 cells). Fluorine is used to treat dental caries. However, its excessive exposure can be harmful to human health. Few reports are available regarding the synthesis of the combination of fluoride in aqueous media due to the high hydration enthalpy of the fluoride ion. Mohapatra et al. synthesized boric acid-modified NBS-CQDs combined with dopamine based on photoelectron transfer mechanism for the detection of fluoride ions in aqueous media.120 N-Doping introduces a new surface state, which promotes high-yield radiation recombination and electron enrichment in CQDs. S on the other hand synergistically enhances the role of the N atoms doped in CQDs. Further doping of B, F, and P improves the luminescence properties of CQDs.
 Fig. 10  (A) Plausible binding sites for (a) glucosamine (b) sialyl Lewisa with NSB-CQD. (B) (a) STEM image, elemental mapping showing the presence of (b) carbon, (c) nitrogen, (d) sulphur, (e) boron, (f) oxygen in BNSCQD. (C) PL emission spectra of NBS-CQD at various excitations. (D) (a) Fluorescence images of the paper-based sensor for visual detection of glucosamine at different concentrations under different wavelengths, relative fluorescence (F/F0) vs. different concentration of glucosamine on strip under lights of wavelength (b) 340 nm and(c) 420 nm.118 
5.4. N–O–P co-doped CQDs (NOP-CQDs)
N, P, and O co-doping can significantly improve the fluorescence and biocompatibility of CQDs. In addition, they introduce groups such as –NH2 and –COOH on the surface of CQDs, which provide a large number of binding sites for antibody conjugation, further enhancing the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) efficiency of the CQDs. Fu et al. proposed a facile hydrothermal method for synthesizing NOP-CDs using egg powder as the precursor and phosphoric acid as the oxidation agent.121 The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) results showed that the NOP-CDs contained a large number of hydrophilic groups, which improved their hydrophilicity. The amino and carboxyl groups on the surface provided modification sites for antibody coupling. P, as the n-type donor, regulated the fluorescent properties of the NOP-CDs to improve the FRET efficiency of the system. Hence, NOP-CD/graphene oxide (GO) composites offer an effective platform to rapidly detect ovalbumin (OVA) through π–π stacking and electrical attraction between the NOP-CDs and GO (“turn off” state).
Doping heteroatoms with different electronegativity into CQD can produce more energy band structures and introduce new defect energy levels and narrow band gaps, which also contributes to the red-shift of the emission wavelength. For example, doping B reduces the LUMO level of CQDs and energy emitted by fluorescence; N with high electronegativity can generate new long-wavelength luminescent groups through functional groups attached to the conjugated sp2 region. Growing evidence has suggested that changing the surface functional groups or defects of CQDs plays a critical role in their observed fluorescence emissions. Consequently, approaches that are capable of facially manipulating the population and location of the defects in CQDs are fundamentally critical in the synthesis of three heteroatom-doped CQDs.
6. Application of heteroatom-doped CQDs
Considering the unique properties (multicolor fluorescence, high quantum yield, low biotoxicity, resistance to photobleaching, and biocompatibility) and advantages of heteroatom-doped CQDs, several applications of these nanomaterials in the fields of sensors, bioimaging, light conversion films, white light-emitting diodes (WLED), and photoelectric catalysis have been reported.
6.1. Sensors
Se Sensors are used to detect the changes in the environment. The doped CQD-based sensors can be employed for the detection of metal ions, such as Fe3+,5,87 Cu2+,106 Ag+,89 Cr6+,107 Sn4+,112 Mo6+,112 Hg2+,114 Pb2+,117 UO22+.102 CQDs have been reported to be used as probes for detecting Hg2+, Fe3+, Cu2+, Ag+, Cr6+, and Pb2+. However, a significant improvement in the sensitivity down to nanomolars and selectivity to identify targets was achieved by replacing CQDs with heteroatom-doped CQDs, and the sensing method was also simple, fast, highly selective, and highly sensitive. Recently, Wang et al. adopted the S-CQDs fluorescent sensor for the quantitative detection of Hg2+ with high sensitivity and selectivity in tap water.122 The high affinity between Hg and S resulted in the formation of mercury sulfide and affected the electron transfer on the surface of S-CQDs, and increased the probability of non-radiative electron transition and decreased the fluorescence. Compared to CQDs, the prepared S-CQD showed higher fluorescence intensity, behavior independent of excitation, relatively high fluorescence quantum yield (QY = 21.1%) and excellent photobleaching resistance. The high fluorescence intensity meant higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the fields of heavy metal ion sensors. In the UO22+ assay, the fluorescence of the NP-CDs was significantly quenched after the addition of UO22+, based on the high affinity between bisphosphonate and uranyl ions.102 This was the case of simple static quenching caused by coordination through bisphosphonate and amino groups on the NP-CD surfaces, acting as an electron donor or/and acceptor to change the surface states of NP-CDs. The chelating effect induced more coordination between UO22+ and bisphosphonate, resulting in changes in the absorption spectrum of NP-CDs after the addition of UO22+. The linear response range to UO22+ was from 0.01 to 2.5 μM with a limit of detection of 4.5 nM. The determination of UO22+ using CQDs as a sensitive fluorescent nanoprobe has not been reported in the literature.
Along with the development of sensitive metal ion detection technology, doped CQDs have also found niche applications in the detections of CN−,123 NO2−,103 F−,120 MnO4−,94 In contrast to the detection of metal ion using the fluorescence quenching mechanism, many anion detections are based on the fluorescence enhancement (fluorescence recovery) of the quenched doped CQD–metal complexes. For example, Chen et al. reported NS-GQD-modified AgNP sensors to detect CN−.123 By employing the inner-filter effect of AgNPs, the fluorescence of NS-GQDs could be effectively quenched, which can be satisfied by the overlap between the emission spectrum of NS-GQDs and the excitation and absorption spectra of AgNPs, resulting in the sharp abatement and red shift in the NS-GQD emission band. Then, obtained NS-GQD–AgNPs were used as a dual-mode colorimetric and fluorescence recovery sensor for CN− in water samples based on the etching of AgNPs by CN−. In contrast to CQDs, the surface states of GQDs and NS-GQDs were altered by N- and S-doping, demonstrating emission behavior independent of excitation in which the fluorescence decay curve is almost mono-exponential. Therefore, the fluorescence of NS-GQD could easily be quenched by AgNP through the inner-filter effect of AgNPs. The attractiveness of this sensing system was that the high quantum yield (67%) and unique fluorescence properties of NS-GQDs and colorimetric dual-readout mode could increase sensing diversity and accuracy. Meanwhile, the sensor could also be used over a wide pH range.
Doped CQDs were also applied for detecting other small bioanalytes, such as glucosamine,118 dopamine,44 ascorbic acid,124L-cysteine,119 ovalbumin,121 TNP110 and p-NP.111 Wang et al. synthesized bright blue fluorescent N-CQDs using glycine and urea and applied them for detecting DA in human serum and rat serum.125 DA can effectively quench the fluorescence of N-CQDs. Fluorescence quenching may be attributed to the aggregation of N-CQDs and the transfer of electrons from N-CQDs to DA under alkaline conditions. The agglomeration of N-CQDs may be due to the noncovalent bonding between the hydroxyl and amino groups on DA and the carboxyl, amino, and hydroxyl groups on the surface of N-CQDs. This sensor showed promise for the detection of DA in living organisms in the future.
Thus far, various raw materials and synthetic methods have been used in the preparation of doped CQDs for detection, and studies have shown that the fluorescent properties of CQDs largely depend on its composition and functional groups on the surface. Therefore, synthesized CQDs will inevitably produce quite different physical, chemical, and optical properties. Standardization is urgently needed when preparing doped CQDs and evaluating the performance of CQDs.
6.2. Bioimaging
Several unique advantages such as a strong and tunable PL, low toxicity, water solubility, and high chemical/optical stability have presented CQDs as desired candidates for bioimaging. However, most CQDs essentially emit blue light with short excitation wavelength under UV irradiation, which greatly causes limitations in bioimaging. One reason is that the short-wavelength excitation reduces their penetration depth in biological tissue, and long-term exposure to short-wavelength excitation can cause damage and even death to living cells and biological systems. The second is the well-known auto-fluorescence of biological systems. Because long-wavelength CQDs exhibit better penetration depth in organs, it is necessary to prepare effective long-wavelength CQDs in this field, especially those with red or NIR emission.81,82,126
Several reports have demonstrated that heteroatom-doped CQDs exhibit long wavelengths and multicolor fluorescence, which can be used for long-term and real-time cell imaging and in vivo biological imaging. Cell images obtained by Gao et al. showed that N-CQDs with great biocompatibility could label PC12 cells.127 In another example, Fig. 11D shows the fluorescence images of HeLa cells incubated with 50 μg mL−1 of yellow fluorescent NB-CQDs obtained from a one-step microwave-assisted hydrothermal treatment of o-phenylenediamine and boric acid.128 The figure shows that HeLa cells emitted strong yellow fluorescence, predominantly in the cytoplasm after incubation with NB-CQDs under illumination at a single wavelength of 405 nm, and there is no significant change in cell morphology and survival rate. NP-CDs showed no noticeable toxic effects in human osteosarcoma cell (U2OS) and human colonic carcinoma cell (HT29) when NP-CDs concentration reached 1000 μg mL−1.129 After incubation with 50 μg mL−1 NP-CDs at 37 °C for 2 h, different fluorescence in the cytoplasm and nucleus of U2OS and HT29 cells were clearly observed by NP-CDs. Green, blue, and red channels in the wavelength range of 425–475 nm, 500–550 nm, and 570–620 nm, were observed at the excitation wavelengths of 402 nm, 488 nm, and 561 nm, respectively, indicating that NP-CDs can bind to certain structures or sites on the cell membrane and nucleus. These indicate the promising potential applicability as a good cell imaging agent for in vivo imaging.
 Fig. 11  (A) (a) UV–vis absorption spectra of NSP-CDs; (b) PL spectra of blue, green, yellow and red NSP-CDs. (B) SK-MEL-28 incubated with NSP-CDs (top) and NSP-CDs-FA (bottom) for 2 h and corresponding images in multi-color channels, 405, 480, 555 and 614 nm obtained through confocal microscopy. (C) Mechanism of FA mediated NSP-CD-FA migration to nucleus (FR: folate receptor; GPI: glycosylphosphatidylinositol). (D) Confocal microscopy images of BN-CQDs (50 μg mL−1) incubated with HeLa cells for different times (0, 2, 4 and 6 h).128 
Doped CQDs can exhibit multi-color emission, which is a huge advantage that distinguishes them from the majority of labeling agents. Nasrin et al. demonstrated that multicolor-emitting NSP-CDs can be widely utilized for real-time non-invasive deep-tissue imaging and photo-therapeutic applications.45 The prepared NSP-CDs showed wavelength-dependent full-color emissions with long absorption spectra extending into the far red region of the spectrum as showed as Fig. 11A. Water-soluble NSP-CDs conjugated with folic acid could be targeted for bioimaging and photosensitization of the human melanoma cancer cells, SK-MEL28 (Fig. 11C). Furthermore, NSP-CDs had the ability to penetrate the nucleus in a multicolor window under deep-tissue setting and completed the photosensitization of cancer cells (Fig. 11B).
Heteroatom-doped CQDs are easily taken up by cells, wherein fluorescence imaging can simultaneously perform single-photon excitation and multiphoton excitation. However, the exact mechanism of CQD uptake by cells remains to be elucidated, and most experiments demonstrate that the heteroatom-doped CQDs enter the cytoplasm through endocytosis without apparent penetration into the nucleus. Therefore, it is believed that the interaction between protective/functional coatings on CQDs plays an important role in selective cell targeting. And more attention should be paid to the safety of heteroatom-doped CQDs by studying their long term toxicity, cellular-uptake mechanism, intracellular and in vivo metabolic pathway.
6.3. Light-emitting diodes
Heteroatom-doped CQDs have attracted considerable attention for their potential applications in sensors, bioimaging, and LEDs. Among these, LEDs, mainly white LEDs, have become a research focus and undergone rapid development. Luminescence is the phenomenon of emitting light from a material excited by external energy. As a large portion of global energy is used for lighting, developing efficient lighting technologies is important. There are two main methods for the application of heteroatom-doped CQDs in LEDs. The first method is to cover the LED with CQDs for changing its illumination intensity and emission wavelength.130–132 The second is to develop light-emitting layer using CQDs within the LED structure.133
Heteroatom-doped CQDs have been frequently coated onto the surface of LEDs, resulting in the modification of color and enhancement in the intensity of emitting lights. The light conversion film (LCF) was designed by embedding NS-CQDs in a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution.43 The WLED was obtained by assembly of NS-CQDs and epoxy resin integrated on the UV-LED chip (460 nm). Zheng et al. prepared solid-state WLEDs and designed composites by avoiding the aggregation of N-CDs in a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution.130 The WLEDs were fabricated by coating the solid-state NCD/PVA composite on a 395 nm excited UV-LED with suitable thickness. Without the addition of any other phosphors, solid NCD/PVA composite exhibited direct white light emission. Wang et al. successfully fabricated warm WLEDs by combining highly luminescent N-CDs and the UV-LED chip.131 They designed the use of N-CD/silicone with a broad blue-red spectrum composition as a color converter to effectively convert UV light from 365 nm UV-LED chips into white light. The as-obtained WLEDs exhibited bright warm white light with color coordinates of (0.42, 0.40) and correlated color temperature of 3416 K, which is adaptable for indoor illumination. Liu et al. obtained solid-state luminescent N-CD/starch composite by ultrasonic treatment with an N-CD-to-starch ratio of 1:100, combined with ultraviolet LED chips for fabricating white LEDs.132 WLEDs emitted bright white light at an operating voltage of 3.0 V. The blue fluorescence emitted by the N-CDs was combined with the yellow light emitted by the ultraviolet LED chip to realize the white light emission of the LED.
Besides, the GQDs can also be used as the active layer by forming composite with other emitting materials to improve the performance of LEDs. Wang et al. reported the example of remote tunable UV-WLEDs based on directly white-light emission of Cl-GQDs embedded solid composite film (Cl-ESCF) prepared by a simple solution casting based on a silicon resin matrix, as shown in Fig. 12A.133 The freestanding Cl-ESCF had flexibility in shape, high transparency, excellent photostability and temperature resistance, and retains its optical properties in the solid state (Fig. 12B). Such a uniform and defect-free natural white emissive Cl-GQD-based solid film under single UV excitation could be used in pliable high ending.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of preparing solid luminescent film (Cl-ESCF). (B) (a) Light intensity distribution of two orthogonal directions from the surface of composite film. Inset shows a photograph of the operating remote WLED device at 500 mA. (b) EL spectra of the WLED at the current regulation (20–500 mA). Inset shows the schematic presentation of remote UV-pumped WLED. (c) The corresponding CIE-1931 color space diagram. Inset plots the variation of the chromaticity coordinates at different bias currents. (d) EL intensity of the composite film against time (at 500 mA).133 
Moreover, multicolor luminescent heteroatom-doped CQDs can also be used for constructing multicolor-emitting materials that might be further used for multicolor patterning. In order to exert the role of doper CQDs as a color converter and enhance the brightness and light efficiency of CQDs-based LEDs in the field of lighting, the preparation of heteroatom-doped CQDs with higher QY is still a major challenge. In brief, the application of the CQDs on LEDs is fast becoming a reality in the near future.
6.4. Photoelectric catalysis
Photocatalysis has attracted considerable attention owing to its application in new energy and green chemistry. The performance of a photocatalyst is the decisive factor in restricting the rate of photocatalytic reaction. In the field of electrocatalysis, fuel cells, ORR, and its reverse reaction, i.e., oxygen evolution reaction, are the crucial for in-depth research. Electrocatalysts are often used to improve the kinetics of ORR owing to their sluggishness. Pt is the best catalyst by far; however, its high price restricts the development of electrocatalytic technology. With their excellent electronic conductivity, visible-light absorption capacity, and chemical stability, doped CQDs show great application potential in photocatalytic materials.56,134–136
Multi-edge surfaces of N-GQDs play a key role in imparting high photocatalytic and electrocatalytic activity. Riaz et al. oriented N-GQDs on a three-dimensional (3D) self-assembled foam-like structure by phase separation mechanism and covered with graphene–oxide-coated woven carbon fiber fabric.134 This 3D-assembled structure provided highly exposed active surfaces, which gives excellent photocatalytic degradation performance of methylene blue. Additionally, the fast charge transfer and easy diffusion of electrolyte in a 3D network produced outstanding electrocatalytic activity, higher than that of Pt-coated FTO glass. Tungsten oxide (WO3) exhibits good visible-light photo-absorption as a promising photocatalytic n-type semiconductor. However, pure WO3 has low efficiency for light-energy conversion owing to low reduction potential. N-CQD-based efficient ternary photocatalyst was synthesized by modifying the surface of GO-incorporated WO3 nanosheets, which is applied for the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange.135 The surface of WO3 nanosheets was modified by morphological defects, making more active sites, which extends the absorption of WO3 from the UV region to the visible region. N-CQDs as an electron trap accepted electrons from WO3, which contributed to the reduction of the recombination of electron–hole pairs, resulting in more hydroxyl radicals to carry redox reactions.
In view of N-CQDs attractive optical properties and up-conversion in particular, a nanocomposite of N-CQDs and CuO is expected to realise the efficient usage of the solar driven water detoxification. Using methyl orange (MO) as a model dye, Jamila et al. showed that CuO/N-CQDs nanocomposites are able to degrade 92% of MO within 4 h under visible light irradiation, while only 33% of MO is degraded when pure CuO is used as the photocatalyst.136 It is believed that the N-CQDs in the nanocomposites raise the number of photoreaction sites, increases the photo adsorption, and facilitate the transfer of electrons from CuO, allowing charge separation, stabilisation and hindering recombination, thereby showing superior degradation efficiency compared to pure CuO nanoleaves.
Up-converted photoluminescence and effective electron transfer ability of heteroatom-doped CQDs enable them to be used either as a catalyst itself or in designing a photocatalyst. Compared to photocatalysts, there have been fewer studies in the usability of CQDs as electrocatalysts for ORR and OER. In-depth theoretical and experimental studies are needed to delicately design CQD-based electrocatalysts with desirable electrocatalytic activity and long-term operation stability.
7. Summary and outlook
7.1. Summary
Herein, we introduced three types of heteroatom-doped CQDs, and different properties, synthesis methods, and applications of these nanostructures were discussed. Different types of PL emissions in heteroatom-doped CQDs were explained, and their mechanisms were clarified. Meanwhile, the effect of the interaction between atoms on the properties of CQDs was elucidated.
As a novel carbon-based material, CQDs exhibit excellent physical and chemical properties and can be easily doped. However, at present, most of the CQDs emit blue light under UV irradiation and show low fluorescence intensity, which limits their applications. Heteroatom doping improves the quantum yield of CQDs and achieves long-wavelength emission (e.g., yellow and red) with a large Stokes shift by adding more coordination sites and introducing more defects. Heteroatom-doped CQDs can be classified into three types: (1) CQDs doped with a single heteroatom; (2) CQDs doped with two heteroatoms; and (3) CQDs doped with three heteroatoms. Highly electronegative atoms (e.g., N and S) usually cause blue-shifted PL emission, and atoms with low electronegativity (e.g., P, B, and Se) result in a redshift. Various heteroatoms could modulate surface functional groups and vary the emission wavelength of CQDs.
In addition, the different advantages of doped CQDs were discussed for a variety of applications with a focus on their novel application in bioimaging and LEDs. In fact, their use might be beneficial in the treatment of tumor and illumination in the future owing to their photoluminescence. Meanwhile, other issues regarding their application are discussed. For example, in bioimaging, heteroatom-doped CQD basically enters the cytoplasm through endocytosis, without apparent penetration into the nucleus.
7.2. Outlook
Enormous effort has been undertaken to improve electronic, chemical and optical properties of heteroatom-doped CQDs in variety of applications. Herein, we have shown that heteroatom doping plays an important role in the enhancement of quantum yields and long-wavelength emission. Recent studies have focused on employing heteroatom-doped CQD high-fluorescence intensity as bioimaging agents, which has opened a new area of interest for doped CQDs. By conjugating targeting moieties and therapeutic components (e.g., proteins or peptides), doped CQDs hold the potential to address the challenges of cancer heterogeneity and adaptation. Doped CQDs are also used in photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy, promoting photoacoustic imaging—another new area of research. Meanwhile, they can be integrated with metals and metal compounds, semiconductors and polymers to produce functional materials, which show superior prospects in various applications such as sensors, fuel cells, solar cells, and photocatalytical processes.
There are still some obstacles to be conquered by further research before the development of doped CQDs in the aforementioned applications. Although heteroatom doping has been studied widely in recent years, many reports have shown that doped CQDs emit blue light under UV irradiation, and the fluorescence intensity of CQDs decreases significantly when their emission peak is red-shifted. Meanwhile, obtaining a uniform size is difficult for the prepared CQDs. This will hinder the further application of doped CQDs, especially in vivo. The use of specific precursors or typical precursors in special solvents in the preparation of doped CQDs is an important strategy to achieve red emission. In general, the majority of synthetic methods are developed on a laboratory scale and are often not suitable for industrial production. Also, production of heteroatom-doped CQDs with controlled shape, size, structure and functionalities limits commercialization. Further, finding simple synthetic and purification techniques for the mass production of doped CQDs with various shapes, uniform sizes and specific target is of vital importance. It should be noted that the detailed mechanism for photoluminescence in heteroatom-doped CQDs is not clear yet. Therefore, theoretical calculations may be helpful in understanding the fundamental PL mechanism, increasing the quantum yield, and better controlling their emission wavelength. By overcoming these obstacles over the next few years, doped CQDs will be useful in various areas. Its minor toxicity and low price can make doped CQDs commercially applicable in the biomedical field in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51703192), Innovation Team Project of Yanbian University (China), and an Inha University Research (South Korea).
References
S. Lu, G. Xiao, L. Sui, T. Feng, X. Yong, S. Zhu, B. Li, Z. Liu, B. Zou, M. Jin, J. S. Tse, H. Yan and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6187–6191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, Q. Guan, Y. Liu, B. Wei, Y. Yang and Z. Yu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 1051–1054 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Bao, B. Gao and M. Li, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 8288–8296 RSC .
H. Li, X. Wang, Z. Cai, L. Lu, J. Tao, B. Sun, Y. Yang, Q. Xu, Z. Yu and P. Zhao, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2017, 409, 6655–6662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jana, M. Ganguly, K. R. S. Chandrakumar, G. M. Rao and T. Pal, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 573–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Yola and N. Atar, Composites, Part B, 2019, 175, 107113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, L. Sui, M. Wu, S. Zhu, X. Yong and B. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801192 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Talukdar, S. K. Behera and P. Deb, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12137–12146 RSC .
P. Zhao, Q. Xu, J. Tao, Z. Jin, Y. Pan, C. Yu and Z. Yu, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2017, 10, e1483 Search PubMed .
T. Geng, T. Feng, Z. Ma, Y. Cao, Y. Chen, S. Tao, G. Xiao, A. Lu, B. Yang and B. Zou, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5072–5079 RSC .
Q. Liang, W. J. Ma, Y. Shi, Z. Li and X. Yang, Carbon, 2013, 60, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, C. Wu, Z. Zhang, W. Wu, X. Wang and Z. Yu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 1601–1608 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Peng, Y. Cao, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3344–3351 RSC .
S. Lu, L. Sui, J. Liu, S. Zhu, A. Chen, M. Jin and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603443 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Liu, M. Wu, X. Feng, S. A. T. Redfern, Y. Shang, X. Yong, T. Feng, K. Wu, Z. Liu, B. Li, Z. Chen, J. S. Tse, S. Lu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800676 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ge, Q. Jia, W. Liu, L. Guo, Q. Liu, M. Lan, H. Zhang, X. Meng and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4169–4117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Lu, A. Wu, C. Cai and H. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5360–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Riaz, M. Ali, T. Maiyalagan, A. S. Anjum, S. Y. Lee, M. J. Ko and S. H. Jeong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 483, 425–431 CrossRef CAS .
P. Anilkumar, X. Wang, L. Cao, S. Sahu, J. H. Liu, P. Wang, K. Korch, K. N. Tackett, A. Parenzan and Y. P. Sun, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2023–2027 RSC .
W. F. Zhang, H. Zhu, S. F. Yu and H. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2263–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, X. Gong, M. Nan, Y. Liu, S. Shuang and C. Dong, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 898, 116–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, D. Liu, A. Shi and T. You, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 1762–1770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Z. Yang, Q. Wang and T. Wang, Mater. Des., 2018, 140, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. Yan, W. Song and D. Xu, Composites, Part A, 2018, 114, 149–169 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jia, X. Li and J. Huang, Composites, Part A, 2017, 101, 273–282 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zou, C. Hou, H. Fa, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Dong, D. Li, D. Huo and M. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 239, 1033–1041 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Yang, L. Cao, P. G. Luo, F. Lu, X. Wang, H. Wang, M. J. Meziani, Y. Liu, G. Qi and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11308–11309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, L. Yang, W. Li, X. Wang, Y. Shang and B. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 1409–1416 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Karakocak, J. Liang, S. Kavadiya, M. Y. Berezin, P. Biswas and N. Ravi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 3682–3692 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zuo, A. Xie, X. Pan, T. Su, J. Li and W. Dong, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2376–2385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, W. Zhang, Y. Han, X. Chen, L. Zhu, W. Tang, J. Wang, T. Yue and Z. Li, Food Chem., 2018, 258, 214–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Nemati, M. Hosseini, R. Zare-Dorabei, F. Salehnia and M. R. Ganjali, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 25–34 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 15–18 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, A. Y. Chen, Y. Y. Huang, X. F. Xie, B. He, J. H. Yang and X. Y. Wang, Carbon, 2020, 162, 234–244 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, M. Yang, H. Zhang, S. Zhu, X. Zhu and K. Wang, Opt. Mater., 2018, 77, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Barman, B. Jana, S. Bhattacharyya and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20034–20041 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 1620–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 326–381 RSC .
M. M. Mohideen, Y. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Appl. Energy, 2020, 257, 114027 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Li, Y. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu, X. Liu, L. Wang, X. Liu, W. Xue and N. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 11631–11638 RSC .
F. Niu, Y. Xu, M. Liu, J. Sun, P. Guo and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5470–5477 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Xu, H. Liao, C. Yao, Y. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Chen, D. Pan, L. Sun and M. Wu, Gram-scale synthesis of single-crystalline graphene quantum dots with superior optical properties, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5375 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Zhuang, W. Li, C. Hu, B. Lei and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8014–8021 RSC .
S. K. Tammina, D. Yang, S. Koppala, C. Cheng and Y. Yang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2019, 194, 61–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nasrin, M. Hassan, G. Mann and V. G. Gomes, J. Lumin., 2020, 217, 116811 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, B. Pant, B. S. Kim, R. S. Jang, S. Park, M. Park, S. J. Park and H. Y. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2017, 207, 57–61 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Meng and S. J. Park, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 218, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Y. Rhee, D. Hui and S. J. Park, Composites, Part B, 2018, 143, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. M. Yang and S. J. Park, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2018, 18, 163–169 CrossRef .
A. Rehman and S. J. Park, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 539–548 CrossRef CAS .
R. Atchudan, T. N. J. I. Edison, S. Perumal, N. C. S. Selvam and Y. R. Lee, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 372, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, H. Zhou, J. Tang, S. Deng, F. Yan and W. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 343–368 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Li, L. Xu, Y. Qiao and J. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 3905–3912 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, A. Q. Zheng, X. Liu, J. J. Chen, T. Yang, M. L. Chen and J. H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7901–7909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, Y. Feng, H. Li, Z. Du, Q. Teng and H. Wang, Particuology, 2018, 41, 94–100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, Y. Zhao, L. Fang, J. Zheng, P. Hu, Y. Liu, X. Cao, Z. Chen, W. Wu and M. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2017, 188, 304–307 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, R. Tian, Y. Dong, J. Yang, J. Liu and Q. Chang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11665–11671 RSC .
G. He, M. Shu, Z. Yang, Y. Ma, D. Huang, S. Xu, Y. Wang, N. Hu, Y. Zhang and L. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 422, 257–265 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. B. Yang, C. Guo, J. Shao, Y. Chi, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800–7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, Z. Liu, L. Song, W. Guo, W. Gao, L. Ci, A. Rao, W. Quan, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 275605 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Li, J. Cao, J. Zhu, L. Fan and X. Li, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10201–10207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bian, C. Shen, Y. Qian, J. Liu, F. Xi and X. Dong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 242, 231–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, J. Yang, J. Tian, L. Jia and J. S. Yu, Carbon, 2014, 77, 775–782 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dai, C. Wu, Y. Lu, D. Deng and S. Xu, J. Lumin., 2017, 190, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Duan and Q. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 588–595 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, L. He, Y. Long, S. Pan, H. Liu, J. Yang and X. Hu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 279, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Shan, J. Ma, Y. Gu, Z. Qian, J. Chen and H. Feng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5465–5468 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Lin, C. Luo, Y. Wang, C. Jiang, R. Qi, R. Huang, J. Travassejdic and H. Peng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 32225–32228 RSC .
F. Wang, Q. Hao, Y. Zhang, Y. Xu and W. Lei, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 273–279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, H. Zhou, J. Tang, S. Deng, F. Yan, W. Li and M. Qu, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 343–368 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, G. Trivizas, M. A. Karakassides, M. Baikousi, A. Kouloumpis, D. Gournis, A. Bakandritsos, K. Hola, O. Kozak, R. Zboril, I. Papagiannouli, P. Aloukos and S. Couris, Carbon, 2015, 83, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shen, J. Wang, Y. Cao and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6668–6675 RSC .
T. Van Tam, S. G. Kang, K. F. Babu, E. S. Oh, S. G. Lee and W. M. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10537–10543 RSC .
F. Li, T. Li, C. Sun, J. Xia, Y. Jiao and H. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9910–9914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qian, X. Shan, L. Chai, J. Ma, J. Chen and H. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6797–6805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, H. Ji, E. Ju, Y. Guan, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zuo, L. Tang, J. Xiang, R. Ji, L. Luo, L. Rogee and S. P. Lau, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 211901–211905 CrossRef .
Q. Feng, W. Xiao, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, Y. Lin, J. Li, Q. Ye and Z. Huang, Materials, 2018, 11, 1–11 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Ju, L. Zhang, M. Sun, Z. Zhou, Z. Dai, L. Zhang, A. Gong, C. Wu and F. Du, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 10, 6943–6953 CAS .
H. Su, Y. Liao, F. Wu, X. Sun, H. Liu, K. Wang and X. Zhu, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 170, 194–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, A. Trinchi, P. Atkin and I. Cole, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2970–2974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, C. Lin, M. He, R. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, W. Xiang and X. Liang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 41552–41560 RSC .
H. Li, F. Q. Shao, S. Y. Zou, Q. J. Yang, H. Huang, J. J. Feng and A. J. Wang, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 821–826 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, L. Chen, J. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Yang and S. Yu, Opt. Mater., 2020, 100, 109647 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. Yang, C. Guo, J. Shao, Y. Chi, C. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800–7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, X. Gong, M. Nan, Y. Liu, S. Shuang and C. Dong, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 898, 116–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, Y. Wang, J. Liu, Q. Yang, B. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. Wang and G. Lu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 242, 1272–1280 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zou, C. Hou, H. Fa, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Dong, D. Li, D. Hou and M. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 239, 1033–1041 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Dang, C. Sundaram, Y. L. T. Ngo, J. S. Chung, E. J. Kim and S. H. Hur, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 3284–3291 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, S. Li, M. Cheng, L. Zhao, B. Zhang, Y. Gao, X. Yan, F. Liu and G. Lu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 13147–13156 RSC .
Y. Zhao, S. Zou, D. Huo, C. Hou, M. Yang, J. Li and M. Bian, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1047, 179–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Li, X. Yang, X. Han, Y. Jiao, T. Wei, D. Yang, H. Xu and G. Nie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2377–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chatzimitakos, A. Kasouni, L. Sygellou, I. Leonardos, A. Troganis and C. Stalikas, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 267, 494–501 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding, Z. Deng, J. Chen and Y. Jin, Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 189, 110838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, M. Ou, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zeng, J. Ding, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12070–12079 RSC .
N. Parvin and T. K. Mandal, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 1117–1125 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mehata and R. K. Ratnesh, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 7619–7631 RSC .
P. Hindenberg, J. Zimmermann, G. Hernandez-Sosa and C. Romero-Nieto, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 7503–7508 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Miao, Y. He, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 083103 CrossRef .
J. Shangguan, J. Huang, D. He, X. He, K. Wang, R. Ye, X. Yang, T. Qing and J. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 7477–7484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. G. Liu, Y. Z. Fan, Y. J. Ju, N. Xiao, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1013, 63–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shamsipur, K. Molaei, F. Molaabasi, S. Hosseinkhani, N. Alizadeh, M. Alipour and S. Moassess, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 772–782 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zan, L. Rao, H. Huang, W. Xie, D. Zhu, L. Li, X. Qie, S. S. Guo, X. Z. Zhao, W. W. Liu and F. Dong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 555–561 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bao, Z. Chen, Z. Zhao, X. Sun, J. Zhang, L. Hou and C. Yuan, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 386 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Li, Q. Xu, Z. Tao, F. Yao, X. Huang, Y. Wu, D. Wang, P. Jiang and Q. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rong, K. Zhang, Y. Wang and X. Chen, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 1119–1124 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tian, Y. He, Y. Ge and G. Song, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 1265–1271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Li, P. Wu, C. Ma, X. Wu, M. Xu, S. Luo, Z. Xu and S. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 281, 34–43 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ye, F. Yan, D. Shi, T. Zheng, Y. Wang, X. Zhou and L. Chen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2016, 162, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, Y. Chen, F. Cao, L. Wang, Z. Wang and Y. Leng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 48386–48393 RSC .
N. Xiao, S. G. Liu, S. Mo, N. Li, Y. J. Ju, Y. Ling, N. B. Li and H. Q. Luo, Talanta, 2018, 184, 184–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tabaraki, O. Abdi and S. Yousefipour, J. Fluoresc., 2017, 27, 651–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qu, X. Miao, X. Wang, C. Nie, Y. Li, L. Luo and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4988–4992 RSC .
C. Wang, D. Sun, K. Zhuo, H. Zhang and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54060–54065 RSC .
S. Kundu, R. M. Yadav, T. N. Narayanan, M. V. Shelke, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and V. K. Pillai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11515–11519 RSC .
Z. Zhu, Y. Zhai, Z. Li, P. Zhu, S. Mao, C. Zhu, D. Du, L. Belfiore, J. Tang and Y. Liu, Mater. Today, 2019, 52–79 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, S. Wang, X. Hou, Z. Sun, Y. Jiang, Z. Dong, Q. Tao, J. Man and Y. Cao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 445, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Das and S. Mohapatra, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 2190–2197 RSC .
S. Huang, E. Yang, J. Yao, Y. Liu and Q. Xiao, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1035, 192–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mohapatra and R. K. Das, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1058, 146–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, L. Sheng, Y. Yu, M. Ma, Z. Cai and X. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 269, 278–287 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Shi, Y. Yan, E. Liu, X. Hu and J. Fan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 232, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, D. Zhao, T. Hu, J. Sun and X. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 241, 779–788 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. S. Chung and S. H. Hur, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 171, 107752 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Shi, M. Yang, Y. Yan, E. Liu, Z. Ji and J. Fan, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 391, 112374 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J. S. Wei, N. Zhong, Q. Y. Gao and H. M. Xiong, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 12635–12642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, Y. Ma, Y. Zhou, H. Song, L. Li, S. Liu, X. Liu, X. Liu, B. Gao, C. Liu and K. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 216, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, L. Chen, J. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Yang and S. Yu, Opt. Mater., 2020, 100, 109647 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tu, S. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Wei, K. Qin and Q. Zhang, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 178, 108316 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zheng, H. L. Wang, G. Q. Ding, G. L. Cui, L. Chen, P. H. Zhang, Q. Gong and S. M. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 195, 58–61 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Opt. Mater., 2017, 73, 319–329 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Zheng, Y. Yang, Y. Chen and X. Liu, Opt. Mater., 2018, 86, 530–536 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wang, G. G. Wang, J. B. Li, Z. Liu, Y. X. Chen, L. F. Liu and J. C. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 773–782 CrossRef CAS .
R. Riaz, M. Ali, H. Anwer, M. J. Ko and S. H. Jeong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 557, 174–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Jamila, S. Sajjad, S. A. K. Leghari and M. Long, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 382, 121087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Jamila, S. Sajjad, S. A. K. Leghari and T. Mahmood, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2020, 138, 109233 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Co-first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The synthesis of CQDs with different raw materials.	 

Hydrothermal treatment	Orthophenylene diamine	28	420/477	1–2	N	Design and tailor optical–electronic properties of carbon nanostructures	
57

Thioacetic acid	—	—	3.8–7.4	S	—	
64

Maltitol and H2SO4	—	—	2.75	S	Bifacial dye-sensitized solar cells	
71

Triethyl phosphonoacetate and phosphoric acid	—	—	3.5	P	Biosensing and bioimaging	
68

Ethylenediamine and boric acid	50	340/430	1–6	B	LED convertors and live cell imaging reagents	
72

Selenocystine	7.6	398/490	1–5	Se	As an antioxidant to protect the cells	
74

Fluorinated graphene oxide	—	330/445	5.6	F	Solar cells, biosensors, and long-term cellular imaging	
76

Degreasing cotton and hydrofluoric acid	—	340/428	3.25	F	UV photodetectors	
77

Iodixanol and glycine	—	370/475	2.7	I	X-ray CT contrast agents	
79

Microwave synthesis	Acetylacetone and NH3·H2O	51.61	380/420	<4.31	N	Illumination, electronic devices, and biosensing	
58

Citric acid, boric acid and urea	10–15	350/450	2–6	B	Cell labeling, photodynamic therapy or various photonic applications.	
71

Electrochemical synthesis	Sodium phytate	—	—	2–4	P	Biomedical and polymeric materials	
40

Solvent-thermal method	Phosphorous tribromide and hydroquinone	25	—	5–15	P	Catalysis and photovoltaic device	
5

Silicon tetrachloride and hydroquinone	19.2	—	7 ± 2	Si	Bioimaging application and multifunctional sensor	
75

Thermal cutting	Fluorinated graphene	13.2	480/533	5.11	F	As a multimodal material in biomedical fields	
78


 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic diagram of formation process of N-CDs. (B) TEM images and the corresponding particle size distribution of (a) and (b) N-CDs160-1, (c) and (d) N-CDs200-1, (e) and (f) N-CDs200-2. (C) (a) Viability of BT-474 cells incubation with N-CDs of different concentrations; confocal fluorescence microphotographs of N-CDs labeled BT-474 cells under (b) bright field; (c) 405 nm excitation; (d) the merged image of (b) and (c).58	 

 	Fig. 3  The synthesis of P-CQDs by electrolytic method and their application in scavenging free radical.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The XPS survey scan of GQD and B-GQD with different boric acid concentration. High resolution C 1s XPS spectra of (b) the undoped GQD and (c) BGQD4. (d) Cyclic voltammogram of different G-BGQD composites at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) of different G-BGQD composites and commercial Pt/C catalyst. (f) G-BGQDs composite materials.73	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Detection of melamine based on Si-CQDs. (B) Fluorescence emission spectra of Si-CQDs, CQDs, and P-CQDs. (C) Effect of Si-CQDs on human HeLa cells.75	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic synthesis of I-CQDs from the HTC of iodixanol and glycine and following application.79	 

1	Methionine	Acrylic acid	Hydrothermal, 200 °C, 12 h	Blue/2.3 nm	420/485	10.55	Fe3+ ions detection and temperature sensor.	
87

2	Cysteine	Citric acid	Pyrolysis	Blue	346/415	67	Dual-mode colorimetric and fluorescent recovery sensors for CN–	
123

3	
L-Cysteine	Glycerol	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 12 h	Blue/4.7 nm	350/440	15.2	A fluorescent sensor to determine fluazinam	
88

4	Sulfuric acid	
m-Phenylenediamine	Hydrothermal, 200 °C, 10 h	Yellow and blue/4.3 nm	—	43	Light conversion films and white-light-emitting diodes (WLED)	
43

5	Ammonium persulfate/urea	Caffeine	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 3 h	Blue/13 nm	370/426	69	Detection of Ag+	
89

6	
L-Cysteine	Citric acid	Hydrothermal, 200 °C, 3 h	Blue	355/450	57.2	Detection of methotrexate	
91

7	Human fingernails sulfuric acid	
	Microwave irradiation, 400 W, 2 min	Blue/2.2 nm	—	—	Detection of SY and cell imaging agent	
93

9	Methionine and ethylenediamine	
	Hydrothermal	blue, 5 nm	320/390	—	Detection of Fe3+	
90


 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the sensitive fluorescence detection of fluazinam based on NS-CDs (represents-stacking effect; represents the hydrogen interaction; represents the interaction between the electron-rich groups and electron-deficient groups).88	 

1	Adenosine 5′-triphosphate	
	Hydrothermal, 220 °C, 6 h	Blue/4.2–8.7 nm	320/408	43.2%	Detection of Fe3+	
100

2	
N-Phosphonomethyl aminodiacetic acid and ethylenediamine	
	Microwave-assisted thermolysis	Blue/3.3 nm	346/418	17.5%	Cellular imaging	
83

3	4-Aminosalicylic acid and H3PO4	
	Solvothermal, 180 °C, 4 h	Bright green/4.75 nm	386/530	18.9%	Detection of nitrite and cells imaging	
103

4	Ethylene diamine, phosphoric acid	Citric acid	Hydrothermal, 250 °C, 2 h	Green, red	340/430, 450/500	30%, 78%	FL and photoacoustic (PA) imaging of living tissue	
96

5	Alendronate sodium	
	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 20 h	Greenish blue/5 nm	330/420	35.0%	Detection of uranyl ion	
102

6	Eleocharis dulcis	
	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 5 h	Blue	380/458	11.2%	Fluorescent ink and detection for elemental Fe3+	
104

7	Ethylenediamine and urea phosphate	Citric acid	Microwave, 700 W, 30 min	Blue, 2.7 ± 0.7 nm	350/441	44.2%	Detection of DA	
44


1	EDA and sodium tetraborate, boric acid, manganese borate	CA	Hydrothermal, 160 °C 4 h	Blue/3.7 ± 0.2 nm	—	29.01%, 52.42%, 68.28%	Ensing and imaging of human umbilical vein endothelial cells	
109

2	APBA	
	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 4 h	Green/2.8 nm	490/540	25.9%	Detection of Cr(VI)	
107

3	Aminophenylboronic acid (APBA)	
	Combustion	Green/2.5 nm	310/520	1.6%	Detection of Cu2+	
106

5	2-Hydroxyphenylboronic acid and ethylenediamine	
	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 12 h	Yellow–green	—	6.59%	Ink for writing on different paper and cell imaging	
110

6	3-Aminophenylboronic acid	
	Hydrothermal, 160 °C, 8 h	Blue/2.1 nm	350/—	7%	
p-NP determination in environmental water samples	
111

7	Boric acid and urea	citric acid,	Microwave-assisted	Blue/20 nm	350/455	—	Detection of Sn4+ and Mo6+ ions	
112


 	Fig. 8  The synthesis of NB-CQDs by hydrothermal method and sensing mechanism of Cr6+ and dopamine.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) The proposed energy-level diagram of the NSe-CDs. (B) PL emission spectra under different excitation wavelengths in the range of 460–540 nm (excitation wavelength interval 20 nm) of NSe-CDs (the insert shows a photograph of NSe-CDs solution under excitation wavelength of 497 nm). (C) (a) TEM image of NSe-CDs, inset: nanoparticles diameter histogram of NSe-CDs. (b) HRTEM image of NSe-CDs. (c) The corresponding Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) image of NSe-CDs.115	 

1	Cucumber juice	N/S/P	Hydrothermal	Fron blue to green/<10 nm	—	—	Detection of Hg2+ ion.	
114

2	Anthracite coal concentrated sulphuric acid and nitric acid	N/S/P	Wet chemical plus dialysis	Blue/1–7 nm	—	—	Detection of Pb2+	
117

3	A customized ionic liquid multiwalled carbon nanotubes	N/S/F	Microwave treatment	Blue/2 nm	—	70%	Photocatalysis in solar cells, LED	
115

4	Thiourea and 3-amino phenyl boronic acid citric acid	N/S/B	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 6 h	Blue	—	28%	Detection of glucosamine	
118

5	3-Aminobenzeneboronic acid and 2,5-diaminobenzenesulfonic acid	N/S/B	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 8 h	Red/2.84 nm	520/605	11.6%	Detection of Ag+ ions and L-cysteine (L-Cys)	
119

6	Egg powder and phosphorus acid	N/O/P	Hydrothermal, 180 °C, 8 h	Blue/3.1 ± 0.2 nm	360/443	11.1%	Detection of ovalbumin (OVA)	
121


 	Fig. 10  (A) Plausible binding sites for (a) glucosamine (b) sialyl Lewisa with NSB-CQD. (B) (a) STEM image, elemental mapping showing the presence of (b) carbon, (c) nitrogen, (d) sulphur, (e) boron, (f) oxygen in BNSCQD. (C) PL emission spectra of NBS-CQD at various excitations. (D) (a) Fluorescence images of the paper-based sensor for visual detection of glucosamine at different concentrations under different wavelengths, relative fluorescence (F/F0) vs. different concentration of glucosamine on strip under lights of wavelength (b) 340 nm and(c) 420 nm.118	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) (a) UV–vis absorption spectra of NSP-CDs; (b) PL spectra of blue, green, yellow and red NSP-CDs. (B) SK-MEL-28 incubated with NSP-CDs (top) and NSP-CDs-FA (bottom) for 2 h and corresponding images in multi-color channels, 405, 480, 555 and 614 nm obtained through confocal microscopy. (C) Mechanism of FA mediated NSP-CD-FA migration to nucleus (FR: folate receptor; GPI: glycosylphosphatidylinositol). (D) Confocal microscopy images of BN-CQDs (50 μg mL−1) incubated with HeLa cells for different times (0, 2, 4 and 6 h).128	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of preparing solid luminescent film (Cl-ESCF). (B) (a) Light intensity distribution of two orthogonal directions from the surface of composite film. Inset shows a photograph of the operating remote WLED device at 500 mA. (b) EL spectra of the WLED at the current regulation (20–500 mA). Inset shows the schematic presentation of remote UV-pumped WLED. (c) The corresponding CIE-1931 color space diagram. Inset plots the variation of the chromaticity coordinates at different bias currents. (d) EL intensity of the composite film against time (at 500 mA).133	 
Footnote
† Co-first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
