MOF-derived electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00906J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00906J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1414-1448MOF-derived electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions

        
          
            Hao-Fan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liyu 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huan 
            Pang
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Stefan 
            Kaskel
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Qiang 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab
aAIST-Kyoto University Chemical Energy Materials Open Innovation Laboratory (ChEM-OIL), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. E-mail: q.xu@aist.go.jp
bSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China. E-mail: panghuan@yzu.edu.cn; qxuchem@yzu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden and Fraunhofer IWS, Bergstraße 66, Dresden, 01062, Germany. E-mail: stefan.kaskel@tu-dresden.de
Received 
      21st December 2019
    First published on 10th February 2020AbstractOxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) are three key reactions for the development of green and sustainable energy systems. Efficient electrocatalysts for these reactions are highly desired to lower their overpotentials and promote practical applications of related energy devices. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have recently emerged as precursors to fabricate carbon-based electrocatalysts with high electrical conductivity and uniformly distributed active sites. In this review, the current progress of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for ORR/OER/HER electrocatalysis is presented. Materials design strategies of MOF-derived carbon-based materials are firstly summarized to show the rich possibilities of the morphology and composition of MOF-derived carbon-based materials. A wide range of applications based on these materials for ORR, OER, HER and multifunctional electrocatalysis are discussed, with an emphasis on the required features of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for the electrocatalysis of corresponding reactions. Finally, perspectives on the development of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for ORR, OER and HER electrocatalysis are provided.
Hao-Fan Wang
Hao-Fan Wang received his BS and PhD degrees from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University in 2013 and 2018, respectively. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in AIST-Kyoto University Chemical Energy Materials Open Innovation Laboratory (ChEM-OIL). His research interests include carbon materials, MOF-derived materials, and their applications in electrocatalysis and metal–air batteries.
Liyu Chen
Liyu Chen received his BS degree in 2013 and his PhD in 2017, both from South China University of Technology. Since August 2017, he joined Prof. Qiang Xu's group in AIST-Kyoto University Chemical Energy Materials Open Innovation Laboratory (ChEM-OIL) as a post doc researcher. His research is centered on the design and preparation of MOF-based materials and their applications in heterogeneous catalysis.
Huan Pang
Huan Pang received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He is now a university distinguished professor at Yangzhou University and Young Changjiang Scholars of the Ministry of Education. His group engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially for MOF-based materials. He is a member in the editorial board of FlatChem, young editorial board member of Chinese Journal of Inorganic Chemistry, and a managing editor of EnergyChem. His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.
Stefan Kaskel
Stefan Kaskel studied chemistry and received his PhD in Tübingen (1997). After a postdoc in the group of J. D. Corbett, he was a group leader at the Max Planck Institute for Coal Research. Since June 2004, he is Full Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at TU Dresden, and since 2008 also the head of the business unit Chemical Surface Technology at the Fraunhofer Institute (IWS). His research interests are focused on porous and nanostructured materials for applications in energy storage, catalysis, batteries and separation technologies.
Qiang Xu
Qiang Xu received his PhD in 1994 from Osaka University. He is director of AIST-Kyoto University ChEM-OIL, adjunct Professor of Kobe University/Kyoto University and specially-appointed professor of Yangzhou University. He received Thomson Reuters Research Front Award in 2012 and Humboldt Research Award in 2019 and was recognized a highly cited researcher (2014–2019) in Chemistry and Engineering/Materials Science by Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics. His research interests include the chemistry of nanostructured materials and their applications, especially for catalysis and energy. He is a fellow of Engineering Academy of Japan (EAJ), European Academy of Sciences (EURASC) and National Academy of Sciences, India (NASI).
1. Introduction
Electrochemical oxidation and reduction reactions are the basis of various energy storage and conversion devices. Among them, the redox reactions between water, oxygen and hydrogen, such as oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), have raised increasing concerns in recent years, for their critical roles in many energy processes, including fuel cells, metal–air batteries, water electrolysis, and so on.1–3 In particular, the increasing amount of fluctuating renewable energy in the grid renders such conversion reactions as attractive for intermittent chemical energy storage. To promote the practical applications of these energy devices, efficient electrocatalysts for ORR, OER and HER are required to lower the reaction energy barrier and improve the energy efficiency.
For the electrocatalysis of these gas-involving reactions, the electrocatalysts should be able to ensure fast electron and mass transport, and provide abundant tri-phase regions for surface reaction.2 With these considerations, carbon materials, with high electrical conductivity and tunable porous structure, can be promising candidates to build highly active oxygen/hydrogen electrocatalysts. State-of-the-art active materials for oxygen and hydrogen electrocatalysis are precious metals and their compounds (Pt for ORR and HER, IrO2 for OER, etc.). Due to the limited reserves and high cost of precious metals, non-precious metal-based materials were investigated as their alternatives for electrocatalysis.4–9 For these electrocatalysts with metal-based active sites, carbon materials can be used as multifunctional supports to enhance charge and mass transport.10,11 In the past decade, carbon materials themselves were also demonstrated to be active materials for ORR,12–15 OER,16 HER17 and multifunctional electrocatalysis.18,19 With advantages in both structural features and intrinsic activity, carbon materials serving as catalyst supports and active materials have both been widely investigated in ORR/OER/HER electrocatalysis in recent years.20,21
Common synthesis routines of carbon materials include the exfoliation of graphite and graphite-like materials,22,23 polymerization of small molecules,24,25 pyrolysis of carbon-containing materials, etc.26,27 Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of materials constructed by connecting metal ions or clusters with organic linkers, exhibiting open crystalline structure, exceptional porosity, structural flexibility, and tunable functionality.28–30 Since the use of MOFs as precursors/templates for synthesis of porous carbons was first reported in 2008,31 the pyrolysis of MOFs has been widely adopted as an effective way to obtain carbon-based materials with various morphologies and compositions.32,33 For the use in ORR/OER/HER electrocatalysis, carbon-based materials derived from MOFs are featured with the following advantages: (1) the morphology and porosity of the carbon-based materials can be regulated to expose the active sites and facilitate the mass transport in electrocatalytic reactions; (2) the well dispersed metal species in carbon-based materials can be achieved to improve utilization efficiency, due to the even distribution of metal centers at atomic level in MOF precursors. (3) The incorporation of heteroatoms in linkers facilitates doping of carbon materials to achieve well defined heteroatom functional groups, tailored polarity, and intrinsic redox active sites. (4) Encapsulating precursors into the pores of MOFs is another big advantage to achieve the well dispersion of a variety of species on the resulted carbon-based materials, including single-atom metal sites and the heteroatom species coordinating to them.34–38 It is necessary to point out that sometimes the synthesis of MOFs requires expensive organic ligands. However, the above-mentioned advantages of MOF-derived carbon materials make MOFs worth investigating for the development of new functional carbon materials. Moreover, continuous efforts have been made to lower the cost of MOFs and facilitate their large-scale applications.39,40
In this review, a comprehensive overview on MOF-derived carbon-based materials for electrocatalytic oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions will be given, as illustrated in Scheme 1. Besides carbon-based materials, pristine MOFs and MOF-derived non-carbonaceous materials have also been applied in energy electrocatalysis.41–43 These types of materials have been involved in previous reviews,44–46 and will not be discussed herein. In this article, design strategies for regulating the morphology and composition of MOF-derived carbon-based materials are firstly summarized. Then we focus on the applications of MOF-derived carbons on ORR, OER, HER and multifunctional electrocatalysis. Finally, some perspectives are provided for the future development and better design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for electrocatalysis. Through the discussions in this review, we expect to present some points of view on how to achieve efficient electrocatalysis by the rational design of MOFs and their carbon-based derivatives.
 Scheme 1  Design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials with various morphology and composition for the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions. 
2. Morphology and composition design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials
The synthesis of carbon materials from MOFs mainly relies on the high-temperature pyrolysis of MOFs. During the carbonization process, the organic moiety transforms into porous graphitic carbon matrix, and the metal moiety can be converted to metal nanoparticles, metal compound nanoparticles, or atomic metal doping in carbon materials. Furthermore, by using low boiling point metal or the purification after pyrolysis, metal-free carbon materials can also be obtained from MOFs. The morphology and composition are both critical features for electrocatalysts to achieve high activity.47 In this section, we aim to give an overview of the design of MOF-derived nanocarbons with various morphologies and compositions.
2.1 Morphology design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials
For ORR, OER and HER electrocatalysts, well-designed morphologies, including porous and hierarchical morphologies, are highly desired to expose the active sites and facilitate the mass transport.2 Various morphologies have been realized on MOF-derived carbon-based materials via the design of MOFs and further treatments. Herein, morphology design strategies of MOF-derived carbon-based materials and some representative types of morphologies are overviewed.

2.1.1 Morphology inheritance from MOF precursors. 
In the thermal transformation from MOFs to carbon-based materials, MOFs serve as precursors and/or templates. Early studies revealed that MOFs tent to collapse and lost their original morphologies to bulk materials with featureless morphologies under high-temperature conditions of pyrolysis.31 Recently, through selecting appropriate MOF precursors and rational pyrolysis conditions, the size and shape of the MOF precursors can be partially inherited to the derived carbon materials.33,48,49 However, the ordered pore structures of MOFs are hard to be retained under high-temperature treatment. To obtain carbon materials with controlled porosity, hard and soft templates were commonly used.32 By selecting different types of MOFs, changing the MOF synthesis conditions, introducing templates in MOF synthesis, etc., MOF precursors with various morphologies, including 0-dimensional (0D) polyhedral and nanospheres,48,50–55 1D nanorods, nanowires and nanotubes,56–58 2D nanosheets,59–61 3D arrays and other hierarchical structures,62–66 have been reported in the synthesis of carbon-based materials with morphology-preserved transformations.
Polyhedron is one of the most common morphologies of MOF particles. A large part of MOFs, including zeolite imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) and UiO, MIL series, are featured with polyhedral morphology. These polyhedral MOF particles have been used as precursors to synthesize carbon polyhedra through the thermal conversion.50,67–71 As illustrated in Fig. 1a, Zheng et al.50 reported N-doped microporous carbon polyhedra obtained from the pyrolysis of Zn-based ZIF-8. In this work, ZIF-8 polyhedra were calcined under nitrogen protection, with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 to the target carbonation temperature, and then maintained for 8 h. Under different carbonization temperatures of 500, 600, 700, 800 and 900 °C, the polyhedral morphology of the derived carbon materials all well inherited that of ZIF-8. Similarly, through the pyrolysis of Fe(acac)3-coated ZIF-8 (acac = acetylacetonate),68 Co-based ZIF-67,69 Zn/Co bimetallic ZIF, etc.,70,71 carbon polyhedral nanoparticles with retained shape and size from MOFs were also obtained.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of MOF-derived carbon matrices with morphology inherited from MOF precursors. (a) 0D N-doped microporous carbon polyhedra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) 0D hollow carbon spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) 1D nitrogen-doped porous carbon nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) 1D N-doped porous carbon hollow tubules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e) 2D nitrogen-doped carbon nanoplates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) 3D hierarchical N-doped porous carbon arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) 3D spherical superstructure of carbon nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Although MOFs have their specific crystal structures, MOF nanospheres can be synthesized by shortening the synthesis time,72 accelerating the reaction rate,65,73 introducing additives during synthesis, etc.53,54 Besides the self-assembly of MOFs, the utilization of spherical templates is also a common way to synthesize MOF nanospheres.55,74,75 The pyrolysis of MOF nanospheres could yield carbon nanospheres with retained morphology. Fig. 1b presents a schematic illustration of the templated synthesis of MOF spheres and their thermal transformation into hollow spherical carbon-based material, reported by Zhang et al.55 Polystyrene (PS) spheres were used as the template, and a composite of Fe-based MIL-101 and Co-based ZIF-67 was assembled around the spheres. After pyrolysis and the removal of the template, Co–Fe alloy embedded hollow carbon spheres with the similar morphology of the MOF precursor were prepared.
The synthesis of MOFs of 1D morphology can be realized by the anisotropic growth of MOF crystals,57,58,76–79 or by the fabrication of small MOF nanoparticles via electrospinning, templating method, etc.56,80–83 For example, Zhou et al.77 synthesized Co-MOF nanowires using cobalt nitrate as the metal salt and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC) and 4,4′-bipyridine (4,4′-bipy) as the organic ligands (Fig. 1c). The Co-MOF showed a crystal structure with 1D channels and were grown along the c axis to form 1D nanowires. This morphology was well retained in the carbon material obtained after pyrolysis at 700 °C for 2 h under Ar atmosphere. For another strategy, an example of fabricating MOF particles on 1D templates is illustrated in Fig. 1d.81 Composite nanofibers of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and Zn/Co ions were firstly produced by electrospinning method. Then the nanofibers were immersed into an ethanol solution of 2-methylimidazole (2-MeIM) to create ZIF layers on the nanofibers, which were finally converted to 1D porous carbon after pyrolysis at 700 °C. With the assistance of carbon fibers as the template, the MOF nanoparticles and their derived carbon material can be assembled into 1D fibers with a large length scale, fabricating freestanding flexible films.
2D MOF nanosheets can be synthesized by the exfoliation of 3D MOF crystals (“top-down” synthesis) or the “bottom-up” growth with the assistance of capping agents to modulate the growth direction.60,84–86 Recently, Lin et al.60 proposed “bottom-up” synthesis of a 2D MOF with NiSO4 and 4,4′-bipy as building blocks, and pyridine as the MOF growth directing agent (Fig. 1e). The pyridine could suppress the stack of MOF layers along the c axis, thus resulting in the anisotropic growth of 2D MOF nanoplates. Moreover, the lateral size and the thickness of MOF nanoplates can be modulated by changing the amount of pyridine. After subsequent pyrolysis treatment, the 2D MOFs converted to 2D nanocarbons incorporated with metal-based composites. Like 0D and 1D MOFs, MOFs with 2D morphology are able to be fabricated via templating method,87 which could also serve as precursors for the synthesis of 2D nanocarbons.
Carbon materials with well-organized 3D morphology can facilitate the mass transport and the well exposure of active sites in the electrocatalysis process. To obtain MOF-derived 3D carbons, designing MOF precursors with 3D morphology is one of the commonly applied strategies. The construction of 3D MOF structure can be realized by growing MOF arrays on a substrate.62–64,88–91Fig. 1f presents a schematic illustration of the conversion from Ni foam supported CoO arrays to ZIF-67 arrays, and finally to carbon arrays, reported by Cai et al.64 This strategy is applicable for a series of metal substrates (Ni foam, Cu mesh, etc.) and metal oxide/hydroxide precursors (CoO, NiO, Cu(OH)2, etc.) to fabricate corresponding MOF (ZIF-67, Co-MOF-74, Ni-MOF-74, HKUST-1, etc.) arrays and carbon arrays. With these monolith substrates, MOF-derived carbon arrays with well-aligned hierarchical and self-supporting structure can be obtained. Besides arrays, other hierarchical carbon structures can also be obtained through the well design of MOFs.65,66 Recently, Zou et al.65 reported MOF nanorods with a spherical superstructure and the derived carbon material with retained morphology. The MOF spherical superstructure, as shown in Fig. 1g, is prepared by the hydrothermal transformation of Zn-MOF-74 nanospheres. Under the hydrothermal treatment, Zn-MOF-74 was self-assembled to produce a chestnut-shell-like hierarchical structure, which was preserved in the carbonization process. Compared with carbon nanoparticles derived directly from MOF-74 nanospheres, the hierarchical carbon superstructure exhibited a much larger specific area (∼2350 m2 g−1vs. ∼1370 m2 g−1).
In short, MOFs can exhibit a variety of morphologies through the control of MOF crystal growth or the introduction of templates. Therefore, the carbon matrix of the MOF-derived material could retain the morphology of MOFs by rational pyrolysis and consequently exhibit a variety of morphologies.


2.1.2 Morphology change during pyrolysis. 
The morphology of carbon-based materials can be inherited from MOF precursors. Moreover, chemical reactions and physical changes during the pyrolysis process can lead to the morphology evolution in the transformation from MOFs to carbon-based materials. By rationally making use of the morphology evolution, for example, the growth of carbon nanotubes and the pore generation caused by gas release, more diverse morphologies of MOF-derived carbon materials can be created.
One of the most common morphology changes in the carbonization of MOFs is the growth of carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The metal ions (Co ion, Fe ion, etc.) in MOFs can be reduced to metal nanoparticles by carbon or other reductants in the pyrolysis process. With the existence of organic ligands or external carbon sources, these metal nanoparticles can catalyze the growth of CNTs. For the facile and high-yield formation of CNTs from MOFs, Meng et al.92 proposed a general strategy for the oriented conversion from MOFs to CNTs, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. In this method, MOFs were treated by low-temperature (430 °C) pyrolysis under Ar protection. Reductive gas (NH3 and H2) was released in this process to reduce metal ions to metal nanoparticles. The residual organic moiety then acted as the building unit of CNTs. In this way, a CNT-assembled hierarchical carbon structure with a skeleton inheriting the original MOF morphology was obtained. This strategy can be applied on MOFs with various compositions and morphologies. Other works also reported the pyrolysis of different MOFs under different conditions (temperature, time, reductive agent, carbon source, etc.) for CNT growth,76,93–100 and the as-prepared carbon materials exhibited different length and density of CNTs.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of morphology changes of MOF precursors during pyrolysis. (a) Formation of N-doped CNT-assembled hollow dodecahedra in the pyrolysis process of ZIF-67. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Honeycomb-like carbon matrix obtained from the gas release during MOF pyrolysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides the growth of CNTs, the other commonly used strategy is to take the advantage of the released gas during pyrolysis to modify the carbon morphology. Guan et al.101 synthesized ZIF-67 hollow spheres with PS spheres as template. After pyrolysis, a large through-hole was generated on the surface of hollow carbon spheres due to the strong gas outflux from the decomposition of PS spheres. Zhao et al.102 prepared MOFs with triazole as ligands, which decomposes and generates a large amount of gas upon pyrolysis, leading to the formation of foam-like porous carbon networks. Zhu et al.103 used a double-phase approach to encapsulate thiourea (TU) and CoCl2 into the pores of MIL-101-NH2, and obtained honeycomb-like carbon structures with Co9S8 clusters inside after pyrolysis (Fig. 2b). To prepare the MOF composite, MIL-101-NH2 particles were immersed in a double-phase solution containing a hydrophilic solvent (TU and CoCl2 dissolved in methanol–water) and a hydrophobic solvent (n-hexane). The hydrophilic solvent dispersed into small droplets under vigorous stirring, and then diffused into the pores of MOF particles, forming a [Co(TU)4]Cl2 coordination compound. During carbonization, the Co compound decomposed and released bountiful N- and S-containing gas, resulting in the expansion of the original pores of MOFs and the formation of Co9S8-embedded honeycomb-like carbon material. A large surface area of 1791 m2 g−1 can be achieved on the open porous carbon structure. The authors also synthesized MIL-101-NH2 with dicyandiamide and FeCl3 encapsulated in the pores, and the carbonization product exhibited the same honeycomb-like morphology.104
Other types of morphology changes during the MOF pyrolysis were also reported, including the thermal exfoliation of MOFs,105 the etching of carbon by metal particles, etc.106 These morphology evolution phenomena during pyrolysis broaden the possibility of the morphology design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials, especially for the design of hierarchical carbon architectures.


2.1.3 Morphology regulation after pyrolysis. 
The morphology regulation after pyrolysis is mainly the treatment of carbon materials. Carbon materials are stable under mild conditions. The restructuring of carbon materials requires harsh treatments like chemical or thermal activation. For example, the synthesis of 2D graphene nanoribbons via the exfoliation of 1D MOF-derived carbon nanorods was reported by Pachfule et al.57 (Fig. 3a). Zn-Based MOF-74 nanorods were synthesized by room-temperature reaction of zinc acetate and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid with salicylic acid as a modulator. Then the MOF nanorods were pyrolyzed at 1000 °C in Ar atmosphere to obtain carbon nanorods. Finally, graphene nanoribbons were exfoliated from carbon nanorods by KOH treatment under ultrasonication followed by thermal activation at 800 °C. As a result, a 2D carbon material was synthesized from 1D MOF. A hydrothermal transformation of MOF-derived carbon polyhedra to carbon nanorod array was proposed by Amiinu et al.107 (Fig. 3b). ZIF-8 derived N-doped carbon polyhedra were hydrothermally treated together with Co ions, reductive agents and Ti foil substrate. Undergoing a structural evolution mediated by the Co-precursor and metal substrate, the carbon- and Co-based nanorod array was grown on Ti foil. Then a high-temperature calcination was performed to improve the graphitic degree of the carbon material.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustrations of morphology regulation of MOF-derived carbon-based materials after pyrolysis. (a) Exfoliation of 1D MOF-derived carbon nanorods to form 2D graphene nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Hydrothermal transformation of MOF-derived carbon polyhedra to carbon nanorod array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In summary, the morphology design of the carbon matrix of MOF-derived materials generally starts from the morphology design of MOFs. MOFs with various morphologies can be obtained by modulating the crystal growth or with the assistance of templates. The carbon-based materials are able to inherit the morphology of MOF precursors under rational carbonization treatment. With controlled morphology change during carbonization or further treatments of as-prepared carbon-based materials, the morphology of the carbon-based materials can be further regulated. In this way, carbon-based materials with a huge diversity of morphologies can be obtained from MOFs.

2.2 Composition regulation of MOF-derived carbon-based materials
The morphology of the carbon matrix, including the particle size, the pore size distribution, etc., mainly affects the transport of gas, electrolyte and electron in the electrocatalysis process, while the intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts depends on the type of active materials. The active materials of MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts can be divided into heteroatom-doped carbons, atomically dispersed metals in carbons, metal and metal compound particles, etc. These functions typically originate from the organic ligands or metal ions of MOFs, or external precursors like materials encapsulated in MOFs. In the following sections, commonly investigated active materials in MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts and their synthesis strategies are presented.

2.2.1 The doping of non-metallic heteroatoms in carbon-based materials. 
Heteroatom-doping is an important origin of the activity for metal-free carbon-based oxygen and hydrogen electrocatalysts.108–110 For metal-containing electrocatalysts, the interaction between metal atoms and the heteroatoms in carbon also facilitates the electrocatalytic activity.111,112 To introduce heteroatoms in MOF-derived carbon-based materials, heteroatom-containing ligands are usually used for the construction of MOF precursors. Nitrogen-containing ligands, including 2-methylimidazole,67 4,4′-bipyridine,60,105,113,114 2-aminoterephthalic acid, etc.,115,116 were widely investigated to build MOF precursors for the synthesis of N-doped carbon-based materials. MOF precursors with other heteroatom-containing linkers can also be carbonized to obtain carbon-based materials beyond single N-doping. Recently, Wang et al.117 proposed a Cu-MOF with N-containing and P-containing likers as a precursor to prepare carbon materials with N and P co-doping (Fig. 4a). 1-Hydroxyethylidene-1,1-diphosphonic acid and pyrazine were utilized as ligands to connect Cu ions in the Cu-MOF. After pyrolysis in N2 atmosphere, N,P co-doped porous carbon matrices along with embedded Cu nanoparticles were obtained. To achieve higher doping amount and/or dope extra heteroatoms in MOF-derived carbon-based materials, MOFs combining with additional heteroatom-containing precursors were generally used for carbonization.115,118–122 For example, B and N co-doped graphene nanotubes encapsulated with Co nanoparticles were prepared via the pyrolysis of Co-containing ZIF-67 nanoparticles mixed with polyethyleneglycol (PEG), urea and boric acid (Fig. 4b), as reported by Tabassum et al.121 The B and N atoms exhibited high atomic content in the as-prepared carbon matrix of 5.2% (B) and 11.3% (N), respectively.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of the doping of non-metallic heteroatoms in MOF-derived carbon-based materials. (a) N and P co-doped carbon material derived from MOF precursor with N- and P-containing linkers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) B and N co-doped graphene nanotubes derived from ZIF-67 with urea and boric acid providing heteroatoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 


2.2.2 Metal and metal compound nanoparticles. 
Metal-based materials, including precious metals, non-precious metals, their alloys and compounds, have been widely investigated as electrocatalysts for ORR, OER and HER.1,123 Through the pyrolysis of MOFs with/without extra precursors providing metal ions or anions, carbon matrix containing metal/alloy/metal compound particles can be prepared.
Metal, alloy, or metal compound nanoparticles can be generated from the pyrolysis of single MOF precursors under inert atmosphere. For MOFs containing metal ions (such as Fe, Co and Ni ions) with favourable electrocatalytic activity in metallic or compound form, they can be directly pyrolyzed to synthesize efficient electrocatalysts.48,62,90,93–95,124–130 Under high-temperature pyrolysis with the existence of carbon or reductive gas released by MOF decomposition, metal ions with high reduction potentials in MOFs could be reduced to metal nanoparticles. Fig. 5a presents a schematic diagram of an approach for the synthesis of carbon-coated CoFe alloy nanoparticles from a MOF material.125 A Prussian blue analogue (PBA) with CN− ions as linkers, Co and Fe ions as metallic nodes was firstly synthesized as the MOF precursor. Then the Co and Fe ions were reduced by carbon under N2-protected pyrolysis. By varying pyrolysis temperature from 600, 700 to 800 °C, the metal ions were all transformed into metal alloy nanoparticles, and were coated by N-doped graphene layers converted from CN− linkers.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis of metal and metal compound nanoparticles in MOF-derived carbon-based materials from single MOF precursors. (a) Carbon-coated CoFe alloy nanoparticles from Prussian blue analogue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fe/Fe3C composite nanoparticles coated by carbon shells derived from Prussian blue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) Composite of metal oxides and carbon from 2D MOFs with BTC as linkers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Cu3P nanoparticles supported by N,P co-doped carbon nanosheets from MOF precursor with P-containing linkers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
The type of metal compounds generated from the pyrolysis of MOF can be affected by the non-metallic elements in the ligands. Ligands are organic compounds, which contain abundant carbon atoms. The diffusion of carbon atoms into the interstices of metal atoms leads to the formation of metal carbides. Compared with Co and Ni carbides, the Fe carbide Fe3C is more thermally stable.131 Therefore, Fe3C is the most frequently observed carbide in MOF derived materials. As exhibited in Fig. 5b, Fe/Fe3C composite nanoparticles coated by carbon shells were fabricated through the pyrolysis of Prussian blue.127 Moreover, Fe3C nanoparticles derived from other types of MOFs, for example, Fe-based MIL series MOFs, were also reported.93,128,130 The formation of metal oxides from the pyrolysis of MOFs needs oxygen-containing ligands and suitable pyrolysis time and temperature. Zhou et al.90 reported the synthesis of metal oxide/carbon composites from a series of MOF precursors, as illustrated in Fig. 5c. Taking the synthesis of Co3O4/carbon composite as an example, Co(II)-based MOFs with 1D, 2D and 3D structures were obtained using 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate (BTC), 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalate (DHTP) as linkers, respectively. The pyrolysis treatments were conducted at 600 °C in N2 flow for 2 h. Similarly, NiO and Cu2O nanoparticles were also prepared by the pyrolysis of oxygen-containing MOFs under the same condition. Besides using the oxygen atoms in the ligands, the calcination of MOF-derived metal/alloy nanoparticles in air is another way to synthesize metal oxides from MOFs.94,124,129 Other types of metal compounds can also be synthesized from MOFs if suitable ligands with heteroatoms are employed. Kong et al.132 reported a metal–organophosphine framework (MOPF, a kind of MOFs in which metal ions are bonded with P atoms in the ligands) with 1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphaadamantane (PTA) as the ligand, and metal phosphide nanoparticles supported by N,P co-doped carbon nanosheets were obtained via the pyrolysis of MOPF (Fig. 5d). This metal phosphide/carbon composite was then utilized as the cathode material for Na-ion batteries. Further researches on the direct conversion of MOFs to the composites of carbon matrix and various types of metal compounds for oxygen and hydrogen electrocatalysis are expected.
The introduction of additional precursors in the synthesis process of MOF-derived materials provides more possibilities for the composition regulation of metal and metal compounds. For precursors that are pyrolyzed together with MOFs, encapsulating these precursors into the pores of MOFs, for which the double-solvents method has been a powerful tool,133 has been applied as an efficient strategy to ensure the uniform distribution of metal-based species in MOF-derived materials.103,134–138 The encapsulation of chemical species is limited by the small pore size of MOFs. Efforts have been made to explore strategies for efficiently encapsulating nanoentities in MOFs.29 Recently, Chen et al.135 proposed an approach to trap Mo-based polyoxometalate clusters into ZIF-67 for the synthesis of MoxCoxC nanoparticles confined in carbon polyhedrons (Fig. 6a). ZIF-67 possess pores with the size of 1.16 nm, but the window aperture of the pores is only 0.34 nm. The [PMo12O40]3− (PMo12) polyoxometalate clusters with the size of about 1 nm are not able to enter the pores of pre-synthesized ZIF-67. Therefore, a new trapping-based route was proposed, including the opening of the windows of ZIF-67 cages under heating, the access of PMo12 into the cage and the reassembly of ZIF-67 to encapsulate PMo12 in the cage. The uniform dispersed PMo12 nanoclusters were well contacted with Co ions in ZIF-67, leading to small-sized MoxCoxC nanoparticles after pyrolysis. Additional precursors can also be simply introduced in or after the MOF pyrolysis process to alter the composition of MOF-derived metal compounds. For example, a common strategy to obtain metal nitrides, phosphides and sulfides from MOFs is treating MOF-derived materials with N/P/S-containing regents.117,139–146Fig. 6b–d exhibit three schematic illustrations of the synthesis of MOF-derived composites of carbon and cobalt nitrides, phosphides and sulfides, respectively.144–146 In the synthesis of Co3N in Fig. 6b,144 a Co-based Prussian blue analogue precursor was annealed in NH3/N2 flow to realize the carbonization and nitridation in one step. In the preparation process of cobalt phosphides (Fig. 6c) and sulfides (Fig. 6d),145,146 the MOF precursors (ZIF-67) were first pyrolyzed to form carbon/cobalt composites. Then the composites were calcined in protective gas flow, together with NaH2PO2 and sulfur powder to generate cobalt phosphide and sulfide nanoparticles on carbon, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis of metal and metal compound nanoparticles in MOF-derived carbon-based materials with the assistance of additional precursors. (a) Encapsulation of Mo-based polyoxometalate clusters into ZIF-67 for the synthesis of MoxCoxC nanoparticles confined in carbon polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) NH3 treatment of the pyrolysis product of Co-based Prussian blue analogue to prepare the composite of Co3N and carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2019, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany. (c) Pyrolysis of ZIF-67 and the following annealing with NaH2PO2 to synthesis cobalt phosphides embedded in carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Pyrolysis of ZIF-67 and the following annealing with sulfur powder to synthesis cobalt sulfides embedded in carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
As discussed above, multiple kinds of metal and metal compound nanoparticles can be obtained from MOFs. With these metal-based nanoparticles incorporated with the carbon matrix, MOF-derived carbon materials can exhibit superior performance in ORR, OER and HER electrocatalysis.


2.2.3 Atomically dispersed metal sites in carbon materials. 
The atomic dispersion of metal catalysts on the support can maximize the utilization efficiency of active sites.147 MOF-derived atomic-scale metal active sites supported by carbon materials have been demonstrated to exhibit superior activity in electrocatalysis.148–151 To efficiently convert MOFs to atomically dispersed metal sites on carbon materials, MOF precursors with N-containing organic linkers and high Zn content are preferred.151 N atoms can anchor metal atoms in carbon materials to form a metal–Nx–C coordination structure. The utilization of Zn, which has a low boiling point of 907 °C and evaporates under high-temperature pyrolysis, can lower the concentration of other metal atoms, preventing them from aggregation. Nevertheless, with regulation methods to enhance the atomic dispersion of metal sites in MOF-derived carbon-based materials, metal nanoparticles may also generate during pyrolysis. In this case, the chemical etching of MOF-derived carbon-based materials is commonly applied to remove the undesired metal nanoparticles and thus obtain carbon materials with atomically dispersed metal sites.
To obtain atomically dispersed metal in MOF-derived carbon materials, the metal species can be originated from the inorganic nodes, metal ions immobilized on ligands, and metal precursors encapsulated in the pores of MOFs. The transformation of metal nodes in MOFs to atomically dispersed metal sites in carbon materials has been widely investigated.152–157 Recently, Han et al.154 studied the generation of atomically dispersed Co electrocatalysts on carbon polyhedra via the pyrolysis and acid leaching of ZnCo bimetallic MOFs. With varying Zn/Co ratios of 0:1, 2:1 and 8:1 in the MOF precursors, the Co species in the as-prepared carbon materials exhibited different forms of nanoparticles, atomic clusters and single atoms, respectively (Fig. 7a). The role of Zn in MOF precursors on assisting the formation of atomically dispersed metal sites was clearly elucidated in this work. Organic ligands are usually free of metal atoms. However, metal atoms can be anchored on the heteroatoms in the ligands, achieving atomic dispersion in MOFs. Chen et al.158 reported tungsten single atoms on MOF-derived N-doped carbon based on this strategy (Fig. 7b). W5+, Zr4+ and 2-amino terephthalic acid were firstly solvothermally treated to obtain Zr-based UiO-66-NH2 with W ions coordinated with amine groups in the linkers. Then 950 °C pyrolysis in Ar flow and the following hydrofluoric acid etching converted the MOF precursor to carbon polyhedra with W single atoms. The local atomic structure of W single atoms was confirmed to be W1N1C3 (illustrated in Fig. 7b) according to the calculations based on the X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectra. For metal-based precursors encapsulated in the pores of MOFs, a metal coordination compound is favourable for the formation of atomically dispersed metal sites.159,160Fig. 7c presents the synthesis process of Fe single atoms in carbon with iron(II) phthalocyanine (FePc) and ZIF-8 as precursors, reported by Jiang et al.160 The FePc encapsulated in ZIF-8 transformed to Fe2O3 (which was removed by acid wash after pyrolysis) and Fe–N4 single sites upon pyrolysis.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis of atomically dispersed metal sites in MOF-derived carbon-based materials. (a) Design of atomically dispersed Co electrocatalysts on carbon polyhedra through regulating the Zn/Co ratio in ZnCo bimetallic MOFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Design of tungsten single atoms on MOF-derived N-doped carbon through anchoring W ions on the linkers of Zr-based UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Synthesis of Fe single atoms in carbon from ZIF-8 encapsulated FePc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In this section, we presented an overview on the morphology and composition design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials. Through the regulations on the morphology of the carbon matrix, the heteroatom-doping in carbon and the metal-based species integrated with carbon, MOF-derived carbon-based materials with superior activity on the unifunctional or multifunctional electrocatalysis of ORR, OER and HER can be prepared. In the following sections, the performances of MOF-derived carbon-based materials in oxygen and hydrogen electrocatalysis will be introduced.

3. MOF-derived carbon-based materials for ORR
ORR is the key reaction on the cathode of fuel cells and metal–air batteries, with an equilibrium potential of 1.23 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE, the same below if not mentioned). The ORR tests are generally conducted in O2-saturated electrolytes, with the electrocatalyst dispersed on a rotating disk electrode (RDE). The onset potential and half-wave potential (E1/2), usually measured by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) tests, are widely adopted benchmarks for the activity of ORR electrocatalysts. The reaction equation of four-electron ORR pathway is as follows:
Alkaline conditions: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−(3.1)
Acidic conditions: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O(3.2)
The reduction of oxygen can also go through a two-electron pathway, with hydrogen peroxide as the intermediate product:
Alkaline conditions O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−(3.3) HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−(3.4)
Acidic conditions: O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2(3.5) H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O(3.6)
The actual ORR process is usually a mixture of four-electron and two-electron reactions. In most cases, the four-electron pathway is more preferred, because the four-electron process is more effective and the hydrogen peroxide produced in two-electron process may be harmful to the components of electrochemical cells. Therefore, the electron transfer number is an important parameter to evaluate the performance of ORR electrocatalysts. Generally, the electron transfer number can be measured using the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) or based on the Koutecký–Levich (K–L) equation, from the LSV data obtained with different rotating speed of RDE.
The ORR process contains multiple steps of oxygen-containing intermediates adsorbed on active sites of the electrocatalyst. Therefore, the ORR activity of electrocatalysts greatly depends on the interaction strength between the active sites and the oxygen atom in the intermediates, i.e., the adsorption energy of the intermediates on the active sites. The adsorption energy is related to the electronic structure of the active sites, which can be regulated through the structure and composition design of the electrocatalyst. Up to now, much effort has been made on the design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials to achieve high ORR electrocatalytic activity.161–164 In this section, MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts for ORR applications will be presented.
3.1 MOF-derived metal-free carbon materials for ORR
As mentioned above, metal-free MOF-derived carbon materials can be prepared by using metals with low boiling points or acid treatment after pyrolysis to remove metal-based particles. To improve the ORR activity, heteroatoms from the ligands of MOFs or external precursors can be introduced into the carbon matrix. So far, metal-free carbon materials derived from MOFs for ORR electrocatalysis were mostly nitrogen-doped.56,118–120,165–177 The type of N-doping in carbon materials includes pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, graphitic N, oxidized N, etc., as shown in Fig. 8a.165 The electrocatalytic activity of N-doped carbon materials are considered to be originated from the activation of adjacent C atoms by N atoms, and different types of N-doping can deliver different electrocatalytic activity.110,178–180 For example, researches indicated pyridinic N to be active sites for ORR in acid media,178 and OER in alkaline media.179 While Graphitic N is considered as active sites for ORR (in alkaline condition)179 and HER (in acid condition).180 For MOF-derived carbon materials, the configuration of N-doping can be affected by the existing form of N atoms in the ligands or other N sources. Wu et al.165 reported a ZIF-8-derived metal-free N-doped porous carbon ORR electrocatalyst and a following NH3 activation to regulate the type of N configurations. The N-doped porous carbon obtained from the carbonization of ZIF-8 at 900 °C was named as NPC-900. The subsequent NH3 activation at various temperatures led to the formation of N-doped hierarchical porous carbon materials, denoted as NHPC-900-Y, where Y represents the activation temperature. Fig. 8b presents the contents of each type of N configuration in the MOF-derived carbons, measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). NPC-900 obtained from the direct pyrolysis of ZIF-8 exhibited a high N content with a majority of pyridinic and pyrrolic N. After the NH3 treatment, with the activation temperature increasing, the content of total N doping, pyridinic N and pyrrolic N decreased, while the amount of graphitic N increased, probably due to the etching of carbon on the edge, and the doping of N atoms into the carbon matrix. In the ORR tests in 0.1 M KOH, NHPC-900-1000 exhibited the best performance among the MOF-derived N-doped carbons, with an onset potential of 0.96 V, a half-wave potential of 0.84 V and an electron transfer number of more than 3.8 (Fig. 8c and d). This result indicates that, rather than total N/pyrrole-N/pyridine-N contents, the ORR activity relies more on the content of graphitic N in this system.
 Fig. 8  MOF-derived metal-free carbon material with N heteroatoms as ORR electrocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of types of N-doping in carbon materials. (b) The contents of each type of N configuration in ZIF-8-derived NPC-900 and NHPC-900-Y. (c) ORR LSV plots of NPC-900 and NHPC-900-Y in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at room temperature (scan rate 10 mV s−1, rotation speed 1600 rpm). (d) The electron transfer number (n) derived from RRDE data of NPC-900 and NHPC-900-Y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
MOF-derived carbon materials with other heteroatom dopants were also reported as ORR electrocatalysts.118,120,171 Song et al.120 reported a N,S-co-doped ZIF-8 derived carbon material with NH3 and thiourea as extra heteroatom sources. The N,S-coupled dopants were confirmed to promote higher ORR activity of carbon sites than isolated N and S dopants. A Zn-MOF with B,N-containing linkers was proposed by Qian et al. as the precursor for the synthesis of B and N co-doped carbon material.171 The high porosity and dual heteroatom doping resulted in high electrocatalytic activity on ORR, and also acceptable OER activity.
Besides heteroatom doping, structural defects in carbon materials were also demonstrated to afford high electrocatalytic activity.181,182 Defects can also be introduced into MOF-derived carbon materials through proper structure design. For example, Wang et al.167 prepared a defect-rich nanosheet-linked-polyhedron carbon (NLPC) by confining ZIF-8 in NaCl crystals during pyrolysis (Fig. 9a). With NaCl crystals as the pore-forming agent, NLPC exhibits a more porous and defective structure than ZIF-8-derived polyhedron carbon (PC), as shown by the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 9b and c. The defective structure of NLPC was also confirmed by the higher ID/IG ratio in Raman spectra (Fig. 9d), broader peaks in X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and more sp3 carbon content reveal by XPS characterization. As a result, NLPC exhibited a higher ORR activity than PC in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 9e), with an onset potential of 0.92 V, and an electron transfer number of 3.91–3.98 at the potential range of 0–0.8 V. In brief summary, through the design of heteroatoms and defects in MOF-derived metal-free carbon materials, superior ORR activity can be achieved.
 Fig. 9  Defective MOF-derived metal-free carbon material as ORR electrocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of defect-rich nanosheet-linked-polyhedron carbon (NLPC) form ZIF-8 confined in NaCl crystals. (b) TEM images of ZIF-8-derived polyhedron carbon (PC). (c) TEM images of NLPC. (d) Raman spectra of NLPC and PC. (e) ORR LSV plots of PC, NLPC and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
3.2 MOF-derived carbon-based materials with precious-metal-containing active sites for ORR
Precious metals including Pt and Pd have been regarded as ORR electrocatalysts with state-of-the-art activity.183–185 Through rational combination of precious-metal-containing materials and MOFs, precious-metal-based ORR electrocatalysts with high utilization efficiency and strong interaction with the carbon support can be obtained.136,186–190 Precious-metal-containing precursors can be introduced into the pores of MOFs before pyrolysis, and can also be integrated with MOF-derived carbon matrix after pyrolysis. Wang et al.187 developed an approach to prepare Pt3Co intermetallic nanoparticles on ZIF-8-derived carbon for ORR electrocatalysis. ZIF-8 with 40 at% Co doping was used as the precursor to prepare N- and Co-co-doped carbon support (40Co-NC). Then Pt nanoparticles were deposited on the carbon matrix, following by an annealing treatment at 900 °C to form Pt3Co nanoparticles on the carbon support (Pt/40Co-NC-900). The Pt3Co nanoparticles show an average diameter of ∼5 nm in high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image (Fig. 10a). A highly ordered atomic structure was indicated by the high-contrast Pt atoms and low-contrast Co atoms in the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image (Fig. 10b). This ordered Pt3Co intermetallic structure then exhibited superior ORR activity in 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte, with a half-wave potential of 0.92 V, better than the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst (Fig. 10c). With heteroatom-doped carbon supports to efficiently anchor precious metal particles and non-precious metal atoms to regulate the activity, MOF-derived carbon materials with precious-metal-based active sites can take full advantage of precious metal atoms and achieve better ORR performances than commercial precious metal electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 10  MOF-derived carbon material embedded with Pt3Co intermetallic nanoparticles as ORR electrocatalyst. (a) HRTEM image of Pt/40Co-NC-900. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a Pt3Co nanoparticle. (c) ORR LSV plots of Pt/40Co-NC-900 and other Pt-based ORR electrocatalysts measured in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at room temperature with rotation rate of 900 rpm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 MOF-derived carbon-based materials with non-precious metal-based active sites for ORR
Considering the limited reserve and high cost of precious metals, non-precious metal-based materials, especially Fe- and Co-based materials, have been investigated for efficient ORR electrocatalysis.191 MOF-derived carbon materials with atomically dispersed metal sites, metal nanoparticles and metal compound nanoparticles have demonstrated their ORR activity in previous researches, which will be introduced in this section.

3.3.1 Atomically dispersed metal sites. 
Fe–Nx–C structure, with Fe single atoms coordinated with N atoms in graphitic carbon, have long been investigated as high-performance active site for ORR.8,192,193 With MOFs or external precursors as the Fe source, Fe–Nx–C structured ORR electrocatalysts derived from MOFs have been widely studied and exhibited superior activity.104,137,156,157,159,160,194–205 A MOF-derived single-atom Fe ORR electrocatalyst was designed by Jiao et al.197 through Fe-doping in the ligand of MOF precursor. A Zr-based porphyrinic MOF material with 20% Fe-TCPP (TCPP = tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin) and 80% H2-TCPP as ligands was used as the precursor. The single-atom Fe-implanted N-doped porous carbon (FeSA–N–C) obtained from the pyrolysis and subsequent HF etching showed a mesoporous nanorod structure (Fig. 11a and b). The atomic dispersion of Fe on the carbon support was confirmed by the HAADF-STEM image (Fig. 11c). The fitting result of extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectrum indicates the Fe–N4 configuration of the single-atom Fe sites (Fig. 11d). In the ORR tests conducted in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, the FeSA–N–C electrocatalyst exhibited a higher half-wave potential (0.891 V) than the contrast samples, including MOF-derived carbon materials without Fe, with Fe nanoparticles, and commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst (Fig. 11e). In addition to the high utilization efficiency of active sites, electrocatalysts with atomically dispersed metal sites in carbon are also attracting attention for their tolerance in acidic electrolyte.137,156,157,195–198,206 Zhang et al.156 reported an Fe–N4–C electrocatalyst derived from Fe-doped ZIF-8 polyhedra. The electrocatalyst prepared through the 1100 °C pyrolysis of Fe-ZIF with a particle size of 50 nm showed outstanding ORR activity in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte (Fig. 11f and g). The half-wave potential was 0.85 V and the H2O2 yield was less than 1%.
 Fig. 11  MOF-derived carbon materials with Fe–Nx–C structure for ORR electrocatalysis. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of rod-shape FeSA–N–C electrocatalyst. (c) HAADF-STEM image of FeSA–N–C showing atomically dispersed Fe sites. (d) EXAFS spectrum and fitting of FeSA–N–C. (Inset: model of FeSA–N–C. Fe red, N blue, C gray spheres) (e) ORR LSV plots of FeSA–N–C and control samples in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) ORR LSV plots for Fe-ZIF-derived Fe–N4–C catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and Pt/C in 0.1 M HClO4 at 25 °C and 900 rpm. (g) H2O2 yield calculated based on RRDE data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Besides atomically dispersed Fe sites, MOF-derived carbon materials with other atomically dispersed metal sites, especially Co,71,102,153,154,206–208 have also been investigated and exhibited excellent ORR performance. Yin et al.71 reported an ORR electrocatalyst with N-coordinated single-Co atoms derived from a Zn/Co bimetallic MOF. A high half-wave potential of 0.881 V was achieved in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. He et al.207 proposed a surfactant-assisted confinement pyrolysis strategy of Co-doped ZIF-8 to prepare ORR electrocatalysts with Co–N4 active sites. The as-prepared electrocatalyst exhibited an ORR half-wave potential of 0.84 V in acidic electrolyte. Compared with Fe–N–C electrocatalysts, Co–N–C electrocatalysts usually have inferior ORR activity. However, the Fenton's reaction between Fe and H2O2, which leads to the degradation of electrodes and other components in the electrochemical cell, can be avoided in Fe-free electrocatalysts.207 Therefore, MOF-derived atomically dispersed Co-based electrocatalysts with enhanced ORR activity is worth investigating.


3.3.2 Metal-based nanoparticles. 
As summarized above, carbon materials incorporated with various types of metal-based nanoparticles, including metals, alloys, oxides, carbides, sulfides, etc., can be obtained via the pyrolysis of MOFs. Among these materials, nanoparticles containing cobalt are one of the large families that were most frequently studied for ORR electrocatalysis.48,55,76,124,209–221 Metallic cobalt, cobalt compounds and cobalt-containing composites have demonstrated their high ORR activity,222–224 and the pyrolysis of Co-containing MOFs is a facile way to prepare cobalt-based nanoparticles supported by carbon materials. For metallic cobalt, Li et al.210 reported a MOF-derived ORR electrocatalyst with cobalt nanoparticles decorated on honeycomb-like carbon framework. The MOF precursor was prepared by the growth of ZIF-67 on CoAl layered double hydroxides (LDHs) with a 2D layered morphology. Fig. 12a and b show the SEM and TEM images of the carbonized product which was named as LDH@ZIF-67-800. The 2D morphology of LDH template was retained, while the collapse of ZIF-67 particles resulted in the formation of open pores. Co nanoparticles with an average size of ∼11 nm were also generated in the carbonization process. In the ORR test in 0.1 M KOH, with well-distributed Co nanoparticles as the active material, LDH@ZIF-67-800 exhibited an onset potential of 0.94 V, and a half-wave potential of 0.83 V, superior to Pt/C electrocatalyst tested in the same condition (Fig. 12c). In terms of the electron transfer number, a near four electron process with low HO2− yield was achieved on LDH@ZIF-67-800, as revealed by the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) data (Fig. 12d). Cobalt-based compounds, such as oxides, sulfides and phosphates, have also been investigated as ORR active materials in MOF-derived carbons.103,214–217 Zhou et al.214 reported an ORR electrocatalyst of carbon-supported cobalt phosphate, which was derived from a Co-based MOF with phosphonate-based ligand. This electrocatalyst, named as Co3(PO4)2C-N/rGOA, showed a morphology of cobalt phosphate nanoparticles uniformly embedded in the carbon sheet. The cobalt phosphate was coordinated with N atoms from MOF ligands, which improved the ORR activity of the electrocatalyst. The ORR half-wave potential of Co3(PO4)2C-N/rGOA was 0.837 V, slightly more negative than Pt/C, as revealed by the LSV tests in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 12e). The electron transfer number was calculated using K–L equation. Based on the data from ORR LSV plots measured at different rotating rates (Fig. 12f), the electron transfer number was revealed to be ∼4.0 at 0.60–0.75 V. Cobalt-based nanoparticles which serve as the ORR active materials in MOF-derived carbon materials also include cobalt-containing composites.55,124,218–221 Recently, Xiong et al.221 designed a family of bimetallic-MOF-derived CoFe alloys embedded in carbon for ORR electrocatalysis. ZnCo bimetallic MOFs with different Zn/Co ratios were synthesized and carbonized. Then Fe ions were introduced to form CoFe alloy nanoparticles. The electrocatalyst with the best ORR performance, which was derived from the MOF precursor with a Zn/Co ratio of 6:1 (Zn6Co_Fe), exhibited an ORR half-wave potential of 0.89 V and a high electron transfer number over 3.9 in O2-saturated 0.1 M NaOH electrolyte (Fig. 12g and h). As can be seen from the above works, MOF-derived carbon materials with cobalt-based nanoparticles are a group of materials that are favourable for efficient ORR electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 12  MOF-derived carbon-based materials with metal-based nanoparticles for ORR electrocatalysis. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of LDH@ZIF-67-800 exhibiting a porous honeycomb-like carbon-based framework embedded with Co nanoparticles. (c) ORR LSV plots in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 and electrode rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (d) Peroxide yield and electron transfer number of LDH@ZIF-67-800 and Pt/C catalyst based on RRDE data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) ORR performance of MOF-derived carbon material with cobalt phosphate. (e) LSV plots obtained in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a rotating rate of 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (f) LSV plots at different rotating rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g and h) ORR performance of bimetallic-MOF-derived CoFe alloys embedded in carbon. (g) ORR LSV plots obtained in O2-saturated 0.1 M NaOH at 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (h) Calculated electron transfer number and peroxide yield from RRDE data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
MOF-derived carbon materials with nanoparticles containing non-precious metals beyond cobalt have also demonstrated their activity in ORR electrocatalysis.127,225–230 As mentioned above, atomically dispersed Fe sites are well acknowledged as highly active ORR electrocatalysts. Similarly, Fe-based metallic and compound nanoparticles also showed favourable ORR activity.231,232 MOF-derived carbon-supported metallic iron, iron oxides and iron carbides have all been investigated as ORR electrocatalysts.127,225–228 The carbon shell coated Fe/Fe3C composite nanoparticles derived from Prussian blue reported by Hou et al.127 exhibited a half-wave potential of 0.83 V and an electron transfer number of 3.08 at 0.7 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Gao et al.227 prepared a MIL-101-Fe-derived N-doped-carbon-coated Fe3O4 electrocatalyst. The potential to achieve 3 mA cm−2 ORR current density was 35 mV more positive than Pt/C electrocatalyst. However, the type and concentration of the electrolyte in the Hg/HgO reference electrode which was used in this work were not mentioned. Therefore, the half-wave potential relative to RHE cannot be calculated. ORR electrocatalysis on Cu-containing MOF-derived carbons was also reported. Lai et al.230 synthesized N-doped carbon polyhedra with trapped Cu ions and Cu nanoparticles through the pyrolysis of Cu-doped ZIF-8. An ORR half-wave potential of 0.813 V was achieved on this electrocatalyst in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte.
As a summary, the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction reaction is one of the important applications of MOF-derived carbon-based materials. Typical active sites in MOF-derived carbon-based materials for ORR include N heteroatom doping, Pt-based sites, atomic Fe sites and Co-containing nanoparticles. High ORR half-wave potentials up to more than 0.9 V vs. RHE and electron transfer numbers close to 4 can be achieved on these electrocatalysts. The controllable morphology of the conductive carbon matrix and the uniformly distribution of active sites are key features for MOF-derived carbon-based materials to deliver high ORR activity.

4. MOF-derived carbon-based materials for OER
Efficient oxygen evolution electrocatalysis is crucial for various energy-related processes, including electrochemical water splitting, rechargeable metal–air batteries, and so on. The reaction equations of oxygen evolution reaction in alkaline/acidic solutions are as follows:
Alkaline conditions: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−(4.1)
Acidic conditions: 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−(4.2)
The evaluation parameters for OER include onset potential, the potential to achieve 10 mA cm−2 current density (E10, or the overpotential η10), Tafel slope, etc. The use of E10 to evaluate OER activity originated from the researches on solar water-splitting. In a solar water-splitting device, a total overpotential for OER and HER of ∼0.45 V at 10 mA cm−2 is required to achieve 10% solar energy utilization efficiency.233 Then in electrochemical OER and HER catalysis, E10 continued to be adopted as an benchmark for the activity evaluation of electrocatalysts. The Tafel slope is calculated from the Tafel plot, which shows the relationship between the overpotential and the logarithm of current density to base 10. A lower Tafel slope reflects better kinetics of OER.
Similar to ORR, OER is a complicated four-electron process which contains several steps of elementary reactions. In an electrochemical system, the rate-determining step of ORR and OER may be different. Therefore, although OER is the reverse process of ORR, with the same equilibrium potential of 1.23 V, the types of active materials for OER and ORR electrocatalysis are usually different. In this section, MOF-derived carbon-based materials with active materials that are favourable for OER will be introduced.
4.1 MOF-derived metal-free carbon materials for OER
Carbon-based metal-free materials have been demonstrated to provide active sites with OER activity, including heteroatom-doping and defects.182,234–236 However, oxygen evolution reaction requires high oxidation potential, which may lead to the oxidation of carbon materials. Moreover, the bubbles generated during the OER process can cause the collapse of carbon morphology. Therefore, the catalysis of OER is conducted in a harsher environment than ORR. In the synthesis of metal-free carbon materials from MOFs, Zn-based MOFs are most frequently used as the precursor. As the Zn evaporates at high temperature in the pyrolysis process, there is an absence of metals and metal oxides which could catalyze the graphitization of carbon, resulting in low graphitization degree,237,238 and thus low stability in OER. Therefore, compared with ORR, there are not so many reports on MOF-derived carbon-based metal-free materials for OER electrocatalysis.171,239,240 In this section, the OER performances of some of these electrocatalysts are introduced.
In the research on metal-free electrocatalysts for OER, the doping of heteroatoms was most widely studied to provide the electrocatalytic activity, as in the case of ORR, while OER and ORR are considered to be catalyzed by different types of heteroatom doping. A study by Yang et al.179 indicated that in N-doped carbon materials, electron-donating quaternary N (graphitic N) is favourable for ORR, and electron-withdrawing pyridinic N and CO afford the activity for OER. In this consideration, Lei et al.239 prepared an N-doped carbon material by the routine ZIF-8 carbonization method, and then a cathodic polarization treatment was applied to regulate the content of surface functional groups, thus achieving high OER activity. The pyrolyzed product of ZIF-8 (denoted as ZIF-8-C0) was treated in 0.5 M H2SO4 at −2 V vs. saturated calomel electrode (SCE) for 2, 4, 6 and 8 hours to obtain ZIF-8-C2–C8. XPS analysis was then conducted to characterize the relative abundance of different N and O species in ZIF-8-C0–C8 (Fig. 13a and b). Among these MOF-derived carbon materials, ZIF-8-C4 showed the highest pyridinic N and CO content. Accordingly, the best OER performance was achieved on ZIF-8-C4 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 13c), with an E10 of 1.71 V. The relationship between the abundance of different functional groups on ZIF-8-derived carbon electrocatalysts and their OER performances in Fig. 13d confirmed the key role of pyridinic N and CO in improving the OER activity of carbon materials.
 Fig. 13  ZIF-8-derived N-doped carbon material as an OER electrocatalyst. Relative abundances of different (a) N and (b) O configurations in ZIF-8-derived carbon materials obtained from XPS data. (c) OER LSV plots of ZIF-8-C0–C8 and IrO2 electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. (d) The relationship between the abundance of different functional groups and the OER performance of ZIF-8-derived carbon materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to N heteroatoms, other types of heteroatoms were also introduced into MOF-derived carbon materials to enhance the OER activity. The doping of different heteroatoms can induce the formation of various active sites with different electrocatalytic activities. Thus, carbon materials with high OER activity can be obtained by the rational regulation on the type of heteroatom doping. Qian et al.171 reported a B and N co-doped carbon material derived from a Zn-MOF precursor for OER electrocatalysis. Sodium tetrakis(1-imidazolyl)borate (B- and N-containing), imidazole (N-containing) and 1,4-benzenebicarboxlic acid were utilized to form the organic moiety of the MOF precursor. Then the pyrolysis under the atmosphere of H2/Ar at varying temperatures transformed the MOF precursor into a series of B and N co-doped carbon-based electrocatalysts. Among these materials, the electrocatalyst with the best OER activity exhibited a low onset potential of 1.38 V in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, but the E10 was as high as ∼1.8 V. In the OER test performed in 6 M KOH electrolyte, the E10 was decreased to 1.55 V, but the current density dropped at high overpotential. These results indicated the high intrinsic activity of heteroatom-doped MOF-derived carbon, while the active material loading amount and the stability still needed to be improved to achieve high OER current density.
4.2 MOF-derived carbon-based materials with precious-metal-containing active sites for OER
Precious-metal-based materials are a group of highly active electrocatalysts, but there are only a few number of works that employ precious-metal-based materials in MOF-derived carbon-based materials for OER electrocatalysis.241–243 Here, we will give a brief introduction of the OER performances of some of these electrocatalysts. Yang et al.241 reported a Ru-based electrocatalyst from a Ru modified Cu-MOF. Through pyrolysis in N2, calcination in air and acid washing, the as-obtained electrocatalyst with Ru, Cu-doped RuO2 and amorphous carbon matrix was applied in OER electrocatalysis. In 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, the electrocatalyst delivered an η10 of only 204 mV, showing excellent OER activity. For Ir-based OER electrocatalysts, a Co@Ir core–shell nanostructure was prepared by immersing ZIF-67-derived carbon-supported Co nanoparticles into an IrCl3 solution, as reported by Li et al.243 The η10 of this electrocatalyst in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte was measured to be 280 mV. Extremely high OER performance can be achieved on precious-metal-based materials due to their superior intrinsic activity. For future researches, by taking full advantage of MOF materials, precious-metal-based OER electrocatalysts with both high activity and low loading amount can be expected.
4.3 MOF-derived carbon-based materials with non-precious metal-based active sites for OER
Metal-containing carbon materials constitute the majority of MOF-derived carbon-based OER electrocatalysts. Compared with carbon materials, metal-based materials can exhibit higher stability under OER potentials. Moreover, for some kinds of metal-based active materials including metal oxides, chalcogenides, nitrides and phosphides, the surface oxidation during OER process can further enhance their OER activity.244,245 Therefore, MOF-derived carbon-based materials for OER electrocatalysis were usually composed of metal-based active materials. However, for MOF-derived carbon materials with atomically dispersed metal sites, the main bodies of these materials are carbon materials. Therefore, MOF-derived carbons with atomic-level metal sites suffer from the issue of stability and have rarely been applied in OER electrocatalysis. In the following parts, MOF-derived carbon-based OER electrocatalysts with different types of metal-based nanoparticles are presented.

4.3.1 Metals and alloys. 
In the pyrolysis process of MOFs, the carbon or external reductive agents can reduce metal ions to metal or alloy nanoparticles, which are promising candidates to provide superior OER activity.246–251 The regulation of the type and ratio of metal ions in MOF precursors can affect the composition of metal/alloy nanoparticles in the pyrolysis product. Metal atoms in metal/alloy nanoparticles with different compositions possess different electronic structure and thus exhibit different OER activity. In this consideration, Yang et al.251 synthesized a series of carbon-coated metal and alloy nanoparticles containing Fe, Co and Ni from Prussian blue analogues with different metal ions. Among these materials, the electrocatalyst derived from the precursor synthesized with Fe, Co and Ni ions in a molar ratio of 3:4:3 exhibited the best OER activity. In 1 M KOH electrolyte, the η10 was 325 mV, and the Tafel slope was 60 mV dec−1.
Besides the composition of metal and alloy nanoparticles, the crystal structure can also influence the electronic structure. Recently, Wang et al.246 proposed a strategy to synthesize a rare crystal structure of hexagonal close-packed (hcp) NiFe nanoparticle (NP) encapsulated in a N-doped carbon (NC) shell (hcp-NiFe@NC) from MOF material as highly active OER electrocatalyst. Fe ions adsorbed Ni-MOF was prepared to serve as the precursor. The annealing of the MOF precursor with hexamethylenetetramine (HTMA) was then performed to convert the MOF precursor to carbon-coated NiFe alloy nanoparticles. The crystal structure of NiFe alloy nanoparticles was regulated by tuning the pyrolysis temperature. Under 400 °C pyrolysis, hcp-NiFe@NC was obtained, as characterized by the TEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern in Fig. 14a and the XRD pattern in Fig. 14b. When changing the pyrolysis temperature to 500 °C, conventional face-centered cubic (fcc) phase NiFe NPs coated by NC (fcc-NiFe@NC) were generated. In the OER test, instead of using a rotating disk electrode, the electrocatalyst was loaded on a 1 cm2 carbon cloth with a loading amount of 0.25 mg cm−2. In 1 M KOH electrolyte, hcp-NiFe@NC exhibited a much superior OER performance to fcc-NiFe@NC and commercial RuO2 electrocatalyst, with an η10 of 226 mV and Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1 (Fig. 14c and d). In a potentiostatic stability test at an initial current density of 20 mA cm−2, only a slight decay (less than 7.2%) was observed on hcp-NiFe@NC electrocatalyst after 35 h. In this work, the electronic structure of the active material was regulated by tuning the arrangement of Ni and Fe atoms in the alloy crystal, which was realized by simply changing the pyrolysis temperature of the MOF precursor.
 Fig. 14  NiFe alloy nanoparticles encapsulated in N-doped carbon shell from MOF material as an OER electrocatalyst. (a) TEM image of hcp-NiFe@NC. Inset: SAED pattern (scale bar is 5 1nm−1). (b) XRD pattern of hcp-NiFe@NC and the calculated XRD pattern of hcp structure. (c) OER LSV plots of carbon cloth electrodes loaded with different electrocatalysts, obtained in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (d) Tafel plots derived from the LSV plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


4.3.2 Metal oxides and hydroxides. 
Metal oxides and hydroxides like NiFe LDH,252 Co3O4,253 α-Ni(OH)2,254 and CoFe (oxy)hydroxides255 have demonstrated their OER activity. Therefore, in the study of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for OER, metal oxides and hydroxides were also investigated as active materials.62,90,91,256–258 For OER electrocatalysis, a 3D hierarchical porous architecture of the electrocatalyst is preferred for the fast release of oxygen bubbles.234 Therefore, Ma et al.62 designed Co3O4–carbon hybrid porous nanowire arrays (Co3O4C-NA) derived from MOF arrays for efficient OER electrocatalysis. Firstly, Co-naphthalenedicarboxylate MOF arrays were grown on a Cu foil through a hydrothermal process. Then the MOF precursor converted to Co3O4 and carbon hybrid under pyrolysis in N2, as illustrated in Fig. 15a. In the OER tests conducted in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, Co3O4C-NA exhibited an E10 of 1.52 V and a Tafel slope of 70 mV dec−1, better than Cu foil supported IrO2/C (with the same loading amount as Co3O4–carbon arrays), the carbon-free Co3O4 arrays (Co3O4-NA, obtained by the calcination of Co3O4C-NA in air) and the pristine MOF arrays (Fig. 15b and c). In the Co3O4C-NA electrocatalyst, Co3O4 provides high intrinsic activity for OER, and the nanowire array electrode configuration with in situ carbon incorporation leads to high active area, enhanced mass/charge transport and easy release of oxygen bubbles. In this way, through morphology design and pyrolysis of MOF material, a MOF-derived oxide/carbon composite with superior OER activity was obtained.
 Fig. 15  Co3O4–carbon hybrid porous nanowire arrays (Co3O4C-NA) derived from MOF arrays for OER electrocatalysis. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Co3O4C-NA. (b) Polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of Co3O4C-NA and control samples in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate 0.5 mV s−1). Inset in (b): optical image of Co3O4C-NA directly used as the OER electrode operating at 1.70 V with generated bubbles on the surface indicating the formation of O2 gas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
As metal hydroxides are not stable at high temperatures, it is hard to synthesize hydroxide/carbon hybrids through the direct pyrolysis of MOFs. Post-treatments after pyrolysis are usually required to incorporate metal hydroxides in MOF-derived carbons. For example, Li et al.257 synthesized a composite of N-doped carbon and FeOOH through the electrodeposition of FeOOH on ZIF-8-derived carbon material. The hybrid electrocatalyst was supported by Ni foam, achieving an OER current density of 100 mA−2 at an overpotential of only 230 mV. In this work, the carbon matrix of the electrocatalyst was derived from MOFs, and the FeOOH active material was grown on MOF-derived carbon after pyrolysis, from external metal source. Although not directly providing OER activity, the MOF-derived carbon materials played an important role in enhancing the electrical conductivity, exposing more active sites and reducing resistance for electrolyte diffusion.


4.3.3 Other metal compounds. 
In recent years, studies on the OER performance of metal chalcogenides, nitrides and phosphides are rapidly emerging.259–262 Although researches have indicated that the surface anions of these compounds could be replaced by O2− or OH− during the OER process,244,263,264 this oxygen incorporation process can be regarded as the anion regulation on the catalyst surface to further enhance the OER activity.265 Therefore, efficient OER electrocatalysis can be achieved on metal compounds including metal chalcogenides, nitrides and phosphides.
As mentioned above, the synthesis of metal compounds from MOFs requires precursors to contain corresponding atoms that are needed for the formation of the anions of the metal compounds. Co9S8 has long been recognized as an efficient OER electrocatalyst,266–268 and has also been reported to serve as the active material in MOF-derived carbon materials for OER electrocatalysis.269 In this work reported by Wu et al., CdS nanowires were applied as the sulfur source as well as the template to synthesis Co9S8 encapsulated carbon nanofibers from ZIF-67. Firstly, ZIF-67 nanoparticles were grown on CdS nanowires. Then in the pyrolysis process, ZIF-67 was converted to Co nanoparticles and N-doped carbon nanofibers. With the assistance of reductive carbon material, CdS was reduced to evaporative Cd metal, and the released S atoms led to the formation of Co9S8 and N,S co-doped carbon nanofibers (NSCFS). In the TEM (Fig. 16a) and HRTEM (Fig. 16b) images of the electrocatalyst prepared in 850 °C pyrolysis (Co9S8/NSCNFs-850), carbon nanofibers with voids are observed to be decorated with a large number of Co9S8 nanoparticles. This mesoporous morphology can facilitate the electrolyte permeation, gas release and active site exposure. In the OER tests conducted in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 16c and d), Co9S8/NSCNFs-850 exhibited a low η10 of 302 mV and Tafel slope of 54 mV dec−1, superior to commercial RuO2 electrocatalyst with the same loading amount (0.212 mg cm−2 on glassy carbon electrode). The morphology design of the carbon matrix and composition regulation of the active material are both crucial for MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts. In this work, CdS nanowires played an important role in both morphology and composition modulation of ZIF-67-derived materials, which consequently exhibited outstanding OER electrocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 16  Co9S8 encapsulated N,S co-doped carbon nanofibers (Co9S8/NSCNFs-850) derived from ZIF-67 as an OER electrocatalyst. (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of Co9S8/NSCNFs-850. (c) OER LSV plots and (d) Tafel plots measured in 1.0 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Other types of metal compounds were also studied in MOF-derived carbon-based OER electrocatalysts. Zhou et al.270 synthesized a hybrid of cobalt phosphate and N-doped carbon from a MOF material with P-containing linkers. In 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, the η10 of this electrocatalyst is only 267 mV (loading amount: 0.41 mg cm−2). When the MOF precursor was grown on Ni foam (NF), the NF-supported electrocatalyst with a higher loading amount of 1.25 mg cm−2 showed an even lower η10 of 215 mV. Kang et al.144 reported a MOF-derived Co3N@carbon OER electrocatalyst in which the N atoms originated from the CN− linkers of the MOF precursor and the NH3 gas introduced during pyrolysis. This electrocatalyst also exhibited outstanding OER activity with an η10 of 280 mV in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte.


4.3.4 Metal-based composites. 
In metal-based composite materials, the electronic structure of the metal sites at the interface of different materials differs from the sites in the bulk phase. Therefore, the electrocatalytic activity of metal-based materials can be enhanced by forming hybrids with each other. This strategy has also been applied on MOF-derived OER electrocatalysts with metal-based active material.89,271,272 A simple approach of the calcination of MOF-derived alloy nanoparticles in air was reported by Xu et al.89 to synthesis alloy@oxide core–shell structured OER electrocatalyst. The synthesis process includes the growth of ZnO microrod arrays on carbon fiber cloth (CFC), the hydrothermal growth of NiCo-MOF on ZnO, 800 °C pyrolysis in N2 and 300 °C calcination in air, as illustrated in Fig. 17a. The as-obtained material with 3D porous microrod arrays constructed by carbon-confined NiCo@NiCoO2 nanoparticles (NiCo@NiCoO2/C PMRAs) then served as an OER electrocatalyst in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. The OER LSV plots (Fig. 17b) and the Tafel plots (Fig. 17c) indicated that the NiCo@NiCoO2 core–shell composite possessed higher OER activity than single NiCo alloy and NiCo oxide electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 17  Carbon-confined NiCo@NiCoO2 core@shell nanoparticles derived from MOFs for OER electrocatalysis. (a) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of NiCo@NiCoO2/C PMRAs. (b) OER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots of NiCo@NiCoO2/C PMRAs and control samples obtained in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 2.0 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Using multimetallic MOF precursors is also a facile way to obtain metal-based composites. Hong et al.271 synthesized an OER electrocatalyst with carbon-supported Co phosphide, Fe phosphide and Fe carbide as active materials. This electrocatalyst was obtained through the pyrolysis of Fe–Co bimetallic MOF precursor and a following P-doing process at 300 °C with sodium hypophosphite as the phosphating agent. The η10 of this composite electrocatalyst was measured to be 362 mV in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. Huang et al.272 reported the pyrolysis of a hybrid Co–Mo MOF to prepare a composite material of CoOx, MoC and N-doped carbon. When applied as the OER electrocatalyst in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, the CoOx–MoC/NC material exhibited an η10 of 330 mV. In these works, by controlling the ratio of different metal ions in MOF precursors, the content of different active materials in the composite electrocatalysts can be changed, and thus a composite electrocatalyst with optimized OER activity can be obtained.
In summary, for OER electrocatalysis, besides the intrinsic activity, the catalysts are also required to exhibit high durability under OER test conditions. Therefore, for MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts, carbon matrix with high graphitization degree and the presence of metal-based components are preferred. Meanwhile, a porous morphology is also needed to benefit the transport of oxygen bubbles. Through rational design on the composition and morphology, MOF-derived carbon-based materials with metal and metal compounds as active materials can achieve high OER activity with η10 less than 300 mV, which are among the best performances for currently reported OER electrocatalysts.

5. MOF-derived carbon-based materials for HER
Hydrogen is a promising clean energy source for future energy applications. The electrolysis of water is an efficient and environmentally friendly way to produce hydrogen.273 The reaction process of hydrogen evolution is as below:
Alkaline conditions: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−(5.1)
Acidic conditions: 2H+ + 2e− → H2(5.2)
The equilibrium potential of HER is 0 V vs. RHE. Frequently used parameters to evaluate the activity of HER electrocatalysts include the onset potential, E10 (or η10), and the Tafel slope, similar to those of OER electrocatalysts.
Unlike ORR and OER processes, in which the oxygen atoms in the intermediates are adsorbed on the active sites, for HER, hydrogen intermediates (H*) are adsorbed on the active sites during the reaction. Therefore, the selection of active materials for HER is based on their hydrogen adsorption energy. Studies on the mechanism of HER have revealed that active sites with the H* adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) of 0 can afford the best HER activity.274 Among the reported HER electrocatalysts, Pt-based materials are acknowledged to be most active for HER with a near-zero onset overpotential.273 For precious-metal-free electrocatalysts, as summarized from previous reports,273,275,276 active materials for HER exhibit following characteristics that are different from ORR and OER electrocatalysis: (1) more Mo- and W-based materials; (2) more metal compounds other than oxides and hydroxides, such as nitrides, phosphides and chalcogenides. More details of the active materials used in MOF-derived carbon-based materials for HER electrocatalysis will be discussed in the following sections.
5.1 MOF-derived metal-free carbon materials for HER
Although carbon materials have demonstrated their activity towards HER electrocatalysis,180,181,277 there are only few works focusing on metal-free HER electrocatalysts derived from MOFs. Therefore, future explorations are desired in the field of MOF-derived metal-free carbon materials for HER electrocatalysis. For the reported works in this field, good HER performances have been achieved. For example, in a work reported by Lei et al.,239 as discussed in Section 4.1, a series of N-doped carbon materials were synthesized by the pyrolysis of ZIF-8 and a following cathodic polarization treatment for different periods of time. The carbon material with the best HER activity exhibited a low η10 of 155 mV and Tafel slope of 54.7 mV dec−1. It is also worth noting that this electrocatalyst with the best HER activity is not the one with the best OER activity in Section 4.1, indicating that the requirements of active sites for OER and HER electrocatalysis are different.
Only recently, Lin et al.278 synthesized an HER electrocatalyst with metal-free active sites using the metal–organic framework Cu-BTC as a precursor. The Cu-BTC precursor was firstly pyrolyzed to form Cu/C composite. Then two successive solvothermal treatments with ammonium hydroxide were conducted to remove Cu particles and introduce N heteroatoms into the carbon material. The carbon material obtained under the first and second solvothermal reaction are named as S-1 and S-2, respectively. Interestingly, in the electrochemical test in N2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte with a Pt-free graphite rod as the counter electrode, the HER performance of the N-doped carbon material significantly enhanced during cyclic voltammetry (CV) cycling between −0.6 V and 0.1 V (Fig. 18a). In the case of S-2, after 8000 cycles, the carbon material (denoted as S-2-cycle) exhibited an HER η10 of only 57 mV, and a Tafel slope as low as 44.6 mV dec−1, close to those of Pt/C electrocatalyst (Fig. 18b and c). Based on 13C solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (SSNMR) measurements and calculations, a novel configuration of dual graphitic-N doping in a six-membered carbon ring was confirmed in S-2-cycle. Then density functional theory (DFT) calculations were conducted to characterize the ΔGH* of different N-doping structures in graphene (Fig. 18d). The model of carbon atom bonded to two graphitic N atoms (2-graphitic N) showed a ΔGH* value of 0.01 eV, indicating a high intrinsic HER activity of the dual graphitic-N doping structure in S-2-cycle. It needs to be pointed out that single Cu sites can be detected in this N-doped carbon material. However, the Cu sites are considered to only contribute to the structure transformation of the N-doped carbon, not directly influence the hydrogen adsorption properties on the carbon atoms. Therefore, this material can be regarded as an HER electrocatalyst with metal-free active sites.
 Fig. 18  N-Doped carbon material derived Cu-BTC as an HER electrocatalyst. (a) HER polarization curves of S-2 at different CV cycles. (b) HER polarization curves of S-2-cycle and control samples. (c) Tafel plots of different electrocatalyst. The electrochemical tests were conducted in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (d) HER free-energy diagram for different N-doping models. Reproduced with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
From the above works, given that good HER performances can be obtained on MOF-derived metal-free carbon materials, more attentions on MOF-derived metal-free HER electrocatalysts in the future are strongly encouraged.
5.2 MOF-derived carbon-based materials with precious-metal-containing active sites for HER
Besides Pt-based materials which are regarded as the most active materials for HER, other precious metals, including Ru, Ir, etc., have also been employed in HER electrocatalysts.279–281 In the research of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for HER, these precious metals were also investigated as active materials and exhibited excellent activity.282–284
Although commercial Pt/C is highly active HER electrocatalyst, it suffers from low stability caused by Pt nanoparticles ripening and aggregation during the electrocatalysis process. Therefore, Pt nanoparticles with smaller size and stronger interaction with the carbon support are desired for obtaining higher activity and stability. With this consideration, Ying et al.282 proposed a Pt-based HER electrocatalyst derived from Pt-encapsulated ZIF-8 with high activity and stability. In this electrocatalyst named as Pt@NHPCP, Pt nanoparticles were embedded in N-doped hollow porous carbon polyhedrons (Fig. 19a). A tannic acid layer was coated on Pt-encapsulated ZIF-8 before pyrolysis to induce the formation of hollow porous nanostructures with large surface area and fast mass transport. In the as-obtained Pt@NHPCP, Pt nanoparticles were highly dispersed and firmly anchored on the carbon support with the assistance of N dopants in carbon. Therefore, Pt@NHPCP exhibited outstanding HER performance in 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte with an E10 of −57.0 mV (Fig. 19b), which was better than commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst (−69.6 mV). After 5000 cycles of sweeping between 0 and −0.3 V at 100 mV s−1, the E10 of Pt/C decreased to −97.3 mV, while the E10 of Pt@NHPCP only showed a slight shift of 5.2 mV to −62.2 mV (Fig. 19c), indicating a significantly improved stability.
 Fig. 19  MOF-derived carbon-based materials with precious-metal-containing active sites for HER electrocatalysis. (a) HAADF-STEM image of Pt nanoparticles embedded in N-doped hollow porous carbon polyhedrons (Pt@NHPCP) derived from Pt-encapsulated ZIF-8. (b) HER LSV plots of Pt@NHPCP and Pt/C in 0.1 M HClO4 with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (c) Comparation of the HER performances of Pt@NHPCP and Pt/C before and after 5000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) TEM images of Ru-decorated hierarchical porous carbon (Ru-HPC) fabricated from CuRu bimetallic MOF. (e) HER LSV plots of Ru-HPC and control samples in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (f) Mass activity of Ru-HPC and Pt/C in 1.0M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 283. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
MOF-derived carbon-based HER electrocatalysts with precious metals beyond Pt were also reported.134,283–285 For example, Chen's group synthesized MOF-derived RuCo and IrCo alloy nanoparticles coated by N-doped graphene layers, respectively, for efficient HER electrocatalysis.134,285 It is worth noting that, for these two electrocatalysts, in the HER electrocatalysis process, hydrogen atoms were adsorbed on the carbon atoms, which acted as the active sites for HER. However, the precious-metal-based nanoparticles played a key role in regulating the hydrogen adsorption properties of carbon atoms, thus contributing to enhanced HER performances. A MOF-derived carbon-based HER electrocatalyst with Ru as the actual active site was also reported by Qiu et al.283 In this work, a Ru-decorated hierarchical porous carbon (Ru-HPC) material was fabricated from CuRu bimetallic MOF, and its TEM image is presented in Fig. 19d. Cu particles with size of hundreds of nanometers and Ru nanoparticles with size of several nanometers were evenly distributed in the carbon matrix after the pyrolysis of the MOF precursor. Then the Cu particles were removed by FeCl3 solutions to generate macropores on the carbon matrix. The Ru-HPC electrocatalyst exhibited an ultralow overpotential of 22.7 mV to achieve a current density of 25 mA cm−2 (normalized by the geometrical surface area of the electrode) in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, better than commercial Pt/C (Fig. 19e). Moreover, the current density on Ru-HPC showed negligible degradation after 10 h amperometric current–time test. When considering the current density based on the mass of precious metal, Ru-HPC delivered a mass current density of 7.8 A mgRu−1 at an overpotential of 50 mV, 16 times higher than Pt/C (0.46 A mgPt−1, Fig. 19f). Thus, a precious-metal-based HER electrocatalyst with excellent activity, long durability and high Ru atom utilization efficiency was obtained via the rational design and treatment of MOF material.
5.3 MOF-derived carbon-based materials with non-precious metal-based active sites for HER
Non-precious metal-based materials have been widely applied as HER electrocatalysts and have shown the potential to exhibit Pt-like HER performance.273 In this section, commonly investigated non-precious metal-based active materials for HER in MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts will be introduced.

5.3.1 Atomically dispersed metal sites. 
As discussed above, the atomically dispersed metal sites in carbon can improve the utilization efficiency of metal atoms and the stability in acidic electrolyte. MOF precursors, which are favourable for the formation of atomically dispersed metal sites, have been studied to synthesize HER electrocatalysts with atomic-level active sites in carbon.158,286 In 2016, Fan et al.286 reported the first MOF-derived atomic metal-doped carbon electrocatalyst for HER. A Ni-MOF was carbonized and then treated by acid leaching and electrochemical activation to obtain the carbon-based electrocatalyst with atomically isolated Ni species, which was named as A-Ni–C. The HAADF-STEM image of A-Ni–C confirmed the atomic distribution of Ni species (Fig. 20a). Statistics based on >120 observed Ni species in HAADF-STEM images indicated that single-atom Ni sites were in the majority, and the residual part of Ni species was recognized as atomic nano clusters. In an acidic electrolyte of 0.5 M H2SO4, A-Ni–C exhibited excellent HER performance with an E10 of −34 mV and a Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1, which were comparable to commercial Pt/C (Fig. 20b and c). MOF-derived carbon materials with atomic metal sites were also investigated for alkaline HER electrocatalysis. As introduced in Section 2.2.3, a MOF-derived carbon material with single W atom was reported by Chen et al.,158 and this material (named as W-SA) was then applied as an HER electrocatalyst in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. The η10 of W-SA (85 mV) was close to that of Pt/C (78 mV), and the HER performance of W-SA showed no appreciable degradation after 10000 CV cycles between 0 and −0.15 V.
 Fig. 20  MOF-derived carbon material with atomically isolated Ni species (A-Ni–C) as an HER electrocatalyst. (a) HAADF-STEM image of A-Ni–C. Inset: The size distribution figure based on >120 observed Ni species counted from high-magnification images. (b) HER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots in 0.5M H2SO4 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 


5.3.2 Metals and alloys. 
Metal and alloy nanoparticles can be simply obtained in the pyrolysis process of MOFs via the reduction of metal ions by carbon or other reducing agents. From the above discussions, it can be seen that metal and alloy nanoparticles have demonstrated their activity in both ORR and OER electrocatalysis. As for HER, MOF-derived carbon materials with metal or alloy nanoparticles were also studied.125,287,288 A MOF-derived carbon material encapsulated with Co nanoparticles was reported by Chen et al.288 to serve as an HER electrocatalyst. Graphene oxide (GO) sheets wrapped by ZIF-8@ZIF-67 core–shell crystals were synthesized as the precursor. The pyrolysis at 900 °C in Ar flow then converted the MOF precursor to Co-encapsulated N-doped carbon nanotubes (Co@N-CNTs), and transformed GO to reduced graphene oxide (rGO). As illustrated by Fig. 21a, Co@N-CNTs were grafted on both sides of rGO, generating a sandwich-like structure, denoted as Co@N-CNTs@rGO. The Co@N-CNTs@rGO electrocatalyst exhibited an η10 of 108 mV and a Tafel slope of 55 mV dec−1 in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 21b and c). Moreover, the η10 showed only negligible decay after 1000 CV cycles (Fig. 21d). DFT calculations revealed that the adsorption of hydrogen on Co was too strong, and the combination of Co clusters and N-doped carbon could regulate the hydrogen adsorption energy to near 0, leading to an improved HER activity. A work by Zhang et al.287 with MOF-derived Co nanoparticles in carbon cage as HER electrocatalyst also confirmed that the interaction with heteroatom-doped carbon could weaken the adsorption of hydrogen on cobalt and thus enhance the HER activity.
 Fig. 21  MOF-derived Co-encapsulated N-doped carbon nanotubes on rGO (Co@N-CNTs@rGO) as an HER electrocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of the sandwich-like structure of Co@N-CNTs@rGO. (b) HER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (d) The comparison of the 1st and 1000th LSV curve of Co@N-CNTs@rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


5.3.3 Mo- and W-based compounds. 
Mo- and W-based compounds, especially chalcogenides, have long been recognized as highly active electrocatalysts for HER.289–293 When preparing Mo- and W-based HER electrocatalysts from MOFs, as MOFs with Mo or W atoms as metal nodes were rarely investigated, Mo and W atoms were usually introduced into the material from additional precursors.138,158,294–297 In these works, besides chalcogenides,294 various other types of Mo- and W-based compounds including oxides,295 nitrides,296 phosphides297 and carbides138 were also reported. Fig. 22 gives an example of MOF-derived tungsten carbide nanoparticles embedded in N-doped nanoporous carbon (WC@NPC) for HER electrocatalysis.138 A Zn-based zeolitic metal-azolate framework material was utilized to encapsulate W(CO)6via a vapor adsorption treatment. After pyrolysis, ultrasmall WC nanoparticles embedded in carbon substrate can be observed in the HRTEM image (Fig. 22a). Electrochemical tests conducted in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte indicated the high HER activity and stability of the WC@NPC electrocatalyst (Fig. 22b–d). The η10 and Tafel slope were measured to be 51 mV and 49 mV dec−1, respectively. The HER LSV curve of WC@NPC did not show obvious change after a potentiostatic test at an overpotential of 50 mV for 5 h. The high intrinsic HER activity of the composite of WC and N-doped graphene were also confirmed by DFT calculations.
 Fig. 22  MOF-derived tungsten carbide nanoparticles embedded in N-doped nanoporous carbon (WC@NPC) for HER electrocatalysis. (a) HRTEM image of WC@NPC. (b) HER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (d) Stability test of WC@NPC at a constant potential. Inset: HER LSV curves before and after stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Besides carbides, the pyrolysis of MOFs containing Mo- or W-based precursors can also derive corresponding oxides, and further treatments can transform oxides to other types of compounds.295–297 Moreover, Mo- and W-based compounds can also be deposited on the MOF-derived carbons after pyrolysis.294 Through these synthesis strategies, Mo- and W-based compounds with high HER activity can be incorporated into MOF-derived carbon materials and exhibit excellent HER performance.


5.3.4 Other transition metal nitrides, phosphides and chalcogenides. 
For the commonly investigated transition metal elements for electrocatalysis, including Fe, Co and Ni, their most reported compounds for HER electrocatalysis contain nitrides, phosphides and chalcogenides, especially phosphides.273,298–300 Metal phosphides are able to possess favourable hydrogen adsorption free energy, and are also possible to exhibit good electrical conductivity.299 Therefore, in a large number of researches on MOF-derived carbon-based materials for HER, Fe, Co or Ni phosphides were chosen as the active material.58,121,122,301–303 Recently, Lu et al.58 synthesized carbon-supported Ni-doped FeP materials from MOFs as HER electrocatalysts, and the origin of the HER activity of the materials was also studied. Ni-doped MIL-88A was treated by phytic acid and then pyrolyzed under Ar and H2 to obtain Ni-doped FeP/C hollow nanorods. With different Ni/Fe ratios in the MOF synthesis, three Ni-doped FeP/C samples were prepared and denoted as NFP/C-1, NFP/C-2 and NFP/C-3, respectively. The LSV plots measured in 0.5 M H2SO4 (Fig. 23a) showed that the η10 of the best electrocatalyst (NFP/C-3) was 72 mV, much smaller than the FeP/C electrocatalyst without Ni doping. The HER tests in 1.0 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 1.0 M KOH solution were also conducted, and superior activities of NFP/C-3 in neutral and alkaline conditions were confirmed. The NFP/C-3 electrocatalyst was also demonstrated to exhibit good stability by the chronopotentiometric measurements at a constant HER current density of 10 mA cm−2 in acidic, neutral and alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 23b). Then the key role of Ni doping on weakening the too strong hydrogen adsorption on pure FeP was verified by XPS analyses and DFT calculations.
 Fig. 23  HER performances of MOF-derived carbon-based materials with metal phosphides, nitrides and chalcogenides. (a) HER LSV curves of MOF-derived Ni-doped FeP/C electrocatalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4. (b) Chronopotentiometry curves at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2 for 12 hours of NFP/C-3 in 0.5 M H2SO4, 1.0 M PBS, and 1.0 M KOH solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) HER LSV curves of MOF-derived NiCoN/C nanocages and control samples in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (d) Chronoamperometry curves at overpotential of 200 mV of NiCoN/C nanocages and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) HER LSV curves of CoSe2@DC and control samples in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (f) Chronoamperometric curves CoSe2@DC. Inset: The polarization curves of CoSe2@DC before and after 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Transition metal nitrides and chalcogenides derived from MOFs for HER are also attracting attentions. Lai et al.141 reported ZIF-67-derived NiCo nitrides/carbon complex nanocages (NiCoN/C nanocages) as an HER electrocatalyst. ZIF-67 nanocubes were treated by Ni(NO3)2 solution and then annealed under NH3 atmosphere to be converted to NiCoN/C nanocages. The nitride-based electrocatalyst exhibited an overpotential of 142 mV to achieve 20 mA cm−2 current density in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, 34 mV lower than Pt/C (Fig. 23c). The stability tests at a constant overpotential of 200 mV showed a better stability of NiCoN/C nanocages than Pt/C (Fig. 23d). For chalcogenides, as reported by Zhou et al.,96 ZIF-67-derived Co nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanotubes were calcined in air and then with selenium powders to obtain CoSe2 nanoparticles embedded in defective carbon nanotubes (denoted as CoSe2@DC). An E10 of −132 mV was obtained on CoSe2@DC in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte, which is better than the electrocatalyst with Co and Co3O4 as active materials (Fig. 23e). The continuous amperometric i–t testing and long-time CV cycling both suggested CoSe2@DC to be stable under HER test conditions (Fig. 23f).
To briefly conclude, various types of MOF-derived carbon-based HER electrocatalysts with outstanding performance have been proposed. For HER electrocatalysis in acidic condition, some state-of-the-art MOF-derived carbon-based materials can achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at overpotentials less than 100 mV. For HER electrocatalysis in alkaline electrolyte, H2O or OH− would be the reacting species, and the kinetics of the transformation from H2O/OH− to H* is much lower than the transformation from H+ to H* in acidic electrolyte.304,305 Therefore, HER performances in alkaline media are usually inferior to those in acidic media, which is consistent with the works introduced above. For further studies on MOF-derived carbon-based materials for HER, more attentions are expected to be paid on improving the HER activity in alkaline condition.

6. MOF-derived carbon-based materials for multifunctional electrocatalysis
The high demand for multifunctional electrocatalysts is due to their applications in energy devices, for example, ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts for metal–air batteries, OER/HER bifunctional electrocatalysts for water electrolyzers, etc. Although ORR, OER and HER have different requirements for electrocatalysts, through rational design, one electrocatalyst can be featured with high activity for two or more of these reactions. In this section, MOF-derived carbon-based materials with multiple activities for ORR, OER or HER are overviewed. The performances of corresponding energy devices are also mentioned.
6.1 ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalysis
Metal–air batteries are known as promising future energy devices for their high theoretical capacity. In the air electrode of aqueous metal–air batteries, ORR takes place in the discharge process, and OER occurs during charge. Therefore, bifunctional ORR and OER electrocatalysts are required on the air electrode to reduce the overpotentials in the discharge and charge process of metal–air batteries. For ORR and OER electrocatalysts, their intrinsic activity depends on the adsorption energy of the oxygen-containing intermediates on the active sites. The adsorption energies of the intermediates have linear scaling relations between each other, which prevent a single active site to achieve the highest activity for both ORR and OER, as revealed by theoretical analyses on ORR and OER mechanisms.306 By choosing proper catalyst systems and applying rational regulations, the scaling relationships are able to be changed, and electrocatalysts with both improved ORR and OER activity can be obtained.47,306
To evaluate the ORR/OER bifunctional activity of an electrocatalyst, the potential gap (ΔE) between the E10 for OER and the E1/2 for ORR has been widely adopted as the evaluation benchmark. The bifunctional activity can also be characterized by applying the electrocatalyst onto the air electrode of an aqueous metal–air battery. From the discharge/charge polarization curves and galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of metal–air batteries, the charge–discharge voltage gap and the round-trip efficiency can be obtained, which reflect the activity of the ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalyst on the air electrode.307
As precious-metal-based electrocatalysts generally only exhibit single activity towards ORR or OER, the reported bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalysts are majorly non-precious-metal materials.47,308 For MOF-derived carbon-based ORR/OER electrocatalysts, various types of non-precious-metal active materials have been investigated, including nanocarbons,171,240 atomic metal sites,152,309 metals/alloys,79,94,95,99,106,140,310–323 oxides62,94,129,322–326 and other metal compounds.140,327,328 Among these electrocatalysts, Co-based active materials are one of the most widely investigated active materials, because the oxidation states of cobalt atoms under ORR and OER potential can be different, thus exhibiting bifunctional activity.329 Through the addition of other metal ions or anions, the electronic structure of Co atoms can be further regulated, leading to enhanced bifunctional activity.330–332 In the case of MOF-derived electrocatalysts, the synthesis and composition regulation of Co-based materials can be easily realized through the design of MOF precursors. Therefore, the MOF-based synthesis is an effective and facile way to obtain highly active ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts.

Fig. 24 gives an example of the design and characterization of a MOF-derived carbon-based ORR/OER electrocatalyst with CoFe alloy as the active material.313 Guest Fe ions were introduced into core–shell ZIF-8@ZIF-67 nanoparticles to modulate the morphology and electrocatalytic activity of the pyrolysis product. Firstly, ZIF-67 was grown on ZIF-8 seeds to form the core–shell structure. Then Fe ions were introduced into the MOF crystals by mixing X mg (X = 5, 10, 20) Fe(NO3)3 and 300 mg ZIF-8@ZIF-67 in n-hexane. Finally, the MOF precursors were pyrolyzed and then washed by acid to obtain CoFe alloy decorated carbon cages (CoFeX@CC) as ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts. With an increasing amount of Fe, more carbon nanotubes were grown, gradually connecting the MOF-derived carbon cages to form a hierarchical superstructure with larger surface area. The SEM and TEM images of CoFe20@CC are presented in Fig. 24a–c. The connected carbon cages, plenty of CNTs and carbon-coated CoFe alloy nanoparticles can be observed. The ORR and OER performances of Co@CC (derived from ZIF-8@ZIF-67 without Fe doping) and CoFeX@CC were tested in 0.1 M KOH and 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, respectively. Among these electrocatalysts, CoFe20@CC exhibited the best bifunctional activity of an E1/2 of 0.86 V, an E10 of 1.52 V and a ΔE as low as 0.66 V (Fig. 24d and e). This superior ORR/OER bifunctional activity can be attributed to the unique hierarchical superstructure and the synergetic effect between Fe and Co.
 Fig. 24  A MOF-derived carbon-based material for ORR and OER bifunctional electrocatalysis. (a and b) SEM images, and (c) TEM image of CoFe20@CC with hierarchically porous superstructure. (d) ORR LSV plots of MOF-derived carbon cages in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at 5 mV s−1 and a rotating speed of 1600 rpm. (e) OER LSV plots in Ar-saturated 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (f) Discharge polarization curves and corresponding powder density plots of Zn–air batteries. (g) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of CoFe20@CC and Pt/C + IrO2 at 5 mA cm−2 for 400 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Demonstrated as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for ORR and OER, CoFe20@CC was then employed as the air electrode electrocatalyst in a Zn–air battery. A Zn plate was used as the metal electrode, and a solution of 6.0 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2 served as the electrolyte. The discharge polarization curves presented in Fig. 24f showed the discharge properties of Zn–air batteries with different air electrode electrocatalysts. The discharge property of a Zn–air battery largely depends on the ORR activity of the air electrode electrocatalyst. The small polarization overpotential and high power density of CoFe20@CC are consistent with the result of ORR tests. In some works, the charge polarization curves are also tested to characterize the OER activity of the electrocatalysts.47 The galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves are shown in Fig. 24g, which were obtained by alternately applying a constant discharge and charge current density. The voltage gap between the charge and discharge voltages and the round-trip efficiency (calculated by dividing the discharge voltage by the charge voltage) are commonly used to evaluate the rechargeability of a Zn–air battery, and also reflect the ORR/OER bifunctional activity of the air electrode electrocatalyst. In this work, CoFe20@CC exhibited an initial voltage gap of ∼0.96 V and an initial round-trip efficiency of ∼54.3% at a current density of 5 mA cm−2. After 400 cycles for over 130 cycles, the performance was even improved, with a voltage gap of ∼0.84 V and a round-trip efficiency of 58.0%. The improvement of the Zn–air battery performance can be attributed to the better infiltration of the electrocatalyst after cycling.
As presented above, MOF-derived carbon-based materials can exhibit excellent bifunctional activity towards ORR and OER electrocatalysis. Through separate ORR and OER tests, as well as metal–air battery tests, the high activity of the bifunctional electrocatalysts can be fully demonstrated.
6.2 OER/HER bifunctional electrocatalysis
The main application of OER/HER bifunctional electrocatalysts is electrochemical water splitting. An electrocatalyst with both low OER and HER overpotential can effectively reduce the energy consumption of the water electrolyzer. The difference between the E10 of OER and HER, and the voltage to achieve a certain current density (usually 10 mA cm−2) in a water electrolyzer are commonly used to evaluate the OER/HER bifunctional activity of an electrocatalyst. MOF-derived carbon-based materials for overall water splitting are mainly with metal-based active sites which have been investigated in both OER and HER electrocatalysis, such as precious metals,241–243,283 non-precious metals/alloys,59,64,126,250,251,333–336 Co-based phosphides,69,100,337,338 Mo-based carbides,135,339,340etc.59,64,334 In a recent work by Zhao et al.,334 a composite of Fe–Ni bimetallic MOF (MIL-88-Fe/Ni) and dicyandiamide (DCDA) was utilized as the precursor for the synthesis of an OER/HER bifunctional electrocatalyst. The pyrolysis product of this precursor was composed of FeNi3 and FeNi2O4 embedded in N-doped carbon–CNT matrix, denoted as Fe–Ni@NC-CNTs. In 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, the Fe–Ni@NC-CNTs electrocatalyst exhibited η10 of 274 mV for OER and 202 mV for HER (Fig. 25a and b). The OER and HER performances were competitive to commercial Ir/C and Pt/C electrocatalyst, respectively. Typical evaluation methods of an OER/HER bifunctional electrocatalyst in a water electrolyzer were also presented in this work (Fig. 25c–f). As illustrated in Fig. 25c, Fe–Ni@NC-CNTs supported by Ni foam was used as both the anode and cathode of the electrolyzer. At a cell voltage of 1.98 V, with a current density of 145 mA cm−2, the performance of Fe–Ni@NC-CNTs exceeded the electrolyzer with Ir/C as anode and Pt/C as cathode (Fig. 25d). The stability was demonstrated by operating the water electrolyzer at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2 for 40000 s (Fig. 25e). By measuring the volume of O2 and H2 gases during the chronopotentiometry test, a faradaic efficiency of approximately 100% for both OER and HER can be confirmed (Fig. 25f).
 Fig. 25  A MOF-derived carbon-based material for OER and HER bifunctional electrocatalysis. (a) OER LSV plots and (b) HER LSV plots of MOF-derived bifunctional electrocatalysts and precious-metal-based electrocatalysts in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (c) Schematic illustration of a water electrolyzer. (d) Polarization curves of water electrolyzers. Inset: Photograph of a two-electrode configuration water electrolyzer. (e) Chronoamperometry curve of Fe–Ni@NC-CNT at 10 mA cm−2 with a catalyst loading 1.0 mg cm−2 (geo). Inset: LSV curves before and after 40000 s durability test. (f) O2 and H2 yield as a function of water splitting time for Fe–Ni@NC-CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
6.3 ORR/HER bifunctional electrocatalysis
Unlike ORR/OER and OER/HER bifunctional electrocatalysts, there is a lack of practical applications for ORR/HER bifunctional electrocatalysts. Therefore, only few works have reported MOF-derived carbon-based materials with ORR/HER bifunctional activity.117,341–343 In these works, the ORR and HER performances were separately measured, and the bifunctional activity was not evaluated in devices. For example, Zhang et al.343 synthesized Co9S8 nanoparticles embedded in N,S-codoped carbon from ZIF-8/cobalt thiourea composite precursor, which exhibited bifunctional activity towards both ORR and HER. An ORR half-wave potential of 0.85 V (in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH) and an HER η10 of 173 mV (in 1.0 M KOH) were achieved on this electrocatalyst. DFT calculations were also performed to verify the high activity of Co sites for ORR and S sites for HER in this Co9S8-based material. As introduced in the section of composition regulation of MOF-derived carbon-based materials, Wang et al.117 prepared MOF-derived Cu3P nanoparticles coated by a N,P-codoped carbon shell. This material also exhibited ORR/HER bifunctional activity. The E1/2 for ORR was measured to be 0.78 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, and the η10 for HER was only 89 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Electrocatalysts with both ORR and HER activity can be applied in more application scenarios than unifunctional ORR or HER electrocatalysts. However, the need for ORR/HER bifunctional electrocatalysts will not largely increase before an application requiring this type of electrocatalyst emerges.
6.4 ORR/OER/HER trifunctional electrocatalysis
Trifunctional electrocatalysts for ORR, OER and HER can be used in both aqueous metal–air batteries and water electrolyzers. Moreover, by connecting the metal–air battery and the water electrolyzer, a self-powered water splitting system can be obtained. The optimization of the electrocatalytic activities for ORR, OER and HER on one electrocatalyst is quite complicated. It is hard to achieve the best activity for all the three reactions simultaneously. For the design of active materials for ORR/OER/HER trifunctional electrocatalysts, materials which have shown bifunctional activity, such as carbon materials and transition-metal-based materials, were usually preferentially considered.181,344–347 For MOF-derived carbon-based materials, as metal-free carbons were rarely used for OER, the reported ORR/OER/HER trifunctional electrocatalysts were mainly with transition-metal-based active materials.97,139,348–354
In a recent work reported by Wei et al.,350 an excellent MOF-derived ORR/OER/HER trifunctional electrocatalyst with iron–nickel phosphide as active material was proposed. The electrocatalyst were prepared through the pyrolysis and further phosphidation treatment of a carefully designed open-capsular FeNi-MOF together with melamine. The as-obtained material exhibited a morphology of a nitrogen-doped carbon hollow (NCH) framework with iron–nickel phosphide (FeNiP) nanoparticles embedded in open capsular carbons interconnected by plentiful carbon nanotubes (FeNiP/NCH), as shown by the schematic illustration (Fig. 26a) and the TEM image (Fig. 26b). The LSV plots for OER, HER and ORR are shown in Fig. 26c, d and e, respectively. The ORR tests were performed in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, while the OER and HER performances were tested in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. As presented in the LSV plots, FeNiP/NCH exhibited a very low η10 for OER of 250 mV, and also good activity for ORR (E1/2 = 0.75 V) and HER (η10 = 216 mV). Then FeNiP/NCH was deposited on Ni foam to serve as both the anode and cathode of a water electrolyzer, which delivered a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of only 1.59 V (Fig. 26f). A Zn–air battery with FeNiP/NCH as the air electrode electrocatalyst was also fabricated (Fig. 26g). The discharge polarization curve indicated a peak power density as high as 250 mV cm−2 (Fig. 26h), much superior to that of Pt/C. The galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling test showed a voltage gap of only 0.66 V at 5 mA cm−2 (1.23 V for discharge and 1.89 V for charge), and good stability for over 500 h (Fig. 26i). Finally, a self-powered water splitting system with a water electrolyzer powered by two Zn–air batteries was presented to directly show the trifunctional activity of FeNiP/NCH.
 Fig. 26  A MOF-derived carbon-based trifunctional electrocatalyst for ORR, OER and HER. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of FeNiP/NCH. (b) TEM image of FeNiP/NCH. (c) OER and (d) HER LSV plots of FeNiP/NCH and control samples in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mA cm−2. Inset of (d): HER Tafel plots. (e) ORR LSV plots of FeNiP/NCH and control samples in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte with RDE rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (f) Polarization curve of a water electrolyzer with FeNiP/NCH as the electrocatalyst. Inset: Schematic illustration of a water electrolyzer. (g) Schematic illustration of a Zn–air battery. (h) Polarization curves and power density plots of Zn–air batteries with FeNiP/NCH and Pt/C as air electrode electrocatalysts, respectively. (i) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of rechargeable Zn–air batteries with FeNiP/NCH and Pt/C catalysts on Ni foam, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 350. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The development of green energy conversion and storage devices like metal–air batteries and water electrolyzers requires multifunctional electrocatalysts for ORR, OER and/or HER. The design of multifunctional electrocatalysts needs careful selection and precious regulation of the active materials. For the synthetic routes based on the pyrolysis of MOFs, the structure and composition of the carbonized product can be modulated by the engineering of metal nodes, organic linkers, encapsulated materials, pyrolysis conditions, and so on. Thus, the active materials can be regulated from multiple aspects to achieve high multifunctional activity.
7. Summary and outlook
Efficient electrocatalysts for ORR, OER and HER can greatly promote the development of energy conversion technologies. The research of MOFs as a platform for electrocatalyst synthesis has fostered the emergence of various carbon-based electrocatalysts with novel morphology and high activity. As summarized from the above discussions in this review, the carbon-based electrocatalysts were mostly obtained from the pyrolysis of MOF precursors under inert atmosphere. During the pyrolysis process, the organic moiety of MOF precursors transforms into carbon materials. Meanwhile, the metal moiety evaporates under high temperature, or remains in the carbon matrix in many possible forms, including atomically dispersed sites and metal-containing nanoparticles. By choosing proper MOF precursors, carbon- or metal-based active materials for ORR/OER/HER electrocatalysis can be obtained in the MOF-derived carbon-based materials. Moreover, the composition of the electrocatalyst can be further regulated through the introduction of additional precursors or the treatment after pyrolysis. The morphology of the electrocatalyst can also be regulated by the morphology design of MOF precursors, or the morphology evolution during/after pyrolysis. By these means, most of the commonly investigated active materials for ORR, OER and HER electrocatalysis have been obtained from the pyrolysis of MOFs, with favourable morphology for gas-evolving electrocatalysis and exhibiting top-level performances.
The development of electrocatalysts for ORR, OER and/or HER is still in progress. To realize practical applications of these electrocatalysts in energy devices, further decrease in overpotential and improvement on stability are required. The MOF-based carbonization strategy has shown the ability to generate novel types of carbon-based materials with high electrocatalytic activity, and is promising to give rise to electrocatalysts with better performance in the future. For the future development of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for ORR, OER and HER electrocatalysis, in the end of this article, some personal perspectives in this filed are presented, from the aspect of “MOF” (the design of MOF materials), “derive” (the carbonization process), “carbon-based materials” (characterizations of electrocatalysts) and “electrocatalysis” (requirements for MOF-derived carbon-based materials as electrocatalysts).
(i) The design of MOF materials. The design of MOF-derived materials starts from the design of MOFs. Reasonable regulations on MOF precursors can provide more possibilities to their derived electrocatalysts. As presented in the works introduced above, high-performance electrocatalysts have been proposed through the careful selection of metal nodes and organic linkers, the fabrication of novel MOF crystal structures, the well matching of MOF pore structures and encapsulated nanoparticles, and so on. The design on MOFs like these requires deep understanding of MOFs. Abundant fundamental knowledge about MOFs is essential for advanced innovations on MOF-derived electrocatalysts. In addition, for large-scale industrial production of MOF-derived materials, the development of low-cost and easily synthesized MOFs is also crucial. With this consideration, in recent years, progresses have been made on the industrial production of MOFs.355,356
(ii) The carbonization process. High-temperature pyrolysis is necessary for the transformation from MOFs to carbon-based materials. Meanwhile, the high temperature is also a harsh condition for material synthesis. The original pore structure of MOFs collapses during pyrolysis, and the newly formed pore structure inside the MOF-derived carbon matrix is hard to control. Therefore, it is challenging and worth investigating to realize controllable pore structure design in the carbon matrix during pyrolysis, which will significantly enhance the mass transport for electrocatalytic reactions. Moreover, due to the high temperatures during the carbonization treatment, materials with low thermostability cannot be directly obtained in MOF-derived carbon-based materials. Combined synthesis methods are recommended to incorporate these materials into MOF-derived carbon matrix, thus expanding the range of available active materials in MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts.
(iii) Characterizations of electrocatalysts. Detailed and precise characterizations on the structural features and electrocatalytic activity of the electrocatalysts are crucial for identifying the active sites, accurately evaluating the catalyst performance and providing guidance for future catalyst design. For the structural characterization of MOF-derived carbon-based materials, especially materials with atomically dispersed metal sites, advanced technologies like XAFS, HAADF-STEM are recommended to give more details about the material. In situ structural characterizations using Raman spectroscopy, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), etc., are also recommended to monitor the structural evolution of the electrocatalysts during electrochemical reactions. For the electrochemical tests, standard testing conditions and methods should be established and applied to obtain valuable data of the electrocatalytic activity. In this way, a work is able to serve as a good reference for other researchers in this field.
(iv) Requirements for MOF-derived carbon-based materials as electrocatalysts. The design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials for ORR, OER and HER should meet the requirements of the electrocatalysis of these reactions. To improve the performance of an electrocatalyst, the main factors that suppress the activity should be firstly identified, which may be the intrinsic activity of the active site, the loading amount of the active material, the gas transport, the electrical conductivity, the structural stability, and so on. Moreover, the corrosion of carbon in the electrocatalysis process, especially at oxidation potentials, is a critical problem that hinders the long-term stability of MOF-based carbon-based materials. Therefore, it is promising to improve the carbon graphitization degree in MOF-derived carbon-based materials, or develop MOF-derived materials beyond carbon.357–359
The development of ORR, OER and HER electrocatalysts is a hot and important topic in the fields of chemistry, materials, energy and environment. The research on MOF-derived carbon-based materials has brought about a large number of efficient electrocatalysts, and is promising to further promote the research progress of ORR, OER and HER electrocatalysis. We hope this review can be a useful reference for researchers who are focusing on the fields of MOFs and electrocatalysis. With full consideration of desired features for electrocatalysis, via rational MOF design and carbonization treatment, more MOF-derived carbon-based electrocatalysts for ORR, OER and/or HER can be expected in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the editor for the kind invitation. Financial support from AIST and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21875207 and U1904215) is appreciated. S. K. acknowledges financial support from DFG (SPP 1928 Coornets).
Notes and references
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. T. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 881–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuang and G. F. Zheng, Small, 2016, 12, 5656–5675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612–13614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, G. S. Hong and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lefevre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J. P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang and H. J. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3088–3113 RSC .
D. S. Su and G. Centi, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 151–173 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Li, W. Zhou, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, F. Wei, J. C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. M. Zhang, Z. H. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116–20119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. H. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. J. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
G. L. Tian, M. Q. Zhao, D. S. Yu, X. Y. Kong, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, Z. H. Zhao, Z. H. Xia and L. M. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. B. Chen, K. Mullen and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800528 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tang, M. M. Titirici and Q. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 1077–1093 CrossRef .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Y. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sridhar, J. H. Jeon and I. K. Oh, Carbon, 2011, 49, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, K. Wang, L. H. Wu, S. H. Yu, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 813–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A. P. Seitsonen, M. Saleh, X. L. Feng, K. Mullen and R. Fasel, Nature, 2010, 466, 470–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Y. Zhang and C. W. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Q. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Y. Chen, R. Luque and Y. W. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4614–4630 RSC .
D. Li, H.-Q. Xu, L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100005 CrossRef .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. V. Kaneti, J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, X. C. Jiang, A. B. Yu, K. C. W. Wu and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604898 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dang, Q. L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 17075 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shen, X. D. Chen, J. Y. Chen and Y. W. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5887–5903 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahmood, W. H. Guo, H. Tabassum and R. Q. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600423 CrossRef .
J. L. Liu, D. D. Zhu, C. X. Guo, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700518 CrossRef .
W. P. Yang, X. X. Li, Y. Li, R. M. Zhu and H. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804740 Search PubMed .
Z. Liang, R. Zhao, T. Qiu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100001 CrossRef .
D. DeSantis, J. A. Mason, B. D. James, C. Houchins, J. R. Long and M. Veenstra, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 2024–2032 CrossRef CAS .
M. Witman, S. L. Ling, A. Gladysiak, K. C. Stylianou, B. Smit, B. Slater and M. Haranczyk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1171–1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. C. Dong, C. T. He, H. J. Yin, P. F. An, K. Zhao, X. F. Zhang, C. Gao, L. J. Zhang, J. W. Lv, J. X. Wang, J. Q. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. X. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Q. Liu, H. J. Zhao and Z. Y. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–10 Search PubMed .
F. L. Lyu, Y. C. Bai, Z. W. Li, W. J. Xu, Q. F. Wang, J. Mao, L. Wang, X. W. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 8 Search PubMed .
X. F. Xiao, C. T. He, S. L. Zhao, J. Li, W. S. Lin, Z. K. Yuan, Q. Zhang, S. Y. Wang, L. M. Dai and D. S. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 893–899 RSC .
A. Indra, T. Song and U. Paik, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705146 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Sun, Q. Li, H. G. Xue and H. Pang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1273–1299 CrossRef CAS .
P. Q. Liao, J. Q. Shen and J. P. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 373, 22–48 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Wang, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803329 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Chen, C. M. Wang, Z. Y. Wu, Y. J. Xiong, Q. Xu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5010–5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Chen, R. Zhang, L. Jiao and H. L. Jiang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 362, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Zheng, Y. Yang and Q. W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5261 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, S. Choi and M. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4492–4495 RSC .
J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, J. Liu, N. L. Torad, M. Imura, S. Furukawa and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1572–1580 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li and L. W. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4029–4038 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Naveen, K. Shim, M. S. A. Hossain, J. H. Kim and Y. B. Shim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602002 CrossRef .
S. L. Zhang, B. Y. Guan and X. W. Lou, Small, 2019, 15, 1805324 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Z. Y. Wu, H. L. Jiang and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14385–14388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pachfule, D. Shinde, M. Majumder and Q. Xu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 718–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, S. W. Liu, Y. P. Zang, R. R. Liu, G. Q. Liu, G. Z. Wang, Y. X. Zhang, H. M. Zhang and H. J. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Lin, G. Chen, H. Wan, F. S. Chen, X. H. Liu and R. Z. Ma, Small, 2019, 15, 1900348 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Pan, L. K. Zhu, H. H. Yu, B. Y. Duan, R. W. Wang, Z. T. Zhang and S. L. Qiu, Carbon, 2019, 146, 671–679 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Zhang, S. C. Hou, H. Zhang, W. Zeng, F. L. Yan, C. C. Li and H. G. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2400–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Cai, W. Zhang, L. Jiao, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Chem, 2017, 2, 791–802 CAS .
L. L. Zou, M. Kitta, J. H. Hong, K. Suenaga, N. Tsumori, Z. Liu and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900440 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3092–3096 RSC .
N. Y. Cheng, L. Ren, X. Xu, Y. Du and S. X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801257 CrossRef .
Y. J. Chen, S. F. Ji, Y. G. Wang, J. C. Dong, W. X. Chen, Z. Li, R. A. Shen, L. R. Zheng, Z. B. Zhuang, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. L. Sheng, S. Gul, J. Yano and Y. J. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7636–7642 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. L. Sheng, W. S. Drisdell, J. Yano and Y. J. Sun, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7068–7076 CrossRef CAS .
P. Q. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. R. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. X. Ju, J. F. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. X. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Q. Wei and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Venna, J. B. Jasinski and M. A. Carreon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18030–18033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Li, P. F. Liu, R. Liu, M. M. Liu, K. Tao, S. R. Zhu, M. K. Wu, F. Y. Yi and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13311–13316 RSC .
S. Sorribas, B. Zornoza, C. Tellez and J. Coronas, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9388–9390 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. Y. Wei, X. T. Wu, H. Y. Jiang, W. Wang and H. X. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13963–13966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zou, C. C. Hou, Z. Liu, H. Pang and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15393–15401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Zhou, J. Meng, P. Li, Z. L. Tao, L. Q. Mai and J. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 268–273 RSC .
L. M. Zhou, K. Zhang, J. Z. Sheng, Q. Y. An, Z. L. Tao, Y. M. Kang, J. Chen and L. Q. Mai, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Zhang, Q. B. Dai, H. G. Zheng, M. D. Chen and L. M. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705431 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Wang, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Bando, J. J. Lin, C. Liu, J. S. Li and Y. Yamauchi, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 394–407 RSC .
Y. M. Chen, X. Y. Li, K. Park, W. Lu, C. Wang, W. J. Xue, F. Yang, J. Zhou, L. M. Suo, T. Q. Lin, H. T. Huang, J. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Chem, 2017, 3, 152–163 CAS .
W. Tian, H. Hu, Y. X. Wang, P. Li, J. Y. Liu, J. L. Liu, X. B. Wang, X. D. Xu, Z. T. Li, Q. S. Zhao, H. Ning, W. T. Wu and M. B. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1990–2000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Wang, J. S. Li, J. Z. Liu, C. H. Wang, X. Y. Sun, J. Y. Shen, W. Q. Han and L. J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1211–1220 RSC .
G. W. Zhan and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3268–3281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Wang, M. T. Zhao, J. F. Ping, B. Chen, X. H. Cao, Y. Huang, C. L. Tan, Q. L. Ma, S. X. Wu, Y. F. Yu, Q. P. Lu, J. Z. Chen, W. Zhao, Y. B. Ying and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4149–4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Z. Li, Y. Maeda and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8436–8438 RSC .
L. Huang, X. P. Zhang, Y. J. Han, Q. Q. Wang, Y. X. Fang and S. J. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18610–18617 RSC .
C. Guan, X. M. Liu, W. N. Ren, X. Li, C. W. Cheng and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602391 CrossRef .
H. Xu, Z. X. Shi, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705442 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. B. Dou, A. Zhou, L. Shu, Y. Chen and J. R. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1655–1661 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Xiao, X. L. Lv, L. H. Qian, S. L. Yuan, S. Wang and P. X. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16516–16523 RSC .
J. S. Meng, C. J. Niu, L. H. Xu, J. T. Li, X. Liu, X. P. Wang, Y. Z. Wu, X. M. Xu, W. Y. Chen, Q. Li, Z. Z. Zhu, D. Y. Zhao and L. Q. Mai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8212–8221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Li, S. L. Li, Y. J. Tang, M. Han, Z. H. Dai, J. C. Bao and Y. Q. Lan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2710–2713 RSC .
A. Aijaz, J. Masa, C. Rosler, W. Xia, P. Weide, A. J. R. Botz, R. A. Fischer, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4087–4091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhou, J. Lu, K. Zhou, L. J. Yang, Y. T. Ke, Z. H. Tang and S. W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, W. Zhang, G. Z. Fan, Z. S. Li, D. G. Fu, W. C. Hao, C. W. Yuan and Z. G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13781–13785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Jin, H. Zhou, W. Q. Li, Z. H. Wang, J. L. Yang, Y. L. Xiong, D. P. He, L. Chen and S. C. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20093–20099 RSC .
Y. L. Li, B. M. Jia, Y. Z. Fan, K. L. Zhu, G. Q. Li and C. Y. Su, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702048 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, K. A. Sun, S. J. Liu, X. Cao, K. L. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Q. Liu, D. S. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2610–2618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700247 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhao, Z. B. Liang, S. Gao, C. Yang, B. J. Zhu, J. L. Zhao, C. Qu, R. Q. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1975–1979 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Zhu, W. Xia, T. Akita, R. Q. Zou and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6391–6398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Zhu, W. Xia, L. R. Zheng, R. Q. Zou, Z. Liu and Q. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 504–511 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Hao, C. Tang, E. Zhang, P. Y. Zhai, J. Yin, W. C. Zhu, Q. Zhang and S. Kaskel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702829 CrossRef PubMed .
W. M. Zhang, X. Y. Yao, S. N. Zhou, X. W. Li, L. Li, Z. Yu and L. Gu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800423 CrossRef PubMed .
I. S. Amiinu, X. B. Liu, Z. H. Pu, W. Q. Li, Q. D. Li, J. Zhang, H. L. Tang, H. N. Zhang and S. C. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704638 CrossRef .
J. J. Duan, S. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5207–5234 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839–2855 RSC .
X. Liu and L. M. Dai, Nat. Rev.
Mater., 2016, 1, 16064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhu, C. X. Guo, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 915–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4998–5001 RSC .
G. P. Hao, G. Mondin, Z. K. Zheng, T. Biemelt, S. Klosz, R. Schubel, A. Eychmuller and S. Kaskel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1941–1945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Hao, N. R. Sahraie, Q. Zhang, S. Krause, M. Oschatz, A. Bachmatiuk, P. Strasser and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17285–17288 RSC .
L. Zheng, Y. Y. Dong, B. Chi, Z. M. Cui, Y. J. Deng, X. D. Shi, L. Du and S. J. Liao, Small, 2019, 15, 1803520 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Yang, Z. C. Ju, Y. Jiang, Z. Xing, B. J. Xi, J. K. Feng and S. L. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1700104 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wang, X. Y. Dong, J. Du, J. Y. Zhao and S. Q. Zang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703711 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Li, Y. Y. Chen, Y. J. Tang, S. L. Li, H. Q. Dong, K. Li, M. Han, Y. Q. Lan, J. C. Bao and Z. H. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6316–6319 RSC .
J. S. Li, S. L. Li, Y. J. Tang, K. Li, L. Zhou, N. Kong, Y. Q. Lan, J. C. Bao and Z. H. Dai, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Song, W. W. Liu, N. C. Cheng, M. N. Banis, X. Li, Q. Sun, B. W. Xiao, Y. L. Liu, A. Lushington, R. Y. Li, L. M. Liu and X. L. Sun, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 900–907 RSC .
H. Tabassum, W. H. Guo, W. Meng, A. Mahmood, R. Zhao, Q. F. Wang and R. Q. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601671 CrossRef .
Y. H. Cheng, J. N. Guo, Y. Huang, Z. J. Liao and Z. H. Xiang, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dou, X. Wang and S. Y. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800211 CrossRef .
W. Xia, R. Q. Zou, L. An, D. G. Xia and S. J. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 568–576 RSC .
Y. Yang, Z. Y. Lun, G. L. Xia, F. C. Zheng, M. N. He and Q. W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3563–3571 RSC .
Y. Xu, W. G. Tu, B. W. Zhang, S. M. Yin, Y. Z. Huang, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605957 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, T. Z. Huang, Z. H. Wen, S. Mao, S. M. Cui and J. H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400337 CrossRef .
S. L. Zhao, H. J. Yin, L. Du, L. C. He, K. Zhao, L. Chang, G. P. Yin, H. J. Zhao, S. Q. Liu and Z. Y. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12660–12668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan, A. Sumboja, H. J. Wu, W. N. Ren, X. M. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. L. Liu, C. W. Cheng, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704117 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Lai, W. Chen, Z. A. Zhang, Y. H. Qu, Y. Q. Gan and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 733–742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Wang, C. Ye, M. Wang, T. H. Li, Y. N. Yu and S. J. Bao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 112–117 CrossRef .
M. H. Kong, H. H. Song and J. S. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801489 CrossRef .
A. Aijaz, A. Karkamkar, Y. J. Choi, N. Tsumori, E. Ronnebro, T. Autrey, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13926–13929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Su, Y. Yang, G. L. Xia, J. T. Chen, P. Jiang and Q. W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14969 CrossRef .
C. F. Chen, A. P. Wu, H. J. Yan, Y. L. Xiao, C. G. Tian and H. G. Fu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4746–4755 RSC .
J. Ying, J. Li, G. P. Jiang, Z. P. Cano, Z. Ma, C. Zhong, D. Su and Z. W. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 496–503 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Jin, H. Zhou, D. P. He, Z. H. Wang, Q. L. Wu, Q. R. Liang, S. L. Liu and S. C. Mu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Xu, X. F. Xiao, Z. M. Ye, S. L. Zhao, R. G. Shen, C. T. He, J. P. Zhang, Y. D. Li and X. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5285–5288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Hao, Y. Q. Xu, W. Liu and X. M. Sun, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 108–115 RSC .
C. Guan, A. Sumboja, W. J. Zang, Y. H. Qian, H. Zhang, X. M. Liu, Z. L. Liu, D. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 243–250 CrossRef .
J. P. Lai, B. L. Huang, Y. G. Chao, X. Chen and S. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805541 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Bai, S. S. Li, J. Fu, Q. Zhang, F. F. Chang, L. Yang, J. Lu and Z. W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 680–686 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Wang, R. Q. Zou, W. Xia, J. Ma, B. Qiu, A. Mahmood, R. Zhao, Y. Y. C. Yang, D. G. Xia and Q. Xu, Small, 2015, 11, 2511–2517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Kang, S. Y. Im, J. Lee, S. H. Kwag, S. B. Kwon, S. Tiruneh, M. J. Kim, J. H. Kim, W. S. Yang, B. Lim and D. H. Yoon, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1605–1611 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Wang, C. Wu, F. Wang and G. Q. Jiang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 5843–5853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. J. Ma, D. Bresser, Y. C. Ji, D. Geiger, U. Kaiser, C. Streb, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7220–7231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100018 CrossRef .
B. Bayatsarmadi, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13, 1700191 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Peng, B. Z. Lu and S. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801995 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jiao and H. L. Jiang, Chem, 2019, 5, 786–804 CAS .
Z. B. Liang, C. Qu, D. G. Xia, R. Q. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9604–9633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. S. Wu, H. J. Wu, Z. L. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, D. A. Cullen, Y. T. Pan, S. Hwang, M. Y. Wang, Z. X. Feng, J. Y. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, H. G. Zhang, Y. H. He, Y. Y. Shao, D. Su, K. L. More, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706758 CrossRef PubMed .
X. P. Han, X. F. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Y. Ma, C. Zhong, W. B. Hu and Y. D. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5359–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Geng, Y. J. Cao, W. X. Chen, X. D. Kong, Y. Liu, T. Yao and Y. Lin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Zhang, S. Hwang, M. Y. Wang, Z. X. Feng, S. Karakalos, L. L. Luo, Z. Qiao, X. H. Xie, C. M. Wang, D. Su, Y. Y. Shao and G. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14143–14149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Fu, C. Z. Zhu, D. Su, J. H. Song, S. Y. Yao, S. Feng, M. H. Engelhard, D. Du and Y. H. Lin, Small, 2018, 14, 1703118 CrossRef PubMed .
W. X. Chen, J. J. Pei, C. T. He, J. W. Wan, H. L. Ren, Y. Wang, J. C. Dong, K. L. Wu, W. C. Cheong, J. J. Mao, X. S. Zheng, W. S. Yan, Z. B. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800396 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Deng, B. Chi, J. Li, G. H. Wang, L. Zheng, X. D. Shi, Z. M. Cui, L. Du, S. J. Liao, K. T. Zang, J. Luo, Y. F. Hu and X. L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802856 CrossRef .
R. Jiang, L. Li, T. Sheng, G. F. Hu, Y. G. Chen and L. Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11594–11598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Fu, C. Z. Zhu, J. H. Song, D. Du and Y. H. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700363 CrossRef .
Q. Ren, H. Wang, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700515 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Zhang, H. Osgood, X. H. Xie, Y. Y. Shao and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 331–350 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Qian, I. A. Khan and D. Zhao, Small, 2017, 13, 1701143 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Wu, K. Wang, M. Yi, Y. X. Tong, Y. Wang and S. Q. Song, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6082–6088 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Lai, Y. X. Zhao, Y. Y. Liang, J. P. He and J. H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8334–8344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Wang, L. Tao, Z. H. Xiao, R. Chen, Z. Q. Jiang and S. Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705356 CrossRef .
M. J. Yang, X. H. Hu, Z. S. Fang, L. Sun, Z. K. Yuan, S. Y. Wang, W. Hong, X. D. Chen and D. S. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701971 CrossRef .
L. Ye, G. L. Chai and Z. H. Wen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606190 CrossRef .
A. D. Tan, Y. F. Wang, Z. Y. Fu, P. Tsiakaras and Z. X. Liang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 260–266 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Qian, Z. G. Hu, X. M. Ge, S. L. Yang, Y. W. Peng, Z. X. Kang, Z. L. Liu, J. Y. Lee and D. Zhao, Carbon, 2017, 111, 641–650 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Zhu, L. J. Li, J. J. Cai, M. Jiang, J. B. Qi and X. B. Zhao, Carbon, 2014, 79, 544–553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pandiaraj, H. B. Aiyappa, R. Banerjee and S. Kurungot, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3363–3366 RSC .
L. J. Zhang, X. Y. Wang, R. H. Wang and M. C. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7610–7618 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Zhao, H. Y. Zhao, T. T. Zhang, X. C. Yan, Y. Yuan, H. M. Zhang, H. J. Zhao, D. M. Zhang, G. S. Zhu and X. D. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11666–11671 RSC .
A. Aijaz, N. Fujiwara and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6790–6793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Zhang, Z. X. Su, F. L. Jiang, L. L. Yang, J. J. Qian, Y. F. Zhou, W. M. Li and M. C. Hong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6590–6602 RSC .
D. H. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, J. W. Miao, S. F. Hung, J. Z. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Z. Wang, L. P. Zhang, R. Chen, J. J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. M. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Z. Zhang, A. J. Du, G. P. Gao, J. Chen, X. C. Yan, C. L. Brown and X. D. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9532–9538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang, X. Chen, B. Q. Li, T. Z. Hou, B. S. Zhang, Q. Zhang, M. M. Titirici and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6845–6851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Wu and H. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Antolini, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 915–931 RSC .
J. Hou, M. Yang, C. Ke, G. Wei, C. Priest, Z. Qiao, G. Wu and J. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100023 CrossRef .
Y. Luo, L. Calvillo, C. Daiguebonne, M. K. Daletou, G. Granozzi and N. Alonso-Vante, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 39–50 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, S. Hwang, Y. T. Pan, K. Chen, Y. H. He, S. Karakalos, H. G. Zhang, J. S. Spendelow, D. Su and G. Wu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4163–4171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Du, C. M. Wang, R. Long and Y. J. Xiong, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3228–3237 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Ling, W. J. Liu, S. Q. Chen, X. Hu and H. Jiang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 3331–3338 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Gu, C. S. Shang, J. Li and E. K. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2814–2818 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Gewirth, J. A. Varnell and A. M. DiAscro, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2313–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, Q. Zhu and A. W. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11027–11033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Sa, D. J. Seo, J. Woo, J. T. Lim, J. Y. Cheon, S. Y. Yang, J. M. Lee, D. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, C. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15046–15056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Ye, H. B. Li, F. Cai, C. C. Yan, R. Si, S. Miao, Y. S. Li, G. X. Wang and X. H. Bao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7638–7646 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Xiao, J. B. Zhu, L. Ma, Z. Jin, J. Ge, X. J. Deng, Y. Hou, Q. G. He, J. K. Li, Q. Y. Jia, S. Mukerjee, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, D. S. Su, C. P. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2824–2832 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ahn, X. W. Yu and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606534 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jiao, G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8525–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Wang, H. G. Zhang, H. H. Lin, S. Gupta, C. Wang, Z. X. Tao, H. Fu, T. Wang, J. Zheng, G. Wu and X. G. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Chung, M. J. Kim, N. Kang, J. M. Yoo, H. Shin, O. H. Kim and Y. E. Sung, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2890–2898 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Li, S. Ghoshal, W. T. Liang, M. T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen, B. Halevi, S. McKinney, G. McCool, C. R. Ma, X. X. Yuan, Z. F. Ma, S. Mukerjee and Q. Y. Jia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2418–2432 RSC .
Z. Y. Guo, Z. P. Zhang, Z. L. Li, M. L. Dou and F. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, X. M. Shi, P. Gao, S. S. Wang, W. Hu, X. X. Zhao, Y. M. Ni, X. Y. Xu, Y. Q. Xu, W. S. Yan, H. X. Ji and M. H. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Ye, F. Cai, H. B. Li, H. H. Wu, G. X. Wang, Y. S. Li, S. Miao, S. H. Xie, R. Si, J. Wang and X. H. Bao, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Wang, G. K. Han, L. G. Wang, L. Du, G. Y. Chen, Y. Z. Gao, Y. L. Ma, C. Y. Du, X. Q. Cheng, P. J. Zuo and G. P. Yin, Small, 2018, 14, 1704282 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Chen, S. F. Ji, S. Zhao, W. X. Chen, J. C. Dong, W. C. Cheong, R. A. Shen, X. D. Wen, L. R. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. C. Cai, H. L. Tang, Z. B. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Meng, S. C. Cai, R. Wang, H. L. Tang, S. Q. Song and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. He, S. Hwang, D. A. Cullen, M. A. Uddin, L. Langhorst, B. Y. Li, S. Karakalos, A. J. Kropf, E. C. Wegener, J. Sokolowski, M. J. Chen, D. Myers, D. Su, K. L. More, G. F. Wang, S. Litster and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 250–260 RSC .
Y. K. Zhang, Y. X. Lin, H. L. Jiang, C. Q. Wu, H. J. Liu, C. D. Wang, S. M. Chen, T. Duan and L. Song, Small, 2018, 14, 1702074 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. You, X. B. Gong, W. Wang, D. P. Qi, X. H. Wang, X. D. Chen and N. Q. Ren, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501497 CrossRef .
Z. H. Li, M. F. Shao, L. Zhou, R. K. Zhang, C. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2337–2344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Li, M. F. Shao, L. Zhou, Q. H. Yang, C. Zhang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Peera, J. Balamurugan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Small, 2018, 14, 1800441 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Bai, F. C. Shen, S. L. Li, J. Liu, L. Z. Dong, Z. M. Wang and Y. Q. Lan, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800049 CrossRef .
T. H. Zhou, Y. H. Du, S. M. Yin, X. Z. Tian, H. B. Yang, X. Wang, B. Liu, H. M. Zheng, S. Z. Qiao and R. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2563–2570 RSC .
L. Song, J. Tang, T. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Ide, J. P. He and Y. S. K. Yamauchi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 6807–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Xiao, C. Zhao, C. C. Hu, J. B. Xi and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 348, 183–192 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Zhang, C. X. Li, J. Liu, L. Zhou, R. H. Liu, X. Han, H. Huang, H. L. Hu, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8184–8189 RSC .
B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, M. H. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706738 CrossRef .
H. L. Tang, S. C. Cai, S. L. Xie, Z. B. Wang, Y. X. Tong, M. Pan and X. H. Lu, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500265 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, L. Han, M. Z. Yu, Z. Y. Wang and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 107–111 RSC .
Y. Xiong, Y. Yang, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10744–10750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Su, Y. H. Zhu, H. L. Jiang, J. H. Shen, X. L. Yang, W. J. Zou, J. D. Chen and C. Z. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15080–15089 RSC .
X. Liu, W. Liu, M. Ko, M. Park, M. G. Kim, P. Oh, S. Chae, S. Park, A. Casimir, G. Wu and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5799–5808 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Su, H. Xiao, J. Zhao, Y. Yao, Z. G. Shao, C. Li and Q. H. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2941–2946 RSC .
D. Zhao, J. L. Shui, C. Chen, X. Q. Chen, B. M. Reprogle, D. P. Wang and D. J. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3200–3205 RSC .
S. Y. Gao, B. F. Fan, R. Feng, C. L. Ye, X. J. Wei, J. Liu and X. H. Bu, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, H. T. Wang, D. C. Lin, J. Zhao, C. Liu, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1213–1222 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Li, N. Zhou, J. Y. Song, L. Fu, J. Yan, Y. G. Tang and H. Y. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 413–421 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Lai, J. J. Zhu, Y. X. Zhao, Y. Y. Liang, J. P. He and J. H. Chen, Small, 2017, 13, 1700740 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. F. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3675–3679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, S. B. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. H. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2925–2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hu and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11736–11758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Wang, C. Tang, B. Wang, B. Q. Li, X. Y. Cui and Q. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 124–130 CrossRef .
N. L. Torad, M. Hu, Y. Kamachi, K. Takai, M. Imura, M. Naito and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2521–2523 RSC .
H. L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y. Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Q. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Lei, L. Wei, S. L. Zhai, Y. Q. Wang, H. E. Karahan, X. C. Chen, Z. Zhou, C. J. Wang, X. Sui and Y. Chen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 102–111 RSC .
S. W. Liu, H. M. Zhang, Q. Zhao, X. Zhang, R. R. Liu, X. Ge, G. Z. Wang, H. J. Zhao and W. P. Cai, Carbon, 2016, 106, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, P. P. Xu, Z. Y. Lin, Y. Yang, P. Jiang, C. L. Wang, S. Liu, S. P. Gong, L. Hu and Q. W. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1803009 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, Y. Wu, D. Zheng, K. Wang and Z. H. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134568 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Li, Z. Zong, Z. H. Tang, Z. Liu, S. W. Chen, Y. Tian and X. F. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5105–5114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1937–1938 CrossRef .
A. Bergmann, E. Martinez-Moreno, D. Teschner, P. Chernev, M. Gliech, J. F. de Araujo, T. Reier, H. Dau and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Wang, H. C. Yang, Y. J. Zhang and Q. B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6099–6103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Bu, W. S. Chen, J. J. Gu, P. O. Agboola, N. F. Al-Khalli, I. Shakir and Y. X. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 7009–7016 RSC .
L. Du, L. L. Luo, Z. X. Feng, M. Engelhard, X. H. Xie, B. H. Han, J. M. Sun, J. H. Zhang, G. P. Yin, C. M. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Y. Shao, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sivanantham, P. Ganesan, L. Estevez, B. P. McGrail, R. K. Motkuri and S. Shanmugam, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702838 CrossRef .
Z. L. Chen, Y. Ha, H. X. Jia, X. X. Yan, M. Chen, M. Liu and R. B. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803918 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Z. Y. Lin, S. Q. Gao, J. W. Su, Z. Y. Lun, G. L. Xia, J. T. Chen, R. R. Zhang and Q. W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 469–479 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Q. Q. Jiang, Z. H. Xiao, X. Y. Li, J. Huo, S. Y. Wang and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Gao, W. C. Sheng, Z. B. Zhuang, Q. R. Fang, S. Gu, J. Jiang and Y. S. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7077–7084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Burke, M. G. Kast, L. Trotochaud, A. M. Smith and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3638–3648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khalid, A. M. B. Honorato, E. A. Ticianelli and H. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12106–12114 RSC .
F. Li, J. Du, X. N. Li, J. Y. Shen, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu and L. C. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702598 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, J. Y. Li, Z. H. Wen, S. M. Cui, C. Yuan and J. H. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Cai, J. H. Huang, J. X. Chen and Z. H. Wen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4858–4861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Z. Chen, K. Xu, Z. W. Fang, Y. Tong, J. C. Wu, X. L. Lu, X. Peng, H. Ding, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14710–14714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yu, Y. Feng, B. Y. Guan, X. W. Lou and U. Paik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1246–1250 RSC .
K. Xu, P. Z. Chen, X. L. Li, Y. Tong, H. Ding, X. J. Wu, W. S. Chu, Z. M. Peng, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4119–4125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, H. T. Wang, Y. Z. Li, Y. Y. Liu, J. Sun, S. H. Lee, J. S. Lee and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 244–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, A. N. Gandi, C. Xia, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum, U. Schwingenschlogl and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1035–1042 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Wang, C. Tang, B. Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 521–534 RSC .
S. C. Huang, Y. Y. Meng, S. M. He, A. Goswami, Q. L. Wu, J. H. Li, S. F. Tong, T. Asefa and M. M. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606585 CrossRef .
J. Yang, G. X. Zhu, Y. J. Liu, J. X. Xia, Z. Y. Ji, X. P. Shen and S. K. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4712–4721 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dou, L. Tao, J. Huo, S. Y. Wang and L. M. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1320–1326 RSC .
L. L. Wu, Q. S. Wang, J. Li, Y. Long, Y. Liu, S. Y. Song and H. J. Zhang, Small, 2018, 14, 1704035 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Zhou, Y. H. Du, D. P. Wang, S. M. Yin, W. G. Tu, Z. Chen, A. Borgna and R. Xu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6000–6007 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, M. Kitta and Q. Xu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800214 CrossRef .
T. Huang, Y. Chen and J. M. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1702753 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and J. K. Norskov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng and Y. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942–14962 RSC .
J. Mohammed-Ibrahim and X. M. Sun, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 34, 111–160 CrossRef .
K. G. Qu, Y. Zheng, X. X. Zhang, K. Davey, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7293–7300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Lin, Y. Yang, M. S. Li, H. Huang, W. Hu, L. Cheng, W. S. Yan, Z. W. Yu, K. T. Mao, G. L. Xia, J. Lu, P. Jiang, K. Yang, R. R. Zhang, P. P. Xu, C. L. Wang, L. Hu and Q. W. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16973–16980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, M. Ming, S. Niu, Y. Zhang, G. Y. Fan and J. S. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801698 CrossRef .
S. Cherevko, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, N. Kulyk, J. P. Grote, A. Savan, B. R. Shrestha, S. Merzlikin, B. Breitbach, A. Ludwig and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Zhang, Z. L. Lang, Y. H. Wang, H. Q. Tan, H. Y. Zang, Z. H. Kang and Y. G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2569–2580 RSC .
J. Ying, G. P. Jiang, Z. P. Cano, L. Han, X. Y. Yang and Z. W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 88–94 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Qiu, Z. B. Liang, W. H. Guo, S. Gao, C. Qu, H. Tabassum, H. Zhang, B. J. Zhu, R. Q. Zou and Y. Shao-Horn, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Z. H. Pu, H. Zhou, J. Yu, I. S. Amiinu, J. W. Zhu, Q. R. Liang, J. L. Yang, D. P. He, Z. Y. Hu, G. Van Tendeloo and S. C. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 472–480 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, J. T. Chen, C. L. Wang, K. Yang, S. P. Gong, S. Liu, Z. Y. Lin, M. S. Li, G. L. Xia, Y. Yang, J. W. Su and Q. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705324 CrossRef PubMed .
L. L. Fan, P. F. Liu, X. C. Yan, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, H. G. Yang, S. L. Qiu and X. D. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Zhang, Z. J. Ma, J. J. Duan, H. M. Liu, G. G. Liu, T. Wang, K. Chang, M. Li, L. Shi, X. G. Meng, K. C. Wu and J. H. Ye, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 684–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Chen, R. B. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Ha, Y. H. Guo, D. L. Sun, M. Liu and F. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802011 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wan, Y. N. Regmi and B. M. Leonard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6407–6410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao, M. A. Sk, L. Thia, X. M. Ge, R. J. Lim, J. Y. Wang, K. H. Lim and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2624–2629 RSC .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. B. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. H. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Norskov and X. L. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. W. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. L. Zhou, T. Ding, C. D. Wang and Q. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18004–18009 RSC .
Y. J. Tang, M. R. Gao, C. H. Liu, S. L. Li, H. L. Jiang, Y. Q. Lan, M. Han and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12928–12932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, G. Chen, X. M. Xu, G. M. Yang, M. L. Liu and Z. P. Shao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3540–3547 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, F. J. Zhang, X. Wang, D. S. He, G. Wu, Q. H. Yang, X. Hong, Y. Wu and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12854–12858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1781 RSC .
H. T. Du, R. M. Kong, X. X. Guo, F. L. Qu and J. H. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21617–21624 RSC .
F. L. Yang, Y. T. Chen, G. Z. Cheng, S. L. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3824–3831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Lim, S. Z. Huang, Y. M. Zhang, D. Z. Kong, Y. Wang, L. Guo, J. Zhang, Y. M. Shi, T. P. Chen, L. K. Ang and H. Y. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 98–107 CrossRef .
C. Wu, Y. J. Yang, D. Dong, Y. H. Zhang and J. H. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1602873 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasche, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255–2260 RSC .
D. Strmcnik, M. Uchimura, C. Wang, R. Subbaraman, N. Danilovic, D. van der Vliet, A. P. Paulikas, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 300–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Busch, N. B. Halck, U. I. Kramm, S. Siahrostami, P. Krtil and J. Rossmeisl, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 126–135 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Wang and Q. Xu, Matter, 2019, 1, 565–595 CrossRef .
Z. F. Huang, J. Wang, Y. C. Peng, C. Y. Jung, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700544 CrossRef .
D. X. Ji, L. Fan, L. L. Li, S. J. Peng, D. S. Yu, J. N. Song, S. Ramakrishna and S. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808267 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Zhu, M. L. Xiao, Y. L. Zhang, Z. Jin, Z. Q. Peng, C. P. Liu, S. L. Chen, J. J. Ge and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6335–6342 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Huang, Y. L. Zhang, H. M. Shen, W. Li, T. Shen, Z. Ali, T. Tang, S. J. Guo, Q. Sun and Y. L. Hou, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2914–2920 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Wang, Z. K. Kou, S. C. Mu, J. P. Liu, D. P. He, I. S. Amiinu, W. Meng, K. Zhou, Z. X. Luo, S. Chaemchuen and F. Verpoort, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705048 CrossRef .
C. C. Hou, L. L. Zou and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Li, H. Y. He, H. B. Cao, S. M. Sun, W. L. Diao, D. L. Gao, P. L. Lu, S. S. Zhang, Z. Guo, M. J. Li, R. J. Liu, D. H. Ren, C. M. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. K. Jiang and G. J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Wu, L. J. Hu, N. Wang, Y. M. Li, D. K. Zhao, L. G. Li, X. W. Peng, Z. M. Cui, L. J. Ma, Y. Tian and X. F. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 55–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Wu, X. C. Qiu, F. Liang, Q. K. Zhang, A. Koo, Y. N. Dai, Y. Lei and X. L. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gadipelli, T. T. Zhao, S. A. Shevlin and Z. X. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1661–1667 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. S. Luo, H. F. Lin, P. Y. Tang, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol, K. Wan, B. W. Mao, L. M. Liu and J. Fransaer, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 46–61 CrossRef .
Z. J. Wang, Y. Z. Lu, Y. Yan, T. Y. P. Larissa, X. Zhang, D. Wuu, H. Zhang, Y. H. Yang and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 368–378 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, G. Meng, W. X. Liu, T. Li, Q. Yang, X. M. Sun and J. F. Liu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhao, Q. X. Lai, J. J. Zhu, J. Zhong, Z. M. Tang, Y. Luo and Y. Y. Liang, Small, 2018, 14, 1704207 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. P. Deng, J. Fu, D. U. Lee, R. L. Liang, Z. P. Cano, Y. S. Liu, Z. Y. Bai, S. Hwang, L. Yang, D. Su, W. G. Chu and Z. W. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702900 CrossRef .
B. H. Chen, X. B. He, F. X. Yin, H. Wang, D. J. Liu, R. X. Shi, J. N. Chen and H. W. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700795 CrossRef .
D. N. Ding, K. Shen, X. D. Chen, H. R. Chen, J. Y. Chen, T. Fan, R. F. Wu and Y. W. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7879–7888 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Zhong, Z. H. Pan, X. S. Wang, J. Yang, Y. C. Qiu, S. Y. Xu, Y. T. Lu, Q. M. Huang and W. S. Li, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802243 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chaikittisilp, N. L. Torad, C. L. Li, M. Imura, N. Suzuki, S. Ishihara, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4217–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ahn and A. Manthiram, Small, 2017, 13, 1702068 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, F. L. Yang, G. Z. Cheng and W. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1703748 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Ding, S. G. Chen, Y. Nie, K. Xiong and Z. D. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15529–15532 RSC .
H. F. Wang, C. Tang, B. Wang, B. Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702327 CrossRef PubMed .
H. F. Wang, C. Tang, X. L. Zhu and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3379–3385 RSC .
T. Maiyalagan, K. A. Jarvis, S. Therese, P. J. Ferreira and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Liu, Q. L. Hong, Q. H. Li, Y. H. Du, H. X. Zhang, S. M. Chen, T. H. Zhou and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801136 CrossRef .
X. J. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, J. R. J. Simke, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8921–8926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. B. Lian, C. Yang, L. K. Xiong, P. W. Qi, Q. Q. Mu, X. H. Zhao, J. Guo, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2363–2371 RSC .
J. S. Meng, X. Liu, J. T. Li, Q. Li, C. Zhao, L. H. Xu, X. P. Wang, F. Liu, W. Yang, X. M. Xu, Z. Liu, C. J. Niu and L. Q. Mai, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7773–7781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Weng, C. R. Grice, W. W. Meng, L. Guan, F. H. Xu, Y. Yu, C. L. Wang, D. W. Zhao and Y. F. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1434–1442 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Song, C. Z. Zhu, B. Z. Xu, S. F. Fu, M. H. Engelhard, R. F. Ye, D. Du, S. P. Beckman and Y. H. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601555 CrossRef .
Q. Hu, X. F. Liu, B. Zhu, L. D. Fan, X. Y. Chai, Q. L. Zhang, J. H. Liu, C. X. He and Z. Q. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
Q. R. Liang, H. H. Jin, Z. Wang, Y. L. Xiong, S. Yuan, X. C. Zeng, D. P. He and S. C. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, W. J. Zhou, L. K. Wang, J. Jia, Y. T. Ke, L. J. Yang, K. Zhou, X. J. Liu, Z. H. Tang, L. G. Li and S. W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1045–1053 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, Q. H. Wang, P. Han and G. F. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700193 CrossRef .
S. L. Zhang, D. Zhai, T. T. Sun, A. J. Han, Y. L. Zhai, W. C. Cheong, Y. Liu, C. L. Su, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 186–193 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Guo, P. F. Yuan, J. A. Zhang, H. C. Xia, F. Y. Cheng, M. F. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Y. Qiao, S. C. Mu and Q. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805641 CrossRef .
C. G. Hu and L. M. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604942 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Li, P. Wen, T. B. Williams, S. Adhikari, C. C. Dun, C. Lu, D. Itanze, L. Jiang, D. L. Carroll, G. L. Donati, P. M. Lundin, Y. J. Qiu and S. M. Geyer, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705796 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Zhang and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13296–13300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Amiinu, Z. H. Pu, X. B. Liu, K. A. Owusu, H. G. R. Monestel, F. O. Boakye, H. N. Zhang and S. C. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702300 CrossRef .
E. H. Zhang, Y. Xie, S. Q. Ci, J. C. Jia, P. W. Cai, L. C. Yi and Z. H. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17288–17298 RSC .
Y. S. Wei, M. Zhang, M. Kitta, Z. Liu, S. Horike and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7906–7916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Han, Z. Y. Bai, T. Zhang, X. B. Wang, X. L. Yang, X. M. Ma, Y. P. Zhang, L. Yang and J. Lu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 724–732 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khalid, A. M. B. Honorato, H. Varela and L. M. Dai, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Wang, J. W. Qin, T. Meng and M. H. Cao, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 626–638 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahmood, H. Tabassum, R. Zhao, W. H. Guo, W. Aftab, Z. B. Liang, Z. L. Sun and R. Q. Zou, Small, 2018, 14, 1803500 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gaab, N. Trukhan, S. Maurer, R. Gummaraju and U. Muller, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 157, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaap9252 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, S. Han, K. Tanaka, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2009, 82, 1052–1054 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, X. B. Zhang, H. Shioyama, T. Mukai, T. Sakai and Q. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 857–861 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100027 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Hao-Fan Wang
	Hao-Fan Wang received his BS and PhD degrees from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University in 2013 and 2018, respectively. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in AIST-Kyoto University Chemical Energy Materials Open Innovation Laboratory (ChEM-OIL). His research interests include carbon materials, MOF-derived materials, and their applications in electrocatalysis and metal–air batteries.

Liyu Chen
	Liyu Chen received his BS degree in 2013 and his PhD in 2017, both from South China University of Technology. Since August 2017, he joined Prof. Qiang Xu's group in AIST-Kyoto University Chemical Energy Materials Open Innovation Laboratory (ChEM-OIL) as a post doc researcher. His research is centered on the design and preparation of MOF-based materials and their applications in heterogeneous catalysis.

Huan Pang
	Huan Pang received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He is now a university distinguished professor at Yangzhou University and Young Changjiang Scholars of the Ministry of Education. His group engaged in the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials, especially for MOF-based materials. He is a member in the editorial board of FlatChem, young editorial board member of Chinese Journal of Inorganic Chemistry, and a managing editor of EnergyChem. His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in nanoelectrochemistry with a focus on energy devices.

Stefan Kaskel
	Stefan Kaskel studied chemistry and received his PhD in Tübingen (1997). After a postdoc in the group of J. D. Corbett, he was a group leader at the Max Planck Institute for Coal Research. Since June 2004, he is Full Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at TU Dresden, and since 2008 also the head of the business unit Chemical Surface Technology at the Fraunhofer Institute (IWS). His research interests are focused on porous and nanostructured materials for applications in energy storage, catalysis, batteries and separation technologies.

Qiang Xu
	Qiang Xu received his PhD in 1994 from Osaka University. He is director of AIST-Kyoto University ChEM-OIL, adjunct Professor of Kobe University/Kyoto University and specially-appointed professor of Yangzhou University. He received Thomson Reuters Research Front Award in 2012 and Humboldt Research Award in 2019 and was recognized a highly cited researcher (2014–2019) in Chemistry and Engineering/Materials Science by Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics. His research interests include the chemistry of nanostructured materials and their applications, especially for catalysis and energy. He is a fellow of Engineering Academy of Japan (EAJ), European Academy of Sciences (EURASC) and National Academy of Sciences, India (NASI).

 	Scheme 1  Design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials with various morphology and composition for the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of MOF-derived carbon matrices with morphology inherited from MOF precursors. (a) 0D N-doped microporous carbon polyhedra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) 0D hollow carbon spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) 1D nitrogen-doped porous carbon nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) 1D N-doped porous carbon hollow tubules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e) 2D nitrogen-doped carbon nanoplates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) 3D hierarchical N-doped porous carbon arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) 3D spherical superstructure of carbon nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of morphology changes of MOF precursors during pyrolysis. (a) Formation of N-doped CNT-assembled hollow dodecahedra in the pyrolysis process of ZIF-67. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Honeycomb-like carbon matrix obtained from the gas release during MOF pyrolysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustrations of morphology regulation of MOF-derived carbon-based materials after pyrolysis. (a) Exfoliation of 1D MOF-derived carbon nanorods to form 2D graphene nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Hydrothermal transformation of MOF-derived carbon polyhedra to carbon nanorod array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of the doping of non-metallic heteroatoms in MOF-derived carbon-based materials. (a) N and P co-doped carbon material derived from MOF precursor with N- and P-containing linkers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) B and N co-doped graphene nanotubes derived from ZIF-67 with urea and boric acid providing heteroatoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis of metal and metal compound nanoparticles in MOF-derived carbon-based materials from single MOF precursors. (a) Carbon-coated CoFe alloy nanoparticles from Prussian blue analogue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fe/Fe3C composite nanoparticles coated by carbon shells derived from Prussian blue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) Composite of metal oxides and carbon from 2D MOFs with BTC as linkers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Cu3P nanoparticles supported by N,P co-doped carbon nanosheets from MOF precursor with P-containing linkers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis of metal and metal compound nanoparticles in MOF-derived carbon-based materials with the assistance of additional precursors. (a) Encapsulation of Mo-based polyoxometalate clusters into ZIF-67 for the synthesis of MoxCoxC nanoparticles confined in carbon polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) NH3 treatment of the pyrolysis product of Co-based Prussian blue analogue to prepare the composite of Co3N and carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2019, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany. (c) Pyrolysis of ZIF-67 and the following annealing with NaH2PO2 to synthesis cobalt phosphides embedded in carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Pyrolysis of ZIF-67 and the following annealing with sulfur powder to synthesis cobalt sulfides embedded in carbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis of atomically dispersed metal sites in MOF-derived carbon-based materials. (a) Design of atomically dispersed Co electrocatalysts on carbon polyhedra through regulating the Zn/Co ratio in ZnCo bimetallic MOFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Design of tungsten single atoms on MOF-derived N-doped carbon through anchoring W ions on the linkers of Zr-based UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Synthesis of Fe single atoms in carbon from ZIF-8 encapsulated FePc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−	(3.1)
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O	(3.2)
O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−	(3.3)
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−	(3.4)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2	(3.5)
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O	(3.6)

 	Fig. 8  MOF-derived metal-free carbon material with N heteroatoms as ORR electrocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of types of N-doping in carbon materials. (b) The contents of each type of N configuration in ZIF-8-derived NPC-900 and NHPC-900-Y. (c) ORR LSV plots of NPC-900 and NHPC-900-Y in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at room temperature (scan rate 10 mV s−1, rotation speed 1600 rpm). (d) The electron transfer number (n) derived from RRDE data of NPC-900 and NHPC-900-Y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Defective MOF-derived metal-free carbon material as ORR electrocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of defect-rich nanosheet-linked-polyhedron carbon (NLPC) form ZIF-8 confined in NaCl crystals. (b) TEM images of ZIF-8-derived polyhedron carbon (PC). (c) TEM images of NLPC. (d) Raman spectra of NLPC and PC. (e) ORR LSV plots of PC, NLPC and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  MOF-derived carbon material embedded with Pt3Co intermetallic nanoparticles as ORR electrocatalyst. (a) HRTEM image of Pt/40Co-NC-900. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a Pt3Co nanoparticle. (c) ORR LSV plots of Pt/40Co-NC-900 and other Pt-based ORR electrocatalysts measured in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at room temperature with rotation rate of 900 rpm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  MOF-derived carbon materials with Fe–Nx–C structure for ORR electrocatalysis. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of rod-shape FeSA–N–C electrocatalyst. (c) HAADF-STEM image of FeSA–N–C showing atomically dispersed Fe sites. (d) EXAFS spectrum and fitting of FeSA–N–C. (Inset: model of FeSA–N–C. Fe red, N blue, C gray spheres) (e) ORR LSV plots of FeSA–N–C and control samples in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) ORR LSV plots for Fe-ZIF-derived Fe–N4–C catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 and Pt/C in 0.1 M HClO4 at 25 °C and 900 rpm. (g) H2O2 yield calculated based on RRDE data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  MOF-derived carbon-based materials with metal-based nanoparticles for ORR electrocatalysis. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of LDH@ZIF-67-800 exhibiting a porous honeycomb-like carbon-based framework embedded with Co nanoparticles. (c) ORR LSV plots in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 and electrode rotation speed of 1600 rpm. (d) Peroxide yield and electron transfer number of LDH@ZIF-67-800 and Pt/C catalyst based on RRDE data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) ORR performance of MOF-derived carbon material with cobalt phosphate. (e) LSV plots obtained in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a rotating rate of 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (f) LSV plots at different rotating rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g and h) ORR performance of bimetallic-MOF-derived CoFe alloys embedded in carbon. (g) ORR LSV plots obtained in O2-saturated 0.1 M NaOH at 1600 rpm and a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (h) Calculated electron transfer number and peroxide yield from RRDE data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 
4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−	(4.1)
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(4.2)

 	Fig. 13  ZIF-8-derived N-doped carbon material as an OER electrocatalyst. Relative abundances of different (a) N and (b) O configurations in ZIF-8-derived carbon materials obtained from XPS data. (c) OER LSV plots of ZIF-8-C0–C8 and IrO2 electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. (d) The relationship between the abundance of different functional groups and the OER performance of ZIF-8-derived carbon materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  NiFe alloy nanoparticles encapsulated in N-doped carbon shell from MOF material as an OER electrocatalyst. (a) TEM image of hcp-NiFe@NC. Inset: SAED pattern (scale bar is 5 1nm−1). (b) XRD pattern of hcp-NiFe@NC and the calculated XRD pattern of hcp structure. (c) OER LSV plots of carbon cloth electrodes loaded with different electrocatalysts, obtained in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (d) Tafel plots derived from the LSV plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Co3O4–carbon hybrid porous nanowire arrays (Co3O4C-NA) derived from MOF arrays for OER electrocatalysis. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Co3O4C-NA. (b) Polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of Co3O4C-NA and control samples in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate 0.5 mV s−1). Inset in (b): optical image of Co3O4C-NA directly used as the OER electrode operating at 1.70 V with generated bubbles on the surface indicating the formation of O2 gas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Co9S8 encapsulated N,S co-doped carbon nanofibers (Co9S8/NSCNFs-850) derived from ZIF-67 as an OER electrocatalyst. (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of Co9S8/NSCNFs-850. (c) OER LSV plots and (d) Tafel plots measured in 1.0 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  Carbon-confined NiCo@NiCoO2 core@shell nanoparticles derived from MOFs for OER electrocatalysis. (a) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of NiCo@NiCoO2/C PMRAs. (b) OER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots of NiCo@NiCoO2/C PMRAs and control samples obtained in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 2.0 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−	(5.1)
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(5.2)

 	Fig. 18  N-Doped carbon material derived Cu-BTC as an HER electrocatalyst. (a) HER polarization curves of S-2 at different CV cycles. (b) HER polarization curves of S-2-cycle and control samples. (c) Tafel plots of different electrocatalyst. The electrochemical tests were conducted in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (d) HER free-energy diagram for different N-doping models. Reproduced with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  MOF-derived carbon-based materials with precious-metal-containing active sites for HER electrocatalysis. (a) HAADF-STEM image of Pt nanoparticles embedded in N-doped hollow porous carbon polyhedrons (Pt@NHPCP) derived from Pt-encapsulated ZIF-8. (b) HER LSV plots of Pt@NHPCP and Pt/C in 0.1 M HClO4 with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (c) Comparation of the HER performances of Pt@NHPCP and Pt/C before and after 5000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) TEM images of Ru-decorated hierarchical porous carbon (Ru-HPC) fabricated from CuRu bimetallic MOF. (e) HER LSV plots of Ru-HPC and control samples in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (f) Mass activity of Ru-HPC and Pt/C in 1.0M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 283. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  MOF-derived carbon material with atomically isolated Ni species (A-Ni–C) as an HER electrocatalyst. (a) HAADF-STEM image of A-Ni–C. Inset: The size distribution figure based on >120 observed Ni species counted from high-magnification images. (b) HER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots in 0.5M H2SO4 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 21  MOF-derived Co-encapsulated N-doped carbon nanotubes on rGO (Co@N-CNTs@rGO) as an HER electrocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of the sandwich-like structure of Co@N-CNTs@rGO. (b) HER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (d) The comparison of the 1st and 1000th LSV curve of Co@N-CNTs@rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  MOF-derived tungsten carbide nanoparticles embedded in N-doped nanoporous carbon (WC@NPC) for HER electrocatalysis. (a) HRTEM image of WC@NPC. (b) HER LSV plots and (c) Tafel plots in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (d) Stability test of WC@NPC at a constant potential. Inset: HER LSV curves before and after stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  HER performances of MOF-derived carbon-based materials with metal phosphides, nitrides and chalcogenides. (a) HER LSV curves of MOF-derived Ni-doped FeP/C electrocatalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4. (b) Chronopotentiometry curves at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2 for 12 hours of NFP/C-3 in 0.5 M H2SO4, 1.0 M PBS, and 1.0 M KOH solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) HER LSV curves of MOF-derived NiCoN/C nanocages and control samples in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (d) Chronoamperometry curves at overpotential of 200 mV of NiCoN/C nanocages and Pt/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) HER LSV curves of CoSe2@DC and control samples in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (f) Chronoamperometric curves CoSe2@DC. Inset: The polarization curves of CoSe2@DC before and after 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  A MOF-derived carbon-based material for ORR and OER bifunctional electrocatalysis. (a and b) SEM images, and (c) TEM image of CoFe20@CC with hierarchically porous superstructure. (d) ORR LSV plots of MOF-derived carbon cages in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at 5 mV s−1 and a rotating speed of 1600 rpm. (e) OER LSV plots in Ar-saturated 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (f) Discharge polarization curves and corresponding powder density plots of Zn–air batteries. (g) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of CoFe20@CC and Pt/C + IrO2 at 5 mA cm−2 for 400 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 25  A MOF-derived carbon-based material for OER and HER bifunctional electrocatalysis. (a) OER LSV plots and (b) HER LSV plots of MOF-derived bifunctional electrocatalysts and precious-metal-based electrocatalysts in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. (c) Schematic illustration of a water electrolyzer. (d) Polarization curves of water electrolyzers. Inset: Photograph of a two-electrode configuration water electrolyzer. (e) Chronoamperometry curve of Fe–Ni@NC-CNT at 10 mA cm−2 with a catalyst loading 1.0 mg cm−2 (geo). Inset: LSV curves before and after 40000 s durability test. (f) O2 and H2 yield as a function of water splitting time for Fe–Ni@NC-CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  A MOF-derived carbon-based trifunctional electrocatalyst for ORR, OER and HER. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of FeNiP/NCH. (b) TEM image of FeNiP/NCH. (c) OER and (d) HER LSV plots of FeNiP/NCH and control samples in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mA cm−2. Inset of (d): HER Tafel plots. (e) ORR LSV plots of FeNiP/NCH and control samples in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte with RDE rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (f) Polarization curve of a water electrolyzer with FeNiP/NCH as the electrocatalyst. Inset: Schematic illustration of a water electrolyzer. (g) Schematic illustration of a Zn–air battery. (h) Polarization curves and power density plots of Zn–air batteries with FeNiP/NCH and Pt/C as air electrode electrocatalysts, respectively. (i) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of rechargeable Zn–air batteries with FeNiP/NCH and Pt/C catalysts on Ni foam, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 350. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
