Recent progress in electrode and electrolyte materials for flexible sodium-ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA07188A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07188A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22507-22543Recent progress in electrode and electrolyte materials for flexible sodium-ion batteries

        
          
            Kuldeep 
            Mishra
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nitish 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            S. A. 
            Hashmi
          
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Physics and Materials Science, Jaypee University, Anoopshahr, Bulandshahr-203390, India
bSchool of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi 110067, India
cDepartment of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi-110007, India. E-mail: sahashmi@physics.du.ac.in
Received 
      22nd July 2020
    , Accepted 6th October 2020First published on 10th October 2020AbstractSodium ion batteries (NIBs) have gained remarkable attention as a potential alternative to lithium ion batteries for upcoming large-scale applications ranging from small electronic equipment to electric vehicles. In recent years, motivated by the growing market of flexible and wearable electronics, researchers have tried to build improved energy-storage systems with the capability of bending, folding and stretching. Significant progress has been made in the preparation of electrode and electrolyte materials for flexible NIBs. Flexible carbonaceous materials such as graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes etc., and other metals and their oxides/sulfides immobilized on flexible carbonaceous sheets have been explored as anodes for flexible NIBs. On the other hand, sodiated layer transition metal oxides, phosphates and few organic compounds pasted on flexible carbonaceous supports are proposed as potential cathodes. On the electrolyte part, polymer-based flexible films have shown their potential as promising systems. In this review article, recent progress and well-developed strategies for the preparation of electrodes and electrolytes to realize flexible and stretchable NIBs are discussed. The performance of promising flexible anodes and cathodes in terms of discharge capacities and cycling in Na half-cells is highlighted. Prospects for the further development of future flexible NIBs are also presented.Kuldeep MishraKuldeep Mishra is Assistant Professor in Department of Physics and Materials Science, Jaypee University Anoopshahr (India). He obtained his PhD in Physics in 2013 from Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida (India). He has been awarded Dr D. S. Kothari Postdoctoral Fellowship from University Grants Commission (India) for research on flexible polymer electrolytes. He has finished a research project on polymer electrolytes for sodium batteries sponsored by Science and Engineering Research Board, Delhi (India) under Young Scientist Scheme. His current research is mainly focused on electrolyte and electrode materials for alternative battery systems based on sodium and magnesium, and supercapacitors.Kuldeep MishraNitish Yadav is currently a National Post-doctoral Fellow at Jawaharlal Nehru University. He received B.E. in Chemical Eng. and M.Sc. in Physics degrees from Birla Institute of Technology and Science – Pilani. He completed his PhD from the University of Delhi under the guidance of Prof. S. A. Hashmi where he worked on porous polymer electrolytes and biomass-derived carbon electrodes. His current research focuses on understanding the energetics and kinetics of atomic-scale processes happening in carbon-based supercapacitor and battery electrodes.S. A. HashmiS. A. Hashmi is Professor in Department of Physics & Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi (India) since January, 2011. He joined University of Delhi in 2005 as reader. Formerly he was a faculty member at North Eastern Regional Institute of Science & Technology, Itanagar (India). He obtained his PhD in Physics in 1988 from Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi (India). His current research activities are focused on the development of electrode and electrolyte materials for electrochemical energy storage devices. His main focus is towards solid-state batteries and supercapacitors based on polymer-based electrolytes.
1 Introduction
Due to rapid industrialization around the globe and the growing need for portable devices, sustainable energy production plays an important role in the advancement of human civilization. Significant effort has been made towards the development of sustainable/renewable energy sources such as wind energy, solar energy, tidal energy, and hydropower. These sources have the potential not only to meet all our energy demands but also to reduce environmental hazards. However, the intermittent nature of power supply from these renewable energy sources has motivated researchers to develop high-performance energy storage systems to make optimum use of the power generated by them. The research and development of lithium-ion battery (LIB) technology became well established after the first commercial LIB was introduced by Sony and Asahi Kasei in 1991. LIBs have started being used for a variety of applications from portable electronic appliances to electric vehicles. However, a few problems associated with the safety, poor low-temperature performance, lifetime, and cost of LIBs still need rectification. The mineral resources of Li are controlled by only a few countries, such as Chile, Australia, Argentina and China. The growing demand for LIBs puts immense pressure on the supply of lithium from its geographically constrained minerals, leading to quick exhaustion of the Li reservoirs and soaring of the cost of this already precious metal.
In contrast, sodium (Na) metal, located just below Li in the periodic table, is the sixth most abundant element in the earth's crust (∼2.6%) and has a uniform geographic distribution with an unlimited amount in sea water in the form of dissolved salts. Due to such high abundance, sodium may lead to a significant cost advantage. Moreover, while most of the LIBs utilize cobalt in the cathode, sodium-ion batteries (NIBs) are less dependent on such an expensive, toxic and rare element.1 Sodium possesses chemical properties similar to lithium and sodium-ion batteries (NIBs) share similar cell chemistry with LIBs (Table 1). Undoubtedly, sodium lags lithium in terms of open circuit potential (E°) and charge-storage capacity (for metal electrodes) but its high abundance and extremely low cost are advantageous in meeting the demand for large-scale energy storage.
Table 1 Comparison between lithium and sodium




Properties
Lithium
Sodium




Cation size (radius, Å)
0.76
1.06


Atomic weight (g mol−1)
6.9
23


Electronic shell structure
2, 1
2, 8, 1


Melting point (°C)
180.54
97.72


Cost, carbonates ($ ton−1)
5000
150



E° (vs. SHE)
−3.05
−2.71


Metal capacity (mA h g−1)
3829
1165




Around 50 years ago, a solid state sodium electrolyte, sodium β-alumina (NaAl11O17), led to pioneering efforts in the development of sodium ion batteries, resulting in two commercial devices: (a) sodium–sulfur (Na–S) cells and (b) ZEBRA cells. But both of these systems require elevated operating temperature (∼300 °C) and their power density is observed to be poor. Even then, their high energy density combined with a significantly long cycle life makes them suitable for load-leveling applications. In recent years the research and development of sodium ion batteries (NIBs) has been highly motived by the current state-of-the-art LIB technologies due to their various similarities in chemistry and charge-storage mechanisms, and primarily, researchers are working to realize high energy density NIBs at moderate/room temperature.
The thrust of developing energy storage systems to meet the requirements of modern technologies and future demand has reached to a stage of realizing batteries for rapidly growing markets of small, lightweight, thin, and flexible electronic devices. Flexible electronics have gained considerable interest due their incomparable portability, environmental compatibility and wide applicability. The existing energy storage systems, including Li- and Na-based technologies, are bulky, heavy and rigid to meet the demands of flexible electronics. In this regard, significant attention has been given to flexible LIBs;2–4 however, research on flexible NIBs is still in the early stage. In the last few years, the interesting properties like high abundance, low cost and suitable cell chemistry of sodium have motivated researchers to develop flexible energy storage systems based on it. Recently, a few electrode and electrolyte materials with outstanding structural and electrochemical properties and significant performance for sodium based flexible energy storage devices, including NIBs, sodium-ion capacitors (SICs), Na–S batteries and Na–Se batteries, have been reviewed.5,6 However, the progress in electrode and electrolyte materials specifically for high-performance flexible NIBs still needs special attention to build a strong base for the materials' choice for a commercially viable energy storage system.
This review covers the recent developments in the electrode and electrolyte materials for flexible NIBs. Different types of carbonaceous materials, such as reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and carbon nanofibers (CNFs), and their composites with inorganics, have been discussed as anode materials for flexible NIBs, followed by various layered structures pasted on flexible carbonaceous substrates and organic materials as the cathode. This review discusses different approaches of structural modifications in flexible electrodes for superior performance in sodium half-cells. In the electrolyte part, the possibility of using high ionic conducting polymer electrolytes for future flexible NIBs is also discussed. This review would give better understanding of flexible electrode and electrolyte materials for flexible NIBs and the different ways of obtaining high performance materials by altering their structures to obtain viable products.
2 Conventional sodium ion battery (NIB) battery build-up
The structure of NIBs has a close resemblance to that of LIBs. Fig. 1a illustrates the structure of a typical NIB and the various classes of anodes, cathodes and electrolytes. The anode, cathode and electrolyte are the three essential components of a standard galvanic cell. A brief discussion on these components is given below:
 Fig. 1  Illustration of various components of a typical NIB (a) and typical materials used to prepare flexible NIBs (b). (n-PAQs: n-type redox-active poly(anthraquinonyl sulphide), p-PTA: p-dopable polytriphenylamine, PPy: polypyrrole, NTP: NaTi2(PO4)3, NVP: Na3V2(PO4)3, NNMO: Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2, NLNMO: Na0.80Li0.12Ni0.22Mn0.66O2, NNMMO: Na0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1Mn0.67O2, NMO: Na0.44MnO2, NFPP: Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7), NFP: NaFePO4, NNFMO: NaNi1/3Fe1/3Mn1/3O2, rGO: reduced graphene oxide, HC: hard carbon, CNF: carbon nanofiber, NGQDs: nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots, and SNTAs: sandwich like nanotube arrays). 
2.1 Anode or negative electrode
The anode provides electrons to the external circuit through oxidation during the electrochemical discharge reaction. Various carbonaceous materials, transition metal oxides/sulfides, and intermetallic and organic compounds have been well investigated for NIBs. Research on the anode materials for NIBs can be categorized on the basis of three mechanisms during sodiation/de-sodiation processes:7–10
a insertion reaction-based anodes such as carbonaceous materials and titanium-based oxides,
b conversion reaction-based anodes such as transition metal oxides or transition metal sulfides, and
c alloying reaction based anodes prepared by alloying of sodium with elements of group 14 or 15 elements.11
Many anode materials that undergo the above processes have been investigated for NIBs.7–12 However, the sluggish reaction kinetics due to the large ionic size of Na+ ions (1.06 Å) still remains a big issue to be resolved.
2.2 Cathode or positive electrode
The cathode accepts electrons from the external electric circuit through reduction during the electrochemical discharge reaction. The cathode material must exhibit negligible structural change during the intercalation/de-intercalation process to ensure minimum capacity fading upon repeated cycling. The intercalation/de-intercalation processes involve the interstitial insertion/removal of Na ions into a host crystal lattice, as discussed by a number of researchers, and as expressed in the chemical equation below:7–12  
This reaction is highly reversible because similar transition states are realized for both the forward and backward reactions. However, the radius of sodium (1.06 Å) is larger as compared to that of lithium atoms (0.76 Å). Due to this, sodium may form multiple crystallographic phases when inserted into the host electrode material lattice which results in partial loss of reversibility. Layered transition metal oxides Na1−xMO2 (M: transition metals such as Fe, Co, Mn, Ti, Cr etc.) and their derivatives have been synthesized and investigated for cathode preparation. A few metal fluorides (metal: Fe, V, Ti, Co, and Mn) including sodiated compounds have also been studied. Phosphates and fluorophosphates such as NaFePO4, Na2FePO4F, and NaVPO4F, and pyrophosphates such as (MoO2)2P2O7, Na2FeP2O7 and β-Na2MnP2O7 have also been investigated as cathode materials.
2.3 Electrolyte
The electrolyte is an important component that controls the chemistry between the two electrodes and affects the electrochemical performance of the battery. It is an ion conducting and electronic insulating medium sandwiched between the two electrodes. It acts as a medium for charge transfer between the anode and cathode. Various types of organic liquid electrolytes are being commercially used in energy storage devices but they are plagued by the problems associated with these liquid-phase electrolytes, such as leakage, corrosion at the electrode/electrolyte interface, volatility, flammability, and overheating. In order to circumvent these problems, various types of solid electrolytes have been investigated, as well as alternatives such as crystalline inorganic electrolytes, glassy electrolytes, polymer-based electrolytes, and hybrid electrolyte systems.7,13
3 Solid-state flexible NIBs
The development of flexible batteries including NIBs, characterized by their light weight, portability, and ease of bending, rolling, and folding, is a fast-growing area of research that aims to provide us with next-generation wearable electronic textiles, portable electronics, wireless sensors and connected devices.14–19 Similar to LIBs, NIBs comprise main components such as anode, cathode, electrolyte, current collector and packaging materials. Few typical electrode and electrolyte materials for flexible NIBs are illustrated in Fig. 1b. Conventionally, electrodes for NIBs are fabricated using the slurry-casting method. In this method, a slurry containing different electrode constituents such as the active material, conducting additive and binder is coated on a current collector, and then dried and pressed to form the electrode. Electrodes prepared by this process suffer from electrode layer detaching from the current collector upon repeated bending, which affects the battery performance through the reduction of the overall volumetric/gravimetric energy density of the electrode. Conventionally, in these batteries, the liquid form of electrolytes is used, which has its own drawbacks, such as electrode corrosion and electrolyte leakage. Such a configuration of NIBs is characteristically rigid and heavy. In order to meet the energy requirements for various applications like wearables electronic textiles, portable electronics, wireless sensors and connected devices the battery must be flexible, bendable and stretchable. This requires highly flexible and deformable electrodes and electrolytes with high compatibility with such electrodes. Currently, the research in the development of flexible batteries is in the nascent phase. The design and architecture play an important role in an efficient, well-performing energy storage system.20 Performance parameters such as specific capacity, cycle life, rate capability, and flexibility are strongly21 dependent on the properties of the electrodes and electrolyte and the design of the flexible battery.22 Flexible batteries are, in general, obtained in two forms: (a) planar and (b) cable shaped (Fig. 2). Yang et al.21 reported a planar shaped wearable NIB full cell constituting nitrogen-doped carbon sheets derived from okara as the anode and sodium vanadium phosphate (Na3V2(PO4)3) (NVP) as the cathode. The battery delivered a good specific capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1 up to 200 cycles. The authors emphasized on the sustainable and low-cost route to synthesize carbon electrodes for NIBs. Recently, Wang et al.23 reported a cable-shaped flexible NIB utilizing a nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dot coated layered transition-metal dichalcogenide, tungsten disulfide (WS2), supported with porous three dimensional carbon foam as the anode, layered Na0.44MnO2 coated onto nickel foam as the cathode, and NaPF6 + EC/DEC solution as the electrolyte. A 7 cm long cable-shaped battery cell delivered a capacity of ∼1.3 mA h at a current of 3 mA. The NIB retained a capacity of 58.1 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram and photographs of the cable battery (a), reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry, planar battery (b), reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society, and illustration of typical planar and cable shaped batteries with various components (c, d). 
Such examples demonstrate the potential of flexible NIBs; however, immense progress in developing an optimized anode, cathode and electrolytes is still needed to realize a commercial level NIB. Currently, research efforts are being made to address three main issues related to flexible batteries: (i) synthesis/preparation of flexible electrodes, (ii) increasing the electrochemical performance/stability of the electrodes and electrolyte, and (iii) fabrication of devices with high energy and power density.25 The selection and design of electrodes with good mechanical flexibility, high capacity, and excellent conductivity and the preparation of highly flexible and high ionic conducting electrolyte/separators are the key requirements for a viable NIB.
3.1 Electrode materials for flexible NIBs
In NIBs the term “flexible” may reflect three main classes of batteries: bendable, stretchable, and compressible. Bendable NIBs are the most investigated devices. In order to obtain an ultra-thin, light weight, and flexible NIB, the synthesis of flexible electrodes is an important task. For flexible electrode preparation, there are a few important factors such as the morphology, crystal structure, and composition that affect the charge transfer processes and also the overall electrochemistry of the battery.24 Two important types of electrodes that are prepared are: (i) intrinsically flexible “stand-alone” electrodes and (ii) flexible composite electrodes pasted on a flexible substrate such as carbon cloth and carbon nanofibers. CNT and graphene based flexible “stand-alone” anode materials have been prominently investigated for LIBs and NIBs due to their good ion storage capacity. On the other hand, Metal-substrate-based flexible electrodes are constructed by directly growing oriented and architecture nanoarrays on conductive metal substrates.26,27

3.1.1 Anode materials. 
For anode materials, as discussed earlier, insertion, conversion and alloying reaction based materials have been extensively studied. These materials have been studied well for flexible batteries also as “stand-alone” anodes and as flexible electrode-coated substrates. While graphite works efficiently as an anode for lithium storage, the same is not true for its use in NIBs due to the larger radius of the sodium atom/ion that hinders the proper intercalation of sodium between the graphitic layers.7 In recent years, other forms of carbon, such as hard carbon, soft carbon, and graphene, have been identified as attractive materials as they show good sodium retention in their disordered structure possessing a larger interlayer distance. Hard carbons also show better cycling stability, unlike graphite, and hence they are less prone to the formation of a solid-electrolyte interface (SEI).7–9 Additionally, carbonaceous materials such as graphene films, carbon cloth (CC) and carbon fibers exhibit good structural stability against repeated deformations. This kind of flexibility makes these materials a great choice not only as substrates but also as stand-alone electrodes.
a Stand-alone carbonaceous anodes. 
Carbonaceous materials, with sp2-bonded carbon atoms forming a honeycomb-like crystal lattice structure, display unique characteristics such as good electrical conductivity, high chemical and thermal stability, low toxicity and ease of functionalization, which make them exceptional materials of choice for applications in flexible and wearable electronics such as sensors, including temperature and humidity sensors, electrochemical sensors etc., wearable healthcare systems, flexible supercapacitors and batteries.28 A great emphasis has been given to such materials in flexible and stretchable LIBs.29 Graphene is a 2D material comprising a monoatomic layer of carbon atoms that possesses high stiffness with significant electrical and thermal conductivity, a large specific surface area and good electrochemical activity. These properties are enough to establish graphene sheets as potential electrodes for NIBs. These light weight sheets have excellent mechanical stability, a large specific surface area, good electrochemical activity and electrical conductivity. Zhang et al. prepared a porous graphene film using a facile filtration method together with a thermal reduction step.30 They proposed this membrane as a binder-free anode for LIBs and NIBs. A good reversible capacity of 195 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 has been obtained after 50 cycles using porous graphene as the working electrode and sodium as the counter electrode.30 David and Singh31 investigated the electrochemical cycling behavior of a reduced graphene oxide (rGO) paper electrode for lithium and sodium. They studied the effect of the annealing temperature and gas environment on the electrical conductivity, electrochemical capacity, and rate capability of the electrodes. The lithium storage capacity has been found to increase with increasing temperature in an argon atmosphere while a sharp decline in Na-charge capacity has been observed for rGO annealed above 500 °C. This is attributed to the increased order and decreased interlayer spacing, which blocks the sodium insertion in the electrode. In order to improve the sodium storage performance of graphene, Deng et al. reported flexible sulfur-doped graphene films as anode materials for NIBs (Fig. 3a and b).32 They used thiourea as a sulfurizing and reducing agent, which induces larger spacing between layers and additional redox sites for sodium activity. This anode showed a good reversible capacity of 377 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation (a) and photograph (b) of a sulfur-doped flexible graphene film and its discharge–charge profiles at 100 mA g−1 current density (c), reproduced with permission,32 copyright 2016, Elsevier. Schematic illustration of the fabrication of highly flexible N-CNF films using electrospinning (d), and its cycling performance at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 (e), reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
Carbon nanofibers (CNFs) have also been investigated as potential anode materials for NIBs. Electrospinning is an easy, inexpensive and scalable technique for the preparation of fibrous materials, which is found to be suitable for the preparation of CNFs. Jin et al. prepared mechanically flexible, binder-free carbon nanofiber electrode materials by high temperature carbonization of electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN) polymer.33 In this anode system, the electrode capacity was found to be inferior for sodium due to its larger size as compared to lithium. For sodium, the electrode showed a specific capacity value of ∼50 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, while for lithium, it was found to be ∼200 mA h g−1. To obtain better anode materials, the same group tailored CNFs using lignin, which is the second most abundant natural polymer.34 They reported low-cost and bio-based carbon nanofibre webs obtained from PAN and refined lignin, extracted from hardwood lignosulfonate, via electrospinning, followed by stabilization and carbonization performed at three different temperatures 800, 1000 and 1300 °C. The composition with 50% refined lignin carbonized at 1300 °C showed the best performance with a reversible capacity of about 292.6 mA h g−1 and a high initial efficiency of 70.5% at a current density of 20 mA g−1 with a good rate capability of 80 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, and excellent cycling stability. Using the same electrospinning technique, Li et al. obtained a lightweight, flexible and free-standing porous CNF with a three-dimensional (3D) interconnected structure by the carbonization of a polymer mixture PAN-triblock copolymer Pluronic F127.35 The Pluronic F127 copolymer was used as a pore inducer during carbonization. A good reversible capacity of 266 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.2C, corresponding to ∼80% of the initial charge capacity, was shown by the prepared anode.35 Wang et al. reported free-standing N-doped CNF films obtained using polyamic acid (PAA) as a polymer precursor using electrospinning (Fig. 3d).36 With a high level of nitrogen doping, the N-CNF anode displays an excellent structural stability with a uniformly porous 3D interconnected conductive structure. The above anode system delivered a stable capacity of 377 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles (Fig. 3f) and retained 154 mA h g−1 at a current density of up to 15 A g−1.
b Composite anodes deposited on flexible substrates. 
Studies on LIBs have shown that 2-D layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs e.g., MoS2 and WS2) are promising materials for efficient storage and release of Li ions.37–39 These inorganic materials have also been studied as an anode for flexible NIBs. Particularly, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has received great attention for use in LIBs and SIBs due to its highly flexible layered structure, good potential, and high specific capacity. Yang et al. reported free-standing and flexible MoS2/CNF anode films in which MoS2 nanoparticles were encapsulated in porous CNFs.40 The anode system delivered an excellent capacity of 260 mA h g−1 after 2600 cycles at 1 A g−1 and high rate performance as it offers a capacity of 210 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1. The carbon network, in the above report, gave superior electrical conductivity, available to accommodate volume changes and had improved ion transport. David et al. synthesized layered, free-standing, flexible paper anodes for NIBs composed of acid-exfoliated few-layer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and rGO flakes using vacuum filtration of homogeneous dispersions of various compositional ratios of MoS2 and rGO, followed by thermal reduction at elevated temperatures (Fig. 4a).41 They experimentally demonstrated, for the first time, the reversible electrochemical storage of Na in a layered self-standing MoS2 composite electrode at room temperature. The electrical conductivity of the MoS2 composite increases significantly upon rGO addition (Fig. 4b). It has been observed that the intercalation of Na+ into the S–S layered space to form NaxMoS2 is followed by the separation of MoS2 into the Mo and Na2S phases. The sodium half-cell using the above anode system delivered a high first cycle electrochemical capacity of 338 mA h g−1 with excellent cyclability of Na ions (Fig. 4c). Xiong et al. reported a large-scale flexible membrane of MoS2/CNFs by an electrospinning technique (Fig. 4d).42 They obtained 1D nanofibers having a smooth surface with an average diameter of ∼200 nm, which reduced to 150 nm after thermal treatment at 800 °C. The flexible MoS2 distributed CNF anode showed a superior rate capability of 283.3, 246.5 and 186.3 mA h g−1 at 0.5, 1 and 2 A g−1, respectively, with outstanding cyclability (Fig. 4e). The homogeneous distribution of few-layered MoS2 nanosheets in the hybrid nanofibers has been observed and the free-standing structural nature provides excellent cycling stability to the anode.42 Heterostructured MoS2–graphene materials also provide us with another avenue for high capacity Na+ storage. Recently, Li et al. explored liquid-phase exfoliated graphene (LEGr) supported MoS2 heterostructures obtained by a one-pot microwave-assisted solvothermal method as an anode material for NIBs (Fig. 4f).43 They obtained a reversible capacity of 387.3 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 0.3 A g−1 (Fig. 4g) and a high capacity of 3182.2 mA h g−1 at 1.0 A g−1, which was superior to that of stand-alone MoS2 and MoS2@rGO anode systems. The authors claimed that the outstanding electrochemical performance of the anode system was due to the formation of unique ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets hybridized with the LEGr nanosheet heterostructures, which improve electrical conductivity, providing more sodium storage sites, and alleviate the volume-change-induced pulverization.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation showing the synthesis of rGO/MoS2 composite paper (a), electrical conductivity vs. MoS2 loading (b), and sodium charge capacity of various electrodes at a constant current density of 25 mA g−1 (c). Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Photograph of flexible MoS2-CNFs film (d) and rate capacity of the MoS2-CNFs at different current densities (e). Reproduced with permission.42 Schematic of the synthesis of the MoS2@LEGr heterostructures (f) and cycling performance of the MoS2@LEGr electrode at a current density of 0.3 A g−1 (g). Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, IOP Publishing, Ltd. 
Similar to MoS2, MoSe2 has three stacked atom layers (Se–Mo–Se) bound by the van der Waals force with a smaller band gap and larger layered space. This hints towards its better electric conductivity and Coulombic efficiency when used as an anode material in NIBs.44 Zhang et al. studied MoSe2 nanosheets grown on CC as an anode material for NIBs.45 They prepared flexible anode films using an efficient solvothermal method. The MoSe2 nanosheets grown uniformly on carbon fiber enhanced the interface reaction area between the electrode and electrolyte, while the carbon fiber provided a conductive pathway for fast electron transfer. The anode system delivered a stable discharge capacity of 452.6 mA h g−1 with 85.5% retention after 100 cycles at 0.2 A g−1 and a high discharge capacity of 161.9 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 5 A g−1. Another compound of molybdenum, namely layered molybdenum trioxide (MoO3), has recently gained significant attention as an anode material for NIBs. MoO3 is a well-known lithium insertion material.46 The high specific capacity, low cost, and ease of preparation make MoO3 an attractive choice for NIBs. Li et al. investigated the effect of oxygen vacancies on the electrochemical performance of MoO3−x deposited on a flexible current collector by the thermal reduction method.47 They demonstrated that MoO3−x, with a well-controlled oxygen vacancy, exhibits a specific capacity of 156 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1, close to the theoretical value with excellent rate capability and stability for at least 2000 charge–discharge cycles. Chen et al. synthesized a MoO3/CNF composite anode for NIBs and LIBs by thermal reduction and hot HNO3 treatment of fibres obtained from electrospinning of a solution of PVA and ammoniummolybdate tetrahydrate.48 The synthesized porous structure provided a large specific surface area of ∼400 m2 g−1. The system showed excellent rate capability with a capacity 300.9 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles.
Phosphorus (P) is also considered as an attractive anode material for NIBs due to its higher theoretical specific capacity (∼2600 mA h g−1) due to the formation of the Na3P phase,49 its natural abundance and low price.7 However, phosphorus undergoes tremendous volume expansion (∼391%) during sodiation/de-sodiation since each phosphorus atom bonds with up to three sodium atoms. This results in the pulverization of the phosphorus particles and formation of an unstable solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) on their surface.50 Ma et al. explored the possibility of improving the electrochemical performance of the phosphorus anode by synthesizing its composite with highly conducting carbon materials.51 They obtained a binder-free and free-standing phosphorus loaded CNF anode on a graphene film (P/CNF@rGO) (Fig. 5a) and observed that graphene coating in the anode promotes electronic transport, controls the large volume change of the red phosphorus layer and prevents the loss of phosphorus from the substrate. From cyclic voltammetry studies, the formation of various NaxPy alloy phases was confirmed. Additionally, the presence of anodic peaks ∼0.75 V and 0.93 V revealed the easier desodiation in the (P/CNF@rGO) anode than the simple P/CNF anode (Fig. 5b). The synthesized anode system delivered a good capacity of 725.9 mA h g−1 after 55 cycles at a current density of 50 mA g−1 (Fig. 5c) and the cell delivered a significant capacity of 406.6 mA h g−1 after 180 cycles even at larger current densities, as high as 1000 mA g−1. Liu et al. recently synthesized red phosphorus/graphene composite flexible anodes for NIBs using a single-step flash-heat synthesis process.52 They observed that the nanosized phosphorus helps in internal stress reduction during sodiation/de-sodiation which leads to a long cycle life. It also decreases the sodium ion diffusion length and improves the transport kinetics. In this anode system, the reduced graphene provides electronic conductivity and mechanical support to the phosphorus particles against volume change during charge/discharge. The fabricated NIB cell delivered an average capacity of 1625 mA h g−1 during 200 deep cycles at 1 A g−1. The same research group also reported red phosphorus nanodots on rGO as a flexible and ultra-fast anode for NIBs.53 In order to deal with the limitations of pure phosphorus, they deposit red phosphorus nanodots densely and uniformly onto rGO sheets. The fabricated highly flexible anode provided a charge capacity of 1211 mA h g−1 in the initial cycles and retained 914 mA h g−1 after 300 charge/discharge cycles with a current density of 1593.9 mA g−1.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthesis process of the P/CFs@RGO composites (a), cyclic voltammograms for the first three cycles of the P/CFs@RGO composite (b), and cycling performance of red P, CFs, P/CFs, and P/CFs@RGO composites at 50 mA g−1 (c), reproduced with permission,51 copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Tin (Sn) is another promising candidate as an anode material for NIBs. It is a low cost and environment-friendly material with a high theoretical capacity of 847 mA h g−1 with sodium in the Na15Sn4 form.54,55 However, the volume expansion of 420% during the conversion of Sn to Na15Sn4 leads to continuous pulverization of active materials and loss of electrical contact with the current collector which results in capacity fading and deterioration in cyclability.56 Xu et al. reported a porous carbon/tin (C/Sn) composite anode system prepared by the dispersion of SnO2 nanoparticles in a nanophase-patterned polymer matrix followed by carbonization for NIBs and LIBs.57 The C/Sn anode system delivered lower capacity and inferior rate capability for Na as compared to Li due to the large size of Na ions, which resulted in sluggish Na-ion diffusion and a large volume change in the sodiation/desodiation process. Liu et al. adopted an interesting approach to deal with the problems of Sn-based electrodes.58 They prepared an anode for NIBs where Sn nanodots are encapsulated in porous N2-doped CNF anodes. To obtain such an anode material, researchers electrospun PAN, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and SnCl2 solution into fibers, which was followed by carbonization and reduction at 700 °C in a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 6a and b). A capacity of 633 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 current density was obtained, close to the theoretical capacity of 645 mA h g−1 and a capacity of 483 mA h g−1 was retained after 1300 cycles at 2000 mA g−1 (Fig. 6c and d). The above performance appears superior to that of bulk Sn. The authors explained the excellent performance of the anode on the basis of ultra-small Sn nanodots of 1–2 nm size and uniform distribution nanodots in the carbon fiber. The ultra-small nanodots reduce the absolute strain and improve the utilization rate of active materials during sodiation/desodiation, while the uniform distribution of nanodots creates a balanced stress and maintains the integrity of the electrode during cycling. On the other hand, the 1D porous N2-doped carbon frame interlinks into a 3D conductive network, which supports the electron and Na+ ion diffusion kinetics and reduces the large variation in the volume of the anode and prevents pulverization and aggregation. In another approach, Xu et al. reported a binder-free anode of SnS2 and graphene nanosheets deposited on a CC substrate using a two-step solvothermal method.59 In this system, the formation of an irreversible solid electrolyte interface affected the discharge capacity of the SnS2/graphene nanosheet anode after the first cycle (Fig. 6e). However, the easier electron transfer and fast kinetics of the anode were attributed to its unique integrated structure, which improved rate and cycling capability. The above anode system demonstrated its potential with a high reversible specific discharge capacity of 378 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at a specific current of 1200 mA g−1, which was better than that of the standalone SnS2 nanosheets (Fig. 6f). In order to deal with issues such as insufficient conductivity and volume expansion, Chen et al. recently reported a flexible and self-standing SnS2/CNF film, prepared by electrospinning.60 The SnS2/CNF anode delivered an excellent capacity of 570.8, 521.9, 462.9, 417.7 and 247.1 mA h g−1 at a current density 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 A g−1, respectively, with good cycle reversibility (Fig. 6g). Additionally, the doping of Mo may enhance the ion transfer kinetics by elevating the electrical conductivity of tin based anodes. Using the above idea, recently, Wang et al. reported Mo–SnO2 nanoflake arrays anchored on carbon foam as a flexible anode with superior performance, 575.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles, to other undoped SnO2 based anode systems.61 The tin-antimony (SnSb) alloy is considered as a better compound as far as structural integrity and conductivity of the electrode are concerned. It has also been investigated for use as an anode for NIBs. Ji et al. prepared and investigated rGO/SnSb nanocomposites as anode materials for NIBs.62 In this system, the unique nanostructured rGO–SnSb nanocomposite delivered a high initial reversible capacity of >400 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and retained a reversible specific capacity value greater than 360 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles. In this study, the rGO enhanced the conductivity of the electrodes and also buffered the volume changes in the SnSb alloy while maintaining structural integrity. SnSe nanoparticles/CNF has also been reported, recently, as a binder-free flexible anode for SIBs delivering 290 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 after 200 cycles.63
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the preparation process for Sn NDs@PNC NF (a), photos of the as-spun PAN/PMMA/SnCl2 fiber membrane, calcined self-supported Sn NDs@PNC electrode and fabricated Na-ion batteries (b), galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles obtained at a current density of 200 mA g−1 of the Sn NDs@PNC electrode in the voltage range of 0.01–2 V vs. Na+/Na (c), and long-term cycling stability of the Sn NDs@PNC electrode at a current density of 2000 mA g−1 (d), reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons. The charge/discharge curves of SnS2@graphene nanosheet arrays at various current rates (e), and cycling performance of SnS2@graphene and SnS2 nanosheet arrays at 1200 mA g−1 for 200 cycles (f), reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2016, Elsevier, and rate capability of SnS2/CNFs (g), reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Titanium (Ti) is also an important element which is widely distributed in the earth's crust, and its compounds are highly stable, environmentally friendly and inexpensive. Titanium-based compounds have been widely studied as anode materials for LIBs. For NIBs, layered Na/Ti containing oxides are extensively explored as high-performance anode materials as titanium redox can provide a suitable insertion potential and superior structural stability, ensuring the safety and long-term operation of NIBs.64 Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been largely investigated as an anode for LIBs and NIBs due to its high power density, intrinsic safety, low cost, and environmental friendliness. González et al. prepared self-organized titania nanotubes (nt-TiO2) by anodization of Ti foil at 100 V.65 The anatase structure was attained by the nanotubes after annealing at 550 °C. NMR studies on this system revealed that the accommodation of sodium in anatase nt-TiO2 was mainly due to pseudocapacitive behavior. Two types of sodium were found in anatase nt-NaxTiO2, and the reversible accommodation of Na occurs on the anatase surface. The self-organized nt-TiO2 delivered about 190 mA h g−1 after 800 cycles. The low electrical conductivity and poor ion diffusion coefficient of TiO2 lead to poor intrinsic electrochemical activity.66 Zhu et al. reported a graphene-modified TiO2 microsphere (TiO2@rGO) composite anode system prepared by a spray-drying method.67 In the above system, the rGO introduced good conductivity, flexibility and a large surface area, which, in turn, enhanced the electrochemical performance of the composite anode and controlled the volume change during sodiation/desodiation. This anode system delivered a high charge capacity of 170 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, and long cycle life with 87% capacity retention after 300 cycles at 0.2C. In order to improve the performance of the anode system, dispersing nanostructured TiO2 on conductive carbonaceous materials appears to be a good approach for anode preparation for NIBs. Recently, Zhang et al. reported a flexible anode of rGO modified TiO2 nanoparticles with N doped carbon foam (NCF) for NIBs and LIBs prepared by the hydrolysis method (Fig. 7a).68 The NCF-TiO2 anode displayed a jump in its electrical conductivity from 2.5 mS cm−1 to 0.14 S cm−1 upon rGo modification. This anode system showed high electron/ion transfer kinetics with good capacities of 305, 208, and 120 mA h g−1 at 0.5, 2, and 10C, respectively, and nearly 100% capacity retention after 70 cycles at 5C for the NIB. The authors demonstrated the significant flexibility of the above anode system in a typical LIB (Fig. 7b). Wang et al. introduced a new graphene/TiO2 composite with germanium (Ge) as the key element.69 In the above anode system, graphene doped on Ge enhances the battery properties by accommodating volume change during sodiation/desodiation due to its inherent mechanical flexibility and strong thermal/chemical stability (Fig. 7c), while the thin coating of TiO2 enhances the stability of the cycle and rate performances. The electrode system delivered a capacity of 190 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with negligible capacity loss for NIBs with a coulombic efficiency close to 99% (Fig. 7d). Few layered Ti-based anode materials have also been investigated for NIBs such as Na2Ti3O7 and Na2Ti6O13.22,70–72
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of NCF@rGO-TiO2 (a), schematic presentation of a LIB using the NCF@rGO-TiO2 anode and its operation under different bending conditions (b), reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Illustration of volume change of the Ge@graphene@TiO2 electrode and traditional nanofibers before and after cycling (c), and comparative cycling performance of the Ge@graphene@TiO2 electrode at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (d). Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
Few unclassified materials have also been investigated for anode preparation. Yan et al. reported a new anode material of sodium trimesic (Na3TM) synthesized by an acid-base neutralization reaction.73 They demonstrated the enhanced Na-storage properties of the anode when 3D CNT networks were embedded in its microparticles. The anode delivered a maximum reversible capacity of 214.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1. The above report revealed that only two Na ion storage was reversible after the initial uptake of three Na ions and the sodiation/desodiation processes were stepwise with one Na ion transfer per step. Iron disulfide (FeS2) has been investigated well for LIBs.74,75 It is environmentally friendly, low cost, and naturally abundant in the form of pyrite.76 Chen et al. reported an FeS2/CNT neural network (FeS2/CNTNN) composite anode obtained by a one-step solvothermal method.77 This anode delivered a reversible specific capacity of 394 mA h g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1 after 400 cycles. Furthermore, the anode delivered superior rate and cycling performance, with capacities of 309 and 254 mA h g−1 at 1 and 22 A g−1 after 1800 and 8400 cycles, respectively. They attributed the high performance to the FeS2/CNT neural network nanostructure with enhanced electronic conductivity, a short sodium-ion diffusion distance, and better volume expansion accommodation. Additionally, the anode showed redox reactions dominated by pseudo-capacitive behaviors, which, in turn, resulted in enhanced Na storage with an unexpected high rate capability and large cyclability. Another compound of iron, Nano-sized iron phosphides encapsulated in a flexible carbon substrate, has also been explored for NIBs. Recently, FeP nanoparticles wrapped in a 3D interconnected N, P-codoped CNF film (FeP@NPCNF) have been demonstrated in a flexible NIB with a sodium vanadium phosphate (NVP) cathode by Shi et al. (Fig. 8a and b).78 The anode materials prepared by a simple electrospinning method followed by phosphorization at elevated temperature possessed uniformly dispersed FeP nanoparticles in a flexible 3D interconnected CNF network. The flexible NIB full cell using the above electrode configuration delivered a first discharge capacity of 296 mA h g−1 and retained 238 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles (Fig. 8c). Although the above system demonstrates significant potential, the capacity deterioration remains an issue like in other flexible NIB full cells (Fig. 8d). Silicon carbide (SiC) has also been explored as a pre-sodiated graphene/SiC/HCF anode for flexible NIBs.79 The above anode delivered a highly reversible capacity of 501 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1 with an excellent rate capacity up to 100 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a NVP//FeP@NPCNF full cell (a), photograph of a glowing LED using the above cell (b), galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles (c), and cycling performance of the NVP//FeP@NPCNF full cell at 0.2 A g−1 (d). Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


3.1.2 Cathode materials. 
As discussed in the earlier section, various layer-structured transition metal oxides, phosphates, fluorophosphates etc. have been investigated as cathode materials for NIBs. As far as flexible NIBs are concerned, very few cathode materials have been reported. The most commonly used method to fabricate flexible cathodes is to grow the active materials on flexible supports, such as CC, CNFs, graphene paper, nickel foam, and Ti foil. Yang et al.80 reported a binder-free flexible Na2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2/rGO cathode prepared by simple ultrasonic dispersion and vacuum filtration. The π–π bonds of rGO imparted strong bonding between rGO and Na2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2 particles, and the rGO also enhanced the electrical conductivity of the cathode. The electrode delivered a specific capacity of 83 mA h g−1 at 1C, which is close to the theoretical capacity of Na2/3[Ni1/3Mn2/3]O2. The electrode retained 68.4% specific capacity at a high current density of 10C. The ternary NiCo2O4 (NCO) has also shown improved electrochemical performance in the form of enhanced electrochemical activity and superior electrical conductivity for LIBs, and has been proposed as a potential alternative to graphite.81 Various NCO/carbon composites have also been investigated as a cathode for flexible LIBs and NIBs. Mo et al.82 prepared a 3D porous NCO nanowire array on carbon fiber cloth as a cathode material for flexible LIBs and NIBs. The NCO/carbon fiber cathode showed a good discharge specific capacity of 542 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles with a significant reversible capacity retention of 81%. The improved electrochemical performance of the cathode was attributed to the 3D porous nanostructured NCO/carbon fiber composite with a novel carbon skeleton, which provides enough space for volume expansion during sodiation/de-sodiation and facilitates faster ion/electron kinetics.
Polyanion-based cathode materials, NaxMy(XO4)n (M = transition metals, X = S, P, Si, As, Mo, and W), have been explored well as cathode materials for NIBs.83 The covalently bonded oxygen atoms in the polyanions provide stable 3D host framework structures with excellent thermal stability and long cycle life with structural robustness and stability to these materials.84 However, the low electrical conductivity due to their distinctive structures associated with electronic interactions of the XO4 anion units during cell reactions is an issue to resolve along with the variable volume expansion during Na intercalation/de-intercalation. In this regard, two main approaches are as follows: (i) reduction of particle size of active materials to the nano-range to shorten the Na+ diffusion length and (ii) addition of micro/nano-porous conductive carbonaceous materials in the active material to improve electronic conductivity and to accommodate the volume variation. The sulfate-based polyanions with strong electronegativity and high operating potential are viable candidates as cathode materials for NIBs.85–90 Alluaudite-type Na2Fe2(SO4)3 has been explored as an excellent cathode material for NIBs.91–93 Motivated by these efforts, T. Yu et al.94 prepared a free-standing alluaudite Na2+2xFe2−x(SO4)3@porous CNF hybrid film by combining the electrospinning and electrospraying techniques. In this system, sulfate nanoparticles were wrapped in highly porous graphitic-like CNFs. The flexible CNF showed better interaction with the electrochemically active Na2+2xFe2−x(SO4)3 and superior electrochemical properties as compared to other carbon-based supports such as graphene, CNTs and active carbon. The cathode demonstrated specific capacities of ∼50 and ∼80 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 40C and 5C, respectively, with over 95.2% of the capacity retained after 500 cycles at the same current rate. In another approach, 3D-framework vanadium-based mixed-polyanion compounds have also gained significant interest. These materials provide different interstitial sites for sodium ions, through which sodium ion diffusion takes place along well-defined channels provided by the 3D framework.95,96 However, these materials suffer from poor conductivity, which affects the ion kinetics and rate capability of the cathode. In order to deal with this problem, Zhang et al.97 designed and synthesized a 1D-nanostructured Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4)/C nanorod-graphene composite. They synthesized cathode materials using a molten-salt synthetic strategy.98 The large graphene nanosheet built up a 3D framework for the Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4)/C nanorods and provided bicontinuous electron/ion transport pathways and a large electrolyte–electrode contact area for rapid electron/ion diffusion. The above cathode approaches high initial reversible specific capacities with capacity retentions of 95% and 83% after 200 cycles at a 1C rate in sodium and lithium battery systems, respectively. Jin et al.99 synthesized a 1D NaVPO4F/CNF cathode using an electrospinning method. The self-standing NaVPO4F/CNF cathode delivered a reversible capacity of 103 mA h g−1 at 1C. The above cathode showed excellent rate performance and cycle performance and retained 56 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 50C with negligible decay at 2C after 1000 cycles.
Sodium vanadium phosphate (NVP) (Na3V2(PO4)3) is also considered as a promising NASICON-type cathode material for NIBs. It has significant ion transport channels promoting the sodium diffusion coefficient, superior structure and thermal stability, and high energy density.100–102 But the low electronic conductivity of NVP limits its application in NIBs. In order to deal with this problem, Guo et al.103 proposed loading NVP particles on flexible carbon structure supported CC (NVP@C-CC). They prepared this binder-free flexible cathode by a two-step coating followed by an annealing treatment. The obtained NVP@C-CC demonstrated 82.0% capacity retention over 2000 cycles at a current rate of 20C and high rate capacity of 96.8 and 69.9 mA h g−1 at 100C and 200C rates, respectively, for sodium half cells. The cell showed fairly high energy and power densities of 396 W h kg−1 and 97 kW kg−1,respectively.103 Luo et al.104 took a different synthesis approach for a NVP/C flexible fiber membrane, which included electrospinning followed by a unique hot-pressing process and subsequent sintering in an argon atmosphere. This hot-pressing technique not only maintained uniform thickness of the composite membrane but also protected the structure of the NVP/C composite. The NVP/C composite cathode exhibited an initial capacity of 107 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.1C with insignificant capacity loss in the 100th cycle. Zhang et al.105 used a flexible and binder-free NVP/rGO composite cathode for NIBs with a Sb/rGO anode. The NVP/rGO cathode delivered a good reversible capacity of 113 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and a high capacity retention of ∼96.6% after 120 cycles in half-cell configuration with sodium metal foil as the counter electrode. The NIB full cell comprising the NVP/rGO cathode and Sb/rGO anode delivered a highly reversible capacity of ∼400 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 charge/discharge cycles. The unique nanohybridization of the electrodes contributed to the excellent cyclability and rate capability. The perfect incorporation of NVP and Sb nanocrystals into porous, conductive and interconnected rGO frameworks provided a strong platform for good electrical connectivity and hindrance to volume change during sodiation/de-sodiation. Recently, Yan et al.106 proposed a NVP@C@CNT nanocomposite synthesized by a hydrogel self-templated method. In this report researchers stated three main reasons for the excellent performance of the cathode: (i) the presence of homogeneous carbon coating on the surface of NVP nanoparticles, which can suppress the NVP nanoparticle aggregation and provide more accessible interfacial sites for sodium intercalation/de-intercalation, (ii) the porous structure within the composite provides conductive channels for electrons, and the accessible sites are further increased, which promote a better electrolyte penetration, and (iii) the flexible CNT networks adjust volume expansion during repetitive sodium intercalation/de-intercalation, which helps in maintaining structural integrity for long term and high-rate performance (Fig. 9a). The above cathode system showed 94% capacity retention after 4500 cycles at 5C (Fig. 9b) and a superior rate capability of 84 mA h g−1 at 10C. Recently, Zhang et al.79 successfully demonstrated flexible sodium-ion full batteries using a binder-free composite cathode of porous NVP coated hard carbon fibers (HCF) and an anode of pre-sodiated graphene/Silicon carbide (SiC)/HCF (Fig. 9c). The BFCF-NVP/HCF cathode in the electrolyte with a 5% FEC additive, with superior Na+ ion diffusivity, delivered a capacity of 78.30 mA h g−1 at 20C after 150 cycles with a high capacity retention of 88.67% (Fig. 9d). The full cell with the NVP/HCF cathode and the pre-sodiated graphene/SiC/HCF anode showed a high-output voltage of 3.34 V, high energy density of 234.1 Wh kg−1 at a current rate of 0.5 A g−1, ultra-long cyclability (over 2905 cycles at 0.5 A g−1 and 1000 cycles at 5 A g−1) and high Coulombic efficiency (100%). However, the capacity of the above cell deteriorated upon a very large number of bending cycles and the initial discharge capacity of 52.6 mA h g−1 reduced to 35.8 mA h g−1 after 1600 bending cycles (Fig. 9e). The electrochemical performance of the full cell appeared immune to the bending and twisting conditions. The electrochemical impedance studies performed on the above full cell revealed a negligible change in the resistance corresponding to the solid electrolyte interface (RSEI) upon cycling indicating no further thickening of the SEI passivation layer, and a gradual increase in charge transfer resistance (RCT) associated with the capability of the cell to keep a high degree of sodium during the intercalation/deintercalation process of Na ions.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the significance of providing electronic pathways in the NVP nanoparticle in NVP@C@CNT composite cathodes (a) and cycle performance of NVP@C@CNT composite cathodes at 5C for 4500 cycles (b), reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of a flexible sodium-ion full battery (FSIFB) using the BFCF-NVP/HCF cathode and the PGN/SiC/HCF anode and the structure of the BFCF-NVP/HCF cathode (c). The capacity retention of the BFCF-NVP/HCF cathode in a 1M NaClO4 electrolyte (EC:PC (1:1, v/v) + 0% and 5% FEC) (d). Charge–discharge curves of this FSIFB at 0.5 A g−1 before and after different bending cycles at a bending angle of 30–90° (e). Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Vanadium dioxide (VO2) has been explored well as a cathode material for LIBs due to its good Li+ ion storage.107 However, self-aggregation, pulverization and complex ion/electron pathways provided by VO2 hamper the cycling stability and rate capability of the battery. Balogun et al.108 proposed a different approach to deal with such problems. They synthesized VO2 interlaced nanowires, surface functionalized with carbon quantum dots (CQDs), directly grown on 3D CC by a simple hydrothermal method and immersion processes for use as a cathode in both LIBs and NIBs. The CQDs are observed to protect the surface of the VO2 nanowires and played an important role in the transport of electrons to enhance the Li and Na storage performance. The above cathode exhibited capacities of 420 and 328 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.3C for lithium and sodium storage, respectively.108 The cathode showed the energy and power densities of 264 Wh kg−1 and 41333 W kg−1, respectively, for Na+ storage which was almost similar to that for Li+ storage. However, the cycling performance of the cathode was observed to be insufficient. Vanadium oxide hydrate (H2V3O8) is also an interesting cathode material and has been studied well for LIBs. H2V3O8 has large interlayer spacing which makes it a good candidate for sodium storage also. It contains mixed valences of V5+ and V4+, due to which it is able to offer better electrochemical properties viz. electronic conductivity, high operating voltage and a more number of active redox sites during charge/discharge as compared to other vanadium oxides.109 H2V3O8 has hydrogen bonds which provide an elastic shielding to volume change during charging/discharging.110,111 Wang et al.112 reported a flexible and additive free H2V3O8 nanowire membrane, synthesized by a hydrothermal method followed by a suction filtration process, as a cathode for NIBs. A good specific capacity of 168 mA h g−1 at a current density of 10 mA g−1 was delivered by the above cathode system with almost no capacity loss after 100 cycles. The study demonstrated that layered H2V3O8 exhibits not only large interlayer spacing but a slight structural breathing effect also which promote higher Na+ storage. In spite of the various advantages of these cathode materials, the use of environmentally toxic and expensive vanadium element is a critical issue in their practical applications, and it needs to be replaced.
As an alternative to vanadium, iron (Fe), being the most abundant and non-toxic 3d element, appears promising as the redox center in the polyanionic system. Many Fe-based polyanionic compounds possess high structural stability during cycling and sufficiently high cycling stability with high energy densities at different drain currents. These interesting properties mark Fe-based polyanionic compounds a potential candidate as cathodes in NIBs.113,114 Iron-based phosphates such as NaFePO4, Na2FeP2O7, Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) and FePO4 have also been investigated as cathode materials for NIBs due their high structural stability.115–117 Na2FeP2O7 with a triclinic structure shows electrochemical activity in the potential range of 2–4.5 V vs. Na/Na+ with a reversible capacity of ∼90 mA h g−1 with exceptional thermal stability up to 500 °C.84 Its well developed channeled crystal structure is described by a framework of the metal polyhedra, FeO6 and FeO5 with the bridging pyrophosphate P2O7 groups (Fig. 10a). It demonstrates electrochemical behavior based on the activation of the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple accommodating Na+ ions in these channels. The presence of various plateaus in the charge/discharge profile of Na2FeP2O7 reveals the different Na defect sites of the pristine (Fig. 10b). However, the capacity of the above cathode systems reduces significantly on increasing the drain current (c-rate) (Fig. 10c), which can be associated with the lower electrical conductivity and the micro-size particle state, as suggested by Kim et al. Song et al.118 demonstrated Na2FeP2O7 nanoparticles, 20 to 50 nm size, accommodated over a porous high electrical conducting CC substrate as a flexible cathode system for NIBs (Fig. 10d and e). The nanoparticles of the active materials displayed superior performance as compared to bulk with a superior rate capability of 77 and 65 mA h g−1 with long-term cyclability over 10000 cycles at 10C and 60C, respectively (Fig. 10f).
 Fig. 10  The crystal structure of Na2FeP2O7 projected along the [011] direction showing the different sodium sites and the arrangement of octahedral and polyhedral units (a), the voltage profiles of the Na2FeP2O7 cathode at a C/20 rate starting with discharge (pre-discharge) (b), and rate capability measured at C/20 for charging and at various rates for discharging of the Na2FeP2O7 cathode (c), reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. Schematic illustration (d) and digital photograph of the flexible Na2FeP2O7 nanoparticles@porous CC cathode (e) and long-term cyclability of the Na2FeP2O7 nanoparticles@porous CC cathode at 10 and 60C (f), reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another polyanionic system, Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) coupled with tunable carbon-coated nanoparticles, was explored as an environmentally friendly cathode immune to atmospheric conditions recently by Chen et al.119 The cathode showed impressive rate performance with specific capacities of 113.0 and 80.3 mA h g−1 at 0.05C and 20C, respectively, and cycling stability with 69.1% capacity retention after 4400 cycles at 20C. The authors also explored Na-ion dynamics using density functional theory (DFT) and bond valence sum (BVS) calculations, and discovered that, on the basis of individual binding energy, the Na+ ions are of three different types. Various images of the crystal structure of the Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) material with three different types (A, B, and C) of Na+ ions are shown in Fig. 11a and b. The studies demonstrated that Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) provides 3D diffusion pathways, or tunnels, for all three Na+ ions with low energy barriers. Inspired by the potential of these materials, recently Ma et al.120 prepared core-double-shell structured Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)@NaFePO4@C(NFPP@NFP@C-CC) nanoparticles, grown on CC by a sol–gel based dip-coating method followed by heat treatment. This cathode system showed its potential for a high power output as a relatively small voltage drop was observed with increasing current rate, as compared to its discharge capacity. They observed that the core-double-shell structure confined the NaFePO4 particles at the nanoscale level (Fig. 11c) and facilitated its electrochemical activation by spontaneous structural disorder during the de-sodiation process. The cathode delivered a high discharge capacity of 136 mA h g−1 at 0.1C with considerable cycling stability and a rate capability of 68 mA h g−1 at 100C (Fig. 11d and e). The NFPP@NFP@C-CC cathode in combination with a HC anode in a full NIB cell exhibited good cycling stability with 97.2% capacity retention after 110 cycles (Fig. 11f).
 Fig. 11  Crystal structure of Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) (a) and Na+ ion diffusion paths in Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) cathode materials (b), reproduced with permission.119 Copyright permission not required. Illustration of the NFPP@NFP@C-CC flexible electrode (c), charge–discharge profiles of NFPP@NFP@C-CC at a current rate of 0.1C (d), rate performance of NFPP@NFP@C-CC at different current rates (e), and cycling performance of the NFPP@NFP@C-CC//H–C full cell at 200 mA g−1 (f). Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
The polyanion-type cathodes, discussed above, are undoubtedly promising in terms of structural integrity and stable cell performance but their experimental discharge capacities are far lower than the theoretical values. Additionally, the presence of heavy inactive counter cations, such as P, S, Si, etc., in their main structures establishes an unwanted compromise between cell voltage and its stability.83
Hexacyanide Prussian blue (PB) (NaFeIIIFeII(CN)6) and its analogues (NaxMFe(CN)6, M = Fe, Co, Ni, etc.), comparatively newer than layered transition metal oxide, have been extensively investigated as cathodes for NIBs because of their potential two-electron redox capacity, corresponding to the M2+/3+ and Fe2+/3+ couples, associated with a reversible 2 Na+ ion storage per molecular unit.121–125 These materials are transition-metal hexacyanoferrates possessing catchy properties such as open framework structure, rich redox-active sites and significant structural stability. Additionally, the nano-structured PB materials display a remarkable enhancement in the rate capabilities as compared to their solid counterparts. However, the low electrical conductivity and structural imperfectness are two major concerns which result in insufficient cycle life and low energy efficiency of NIBs. Nie et al.126 synthesized a flexible binder-free PB analogue open structured nano-size FeFe(CN)6/CC composite cathode using low temperature strategies (Fig. 12a). The cathode showed lower charge-transfer resistance, better kinetics for Na+ intercalation/de-intercalation and remarkably improved sodium storage capacity. It exhibited a specific capacity of 82 mA h g−1 at a 0.2C rate, good rate capability and cycling performance with 81.2% capacity retention after 1000 cycles (Fig. 12b). The superior rate capability observed in this system was due to the nanosized FeFe(CN)6 active materials which provide relatively shorter Na+/e− diffusion paths. Zhu et al.127 reported a novel tube-type NIB using Prussian blue-graphene composites on a Ni-coated cotton textile (PB@GO@NCT). The NCT, used as a novel current collector in the above cathode system, showed promising advantages such as high mechanical strength/flexibility, good electronic conductivity and superior electrochemical stability. In its charge/discharge profile, two characteristic plateaus were obtained corresponding to the two Fe2+/3+ couples associated with their low and high spin. The above cathode delivered a discharge good electrochemical performance with a high capacity of over 110 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.5C, significant rate capability and a long life of 1800 cycles tested at 5C. A cable shaped flexible NIB using the above cathode system was also demonstrated, which exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 87 mA h g−1 reaching saturation at 63 mA h g−1 after 120 cycles, and an energy density of more than 260 Wh kg−1.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the unit cell of the open-framework FeFe(CN)6 PB analogue structure (a), and cycling performance of the FeFe(CN)6/carbon textile cathode at a current density of 0.5 and 1C (b), reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Few organic cathode materials have also been explored for NIBs due to their interesting properties, such as high theoretical capacities, fast reaction kinetics, better compatibility with flexible substrates, environmental sustainability, and indifference to the ion radius.128–130 Deng et al. reported first an all-organic NIB based on two highly electroactive, structurally stable, and environmentally friendly redox polymers, polytriphenylamine (PTPAn) cathode and poly(anthraquinonyl sulfide) (PAQS) anode.131 This device stored charge via reversible doping/dedoping redox mechanisms at both the cathode (PF6− doping/dedoping) and the anode (Na+ doping/dedoping). The reactions associated with the prototype NIB are given as:131   (Cathodic reaction)   (Anodic reaction)   (Overall reaction)
This proto-type NIB provided a voltage output of 1.8 V with a considerable specific energy of 92 Wh kg−1 and specific capacity of 3200 mA g−1at 16C and also exhibited an excellent cycling stability with 85% capacity retention after 500 cycles at an 8C rate.
Redox-active polymers with high capacity and flexible ionic channels appear to be promising candidates for Na+ ion storage. However, conventional p-type polymers storing electric charges through the doping/de-doping reactions of large electrolyte anions do not qualify as Na+ ion storage cathode materials. Due to the low doping level of large counter anions and instability due to higher dissolution in electrolytes, these polymers fail to possess high redox capacity and cycling performance.132 In order to deal with this issue, Zhou et al.132 demonstrated a unique approach of activation of electroactive polymer polypyrrole chains by doping with redox-active anions (diphenylamine sulfonate anions). They synthesized the cathode material using a simple chemical doping method and observed that the organic redox-active anion diphenylamine sulfonate acts as an anionic counterion and enhances the electrochemical activity of the polymer and also contributes to the faradaic charge storage capacity of the cathode. The prepared organic cathode delivered a redox capacity of 115 mA h g−1 with excellent rate capability and cycling stability. The same research group also reported a redox-active Fe(CN)64−-doped polypyrrole cathode for NIBs.133 This cathode system showed excellent performance with a high reversible capacity of 135 mA h g−1 at 1600 mA g−1 and a strong capacity retention of 85% over 100 cycles. The synthesis of a Na-rich organic host is also an interesting approach for cathode preparation. In contrast to the conventional p-doping/dedoping redox mechanism, these ionizable organic sodium salt grafted polymer chains can induce reversible Na+ insertion/extraction reactions during charge and discharge. Motivated by this idea, Zhou et al.134 synthesized sulfonatedpolyaniline, poly(aniline-co-aminobenzenesulfonic sodium) (PANS) using chemical oxidative copolymerization followed by ball-milling, as a novel cathode for NIBs. Due to the high Na density and strong electron-withdrawing –SO3Na group attached to the polyaniline chains, the above cathode delivered a high reversible capacity of 133 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 96.7% over 200 cycles. Polyimide (PI) is a conjugated carbonyl polymer with a stable framework and highly electroactive carbonyl group. Due to the presence of the carbonyl group, it has shown a significantly improved cycle life, mainly in LIBs. However, the electronic insulation of conjugated carbonyl polymers hinders its direct application. Huang et al.128 prepared 3D graphene/PI composites through a one-step solvothermal strategy with simultaneous in situ polymerization of PI on a graphene surface for LIBs and NIBs. With this unique preparation strategy, efficient loading of the active PI polymer and better charge kinetics were received. The flexible graphene/PI cathode delivered excellent and nearly similar capacity for both LIBs (240 mA h g−1) and NIBs (213 mA h g−1), with excellent rate capability and superior cycling stability (81.2% after 600 cycles for LIBs and 80.4% after 1000 cycles for NIBs).128 The above study indicated that the electrochemical performance of conjugated carbonyl polymer-based electrodes can be greatly improved by combining controlled polymerization of active polymers and hierarchical structure design of the graphene framework. Using the same approach, Yuan et al.135 reported a free-standing, binder-free and flexible cathode film comprising aromatic carbonyl compound 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic-dianhydride (PTCDA) and CNTs for LIBs and NIBs. The cathode films were prepared by a simple vacuum filtration strategy. The flexible organic cathode showed a high reversible capacity of ∼150 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 for LIBs and 57.8 mA h g−1 at 25 mA g−1 for NIBs with good cycling stability and rate capability. The above discussed cathode systems possess an aromatic π bond in the benzenoid ring and CC, CO, and CN covalent bonds which is involved in the electrochemical reactions during cell charge/discharge, due to which these cathodes display inferior electrochemical properties at high drain currents. Additionally, the dissolution of the cathode in the electrolyte is a major issue to resolve before optimization at the commercial level, which can be avoided by entrapping/encapsulating redox organic moieties with the porous carbon network.136,137 Among the various organic active materials, poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy4-vinylmethacrylate) (PTMA), possessing stable organic radical 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO) repeating units, exhibits a fast reversible oxidation/reduction behavior which allows high potentials with a high power and long cycle life.138 Kim et al. designed a unique organic electrode comprising poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy4-vinylmethacrylate) (PTMA) encapsulated in CNTs (Fig. 13a) to form a highly active polymer containing electrode.137 The CNTs, containing a large amount of polymer, provide high electronic conductivity, while preventing the active material from dissolving in the electrolyte, which resulted in a longer life of stable cell performance than the normal PTMA/CNT composite cathode (Fig. 13b). The PTMA-impregnated CNTs displayed a reversible redox reaction involving two electrons and delivered an initial discharge capacity of 222 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, with a capacity retention of around 93% after 100 cycles at 0.5C (Fig. 13c). The electrode performance was found to improve at higher currents (210 mA h g−1 at 1C and 190 mA h g−1 at 5C).137 Recently, Kim et al.139 applied the same approach to a poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-4-yl-1-oxyl vinyl ether) (PTVE) organic cathode, possessing superior theoretical capacity to PTMA. In this PTVE/CNT composite cathode system, π–π* interaction between PTVE and CNTs hindered the dissolution of the cathode, which was an additional benefit over other organic cathodes including PTMA. The above cathode system delivered impressive discharge capacities at higher current densities with superior reversibility and structural stability. The NIB full cell, with the PTVE/CNT composite cathode, HC anode and porous polyimide- 1.5 M NaClO4 in ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethyl carbonate (DEC) (1:1 v/v) gel polymer electrolyte, delivered appreciable charge–discharge profiles at different current rates and excellent cycle performance at room temperature with an initial discharge capacity of 128.61 mA h g−1 at 0.5C which reduced to ∼120 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. The capacity retention of the above cell was also impressive at higher drain currents. As discussed above, undoubtedly, the organic materials, particularly cathodes for NIBs in the present case, appear better than the brittle inorganic counterparts due characteristics such as solubility, ease of film formability and processing in flexible batteries. The experimentally obtained initial capacities of such cathodes are quite close to the theoretical values. However, the cycling stability and life of such a system still need optimization.
 Fig. 13  Illustration of the PTMA-impregnated CNT structure (a), comparative open circuit voltage profiles of NIBs with the PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT cathode based Na-ion batteries for twelve days (b), and cycle performance of the PTMA-impregnated CNT sodium battery at room temperature (c), reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Difficulties in preparing flexible electrodes. 
Electrodes, which generally comprise the active material deposited on the current collectors, either at the macro- or nano-scale, are most likely to fail in the presence of repeated torsional and bending stresses on the device. The failure of the metallic foil, dislodging of the active material from the current collector, polarization due to the binder, decrease in specific capacity due to the presence of conductive additives and binders, and volumetric changes in the electrode upon charge–discharge are the major problems faced while designing flexible electrodes.140–142 Thus, current collectors that can withstand such stresses without failure and synthesis techniques which ensure good adhesion between the current collector and active materials are required, so that electrochemical performance is maintained in the distorted state as well as after a very large number of distortions in a given region of the electrode. This leads to a number of challenges in synthesizing flexible electrodes and has made difficult the commercialization of flexible devices. Although metallic current collectors boast high electronic conductivity, they have a few major drawbacks that make them unsuitable for use in flexible devices.143–145 The high density of bendable metal current collectors reduces the gravimetric capacity of the devices.146 In most of the cases the metal foil used as the current collector also does not have sufficient binding with the active materials and binders are needed for proper adhesion. These binders lead to polarization and loss of capacity of the electrodes.142 The electrochemically inactive components such as binders and conducting additives present a significant challenge in flexible sodium-ion batteries as they are required to maintain performance under repeated stresses on one hand and reduce the specific values of performance parameters such as capacity, power and energy merely by their presence in the electrodes. Particularly, many sodium-ion cathodes prepared as nanorods require, due to their inherent insulating nature, a conducting additive to enhance charge transfer, leading to an optimization problem with respect to their mechanical sturdiness and electrochemical performance. The use of polymeric binders leads to problems such as polarization as they are insulating and electrochemically inactive.146,147 This also leads to gravimetric and volumetric loss in the capacity of the electrodes.147 Undesired interactions of the binder with the electrolyte are also known to occur,147 which lead to quick degradation in capacity and rate capability after a few charge–discharge cycles. Thermal stability is another major issue associated with the use of binders and polymeric electrolytes. Most binders are unstable beyond 200 °C (ref. 147) and polymer electrolytes beyond 120 °C (ref. 146) leading to constraints in the application of such devices in situations where a high temperature is unavoidable. The problem of low volumetric energy density also arises in sulfate and phosphate based polyanionic compounds that possess open paths for Na+-ion transport also have non-close-packed structures.148 CNT based electrodes, while having excellent electronic conductivity and mechanical strength, have the disadvantages of a high production cost, difficulty in industrial scaling and lower rate capability.149,150 Electrolytes prepared using CNTs may also suffer from an increase in resistance with tensile stain.151,152 While a number of methods can be used to prepare CNT sheets, such as filtration,153 spin coating from CNT dispersions,154 Langmuir–Blodgett deposition,155 and weaving from vertical CNT forests,156 they are not scalable to an industrial scale due to various reasons such as a slow rate of production, long processing times and difficulty in producing the CNTs themselves.157 The residual metallic impurities on CNTs also influence the performance, and stability of the electrodes.3 Graphene offers advantages of high conductivity and good mechanical stability but it too has a high cost of manufacturing, and difficult synthesis processes that use chemicals harmful to the environment.3 The advantage of high electronic conductivity is also diminished in the presence of defects. Additionally, the weak interfacial interactions between graphene and active materials demand the use of a binder leading to poor electrochemical and thermal stability.3 CNFs are good candidates for flexible electrode current collector use due to their low cost and ease of synthesis but suffer from drawbacks such as weak mechanical stability, a small number of surface functionalities that lead to weak interactions with the active materials, and a small specific surface area which reduces both the electronic conductivity and loading of the active material.3,146 Carbon cloth is also cheap to manufacture but suffer from problems such as poor conductivity and a morphology that cannot be controlled easily,146 which leads to limitations in the type of active material that can be used and low loading of active materials. Large volume changes associated with sodium-insertion/deinsertion and phase-transformations in the nanostructured active material deposited on the flexible current collector lead to the pulverization of the former and detachment from the current collector, causing rapid degradation in the capacity of the device.158–160 Inorganic cathodes have poor electronic conductivity and poor elastic properties, and undergo significant volumetric changes upon charging and discharging.3 Many transition metal oxides, along with other chalcogen oxides (transition metal sulfides and selenides), too have poor rate performance and low cycling stability due to volumetric expansion.146 The biocompatibility of flexible sodium-ion batteries is also an important issue as this decides if they can be used inside the human body, on the skin or in fabrics, where they can come in contact with human tissue.146 Materials which do not interact adversely with human tissue are required in such scenarios and currently lack the needed research efforts. Apart from problems associated with the addition of binders, conducting additives and adhesion of active materials on the current collector, most materials presently used for flexible electrodes, in general, also have poor self-healing capabilities and high environmental footprints, along with a high cost of manufacture, which present significant challenges to the mass production of flexible sodium-ion batteries. A number of processes are used to prepare flexible electrodes, such as hydrothermal growth of active material on a carbon fibre/nanotube matrix. This method needs high temperatures and highly basic or acidic environments, where the mass loading of active material cannot be fine-tuned.161 Chemical vapour deposition, used to grow interconnected 3D networks of graphene, is costly and requires hydrothermal growth of active material.162 The preparation of electrodes via vacuum filtration is a binderless, easy and quick process and can provide nanocomposite films and the composition of the film to be prepared can be easily controlled.163 However, it is a time-consuming process and does not address the issue of volumetric changes brought about during charging–discharging or the poor mechanical strength of the films against in-plane, longitudinal stresses and bending. Thus, there is much room for progress in developing flexible electrodes for sodium-ion batteries that are mechanically sound, electrochemically and thermally stable and also biocompatible.
Some general methods to prepare flexible electrodes are summarized as follows:
• electrospinning followed by carbonization is used for solutions/suspensions of transition metal oxide/sulfide/selenide nanoparticles in polymer solutions.164,165,229,230
• Spinning of CNT arrays dipped in active material solutions yields free standing electrodes with the active material deposited on the CNTs once solvent has dried.231
• Sol–gel process with a free standing CNF/CNT/CC matrix yields electrodes with metal oxide particles embedded in a carbon current collector matrix.78,167
• Solid-state reactions yield transition metal oxide particles. This is followed by mixing of this active material with a polymeric binder and conducting additive to obtain a slurry that may be deposited on metallic foil or a mesh or a carbon matrix.231,232
• Sugar-cube templating of poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) gel precursor followed by thermal curing and immersion in GO and reflux yields transition metal oxide particles deposited on polymer (PDMS)/rGO sponge.223
• Hydrothermal growth can be used to grow transition metal oxide nanorods or nanoparticles on a CC substrate.233,234
• Sol–gel dip coating of a CC substrate in a sol–gel precursor followed by dip-coating yields core-double-shell structured composite flexible electrodes.120
• Electrospinning FeOOH nanorods in PAN solution followed by phosphorization yields FeP on nanoporous carbon electrodes.78
• Hydrothermal treatment of a carbonaceous precursor on a CC matrix followed by annealing yields HC (active material) deposited on CC.235

3.2 Electrolyte for flexible NIBs
As discussed earlier, the electrolyte is a medium sandwiched between the anode and the cathode, which allows only ion transport to take place, and it has a significant role in controlling the power density of the battery. For high capacity, stable and flexible NIBs, the electrolyte must have the following properties:
• high ionic conductivity (≥0.1 mS cm−1 at room temperature and beyond),
• High Na+ ion transference number and negligible electronic transference number,
• high flexibility,
• high electrochemical stability window,
• good mechanical and thermal stability,
• highly durable, i.e. capable of maintaining its performance for a sufficiently long time under the operating conditions of a specific device, and
• cost effectiveness and environmental friendliness.
In the growing phase of research on NIBs, many solid-state inorganic electrolytes including crystalline ceramics and glassy materials have been reported and many of these materials provided good ionic conductivity. But these materials fail to provide flexibility for devices including NIBs. On the other hand, various liquid electrolytes with good room temperature ionic conductivity have been reported for NIB application.7,13,173 They are simple solutions of sodium salts like NaClO4, NaPF6, NaCF3SO3etc., in less volatile solvents such as ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonate (PC), diethylene carbonate (DEC) etc. or their binary mixtures. In most of the earlier discussed flexible NIBs, liquid electrolytes are used with commercially available separators. Due to liquidus nature, these systems demonstrate excellent ionic conductivity (≥10−3 S cm−1) at room temperature with sufficient electrochemical stability. But these liquid electrolyte-based NIBs suffer from common problems such as corrosion, leakage, low gravimetric and volumetric energy densities, and shape constraints. In this particular case, polymer-based electrolytes are observed to have tremendous potential.174 This class of electrolytes possesses a number of intrinsic qualities that are not found in other types of ion conducting materials, for example, shape versatility, film formability, flexibility, dendrite resistance and light weight. Due to their solid-state and free-standing nature, the possibility of electrolyte leakage is completely avoided. In last few years, flexible polymer electrolyte systems have been extensively investigated for sodium-based battery applications.174 The ionic conductivity in such electrolyte systems is mainly because of two mechanisms, involving the significant role of the structure of the host polymer, which are given as follows:175
a Arrhenius model: according to this model, the ion transport in polymer electrolytes takes place due to transitional motion/hopping of the ions from one polar site to another supported by the segmental motion of the polymer matrix.176 This conductivity model, in general, is observed to be valid for semi-crystalline polymer–salt complexes. The relationship between the dc conductivity and temperature of such systems is explained on the basis of the well-known Arrhenius equation: (1)where σ0 (S cm−1) is a pre-exponential factor and considered to be the conductivity at infinitely high temperature, Ea (eV) is the activation energy required to initiate ionic motion, and kB (eV K−1) is the Boltzmann constant.
b Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher (VTF) model: This model is one of the simplest approaches for understanding ion transport in a polymer and is explained by the segmental mobility of the chains. In this model, ion motion is considered to be promoted by the free volume, distributed in the polymer chains. This model states that the free volume present in the polymer increases with temperature due to thermal expansion.177,178 The ions can easily move through this free volume and consequently, ion mobility increases and high liquid-like ionic conductivity is obtained. This conductivity model is appropriate for highly amorphous polymer electrolyte systems, such as gel polymer electrolytes. The non-linear Arrhenius plot of temperature-dependent dc conductivity of these systems is explained on the basis of the VTF equation: (2)where B (K, eV) is the rate at which the conductivity changes with temperature and is called pseudo-activation energy, T0 (K) is the ideal glass transition temperature, and A (S cm−1 K1/2) is the pre-exponential factor.
For NIBs, polymer electrolytes are, in general, polymers added with different sodium salts. On the basis of their physical properties, polymer electrolytes can be classified into two broad categories: (i) solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) and (ii) gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs).13
Solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs): this is the oldest category of polymer-based electrolyte systems, which are generally referred to as salt-in-polymer systems, prepared by the addition of sodium salts NaX (where X = ClO4, PF6, CF3SO3, Cl, Br, I etc.) in polymers. Polymers with polar groups attached to their main chains such as polyethylene oxide (PEO), polyacrylonitrile (PAN), etc. are preferred for SPEs.
Ion transport, in such systems, is associated with local relaxation as well as segmental motion of the polymer chains, which dominate in the presence of a high degree of amorphicity of the host polymer.175 Among the reports in the early stage on Na+ ion conducting SPEs, Hashmi and Chandra studied PEO complexed with NaPF6, prepared by the solution cast technique.179 They observed interaction of Na+ ions with the ether oxygens of PEO, which suppress the crystallinity of the polymer and promote chain-assisted ion motion. They reported a high room temperature ionic conductivity of 5 μS cm−1 with a Na+-transport number as high as ∼0.45. Boschin and Johansson reported a PEO complexed with sodium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonylimide) (NaTFSI) sodium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (NaFSI) system and obtained the highest room temperature ionic conductivity of ∼4.5 μS cm−1 for the SPE with NaTFSI salt.180 Park et al.181 reported the performance of a Na–S battery with the PEO:NaCF3SO3 SPE at 90 °C. This SPE showed an ionic conductivity of 0.34 mS cm−1 at 90 °C. The battery delivered a first discharge capacity of 505 mA h g−1 of sulfur at 90 °C. Various sodium salts hosted in PVA182–184 and PAN185 have also been reported. Cisneros et al.186 reported commercially available and inexpensive materials poly(oxyethylene), POE, complexed with three different sodium salts NaI, NaCF3SO3 and NaClO4. The SPE films were prepared by the solution cast technique, followed by hot-pressing. These SPEs appeared to retain good free-standing consistency with stable ionic conductivity, but the conductivity values were poor (<1 μS cm−1) at room temperature and were not sufficient for practical applications. The conductivity of SPEs is observed to be limited and not exactly suitable for battery applications. The low ionic conductivity is attributed to the crystallinity of the polymer matrix which suppresses the ionic motion within the electrolyte. In order to reduce the crystallinity of the polymer matrix, many approaches have been proposed, such as plasticization, and dispersion of nano/micro-size ceramic particles in the polymer matrix. In plasticization, liquid plasticizers such as low molecular weight poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), organic solvents such as ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonate (PC), diethylene carbonate (DEC), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), or ionic liquids are added to SPEs. These plasticizer molecules intersperse themselves between the polymeric chains in the SPEs, making segmental motion more facile, and decrease the crystallinity of the host polymer by disrupting the crystalline regions. This further promotes segmental motion, eventually leading to enhanced ionic conductivity. Additionally, the high dielectric constant of organic plasticizers, like EC and PC, supports ion dissociation in plasticized SPEs and increases the number of free charge carriers. The plasticizers decrease the glass transition temperature of the polymers as well, which results in higher electrical conductivity in the plasticized polymer electrolytes.187,188 Bhide and Hariharan189 studied the effect of a plasticizer PEG on the ionic conductivity of the PEO–NaPO3 SPE system. They observed an enhancement of two orders in ionic conductivity with good improvement in the Na+ ion transport number to 0.42. In this work, the cell: Na|(PEO)6:NaPO3 + 70 wt% PEG400|(I2 + acetylene black + PEO) gave an open circuit potential (OCP) of 2.94 V and a discharge capacity of 9.5 mA h−1. Room temperature ionic liquids are also considered as good plasticizers for SPEs. The large ESW and liquid-phase range, and negligible volatility of these liquids ensure non-degradable performance of plasticized SPEs. Egashira et al.190 used the diethyl-methoxyethyl-ammonium tetrafluoroborate (DEMEBF4) ionic liquid in a poly(ethylene glycol) dimethylether (PEGDME)–NaBF4 complex SPE. They obtained a good ionic conductivity of 1.2 mS cm−1 for a molar ratio of EO:NaBF4:DEMEBF4 of 8:1:2. Boschin and Johansson191 used non-volatile and conducting pyrrolidinium ionic liquids Pyr13TFSI and Pyr13FSI in PEO–NaTFSI and PEO–NaFSI SPE, respectively, as plasticizers. The ionic conductivity values were enhanced but remained below 1 mS cm−1 in all the cases. Similarly, Singh et al.192 reported a PEO–sodium methylsulphate salt (NaMS) complex, plasticized with the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium methylsulphate (BMIM-MS). The composition with 60 wt% BMIM-MS plasticizer showed a sufficient ionic conductivity of ∼0.1 mS cm−1 at room temperature with a good electrochemical stability window of ∼4–5 V and Na+ ion transport number of 0.46. On the other hand, the dispersal of a variety of ceramic fillers into SPEs not only enhances the ionic conductivity of polymer electrolyte systems but also improves the other physical, mechanical and electrochemical properties.193,194 The particle size and the nature of the dispersoid material significantly affected the properties of the electrolyte. Weiczorek and co-workers reported a significant increase in the conductivity when micro-sized Al2O3 particles were dispersed in the PEO-NaI SPE.194,195 They suggested a significant role of the surface groups attached to the ceramic particles in promoting the local structural modifications of the composite polymer matrix. Ni'mah et al.196 reported a nanosized TiO2 dispersed PEO-NaClO4 SPE which exhibited a maximum ionic conductivity of ∼0.26 mS cm−1 at 60 °C. The electrolyte performed good in a Na+ ion half-cell. There is another approach of using filler particles containing sodium in their main structure such as Na-β-alumina and NASICON. These active fillers have inherent sodium ion conductivity which provides an additional pathway to the motion of Na+ ions in the composite polymer electrolyte and suppresses the sodium dendrite formation during battery operation.197–199 Kim et al.197 reported a NASICON-based composite hybrid solid electrolyte comprising PVdF-HFP polymer, 1 M NaCF3SO3 in TEGDME and NASICON structured Na3Zr2Si2PO12. The flexible hybrid electrolyte system was prepared by a combination of solution cast and hot-pressing techniques. Fig. 14 depicts the flexible hybrid solid electrolyte with Na-ion conducting paths and variation of ionic conductivity and tNa+ with NASICON powder in the electrolyte. The above hybrid electrolyte system showed a high ionic conductivity of 0.12 mS cm−1 at 0 °C, which increased to 1.4 mS cm−1 at 90 °C, with an exceptional tNa+ of 0.92 and ESW of 5 V. These excellent properties are the results of the active NASICON filler present in the hybrid solid electrolyte which itself is a sodium ion conducting material and it suppresses the anion movement. The authors also demonstrated a flexible pouch-type full cell utilizing the optimized hybrid electrolyte with a hard carbon anode and NaFePO4 cathode. The cell delivered an average voltage of ∼2.6 V and discharge capacity of ∼120 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.2C with a good capacity retention of 96% after 200 cycles.
 Fig. 14  Photograph of the flexible NASICON-doped hybrid solid electrolyte (a), model representation of the composite in the hybrid solid electrolyte with Na-ion conducting paths (b), and variation of conductivity and tNa+ with NASICON concentration in the hybrid solid electrolyte (c). Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs): they are solvent swollen polymeric systems, which are prepared by immobilization of a large amount of liquid electrolyte, i.e., a molar solution of Na salts in less or non-volatile solvents, in a polymer matrix. The larger amount of liquid present in the polymer matrix promotes both the cohesive properties of solids and the diffusive transport properties of liquids. GPEs have received great attention due to their good ionic conductivity, a wide electrochemical stability window, good electrode compatibility, good thermal stability to some extent, and free-standing flexible consistency.13 The polymer poly(vinylidenefluoride-hexafluoropropylene) (PVdF-HFP) has been widely used for GPE preparation. It is a semi-crystalline polymer with reduced crystallinity as compared to pure poly(vinylidenefluoride) (PVdF) due to its amorphous HFP content. Furthermore, it has a porous structure with well-organized interconnecting cellular pores, which help in high liquid electrolyte retention with no leakage. Kumar and Hashmi200 reported free-standing flexible GPE films comprising a solution of NaCF3SO3 (NaTf) in a room temperature ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazoliumtrifluoro-methane sulfonate (EMI-triflate or EMITf) immobilized in PVdF-HFP. The sodium ion conducting GPE offered a high ionic conductivity of ∼1 mS cm−1 at room temperature with a sufficiently wide electrochemical potential window of ∼5 V, and sufficient thermal stability. The GPE showed a Na+ ion transport number of 0.23. This GPE demonstrated a typical liquid-rich electrolyte character by following non-Arrhenius VTF behavior. Recently, Kumar and Kanchan201 demonstrated the application of a PVdF-HFP + NaTf + EMITf GPE system in a prototype Na/S battery which delivered an OCV of ∼2.3 V and first discharge capacity of ∼240 mA h g−1 of sulfur at room temperature. Guo et al.202 used the GPE of PVDF-HFP immersed in 1.0 M NaClO4 in PC:FEC to fabricate a quasi-solid-state sodium-ion full battery with a carbon cloth anode and Na3V2(PO4)2O2F(NVPOF) cathode material. The high ionic conducting GPE (4.2 mS cm−1) showed good chemistry with used electrodes and the battery delivered an excellent specific capacity of 78.1 mA h g−1 at 10C with ∼90% capacity retention after 500 cycles at 10C.
Researchers have also studied the effect of nanoparticle dispersion on the physical and electrochemical properties of GPEs. Kumar et al.203 reported a SiO2 nanoparticle dispersed PVdF-HFP based GPE system immobilizing the liquid electrolyte NaCF3SO3 in EC/PC. This system showed the typical characteristics of GPEs with an excellent ionic conductivity of ∼4 mS cm−1 at room temperature and an electrochemical potential window of ∼4 V. The SiO2 nanoparticles played an active role in influencing the electrochemical behavior of the GPE. In the composition-dependent conductivity curve, the GPE showed two peaks with increasing concentration of SiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 15). This conductivity pattern and occurrence of the peaks are well explained on the basis of typical nanocomposite polymer electrolyte systems. The first peak is associated with the increased dissociation of ions due to the SiO2 nanofiller in the GPE, and the second peak is explained as the result of formation of a highly conducting space-charge layer between the SiO2 nanoparticles and GPE. The final decrease in the conductivity was due to the blocking effect of the space-charge layers due to the presence of a larger number of nanoparticles. The above system showed an improved Na+ ion transport number of 0.52 due to the dispersion of SiO2 nanoparticles. The authors also demonstrated the application of an optimized GPE membrane in a proto-type Na/S battery, which delivered a first discharge capacity of 165 mA h g−1 of sulfur with an OCV of 2.18 V.
 Fig. 15  Room temperature ionic conductivity of gel polymer electrolyte nanocomposite films as a function of SiO2 content. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
Continuing with the idea of a nanocomposite GPE system, Kumar and Hashmi204 also reported the effect of SiO2 nano-fillers on the ionic conductivity of a PMMA based GPE with a liquid electrolyte of NaClO4 in EC:PC. Another approach is the dispersion of sodium active nanoparticles in GPE systems. Hashmi et al. reported an improved Na+ ion transport number of their previously reported GPE system, PVdF-HFP + NaTf + EMITf, by the dispersion of an active filler NaAlO2 in the polymer matrix.205 They obtained a good ionic conductivity of ∼5.5–6.5 mS cm−1 at room temperature and a much improved Na+ ion transport number of 0.42 for the optimized composition with the active filler NaAlO2. As discussed earlier, the amorphicity of the polymer matrix plays an important role in improving ionic mobility and hence ionic conductivity in gel polymer electrolytes. Mishra et al.206,207 prepared a nanocomposite GPE using an optimized blend of PVdF-HFM and PMMA. The blending of amorphous PMMA with semicrystalline PVdF-HFP resulted in an enhancement of the amorphicity of the electrolyte membrane, which reflected well in the conductivity of the reported GPE. A proto-type sodium battery utilizing the optimized nanocomposite GPE delivering a specific discharge capacity of ∼400 mA h g−1 was also demonstrated by the same group.207 In order to obtain a single ion GPE system, the use of polymerized macromolecules with Na in their main chain is a good idea. These polymerized compounds can easily donate Na+ ions in the GPE with no associated anion motion. Pan et al.208 reported a GPE comprising poly(bis(4-carbonyl benzene sulfonyl)imide-co-2.5-diamino benzesulfonic acid) (NaPA) immobilized in PVdF-HFP. The above GPE system showed an ionic conductivity of 0.91 × 10−4 S cm−1 with an exceptionally good tNa+ = 0.83 and ESW of 6 V. All these GPE systems discussed above were prepared using the conventional solution cast technique in which a larger amount of liquid electrolyte is entrapped in the polymer matrix by dissolving the constituents in a common solvent followed by casting and subsequent solvent evaporation. But the large amount of liquid electrolyte in the polymer matrix reduces the mechanical and thermal stability of the electrolyte membrane and it is not suitable for large-scale applications.
In another approach of GPE preparation, a micro-porous polymer membrane is first prepared and then activated in a specific liquid electrolyte. In order to prepare micro-porous polymer membranes, various methods have been adopted such as Bellcore's technique, the thermally induced phase separation (TIPS) technique, electrospinning and phase inversion by liquid immersion.209–215 The liquid electrolyte trapped in the micro-porous polymer matrix exhibits liquid-like ion transport and good electrolytic properties with better interfacial properties in the electrolyte/electrode contact region, while the flexible polymer matrix provides free-standing consistency with better mechanical strength and negligible compromise of thermal stability as compared to the pure polymer. Yang et al.215 reported a GPE system prepared by activating a porous PVdF-HFP membrane by soaking in 1 M NaClO4 solution in EC/DMC/DEC. A micro-porous PVdF-HFP membrane was obtained using phase separation by the liquid immersion technique. They compared the performance of the porous PVdF-HFP membrane with a commercially available Celgard 2730 membrane. The prepared porous membranes showed an ionic conductivity of 0.60 mS cm−1 at room temperature, higher than that of Celgard 2730 (0.16 mS cm−1). The prepared porous membranes also exhibited a better Na+ ion transference number (∼0.30). The above GPE also showed good Na/Na+ couple reversibility between the Na electrode and the GPE, which underlines its potential as a safe electrolyte for NIBs. We recently reported a porous PVdF-HFP membrane obtained by exposing polymer solution to steam.216,217 During the exposure of the polymer solution to the steam atmosphere at high temperature, the ultra-small water droplets present in the humid atmosphere initiate a diffusive injection of water, a non-solvent for PVdF-HFP, in the solution. The heat released from the condensing steam helps in the evaporation of the solvent. We obtained mechanically stable and flexible GPE membrane by soaking the porous membrane in a liquid electrolyte of NaClO4 in EC + PC (Fig. 10).216 This GPE showed an excellent liquid electrolyte retention of ∼400% and offered an ionic conductivity of ∼2 mS cm−1 at room temperature. In a recent study, the same group217 demonstrated the effect of zirconium oxide (ZrO2) nanoparticles on the conductivity of porous PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 in EC + PC GPE and obtained an enhanced ionic conductivity upon optimizing the ZrO2 content. Yi took a different approach and prepared a flexible composite GPE by in situ polymerization of methylmethacrylate (MMA) in the porous Na3Zr2Si2PO12–PVdF-HFP composite membrane (Fig. 16a and b).218 The presence of NASICON structured Na3Zr2Si2PO12 affects the electrochemical properties of the GPE, and the system showed a significantly enhanced ionic conductivity of 2.78 mS cm−1 at room temperature, which remains superior in a wide temperature range (Fig. 16c) to the GPE without Na3Zr2Si2PO12, with a wide ESW of ∼4.9 V and a high Na+ ion transference number of ∼0.63. The PMMA and Na3Zr2Si2PO12 dispersoids enhanced the mechanical stability of the GPE. The full cell fabricated using the above flexible GPE, Na/C flexible composite anode and Na0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1Mn0.67O2 cathode delivered an initial discharge capacity of 96 mA h g−1 at a large current density of 192 mA g−1 (Fig. 16d) with excellent cyclability for 600 cycles. In a most recent study,139 a porous gel polymer electrolyte of electrospun polyimide soaked in 1.5 M NaClO4 in EC:DEC (1:1 v/v) is successfully demonstrated in a flexible NIB with an organic PTVE cathode and hard carbon anode. A list of few sodium ion conducting polymer electrolyte systems with good ionic conductivity with their electrochemical properties is presented in Table 2.
 Fig. 16  Schematics of the preparation process of PMMA-based gel into Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and polymer PVDF-HFP matrices forming a composite electrolyte (a), photographs of the electrolyte membranes in different deforming states (b), temperature dependence of the Na-ion conductivity of the PVDF-HFP/PMMA–Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and PVDF-HFP/PMMA GPEs (c), and typical charge/discharge curves of the NIB full cell with a flexible composite GPE, Na/C flexible composite anode and Na0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1Mn0.67O2 cathode at different current densities (d). Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Table 2 Category-wise sodium ion conducting polymer electrolytesa




S.no.
System
Category

σ
RT (mS cm−1)

t
Na+

ESW
Ref. no.





a 
σ
RT: room temperature ionic conductivity, tNa+: Na+ ion transport number, ESW: electrochemical stability window, PEGDME: poly(ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether, DEMEBF4: diethyl methoxyethyl ammonium tetrafluoroborate, PEO: polyethylene oxide, Pyr13TFSI: N-propyl-N-methylpyrrolidiniumbis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, Pyr13FSI: N-propyl-N-methylpyrrolidiniumbis(fluorosulfonyl)imide, BMIM-MS: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium methylsulfate, BMIMTFSI: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, TEGDME: tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether, PVdF-HFP: poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene), PVC: polyvinyl chloride, EMIMFSA: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(fluorosulfonyl)amide), CQDs: carbon quantum dots, Emim FSI: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide, EMITf: 1-ethyl 3- methyl imidazoliumtrifluoro-methane sulfonate, EC: ethylene carbonate, PC: propylene carbonate, FEC: fluoroethylene carbonate, DEC: diethyl carbonate, PU: polyurethane, MATEMP: di(2-methylacryloyltrioxyethyl)methyl phosphonate, MMA: methyl methacrylate, TFMA: trifluoroethyl methacrylate, NaPA: poly(bis(4-carbonyl benzene sulfonyl)imide-co-2.5-diamino benzesulfonic acid), PVCA: poly(vinylene carbonate), PSTB: polymeric sodium tartaric acid borate, NaTFSI: sodium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, EMIMTFSI: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, polyDADMA: poly(dimethyldiallylammonium), C3mpyrFSI: N-propyl-nmethylpyrrolidiniumbis(fluorosulfonyl)imide, PEMA: poly ethylmethacrylate, PMMA: poly(methyl methacrylate), PEGDE: poly(ethylene glycol) diglycidyl ether, DPPO: diamino-poly(propylene oxide), DMC: dimethyl carbonate, and PBMA: poly (butyl methacrylate).





1
PEGDME + NaBF4 + DEMEBF4
Plasticized SPE
1.2
—
—

190



2
PEO + NaN(CF3SO2)2 + Pyr13TFSI
Plasticized SPE
∼0.1
—
—

191



3
PEO + NaN(FSO2)2 + Pyr13FSI
Plasticized SPE
∼0.1
—
—

191



4
PEO + CH3OSO3Na + BMIM-MS
Plasticized SPE
0.105
0.46
4

192



5
PEO + Na(CF3SO2)2N + BMIMTFSI
Plasticized SPE
0.41
0.39
3.6

165



6
PVDF-HFP + PVC + NaCF3SO3 + TEGDME
Platicized SPE
0.12
0.60
—

164



7
PVC + NaN(FSO2)2 + EMIMFSA
Plasticized SPE
2.6
0.27
—

226



8
PEO + NaClO4 + TiO2
Composite SPE
∼0.01
—
—

196



9
PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + NASICON structured Na3Zr2Si2PO12
Composite SPE
>0.1
0.92
5

197



10
PEO + Na(CF3SO2)2N + NASICON structured Na3·4Zr1·8Mg0·2Si2PO12
Composite SPE
0.06
—
4.3

198



11
PEO + NaClO4 + NASICON structured Na3Zr2Si2PO12
Composite SPE
0.021
—
—

199



12
PEO + NaClO4 + CQDs
Composite SPE
0.0717
0.42
—

170



13
PEO + NaN(FSO2)2 + TiO2
Composite SPE
∼0.01
0.394
4.31

220



14
PEO + NaClO4 + SiO2 + EmimFSI
Plasticized composite SPE
1.3
0.61
4.2

171



15
PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + EMITf
GPE
5.74
0.23
5

200



16
PVDF-HFP + NaClO4 + PC/FEC
GPE
4.2
—
—

202



17
PVdF-HFP + NaPA
GPE
0.091
0.83
6

208



18
PU + NaClO4 + EC/PC/DEC/FEC
GPE
1.5
0.22
4.7

221



19
MATEMP + MMA + TFMA + NaClO4 + FEC + EC/PC
GPE
5.13
—
5

224



20
PVCA + PSTB + EC/DEC
GPE
0.1
0.88
4.5

166



21
PMMA + NaBF4 + EC/PC
GPE
0.567
—
>5

168



22
PVdF-HFP + NaPF6 + PC
GPE
1.47
—
3.8

169



23
PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + PC
GPE
1.62
—
>4


24
PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + PC + FEC
GPE
1.91
—
>4


25
PVdF-HFP + NaTFSI + BMIMTFSI
GPE
0.21
—
>4


26
PVdF-HFP + NaTFSI + EMIMTFSI
GPE
0.25
—
>4


27
PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + SiO2 + EC/PC
Composite GPE
4.1
0.52
4

203



28
PMMA + NaClO4 + SiO2 + EC/PC
Composite GPE
3.4
0.23
5

204



29
PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + NaAlO2 + EMITf
Composite GPE
5.5–6.5
0.42
4.7

205



30
PVdF-HFP/PMMA + NaCF3SO3 + Al2O3 + EC/PC
Composite GPE
1.5
0.29–0.33
3.6

207



31
polyDADMA + C3mpyrFSI + NaN(FSO2)2 + Al2O3
Composite GPE
∼0.1
0.61
—

225



32
PVdF-HFP + PEMA + NaCF3SO3 + Sb2O3+ EC/DEC
Composite GPE
0.442
—
—

228



33
PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + EC/DMC/DEC
Porous GPE
0.6
0.3
4.6

215



34
PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + EC/PC
Porous GPE
2
—
4.35

216



35
PEGDE + DPPO in a glass fiber membrane + NaPF6 + EC/DMC/FEC
Porous GPE
2.2
—
4.8

172



36
PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + ZrO2 + EC/PC
Composite porous GPE
∼0.6
—
3.0

217



37
PMMA/PVDF-HFP + Na3Zr2Si2PO12 + NaPF6 + EC/PC
Composite porous GPE
2.78
0.63
4.9

218



38
PVdF-HFP/PBMA + NaClO4 + hydroxyapatite + EC/PC
Composite porous GPE
1.086
0.83
4.9

226



39
PVdF-HFP + NaPF6 + TiO2 + EC/PC
Composite porous GPE
1.3
0.31
3.5

227





4 Full cells based on flexible electrodes
The successful implementation of flexible electrodes together with flexible polymer based electrolytes or glassy microfibre separators has been successfully demonstrated by a number of groups. Most reported flexible NIBs have specific capacity values in the range of 100–125 mA h g−1, with some achieving high values of 600 mA h g−1 and low values of 43 mA h g−1,166,219 as can be noted from Table 3. Due to the technological expertise gained from significant work already carried out to develop flexible LIBs, the evolution of flexible NIBs has been quicker. This reflects in the fact that some high performing flexible NIB devices have been reported in the first three years of their development and later work has been focused more on increasing the flexible nature and durability rather than the performance parameters such as capacity, energy and power. The deposition of the active materials on flexible current collectors which are also electrochemically stable, high electron conducting and durable has been important in the fabrication of full cells that are viable for commercial production. A number of research studies have used flexible electrodes fabricated by depositing the active materials mixed with a conducting additive and polymer binder over metal foil such Al, Cu, Ti and stainless steel.21,78,103,120,131,167,168,170,218–224 While a number of full cells utilizing such electrodes have excellent specific capacity values per unit mass of active materials,78,131,218–221 they have some major disadvantages, such as low gravimetric capacity of the full cell and failure of the metal foil upon repeated deformations, associated with them. These issues make them unattractive for real-life applications. To overcome these problems, current collectors such CNTs, graphene, and rGO have been used.54,105,139,166,169,225 Devices using rGO, as the one fabricated by Zhang et al.105 using free standing electrodes made from composites of active material with rGO, have high specific capacity, while full cells made from CNTs and graphene have moderate (100–125 mA h g−1) to low (∼45 mA h g−1) specific capacity values.54,139,166,169,225 However, the high cost of manufacture and the moderate charge-storage associated with these current collectors make them economically and technologically unfeasible for commercialization. Alternative carbon current collectors such as CNFs, CCs and carbon papers (CPs) have attracted significant attention due to their low cost of synthesis and easy preparation of composites with different active materials.23,54,120,139,164,165,171,172,197,226,227 Full cell devices fabricated with these carbon based materials show moderate values of specific capacities, but have good cycling stability and are mechanically stable.23,54,120,139,164,165,171,172,197,226,227 The large number of ways of synthesis of carbon scaffolds and depositing/growing a number of active materials on these scaffolds enables the fabrication of multiple types of flexible electrodes leading to more freedom in designing a commercial device as per the need of the consumer. It is highly likely that flexible NIBs for commercial purposes will be based on substrates such as CNFs, CCs, and CPs, and metal oxide nanoparticles/nanorods, HC and alloyable metal particles such as those of antimony grown or deposited over them. These flexible electrodes have good charge-storage capacity while also being cost-effective. On the other hand, space and defence sectors, where cost is not a constraint, will utilize composites of high-performance active materials with substrates such as rGO and CNTs.
Table 3 Materials and electrochemical performances of flexible NIBsa




Year
Anode
Synthesis method
Mass loadings of active material in electrodes
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Rate (mA g−1)
Cycling stability
Ref. no.


Electrolyte


Cathode





a n-PAQs: n-type redox-active poly(anthraquinonyl sulphide); p-PTA: p-dopable polytriphenylamine; PVdF: poly(vinylidene fluoride); PVdFHFP: poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene); PAN: polyacrylonitrile; PPy: polypyrrole; MMA: methyl methacrylate; NaTf: sodium triflate; BPO: dibenzoyl peroxide; DME: 1,2-dimethoxy ethane; DOL: 1,3-dioxolane; EC: ethylene carbonate; PC: propylene carbonate; DMC: dimethyl carbonate; DEC: diethyl carbonate; DME: 1,2-dimethoxyethane; FEC: fluoroethylene carbonate; TEGDME: tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether; NTP: NaTi2(PO4)3; NVP: Na3V2(PO4)3; NVTP: Na2VTi(PO4)3; NZSP: Na3Zr2Si2PO12; NNMO: Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2; NLNMO: Na0.80Li0.12Ni0.22Mn0.66O2; NZSPO: Na3Zr2Si2PO12; NNMMO: Na0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1Mn0.67O2; NMO: Na0.44MnO2; NFPP: Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7); NFP: NaFePO4; NNFMO: NaNi1/3Fe1/3Mn1/3O2; h-NCO: P2/P3 heterostructured Na0.7CoO2; rGO: reduced graphene oxide; HC: hard carbon; SS: stainless steel; CC: carbon cloth; CNF: carbon nanofiber; Sn@CNT-CP: free standing core-sheath structured Sn@Carbon nanotube Sn@CNT nanopillars grown vertically on carbon paper; PDMS/rGO sponge: graphene-modified poly(dimethylsiloxane) sponge electrodes; NGQDs-WS2/3DCF: nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dot (NGQD) decorated WS2 nanosheets anchoring on porous three dimensional carbon foam; SNTAs: sandwich like nanotube arrays; MCA: modified, electrospun cellulose acetate separator; B-PCPE: plastic crystal polymer electrolyte containing anion-trapping boron moieties; Co9S8@C/3DNCF: core–shell carbon-coated Co9S8@C nanoparticles anchored on 3D N-doped carbon foam (3DNCF); FeP@NPC: FeP nanoparticles wrapped in 3D interconnected N, P-codoped carbon fiber.





2013
n-PAQs@Al-mesh
Polycondensation reaction
—
220
200
500

131



NaPF6 in DME:DOL + microporous membrane (Celgard 2400)
—
—



p-PTA@Al mesh
Oxidative polymerization of triphenylamine monomer
—


2013
NTP@C@Ti mesh
High-temperature reaction of CH3COONa·3H2O, TiO2,NH4H2PO4 and some amount of citrate
0.7 mg cm−2
100
65
250

222



Na2SO4 (aq.)
—
—


Na2NiFe(CN)6@Ti mesh
Mixing 0.1 M NiCl2·6H2O and Na4Fe(CN)6·10H2O sol. under continuous stirring.
0.7 mg cm−2


2014
NTP@Ti mesh
High-temperature calcination
0.7 mg cm−2
104
200
1000

223



Na2SO4 (aq.)
—
—


Hexacyanoferrate(II) Na2CuFe(CN)6@Ti mesh
Mixing 0.1 M CuCl2·6H2O and 0.1 M Na4Fe(CN)6·10H2O aqueous solutions under continuous stirring for 6 h, and then aging for another 24 h
0.7 mg cm−2 (1:1.7 ratio with the anode)


2015
Binder free Sb/rGO nanocomposite
Ultrasonication + stirring of suspensions of GO and SbCl3 followed by drying on the substrate
0.2 mG cm−2
400
100
100

105



NaClO4 in EC:DMC + glass fiber membrane
—
—


Binder free NVP/rGO nanocomposite
Mixing of reactants + thermal treatment in an inert atmosphere
4 mg cm−2


2015
HC@carbon paper
Solvent casting on carbon paper
—
120
0.2C
200

197



NaTf/TEGDME + porous NASICON-type NZSP composite with PVdFHFP
Solid-state reaction
—


NaFePO4@carbon paper
Modified mechanical activation
—


2015
Highly ordered Sb nanorod arrays@Al foil
Electrodeposition inside nanoimprinted AAO
0.4 mg cm−2
620
200
250

219



NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fiber separator (Whatman, GFB/55)
—
—


P2-NNMO@Al foil
Co-precipitation method
0.4 mg cm−2


2015
Sn@CNT-CP
Carbonization of facial tissue + soaking in SnCl2 + ambient pressure chemical vapour deposition of carbon
1.2 mg cm−2
160 (μA h cm−2)
52 (μA cm−2)
100

54



NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass microfibre separator (Whatman) NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass microfibre separator (Whatman)
—
—


P2-NLNMO
—
3.6 mg cm−2


2016
Antimony@Cu foil
Chemical reduction of SbCl3 with NaBH4
0.5 mg cm−2
106.8
60
100

167



NaClO4 in PC-FEC + cross-linked PMMA
Radical polymerization of precursor solution drop-cast on a porous cellulose membrane
—


NVP@Al foil
Sol–gel method
2 mg cm−2


2016
N2-doped carbon sheets@Ti foil
Carbonization of okara followed by chemical oxidation and reduction
1.4 mg cm−2
103
562.5
200

21



NaClO4 in PC-FEC + separator
—
—


NVP@Ti foil
Solid-state reaction
—


2017
Bi2O3 oxide nanoparticles on CNFs
Electrospinning followed by carbothermal treatment of precursors
0.53 mg cm−2
252
400
50

229



NaPF6 in EC:DMC-FEC + separator
—
—


NASICON-type NVP
—
—


2017
PDMS/rGO sponge – VOPO4
Sugarcube templating followed by thermal curing and immersion in GO (aq.) solution; reflux (for VOPO4)
7.5 mg cm−2
126
50
100

223



NaClO4 in PC-FEC + porous P(VDF-HFP) gel separator/electrolyte + D34
Soaking a porous membrane formed by immersion precipitation with an organic electrolyte
—


PDMS/rGO sponge/hard carbon
Sugarcube templating followed by thermal curing and immersion in GO (aq.) solution
6 mg cm−2


2017
Nano-sized NTP@CNT
Spinning of CNT arrays dipped in active material suspensions
6 mg cm−2
43
100
200

231



Na2SO4 (aq.) + microporous PAN nonwoven separator
—
—


Na0.44MnO2@CNT
Solid-state reaction
10 mg cm−2


2017
Crossing-linked NVTP/porous carbon nanofiber
Modified electrospinning
—
55
0.5C
600

226



1 M Na2SO4 (aq.)
—
—


Crossing-linked NVTP/porous carbon nanofiber
Modified electrospinning
—


2018
Composite Na/C
Dissolution of Na pieces in carbon felt
—
124
24
600

218



MMA + BPO + NaPF6 in EC:PC in porous NZSPO–PVdFHFP composite membrane
Electrospinning
—


NNMMO@Al foil
Sol–gel process
2 mg cm−2


2018
NTP@C
Mixing NTP with acetylene black and PVdF
1.2–1.8 mg cm−2
116
0.1C
15

230



NaClO4 in PC-FEC
—
—


NVP–CNF
Electrospinning of NVP precursors (prepared by sol gel) and PAN followed by carbonization
1–1.5 mg cm−2


2018
NGQDs-WS2/3DCF scaffold
3DCF: carbonization of melamine foam; NGQDs: one-step hydrothermal reaction; WS2/3DCF: solvothermal method: NGQDs on WS2/3DCF: electrophoresis
—
58.1
50
100

23



NaPF6 in EC:DEC-FEC + glass fiber separator
—
—


NMO@Ni foam
Coating slurry on Ni foam
—


2018
NTP@C@Cu foil
Coating NTP, carbon black and PVdF slurry on CC
2.9 mg cm−2
96.8
—
500

103



NaClO4 in EC:DMC-FEC + glass fiber membrane (Whatman)
—
—


Freestanding NVP@C @CC
Sol–gel process with pre-treated CC
3.5 mg cm−2


2018
Self-supported C@MoS2@PPy SNTAs@Cu foil
Template-based hydrothermal deposition method
0.25 mg cm−2
509.8
50
20

220



NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fiber separator (Whatman)
—
—


NVP@Al foil
NVP + Super-P + PVdF slurry on Al foil
4.8 mg cm−2


2018
Bi2S3 nanorods encapsulated in N2-doped graphene@Cu foil
Hydrothermal synthesis of Bi2S3 followed by hydrothermal treatment with GO solution
1 mg cm−2
649 (anode)
62.5 (anode)
—

221



NaClO4 in EC:DMC-FEC + glass fibre separator (Whatman)
—
—


NMO@Al foil
NMO + carbon black + PVdF slurry on Al foil
—


2018
SnS2@Cu foil
Solid-phase method
—
98
118
40

232



NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + MCA
MCA: electrospinning
—


NVP@Al foil
Amine-thermal reaction
—


2018
NASICON-type NVTP@SS
Sol–gel method with Ti(CH3CH2CH2CH2O)4 followed by carbonization
10 mg cm−2
45
12
1000

233



9.2 M NaOTF “water-in-salt” electrolyte
—
—


NASICON-type NVTP@SS
Sol–gel method with Ti(CH3CH2CH2CH2O)4 followed by carbonization
10 mg cm−2


2019
3D carbon-networks/Fe7S8/graphene
Two-step method including the assembling process and thermal treatment
3 mg cm−2
1.42 mA h cm−2
0.3 mA cm−2
50

225



NaClO4/diglyme + flexible modified cellulose acetate separator
—
—


Flexible NVP@C
—
—


2019
TiO2 nanodots@CC
Hydrothermal growth on CC
11 mg cm−2
2.20 mA h cm−2
0.2 mA cm−2
200

234



NaPF6 in DME + microporous polypropylene film
—
—


CC-NVP
Chemical reaction followed by calcination
14 mg cm−2


2019
HC@Cu foil
Purchased
—
114
50
110

120



NaClO4 in PC-FEC + glass fibre (Whatman)
—
—


Core–double-shell structured NFPP@NFP@C-CC
Sol–gel dip coating + heat treatment
2.14 mg cm−2


2019
HC@Al foil
Procured
1.5–2.0 mg cm−2
104
0.1C
120

224



B-PCPE

In situ UV-curing of PCE and B-HEMA inside a polypropylene-cellulose composite nonwoven (PCN) skeleton
—


NNFMO@Al foil
Procured
1.5–2.0 mg cm−2


2019
Co9S8@C/3DNCF
Solution adsorption + calcination
0.5–1.1 mg cm−2
377.4
0.5
500

227



NaClO4 in EC:DMC-FEC + separator
—
—


NVP@C
Mixing + annealing
0.5–1.1 mg cm−2


2020
FeP@NPC@Ni lug
Electrospinning FeOOH nanorods into PAN solution + phosphorization
0.5–0.8 mg cm−2
296
200
—

78



NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fibre membrane (Whatman)
—
—


NVP@Al lug
Sol–gel method
—


2020
HC@CC (HC@CC)
Hydrothermal treatment + annealing
—
120
0.1C
100

228



NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fibre membrane
—




Freestanding 3D h-NCO nanosheet arrays@CC
Electrodeposition + solvothermal treatment upon CC
2 mg cm−2


2020
HC@Al foil
—
—
128.6
0.5C (0.14 mA cm−2)
100

139



1.5 M NaClO4 in EC:DEC + electrospun poly (amic acid):dimethylacetamide (DMAc) gel polymer
Electrospinning + soaking of electrolyte solution
—


poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-4-yl-1-oxyl vinyl ether) (PTVE)-CNT@Al foil
Dissolution–diffusion process
3.37 mg cm−2




5 Outlook of flexible NIBs for practical applications
Flexible secondary NIBs with high energy density are promising candidates for integration with handheld flexible electronic devices, medical appliances and wearable fabrics. With the development of flexible mobile phones and wearable thin film devices the requirement of flexible batteries has emerged. The large consumer demand in this sector can be met in a sustainable and cost-effective manner using sodium-ion technology. Thin film batteries and uniaxial cable like batteries can likely meet the demands of wearable and handheld devices. Medical appliances such as skin-patches for drug delivery and measurement, pacemakers and hearing aids can also be powered, and their performance as well as compatibility with the human body improved, by the incorporation of flexible energy-storage devices in their design considerations. Flexible sodium-ion batteries with biocompatible wearable fabrics for civil, medical as well as defence purposes provide much promise for the application of flexible sodium-ion batteries as they have a high surface area. Flexible batteries can either be sewn in over the natural fabric or the fabric itself can be woven using thread-like coaxial batteries. The total capacity of a garment with flexible batteries covering the entire surface should be enough to power multiple handhelds or wearable devices. One interesting application that can change the way we fly is to develop and incorporate CNT based flexible but mechanically strong and lightweight sodium-ion batteries to prepare fuselage and wings for aircrafts. This will not only help maintain a lightweight aircraft but also store charge sufficient for commercial flights. Numerous other practical applications for flexible sodium-ion batteries exist such as in smart-cards, the internet of things, flexible robotics, footwear for smart exercise, interactive media such as Harry Potter styled newspapers, cards, disposable posters made with flexible screens, radio frequency identification tags, electronic jewellery, powering printed circuits, and camouflage clothing for soldiers.
6 Conclusions and prospects
Flexible NIBs are expected to be next generation energy storage devices that meet the requirements of miniaturized flexible and wearable electronics including smart electronics. In this review, recent progress in flexible and stretchable anode, cathode and electrolyte materials for NIB applications has been highlighted. The problems associated with the synthesis of flexible electrodes have also been discussed. Most of the research work published to date demonstrated the preparation and performance studies of flexible anode/cathode materials for sodium half-cells, which leaves scope for analysing the performance of flexible NIBs utilising the best combinations of electrodes and electrolytes to receive a system of superior electrochemical properties and flexibility. Table 3 lists flexible NIBs, reported in the last few years, with the respective electrode and electrolyte configurations and their performances. Timeline demonstration of few interesting approaches towards the development of flexible NIB full cells is shown in Fig. 17. Such approaches and the outcomes are certainly encouraging; however, flexible NIBs are still lacking in terms of capacity and cycle life. Moreover, the synthesis of flexible electrodes with sustainable performance under different bending and stretching conditions needs more effort for the standardization. The conclusive observations and prospects are summarized as follows:
 Fig. 17  A brief chronology of the recently developed flexible NIBs with novel approaches. Reproduced with permission,131 copyright 2013, Springer Nature. Reproduced with permission,222 copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission,223 copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission,23 copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission,219 copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission,167 copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
1 carbonaceous structures such as graphene, CNFs, CNTs, rGO and their composites exhibit good structural stability against repeated deformations. These materials can be used as active materials in anodes for flexible NIBs. They can also provide excellent electronic conductivity and mechanical support to high capacity anode materials like metal dichalcogenides, phosphorus, tin, titanium oxides etc. The synthesis of nano-sized high capacity active materials entrapped in a flexible porous carbonaceous structure appears to be a promising approach to design anodes for flexible NIBs. In such systems, the high capacity of the active material is coupled with the complimentary properties of the carbon structure, which includes the enhancement of the electronic and Na+ ion diffusion kinetics, and prevention of volume expansion, pulverization and aggregation. The pre-sodiation of the carbonaceous structures may enhance the capacity and cyclability of the battery. Additionally, the encapsulation of nano-size active materials in a hybrid substrate of carbonaceous structures and highly stretchable organic materials can be a good approach to receive high capacity anodes with good electronic conductivity and flexibility in terms of all possible stretching, bending, rolling and twisting.
2 For flexible cathode materials, the growth of active materials such as inorganic layered transition metal oxides, sodiated metal fluorides, phosphates, fluorophosphates and pyrophosphates on a flexible carbonaceous structure appears to be a desirable approach. These layered structures show good sodium storage capacity and long cycle lives. The porous composites of layered active material and carbon provide efficient conductive channels for the mobility of electrons, and a larger number of sites become accessible to ions. Similar to anodic systems, flexible carbonaceous structures not only contribute to the conductivity of cathodes but also suppress the volume expansion during repetitive sodium intercalation/de-intercalation. Few redox-active polymers also show high capacity matching to their theoretical value and flexible ionic channels for Na+ ion storage. These organic electrode materials appear to have better compatibility with flexible devices with a lower cost. But the dissolution of these materials in the electrolyte is an issue due to which long term cyclability of these systems is in question. In this regard, the use of high sodium ion conducting flexible polymer electrolyte systems may be an effective way to get rid of this problem. The use of carbonaceous-organic hybrid substrates may also provide significant flexibility to high capacity active cathode materials.
3 Liquid electrolytes are mostly used in flexible NIBs as revealed from Fig. 17. However, the issues such liquid electrolyte leakage, electrode corrosion and dissolution of electrodes may be avoided by using highly flexible and mechanically stable gel polymer electrolytes. The dispersion of NASICON structured active fillers may enhance the Na+ ion transport in gel polymer electrolytes and hence the utility of the electrolyte for flexible battery application. These electrolytes have a high content of liquid electrolyte of sodium salts immobilized in a polymer matrix and provide excellent liquid-like ionic conductivity with significant thermal and electrochemical stability. Additionally, the solid/quasi-solid consistency of such systems may provide immunity from the dissolution of the electrodes. These electrolyte systems appear better than the conventionally used liquid and solid-state inorganic electrolytes in terms of compatibility with electrodes, flexibility, and safety.
Recent progress in NIB technology has resulted in encouraging results which create a strong base to produce flexible and stretchable devices. In future, the research should be aligned to optimize various electrodes and electrolytes, including supportive elements, current collectors and packaging materials, in terms of their structural flexibility, compatibility, electrochemical performance and safety.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the funding (Sanction Nos: YSS/2015/001234 and EMR/2016/002197) received from the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) New Delhi, India.
References
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5237–5288 RSC .
T. Tao, S. Lu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700375 CrossRef .
H. Cha, J. Kim, Y. Lee, J. Cho and M. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1702989 CrossRef .
H. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Hu, X. Liu and G. Yu, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 26, 83–104 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Z. Sun, K. Tan, D. K. Denis, J. Sun, L. Liang, L. Hou and C. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4353–4382 RSC .
J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kubota and S. Komaba, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2538 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Shao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 CAS .
M. Mortazavi, Q. Ye, N. Birbilis and N. V. Medhekar, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vignarooban, R. Kushagra, A. Elango, P. Badami, B.-E. Mellander, X. Xu, T. G. Tucker, C. Nam and A. M. Kannan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 2829–2846 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Lee, J.-S. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo, S. Jeon, T.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5753–5761 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Zamarayeva, A. M. Gaikwad, I. Deckman, M. Wang, B. Khau, D. A. Steingart and A. C. Arias, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500296 CrossRef .
V. Vega-Garita, L. Ramirez-Elizondo, N. Narayan and P. Bauer, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2019, 27, 346–370 Search PubMed .
C.-C. Wu, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 11862–11870 RSC .
R. Singh, E. Singh and H. Singh Nalwa, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 48597–48630 RSC .
S. Yoshida, T. Mizuno, S. Kusama, K. Sato, B. Raut and M. Nishizawa, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 170–176 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gaikwad, A. C. Arias and D. A. Steingart, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 305–328 CrossRef .
T. Yang, T. Qian, M. Wang, X. Shen, N. Xu, Z. Sun and C. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 539–545 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, L. Shen, H. Li, G. Pang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Kong, S. Huang, Y. Shi, M. Ding, Y. Von Lim, T. Xu, F. Chen, X. Li and H. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10813–10824 RSC .
L. Hu, H. Wu, F. La Mantia, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5843–5848 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M.-S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef .
S.-W. Kim, D.-H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Huang, C. Yuan and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. Xia, H. Wang, X. Liang, Z. Yin and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801072 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Jiao, M. Liao, B. Wang and H. Peng, Carbon, 2017, 124, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Zhou, C. Liu, X. Chen and H. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8837–8843 RSC .
L. David and G. Singh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28401–28408 CAS .
X. Deng, K. Xie, L. Li, W. Zhou, J. Sunarso and Z. Shao, Carbon, 2016, 107, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, Z. Shi and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 141, 302–310 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, B. Yu, Z. Shi, C. Wang and C. Chong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 800–807 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, L. Zeng, Z. Yang, L. Gu, J. Wang, X. Liu, J. Cheng and Y. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 693–698 RSC .
S. Wang, L. Xia, L. Yu, L. Zhang, H. Wang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502217 CrossRef .
H. Liu, D. Su, R. Zhou, B. Sun, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 970–975 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, X. Li, A. Lushington, M. Cai, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li and X. Sun, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, M3034 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cabana, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, M. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Jiang and Y. Yu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3844–3853 CrossRef CAS .
L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, W. Luo, X. Hu, C. Chen, L. Qie, D. Hou and Y. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Li, H. Wang, W. Wei and L. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 104003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Lan, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhong, Z. Zhang and Y. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Zhao and Y. Du, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 1440–1444 RSC .
S.-H. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, R. Deshpande, P. A. Parilla, E. Whitney, D. T. Gillaspie, K. M. Jones, A. H. Mahan, S. Zhang and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3627–3632 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, D. Wang, Q. An, B. Ren, Y. Rong and Y. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5402–5405 RSC .
Z. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Ding, T. Wang and M. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 755–765 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, J. Mao, Y. Zhu, C. Luo, L. Suo, T. Gao, F. Han, S.-C. Liou and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500174 CrossRef .
S.-O. Kim and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5935–5942 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, L. Chen, X. Ren, G. Hou, L. Chen, L. Zhang, B. Liu, Q. Ai, L. Zhang, P. Si, J. Lou, J. Feng and L. Ci, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1574–1581 RSC .
Y. Liu, A. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Liu, J. Cai, X. Cao and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3780–3790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, A. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Liu, X. Cao, Y. Ma, L. Chen, C. Lau, T.-C. Chen, F. Wei and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5530–5537 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, K. Kretschmer, J. Zhang, B. Sun, D. Su and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Nam, T.-H. Kim, K.-S. Hong and H.-S. Kwon, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11824–11835 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, Y. Liu, Z. Jia, Y.-C. Chen, J. Wan, N. Weadock, K. J. Gaskell, T. Li and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, K. Zhao, L. Zhang, Z. Xie, Z. Cai and Y. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 654, 357–362 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, X. Yao, Q. Cao, S. Ding, J. He and S. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2019, 234, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Wang, X. L. Wang, Z. J. Yao, D. Xie, X. H. Xia, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 560, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, W. Zhou, V. Chabot, A. Yu and X. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24895–24901 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, Y. Yuan, H. Yan, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Li, X. Yang, H. Shu, X. Wang and G. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227559 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, J. Yi, Y. Sun and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2978–3006 RSC .
J. R. González, R. Alcántara, F. Nacimiento, G. F. Ortiz and J. L. Tirado, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 4602–4609 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Ji, M. Jing, H. Hou, Y. Zhu, L. Fang, X. Yang, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5648–5655 RSC .
X. Zhu, Q. Li, Y. Fang, X. Liu, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Wang, W. Yuan, J. Wu, H. Liu, H. Wu and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 311, 141–149 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Fan, D. Gong, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang and B. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1104–1111 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, J. Cabana and M. Shirpour, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2014, 24, 5–14 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Trinh, O. Crosnier, S. B. Schougaard and T. Brousse, ECS Trans., 2011, 35, 91 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bi, C. Zeng, T. Ma, A. Etogo, X. Wang and L. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, H. Ye, X.-L. Wu, Y.-P. Zheng, F. Wan, M. Liu, X.-H. Zhang, J.-P. Zhang and Y.-G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16622–16629 RSC .
R. Tan, J. Yang, J. Hu, K. Wang, Y. Zhao and F. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 986–989 RSC .
A. Douglas, R. Carter, L. Oakes, K. Share, A. P. Cohn and C. L. Pint, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11156–11165 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Choi, G. Cheruvally, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Hu, B. Evanko, X. Sun, X. Li, T. Hou, S. Cai, C. Zheng, W. Hu and G. D. Stucky, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 117–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, Z. Li, L. Shen, X. Yin, Y. Liu, G. Chang, J. Wang, S. Xu, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 29, 78–83 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. He, W. Xu, G. Xu, X. Yi, X. Yang and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9890–9902 RSC .
D. Yang, X.-Z. Liao, J. Shen, Y.-S. He and Z.-F. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6723–6726 RSC .
X. Han, X. Gui, T.-F. Yi, Y. Li and C. Yue, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2018, 22, 109–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mo, Q. Ru, J. Chen, X. Song, L. Guo, S. Hu and S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19765–19773 RSC .
T. Jin, H. Li, K. Zhu, P.-F. Wang, P. Liu and L. Jiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2342–2377 RSC .
H. Kim, R. A. Shakoor, C. Park, S. Y. Lim, J.-S. Kim, Y. N. Jo, W. Cho, K. Miyasaka, R. Kahraman, Y. Jung and J. W. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1147–1155 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, G. Oyama, C. D. Ling and A. Yamada, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1297–1299 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, S. Zhang and C. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4484–4492 RSC .
M. Reynaud, G. Rousse, A. M. Abakumov, M. T. Sougrati, G. V. Tendeloo, J.-N. Chotard and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2671–2680 RSC .
Y. Meng, Q. Li, T. Yu, S. Zhang and C. Deng, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1645–1654 RSC .
M. Reynaud, P. Barpanda, G. Rousse, J.-N. Chotard, B. C. Melot, N. Recham and J.-M. Tarascon, Solid State Sci., 2012, 14, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, J.-N. Chotard, N. Recham, C. Delacourt, M. Ati, L. Dupont, M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 7401–7413 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, G. Oyama, S. Nishimura, S.-C. Chung and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4358 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oyama, S. Nishimura, Y. Suzuki, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1019–1023 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, T. Yu, S. Zhang and C. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1624–1631 RSC .
T. Yu, B. Lin, Q. Li, X. Wang, W. Qu, S. Zhang and C. Deng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 26933–26941 RSC .
S. Y. Lim, H. Kim, J. Chung, J. H. Lee, B. G. Kim, J.-J. Choi, K. Y. Chung, W. Cho, S.-J. Kim, W. A. Goddard, Y. Jung and J. W. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 599–604 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lim and J. W. Choi, Meet. Abstr., 2013, MA2013–02, 369 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Deng and Y. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20538–20544 RSC .
C. Deng and S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9111–9117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Li, K. Cao, X. Wang and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700087 CrossRef .
K. Saravanan, C. W. Mason, A. Rudola, K. H. Wong and P. Balaya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, W. Han, X. Lu, H. Yang, Y.-S. Hu, J. Zhou, Z. Zhou, J. Li, W. Chen, D. Chen and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 156–160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, L. Xiao, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5895–5900 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, J. Qin, Z. Yin, J. Bai, Y.-K. Sun and M. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 136–147 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, B. Cheng, S. Chen, Z. Ge and H. Zhuo, Mater. Lett., 2018, 232, 153–156 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. Hu, Small, 2015, 11, 3822–3829 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Z. Ma, H. Lin, K. Rui, Q. Zhang, Q. Wang, M. Du, D. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu and W. Huang, Compos. Comm., 2019, 13, 97–102 CrossRef .
C. Wu and Y. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1191–1206 RSC .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Luo, F. Lyu, F. Wang, H. Yang, H. Li, C. Liang, M. Huang, Y. Huang and Y. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9733–9744 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, H. Song, C. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Liu and G. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11391–11399 CrossRef CAS .
V. Legagneur, A. Le Gal La Salle, A. Verbaere, Y. Piffard and D. Guyomard, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 1153–1161 CrossRef CAS .
Q. An, J. Sheng, X. Xu, Q. Wei, Y. Zhu, C. Han, C. Niu and L. Mai, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2075–2080 RSC .
D. Wang, Q. Wei, J. Sheng, P. Hu, M. Yan, R. Sun, X. Xu, Q. An and L. Mai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12074–12079 RSC .
Z. Dai, U. Mani, H. T. Tan and Q. Yan, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700098 CrossRef .
M. Chen, D. Cortie, Z. Hu, H. Jin, S. Wang, Q. Gu, W. Hua, E. Wang, W. Lai, L. Chen, S.-L. Chou, X.-L. Wang and S.-X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800944 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Liu, L. Jiao and L.-Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801917 CrossRef .
H. Kim, I. Park, S. Lee, H. Kim, K.-Y. Park, Y.-U. Park, H. Kim, J. Kim, H.-D. Lim, W.-S. Yoon and K. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3614–3622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, L. Xiao, J. Qian, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3539–3543 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jo Song, D.-S. Kim, J.-C. Kim, S.-H. Hong and D.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5502–5510 RSC .
M. Chen, W. Hua, J. Xiao, D. Cortie, W. Chen, E. Wang, Z. Hu, Q. Gu, X. Wang, S. Indris, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1480 CrossRef .
X. Ma, Z. Pan, X. Wu and P. K. Shen, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 365, 132–141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, L. Wang, J. Cheng and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6544–6546 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Lu, J. Liu, M. Xu, J. Cheng, D. Zhang and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 2018–2021 CrossRef .
S.-H. Yu, M. Shokouhimehr, T. Hyeon and Y.-E. Sung, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 2, A39 CrossRef CAS .
D. Asakura, C. H. Li, Y. Mizuno, M. Okubo, H. Zhou and D. R. Talham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2793–2799 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, C. Wu, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702619 CrossRef .
P. Nie, L. Shen, G. Pang, Y. Zhu, G. Xu, Y. Qing, H. Dou and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16590–16597 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Yuan, D. Bao, Y. Yin, H. Zhong, X. Zhang, J. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603719 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, K. Li, J. Liu, X. Zhong, X. Duan, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2710–2716 RSC .
S. Wu, W. Wang, M. Li, L. Cao, F. Lyu, M. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Shi, B. Nan, S. Yu, Z. Sun, Y. Liu and Z. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13318 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, S. Sarkar, S. Shi, Q.-A. Huang, H. Zhao, L. Yan, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908445 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, X. Liang, X. Wu, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Feng and H. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2671 CrossRef .
M. Zhou, Y. Xiong, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 114–118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Zhu, Y. Cao, R. Zhao, J. Qian, X. Ai and H. Yang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5495–5498 RSC .
M. Zhou, W. Li, T. Gu, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14354–14356 RSC .
C. Yuan, Q. Wu, Q. Shao, Q. Li, B. Gao, Q. Duan and H. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 517, 72–79 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, J. Hong, H. Kim, H.-D. Lim, S. B. Cho, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2558–2565 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, Y. Kim, S. Park, H. Ko and Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1264–1269 RSC .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 RSC .
H. Woo Kim, H.-J. Kim, H. Byeon, J. Kim, J. Woon Yang, Y. Kim and J.-K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17980–17986 RSC .
S. Park and S. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 89, 516–522 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim and K. Y. Cho, J. Electrochem. Sci. Technol., 2015, 6, 1–6 CrossRef .
J. Jin, Z. Wen, G. Ma, Y. Lu, Y. Cui, M. Wu, X. Liang and X. Wu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2558–2560 RSC .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494–499 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, Y. Noguchi, K. Hata, T. Fukushima, T. Aida and T. Someya, Science, 2008, 321, 1468–1472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2779–2795 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3560–3573 RSC .
T. Jin, Q. Han and L. Jiao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806304 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1800212 CrossRef .
H.-W. Liang, Q.-F. Guan, Z. Zhu, L.-T. Song, H.-B. Yao, X. Lei and S.-H. Yu, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e19 CrossRef .
W. K. Chee, H. N. Lim, Z. Zainal, N. M. Huang, I. Harrison and Y. Andou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4153–4172 CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. Tee, S. L. Hellstrom, J. A. Lee, C. H. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 788–792 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, X. Niu, Z. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3989–3994 CrossRef CAS .
M. Endo, H. Muramatsu, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim, M. Terrones and M. S. Dresselhaus, Nature, 2005, 433, 476 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ago, K. Petritsch, M. S. Shaffer, A. H. Windle and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1281–1285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, N. Minami, W. Zhu, S. Kazaoui, R. Azumi and M. Matsumoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2003, 42, 7629 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fugetsu, E. Sano, M. Sunada, Y. Sambongi, T. Shibuya, X. Wang and T. Hiraki, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1256–1258 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Matter, 2019, 1, 90–114 CrossRef .
M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, G. Singh and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 81–102 RSC .
Y. Cao, L. Xiao, W. Wang, D. Choi, Z. Nie, J. Yu, L. V. Saraf, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3155–3160 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J.-H. Ouyang and D. Jia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, H. Che, F. Feng, J. Liao, H. Wang, Y. Yin and Z.-F. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 43056–43065 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Singh, S. K. Singh, H. Gupta, Shalu, L. Balo, A. K. Tripathi, Y. L. Verma and R. K. Singh, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 1909–1919 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Chai, T. Liu, R. Hu, Z. Zhang, G. Li and G. Cui, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 337, 140–146 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xue, X. Shi, B. Lin, Q. Guo, Y. Zhao and H. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2020, 457, 228059 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue and D. J. Quesnel, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 7504–7510 RSC .
D. T. Vo, H. N. Do, T. T. Nguyen, T. T. H. Nguyen, V. M. Tran, S. Okada and M. L. P. Le, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2019, 241, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, K. Dai, H. Hou, X. Ji, L. Chen, D. G. Ivey and W. Wei, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700996 CrossRef .
S. Song, M. Kotobuki, F. Zheng, C. Xu, S. V. Savilov, N. Hu, L. Lu, Y. Wang and W. D. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6424–6431 RSC .
Q. Yu, Q. Lu, X. Qi, S. Zhao, Y.-B. He, L. Liu, J. Li, D. Zhou, Y.-S. Hu, Q.-H. Yang, F. Kang and B. Li, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 23, 610–616 CrossRef .
K. Matsumoto, J. Hwang, S. Kaushik, C.-Y. Chen and R. Hagiwara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3247–3287 RSC .
L. Qiao, X. Judez, T. Rojo, M. Armand and H. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 070534 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, T. J. Woo, M. F. Z. Kadir and H. M. Ahmed, J. Sci. Adv. Mater. Dev., 2018, 3, 1–17 Search PubMed .
L. M. Carvalho, P. Guégan, H. Cheradame and A. S. Gomes, Eur. Polym. J., 2000, 36, 401–409 CrossRef CAS .
I. J. A. Mertens, M. Wübbenhorst, W. D. Oosterbaan, L. W. Jenneskens and J. van Turnhout, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 3314–3324 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Bobade, S. V. Pakade (Yawale) and S. P. Yawale, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2009, 355, 2410–2414 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hashmi and S. Chandra, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1995, 34, 18–26 CrossRef .
A. Boschin and P. Johansson, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 175, 124–133 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Park, H.-S. Ryu, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Lee and H.-J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 450–454 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Bhargav, V. M. Mohan, A. K. Sharma and V. V. R. N. Rao, Ionics, 2007, 6, 441–446 CrossRef .
P. B. Bhargav, V. M. Mohan, A. K. Sharma and V. V. R. N. Rao, Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater., 2007, 56, 579–591 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Bhargav, V. M. Mohan, A. K. Sharma and V. V. R. N. Rao, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, 165–171 CrossRef .
Z. Osman, K. B. M. Isa, A. Ahmad and L. Othman, Ionics, 2010, 5, 431–435 CrossRef .
C. S. Martinez-Cisneros, B. Levenfeld, A. Varez and J. Y. Sanchez, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 456–466 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, N. Gu, Z. Cheng, X. Yang, E. Wang and S. Dong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 74, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mishra and D. K. Rai, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2013, 62, 311–319 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhide and K. Hariharan, Eur. Polym. J., 2007, 43, 4253–4270 CrossRef CAS .
M. Egashira, T. Asai, N. Yoshimoto and M. Morita, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 95–98 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boschin and P. Johansson, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 1006–1015 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar Singh, Shalu, S. Kumar Chaurasia and R. Kumar Singh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40199–40210 RSC .
L. M. Bronstein, R. L. Karlinsey, K. Ritter, C. G. Joo, B. Stein and J. W. Zwanziger, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1812–1820 RSC .
W. Wieczorek, Z. Florjanczyk and J. R. Stevens, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Przyluski, M. Siekierski and W. Wieczorek, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2101–2108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Ni’mah, M.-Y. Cheng, J. H. Cheng, J. Rick and B.-J. Hwang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 375–381 CrossRef .
J.-K. Kim, Y. Jun Lim, H. Kim, G.-B. Cho and Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3589–3596 RSC .
Z. Zhang, K. Xu, X. Rong, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, X. Huang and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2017, 372, 270–275 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, L. Xue, J. B. Goodenough and A. Manthiram, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 416–423 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar and D. K. Kanchan, Journal of Energy Storage, 2019, 22, 44–49 CrossRef .
J.-Z. Guo, A.-B. Yang, Z.-Y. Gu, X.-L. Wu, W.-L. Pang, Q.-L. Ning, W.-H. Li, J.-P. Zhang and Z.-M. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17903–17910 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar, M. Suleman and S. A. Hashmi, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 202, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5101–5108 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hashmi, M. Y. Bhat, M. K. Singh, N. T. K. Sundaram, B. P. C. Raghupathy and H. Tanaka, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 2817–2826 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mishra, A. Garg, R. Sharma, R. Gautam and S. S. Pundir, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 12, 621–627 CAS .
K. Mishra, T. Arif, R. Kumar and D. Kumar, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2019, 23, 2401–2409 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, Z. Li, W. Zhang, D. Zeng, Y. Sun and H. Cheng, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 300, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .

          A. S. Gozdz, C. N. Schmutz, J.-M. Tarascon and P. C. Warren, Lithium secondary battery extraction method, US Pat. 5540741,  1996 .
T. Michot, A. Nishimoto and M. Watanabe, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1347–1360 CrossRef CAS .
G.-L. Ji, B.-K. Zhu, Z.-Y. Cui, C.-F. Zhang and Y.-Y. Xu, Polymer, 2007, 48, 6415–6425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, Y. Xu, D. Chen, Y. Xie, L. Chen, M. Que and Y. Hou, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 22728–22734 RSC .
P. Raghavan, X. Zhao, C. Shin, D.-H. Baek, J.-W. Choi, J. Manuel, M.-Y. Heo, J.-H. Ahn and C. Nah, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6088–6094 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magistris, P. Mustarelli, F. Parazzoli, E. Quartarone, P. Piaggio and A. Bottino, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 657–660 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Yang, Z. Chang, M. X. Li, X. W. Wang and Y. P. Wu, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 269, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yadav, K. Mishra and S. A. Hashmi, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 570–582 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yadav, K. Mishra and S. Hashmi, High Perform. Polym., 2018, 30, 957–970 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, W. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li and C. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35039–35046 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Mi, C. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Cui, X. Feng, Y. Cao and C. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806664 CrossRef .
T. Zhu, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y.-G. Wang, C. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5263–5271 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, H.-S. Woo, J.-M. Heo, J.-M. Kim, R. Thangavel, Y.-S. Lee and D.-W. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4645–4654 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, Y. Xu, C. Wang, L. Wen, Y. Fang, Y. Mi, M. Zhou, H. Zhao and Y. Lei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2954–2962 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Ding, H. Ha, Y. Shi, L. Peng, X. Zhang, C. J. Ellison and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700898 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, X. Liu, Y. Duan, L. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Feng, W. Chen and Y. Zhao, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 583, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fdz De Anastro, N. Lago, C. Berlanga, M. Galcerán, M. Hilder, M. Forsyth and D. Mecerreyes, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 582, 435–441 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. A. Rani, J. Hwang, K. Matsumoto and R. Hagiwara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, H5031 CrossRef .
H. Verma, K. Mishra and D. K. Rai, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 521–532 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, C. Lakshmi and P. Vickraman, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, 1106–1111 CrossRef .
H. Yin, M.-L. Cao, X.-X. Yu, H. Zhao, Y. Shen, C. Li and M.-Q. Zhu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1615–1621 RSC .
Q. Ni, Y. Bai, Y. Li, L. Ling, L. Li, G. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Ren, F. Wu and C. Wu, Small, 2018, 14(43), 1702864 CrossRef .
G. Pang, P. Nie, C. Yuan, L. Shen, X. Zhang, J. Zhu and B. Ding, Energy Technol., 2014, 2(8), 705–712 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, L. Zhang, C. Liu, X. Feng, J. Zhang, L. Guan, L. Mi and S. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(28), 23883–23890 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, M. Zarrabeitia, A. Mariani, Z. Jusys, M. Hekmatfar, H. Zhang, D. Geiger, U. Kaiser, R. J. Behm, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105176 CrossRef CAS .
B. Long, J. Zhang, L. Luo, G. Ouyang, M.-S. Balogun, S. Song and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2626–2635 RSC .
F. Xie, Z. Xu, A. C. S. Jensen, F. Ding, H. Au, J. Feng, H. Luo, M. Qiao, Z. Guo, Y. Lu, A. J. Drew, Y.-S. Hu and M.-M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27567–27575 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Kuldeep Mishra	Kuldeep Mishra is Assistant Professor in Department of Physics and Materials Science, Jaypee University Anoopshahr (India). He obtained his PhD in Physics in 2013 from Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida (India). He has been awarded Dr D. S. Kothari Postdoctoral Fellowship from University Grants Commission (India) for research on flexible polymer electrolytes. He has finished a research project on polymer electrolytes for sodium batteries sponsored by Science and Engineering Research Board, Delhi (India) under Young Scientist Scheme. His current research is mainly focused on electrolyte and electrode materials for alternative battery systems based on sodium and magnesium, and supercapacitors.
Kuldeep Mishra	Nitish Yadav is currently a National Post-doctoral Fellow at Jawaharlal Nehru University. He received B.E. in Chemical Eng. and M.Sc. in Physics degrees from Birla Institute of Technology and Science – Pilani. He completed his PhD from the University of Delhi under the guidance of Prof. S. A. Hashmi where he worked on porous polymer electrolytes and biomass-derived carbon electrodes. His current research focuses on understanding the energetics and kinetics of atomic-scale processes happening in carbon-based supercapacitor and battery electrodes.
S. A. Hashmi	S. A. Hashmi is Professor in Department of Physics & Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi (India) since January, 2011. He joined University of Delhi in 2005 as reader. Formerly he was a faculty member at North Eastern Regional Institute of Science & Technology, Itanagar (India). He obtained his PhD in Physics in 1988 from Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi (India). His current research activities are focused on the development of electrode and electrolyte materials for electrochemical energy storage devices. His main focus is towards solid-state batteries and supercapacitors based on polymer-based electrolytes.

Cation size (radius, Å)	0.76	1.06
Atomic weight (g mol−1)	6.9	23
Electronic shell structure	2, 1	2, 8, 1
Melting point (°C)	180.54	97.72
Cost, carbonates ($ ton−1)	5000	150

E° (vs. SHE)	−3.05	−2.71
Metal capacity (mA h g−1)	3829	1165

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of various components of a typical NIB (a) and typical materials used to prepare flexible NIBs (b). (n-PAQs: n-type redox-active poly(anthraquinonyl sulphide), p-PTA: p-dopable polytriphenylamine, PPy: polypyrrole, NTP: NaTi2(PO4)3, NVP: Na3V2(PO4)3, NNMO: Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2, NLNMO: Na0.80Li0.12Ni0.22Mn0.66O2, NNMMO: Na0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1Mn0.67O2, NMO: Na0.44MnO2, NFPP: Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7), NFP: NaFePO4, NNFMO: NaNi1/3Fe1/3Mn1/3O2, rGO: reduced graphene oxide, HC: hard carbon, CNF: carbon nanofiber, NGQDs: nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots, and SNTAs: sandwich like nanotube arrays).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram and photographs of the cable battery (a), reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry, planar battery (b), reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society, and illustration of typical planar and cable shaped batteries with various components (c, d).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation (a) and photograph (b) of a sulfur-doped flexible graphene film and its discharge–charge profiles at 100 mA g−1 current density (c), reproduced with permission,32 copyright 2016, Elsevier. Schematic illustration of the fabrication of highly flexible N-CNF films using electrospinning (d), and its cycling performance at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 (e), reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation showing the synthesis of rGO/MoS2 composite paper (a), electrical conductivity vs. MoS2 loading (b), and sodium charge capacity of various electrodes at a constant current density of 25 mA g−1 (c). Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Photograph of flexible MoS2-CNFs film (d) and rate capacity of the MoS2-CNFs at different current densities (e). Reproduced with permission.42 Schematic of the synthesis of the MoS2@LEGr heterostructures (f) and cycling performance of the MoS2@LEGr electrode at a current density of 0.3 A g−1 (g). Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, IOP Publishing, Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthesis process of the P/CFs@RGO composites (a), cyclic voltammograms for the first three cycles of the P/CFs@RGO composite (b), and cycling performance of red P, CFs, P/CFs, and P/CFs@RGO composites at 50 mA g−1 (c), reproduced with permission,51 copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the preparation process for Sn NDs@PNC NF (a), photos of the as-spun PAN/PMMA/SnCl2 fiber membrane, calcined self-supported Sn NDs@PNC electrode and fabricated Na-ion batteries (b), galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles obtained at a current density of 200 mA g−1 of the Sn NDs@PNC electrode in the voltage range of 0.01–2 V vs. Na+/Na (c), and long-term cycling stability of the Sn NDs@PNC electrode at a current density of 2000 mA g−1 (d), reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons. The charge/discharge curves of SnS2@graphene nanosheet arrays at various current rates (e), and cycling performance of SnS2@graphene and SnS2 nanosheet arrays at 1200 mA g−1 for 200 cycles (f), reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2016, Elsevier, and rate capability of SnS2/CNFs (g), reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of NCF@rGO-TiO2 (a), schematic presentation of a LIB using the NCF@rGO-TiO2 anode and its operation under different bending conditions (b), reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Illustration of volume change of the Ge@graphene@TiO2 electrode and traditional nanofibers before and after cycling (c), and comparative cycling performance of the Ge@graphene@TiO2 electrode at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (d). Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a NVP//FeP@NPCNF full cell (a), photograph of a glowing LED using the above cell (b), galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles (c), and cycling performance of the NVP//FeP@NPCNF full cell at 0.2 A g−1 (d). Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the significance of providing electronic pathways in the NVP nanoparticle in NVP@C@CNT composite cathodes (a) and cycle performance of NVP@C@CNT composite cathodes at 5C for 4500 cycles (b), reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of a flexible sodium-ion full battery (FSIFB) using the BFCF-NVP/HCF cathode and the PGN/SiC/HCF anode and the structure of the BFCF-NVP/HCF cathode (c). The capacity retention of the BFCF-NVP/HCF cathode in a 1M NaClO4 electrolyte (EC:PC (1:1, v/v) + 0% and 5% FEC) (d). Charge–discharge curves of this FSIFB at 0.5 A g−1 before and after different bending cycles at a bending angle of 30–90° (e). Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  The crystal structure of Na2FeP2O7 projected along the [011] direction showing the different sodium sites and the arrangement of octahedral and polyhedral units (a), the voltage profiles of the Na2FeP2O7 cathode at a C/20 rate starting with discharge (pre-discharge) (b), and rate capability measured at C/20 for charging and at various rates for discharging of the Na2FeP2O7 cathode (c), reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. Schematic illustration (d) and digital photograph of the flexible Na2FeP2O7 nanoparticles@porous CC cathode (e) and long-term cyclability of the Na2FeP2O7 nanoparticles@porous CC cathode at 10 and 60C (f), reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Crystal structure of Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) (a) and Na+ ion diffusion paths in Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) cathode materials (b), reproduced with permission.119 Copyright permission not required. Illustration of the NFPP@NFP@C-CC flexible electrode (c), charge–discharge profiles of NFPP@NFP@C-CC at a current rate of 0.1C (d), rate performance of NFPP@NFP@C-CC at different current rates (e), and cycling performance of the NFPP@NFP@C-CC//H–C full cell at 200 mA g−1 (f). Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the unit cell of the open-framework FeFe(CN)6 PB analogue structure (a), and cycling performance of the FeFe(CN)6/carbon textile cathode at a current density of 0.5 and 1C (b), reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 13  Illustration of the PTMA-impregnated CNT structure (a), comparative open circuit voltage profiles of NIBs with the PTMA–CNT composite and PTMA-impregnated CNT cathode based Na-ion batteries for twelve days (b), and cycle performance of the PTMA-impregnated CNT sodium battery at room temperature (c), reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 14  Photograph of the flexible NASICON-doped hybrid solid electrolyte (a), model representation of the composite in the hybrid solid electrolyte with Na-ion conducting paths (b), and variation of conductivity and tNa+ with NASICON concentration in the hybrid solid electrolyte (c). Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Room temperature ionic conductivity of gel polymer electrolyte nanocomposite films as a function of SiO2 content. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematics of the preparation process of PMMA-based gel into Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and polymer PVDF-HFP matrices forming a composite electrolyte (a), photographs of the electrolyte membranes in different deforming states (b), temperature dependence of the Na-ion conductivity of the PVDF-HFP/PMMA–Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and PVDF-HFP/PMMA GPEs (c), and typical charge/discharge curves of the NIB full cell with a flexible composite GPE, Na/C flexible composite anode and Na0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1Mn0.67O2 cathode at different current densities (d). Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 


1	PEGDME + NaBF4 + DEMEBF4	Plasticized SPE	1.2	—	—	
190

2	PEO + NaN(CF3SO2)2 + Pyr13TFSI	Plasticized SPE	∼0.1	—	—	
191

3	PEO + NaN(FSO2)2 + Pyr13FSI	Plasticized SPE	∼0.1	—	—	
191

4	PEO + CH3OSO3Na + BMIM-MS	Plasticized SPE	0.105	0.46	4	
192

5	PEO + Na(CF3SO2)2N + BMIMTFSI	Plasticized SPE	0.41	0.39	3.6	
165

6	PVDF-HFP + PVC + NaCF3SO3 + TEGDME	Platicized SPE	0.12	0.60	—	
164

7	PVC + NaN(FSO2)2 + EMIMFSA	Plasticized SPE	2.6	0.27	—	
226

8	PEO + NaClO4 + TiO2	Composite SPE	∼0.01	—	—	
196

9	PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + NASICON structured Na3Zr2Si2PO12	Composite SPE	>0.1	0.92	5	
197

10	PEO + Na(CF3SO2)2N + NASICON structured Na3·4Zr1·8Mg0·2Si2PO12	Composite SPE	0.06	—	4.3	
198

11	PEO + NaClO4 + NASICON structured Na3Zr2Si2PO12	Composite SPE	0.021	—	—	
199

12	PEO + NaClO4 + CQDs	Composite SPE	0.0717	0.42	—	
170

13	PEO + NaN(FSO2)2 + TiO2	Composite SPE	∼0.01	0.394	4.31	
220

14	PEO + NaClO4 + SiO2 + EmimFSI	Plasticized composite SPE	1.3	0.61	4.2	
171

15	PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + EMITf	GPE	5.74	0.23	5	
200

16	PVDF-HFP + NaClO4 + PC/FEC	GPE	4.2	—	—	
202

17	PVdF-HFP + NaPA	GPE	0.091	0.83	6	
208

18	PU + NaClO4 + EC/PC/DEC/FEC	GPE	1.5	0.22	4.7	
221

19	MATEMP + MMA + TFMA + NaClO4 + FEC + EC/PC	GPE	5.13	—	5	
224

20	PVCA + PSTB + EC/DEC	GPE	0.1	0.88	4.5	
166

21	PMMA + NaBF4 + EC/PC	GPE	0.567	—	>5	
168

22	PVdF-HFP + NaPF6 + PC	GPE	1.47	—	3.8	
169

23	PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + PC	GPE	1.62	—	>4
24	PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + PC + FEC	GPE	1.91	—	>4
25	PVdF-HFP + NaTFSI + BMIMTFSI	GPE	0.21	—	>4
26	PVdF-HFP + NaTFSI + EMIMTFSI	GPE	0.25	—	>4
27	PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + SiO2 + EC/PC	Composite GPE	4.1	0.52	4	
203

28	PMMA + NaClO4 + SiO2 + EC/PC	Composite GPE	3.4	0.23	5	
204

29	PVdF-HFP + NaCF3SO3 + NaAlO2 + EMITf	Composite GPE	5.5–6.5	0.42	4.7	
205

30	PVdF-HFP/PMMA + NaCF3SO3 + Al2O3 + EC/PC	Composite GPE	1.5	0.29–0.33	3.6	
207

31	polyDADMA + C3mpyrFSI + NaN(FSO2)2 + Al2O3	Composite GPE	∼0.1	0.61	—	
225

32	PVdF-HFP + PEMA + NaCF3SO3 + Sb2O3+ EC/DEC	Composite GPE	0.442	—	—	
228

33	PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + EC/DMC/DEC	Porous GPE	0.6	0.3	4.6	
215

34	PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + EC/PC	Porous GPE	2	—	4.35	
216

35	PEGDE + DPPO in a glass fiber membrane + NaPF6 + EC/DMC/FEC	Porous GPE	2.2	—	4.8	
172

36	PVdF-HFP + NaClO4 + ZrO2 + EC/PC	Composite porous GPE	∼0.6	—	3.0	
217

37	PMMA/PVDF-HFP + Na3Zr2Si2PO12 + NaPF6 + EC/PC	Composite porous GPE	2.78	0.63	4.9	
218

38	PVdF-HFP/PBMA + NaClO4 + hydroxyapatite + EC/PC	Composite porous GPE	1.086	0.83	4.9	
226

39	PVdF-HFP + NaPF6 + TiO2 + EC/PC	Composite porous GPE	1.3	0.31	3.5	
227





2013	n-PAQs@Al-mesh	Polycondensation reaction	—	220	200	500	
131

NaPF6 in DME:DOL + microporous membrane (Celgard 2400)	—	—

p-PTA@Al mesh	Oxidative polymerization of triphenylamine monomer	—
2013	NTP@C@Ti mesh	High-temperature reaction of CH3COONa·3H2O, TiO2,NH4H2PO4 and some amount of citrate	0.7 mg cm−2	100	65	250	
222

Na2SO4 (aq.)	—	—
Na2NiFe(CN)6@Ti mesh	Mixing 0.1 M NiCl2·6H2O and Na4Fe(CN)6·10H2O sol. under continuous stirring.	0.7 mg cm−2
2014	NTP@Ti mesh	High-temperature calcination	0.7 mg cm−2	104	200	1000	
223

Na2SO4 (aq.)	—	—
Hexacyanoferrate(II) Na2CuFe(CN)6@Ti mesh	Mixing 0.1 M CuCl2·6H2O and 0.1 M Na4Fe(CN)6·10H2O aqueous solutions under continuous stirring for 6 h, and then aging for another 24 h	0.7 mg cm−2 (1:1.7 ratio with the anode)
2015	Binder free Sb/rGO nanocomposite	Ultrasonication + stirring of suspensions of GO and SbCl3 followed by drying on the substrate	0.2 mG cm−2	400	100	100	
105

NaClO4 in EC:DMC + glass fiber membrane	—	—
Binder free NVP/rGO nanocomposite	Mixing of reactants + thermal treatment in an inert atmosphere	4 mg cm−2
2015	HC@carbon paper	Solvent casting on carbon paper	—	120	0.2C	200	
197

NaTf/TEGDME + porous NASICON-type NZSP composite with PVdFHFP	Solid-state reaction	—
NaFePO4@carbon paper	Modified mechanical activation	—
2015	Highly ordered Sb nanorod arrays@Al foil	Electrodeposition inside nanoimprinted AAO	0.4 mg cm−2	620	200	250	
219

NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fiber separator (Whatman, GFB/55)	—	—
P2-NNMO@Al foil	Co-precipitation method	0.4 mg cm−2
2015	Sn@CNT-CP	Carbonization of facial tissue + soaking in SnCl2 + ambient pressure chemical vapour deposition of carbon	1.2 mg cm−2	160 (μA h cm−2)	52 (μA cm−2)	100	
54

NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass microfibre separator (Whatman) NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass microfibre separator (Whatman)	—	—
P2-NLNMO	—	3.6 mg cm−2
2016	Antimony@Cu foil	Chemical reduction of SbCl3 with NaBH4	0.5 mg cm−2	106.8	60	100	
167

NaClO4 in PC-FEC + cross-linked PMMA	Radical polymerization of precursor solution drop-cast on a porous cellulose membrane	—
NVP@Al foil	Sol–gel method	2 mg cm−2
2016	N2-doped carbon sheets@Ti foil	Carbonization of okara followed by chemical oxidation and reduction	1.4 mg cm−2	103	562.5	200	
21

NaClO4 in PC-FEC + separator	—	—
NVP@Ti foil	Solid-state reaction	—
2017	Bi2O3 oxide nanoparticles on CNFs	Electrospinning followed by carbothermal treatment of precursors	0.53 mg cm−2	252	400	50	
229

NaPF6 in EC:DMC-FEC + separator	—	—
NASICON-type NVP	—	—
2017	PDMS/rGO sponge – VOPO4	Sugarcube templating followed by thermal curing and immersion in GO (aq.) solution; reflux (for VOPO4)	7.5 mg cm−2	126	50	100	
223

NaClO4 in PC-FEC + porous P(VDF-HFP) gel separator/electrolyte + D34	Soaking a porous membrane formed by immersion precipitation with an organic electrolyte	—
PDMS/rGO sponge/hard carbon	Sugarcube templating followed by thermal curing and immersion in GO (aq.) solution	6 mg cm−2
2017	Nano-sized NTP@CNT	Spinning of CNT arrays dipped in active material suspensions	6 mg cm−2	43	100	200	
231

Na2SO4 (aq.) + microporous PAN nonwoven separator	—	—
Na0.44MnO2@CNT	Solid-state reaction	10 mg cm−2
2017	Crossing-linked NVTP/porous carbon nanofiber	Modified electrospinning	—	55	0.5C	600	
226

1 M Na2SO4 (aq.)	—	—
Crossing-linked NVTP/porous carbon nanofiber	Modified electrospinning	—
2018	Composite Na/C	Dissolution of Na pieces in carbon felt	—	124	24	600	
218

MMA + BPO + NaPF6 in EC:PC in porous NZSPO–PVdFHFP composite membrane	Electrospinning	—
NNMMO@Al foil	Sol–gel process	2 mg cm−2
2018	NTP@C	Mixing NTP with acetylene black and PVdF	1.2–1.8 mg cm−2	116	0.1C	15	
230

NaClO4 in PC-FEC	—	—
NVP–CNF	Electrospinning of NVP precursors (prepared by sol gel) and PAN followed by carbonization	1–1.5 mg cm−2
2018	NGQDs-WS2/3DCF scaffold	3DCF: carbonization of melamine foam; NGQDs: one-step hydrothermal reaction; WS2/3DCF: solvothermal method: NGQDs on WS2/3DCF: electrophoresis	—	58.1	50	100	
23

NaPF6 in EC:DEC-FEC + glass fiber separator	—	—
NMO@Ni foam	Coating slurry on Ni foam	—
2018	NTP@C@Cu foil	Coating NTP, carbon black and PVdF slurry on CC	2.9 mg cm−2	96.8	—	500	
103

NaClO4 in EC:DMC-FEC + glass fiber membrane (Whatman)	—	—
Freestanding NVP@C @CC	Sol–gel process with pre-treated CC	3.5 mg cm−2
2018	Self-supported C@MoS2@PPy SNTAs@Cu foil	Template-based hydrothermal deposition method	0.25 mg cm−2	509.8	50	20	
220

NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fiber separator (Whatman)	—	—
NVP@Al foil	NVP + Super-P + PVdF slurry on Al foil	4.8 mg cm−2
2018	Bi2S3 nanorods encapsulated in N2-doped graphene@Cu foil	Hydrothermal synthesis of Bi2S3 followed by hydrothermal treatment with GO solution	1 mg cm−2	649 (anode)	62.5 (anode)	—	
221

NaClO4 in EC:DMC-FEC + glass fibre separator (Whatman)	—	—
NMO@Al foil	NMO + carbon black + PVdF slurry on Al foil	—
2018	SnS2@Cu foil	Solid-phase method	—	98	118	40	
232

NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + MCA	MCA: electrospinning	—
NVP@Al foil	Amine-thermal reaction	—
2018	NASICON-type NVTP@SS	Sol–gel method with Ti(CH3CH2CH2CH2O)4 followed by carbonization	10 mg cm−2	45	12	1000	
233

9.2 M NaOTF “water-in-salt” electrolyte	—	—
NASICON-type NVTP@SS	Sol–gel method with Ti(CH3CH2CH2CH2O)4 followed by carbonization	10 mg cm−2
2019	3D carbon-networks/Fe7S8/graphene	Two-step method including the assembling process and thermal treatment	3 mg cm−2	1.42 mA h cm−2	0.3 mA cm−2	50	
225

NaClO4/diglyme + flexible modified cellulose acetate separator	—	—
Flexible NVP@C	—	—
2019	TiO2 nanodots@CC	Hydrothermal growth on CC	11 mg cm−2	2.20 mA h cm−2	0.2 mA cm−2	200	
234

NaPF6 in DME + microporous polypropylene film	—	—
CC-NVP	Chemical reaction followed by calcination	14 mg cm−2
2019	HC@Cu foil	Purchased	—	114	50	110	
120

NaClO4 in PC-FEC + glass fibre (Whatman)	—	—
Core–double-shell structured NFPP@NFP@C-CC	Sol–gel dip coating + heat treatment	2.14 mg cm−2
2019	HC@Al foil	Procured	1.5–2.0 mg cm−2	104	0.1C	120	
224

B-PCPE	
In situ UV-curing of PCE and B-HEMA inside a polypropylene-cellulose composite nonwoven (PCN) skeleton	—
NNFMO@Al foil	Procured	1.5–2.0 mg cm−2
2019	Co9S8@C/3DNCF	Solution adsorption + calcination	0.5–1.1 mg cm−2	377.4	0.5	500	
227

NaClO4 in EC:DMC-FEC + separator	—	—
NVP@C	Mixing + annealing	0.5–1.1 mg cm−2
2020	FeP@NPC@Ni lug	Electrospinning FeOOH nanorods into PAN solution + phosphorization	0.5–0.8 mg cm−2	296	200	—	
78

NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fibre membrane (Whatman)	—	—
NVP@Al lug	Sol–gel method	—
2020	HC@CC (HC@CC)	Hydrothermal treatment + annealing	—	120	0.1C	100	
228

NaClO4 in EC:PC-FEC + glass fibre membrane	—	

Freestanding 3D h-NCO nanosheet arrays@CC	Electrodeposition + solvothermal treatment upon CC	2 mg cm−2
2020	HC@Al foil	—	—	128.6	0.5C (0.14 mA cm−2)	100	
139

1.5 M NaClO4 in EC:DEC + electrospun poly (amic acid):dimethylacetamide (DMAc) gel polymer	Electrospinning + soaking of electrolyte solution	—
poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-4-yl-1-oxyl vinyl ether) (PTVE)-CNT@Al foil	Dissolution–diffusion process	3.37 mg cm−2

 	Fig. 17  A brief chronology of the recently developed flexible NIBs with novel approaches. Reproduced with permission,131 copyright 2013, Springer Nature. Reproduced with permission,222 copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission,223 copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission,23 copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission,219 copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission,167 copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
