Ternary layered double hydroxide cathode materials for electrochemical energy storage: a review and perspective  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SE00976E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SE00976E
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 4551-4581Ternary layered double hydroxide cathode materials for electrochemical energy storage: a review and perspective

        
          
            Xi 
            Hu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Wanying 
            Zheng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Mengcheng 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qingqing 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feiyang 
            Zhan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Lingyun 
            Chen
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China. E-mail: lychen@cqu.edu.cn
bNational-Municipal Joint Engineering Laboratory for Chemical Process Intensification and Reaction, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China
Received 
      17th July 2022
    , Accepted 25th August 2022First published on 25th August 2022AbstractThe demand for electrochemical energy storage (EES) with high energy density is increasing with the rapid development of society. Among them, ternary layered double hydroxides (LDHs) have attracted a lot of attention because of their low price and environmental friendliness. More importantly, LDHs with large and adjustable interlayer spacing are ideal candidate materials for cation insertion/doping, which can achieve impressive electrochemical performance. Due to the synergistic effect of different metal ions in ternary LDHs and the synergistic effect of ternary LDHs and other materials in their composites, they provide high specific capacitance/capacity, excellent cycle life, and high energy density. In this review, the crystal structure and preparation of ternary LDHs are reviewed, with an emphasis on their morphology, structural engineering, derivatives and composites, and their applications in EES. In addition, we summarize the challenges facing ternary LDHs as cathode materials for supercapacitors (SCs) and various batteries, such as metal-ion batteries, rechargeable batteries, and metal–air batteries. This review also discusses the charge storage mechanisms of ternary LDHs by various advanced characterization methods.
1. Introduction
The vast majority of the energy used now comes from coal, oil, natural gas or other fossil fuels, and non-renewable energy is gradually being used up.1 The energy crisis and environmental pollution caused by fuel combustion are becoming more and more serious and urgent.2,3 Therefore, the development of renewable energy and energy storage devices has attracted extensive attention.4 Common energy-related technologies include supercapacitors (SCs), metal-ion batteries, and metal–air batteries.5 In theory, any conductive material can be used as an electrode, but different materials are used as electrodes, and there are great differences in processing cost, stability, and conductivity efficiency. In practical research, various factors should be integrated to select appropriate materials for electrodes. Carbon-based materials, conductive polymers, MXenes, metal oxide materials and transition metal sulfides/oxides are often used as electrode materials for SCs and batteries. These materials show electric double layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance, resulting in cyclic stability or limited electrochemical performance of electrode materials. In contrast, layered double hydroxide (LDH) materials, which are metal oxide derivatives, have higher charge storage capacity due to the acquisition of battery-like properties (controlled by electrolyte ion diffusion and phase transition).6,7 For electrochemical energy storage equipment, electrode materials with excellent capacitance performance are the highest premise. In recent years, layered double hydroxides (LDHs) have been widely studied because of the adjustable chemical composition of their main laminates, adjustable types and quantities of guest anions between layers, and adjustable particle size and distribution of intercalation assemblies.8
LDHs, also called hydrotalcite-like compounds, are known as synthetic anionic clays with a brucite-like layered structure. Their general molecular formula is expressed as [M(II)1−xM(III)x(OH)2]x+(An−)x/n·yH2O, in which An− represents an interlayer anion while M(II) and M(III) are divalent (Mg2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, and Zn2+) and trivalent (Al3+, Cr3+, In3+, Mn3+, Ga3+, and Fe3+) metal ions,9–11 respectively, which occupy octahedral positions in the hydroxide layers. The layers are based on octahedral M(OH)6 units, where the metal (M) is coordinated by six hydroxyl groups (OH), forming M(OH)2 brucite-like sheets. The value of x varies from 0.2 to 0.33.10,12 Because LDHs show great flexibility in composition, a large number of active centers can be easily introduced into the structure to change the electronic and structural characteristics of its catalytically active sites. LDHs are derivatives of metal oxides, and the cleavage of interlayer van der Waals bonds can generate high-quality two-dimensional atomically thin monolayers.13 On the basis of binary metal LDHs, there is still a lot of room to further improve their performance by doping with a third metal element.14–16Fig. 1 shows the publishing trend in articles about ternary LDHs over the past 10 years, which indicates that ternary LDHs are gradually attracting the interest of researchers.
 Fig. 1  Trend chart of articles published on ternary metal layered double hydroxides over the past 10 years. 
The morphologies of LDHs are generally two-dimensional sheets17 or flowers.18 At the same time, LDHs show a variety of core–shell structures,19,20 hollow structures,21,22 heterostructures,23,24etc. Different morphologies and structures lead to a large specific surface area and rich active sites on the surface of LDH materials, which provides LDHs great applications in adsorption,25–27 electrochemical conversion28–30 and energy storage. In particular, Zheng et al. once said that hollow-structured LDHs are of particular interest for SCs, because of the large surface area and substantial number of active sites exposed, facilitating charge transfer and reducing aggregation.31 Similarly, according to Poudel et al., the strong interaction in the heterointerface within the nanomaterial produces opportunities to enrich active sites and promote electronic transfer, which is conducive to improving ionic conductivity, redox kinetics, and synergetic effects of participating species. Importantly, combining LDHs with other components leads to multiple valence states and protects the individual components to improve the electrochemical performance of LDH-based nanomaterials in long-term processes against severe chemical conditions.32
LDHs as a competitive case have received a lot of attention because of their highly reversible redox kinetics, environmental friendliness, and generally low cost.33 Wang et al. directly applied Zn–Al hydrotalcite to zinc electrode. The results show that Zn–Al hydrotalcite, as the anode material of an Ni–Zn battery, shows good reversibility, excellent electrochemical cycle stability and better utilization in alkaline solution. However, Zn–Al-LDHs have low conductivity and inhibit the electron transfer of the electrode reaction to a great extent.34 Compared to batteries and fuel cells, SCs are another important low-cost electrochemical energy storage device and have been widely used in the global energy market.32 However, the widespread applications of LDHs as electrode materials for SCs are hampered by their intrinsically poor electric conductivity and strong tendency to stack together.35 In this regard, the rational construction of various 3-dimensional (3D) nanostructures for LDHs is a popular strategy to tackle these problems.31 Because of the flexibility of incorporating mixed-valence metal ions with different compositions and type of interlayer anions into the LDH structure, a diversity of LDH species can be realized.36 On the basis of binary metal LDHs, some researchers made them into ternary LDHs by doping, intercalation, introduction of defects, heterojunctions and so on. Ternary-component LDHs containing two kinds of transition metal exhibited faster charge-carrier transportation and better electronic conductivity.37 Zhang et al. established a ternary metal system Ni0.75Fe0.125V0.125-LDHs/NF electrode, which showed good performance and improved intrinsic catalytic activity and active surface area.38 Later, not just limited to NiFeM-LDHs, other types of ternary LDHs have been widely studied, such as CuNiCo-LDHs,39 CoAlLa-LDHs,40 and NiMgAl-LDHs.41
In addition, LDHs can also be changed into derivatives of LDHs through sulfuration,37 nitridation, oxidation and other processes,42 and can be combined with organic matter (EVA),43 MXene nanosheets,44,45 carbon materials (carbon fibers, carbon nanotubes, carbon ball CSs, HCMSs, etc.),46 graphene (GO, N-rGO)47,48 and other materials to form hybrid materials, among which combining with conductive carbon-based materials is still the most effective method.49 Through the derived and compounded LDHs, the active sites of metals are highly exposed, which is conducive to improving the performance of LDHs. LDHs have been shown to be extraordinary catalyst supports in different heterogeneous reactions, including the oxidation of organics, the synthesis of 2-ethyl-1-hexanol, and the hydroxylation of phenol.50 In terms of electrochemistry, electrodes still suffer from low capacitance and inferior rate performance at high current densities. LDHs have been introduced into carbon materials with the aim of obtaining enhanced energy density and life cycles of SCs. Also, the common low electronic conductivity of LDHs can be overcome by replacing the exchangeable charge-compensating interlayer anions with other functional anions, such as CNTs and carbon nanofibers that can be reduced to electrically conductive carbon materials.32 Yu et al. used various nanostructured carbon species, including zero-dimensional carbon black (CB), one-dimensional carbon nanotubes (CNTs), two-dimensional reduced graphene oxide (rGO), and CNT/rGO composites to couple with NiCoAl-LDHs. Of the electrodes adopted, a nanohybrid electrode consisting of NiCoAl-LDHs, CNTs, and rGO exhibits excellent electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance as high as 1188 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 due to the synergistic effect of NiCoAl-LDHs, rGO, and CNTs, in which the rGO nanosheets are favorable for high specific surface area while the CNT has a fast electron transport path for enhancing the electrical conductivity of the nanohybrids.51
In past decades, ternary LDHs have attracted a lot of attention. The application of LDH materials in photocatalytic water purification52–54 and the electrocatalysis of OER and HER55,56 has been summarized in the literature. Fig. 2 shows some research on ternary LDHs applied to electric energy storage over the past ten years.34,45,57–79 With the passage of time, this newly published literature also needs to be summarized and sorted out.
 Fig. 2  The development path of ternary-layered double hydroxides in electric energy storage from the historical point of view.34,45,57–79 
This review introduces research on ternary LDHs in recent years, from the preparation methods, morphology and structural engineering of ternary LDHs to the application of their derivatives and composites in electric energy storage, which will provide important guidance for the application of ternary LDHs in electric energy storage and other practical industrial applications.
2. Crystal structure of ternary LDHs
LDHs are two-dimensional, hydrotalcite-like, anionic clay materials that are assembled from positively charged main-body lamellae and interlayer anions through non-covalent bonding interactions. The general formula of LDHs is [M(II)1−xM(III)x·(OH)2]x+ [(An−)x/n·yH2O] (abbreviated as M(II)M(III)-A, where M(II) is a divalent metal cation, such as Mg, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co, Fe or Cu; M(III) is a trivalent metal cation, such as Al, Fe, Co, Ni, Mn or Cr; An− is a charge-balancing anion that is stable only in basic conditions with chemical identities ranging from organic, to inorganic, and complex heteropoly-anions, such as Cl−, F−, CO32−, NO3− and SO42−; the value of x is between 0.2 and 0.33 generally representing the molar ratio M(II)/[M(II) + M(III)]).80,81 To a certain extent, M2+ cations can be replaced by M3+ cations with similar ionic radii, resulting in a partial positive charge in the main laminate. The chemical characteristics and valency of metal cations can be changed as required, without significantly changing the framework of the LDHs. As x increases, the charge density of the laminate gradually increases. There is a synergistic effect of metal ions and strong electron conversion ability in the LDH layer. It is further proved that the metal cation site is the active center controlling the selectivity of the chemical reaction. Therefore, the selectivity for the product can be greatly improved by changing the type of metal cation.8 The anion and cation in the interlayer together maintain charge neutrality, thus maintaining the stability of the LDHs. The thickness of the cation layer is determined by the chemical characteristics of the metal ions, and the spacing between layers is determined by the size of the anion.
By building a model, it is possible to understand the effect of divalent and trivalent metal ions on the electrochemical properties of LDHs. Fig. 3a and b show a two-dimensional (2D) structural model of LDHs, in which divalent or trivalent metal hydroxides form a layered structure.36Fig. 3c and d are schematic diagrams of the crystal structures of AlNiFe-LDH82 and Ni3FeAlx-LDH.83
 Fig. 3  Two-dimensional (a) and three-dimensional (b) crystal structures of LDHs. Note: A general formula of stable LDHs is expressed as [M2+1−xM3+x(OH)2]x+(An−)x/n·yH2O, where M2+ is a divalent metal ion; M3+ is a trivalent metal ion; An− are charge-balancing anions.36 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram of the crystal structure of AlNiFe-LDH.82 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the crystal structure of Ni3FeAlx-LDH.83 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Compared with other layered materials, LDHs can synthesize a large number of possible metal anion components and combinations. The divalent and trivalent metal ions in LDH materials occupy octahedral positions in the hydroxide layers. These layers are based on octahedral M(OH)6 units in which the metal (M) is coordinated to six hydroxyl groups (OH), resulting in M(OH)2 hydromagnesite-like flakes.5 Thanks to the tunable M(II)/M(III) molar ratio and exchangeable anions, a large number of metal cations and nanostructures can contribute to desirable physiochemical properties.32
3. Synthesis of ternary LDHs
3.1. Typical methods for the synthesis of pure LDHs
There are many methods to synthesize LDHs, including hydrothermal methods, coprecipitation methods, electrodeposition methods and in situ growth methods. Various methods have various advantages. Appropriate methods are often selected to prepare LDHs according to the required products. This sub-section briefly describes several common methods for the preparation of LDHs.

3.1.1. Hydrothermal method. 
The hydrothermal method refers to a method of preparing materials by dissolving and recrystallizing powder with water as solvent in a sealed pressure vessel. A powder prepared by the hydrothermal method has the advantages of complete grain development, small particle size, uniform distribution and light agglomeration, can use cheaper raw materials, and is simple and environmentally friendly.69 Dinh et al. reported the hydrothermal synthesis of porous ultrathin ternary NiFeV-LDHs nanosheets grown on a foamed nickel (NF) substrate.84 In particular, Enkhtuvshin et al. grew ternary Ni–Fe–Al-LDHs on carbon fiber cloth by a one-step hydrothermal method, loaded ZIF-67 on LDH nanosheets, introduced the fourth transition metal element Co, and triggered a continuous redox reaction, thus obtaining quaternary polymetallic Ni–Fe–Al–Co-LDHs (NFAC-MELDHs).85 The material presents ultrathin 2D nanosheets (Fig. 4a). Liu et al. hydrothermally prepared an NiFeAl-LDH electrode material with excellent SC performance, and this work skillfully used divalent and trivalent metal ions in nickel-based electroplating sludge to form an LDH electrode material with excellent SC performance.86 In 2020, Liu et al. prepared NiMoxCo2−x-LDHs/foam nickel (NF) by a simple hydrothermal method.87
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the catalyst design concept for NFAC-MELDHs via the MOF-derived electrochemical activation process.86 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic and SEM images of Ni2Zn0.5Fe-LDH-modified CPE.88 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic and SEM images of Ni(Co0.5Fe0.5)/NF.93 Copyright 2021, Chemistry Europe. (d) Schematic of the synthesis process, structure and SEM images for NiFeZr-LDH nanosheets.18 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration and SEM images of the fabrication of NiVFe-LDHs.16 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic of the formation procedure and SEM images of electrodeposited Ni-based ternary LDHs.100 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (g) The effect of La substitution with Al on the change in the structure of synthesized LDHs and consequent formation of extra-LDH compounds.40 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (h) A schematic diagram for the formation of FeNiW-LDHs by an electrochemical corrosion strategy.14 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (i) A schematic diagram of the preparation process of ZnFe as LDHs.102 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (j) Illustration showing the formation mechanism of holey interconnected Fe-doped NiCo-LDH nanosheets.104 Copyright 2019, Chemistry Europe. 
Some of the largest drawbacks of the hydrothermal method include high temperature, long duration, and the production of wastewater. But the hydrothermal method is a commonly used method to prepare LDHs in the laboratory.


3.1.2. Coprecipitation method. 
The coprecipitation method prepares a solid product with the help of a precipitant and two or more metal salt solutions. It can precipitate several components at the same time, and the distribution between the components is relatively uniform. The coprecipitation method is often used to prepare multicomponent catalysts, and it is also a method in which one or more active components are loaded on carriers. In 2017, Foruzin et al. prepared flake NixZnyFez-LDHs by coprecipitation (Fig. 4b). Ni2Zn0.5Fe-LDHs show high OER activity. The electrocatalytic activity of CPE modified by Ni2Zn0.5Fe-LDHs is improved, and it has good stability in a neutral medium.88 In 2018, Wu et al. prepared Co–Mn–Fe-LDHs by a coprecipitation method, and used them as a heterogeneous catalyst in a Fenton reaction process.89 Similarly, in 2018, Wang et al. synthesized a series of copper/nickel LDHs with different copper/nickel molar ratios as Fenton's catalysts for phenol degradation.90
Generally speaking, the precipitation method is simple in operation, low in cost and easy for industrial production, but its main disadvantages are poor crystallinity and many impurities.


3.1.3. Electrodeposition method. 
Electrochemical deposition refers to a technology in which an electric current migrates through positive and negative ions in electrolyte solution under the action of an external electric field, and a redox reaction of gaining and losing electrons occurs on the electrode to form a coating. The electrochemical deposition method is simple, low in cost and high in efficiency. Materials can form nanomaterials of various grain sizes with high density and little porosity. In 2021, Ni et al. prepared NiCoFe-LDH nanosheets without adhesive on 1 cm2 graphite paper by a simple electrodeposition method.91 In 2021, Zhou et al. prepared ternary CoNiFe-LDH films based on graded nanosheets by a connected and facile electrodeposition method. The CoNiFe-LDHs exhibit a hierarchical nanosheet structure, which gives the material a higher specific surface area and therefore an increase in active sites and consequently in electrochemical properties.92 In 2022, Wang et al. successfully prepared a series of ternary NiCoFe-LDHs on foamed nickel (NF) by a simple electrodeposition method, and the prepared Ni(Co0.5Fe0.5)/NF showed a unique nanoarray structural characteristics (Fig. 4c). Compared with Ni(Co0.5Fe0.5)-block and Ni(Co0.5Fe0.5)-hydrotalcite prepared by a traditional coprecipitation method, Ni(Co0.5Fe0.5)/NF has a higher Co3+/Co2+ ratio and more defects.93 As a cheap and simple preparation method, electrodeposition allows for the rapid preparation of desirable LDHs.

3.2. Typical methods for the synthesis of doped LDHs
Doping LDHs can mean the doping of one metal element into a binary-metal LDH, or of two metals into mono- or binary-metal LDHs. In this subsection, several common methods for the preparation of doped LDHs are briefly described.

3.2.1. Hydrothermal method. 
The hydrothermal method of preparation is common and the doped metal enters the LDHs smoothly during the hydrothermal process to form the target ternary LDHs. In 2019, Li et al. obtained NiFeZr-LDHs with 3D nanosheet structures directly on nickel foam surfaces by hydrothermal deposition (Fig. 4d). Comparing NiFe-LDHs with NiZr-LDHs, the introduction of Zr ions and the large number of exposed active sites derived from the 3D nanosheet structure and LDH edges resulted in enhanced OER activity for NiFeZr-LDHs.18 In 2020, Wu et al. prepared vanadium-doped nickel–cobalt LDH nanosheet arrays (NCV-LDH NSAs) by a one-step hydrothermal method. The synergistic effect between doped vanadium particles and the original LDHs improves the catalytic performance and charge storage capacity of an NC-LDH NSA carrier.94 In 2021, Li et al. first synthesized Ga3+-doped NiCoGa-LDHs@CC by a one-step hydrothermal method. Because the radius of the Ga ion is smaller than that of nickel or cobalt, and the bond lengths of the Ga–Ni bond and Ga–Co bond are shorter than that of a nickel–cobalt bond, a stable structure will be formed. With Ga doped into LDHs, a synergistic effect with NiCo atoms significantly improves the electrochemical properties of LDHs. The structure, morphology, crystallinity, ion transport mechanics and electrochemical properties of the electrode materials are optimised by adjusting the concentration of Ga3+. Ternary LDHs can also be obtained by doping two metal elements into single-metal LDHs at the same time.95 In 2019, Bao et al. grew active CoMoV-LDH nanosheet arrays on foam nickel for the first time. Doping high-valence Mo and V into Co-based LDHs can adjust the electronic structure and keep Co in a high valence state in OER. High-valence Mo can also be used as the active center of HER to obtain excellent bifunctional water decomposition performance.96 The doped LDHs were successfully prepared by hydrothermal methods.


3.2.2. Coprecipitation method. 
Metal-doped LDHs can be prepared using the coprecipitation method, where the dopant metal can be doped more uniformly into the LDHs. In 2018, Das et al. doped Mg/Al + Fe-LDHs with Fe3+ at the octahedral position of Mg/Al-LDHs by a coprecipitation method.97 Samuei et al. doped NiTi-LDHs with cobalt by a coprecipitation method to prepare ternary LDHs, namely CoNiTi-LDHs. Many transition metal ions in the +2 and +3 oxidation states can be easily bound to the LDH structure. By doping Co atoms into LDHs, CoNiTi-LDHs with a smaller plate size and higher order are obtained.98 Wang et al. reported an NiV-LDH ultrathin nanosheet doped with Fe3+ through a one-step coprecipitation method (Fig. 4e). Fe3+ doping could effectively enhance the oxidation capacity of Ni3+ and facilitate the charge transport of NiV-LDHs.16 In 2022, Feng et al. prepared a series of Co-doped ternary CuxCo3−xAl-LDHs/rGO nanosheet array hybrids (x = 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0) by a coprecipitation method. The CuxCo3−xAl-LDHs/rGO hybrid is characterized by hexagonal CuCoAl-LDH nanosheets anchored in situ on both sides of the rGO surface, and they exhibit an ab-plane vertically staggered growth pattern.99 The ternary LDHs obtained by the coprecipitation method all show good properties. The doped metal is uniformly deposited into the LDHs, forming a synergistic effect with other metals to enhance the properties of the LDHs.


3.2.3. Electrodeposition method. 
Using electrodeposition, nanomaterials of various particle sizes can be prepared. With the preparation of doped ternary LDHs using electrodeposition, the doped metal is uniformly deposited into the LDHs. In 2018, Ding et al. synthesized Ni3−xCoxAl-LDHs (x = 0, 1, 2, 3) on carbon paper by a unipolar pulse electrodeposition (UPED) method and used them as the electrode of a SC. Doping Co species improves the electronic and ionic conductivity and deprotonation of NiAl-LDHs, and the incorporation of Co and Ni cations gives LDHs greater interlayer spacing, which is conducive to the diffusion of OH−.63 Rohit et al., in mid-2021, prepared CoNi and Fe-based ternary LDHs (CNFLs) with different molar ratios by electrodeposition with a three-electrode system (Fig. 4f). Ni-rich CNFL has thin interconnected nanosheets with a large surface area, and its microstructure and high specific surface area improve its electrochemical performance. Therefore, Co–Ni- and Fe-based ternary LDHs with excessive Ni are potential candidates for SCs and OER catalytic applications.100 In 2021, Liu et al. designed a series of Zr-doped LDH nanosheet arrays on NF by electrodeposition. The introduction of Zr4+ into CoFe-LDHs not only tunes the electronic structure to optimize the adoption of O intermediates, but also reduces the crystallinity to expand the electrochemical surface area, thereby facilitating OER and HER processes.101

3.3. Other methods
In addition to the common preparation methods mentioned in the previous subsections, there are methods that can be used in the preparation of LDHs, either as a special preparation method or as the simultaneous use of several methods. This section will briefly list a few of these methods. In 2021, Khan and Tahir prepared CoAl-LDHs using a coprecipitation-assisted hydrothermal method, and then used coprecipitation to replace Al with La to construct a series of CoAlLa-LDH nanosheets (Fig. 4g). The synergistic interaction between the metals, the enhanced charge-carrying capacity of cobalt and even hole diffusion resulted in enhanced photocatalytic activity.40
He et al. used an electrochemical corrosion engineering method to grow a series of FeNiW-LDHs on iron foam (Fig. 4h). Electron paramagnetic spectroscopy shows that the doping of W elements can significantly increase the concentration of oxygen vacancies in FeNi-LDH materials.14 The vacancies effectively increase the carrier mobility and lower the energy barrier of the oxygen intermediate containing the active centre. This will facilitate the industrialisation of the laboratory-prepared catalysts due to the possibility of growing LDHs over a large area.
Wang et al. proposed an effective and simple method of “stone-like” ZnFeAs-LDHs generated by an in situ growth method (Fig. 4i), which was used to directly remove and stabilize As(III) in wastewater. The research shows that the removal rate of As(III) by ZnFeAs-LDHs can reach 99.87%.102 In 2019, Han et al. prepared ZnFeCo LDHs doped with zinc using an in situ growth method in order to develop OER catalysts with stable performance. The zinc-doping strategy alters the electronic structure and improves the intrinsic activity, with Co ions switching between divalence and trivalence with the appearance of 3d electron orbitals, leading to enhanced electron acceptance. This work provides insights into the rational design and synthesis of unique one-dimensional non-precious metal hydroxides with a partially amorphous phase as efficient OER electrocatalysts.103
Septiani prepared porous Fe-doped NiCo-LDHs interconnected nanosheets by using highly uniform Ni–Co glycerate spheres from a template under simple hydrothermal conditions (Fig. 4j). It was found that Fe doping accelerated the hydrolysis rate of Ni–Co glycerate balls in the hydrothermal reaction process, promoting the formation of two-site nanoplates in the process of transforming spherical particles into unique porous interconnections with high porous structure.104 Li synthesized a novel three-dimensional (FeCoNi-LDH) nanocarrier by a cation exchange reaction using a metal–organic framework as a template. These results show that FeCoNi-LDHs have broad application prospects in the field of energy conversion and storage.105
The microwave synthesis method has the advantages of fast heating speed, uniform heating, avoidance of agglomeration during the reaction process, and the sample yield being higher than that in traditional methods, and it is widely used.106 In recent years, researchers have synthesized ternary LDHs using a microwave hydrothermal method,107 a microwave-assisted urea hydrolysis homogeneous pre-precipitation method,108etc. In 2021, Zhang prepared spherical CuFeCr LDHs (L-CuFeCr) composed of stacked nanosheets by a microwave hydrothermal method, which was used as an excellent adsorbent to remove hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) ions.109
The various preparation methods listed above each have their own unique advantages, and the advantages and disadvantages of the above synthetic methods are summarized in Table 1. When selecting an appropriate preparation method, the method should be selected in combination with the characteristics between the product and raw materials.
Table 1 Comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of several synthetic methods




Method
Advantages
Disadvantages




Hydrothermal
Uniform morphology and good crystallization
The mother liquor of the product is different


Coprecipitation
Simple operation, low cost, short synthesis time
Generates wide particle size distributions with an average size ranging from submicron to tens of microns


Electrodeposition method
LDHs with controllable composition and controllable nanostructure can be obtained
LDHs cannot be prepared on a large scale


Coprecipitation-assisted hydrothermal
The sample crystallizes well, the morphology is uniform, and the particle size is small
The operation process is cumbersome


Electrochemical corrosion engineering
Uniform morphology and rapid response
The reaction cannot be stopped immediately, so not suitable for mass production



In situ growth
It can realize the perfect combination of the advantages of the functional body and the matrix
Long reaction time and low utilization rate of raw materials


Template
The size and shape, structure and properties of the nanomaterials can be precisely controlled, and the synthesis method is simple and suitable for mass production
Template agents are difficult to remove in one go


Microwave synthesis
Rapid and uniform heating, small thermal inertia, hygienic and pollution-free, energy saving and highly efficient
A temperature gradient will form inside a bad thermal conductor, resulting in non-uniform heating. If heating is too fast, it will lead to “hot spots” and it is difficult to maintain a certain temperature




4. Strategies for enhancing electrochemical performances of ternary LDHs
4.1. Morphological engineering

4.1.1. Hollow structures. 
Hollow materials can be prepared by a template method followed by an etching-precipitation method31,110 or a direct hydrothermal method.32,38 Yao prepared ZIF triangular nanosheets on carbon fiber cloth (ZIF-67/CC) by an aging reaction, and then used an etching–coprecipitation method to decompose the template ZIF-67 into triangular nanosheets, and by coprecipitation of Co, Ni and Fe ions, they were converted into CoNiFe-LDHs with a hollow structure. Compared with the preparation of hollow nanostructures by a template method and then an etching-coprecipitation method, the preparation process using a hydrothermal method is simpler.110 In 2018, Zheng successfully manufactured a hollow nanocage assembled from NiCoMn-LDHs nanoflakes, composed of bimetallic ZIF framework precursors, through a simple bimetallic CoMn-ZIF templating strategy (Fig. 5a). CoMn-ZIF material is gradually etched by protons generated by hydrolysis of Ni2+ ions in an ethanol solution of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, and released cobalt ions are coprecipitated with manganese ions and nickel ions to form NiCoMn-LDHs.31 The increase in specific surface area will often increase the active sites of the materials, and the adsorption and electrochemical properties of the materials will be greatly improved. In terms of adsorption performance, an adsorbent with a hollow structure has the characteristics of low density, high specific surface area, high stability and surface permeability. The hollow part of the object can accommodate a large number of molecules or large sizes. Zhang et al. prepared hollow NiCoMn-LDHs composed of 2D nanosheets by a solvothermal method.38 In 2021, Hu prepared a new type of NiSiO@NiAlFe-LDH hollow sphere by a hydrothermal method. The adsorption mechanism of Cs by NiSiO@NiAlFe-LDH hollow spheres includes a complexation reaction and electrostatic attraction. The pH value has a great influence on the adsorption capacity of hollow spheres.111 Poudel limited ZnMgAl-LDH nanosheets and hematite (α-Fe2O3) nanorods to the heterogeneous interface orientation of electrospun three-dimensional hollow and porous carbon nanofibers (3DHPCNF) by a hydrothermal method, resulting in the formation of multi-dimensional nanostructures.32 A porous and hollow 3D carbon nanofiber network can not only realize fast electrolyte transfer channels, make ions more easily intercalated/deintercalated, increase redox kinetics, and provide better rate performance and ultra-high durability, but its long-term stability and electrochemical performance exceed those of most similar devices. The above-mentioned research on hollow structure materials shows that a hollow structure greatly increases the specific surface area of materials, and greatly improves the electrochemical and adsorption properties of materials.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration and SEM images for the synthesis of Ni–Co–Mn-LDH nanoflakes assembled into hollow nanocages.31 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) A schematic diagram illustrating the synthesis process and FE-SEM images of a ternary NCM LDH MFs@NSs/NF and Ag@NCM LDH MFs@NSs/NF electrode.68 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) SEM images of Ti1Li3Al2-LDHs.24 Copyright 2019, Nature. (d) TEM images of h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs.113 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library. (e) SEM images of GO/ZCN.114 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.2. Flower-like structures. 
The size of the flower-like structure is in the micron range, which can effectively prevent agglomeration and resultant inactivation. In addition, the larger specific surface area adds more active sites to the performance of the material, and further promotes ternary LDHs. Jeghan prepared a three-dimensional layered oligomer of NiCoMo-LDHs by a surface hydrothermal method, and used it as an efficient electrocatalyst for OER and HER. The sample of NiCoMo-LDHs is composed of spherical flowers. These interconnected layered 2D nanosheets produce hierarchical 3D nanostructures with open spaces, providing materials with large accessible surfaces and abundant electroactive sites, electric double layer capacitors and spacious ion reservoirs for enhancing diffusion.112 Ramulu et al. grew NiCoMo-LDH material MFs@NSs/NF with microflowers in situ on nanoplatelets (NCM-LDHs). The interconnected structure and nanochannels in the NCM-LDH hybrid form provide fast electron transport and efficient electrolyte ion diffusion, which is helpful for obtaining better electrochemical performance. Nano-silver particles (Ag@NCM-LDHs MFs@NSs/NF) were deposited on the hybrid morphology by a wet method, and the SEM images showed the dense decoration of nano-silver particles on NSs (Fig. 5b).68
This section has listed studies of ternary LDHs with flower-like structures. The large and thin flake nanosheets are stacked into a 3D flower-like morphology, which provides rich electroactive sites and ion diffusion channels for redox reactions.


4.1.3. Other morphologies. 
LDHs will have different morphologies due to different synthesis methods, element ratios and other conditions. The unique morphology will provide more possibilities in terms of material properties. Zhang et al. prepared a series of Ti/Li/Al-LDHs with different molar ratios of Ti:Li:Al, which had the shape of a clustered coral reef (Fig. 5c). The increase in free energy of the nanoparticle system will lead to aggregation of the nanoparticles. Ti1Li3Al2-LDH particles are easier to agglomerate after dehydration at high temperature, mainly due to the morphological changes caused by the increase in the free energy of the nanoparticles.24 Hasun successfully synthesized CoFeNi-LDHs (named h-CoFeNi-LDHs) on foamed nickel by MOF-mediated topological transformation. Compared with the regular plate structure of p-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs grown on NF by a one-pot hydrothermal reaction, h-CoFeNi LDHs have a unique porous wrinkled morphology (Fig. 5d). Due to the expanded surface area and abundant active sites, the best catalyst, h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs, showed remarkable bifunctional HER and OER activities.113 In 2020, Zhu et al. prepared fluffy cotton GO/Zn–Co–Ni-LDHs (GO/ZCN for short) with a sacrificial template GO/ZIF-8. It can be observed that the original diamond-shaped dodecahedron particles of ZIF-8 lost their smooth surface after being surrounded by an irregular layer of Zn–Co–Ni-LDH nanoflakes, which indicates that a morphology similar to cotton and cotton clusters can greatly increase the average pore diameter and specific surface area (Fig. 5e).114 Generally speaking, no matter whether the morphology of the LDHs is a hollow structure or a flower-like structure, the change in its morphology generally leads to an increase in specific surface area, an increase in active sites, and an acceleration in the kinetics of electron transmission and charge transfer, which leads to an improvement in the properties of the materials.

4.2. Structural engineering

4.2.1. Doping engineering. 
Doping noble metals into binary LDHs can increase the active sites or enhance their inherent catalytic activity. Li et al. first synthesized a vanadium-doped ferrite nickel nanosheet array (called a nickel ferrite nanosheet) on foamed nickel by a one-step hydrothermal method. Density functional theory (DFT) + U is a method for studying the electronic structure of a multi-electron system. In this study, Li calculated the electronic structures of NiFeV-LDHs and NiFeV-LDHs by DFT simulation, and combined this with electrochemical analysis, and the results showed that the high catalytic activity of NiFeV-LDHs was mainly attributed to the fact that the high-valence vanadium doping could change the electronic structure and narrow the band gap, resulting in enhanced conductivity, easy electron transfer and abundant active sites, thus promoting the activity of OER. Here, the electronic structure engineering strategy developed by doping high-priced transition metals can be extended to other metal oxides or hydroxides to explore more advanced OER electrocatalysts.115 In addition, we think that theoretical methods (DFT + U and molecular dynamics simulation) and experimental techniques (such as in situ testing techniques) should be combined to observe the system changes in the reaction process of the materials, so as to gain a deeper and more comprehensive understanding of the internal reasons for the improvement in the performance of the electrode materials. In 2021, Shi et al. used CoNi-LDHs as the substrate, introduced Fe–CoNi-LDHs into the catalyst surface by cation replacement, and used them as an efficient catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction (Fig. 6a). In addition, due to the limitation of reaction temperature, in vivo lamination does not participate in the substitution reaction. Therefore, Fe3+ only exists at the edge of the surface of CoNi-LDHs, which makes the material rich in surface active sites. Compared with CoNi-LDHs and FeCoNi-LDHs, the overpotential of FeCoNi-LDHs at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 is as low as 260 mV, which indicates that surface doping with Fe can minimize the potential required by the reaction. A smaller Tafel slope (Fig. 6b) will lead to a faster reaction kinetic rate and correspondingly higher catalytic performance. The mass activity and turnover frequency (TOF) show that Fe–CoNi-LDHs have the best indexes, and surface doping with Fe improves the intrinsic activity of the catalyst surface sites. These results further show that surface Fe doping improves the electronic conductivity and accelerates the charge transfer rate. The electrochemical impedance (EIS) of all the samples was tested at 260 mV from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz (Fig. 6c). In addition, after electrolysis for 12 hours, Fe–CoNi-LDHs showed excellent stability under a 260 mV overvoltage (Fig. 6d).11 In 2021, Ding et al. grew tungsten-induced LDHs (NiFeW-LDHs) in situ on carbon fiber paper by an electrodeposition tungsten-doping process. With an increase in W concentration, the nanosheets gradually become flexible nanosheets, providing a larger surface area.116 He et al. used an ion etching method to grow Fe and B codoped Ni–Zn-LDH nanosheets on foamed nickel in situ. The representative NiZnFeB-LDH nanosheets showed excellent electrocatalytic performance for OER (a low overpotential of 280 mV at 100 mA, and the Tafel slope of NiZnFeB-LDHs was 48.4 mV), which was superior to most nickel-based materials reported so far. In addition, NiZnFeB-LDHs can maintain stable electrocatalytic activity for up to 120 hours (100 mA cm−2).117
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of crystal structure. Fe sites in Fe–CoNi-LDHs mainly exist at the edge of the catalyst surface, (b) Tafel slopes, (c) EIS, (d) I–t curve, of CoNi-LDHs, FeCoNi-LDHs, Fe–CoNi-LDHs.11 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of the preparation of D-NiFeAl-LDHs. (f) SEM images of D-NiFeAl-LDHs. (g) EDX elemental maps of D-NiFeAl-LDH electrocatalyst.82 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (h) CV curves of F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi LDHs at different scan rates. (i) Cycle performance of F–ZnMnNi LDHs and F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi LDHs at 1 A g−1 over 100000 cycles. (j) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process of F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi-LDHs through electrostatic interaction. (k) Charge-transfer mechanism of F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi-LDHs van der Waals heterostructure electrode.44 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (l) Scheme of the extended corrosion protection procedure.124 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (m) Growth mechanism and electrochemical behavior of MgAlY-LDHs.125 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
The above-mentioned research shows that doping engineering can effectively improve the electrocatalytic performance of materials under the synergistic effect of each atom.


4.2.2. Defect engineering. 
A defect refers to the area in the actual material structure that deviates from its ideal lattice structure. Building defects and ion vacancies can promote the formation of active sites of LDHs. On the basis of doping elements to adjust the coordination valence and chemical environment of an electrocatalyst, by selectively etching and dissolving unstable substances, more defect sites can be generated on the electrode surface, and more surface metal atoms with a low coordination number can be exposed, thus further improving the OER of an electrocatalyst.82
In 2019, Li changed the coordination environment of Ni and Fe atoms in LDHs by using foamed nickel as a carrier and Al as an introduced element, and prepared an amorphous NiFeAl-LDH electrocatalyst by electrodeposition. Then, a D-NiFeAl-LDHs electrocatalyst with defect sites was obtained by alkali etching, which gave its surface more defect sites and exposed more surface metal atoms with a low coordination number, thus further improving the performance of OER (Fig. 6e). The SEM image of a D-NiFeAl-LDH electrocatalyst is shown in Fig. 6f. The D-NiFeAl-LDHs obtained by alkaline etching of an NiFeAl-LDH precursor electrocatalyst still retain an obvious nanosheet structure. EDX element mapping analysis (Fig. 6g) shows that Ni, Fe and Al elements are uniformly distributed throughout the whole D-NiFeAl-LDH sample.82 In 2022, Liu fabricated oxygen-vacancy-rich NiMnZn-LDHs/Mo2CTx 2D-on-2D nanohybrids through the electrostatic assembly of alkaline-etched NiMnZn-LDHs (eLDHs) nanosheets and exfoliated Mo2CTx MXene. Alkaline corrosion will produce more oxygen vacancies, and will adjust the valence states of Ni and Mn elements in eLDHs. After eLDHs are combined with Mo2CTx MXene, the two components will further adjust the surface electronic structure of eLDHs, promoting the charge transfer between interfaces, and enhancing the oxygen vacancy content, thus providing more active sites for the reaction. This means that defects are rich in electrocatalytically active sites.96 The above-mentioned research shows that the electrochemical properties of materials with defects are obviously improved, which has a certain influence on promoting research into LDH materials in an electrochemical direction.


4.2.3. Heterojunction engineering. 
A heterojunction is the contact transition region formed by the growth of one semiconductor material on another semiconductor material. According to the conductivity types of the two materials, they can be divided into homo–heterojunctions and heterojunctions. The establishment of a heterostructure interface can fully integrate the advantages of the two components and effectively improve the electrochemical performance and activity. In 2020, Arif et al. developed hollow hierarchical nanotubes (HHNTs) of CoVP@NiFeV-LDH heterostructures based on the in situ growth of NiFeV ternary LDHs (NiFeV-LDHs) onto hollow nanotubes of cobalt vanadium phosphide (CoVP) via a simple and scalable hydrothermal method, followed by thermo-assisted phosphorization. The structure of CoVP@NiFeV-LDH HHNTs can provide a large number of active sites exposed on the surface for N2 adsorption and reduction, and can reduce the ion transport distance to improve electrochemical performance.23 In 2020, Sun successfully fabricated a unique layered F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi-LDH van der Waals heterostructure by an electrostatic self-assembly method based on the structural characteristics of exfoliated two-dimensional materials (Fig. 6j and k). The sample combines the advantages of F-MXene and F–ZnMnNi-LDHs, including outstanding electronic conductivity, stable structure and excellent redox activity (Fig. 6h and i).44 Jia doped copper ions into NiCo-LDHs to adjust the electronic structure and enhance the inherent properties of the original LDHs, and then introduced metal Ni3S2 and Cu–NiCo-LDHs to establish a coupling heterostructure interface to improve the conductivity and activity.118 Khan synthesized 1D graphite carbon nitride nanorods (g-CNR) and 2D bimetallic CoAlLa-LDHs without a template to construct a 1D/2D heterojunction interface. La-doped CoAlLa-LDHs with an unsaturated metal center increased reduction sites and oxygen vacancies, thus enhancing charge separation. The coupling of g-CNR and CoAlLa-LDHs with excellent performance leads to an S-type heterojunction mechanism in the 1D/2D interface, which provides a unique charge transfer path, enhancing the separation of charge carriers.40
The research listed in this section shows that the existence of heterostructures will increase the intrinsic activity of materials, increase the active sites, and facilitate the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes.


4.2.4. Intercalation engineering. 
Due to the weak intermolecular force, under certain conditions, some polar molecules can destroy the intermolecular force to enter the interlayer of a layered compound by adsorption, insertion, clamping, hanging, embedding and other ways without destroying its interlayer structure. Intercalated materials learn from each other's strengths in performance, resulting in a synergistic effect, so that the comprehensive performance of the material is increased.
Anion doping has been shown to be an effective approach to modulate the electronic structure to boost the intrinsic conductivity of electrocatalysts.119,120 In 2018, Miao synthesized 1-hydroxyethylidene-1,1-diphosphonic acid intercalated ZnAlCe-LDHs (ZnAlCe-HEDP LDHs) by a coprecipitation method.121 In 2019, Karami synthesized MgZnAl-LDHs by a coprecipitation method and intercalated them with carbonate anions to prepare MgZnAl–CO3-LDHs.122 Vieira et al. combined Ce2+ with corrosion resistance into LDHs by partial substitution of Al3+, and then intercalated nitrate to form Mg3Al1−xCexLDH (x = 7.5 mol%). The degradation of LDHs induced by ultraviolet radiation promoted the release of Ce3+ from the hydroxide layer. LDHs release corrosion inhibitor anions and capture corrosive anions, thus prolonging the life of the metal surface.123 In 2021, Wu et al. prepared Ce-doped Mg–Al-LDH films by an in situ hydrothermal treatment, and achieved vanadate intercalation by an ion exchange reaction, and prepared double-doped LDH films on anodized magnesium alloy AZ31 (Fig. 6l).124
All of the above are anions as intercalation objects, and metal cations can also be used as intercalation objects to form intercalation compounds. In 2021, Dai et al. prepared yttrium-doped Mg–Al-LDH films on anodized AZ31 and Mg–Y alloy by a hydrothermal method for the first time (Fig. 6m). In this work, different alloys (AZ31, MAY and MZY) were listed to study the possibility of in situ growth of MgAlY-LDHs. Y has a good corrosion inhibition performance, so it can be used as a reference to make an MgAlY-LDH film. MgAlY-LDHs can seal the micropores of anodic oxide film to achieve anti-corrosion and self-healing performance. With the addition of metal Y, the nanosheets formed slender and peaked nanosheets with petal clusters, and the specific surface area and surface roughness increased. Comparing the situation before and after corrosion, it was found that the content of Y element was more stable, which indicates that the Y element is released from MgAlY-LDHs and provides a self-healing performance in a corrosive environment.125
Several types of studies related to structural engineering have been listed in this section. Doping, defects, heterojunctions and intercalation can change the properties of LDHs by changing their crystal structure, so that their morphology and properties can be improved. Structural engineering is an effective way to expand the study of LDHs.

5. Derivatives and composites of ternary LDHs
5.1. Derivatives
Ternary LDHs can be transformed into derivatives of LDHs through the processes of vulcanization, phosphating and nitriding, to promote the synergy between atoms and increase the original properties of ternary LDHs.

5.1.1. Sulfide derivatives. 
An electrocatalytic reaction mainly occurs on the surface of electrode materials, so it is very important to modify the surface of a catalyst. By sulfurizing LDHs, their electrochemical performance can be effectively improved. In 2018, Cao prepared 3D porous NiCoFe-LDH nanosheets by layering on carbon cloth, and transformed them into sulfur-containing nanosheet S–NiCoFe-LDHs by hydrothermal vulcanization. S–NiCoFe-LDH nanosheets are evenly distributed on carbon fiber cloth, and interconnected to form a new wall structure with a rough surface, rich micropores and high surface activity, which can provide more electroactive surfaces and enhance surface permeability. The improvement in electrocatalytic performance is attributed to the unique three-dimensional layered nanostructure and sulfur doping, which make the self-supporting S–NiCoFe-LDH electrode rich in active centers with excellent conductivity.126 In 2019, Liu prepared a sulfide-induced edge-amorphized ternary CuNiCo-LDH nanosheet array (S–CuNiCo-LDHs), which showed improved catalytic activity and robust durability for the electro-oxidation of hydrazine as a high-efficiency HzOR electrocatalyst.39 Similarly, Zhang et al. prepared NiCoAl-LDHs on nickel foam by electrodeposition, and then prepared an adhesive-free electrode (S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF) by solvothermal vulcanization (Fig. 7a). Through SEM and TEM images, their porous interconnected cones in foamed nickel are revealed. The electrode was tested (Fig. 7b and c), and both CV curves and GCD curves showed that S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF had a higher specific capacity. The discharge time of S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF is much longer than that of NiCoAl-LDHs/NF, which means that its area specific capacity is higher. A hybrid SC with S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF as the cathode and active carbon attached to nickel foam (AC/NF) as the negative electrode was constructed. An energy density of 0.097 mW h cm−2 could be achieved at a power density of 1.60 mW cm−2, as shown in the Ragone diagram (Fig. 7d) of S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF//AC. This performance of S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF//AC is better than that of other hybrid capacitors. Fig. 7e shows that the capacity after 3500 cycles maintained 73.4% of the maximum capacity, indicating that S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF//AC has good long-term stability.65 Wang used a fast coprecipitation method to synthesize stable Al-doped α-phase NiCo-LDHs (NCA-LDHs). A subsequent surface sulfuration of NCA-LDHs (S-NCA-LDHs) was carried out to improve the conductivity. The as-synthesized S-NCA-LDHs exhibited good electrochemical performance, at 1 A g−1, where the specific capacity showed 727.1C g−1. At 20 A g−1, the specific capacity still remained at 556C g−1. After 10000 cycles, the capacity retention reached 95.1%.127
 Fig. 7  (a) Procedure for the synthesis of S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF and photographs of each step. (b) CV curves of NiCoAl-LDHs/NF and S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF at 50 mV s−1. (c) EIS curves of NiCoAl LDHs/NF and S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF. (d) Areal Ragone plot and (e) the cycling stability of S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF//AC.65 Copyright 2021, The Electrochemical Society. (f) Tafel plots: N–NiFe; N–CoNi; N–CoFe; CoNiFe; N–CoNiFe; and Ir/C. (g) Plots of the capacitive current density (Δj in 1.0 V) as a function of the scan rate. (h) Stability test of N–CoNiFe and Ir/C for the OER before and after 2000 cycles on the GC electrode in a 1.0 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (i) Schematic diagram of the preparation of N-incorporated CoNiFe LDHs.133 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) Schematic of N–NiZnCu LDHs/rGO catalyst preparation. (k) LSVs of N–NiZnCu LDHs/rGO||N–NiZnCu LDHs/rGO and Pt/C||IrO2. (l and m) LSVs and Tafel plots of the catalysts. (n) Chronopotentiometric response of N–NiZnCu-LDHs/rGO at 10 mA cm−2, 50 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively, in 1.0 M KOH containing 0.3 M NH4Cl.134 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (o) Schematic illustration for the synthesis process of NiVFe–B–P-LDHs@NF. (p) The overpotentials of the above samples at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. (q) Polarization curves of NiVFe–B–P-LDHs@NF before and after 1000 cycles. The inset shows the time dependence of the catalytic current during electrolysis over the course of 24 h in 1.0 M KOH.136 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
The above research shows that the electrochemical performance of the original LDHs is significantly improved after vulcanization, which provides a feasible way to improve the performance of LDHs.


5.1.2. Nitride derivatives. 
Nowadays, there are water pollution problems associated with urea, ammonia and hydrazine in cities.128 By electrolysis, these undesirable wastewater components (i.e. urea, ammonia and hydrazine) can be efficiently decomposed, which can significantly reduce environmental pollution.129 At the same time, the introduction of nitrogen (N) and other heteroatoms into materials can adjust the electronic range of the carbon skeleton, to improve the corresponding catalytic activity and improve electron mobility.130–132 In 2022, Nguyen et al. produced trimetallic nitrogen-incorporated CoNiFe (N–CoNiFe) by using a facile coprecipitation method in the presence of ethanolamine (EA) ligands (Fig. 7i). The N–CoNiFe LDHs showed good electrocatalytic efficiency and high stability for the OER, with a low overpotential of 318 mV at 10 mA cm−2, and a low Tafel slope of 72.2 mV dec−1 in a 1.0 M KOH solution (Fig. 7f). The trimetallic N–CoNiFe-LDHs catalyst had the highest Cdl value (3.44 mF cm−2) and ECSA (127.4 cm2) compared to bimetallic N–NiFe, N–CoNi, N–CoFe, or CoNiFe (Fig. 7g). The catalyst shows high durability in the OER process with little change in the overpotential (ca. 16.0 mV) at 10 mA cm−2 after 2000 cycles, which was smaller than for commercial Ir/C (38.0 mV) (Fig. 7h).133 In 2020, Hu et al. synthesized double hydroxides with reduced graphene oxide on foam nickel (N–NiZnCu-LDHs/rGO) (Fig. 7j) by simple hydrothermal and calcination methods. N–NiZnCu-LDHs/rGO was used as the catalyst electrode for mixed water electrolysis, and the potential between cathode and anode was 0.687 V at 50 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7l). The Tafel slope of N–NiZnCu-LDHs/rGO on AOR was 38 mV dec−1 (Fig. 7m). The LSV curve of the 3000th cycle overlapped with that of the 1st cycle, indicating excellent stability, and the stability is much better than that of Pt/C||IrO2 (Fig. 7k and n).134,135 This study highlights the application potential of low-cost composites as electrocatalysts to replace precious metal ones for hydrogen energy production in hybrid water electrolysis, and for employment for the treatment of industrial wastewater containing ammonia, hydrazine and urea.
The above research shows that the introduction of nitrogen into metal LDHs can not only improve the performance of materials, but also reduce environmental pollution. It is a research method in line with green chemistry.


5.1.3. Other derivatives. 
With the exception of the above-mentioned sulfide derivatives and nitride derivatives, there are also two kinds of nonmetals doped into ternary LDHs. Ma et al. tried to dope B and P into LDHs for research, and three types of NiVFe-LDH nanoparticles were prepared on porous nickel foam by a hydrothermal method to prepare self-supporting electrocatalysts, and boron and phosphorus codoping were used to control the electronic structure of the nanosheets (Fig. 7o).136 The nanoscale spheres were clustered on the foamed nickel, and the B and P codoping led to similar dissolution phenomena on the edges of the nanosheets. The existence of heterostructures was confirmed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images. At the same time, B–P codoping forms a large number of defects and amorphous regions on the nanosheets, ensuring effective active sites, which will provide a higher surface area and shorter charge transfer path, making the catalyst an ideal electrochemical catalytic platform. The B–P codoping effect can greatly improve the HER kinetics of the catalyst in an alkaline medium. For NiVFe–B–P-LDHs@NF in a 1.0 m KOH electrolyte without IR compensation, an overpotential of 117 mV was required at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7p) and it showed excellent durability after 1000 CV cycles and 24 hours at current densities of 10 mA cm−2 and 50 mA cm−2, as shown in Fig. 7q. Due to the presence of boron, the electrons of boron are transferred to fill the d-orbital of the adjacent metal, which changes the overall electron distribution. This special electron transfer mechanism reduces the thermodynamic and kinetic barriers of the hydroxylation reaction, and causes the electron-rich metal elements to become the active centers in the hydrogen evolution reaction, which improve the HER performance.137–140
The above research shows that it is an effective protocol to improve the HER performance of the catalyst by the introduction other heteroatoms into transition metal borides.141–143 Both reports indicate that the electron transfer between boron, phosphorus and metal elements is a significant factor for enhancing HER intrinsic activity.

5.2. Composites
Limited active sites and monotonous metal types hinder the performance of LDHs. In order to improve the performance of LDHs, they can be combined with other composite materials to give full play to the advantages of different materials.144 Research on composites of ternary LDHs with several kinds of materials is introduced below, and the properties of the composite materials will be obviously improved.

5.2.1. Inorganic composites. 
5.2.1.1 TiO2. 
TiO2 is a low-cost, non-toxic, highly stable semiconductor. Previous research has indicated that TiO2 is excited and generates electron–hole pairs under light illumination, and the electrons can be transferred to metals via the conduction band, which allows the potential of metals to be more negative than the corrosion potential, inhibiting the corrosion of the metals. Wang et al. synthesized a series of ZnFeAl-LDHs/TiO2 composites with different concentrations. Their unique structure and synergistic mechanism of visible light response characteristics allow all the composite materials to show better photocathode protection performance, stability and durability for 304SS than pure TiO2.145 In 2018, Hao et al. hybridized ternary NiFeCo-LDH nanoplates with Ti3C2Tx (MXene phase) in situ through a simple solvothermal process (Fig. 8a). In the process, Ti3C2Tx was partially oxidized to form anatase TiO2 nanoparticles. Compared with the original NiFeCo-LDHs and a commercial IrO2 catalyst, the obtained Ti3C2Tx/TiO2/NiFeCo-LDHs composite (TTL) shows excellent OER performance. The composite was further deposited on standard BiVO4 film to construct a TTL/BiVO4 photoanode, which showed a significantly enhanced photocurrent density of 2.25 mA cm−2 under illumination of 100 mW cm−2 with respect to RHE at a voltage of 1.23 V (Fig. 8b). The excellent PEC-OER performance is attributed to the partial oxidation of Ti3C2Tx to form TiO2 nanoparticles. The existence of TiO2 makes ternary LDH nanosheets effective hole scavengers, while metal Ti3C2Tx nanosheets are effective electron/ion shuttles, and nanoparticles can expand the absorption of light, thus improving the generation of electron–hole pairs.146
 Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the preparation of TTL for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical oxygen evolution reactions. (b) Photocurrent–potential curves of pristine BiVO4 and TTL/BiVO4 photoanodes measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination.146 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of hybrid CF@NiCoZn-LDHs/Co9S8-QD nanosheet arrays. (d) Schematic illustration displaying the merits of a hybrid CF@NiCoZn-LDHs/Co9S8-QD electrode for energy storage.144 Copyright 2018, Wiley Online Library. (e–g) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF hybrid nanosheet arrays. (h) GCD curves Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF at various current densities. (i) Cycling performances of Co-MOF/NF, NixMn4−xCo-LDHs/NF and Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF electrodes at 20 A g−1. (j) Cycling properties of an ASC device (at 20 A g−1). (k) A comparison of the energy density of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs with those previously reported for MOFs, LDHs and Co sulfide materials.149 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (l) Proposed mechanism of Bi2O3/CuNiFe-LDHs/PS/light system or LOM degradation. (m) Effect of catalyst dosage, PS concentration and different pH values on the degradation of LOM. Experimental conditions: PS concentration = 0.74 mM, Bi2O3/CuNiFe LDHs (1:1) = 0.4 g L−1, pH = 6.08 and LOM = 10 mg L−1.153 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
5.2.1.2 Quantum dots (QDs). 
Quantum dots (QDs) are a class of 0D nanomaterials with a diameter between 1 and 10 nm, which have attracted significant interest in the field of energy storage applications. Decreasing the size of cobalt sulfide to the nanoscale, especially to the quantum dot (QD) scale, is the most effective approach to maintaining the integrity of electrodes and shortening the ion diffusion distance.147In situ formation of cobalt sulfide within LDHs is a practical and effective method to derive more stable and better electrode materials because of the unique advantages of cobalt sulfide, such as weak Co–S bonds, low-solubility product, easy conversion reaction, large theoretical capacity, and high intrinsic conductivity.147,148 In 2020, Yang effectively generated cobalt sulfide quantum dots (Co9S8-QD) based on the in situ selective sulfidization of cobalt on carbon fiber and embedded them in the interlayer of ternary LDH nanosheets derived from a metal–organic framework (Fig. 8c). A CF@NiCoZn-LDHs/Co9S8-QD hybrid with the layered structure of ternary LDHs was prepared, in which the selectively generated Co9S8-QDs exposed more active sites, effectively improving electrochemical properties such as capacitance, electronic conductivity and cycle stability (Fig. 8d).144 Analogously, Liu et al. successfully embedded cobalt sulfide quantum dots (Co9S8-QDs) in situ between ternary LDH layers derived from metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) by selectively sulfurizing CO. SEM images of prepared Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF nanocomposites are shown in Fig. 8e–g, and the thickness is rough. Selectively produced ultra-small sized Co9S8-QDs show more active sites, which accords with the strategy of size minimization, thus greatly enhancing the electrochemical performance. Due to the synergistic effect of LDHs and Co9S8-QDs, the prepared electrode had excellent capacity (Fig. 8h) (492.1 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1), remarkable equivalent series resistance (0.499 U) and an excellent capacity retention rate (Fig. 8i) (90.4% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles). In addition, carbon-coated Fe2O3 nanoarrays were prepared on carbon fiber cloth (CC) as a cathode (Fe2O3@C/CC), and the prepared Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC was an all-solid asymmetric material. When the power density was 750 W kg−1, the ASC device showed excellent energy density (71.48 W h kg−1) (Fig. 8k) and an excellent capacity retention rate (93.7% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles) (Fig. 8j).149
5.2.1.3 Bi2O3. 
Bi2O3, as an n-type semiconductor, has been widely used as a promising material owing to its appropriate band gap and facile synthesis.150,151 Previous studies proved that Bi2O3 could serve as a heterogeneous catalyst for PS activation, producing sulfate radicals (SO42−) by photoinduced electrons under light.150,152 In 2020, Zhang et al. synthesized a new Bi2O3/CuNiFe-LDHs composite material (Fig. 8l). The characterization results showed that the Bi2O3/CuNiFe-LDHs composite material had a large pore volume and high specific surface area, and provided more active centers. Under simulated sunlight, 84.6% LOM (Fig. 8m) could be decomposed in 40 minutes with 0.4 g L−1 Bi2O3/CuNiFe-LDHs and 0.74 mM PS. Repeated experiments showed that the Bi2O3/CuNiFe-LDHs composite maintained good stability and catalytic performance over four cycles of operation.153
Several studies on the combination of inorganic materials and ternary LDHs introduced in this section show that inorganic materials can effectively improve the performance of LDHs.


5.2.2. Carbon composites. 
In addition to being compounded with inorganic substances, LDHs are often compounded with carbon materials such as graphene, carbon microspheres and carbon nanotubes. These carbon materials have many characteristics, such as chemical stability and conductivity, and can be inserted into the interlayer of LDHs to form composite materials.
5.2.2.1 Carbon nanotube composites. 
The unique structure and conductivity of carbon nanotubes make them ideal composite raw materials. In 2020, Tsai et al. synthesized a single-walled carbon nanotubes-Ni–Co–Mn-LDHs (NCMH) nanohybrid material by a simple hydrothermal method, and used it as the electrode material for a composite energy storage device for the first time. Fig. 9a and b show that layered NCMH nanotubes cover the surface of the single-walled carbon nanotubes, forming a conductive network. In Fig. 9c, when the weight ratio of precursor materials SWCNTs and NiCoMn-LDHs was 10:90, the prepared nanohybrid showed the highest capacity of 912 C g−1 at 1 A g−1. And the graph in Fig. 9d shows that a single-walled carbon nanotube NCMH(10:90)//single-walled carbon nanotube composite energy storage device could achieve a high energy density of 11.17 W h kg−1, with a corresponding power density of 66.2 W kg−1. Under a power density of 3306 W kg−1, the hybrid energy storage device could still output an energy density of 2.92 W h kg−1. This reveals that single-walled carbon nanotube NCMH(10:90) show the best performance. Fig. 9e depicts the capacity degradation of two hybrid energy storage devices before and after folding at 20 A g−1 current density. This indicates that devices with higher SWCNT composition (namely SWCNT-NCMH(30:70)) show higher capacity retention rates.154
 Fig. 9  FESEM images of the various electrode materials: (a) SWCNT-NCMH (30:70); (b) SWCNT-NCMH (50:50). (c) The specific capacities at various current densities (1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 50 A g−1). (d) Ragone plots. (e) Capacity degradation after folding at a current density of 20 A g−1.154 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustration of the approach used for the synthesis of LDHs/HCMSs. SEM images of (g) as-prepared bare carbon spheres and (h) LDHs/HCMSs. (i) Elemental mapping of C, O, Al, Mg, and Pb of Pb(II)-laden LDHs/HCMSs. The corresponding TEM images of (j) bare carbon spheres and (k) LDHs/HCMSs.155 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (l) Illustration of the fabrication process of CCO/CNM-2. (m) GCD curves of CCO/CNM-1, CCO/CNM-2, and CCO/CNM-3 electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1. (n) Cycling stability of CCO/CNM-1, CCO/CNM-2, and CCO/CNM-3 electrodes during 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1. (o) Ragone plot of the assembled CCO/CNM-2//AC ASC. (p) Cyclic performance of CCO/CNM-2//AC ASC after 10000 cycles at 6 A g−1.162 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
5.2.2.2 Hollow carbon microsphere composites. 
Carbon-based nanomaterials have rich functional groups. Combined with LDHs, carbon microsphere hierarchical nanostructured materials with a large surface area and stable hollow structure have been constructed, which can be used in the fields of adsorption and electric energy storage. In 2017, Huang et al. prepared LDH-coated hollow carbon microsphere composites (LDHs/HCMSs) by a hydrothermal method with carbon spheres as a template. The morphology and microstructure of the prepared carbon microspheres and LDHs/HCMSs were characterized by SEM and TEM. Fig. 9f shows the preparation process of the composite materials, and in Fig. 9g and h, the uniform carbon microspheres show a smooth surface with an average size of about 150 nm. The LDHs/HCMSs show an interconnected 3D framework with many connections and a rough surface, which indicates that the LDHs were successfully coated on the surface of carbon balls (Fig. 9j and k). The EDX element distribution diagram (Fig. 9i) shows the uniform distribution of carbon, oxygen, magnesium, aluminum and lead elements in hydrate deposits/high-mobility substances. At a current density of 1 A g−1, NiCoFe LDHs/HCMSs nanocomposites showed a significant and high specific capacitance of 3130 F g−1. In addition, an asymmetric SC was prepared with LDHs/HCMSs as the positive electrode and Fe2O3/graphene as the negative electrode. Its maximum energy density was 101 W h kg−1, power density was 91.5 kW kg−1, and long-term cycle stability (the capacity retention rate after 5000 cycles was 82.5%).155
5.2.2.3 GO composites. 
After the combination of GO and rGO with LDHs, more progress has been made in the fields of adsorption, photocatalysis and so on. In 2020, Zong et al. used the liquid-phase deposition of Ca–Mg–Al-LDHs to coat graphene oxide (CaMgAl-LDHs/GO) composites, and purified Eu(III) and fulvic acid (FA) under various experimental conditions.156 In 2021, Deng prepared a CoFeNi-LDHs/GO composite by combining LDHs with GO, which was used to activate peroxymonosulfate (PMS).157 Gao et al. synthesized a cerium-doped NiAl-LDHs/reduced graphene oxide (NiAlCe-LDHs/rGO) composite by a one-step hydrothermal method. NiAlCe-LDHs/rGO has a large specific surface area and uniform dispersion.158 The existence of cerium and rGO accelerates the separation of photogenerated charges, and shows remarkable photocatalytic performance for the degradation of ciprofloxacin.
5.2.2.4 Biomass carbon composites. 
Biomass carbon materials have high surface volume, relatively thin diffusion distances, structural flexibility, thermal and chemical stability, and rich surface functional groups. Additionally, biomass carbon materials are often used in high-performance energy storage systems due to their rate and cycling ability, improved capacity, wide electrochemical windows, and open pore systems that improve ion transfer kinetics. Carbon-based adsorbents are low cost in raw materials, preparation, synthesis and application, so they are particularly interesting in environmental purification research.159,160 Young et al. studied the adsorption of atrazine by Cu–Zn–Fe-LDHs and LDHs dispersed on bamboo biochar (LDHBC), and revealed the interactive effects of pH value, adsorbent dosage and initial concentration of adsorbate on the optimal adsorption performance of hydrotalcite.161 In 2021, Hao et al. successfully prepared cotton carbon/CoNiMn-LDHs (CCO/CNM), a composite material of cotton carbon and metal–organic framework material (ZIF-67), by a solvothermal method and calcination (Fig. 9l). After further optimization, it was found that a CCO/Co–Ni–Mn-LDH-2 (CCO/CNM-2) composite electrode showed excellent electrochemical performance. At a current density of 1 A g−1, the high specific capacitance of CCO/CNM-2 electrode material could be calculated as 2995.56 F g−1 (Fig. 9m). In addition, when the current density was set to 10 A g−1, the capacitance could still maintain 91.8% of the initial capacitance (Fig. 9n) after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. Furthermore, the assembled CCO/CNM-2//activated carbon (AC) asymmetric SC showed an excellent energy density of 104.98 W h kg−1 at a power density of 800 kW kg−1 (Fig. 9o), and the capacitance retention rate at a current density of 10 A g−1 was 79.3% after 1000 charge–discharge cycles (Fig. 9p). Finally, by connecting two CCO/CNM-2//AC asymmetric SCs, three light emitting diodes (LEDs) were successfully lit.162
All the above studies show that carbon has excellent conductivity, and the electrochemical performance of the composite obtained by combining with ternary LDHs is greatly improved.


5.2.3. Polymer composites. 
The polymerisation of LDHs with a variety of materials to form polymorphic materials allows the properties of each material to be combined and improved. ABS refers to an acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene copolymer, a polymeric structural material, also known as ABS resin. ABS plastic is chemically resistant, heat resistant, highly elastic and tough. In 2018, Mo et al. reported a novel synergistic LDHs/DPCPB/ABS composite. The prepared composites are flame retardant in both the gas phase and when coalesced. The results reveal a synergistic effect of Mg–Al–Co-LDHs and DPCPB in the flame retardancy of ABS resins.163 In 2019, Wang et al. synthesized CaMgAl-LDHs (CaMgAl-LDHs) by coprecipitation and after sodium oleate modification, borate was inserted into the interlayer of CaMgAl-LDHs to form O–CaMgAl-LDH composite material. The O–CaMgAl-LDHs/ABS composites were prepared by adding O–CaMgAl-LDHs to acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene resin (ABS). The compatibility between inorganic additives and polymer resins is poor; therefore, organic intercalation is a common and effective method to improve the dispersion and compatibility of inorganic LDH components in the polymer matrix.164 In 2020, Li et al. synthesized Mg/Al/Fe-LDHs from activated Bayer red mud by coprecipitation. The prepared LDHs were inserted into sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and the surface was modified with (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (KH550). The ELDH-SDS-KH composite (ethylene vinyl acetate/LDHs composite) not only significantly reduced the exothermic rate, smoke production and total exothermic rate during combustion, but also had high thermal stability and lower production of aliphatic hydrocarbons and carboxylic acids.165
LDHs are compounded with organic materials, and the obtained materials are mostly used in catalysis and adsorption, which provides LDHs with more applications in other fields.

6. Application of ternary LDHs for EES
Ternary-layered metal compounds can be used as active electrodes of batteries and SCs in electric energy storage, so this section will introduce their specific applications as batteries and SCs in energy storage.
6.1. Ternary LDHs for SCs
Researchers have invented many energy storage devices and, compared with traditional physical capacitors, SCs are considered to have great potential due to their outstanding safety, high energy density, fast charge and discharge, low internal resistance, and wide source of raw materials.166 Some performance data of ternary LDHs used in SCs are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 Examples of application of ternary layered double hydroxides in SCs




Nano-structures
Synthetic method
Electrolyte
Voltage windows
Specific capacitance (current density/scan rate)
Cycling stability (cycles, current density)
Energy densitymax
Power densitymax
Ref.




NiCoFe2-LDHs/NF//Fe2O3/GO
Electrodeposition
3 M KOH
1.0–1.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
252 F g−1 (1A g−1)
82.5% (5000, 10 A g−1)
101 Wh Kg−1
91.5 KW kg−1

167



T2-NCA//AC ASCs
Hydrothermal method
6 M KOH
−1–0 V (vs. SCE)
269.1 F g−1 (1A g−1)
86.02% (2000, 10 A g−1)
89.79 W h kg−1
9301 W kg−1

168



NiCo2Al0.5-LDHs//AC ASC
Hydrothermal
3 M KOH
0–1.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
109 F g−1 (1A g−1)
91.7% (6000, 5 A g−1)
39 W h kg−1
8291 W kg−1

69



Ni1Co2Al1-LDH//AC
One-step hydrothermal method
1 M KOH
0–3.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
633 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
93% (5000, 10 A g−1)
126.0 W h kg−1
12000 W kg−1

33



Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC
Chemistry bath deposition-hydrothermal
6 M KOH
0–1.5 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
95.3 mA hg−1 (1 A g−1)
96.1% (10000, 20 A g−1)
71.48 W h kg−1
750 W kg−1

149



CNMV@NF//V2C@NF
Doping-electrostatic synergistic assembly strategy
6 M KOH
0–1.6 V (vs. SCE)
112F g−1 (2 A g−1)
145.6% (3000, 2 A g−1)
30.16 W h kg−1
700 W kg−1

110



rGO@NiCoAl-LDHs//AC
Dissolved and reassembled strategy
2 M KOH
−0.2–0.5 V (vs. SCE)
214.8 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
92.0% (4000, 10 A g−1)
91.4 W h kg−1
8716 W kg−1

176



ZnNiFe-LDH@Cu(OH)2/CF//AC
Hydrothermal
6 M KOH
0–1 V
88F g−1 (0.4 A g−1)
83.4% (5000, 5 A g−1)
44 W h kg−1
720 W kg−1

50



NiMnCr-LDHs@CS/NF//FeOOH/NF
Hydrothermal
6 M KOH
0–1.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
167.4 C g−1 1.5 A g−1
83% (10000 5 A g−1)
48 W h kg−1
402.7 W kg−1

79



Ni1Co2Al-LDHs@CC//AC
Hydrothermal
3 M KOH
0–1.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
—
90.98% (12000, —)
0.102 mW h cm−2
0.75 mW cm−2

178



CNTs/CoNiFe-LDHs//AC
One-step hydrothermal
6 M KOH
0–1.5 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
96.1 F g−1 1 A g−1
85.0% (3000, 15 A g−1)
29.9 W h kg−1
750.5 W kg−1

179



NCZ-LDH-100@PANI//AC ASC
Electrodeposition
3 M KOH
0–1.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
104.6 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
90% (30000 5 A g−1)
37.2 W h kg−1
7140 W kg−1

180



Ag NPs@NCM LDH MFs@NSs//NF

In situ grown
2 M KOH
0–1.55 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
1752.2 mF cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)
108.5% (15000 40 mA cm−2)
0.569 mW h cm−2
3.82 mW cm−2

68






6.1.1. Pure LDHs. 
Binary LDHs have received a lot of attention in previous studies. Combined with the research on transforming binary LDHs into ternary LDHs by doping, defects, heterojunctions and intercalation mentioned in the above structural engineering section, it has been shown that the performance of ternary LDHs is better than that of binary metal LDHs. In this section, several studies are listed to show that pure ternary LDHs have excellent properties as electrodes of SCs.
Hamed Pourfarzad synthesized NiCoFe-LDHs and used them as an anode material, and Fe2O3/graphene was used as a new cathode for energy storage by SCs. The specific capacitance of the material was 3130 F g−1 (1 A g−1). The maximum energy density and power density of the asymmetric SC could reach 101 W h kg−1 and 91.5 kW kg−1, and it had long-term cycle stability (the capacity retention rate was 82.5% after 5000 cycles).167 In 2020, Tian synthesized NiCoAl-LDHs on foamed nickel by a hydrothermal method, and the sample capacity was 1068 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 (Fig. 10a). The capacity after 2000 cycles at 10 A g−1 remained at 83.7% (Fig. 10b). An asymmetric SC was assembled with activated carbon as the negative electrode and 0.003 mol NiCoAl-LDHs as the positive electrode. The ASC device showed a high energy density of 89.79 W h kg−1 at a power density of 775 W kg−1 (Fig. 10d), and the retention rate was 86.02% at 10 A g−1 for 2000 cycles (Fig. 10c).168
 Fig. 10  (a) Charge and discharge curves of NCA samples at different current densities. (b) Cyclic stability of NC, NA, CA, and NCA samples at 10 A g−1 current density. (c) Cycling performance of the ASC device at a current density of 10 A g−1. (d) Ragone plot of energy and power density of the ASC device at various charge densities.168 Copyright 2020 Springer. (e) Specific capacitance at various current densities for NiCoAl-sphere and NiCoAl-sheet electrodes. (f) Schematic illustration of a fabricated device based on Ni1Co2Al1-LDHs microspheres. (g) Ragone plots of the device in comparison with reference samples. (h) Cycling stability of the device at a current density of 10 A g−1 (inset: GV results of the first and last 5 cycles).33 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (i) Schematic illustration of an ASC device with an Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF cathode and Fe2O3@C/CC anode. (j) CV curves of the Fe2O3@C/CC and Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF electrodes at 20 mV s−1 in a three-electrode system. (k) CV curves of Ni3Mn1Co @Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs measured at different potential windows. (l) CV curves of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs at different scanning speeds. (m) GCD curves of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs measured at different potential windows. (n) GCD curves of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs at different current densities. (o) Cycling properties of the ASC device (at 20 A g−1). (p) A comparison of the energy density of the Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs with those previously reported for MOFs, LDHs and Co sulfide materials.149 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Many studies in the literature have suggested that the molar ratio of active Ni to Co has a sensible impact on the structure, morphology and capacitive performance of LDHs.169–171 In the preparation of a series of ternary LDHs with different molar ratios, Chen found that NiCo2Al0.5-LDHs have high specific capacitance and excellent capacitance retention.69 Gao et al. proposed a one-step method to prepare aluminum nickel cobaltate microspheres, which can show good dispersion and spherical shape without a template, and the performance was best when Ni:Co:Al = 1:2:1. The synthesized material was spherical and well dispersed. Ni1Co2Al-LDHs gave a capacitance of 451 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1 (Fig. 10e). An all-solid asymmetric SC device based on Ni1Co2Al-LDHs microspheres was prepared (Fig. 10f). The maximum energy density was 126.0 W h kg−1 (600 W kg−1) (Fig. 10g), the maximum power density was 12000 W kg−1 (55.1 W h kg−1), and the long-term cycle stability was 5000 times (Fig. 10h).33
The above-mentioned studies all illustrate the feasibility of pure ternary LDHs as SC electrodes.


6.1.2. Inorganic composites. 
Products obtained by compounding ternary metals with other materials can give full play to the excellent properties of the two materials, and the performance of capacitors can be enhanced by applying the products to SCs. In 2021, Liu et al. synthesized Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF. ASC devices with an Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF cathode and Fe2O3@C/CC anode were prepared (Fig. 10i). Fig. 10j shows the stable compatible voltage window of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF and Fe2O3@C/CC at 20 mV s−1, which proves the feasibility of assembling an ASC. The CV curve of different voltage values in Fig. 10k shows that when the window voltage is expanded to 0–1.7 V, polarization appears on the CV curve, and the maximum voltage range for the stable operation of the ASC device should be 1–1.5 V. Fig. 10l shows the CV curve of the ASC device with different scan rates (5–100 mV s−1) in the voltage window of 0–1.5 V. When the scan rate is increased to 100 mV s−1, the CV curve does not change, indicating that the assembled ASC device has excellent rate capability. Fig. 10m shows the GCD curve of the ASC device under different voltage windows (1 A g−1). Fig. 10n shows the GCD curve of the ASC device in the 0–1.5 V voltage window (from 1 to 20 A g−1). The capacity of the ASC device at 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 A g−1 is calculated to be 95.3, 75.8, 60.8, 58.3 and 51.7 mA h g−1, respectively. The prepared MC@COH/NF-2//AC ASC device can still achieve 91.7% capacity retention and 96.1% coulombic efficiency after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. In addition, the Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF electrode microstructure (as shown in Fig. 10o) was not significantly damaged after long cycling. The energy-storage performance of a SC is closely related to its power density and energy density. The power density of the ASC device we prepared was 71.48 W h kg−1, and the energy density was 750 W kg−1 (Fig. 10p).149
Among various nanomaterials, two-dimensional (2D) transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes) have recently attracted widespread attention due to their unique physicochemical properties, such as metallic conductivity, with a particular focus on energy storage applications.24,154 Benefiting from their advantageous 2D structure, because of the short ion diffusion distance and the position of the electrolyte ions, MXene nanosheets show good electrochemical charge storage performance. Zhang et al. synthesized 2D/2D cobalt-doped NiMn-LDHs/V2CTx MXene(CNMV) composites. In the assembled SC, due to the doping effect caused by doping with Co2+ ions, the assembled CNMV electrode showed a higher specific capacitance of 1005 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. For the assembled asymmetric SC (ASC) device, a high energy density of 30.16 W h kg−1 was obtained at 0.7 kW kg−1.110
Combined with the properties of inorganic materials, the inorganic composites of LDHs as SC electrodes show excellent electrochemical properties.


6.1.3. Carbon composites. 
The preparation of LDHs from carbon materials has a positive effect on their electrochemical properties. By combining catalytically active LDHs and carbon materials together where both have excellent electron conductivity (and a large number of electrocatalytically active sites), the performances of such composites have the potential for further enhancement due to the synergy effect.172 Theoretically, the carbon materials with their large surface area173 would increase the exposure rate of active sites and efficiently prevent the aggregation of LDH nanosheets. Furthermore, the electrostatic attraction between the positively charged LDHs and negatively charged carbon materials would shorten the electron diffusion distance and provide electron highways.174 Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) has the merits of boosting electroconductivity and impeding the aggregation of LDHs.175 In 2019, Guo prepared sandwich-like rGO@NiCoAl-LDHs. This unique structure can shorten the electron transfer distance and reduce the diffusion resistance of the electrolyte. Benefiting from a high specific surface area, enhanced electron transport and stable structure, the prepared composite material can be used as an electrode material for high-performance SCs.176 Amani-Ghadim et al. prepared CuZnAl/GO nanocomposites by a simple coprecipitation method. The results show that the charged material energy-storage performance of the CuZnAl/GO nanohybrid material is better than that of CuZnAl-LDHs. The existence of GO prevented the aggregation of CuZnAl-LDHs, increased the specific surface area of the electrode and promoted charge transfer in redox reactions.177
Besides combining ternary LDHs with rGO or GO, carbon fibers and carbon nanotubes can also improve the performance of ternary LDHs. In 2021, Fu successfully designed and prepared a layered ZnNiFe-LDHs@Cu(OH)2/CF core–shell nanorod array composed of ultrathin ZnNiFe-LDH nanosheets and ordered Cu(OH)2 nanorod cores through a typical hydrothermal method and simple in situ oxidation reaction. Finally, the synthesized nanosheets were formed into origami shapes, layered and crossed (Fig. 11a). SEM images showed that the ZnNiFe-LDHs@Cu(OH)2/CF hybrid was made of vertical and crossed ultrathin ZnNiFe-LDHs nanosheets and Cu(OH)2 nanorod cores (Fig. 11b). This hybrid heterostructure with a uniformly distributed Cu(OH)2 nanorod array and highly oriented ultrathin ZnNiFe-LDH nanosheets will help to accelerate electron/ion transfer and expand the number of active centers. The GCD curve is almost symmetrical, which shows its excellent column effect (Fig. 11c). An electrode made of ZnNiFe-LDHs@Cu(OH)2/CF nanomaterial showed a remarkable area capacitance of 6100 mF cm−2 at a current density of 3 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11d). After 5000 cycles, the capacitance retention rate remained as high as 83.4%, and a very small Rs (0.567 Ω) could be observed (Fig. 11e).50 In 2020, Li et al. synthesized a binderless NiMnCr-LDHs@CS/NF composed of NiMnCr-LDHs coated on carbon balls (CS) coated on foamed nickel by a two-step hydrothermal method, and applied it to the anode of SCs. In addition, a hybrid SC was fabricated by using NiMnCr-LDHs@CS/NF as the positive electrode and FeOOH nanorods (FeOOH/NF) deposited on NF as the negative electrode. The hybrid SC showed an energy density of 48 W h kg−1 at a power density of 402.7 W kg−1.79 In 2021, Li et al. grew NixCo2Al-LDHs@CC nanosheets on carbon fiber cloth by a one-step hydrothermal method. By adjusting the molar concentration of nickel, it was found that Ni1Co2Al-LDHs@CC had the best electrochemical performance, and an Ni1Co2Al-LDHs@CC//AC asymmetric SC (ASC) achieved a maximum energy density of 0.102 mW h cm−2 when the power density was 0.75 mW h cm−2, and maintained a capacitance retention rate of 90.98% after 12000 cycles.178 Wang et al. prepared a carbon nanotube/cobalt-nickel-iron LDHs composite. The assembled CNTs/CoNiFe-LDHs//AC ASC had a high specific capacitance (96.1 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1), good cycle stability (85.0% at 15 A g−1) and high energy density (29.5%).179
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram for the step-wise fabrication of origami and layered-shaped heterostructured core–shell nanorods of ZnNiFe-LDHs@Cu(OH)2/CF. (b) ZnNiFe-LDHs@Cu(OH)2/CF origami and layered-shaped nanorod arrays at different angles and magnifications. (c) GCD curves of diverse current densities. (d) A comparison with some relative transition-metal-material-based electrodes reported recently. (e) Cycling properties of the assembled capacitor. The inset shows the CV curves for the 1st and 5000th cycles measured at 50 mV s−1.50 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustration of the preparation steps of NCZ-LDHs@PAN. (g) Ragone plot of the ASC and other reported hybrid devices for comparison and (h) the cycling performance of the NCZ-LDH-100@PANI//AC ASC.180 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (i) Areal capacitance values of the HSC. (j) Ragone plot results of the HSC. (k) Areal capacity values and (l) cycling stability results of Ag@NCM LDHs MFs@NSs/NF electrode. The inset in (l) shows the EIS plots of the Ag@NCM LDHs MFs@NSs/NF electrode before and after the cycling test.68 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
As the electrode material of a SC, a composite of LDHs and carbon material has broad potential in energy storage applications.


6.1.4. Other composites. 
LDHs can also form composite materials with organic matter and metal ions as electrode materials of SCs. Firstly, LDHs and organic matter can form organic–inorganic hybrid materials. In 2021, Hu et al. fixed a polyaniline nanolayer and ultrathin NiCoZn-LDH nanosheet network on the surface of carbon fiber cloth to form a typical organic–inorganic hybrid material (Fig. 11f). Research shows that a small amount of zinc can improve the cycle performance of LDHs, and a PANI layer enhances the interface interaction between LDHs and the current collector, preventing LDHs from peeling off and dissolving. At 1 A g−1, the composite electrode had a high specific capacitance of 1749 F g−1, good rate performance (the capacitance retention rate of 1 A g−1 to 10 A g−1 was 77%) and excellent cycle performance (the capacitance retention rate was still 89% even after 40000 cycles). In addition, the ASC assembled by NCZ-LDHs@PANI and activated carbon provided a high energy density of 10.7 W h kg−1 and excellent cycle stability at the highest power density of 7140 W kg−1 (Fig. 11g), with only 10% capacity decay after 30000 cycles (Fig. 11h). The existence of both Zn2+ and the PANI nanolayer matter a lot to the cycling performance, where zinc promotes the intrinsic cycling structural stability and the PANI nanolayer prevents LDHs from exfoliation and dissolution.180 This method provides a new strategy and inspiration for the rapid preparation of SCs with high capacitance and long life in a time-saving and controllable way.
In materials compounded with metals, the electrical conductivity of the metals and the synergy between the elements are of great help to enhance the performance of the materials. In addition, in 2021, Ramulu et al. integrated conductive nano-silver particles of graded nickel, cobalt and molybdenum (Ag@NCM LDHs) on nanoplatelets by a hydrothermal method. Among all the electrodes, the ternary NiCoMo-LDHs MFs@NSs/NF electrode showed high electrochemical performance, with an area capacity of 709 Ah cm−2 at 5 mA cm−2. In order to further improve the capacity performance, nano-silver particles were integrated into NiCoMo-LDH material. As a result, the Ag@NCM-LDHs MFs@NSs/NF electrode provided an excellent area capacitance (Fig. 11i) of 890 Ah cm−2 at 5 mA cm−2. In particular, the Ag@NCM-LDHs MFs@NSs/NF electrode showed remarkable cycle stability, reaching 88.8% after 15000 cycles. In addition, HSC devices made of Ag@NCM-LDHs MFs@NSs/NF and AC/NF electrodes also showed high surface capacitance (Fig. 11k) of 1752.2 mF cm−2 and maximum Ed (0.569 mW h cm−2) and Pd (3.82 mW cm−2) values (Fig. 11j). In particular, even after 15000 cycles, the hybrid SC still showed excellent cycle stability, with a retention rate of 108.5% (Fig. 11l). In addition, by successfully collecting solar energy through solar panels, and then using the stored energy to power various electronic devices, the practicability of high-speed solar cells was also explored.68
LDHs and their composite materials, as electrode materials of SCs, have the advantages of cost-effectiveness, an adjustable interlayer structure and high specific capacitance, and have strong application potential in the field of energy storage.

6.2. Ternary LDHs for batteries
Electrochemical energy storage refers to the energy storage of various secondary batteries represented by lithium batteries. This section briefly introduces several kinds of batteries. Table 3 lists some studies of ternary LDHs used as electrode materials of batteries in recent years.
Table 3 Examples of application of ternary layered double hydroxides in batteries




Nano-structures
Synthetic method
type
Electrolyte
Voltage windows
Capacity (retention)
Energy densitymax
Power densitymax
Ref.




Zn–Al–Cu-LDHs
Co-precipitation
ZIBs
3 M KCl
−1.105 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
—
—
980 W kg−1

66



CoNiMn-LDHs/V2CTx
Doping-electrostatic synergistic assembly strategy
ZIBs
—
0.9–1.9 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn)
170 mA h g−1 (600)
368.7 W h Kg−1
2056 W Kg−1

110



Ni2V1−xAlx–Cl-LDH
Hydrothermal
CIBs
—
1.2–3 V
113.8 mA h g−1 (1000)
—
—

75



ZnNiMn-LDH
Co-precipitation
ZNBs
6 M KOH
0–0.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
180 mA h g−1 (1000)
—
—

77



Zn–Al–La-LDHs
Hydrothermal
ZNBs
6 M KOH
−1.9 V to −0.8 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
357.34 mA h g−1 (150)
—
—

188



NCA-LDH/C
Hydrothermal
NNBs
5 M NaOH
0–0.8 V (vs. Hg/HgO)
835 mA h g−1 (1500)
1085 W h kg−1
—

189



NiFeRu-LDH
Hydrothermal
LOBs
—
—
3085 mA h g−1 (46)
—
—

76



CoNiFe-LDH/RuO2.1
Anion exchange/exfoliation
LOBs
1 M KOH
1.2–1.8 V(vs. RHE)
—
—
—

190



NiCoFe-LDH/Ti3C2 MXene/NCNT
Stiring/hydrothermal
ZABs
6 M KOH
−0.1–1.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
—
843 W h kg−1
63 mW cm−2

45






6.2.1. Metal-ion batteries. 
6.2.1.1 Zinc-ion battery. 
Based on the previous research of zinc-ion batteries, LDHs have been proved to improve the zinc electrodeposition efficiency of the negative electrode of a zinc-ion battery. In 2018, Hashemi prepared copper-doped zinc–aluminum-cobalt LDHs. The mixture of LDHs and zinc powder was used as the negative electrode material of the battery. In addition, a whole battery based on the composite material (negative electrode) and copper hexacyanoferrate (positive electrode) was tested. The results showed that the battery gave excellent performance for power grid energy storage, and the maximum power density was equal to 980 W kg−1, which was mainly limited by the positive power performance.66 In 2021, Zhang synthesized 2D/2D cobalt-doped NiMn-LDHs/V2CTx MXene(CNMV) composites (Fig. 12a). As the cathode of ZIBs, CNMV showed a high reversible capacity (Fig. 12b) of 322.7 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, and excellent rate performance (65.6 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1), and an impressive energy density of 368.7 W h kg−1 at a power density of 246 W kg−1. More importantly, the long cycle performance of the CNMV cathode was evaluated at a current density of 1 A g−1 for 600 cycles, as shown in Fig. 12c, and the discharge capacity was stable at 170 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 95.7% after 600 cycles, demonstrating that the CNMV composite is stable over long-term cycling and exhibits an excellent cyclability among reported Mn-based aqueous ZIBs. The prepared aqueous ZIBs could deliver an energy density of 368.7 W h kg−1 at a power density of 246 W kg−1 and even 171.3 W h kg−1 at a high 2056 W kg−1, which are superior to most reported Mn-based work for aqueous ZIBs (Fig. 12d).110
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of a CNMV hybrid. (b) Cycling performance at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 of NMV and CNMV electrodes. (c) Long-term cycling performance at 2 A g−1. (d) Ragone plot of aqueous ZIBs.110 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e) Rechargeable Na/Ni battery schematic of a rechargeable aqueous Na/Ni cell. (f) Graphical illustration of the hierarchical NCA-LDH cathode on a carbon microfiber. (g) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the Na/Ni battery at a rate of 1000 mA g−1 in 1 M NaOH. (h) Cycle stability of the Na/Ni battery at a current rate of 1000 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte.189 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Graphic sketch of the Zn–air battery structure. (j) Galvanostatic discharge plots, (k) discharge polarization and power density, and (l) galvanostatic charge and discharge cycling plots of NiCoFeLDHs/MXene/NCNT and Pt/C and IrO2 based Zn–air batteries at j = 10 mA cm−2.45 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
This work has opened up a promising way for preparing water-based energy storage devices with excellent electrochemical performance.
6.2.1.2 Chloride-ion batteries. 
The cathode material of a chloride-ion battery contributes to an anion electrochemical energy storage system. In the past few years, some progress has been made in research into cathode materials for chloride-ion batteries, but compared with other metal-ion batteries, it is still in its infancy. Cl− is considered an optional anion for rechargeable batteries because of its appropriate ionic radius and high electronegativity, which contributes to mass transfer and provides a wide electrochemical stability window. The worldwide cost of rich chlorine-containing materials is low, which is conducive to extension to a global manufacturing scale. Another key advantage of CIB is its dendrite-free characteristic, which is due to the migration of Cl−, making the CIB system safer and suitable for large-scale energy storage.181 Qing Yin took CoFeCl-LDHs as the cathode material of a chloride-ion battery in 2019 and studied its electrochemical properties. In the same year, on this basis, Qing Yin synthesized three-metal Ni2V0.9Al0.1–Cl-LDHs and used them as the cathode material of CIBs. Ni2V0.9Al0.1–Cl-LDHs can provide a high initial capacity of 312.2 mA h g−1 and an ultralong life of more than 1000 cycles (capacity higher than 113.8 mA h g−1) at 200 mA g−1. The remarkable performance of Ni2V0.9Al0.1–Cl-LDHs comes from the synergy between ternary metals: the high redox activity caused by the multivalent state change of Vm+ during Cl ion intercalation/deintercalation (V3+/V5+), the favorable electronic structure of Ni2+ and the inactive Al3+ showing a pinning effect and enhancing the structural stability.75


6.2.2. Rechargeable batteries. 
6.2.2.1 Zn–Ni alkaline secondary batteries. 
In recent years, more and more attention has been paid to Zn–Ni alkaline secondary batteries, which have become powerful candidates for the next generation of electric vehicles with their unique performance. Compared with other secondary batteries, the Zn–Ni alkaline secondary battery has the advantages of high energy, high power density, high open circuit voltage, excellent low-temperature performance, and low toxicity, and its nickel positive electrode also has the characteristic of long cycle life.182–184 Compared with other secondary batteries, such as lithium-ion batteries, zinc–nickel alkaline secondary batteries perform poorly in terms of cycle life, which is also the biggest obstacle to their commercialization. The main reason for the disadvantage of the zinc–nickel battery is the zinc electrode. Deformation, dendrite generation, passivation, self-corrosion, and self-discharge of the zinc anode will occur in the charge–discharge cycle. These problems will lead to the high solubility of the discharge products of the zinc anode in the alkaline electrolyte and the uneven deposition of zinc active substances on the surface of the zinc electrode, which will affect the cycle life of the Zn–Ni battery.185–187 In 2020, Wang et al. proposed Zn-doped NiMn-LDHs. When the doping amount of zinc was 5%, NiMnZn0.2-LDHs as the cathode material of an Ni–Zn battery showed the best electrochemical performance, which could achieve a high discharge capacity (180 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1) and excellent cycle stability (100% retention after 1000 cycles).77 Wu et al. prepared ZnAlLa-LDHs by a hydrothermal method and used them as a new anode material for a zinc-nickel secondary electrode. XRD characterization shows that the highest diffraction peak appears at 2θ = 11.72, which indicates that ZnAlLa-LDHs are highly crystalline LDHs with a typical hexagonal crystal structure, and the addition of appropriate amount of La does not destroy the original structure of the ZnAl-LDHs. SEM analysis shows the scanning electron microscope image of ZnAlLa-LDHs. The sample exhibits a characteristic LDH hexagonal flake shape. Analysis of the measurement results of constant current charge and discharge showed that a ZnAlLa-LDH electrode with Al/La = 4 has better cycle reversibility, and the cycle retention rate could reach 91.63% after 150 cycles.188
6.2.2.2 Na–Ni batteries. 
A sodium-based anode can be used as a substitute for a lithium-ion battery because of its high abundance and low cost. Park et al. studied the rechargeability of an aqueous Na/Ni battery using a hybrid electrolyte system (Fig. 12e and f). Trivalent atoms (Co3+, Al3+) are doped into the Ni(OH)2 layer, and the electrolyte has high energy storage capacity. It is a redox counter cathode based on a metal Na anode and graded NiCoAl-LDHs nanosheets on a carbon microfiber electrode. A mixed system consisting of non-aqueous electrolyte and aqueous electrolyte separated by an alkali ion solid electrolyte (NASICON, Na3Zr2Si2PO12) was used. They made an adhesive-free electrode by directly growing graded NCA-LDH nanosheets on a carbon microrod electrode (NCA-LDHs/C). The water-containing rechargeable sodium/nickel battery had a stable working voltage of 3.1 V, a capacity of 350 mA h g−1 and an energy density of 1085 W h kg−1 (Fig. 12g). In addition, the battery showed good cycle performance after 1500 cycles, and the capacity retention rate in 1 M NaOH was 83% (Fig. 12h).189


6.2.3. Metal–air batteries. 
6.2.3.1 Lithium–air batteries. 
Compared with other metal–air electrodes, lithium–air batteries have higher theoretical specific volume, but are seriously affected by slow discharging/charging kinetics. In 2020, Song designed NiFeRu-LDHs@GF as an integrated binder-free cathode by growing it directly on 3D conductive graphite foam. FESEM showed that NiFeRu-LDHs grow uniformly on the surface of GF, and many vertically aligned nanosheets with dimensions of 300–600 nm and thickness of 20–40 nm were observed. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) photographs further revealed the morphology of the NiFeRu-LDH nanosheets, and the corresponding energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental map revealed the existence of Ru in the nanosheets. The first constant current discharge and charge curves of the LOBs were measured at various current densities. The specific discharge capacities of the LOBs at 200 mA, 300 mA and 400 mA were 3085 mA, 2155 mA and 1085 mA, respectively. The overpotential gradually increased during charging, and after 46 cycles, the terminal voltage was higher than 4.4 V. At the same time, the terminal voltage during discharge was about 2.15 V.76 In the same year, Lu synthesized a superlattice material composed of CoNiFe-LDHs/RuO2.1 nanosheets as the cathode catalyst of a lithium–air battery. According to tests, the Tafel slope of the composite was 48.9 mV dec−1, and the conversion frequency of the superlattice composite of CoNiFe-LDHs/RuO2.1 was calculated to be 0.045 s−1 under an overpotential of 300 mV. The lithium dioxide battery containing ruthenium dioxide nanoparticles was cycled 48 times at 50 mA before the discharge voltage dropped to the cut-off threshold of 2.0 V. In contrast, the superlattice electrode of CoNiFe-LDHs/RuO2.1 can cycle stably over the first 50 cycles without significantly reducing the discharging and charging voltage. In addition, a lower charge platform than ruthenium dioxide nanoparticles was obviously observed at the superlattice electrode, which is beneficial to avoiding electrolyte decomposition.190
6.2.3.2 Zinc–air batteries. 
The noble metal catalysts Pt and IrO2 are considered the most outstanding catalysts toward ORR and OER, respectively. However, their limited abundance hinders their practical applications. Hence, it is desirable to develop cost-effective, robust, and efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts to meet the requirement for rechargeable zinc–air batteries. Rechargeable zinc–air batteries have caught great attention due to their considerable energy density, low cost, and environmental friendliness.191–193 However, the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) severely limit the overall efficiency of zinc–air batteries.194,195 In 2021, Faraji et al. prepared an NiCoFe-LDHs/Ti3C2 MXene/NCNT composite with a porous structure by a simple hydrothermal method. The composite material shows excellent ORR and OER activities, and it was used as a cathode catalyst to assemble a zinc–air battery (Fig. 12i). When J = 10 mA cm−2, the specific capacity of the zinc–air battery based on an NiCoFe-LDHs/MXene/NCNT electrocatalyst was 753 mA h g−1, which corresponds to a high energy density of 843 W h kg−1 (Fig. 12j) and the open-circuit voltage of the battery. The discharge curve and related power density curve are shown in Fig. 12k. The constructed Ni–Co alloy/MXene/NCNT-based battery showed a maximum power density of 63 mW cm−2, which was higher than its equivalent platinum/carbon–iridium-based battery (49.8 mW cm−2). The constant current cycling voltage of the prepared composite material and platinum/carbon/iridium-based battery were measured at j = 10 mA cm−2 to evaluate the recovery ability of the battery (Fig. 12l). Compared with a platinum/carbon/iridium catalyst, the battery assembled with the prepared hybrid structure showed outstanding cycle efficiency within 80 hours, and the growth in overpotential was not obvious.45
The research into the application of several ternary LDHs in batteries listed in this section shows that LDHs exhibit excellent cycle stability and high rate performance, and have great R&D and application potential in the field of battery energy storage.

7. Advanced characterization technologies
In recent years, in situ characterization techniques have been applied in more and more studies. Compared with ex situ characterization techniques, in situ characterization techniques can better simulate the changes over the entire reaction process during testing. The in situ characterization test will record the changes in substances in the reaction process in real time, which will help researchers better understand the functional groups involved in the reaction process, chemical structures and surface morphology of reaction intermediates and other microscopic changes, and can better simulate the experimental process, explaining the mechanism of the reaction. Instead of in situ characterization, the properties of the product can only be tested after the reaction has ended. Therefore, this section will briefly summarize the application of in situ characterization in the study of ternary LDHs.
7.1. 
          In situ IR

In situ infrared spectrum analysis (In situ IR) means that the microscopic reaction changes are recorded by an infrared scanner in the process of testing the reaction in situ. In situ IR is mainly used to test the structural changes in functional groups during the reaction, which can better simulate the experimental process and be helpful to explain the reaction mechanism. In situ IR can be divided into two types: in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (in situ FTIR) and in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (in situ DRIFTS). In situ FTIR characterizes the bulk phase of the material by transmission, and uses the high vacuum adsorption of probe molecules to activate the adsorption and activation of small molecules on the surface of the sample, while in situ DRIFTS characterizes the surface of the material by diffuse reflection, which can measure loose powder samples for atmospheric adsorption, pressure adsorption and vacuum adsorption. When the sample absorbs properly and the scattering energy is weak, the in situ FTIR method can be used; when the sample scattering or reflection energy is large, in situ DRIFTS is more suitable. In situ IR is a commonly used characterization method for studying mechanistic processes.

7.1.1. 
            In situ FTIR. 
The working principle of in situ FTIR is that the infrared radiation emitted by a light source passes through the sample and is converted into an interferogram containing information about the sample by an interferometer. The interferogram is transformed into an infrared spectrum after fast Fourier transform. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy has the characteristics of high detection sensitivity, high measurement accuracy, high resolution, fast measurement speed, low astigmatism and a wide frequency band. In 2022, Fan constructed CuCoAl–CO32−-LDHs for alternating photocatalytic coupling of CO2 reduction and 5-HMF oxidation. In situ FTIR was used to study the interlayer transformation and replenishment process in the process of LDH in situ capture and transformation of CO2. Fig. 13a shows that the stretching vibration peak of CO32− gradually weakens, and a new broad peak appears near 1540 cm−1, which indicates that CO32− may be activated as a monodentate carbonate species under light. In Fig. 13bin situ FTIR characterization confirmed the newly formed peak of 13CO2–CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 under light. The vibration peak moved from 1350 cm−1 to 1324 cm−1, and a new broad peak was formed near 1509 cm−1. This red shift means that the newly formed peak is indeed converted from CO32− and can be attributed to the monodentate carbonate species. When air is introduced into the test chamber under dark conditions, the tensile vibration peak of 12CO2 increases, which proves that the consumed 13CO2 is rapidly supplied in the form of 12CO2. In Fig. 13c and d, it is shown that the vibration peaks at 1668 cm−1, 1520 cm−1, 1190 cm−1 and 1020 cm−1 are attributed to aldehyde groups CO, CC, C–O–C and C–OH in 5-HMF. Compared with liquid 5-HMF (1025 cm−1), the stretching vibration of C–OH of pre-adsorbed 5-HMF shifted to red, indicating that the 5-hydroxy functional group was dissociated and adsorbed. After irradiation, the lights were turned off and air was introduced into the chamber. The signal of 12CO32− (11355 cm−1) appeared immediately, and the contents returned to the original level after 60 minutes. The chamber was further purified with argon, and the catalyst was irradiated with light. The results show that CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 can simultaneously activate interlayer CO2 and 5-HMF, and couple the corresponding photocatalytic reduction and oxidation reactions. More importantly, the consumed interlayer CO2 can be easily supplemented by capturing CO2 from the air, forming CO2–CO2 cycle conversion, thus showing some characteristics of green conversion technology.196
 Fig. 13  Mechanistic study (a–d). In situ FTIR for 12CO32−-CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 (a) and 13CO32−-CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 (b) transformation under Ar + light and air + dark conditions. In situ FTIR for 13CO32− and 5-HMF conversion on the surface of CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 under Ar + light and air + dark conditions (c). 1800–900 cm−1 region for the above process (d).196 Copyright 2018, Springer. In situ DRIFTS spectra of (e) LFC, (f) LFC-ZnMgAl-LDHs, and (g) LFC-LaZnMgAl-LDH-4 with increasing temperature.197 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. In situ DRIFTS spectra of NO adsorption (h) and oxidization processes under UV light illumination (i) over ZnCr-LDHs and ZnCuCr-LDHs samples. (j and k) In situ DRIFTS spectra of NO photo-oxidization process under UV light illumination over the ZnCuCr-LDHs samples.199 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. In situ Raman monitoring of the catalyst evolution and density functional theory calculations. (l and m) In situ Raman spectra collected for h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs, shown as a function of potential, during HER and OER, respectively. (n) Operando Raman spectra of p-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs (at 1.45 V) and h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs (at 1.4 V) as a function of reaction time.113 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library. 


7.1.2. 
            In situ DRIFTS. 

In situ DRIFTS is an in situ technique developed in recent years. Tracking and characterizing the adsorption state of the in situ reaction on the catalyst, and then analyzing the reaction mechanism, has attracted more and more attention in catalytic characterization. This characterization technique is suitable for the direct determination of solid powder samples and surface analysis of materials. The sample processing is simple, with no need for tabletting, and the original shape of the sample is not changed. Compared with other in situ infrared methods, it is easier to realize in situ analysis under various temperatures, pressures and atmospheres.
In 2020, Liu et al. prepared five kinds of double hydroxides (LDHs) containing different proportions of rare earth element La3+, and studied the influence of LFC-LaZnMgAl-4 with the highest La content on the mediator functional groups by using in situ DRIFTS, and compared it with the infrared spectra of LFC and LFC-ZnMgAl-LDHs (Fig. 13e–g). With an increase in La3+ concentration, the characteristic temperature of the complex roughly increased. At the same time, the active functional groups in the complexes gradually decreased, and the LDHs showed a strong inhibitory effect. LaMnMgAl-LDH-4 had the best inhibition effect on the spontaneous combustion of coal. These findings provide a reference for the application of new CSC inhibitors.197
In 2020, Meng et al. conducted in situ DRIFTS measurement in the WGSR process to track the adsorption, intermediates and reaction mechanism on Au/ZnM-LDHs (Au/ZnCr-LDHs was used as a model catalyst).198 In 2021, Fragoso prepared Zn2−xCuxCr–CO3-LDHs with x = 0, 0.2 and 0.4 by a coprecipitation method, and applied them to the performance of a high-efficiency stock photocatalyst. In the process of dynamic monitoring the detailed mechanism of photocatalytic removal of NO, an in situ DRIFTS method was used. Fig. 13h shows the spectra obtained in each sample after subtracting the background after 10 minutes of no flow under dark conditions. In the ZnCuCr-LDHs sample, due to the appearance of NO (1472 cm−1) and NO2 (828, 1330–1343, 1472 cm−1) species, the NO molecules adsorbed on the surface disproportionated in the presence of hydroxyl LDHs groups. Fig. 13i shows the final product obtained on the photocatalyst surface after illumination for 1 hour. The new reverse peak at 668 cm−1 indicates that the component water molecules play a role in the photocatalytic process. The signal is higher in Zn1.6Cu0.4Cr. According to EPR measurement, it is inferred that the sample has high ability to generate OH radicals. No signal corresponding to NO2 was observed, which was consistent with the high selectivity of these samples. This shows that if NO2 is formed, it will be rapidly oxidized to nitrate. With an increase in illumination time, the signal intensity of these oxide species increased, showing a density of 10 to form nitrite and nitrate as final products (Fig. 13j and k), which confirmed the surface passivation of the photocatalyst observed during the reusability test. In situ DRIFTs spectra show that doped samples have higher efficiency in promoting the photochemical oxidation of NO, and the finally obtained species are nickel, tritium and nitrate species.199

7.2. 
          In situ Raman
The Raman effect originates from molecular vibration (and lattice vibration) and rotation, so the information of a molecular vibration energy level (lattice vibration energy level) and rotation energy level structure can be obtained from the Raman spectrum. In situ Raman spectroscopy has the advantages of rapidity, accuracy and usually causes no damage to samples (solid, semi-solid, liquid or gas) during measurement. In 2020, Zhang et al. prepared a series of graded three-metal LDH nanosheets for oxygen electrodes by in situ chemical transformation. In this study, the in situ Raman technique was used to calculate the real active sites.200 In 2020, Sun et al. carried out an in situ Raman study on prepared h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs and compared them with p-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs to study the evolution of the catalyst structure during the electrolysis of HER and OER. Fig. 13l shows that all six main peaks of h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs remained basically unchanged during the HER process, indicating that the catalyst has good structural stability under HER conditions. The situation for OER is quite different. In Fig. 13m, when the applied potential was higher than 1.35 V (relative to RHE), the characteristics of M–O vibration in LDHs with two Raman peaks at 450 and 526 cm, respectively, gradually shifted to a higher wave number at 472 and 553 cm, which is a sign of metal hydroxide (MOOH). This indicates that the actual OER position of LDHs should be surface MOOH, not MOH. As shown in Fig. 13n, the surface of h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs was at 1.4 V (relative to RHE), while that of p-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs was at 1.45 V (relative to RHE) and it took more than 320 seconds to fully evolve into MOOH. Therefore, h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs, which are rich in defects, contain more MOOH sites during oxidation and are more effective in catalyzing OER.113
In this section, advanced characterization techniques have been introduced, including in situ FTIR, in situ DRIFTs and in situ Raman. In situ testing focuses on real-time online tracking analysis and testing, tracking the changes in the whole reaction process in real time, which is helpful for studying the reaction mechanism. At present, in situ characterization technology is seldom used in research into ternary LDHs, so it should be more widely used here.
8. Conclusions and perspectives
With the increasing consumption of fossil resources, people are urgently looking for renewable clean energy and focusing on energy storage. This paper reviews research on the electrochemical energy storage properties of LDH materials in recent years. LDH material is a kind of hydrotalcite compound. Its unique interlayer structure means it is widely used as a combustion supporting agent, as a catalyst, and in electrochemical energy conversion and electrochemical energy storage. The preparation method of LDHs is simple (including mainly hydrothermal methods, precipitation methods, in situ growth methods and electrodeposition methods). LDHs have been regarded as one of the most promising materials due to their simple preparation (especially by hydrothermal/solvothermal and coprecipitation methods), low cost, high flexibility and tunability of metal ions that can be incorporated in the layered host matrix, as well as the possibility of nanostructuring, especially for the preparation of nanosheets.
In this paper, research into ternary LDHs in recent years has been reviewed, and their preparation methods, morphology, structural engineering, derivatives and compounds, advanced characterization technology and application in electrical energy storage have been summarized.
As shown above, research into ternary LDHs and their application in the field of electrochemical energy storage has made some progress, and their preparation methods, nanostructure and electrochemical performance have been greatly improved. Their structural engineering, derivative materials and advanced characterization techniques are still arousing the interest of researchers. Although research into ternary LDHs has made some progress, it still faces several aspects that need to be improved.
(i) With respect to synthesis methods, at present, the materials of ternary LDHs are mainly prepared by a hydrothermal method, but the hydrothermal method is not suitable for the large-scale production and rapid preparation of ternary LDHs and their composites. Therefore, a simple and efficient preparation method is worthy of further study.
(ii) There is not much research on ternary LDH derivatives. Ternary LDHs can be enriched from the aspects of vulcanization, phosphating, nitridation and chlorination, and the synergistic effect of each atom in the derivatives can be studied to further improve the performance of LDHs.
(iii) In terms of composite materials, LDH products compounded with different materials are often applied in different aspects, and the application direction is relatively fixed. The possibility of the application of LDHs in more fields after compounding with various materials should be explored.
(iv) In situ characterization technology can record the dynamic changes in materials in the reaction process in real time, but there is little research on the application of in situ characterization technology in the characterization of ternary LDH materials. Popularizing in situ characterization technology will help to explore the structural changes, surface morphology changes and the synergistic effect between atoms caused by ternary LDHs in structural engineering design (doping, intercalation, defects, heterojunctions) and the formation of derivatives and composites.
(v) The application of ternary LDH materials in SCs still faces problems, such as low conductivity and a tendency to stack. In the future, attention should be paid to adjusting the performance of ternary LDH materials from the viewpoints of increasing specific surface area, improving conductivity and surface dynamics.
(vi) At present, ternary LDHs are seldom used in batteries, and the modification of ternary LDHs to obtain high discharge capacity and more stable cycle performance will require deeper development in the field of battery energy storage.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21676036), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of Chongqing University (No. 2019CDXYHG0013), the Graduate Research and Innovation Foundation of Chongqing (No. CYB22043), and the Large-scale Equipment Sharing Fund of Chongqing University (No. 202103150115).
References
S. Q. Hui, N. Shaigan, V. Neburchilov, L. Zhang, K. Malek, M. Eikerling and P. De Luna, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 54 Search PubMed .
V. S. Thoi, Y. J. Sun, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2388–2400 RSC .
Y. M. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
L. L. Zhou, R. G. Xie and L. J. Wang, Prog. Chem., 2019, 31, 275–282 CAS .
M. M. Zhao, Q. X. Zhao, B. Li, H. G. Xue, H. Pang and C. Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15206–15225 RSC .
B. Ren, B. Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Jiang, Q. Yi, K. Xu, H. Yu, Z. Hu, I. Jeerapan and J. Z. Ou, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 2395–2404 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ren, Y. Wang and J. Z. Ou, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 1108–1127 RSC .
K. L. Wang, T. Q. Wang, Q. A. Islam and Y. Wu, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 1944–1975 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lv, Z. X. Yang, K. Chen, C. D. Wang and Y. J. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 29 Search PubMed .
J. Xie, G. H. Gwak, M. Lee, S. M. Paek and J. M. Oh, Crystals, 2021, 11, 12 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Shi, J. Q. Li, B. Y. Zhang, S. Y. Lv, T. Wang and X. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 565, 8 CrossRef .
X. Zeng and Z. H. Yang, J. Cent. South Univ., 2020, 27, 797–810 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Zhang, K. Xu, Q. Yao, A. Jannat, G. Ren, M. R. Field, X. Wen, C. Zhou, A. Zavabeti and J. Z. Ou, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1073–1078 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, X. Zhou, P. Xu and J. M. Sun, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 9 Search PubMed .
G. B. Chen, T. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. J. Sun, X. D. Zhuang, M. W. Chen and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 7 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, W. J. Liu, Y. M. Hu, L. Xu, M. L. Guan, J. X. Qiu, Y. P. Huang, J. Bao and H. M. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1890–1896 RSC .
L. Huang, S. Chu, J. Q. Wang, F. Kong, L. L. Luo, Y. Wang and Z. G. Zou, Catal. Today, 2013, 212, 81–88 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, L. Teng, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, J. L. Xue, M. Ikram, M. Ullah, L. Li and K. Y. Shi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 300, 11 CrossRef .
H. C. Fu, A. T. Zhang, F. H. Jin, H. W. Guo, W. J. Huang, W. T. Cheng and J. Q. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 607, 1269–1279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. G. Li, Y. H. Wang, B. Lu, J. Yu, M. L. Yuan, Q. Q. Tan, Z. Y. Zhong and F. B. Su, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 10 Search PubMed .
X. J. Liu, L. Zhou, L. Huang, L. L. Chen, L. Long, S. Y. Wang, X. L. Xu, M. C. Liu, W. X. Yang and J. B. Jia, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 883–891 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Qin, B. Q. Wang, Y. Qiu, X. J. Liu, G. C. Qi, S. S. Zhang, A. J. Han, J. Luo and J. F. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 2752–2755 RSC .
M. Arif, G. Yasin, L. Luo, W. Ye, M. A. Mushtaq, X. Y. Fang, X. Xiang, S. F. Ji and D. P. Yan, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 10 CrossRef .
M. Kuang, J. M. Zhang, D. B. Liu, H. T. Tan, K. N. Dinh, L. Yang, H. Ren, W. J. Huang, W. Fang, J. D. Yao, X. D. Hao, J. W. Xu, C. T. Liu, L. Song, B. Liu and Q. Y. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 8 Search PubMed .
R. Dang, X. R. Ma, J. Y. Liu, L. Yan, W. W. Gao, J. Li and B. Chen, Compos. Interfaces, 2016, 24, 1–11 Search PubMed .
S. F. Li, Y. Guo, M. Xiao, T. Zhang, S. H. Yao, S. Y. Zang, H. T. Fan, Y. M. Shen, Z. G. Zhang and W. X. Li, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2019, 26, 12014–12024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Sparks, T. Morgan, P. M. Patterson, S. A. Tackett, E. Morris and M. Crocker, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 82, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bao, Z. L. Wang, J. F. Xie, L. Xu, F. C. Lei, M. L. Guan, Y. Zhao, Y. P. Huang and H. M. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3521–3524 RSC .
E. Enhtuwshin, S. Mhin, K. M. Kim, J. H. Ryu, S. J. Kim, S. Y. Jung, S. Kang, S. Choi and H. Han, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 15312–15322 CrossRef CAS .
D. Likius, A. Rahman, C. Zivayi and V. Uahengo, Catal. Lett., 2020, 150, 1942–1956 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zheng, X. Han, X. X. Zhao, J. Qi, Q. X. Ma, K. Tao and L. Han, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 106, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Poudel and H. J. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 15 CrossRef .
X. R. Gao, R. K. Zhang, X. Q. Huang, Y. Shi, C. Wang, Y. Z. Gao and Z. G. Han, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 859, 8 CrossRef .
R. J. Wang, Z. H. Yang, B. Yang, T. T. Wang and Z. H. Chu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 344–350 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Y. Yang, X. Dai, H. Qiao, J. Yong, X. Luan, L. Yu, C. Luan, Y. Wang and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 1085–1092 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Zhang, X. Q. Zhang, Y. Meng, G. X. Pan, Z. M. Ni and S. J. Xia, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 27 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, B. Y. Wang, C. H. Su, D. L. Li, L. Zhang, R. F. Chong and Z. X. Chang, J. Catal., 2018, 359, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Zhang, H. F. Huang, J. X. Han, F. X. Yan and C. W. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3852–3858 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Liu, J. F. Xie, Y. Q. Guo, S. S. Lou, L. Gao and B. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24437–24444 RSC .
A. A. Khan and M. Tahir, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 8922–8943 CrossRef .
C. Jing, Q. Zhang, X. Y. Liu, Y. X. Chen, X. Wang, L. H. Xia, H. Zeng, D. C. Wang, W. Z. Zhang and F. Dong, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 9604–9612 RSC .
J. M. Gonçalves, P. R. Martins, L. Angnes and K. Araki, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 9981–9997 RSC .
Y. Qian, S. Zhou and X. Chen, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2017, 28, 353–361 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, P. Zuo, W. Sun, R. D. Xia, Z. H. Dong, L. Zhu, J. Lv, G. D. Deng, L. H. Tan and Y. M. Dai, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10242–10254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faraji and N. Arianpouya, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 901, 9 CrossRef .
G. Chen, J. Liu, Y. li, P. Anand, W. Wu, Y. Chen and C. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 494001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Zhou, Z. Cai, X. D. Lei, W. L. Tian, Y. M. Bi, Y. Jia, N. N. Han, T. F. Gao, Q. Zhang, Y. Kuang, J. Q. Pan, X. M. Sun and X. Duan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 7 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. J. Heo, J. H. Park, K. Y. Rhee and S. J. Park, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2020, 9, 1381–1396 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, C. Tang, D. Sun, A. Du, J. Z. Ou, M. Wu and H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131652 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Shen, J. H. Liang, X. M. Fu, Y. Jiang, S. C. Yan, H. M. He and X. Q. Ren, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 2835–2841 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, J. Yang, C. T. Zhao, X. M. Fan, G. Wang and J. S. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3097–3104 RSC .
S. F. Ng, M. Y. L. Lau and W. J. Ong, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 44 Search PubMed .
S. Guru and G. R. Rao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 22 CrossRef .
Q. R. Chen, Y. H. Yu, J. Li, H. X. Nan, S. X. Luo, C. M. Jia, P. L. Deng, S. K. Zhong and X. L. Tian, ChemElectroChem, 2022, 9, 11 Search PubMed .
J. M. Goncalves, P. R. Martins, L. Angnes and K. Araki, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 9981–9997 RSC .
S. Hu, Y. Tan, C. Feng, H. Wu, J. Zhang and H. Mei, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227872 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Chen, J. J. Jiang, Y. D. Zhao, L. Zhang, D. Q. Guo and D. D. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 428–437 RSC .
J. Xu, S. L. Gai, F. He, N. Niu, P. Gao, Y. J. Chen and P. P. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 11667–11675 RSC .
M. Li, J. P. Cheng, F. Liu and X. B. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 640, 5–10 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, L. Yu, M. H. Wu, Y. Wang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 6 Search PubMed .
X. Y. He, Q. Liu, J. Y. Liu, R. M. Li, H. S. Zhang, R. R. Chen and J. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 724, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Y. Lin, Y. Su, B. Zhang, C. J. Li, H. Wang and L. J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 225, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Ding, X. Du, Y. Y. Yang, P. F. Wang, Z. L. Zhang, X. G. Hao, C. J. Peng and G. Q. Guan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 17313–17323 RSC .
X. R. Gao, X. M. Liu, D. J. Wu, B. Qian, Z. K. Kou, Z. H. Pan, Y. J. Pang, L. Q. Miao and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 12 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Zhang, J. Wang, M. G. Li and Y. L. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A98–A106 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Hashemi, G. Kasiri, J. Glenneberg, F. Langer, R. Kun and F. La Mantia, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2073–2079 CrossRef .
T. Wang, F. Yu, X. X. Wang, S. B. Xi, K. J. Chen and H. X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 13 Search PubMed .
B. Ramulu, S. C. Sekhar, S. J. Arbaz and J. S. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 12 CrossRef .
Y. L. Chen, Y. H. Ouyang, J. Yang, L. P. Zheng, B. B. Chang, C. Wu, X. W. Guo, G. R. Chen and X. Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 9384–9392 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Yang, H. Yu, J. Zeng, G. Li, B. Chang, C. Wu, X. Guo, G. Chen, L. Zheng and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 6, 6772–6782 CrossRef .
X. Long, H. Lin, D. Zhou, Y. M. An and S. H. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Wang and Z. H. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 19924–19928 RSC .
M. Gong, Y. G. Li, H. B. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Feng, H. L. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, Z. J. Fan, J. Liu and H. J. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2025–2032 RSC .
X. Wen, Z. H. Yang, X. Xie, Z. B. Feng and J. H. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 451–459 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yin, J. N. Luo, J. Zhang, S. X. Zhang, J. B. Han, Y. J. Lin, J. S. Zhou, L. R. Zheng and M. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 8 Search PubMed .
M. Song, H. Tan, L. Tian, J. Li, Y. Xu, L. L. Shi, L. M. Sun, W. C. Zhuang and X. H. Du, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8, 8 CrossRef .
S. Y. Wang, X. X. Duan, T. F. Gao, Z. L. Wang, D. J. Zhou, K. Sun, Z. C. Shang, Y. Kuang, S. B. Tian, X. J. Li, W. Liu and X. M. Sun, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 7 Search PubMed .
J. F. Zhang, J. Y. Liu, L. F. Xi, Y. F. Yu, N. Chen, S. H. Sun, W. C. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, A. Addad, M. Dolci, P. Roussel, M. Naushad, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 9 Search PubMed .
M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 675–694 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Khan and D. O'Hare, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3191–3198 RSC .
H. X. Li, L. L. Zhang, S. P. Wang and J. X. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28556–28565 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, R. Chen, L. Ma, H. Zhu, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Dinh, P. L. Zheng, Z. F. Dai, Y. Zhang, R. Dangol, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Y. Yan, Small, 2018, 14, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Enkhtuvshin, K. M. Kim, Y. K. Kim, S. Mihn, S. J. Kim, S. Y. Jung, N. T. T. Thao, G. Ali, M. Akbar, K. Y. Chung, K. H. Chae, S. Kang, T. W. Lee, H. G. Kim, S. Choi and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27332–27346 RSC .
T. B. Liu, H. F. Zhou, G. X. Zhong, X. L. Yan, X. T. Su and Z. Lin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 404, 8 Search PubMed .
H. Q. Liu, D. P. Zhao, Y. Liu, Y. L. Tong, X. Wu and G. Z. Shen, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 581–591 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Foruzin, Z. Rezvani, Y. H. Shishavan and B. Habibi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 150–160 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, B. B. Luo, F. F. Chen and F. Yang, Chem. Pap., 2018, 72, 2433–2441 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, M. M. Jing, Y. Wu, W. L. Chen and Y. Ran, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 353, 53–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Ni, S. F. Liu, J. F. Lee, C. W. Pao, J. L. Chen, H. Y. Chen and J. H. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 384, 9 CrossRef .
G. L. Zhou, X. L. Gao, S. Z. Wen, X. L. Wu, L. L. Zhang, T. S. Wang, P. S. Zhao, J. Z. Yin and W. S. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 612, 772–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Wang, X. L. Sun, H. B. Hu, T. Y. Shen, G. H. Liu, Z. W. Li, D. W. Cao, L. He and Y. F. Song, Chem.–Eur. J., 2022, 28, 7 Search PubMed .
Z. X. Wu, D. Khalafallah, C. Q. Teng, X. Q. Wang, Q. Zou, J. H. Chen, M. J. Zhi and Z. L. Hong, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 838, 10 CrossRef .
C. Y. Li, X. Li, H. Q. Wang, M. L. Zheng, F. Tian, R. Y. Tan, P. W. Huo, Y. Yan and X. K. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 871, 12 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Wang, L. Wang, F. Huang, J. Fan, N. Shi, M. Han and Z. Dai, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 3346–3358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, S. K. Dash and K. M. Parida, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 2532–2545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Samuei, S. S. Akbari, E. Ulker and F. Karadas, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 3044–3053 RSC .
D. Feng, Z. Wei, Q. Wang, A. Feng and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 24265–24280 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Rohit, A. D. Jagadale, J. Lee, K. Lee, S. K. Shinde and D. Y. Kim, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 9660–9668 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Liu, K. Jiang, Y. M. Hu, Q. Li, Y. L. Deng, J. Bao and Y. C. Lei, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 604, 767–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. W. Wang, Q. H. Lin, Q. Z. Li, K. Z. Li, L. Y. Wu, S. M. Li and H. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 11 Search PubMed .
J. X. Han, J. Zhang, T. T. Wang, Q. Xiong, W. Wang, L. X. Cao and B. H. Dong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13105–13114 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. W. Septiani, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. N. Guo, B. Yuliarto, X. C. Jiang, Y. Ide, N. Nugraha, H. K. Dipojono, A. B. Yu, Y. Sugahara, D. Golberg and Y. Yamauchi, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1645–1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Z. Li, Z. Q. Sun, H. Jiang, Z. Q. Ma, Q. Wang and F. Y. Qu, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 11628–11636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, X. Yang, A. Nautiyal, Y. Zheng, Q. Guo, J. Luo and X. Zhang, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2019, 2, 151–161 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. Liang, W. Zhu, H. Song, K. Wang and C. Li, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 62 CrossRef .
A. A. E. Sakr, T. Zaki, O. Elgabry, M. A. Ebiad, S. M. El-Sabagh and M. M. Emara, Appl. Clay Sci., 2018, 160, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. Jing, J. Zheng, H. Yu, Q. Chen, L. Guo, D. Pan, N. Naik, Q. Shao and Z. Guo, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 628, 127279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Zhang, J. M. Cao, J. Z. Li, Z. Y. Yuan, D. D. Li, L. L. Wang and W. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 10 Search PubMed .
Y. Hua, C. Pan, X. Zheng, F. P. Hua, L. Xu, G. P. Xu, Y. Jian and X. Peng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 401, 123374 CrossRef .
S. M. N. Jeghan, N. Kim and G. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 22463–22477 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Chen, Y. B. Lian, W. J. Yang, L. Lin, Y. F. Chen, J. B. Xu, D. Wang, X. Q. Yang, M. H. Rummerli, J. Guo, J. Zhong, Z. Deng, Y. Jiao, Y. Peng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 9 Search PubMed .
L. L. Zhu, C. Hao, X. H. Wang and Y. N. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11618–11629 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Li, X. X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. P. Li, G. X. Zhang, W. Liu and X. M. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 8 Search PubMed .
L. Ding, K. Li, Z. Q. Xie, G. Q. Yang, S. L. Yu, W. T. Wang, D. A. Cullen, H. R. Yu and F. Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 395, 10 CrossRef .
J. He, P. Xu and J. M. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2931–2938 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Jia, G. H. Du, D. Han, Y. W. Hao, W. Q. Zhao, Y. Fan, Q. M. Su, S. K. Ding and B. S. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27639–27650 RSC .
W. Xu, J. H. Chen, M. H. Yu, Y. X. Zeng, Y. B. Long, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17827–17827 RSC .
Z. J. Tan, P. Liu, H. M. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Al-Mamun, H. G. Yang, D. Wang, Z. Y. Tang and H. J. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5695–5697 RSC .
M. Y. Miao, J. H. Wang and W. B. Hu, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 543, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Karami, M. Jouyandeh, J. A. Ali, M. R. Ganjali, M. Aghazadeh, M. Maadani, M. Rahn, F. Luzi, L. Torre, D. Puglia and M. R. Saeb, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 136, 6 Search PubMed .
D. E. L. Vieira, A. N. Salak, M. G. S. Ferreira, J. M. Vieira and C. M. A. Brett, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 573, 8 CrossRef .
L. Wu, X. X. Ding, Z. C. Zheng, A. T. Tang, G. Zhang, A. Atrens and F. S. Pan, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 64, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, L. Wu, Y. Xia, Y. N. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Bin, Z. H. Xie, W. J. Ci, G. Zhang and F. S. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 551, 14 CrossRef .
L. M. Cao, J. W. Wang, D. C. Zhong and T. B. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3224–3230 RSC .
J. Z. Wang, Z. Wang, N. Liu, C. Liu, J. Yan, C. C. Li, J. W. Cui, J. Q. Liu, X. Y. Hu and Y. C. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 615, 173–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Xiao, S. N. Li, X. Y. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7825–7832 RSC .
X. Long, H. Lin, D. Zhou, Y. M. An and S. H. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Huang, Y. P. Hou, Z. B. Yu, Z. B. Peng, L. Wang, J. Huang, B. G. Zhang, L. Qian, L. D. Wu and Z. C. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 9458–9466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. M. Zhou, J. S. Mu, E. C. Yang and X. J. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 17202–17208 RSC .
J. X. Guo, C. Liu, Y. F. Sun, J. K. Sun, W. Zhang, T. F. Si, H. Lei, Q. Y. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 263, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. N. Nguyen, M. Kim and J. H. Shim, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 12891–12901 RSC .
S. N. Hu, Y. Tan, C. Q. Feng, H. M. Wu, J. J. Zhang and H. Mei, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 10 CrossRef .
M. Q. Wang, C. Ye, H. Liu, M. W. Xu and S. J. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1963–1967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Ma, S. H. Zhang, Y. He, T. He, H. J. Li, Y. H. Zhang and J. Y. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 886, 8 CrossRef .
Z. J. Chen, X. G. Duan, W. Wei, S. B. Wang, Z. J. Zhang and B. J. Ni, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 293–314 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutta, H. Han, M. Je, H. Choi, J. Kwon, K. Park, A. Indra, K. M. Kim, U. Paik and T. Song, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 11 CrossRef .
S. Gupta, M. K. Patel, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 28 Search PubMed .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, V. Reddu, Y. C. Peng, Z. F. Huang, C. Wang and X. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18502–18511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chunduri, S. Gupta, O. Bapat, A. Bhide, R. Fernandes, M. K. Patel, V. Bambole, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 9 CrossRef .
D. Q. Dong, X. L. Xu, C. L. Ma, L. Y. Gong, L. H. Su and J. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 4545–4555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Kim, S. K. Kim and S. H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6282–6288 RSC .
Q. J. Yang, Q. S. Wang, Y. Long, F. Wang, L. L. Wu, J. Pan, J. Han, Y. Lei, W. D. Shi and S. Y. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 12 Search PubMed .
X. T. Wang, X. B. Ning, Q. Shao, S. S. Ge, Z. Y. Fei, J. Lei and B. R. Hou, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
N. X. Hao, Y. Wei, J. L. Wang, Z. W. Wang, Z. H. Zhu, S. L. Zhao, M. Han and X. Huang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 20576–20584 RSC .
Z. L. Chen, R. B. Wu, M. Liu, H. Wang, H. B. Xu, Y. H. Guo, Y. Song, F. Fang, X. B. Yu and D. L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 13 Search PubMed .
K. Z. Cao, L. F. Jiao, W. K. Pang, H. Q. Liu, T. F. Zhou, Z. P. Guo, Y. J. Wang and H. T. Yuan, Small, 2016, 12, 2991–2997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Liu, Y. L. Qiu, A. T. Zhang, W. R. Yang, C. J. Barrow, J. M. Razal and J. Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22573–22584 RSC .
Y. P. Wang, C. Liu, Y. T. Zhang, W. D. Meng, B. Yu, S. Y. Pu, D. H. Yuan, F. Qi, B. B. Xu and W. Chu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 264–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ke, J. Liu, H. Q. Sun, H. Y. Zhang, X. G. Duan, P. Liang, X. Y. Li, M. O. Tade, S. M. Liu and S. B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Hu, G. S. Zhang, M. Liu, Q. Wang and P. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 338, 300–310 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhang, L. C. Nengzi, Z. J. Wang, X. Y. Zhang, B. Li and X. W. Cheng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 383, 12 Search PubMed .
K. J. Tsai, C. S. Ni, H. Y. Chen and J. H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 454, 10 CrossRef .
S. Y. Huang, S. Song, R. Zhang, T. Wen, X. X. Wang, S. J. Yu, W. C. Song, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and X. K. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11268–11279 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Zong, M. Shao, D. L. Cao, X. J. Xu, S. F. Wang and H. Z. Zhang, Environ. Res., 2021, 196, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, L. W. Xiao, S. J. Yuan, W. Wang, X. M. Zhan and Z. H. Hu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 255, 8 CrossRef .
Z. F. Gao, J. X. Liang, J. Yao, Y. T. Zhao, Q. Meng, G. Y. He and H. Q. Chen, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 10 Search PubMed .
P. Hadi, M. Xu, C. Ning, C. S. K. Lin and G. McKay, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 895–906 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sabzehmeidani, S. Mahnaee, M. Ghaedi, H. Heidari and V. A. L. Roy, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 598–627 RSC .
G. Lartey-Young and L. Ma, Chemosphere, 2022, 293, 133526 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hao, X. K. Wang, X. L. Wu, Y. N. Guo, L. L. Zhu and X. H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 572, 11 CrossRef .
H. B. Mo, L. P. Xu and T. Zhou, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 7 Search PubMed .
B. N. Wang, M. Y. Chen and B. J. Yang, Polymers, 2019, 11, 10 Search PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Qian, H. Y. Han, P. Qiao and H. M. Zhang, Polym. Polym. Compos., 2021, 29, 842–853 CAS .
H. C. Fu, A. T. Zhang, F. H. Jin, H. W. Guo and J. Q. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 16165–16177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pourfarzad, M. Shabani-Nooshabadi, M. R. Ganjali and H. Kashani, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 317, 83–92 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Tian, L. Z. Zhu, E. H. Han, M. Shang and M. C. Song, Ionics, 2020, 26, 367–381 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Kulkarni, A. D. Jagadale, V. S. Kumbhar, R. N. Bulakhe, S. S. Joshi and C. D. Lokhande, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4046–4053 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Z. Gu, Q. Hu, B. Geng and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 17007–17013 RSC .
H. Chen, L. Hu, M. Chen, Y. Yan and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 934–942 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hassan, E. Haque, K. R. Reddy, A. I. Minett, J. Chen and V. G. Gomes, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11988–11994 RSC .
Z. Wang, W. Jia, M. L. Jiang, C. Chen and Y. D. Li, Sci. China Mater., 2015, 58, 944–952 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, R. Z. Ma, C. X. Wang, J. B. Liang, X. H. Liu, K. C. Zhou and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Zhan, Y. M. Zhang, X. L. Liu, S. S. Lu and W. G. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
D. X. Guo, X. M. Song, L. C. Tan, H. Y. Ma, W. F. Sun, H. J. Pang, L. L. Zhang and X. M. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 955–963 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Amani-Ghadim, F. Khodam, S. Aber and M. S. S. Dorraji, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2021, 44, 7 CrossRef .
C. Y. Li, Y. J. Zhou, X. Li, H. Q. Wang, P. W. Huo and X. K. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 536, 9 Search PubMed .
J. W. Wang, Q. Ding, C. H. Bai, F. F. Wang, S. G. Sun, Y. Q. Xu and H. J. Li, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 11 Search PubMed .
W. X. Hu, L. Chen, X. Wu, M. Du, Y. H. Song, Z. L. Wu and Q. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 38346–38357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yin, D. M. Rao, G. J. Zhang, Y. J. Zhao, J. B. Han, K. Lin, L. R. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. S. Zhou and M. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 9 Search PubMed .
D. Q. Zeng, Z. H. Yang, S. W. Wang, X. Ni, D. J. Ai and Q. Q. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4075–4080 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. H. Yang, J. H. Huang, Z. B. Feng and X. E. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Fan, Z. H. Yang, W. Long, B. Yang, J. Jing and R. J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 741–748 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Fan, Z. H. Yang, W. Long, Z. Y. Zhao and B. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, Z. H. Yang, Z. B. Feng, Z. Zhang and J. H. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 308–314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Nie, W. Li, J. Q. Pan, R. A. Senthil, C. Fernandez, A. Khan, Y. Z. Sun and J. J. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 289, 333–341 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wu, Y. S. Qu, W. Z. Zhang, G. Xie, Y. G. Li, Q. F. Shen and X. H. Yu, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 35244–35249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, Z. Khan, T. J. Shin, Y. Kim and H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1564–1573 RSC .
X. Y. Lu, N. Sakai, D. M. Tang, X. M. Li, T. Taniguchi, R. Z. Ma and T. Sasaki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33083–33093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Li, J. Yang, H. B. Yang, L. P. Zhang, J. J. Shao, W. Huang, B. Liu and X. C. Dong, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 963–969 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Fu, Y. Wang, Y. W. Tang, K. Zhou, J. B. Goodenough and J. M. Lee, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Zhu, M. L. Xiao, Y. L. Zhang, Z. Jin, Z. Q. Peng, C. P. Liu, S. L. Chen, J. J. Ge and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6335–6342 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Wang, L. Wan, Y. Q. Lin and B. G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 10 Search PubMed .
D. Bin, B. B. Yang, C. Li, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26178–26187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan, X. Yue, Y. Liu, D. Li and J. Feng, Chem. Catal., 2022, 2, 531–549 CrossRef .
W. Y. Liu, H. Wen, Y. Xiao, Y. H. Li, L. Yin and G. Y. Bai, Thermochim. Acta, 2020, 687, 10 Search PubMed .
Y. Meng, Y. F. Chen, X. B. Zhou, G. X. Pan and S. J. Xia, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 464–476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fragoso, M. A. Oliva, L. Camacho, M. Cruz-Yusta, G. de Miguel, F. Martin, A. Pastor, I. Pavlovic and L. Sanchez, Chemosphere, 2021, 275, 10 CrossRef .
W. D. Zhang, H. Yu, T. Li, Q. T. Hu, Y. Gong, D. Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. T. Fu, H. Y. Zhu, X. D. Yan and Z. G. Gu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 8 Search PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Trend chart of articles published on ternary metal layered double hydroxides over the past 10 years.	 

 	Fig. 2  The development path of ternary-layered double hydroxides in electric energy storage from the historical point of view.34,45,57–79	 

 	Fig. 3  Two-dimensional (a) and three-dimensional (b) crystal structures of LDHs. Note: A general formula of stable LDHs is expressed as [M2+1−xM3+x(OH)2]x+(An−)x/n·yH2O, where M2+ is a divalent metal ion; M3+ is a trivalent metal ion; An− are charge-balancing anions.36 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram of the crystal structure of AlNiFe-LDH.82 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the crystal structure of Ni3FeAlx-LDH.83 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the catalyst design concept for NFAC-MELDHs via the MOF-derived electrochemical activation process.86 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic and SEM images of Ni2Zn0.5Fe-LDH-modified CPE.88 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic and SEM images of Ni(Co0.5Fe0.5)/NF.93 Copyright 2021, Chemistry Europe. (d) Schematic of the synthesis process, structure and SEM images for NiFeZr-LDH nanosheets.18 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration and SEM images of the fabrication of NiVFe-LDHs.16 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic of the formation procedure and SEM images of electrodeposited Ni-based ternary LDHs.100 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (g) The effect of La substitution with Al on the change in the structure of synthesized LDHs and consequent formation of extra-LDH compounds.40 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (h) A schematic diagram for the formation of FeNiW-LDHs by an electrochemical corrosion strategy.14 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (i) A schematic diagram of the preparation process of ZnFe as LDHs.102 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (j) Illustration showing the formation mechanism of holey interconnected Fe-doped NiCo-LDH nanosheets.104 Copyright 2019, Chemistry Europe.	 

Hydrothermal	Uniform morphology and good crystallization	The mother liquor of the product is different
Coprecipitation	Simple operation, low cost, short synthesis time	Generates wide particle size distributions with an average size ranging from submicron to tens of microns
Electrodeposition method	LDHs with controllable composition and controllable nanostructure can be obtained	LDHs cannot be prepared on a large scale
Coprecipitation-assisted hydrothermal	The sample crystallizes well, the morphology is uniform, and the particle size is small	The operation process is cumbersome
Electrochemical corrosion engineering	Uniform morphology and rapid response	The reaction cannot be stopped immediately, so not suitable for mass production

In situ growth	It can realize the perfect combination of the advantages of the functional body and the matrix	Long reaction time and low utilization rate of raw materials
Template	The size and shape, structure and properties of the nanomaterials can be precisely controlled, and the synthesis method is simple and suitable for mass production	Template agents are difficult to remove in one go
Microwave synthesis	Rapid and uniform heating, small thermal inertia, hygienic and pollution-free, energy saving and highly efficient	A temperature gradient will form inside a bad thermal conductor, resulting in non-uniform heating. If heating is too fast, it will lead to “hot spots” and it is difficult to maintain a certain temperature

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration and SEM images for the synthesis of Ni–Co–Mn-LDH nanoflakes assembled into hollow nanocages.31 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) A schematic diagram illustrating the synthesis process and FE-SEM images of a ternary NCM LDH MFs@NSs/NF and Ag@NCM LDH MFs@NSs/NF electrode.68 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) SEM images of Ti1Li3Al2-LDHs.24 Copyright 2019, Nature. (d) TEM images of h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs.113 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library. (e) SEM images of GO/ZCN.114 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of crystal structure. Fe sites in Fe–CoNi-LDHs mainly exist at the edge of the catalyst surface, (b) Tafel slopes, (c) EIS, (d) I–t curve, of CoNi-LDHs, FeCoNi-LDHs, Fe–CoNi-LDHs.11 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of the preparation of D-NiFeAl-LDHs. (f) SEM images of D-NiFeAl-LDHs. (g) EDX elemental maps of D-NiFeAl-LDH electrocatalyst.82 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (h) CV curves of F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi LDHs at different scan rates. (i) Cycle performance of F–ZnMnNi LDHs and F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi LDHs at 1 A g−1 over 100000 cycles. (j) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process of F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi-LDHs through electrostatic interaction. (k) Charge-transfer mechanism of F-MXene/F–ZnMnNi-LDHs van der Waals heterostructure electrode.44 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (l) Scheme of the extended corrosion protection procedure.124 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (m) Growth mechanism and electrochemical behavior of MgAlY-LDHs.125 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Procedure for the synthesis of S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF and photographs of each step. (b) CV curves of NiCoAl-LDHs/NF and S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF at 50 mV s−1. (c) EIS curves of NiCoAl LDHs/NF and S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF. (d) Areal Ragone plot and (e) the cycling stability of S–NiCoAl-LDHs/NF//AC.65 Copyright 2021, The Electrochemical Society. (f) Tafel plots: N–NiFe; N–CoNi; N–CoFe; CoNiFe; N–CoNiFe; and Ir/C. (g) Plots of the capacitive current density (Δj in 1.0 V) as a function of the scan rate. (h) Stability test of N–CoNiFe and Ir/C for the OER before and after 2000 cycles on the GC electrode in a 1.0 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (i) Schematic diagram of the preparation of N-incorporated CoNiFe LDHs.133 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) Schematic of N–NiZnCu LDHs/rGO catalyst preparation. (k) LSVs of N–NiZnCu LDHs/rGO||N–NiZnCu LDHs/rGO and Pt/C||IrO2. (l and m) LSVs and Tafel plots of the catalysts. (n) Chronopotentiometric response of N–NiZnCu-LDHs/rGO at 10 mA cm−2, 50 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively, in 1.0 M KOH containing 0.3 M NH4Cl.134 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (o) Schematic illustration for the synthesis process of NiVFe–B–P-LDHs@NF. (p) The overpotentials of the above samples at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. (q) Polarization curves of NiVFe–B–P-LDHs@NF before and after 1000 cycles. The inset shows the time dependence of the catalytic current during electrolysis over the course of 24 h in 1.0 M KOH.136 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the preparation of TTL for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical oxygen evolution reactions. (b) Photocurrent–potential curves of pristine BiVO4 and TTL/BiVO4 photoanodes measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination.146 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of hybrid CF@NiCoZn-LDHs/Co9S8-QD nanosheet arrays. (d) Schematic illustration displaying the merits of a hybrid CF@NiCoZn-LDHs/Co9S8-QD electrode for energy storage.144 Copyright 2018, Wiley Online Library. (e–g) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF hybrid nanosheet arrays. (h) GCD curves Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF at various current densities. (i) Cycling performances of Co-MOF/NF, NixMn4−xCo-LDHs/NF and Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF electrodes at 20 A g−1. (j) Cycling properties of an ASC device (at 20 A g−1). (k) A comparison of the energy density of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs with those previously reported for MOFs, LDHs and Co sulfide materials.149 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (l) Proposed mechanism of Bi2O3/CuNiFe-LDHs/PS/light system or LOM degradation. (m) Effect of catalyst dosage, PS concentration and different pH values on the degradation of LOM. Experimental conditions: PS concentration = 0.74 mM, Bi2O3/CuNiFe LDHs (1:1) = 0.4 g L−1, pH = 6.08 and LOM = 10 mg L−1.153 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  FESEM images of the various electrode materials: (a) SWCNT-NCMH (30:70); (b) SWCNT-NCMH (50:50). (c) The specific capacities at various current densities (1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 50 A g−1). (d) Ragone plots. (e) Capacity degradation after folding at a current density of 20 A g−1.154 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustration of the approach used for the synthesis of LDHs/HCMSs. SEM images of (g) as-prepared bare carbon spheres and (h) LDHs/HCMSs. (i) Elemental mapping of C, O, Al, Mg, and Pb of Pb(II)-laden LDHs/HCMSs. The corresponding TEM images of (j) bare carbon spheres and (k) LDHs/HCMSs.155 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (l) Illustration of the fabrication process of CCO/CNM-2. (m) GCD curves of CCO/CNM-1, CCO/CNM-2, and CCO/CNM-3 electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1. (n) Cycling stability of CCO/CNM-1, CCO/CNM-2, and CCO/CNM-3 electrodes during 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1. (o) Ragone plot of the assembled CCO/CNM-2//AC ASC. (p) Cyclic performance of CCO/CNM-2//AC ASC after 10000 cycles at 6 A g−1.162 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

NiCoFe2-LDHs/NF//Fe2O3/GO	Electrodeposition	3 M KOH	1.0–1.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)	252 F g−1 (1A g−1)	82.5% (5000, 10 A g−1)	101 Wh Kg−1	91.5 KW kg−1	
167

T2-NCA//AC ASCs	Hydrothermal method	6 M KOH	−1–0 V (vs. SCE)	269.1 F g−1 (1A g−1)	86.02% (2000, 10 A g−1)	89.79 W h kg−1	9301 W kg−1	
168

NiCo2Al0.5-LDHs//AC ASC	Hydrothermal	3 M KOH	0–1.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	109 F g−1 (1A g−1)	91.7% (6000, 5 A g−1)	39 W h kg−1	8291 W kg−1	
69

Ni1Co2Al1-LDH//AC	One-step hydrothermal method	1 M KOH	0–3.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	633 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	93% (5000, 10 A g−1)	126.0 W h kg−1	12000 W kg−1	
33

Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC	Chemistry bath deposition-hydrothermal	6 M KOH	0–1.5 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	95.3 mA hg−1 (1 A g−1)	96.1% (10000, 20 A g−1)	71.48 W h kg−1	750 W kg−1	
149

CNMV@NF//V2C@NF	Doping-electrostatic synergistic assembly strategy	6 M KOH	0–1.6 V (vs. SCE)	112F g−1 (2 A g−1)	145.6% (3000, 2 A g−1)	30.16 W h kg−1	700 W kg−1	
110

rGO@NiCoAl-LDHs//AC	Dissolved and reassembled strategy	2 M KOH	−0.2–0.5 V (vs. SCE)	214.8 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	92.0% (4000, 10 A g−1)	91.4 W h kg−1	8716 W kg−1	
176

ZnNiFe-LDH@Cu(OH)2/CF//AC	Hydrothermal	6 M KOH	0–1 V	88F g−1 (0.4 A g−1)	83.4% (5000, 5 A g−1)	44 W h kg−1	720 W kg−1	
50

NiMnCr-LDHs@CS/NF//FeOOH/NF	Hydrothermal	6 M KOH	0–1.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)	167.4 C g−1 1.5 A g−1	83% (10000 5 A g−1)	48 W h kg−1	402.7 W kg−1	
79

Ni1Co2Al-LDHs@CC//AC	Hydrothermal	3 M KOH	0–1.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	—	90.98% (12000, —)	0.102 mW h cm−2	0.75 mW cm−2	
178

CNTs/CoNiFe-LDHs//AC	One-step hydrothermal	6 M KOH	0–1.5 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	96.1 F g−1 1 A g−1	85.0% (3000, 15 A g−1)	29.9 W h kg−1	750.5 W kg−1	
179

NCZ-LDH-100@PANI//AC ASC	Electrodeposition	3 M KOH	0–1.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	104.6 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	90% (30000 5 A g−1)	37.2 W h kg−1	7140 W kg−1	
180

Ag NPs@NCM LDH MFs@NSs//NF	
In situ grown	2 M KOH	0–1.55 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)	1752.2 mF cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)	108.5% (15000 40 mA cm−2)	0.569 mW h cm−2	3.82 mW cm−2	
68


 	Fig. 10  (a) Charge and discharge curves of NCA samples at different current densities. (b) Cyclic stability of NC, NA, CA, and NCA samples at 10 A g−1 current density. (c) Cycling performance of the ASC device at a current density of 10 A g−1. (d) Ragone plot of energy and power density of the ASC device at various charge densities.168 Copyright 2020 Springer. (e) Specific capacitance at various current densities for NiCoAl-sphere and NiCoAl-sheet electrodes. (f) Schematic illustration of a fabricated device based on Ni1Co2Al1-LDHs microspheres. (g) Ragone plots of the device in comparison with reference samples. (h) Cycling stability of the device at a current density of 10 A g−1 (inset: GV results of the first and last 5 cycles).33 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (i) Schematic illustration of an ASC device with an Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF cathode and Fe2O3@C/CC anode. (j) CV curves of the Fe2O3@C/CC and Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF electrodes at 20 mV s−1 in a three-electrode system. (k) CV curves of Ni3Mn1Co @Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs measured at different potential windows. (l) CV curves of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs at different scanning speeds. (m) GCD curves of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs measured at different potential windows. (n) GCD curves of Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs at different current densities. (o) Cycling properties of the ASC device (at 20 A g−1). (p) A comparison of the energy density of the Ni3Mn1Co@Co9S8-QDs/NF//Fe2O3@C/CC ASCs with those previously reported for MOFs, LDHs and Co sulfide materials.149 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram for the step-wise fabrication of origami and layered-shaped heterostructured core–shell nanorods of ZnNiFe-LDHs@Cu(OH)2/CF. (b) ZnNiFe-LDHs@Cu(OH)2/CF origami and layered-shaped nanorod arrays at different angles and magnifications. (c) GCD curves of diverse current densities. (d) A comparison with some relative transition-metal-material-based electrodes reported recently. (e) Cycling properties of the assembled capacitor. The inset shows the CV curves for the 1st and 5000th cycles measured at 50 mV s−1.50 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustration of the preparation steps of NCZ-LDHs@PAN. (g) Ragone plot of the ASC and other reported hybrid devices for comparison and (h) the cycling performance of the NCZ-LDH-100@PANI//AC ASC.180 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (i) Areal capacitance values of the HSC. (j) Ragone plot results of the HSC. (k) Areal capacity values and (l) cycling stability results of Ag@NCM LDHs MFs@NSs/NF electrode. The inset in (l) shows the EIS plots of the Ag@NCM LDHs MFs@NSs/NF electrode before and after the cycling test.68 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

Zn–Al–Cu-LDHs	Co-precipitation	ZIBs	3 M KCl	−1.105 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)	—	—	980 W kg−1	
66

CoNiMn-LDHs/V2CTx	Doping-electrostatic synergistic assembly strategy	ZIBs	—	0.9–1.9 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn)	170 mA h g−1 (600)	368.7 W h Kg−1	2056 W Kg−1	
110

Ni2V1−xAlx–Cl-LDH	Hydrothermal	CIBs	—	1.2–3 V	113.8 mA h g−1 (1000)	—	—	
75

ZnNiMn-LDH	Co-precipitation	ZNBs	6 M KOH	0–0.6 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	180 mA h g−1 (1000)	—	—	
77

Zn–Al–La-LDHs	Hydrothermal	ZNBs	6 M KOH	−1.9 V to −0.8 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	357.34 mA h g−1 (150)	—	—	
188

NCA-LDH/C	Hydrothermal	NNBs	5 M NaOH	0–0.8 V (vs. Hg/HgO)	835 mA h g−1 (1500)	1085 W h kg−1	—	
189

NiFeRu-LDH	Hydrothermal	LOBs	—	—	3085 mA h g−1 (46)	—	—	
76

CoNiFe-LDH/RuO2.1	Anion exchange/exfoliation	LOBs	1 M KOH	1.2–1.8 V(vs. RHE)	—	—	—	
190

NiCoFe-LDH/Ti3C2 MXene/NCNT	Stiring/hydrothermal	ZABs	6 M KOH	−0.1–1.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)	—	843 W h kg−1	63 mW cm−2	
45


 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of a CNMV hybrid. (b) Cycling performance at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 of NMV and CNMV electrodes. (c) Long-term cycling performance at 2 A g−1. (d) Ragone plot of aqueous ZIBs.110 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e) Rechargeable Na/Ni battery schematic of a rechargeable aqueous Na/Ni cell. (f) Graphical illustration of the hierarchical NCA-LDH cathode on a carbon microfiber. (g) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the Na/Ni battery at a rate of 1000 mA g−1 in 1 M NaOH. (h) Cycle stability of the Na/Ni battery at a current rate of 1000 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte.189 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Graphic sketch of the Zn–air battery structure. (j) Galvanostatic discharge plots, (k) discharge polarization and power density, and (l) galvanostatic charge and discharge cycling plots of NiCoFeLDHs/MXene/NCNT and Pt/C and IrO2 based Zn–air batteries at j = 10 mA cm−2.45 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Mechanistic study (a–d). In situ FTIR for 12CO32−-CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 (a) and 13CO32−-CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 (b) transformation under Ar + light and air + dark conditions. In situ FTIR for 13CO32− and 5-HMF conversion on the surface of CuCoAl-LDHs-E-60 under Ar + light and air + dark conditions (c). 1800–900 cm−1 region for the above process (d).196 Copyright 2018, Springer. In situ DRIFTS spectra of (e) LFC, (f) LFC-ZnMgAl-LDHs, and (g) LFC-LaZnMgAl-LDH-4 with increasing temperature.197 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. In situ DRIFTS spectra of NO adsorption (h) and oxidization processes under UV light illumination (i) over ZnCr-LDHs and ZnCuCr-LDHs samples. (j and k) In situ DRIFTS spectra of NO photo-oxidization process under UV light illumination over the ZnCuCr-LDHs samples.199 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. In situ Raman monitoring of the catalyst evolution and density functional theory calculations. (l and m) In situ Raman spectra collected for h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs, shown as a function of potential, during HER and OER, respectively. (n) Operando Raman spectra of p-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs (at 1.45 V) and h-Co0.34Fe0.33Ni0.33-LDHs (at 1.4 V) as a function of reaction time.113 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
