Chemical vapor deposition of a PbSe/CdS/ nitrogen -doped TiO 2  nanorod array photoelectrode and its band-edge level structure   - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NJ40509A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NJ40509A
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 2302-2307Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsChemical vapor deposition of a PbSe/CdS/nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanorod array photoelectrode and its band-edge level structure†

        
          
            Qi 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianghui 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Aiqing 
            Zhang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yihua 
            Gao
          
        
      *a
aWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Physics, College of Optoelectronic Science & Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, People's Republic of China. E-mail: gaoyihua@hust.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Catalysis and Materials Science of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission-Ministry of Education, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, People's Republic of China
Received 
       (in Montpellier, France) 
      17th June 2012
    , Accepted 21st August 2012First published on 21st August 2012AbstractLead selenide (PbSe) is a candidate for harvesting infrared (IR) light, due to its narrow and controllable optical band gap which can be tuned by its grain size. However, there is still a challenge to assemble a photoelectrode with different cations of selenide and sulphide sensitizers, such as PbSe and cadmium sulphide (CdS), onto the same skeleton by a wet chemical route. In this work, we provide a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method to assemble a PbSe and CdS nanoparticle (NP) co-sensitized nitrogen (N)-doped TiO2 nanorod array (PbSe/CdS/NT) photoelectrode. This hybrid photoanode showed an increased photoelectrochemical (PEC) performance under simulated sun light irradiation. Electrochemical analysis revealed that a presumable cascade structure of band-edge levels, in this photoanode, could be attributed to the enhanced photocurrent. In addition, the carrier multiplication in PbSe NPs via impact ionization, was also suggested to contribute to both the photo and dark current.
1 Introduction
Solar energy is an important source of clean, renewable energy, which can be used to limit fossil fuel usage and environmental concerns. The annual energy of solar irradiation on Earth is large enough to exceed the world's yearly energy consumption. So, solar energy conversion is one of the most promising ways to resolve the energy crisis.1–3 Nowadays, a drawback of solar energy conversion device designs is the focus on absorbing light in the visible part of solar spectrum, leaving a considerable amount of infrared (IR) solar energy unused (the sun's power spectrum: 5% ultraviolet, 43% visible, 52% IR). For utilizing IR solar energy, a promising approach is by employing narrow band gap semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs) to sensitize the solar energy conversion device into the IR region.
Lead selenide (PbSe) was chosen as the sensitizer for absorbing near infrared (near-IR) light due to its narrow and controlled adjustment of band gap (∼0.27 eV in bulk) by tuning the average NP diameter. In addition, in PbSe NPs, the carrier multiplication has been demonstrated to be highly efficient and extremely fast via impact ionization, where more than one additional exciton will form by absorbing a high energy photon.2,4–7 As a result, PbSe NPs have the potential to provide a significantly enhanced solar energy conversion efficiency, in the form of increased photocurrent. Furthermore, by combining PbSe and CdS (∼2.45 eV in bulk) NPs, to sensitize a wide bandgap semiconductor, such as TiO2, you will get a panchromatic light harvesting photoelectrode.
Compared with many familiar routes of fabricating CdS sensitized TiO2, the widely used method in the literature, is the solution processing assembly of a PbSe colloidal quantum dot (QD) sensitized photoelectrode, using organic long chain molecules as a surfactant. There are two drawbacks that must be overcome: (i) so far, it is still a challenge to deposit different kinds of semiconductor NPs onto the same skeleton sequentially by a wet chemical route. For example, if we wanted to deposit a second layer of PbSe NPs after the first layer of CdS NPs on the same TiO2 NRs in solution processing, we must endeavour to avoid the corrosion to CdS in the solution used for synthetizing and/or depositing PbSe NPs. (ii) In solution processing, the surfactant does a good job of controlling the size of colloidal QDs to the expected dimensions. However, it must be shortened or removed in devices for its electrical isolation will hinder the transfer of photo carriers across the grain boundary.1,7,8 This step would also harm the assembled sensitizer particles in our devices. The CVD methodology has none of the problems mentioned above.
In this work, we provide a strategy to obtain CVD synthesized PbSe NPs and an assembled PbSe and CdS co-sensitized N-doped TiO2 nanorod array (PbSe/CdS/NT) hybrid photoelectrode. It showed an enhanced PEC performance compared to that of PbSe or CdS single sensitized TiO2 nanorod array electrodes. Electrochemical analysis revealed that the PbSe/CdS/NT photoelectrode possesses a cascade structure of band-edge levels presumably.9 In addition, the carrier multiplication, via impact ionization in PbSe NPs, was also suggested to contribute to the current density, both under light illumination and dark circumstances. All these, and panchromatic light harvesting, could be attributed to the PEC performance enhancement.
2 Experimental
2.1 Hydrothermal synthesis of TiO2 nanorod (NR) arrays on a fluorine-doped SnO2 conducting glass (FTO) substrate
All reagents were of analytical grade and used without any further purification. TiO2 NR arrays (indexed as T sample) were synthesized by a hydrothermal method15 with slight modification. FTO was ultrasonically cleaned in acetone, isopropyl alcohol, and deionized (DI) water sequentially and dried in a nitrogen stream, and was then placed vertically in a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave (100 mL) containing an aqueous mixture of 0.5 mL of TiCl4, 40 mL of hydrochloric acid (35–38%), and 40 mL of DI water. The autoclave was tightly sealed and heated at 180 °C for 4 h, for the formation of NRs with identical lengths. After natural cooling, the T samples were taken out and rinsed with copious amounts of ethanol and DI water, and were then dried in a vacuum drying oven followed by annealing in air at 450 °C for 30 min. The as-prepared T sample is semitransparent with a white color (Fig. 1a) and has a uniform morphology all over the FTO substrate. The NRs have a diameter of tens of nanometers and a square cross section of about 3 μm in length, with larger diameters at the rod bottom which taper toward the tip. The NRs are approximately perpendicular to the FTO surface, with a relatively large interspace between them, which will be favorable for sensitizer deposition.
 Fig. 1  (a) Digital pictures of N-doped TiO2 and (b) TiO2 samples (2.5 cm × 2.5 cm). (c) SEM image of N-doped TiO2, showing a uniform morphology at a large scale. (d) High magnification and (e) lateral images. 
2.2 CVD synthesis of the N-doped TiO2 NR array film (indexed as NT) sample
N-doping into TiO2 lattice was chosen to extend the light absorption onset of TiO2 from the UV to visible light region, and to offer possible PEC activity under visible light irradiation, though an ongoing debate still exists on the mechanism of visible light shifting of the N-doped TiO2 absorption edge.10–14
N-doped TiO2 NR arrays were prepared by annealing the T sample at 450 °C for 30 min in a NH3/Ar (100/50 standard-state cubic centimeter per minute, i.e., sccm) mixed gas flow, under a pressure of about 700 Pascal (Pa), in a two-zone horizontal tube furnace (Fig. 2). In brief, the T sample was placed in hot center 2. The furnace was initially flushed with NH3/Ar mixed gas several times, in order to remove any residual oxygen, and was then heated up slowly (5 °C min−1) to 450 °C to avoid damage to the electrical conductivity of the FTO substrate. The mixed gases were pre-heated at 950 °C in hot center 1, so that NH3 decomposition and the reducing atmosphere will facilitate the doping of nitrogen due to the formation of oxygen vacancies. The two zones of the furnace underwent the same temperature procedure. The color of the as-prepared N-modified TiO2 NR arrays was dark yellow (Fig. 1b), indicating incorporation of the N atoms. Furthermore, N-doping did not obviously damage the morphology of the TiO2 NR arrays.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the two-zone horizontal tube furnace and the position of substrates. 
2.3 CVD synthesis of the CdS NP sensitized TiO2 NR array (indexed as CdS/T) sample
In a typical procedure, CdS powders were loaded uniformly in a long fused silica boat, which was placed in hot center 2 of the tube furnace (Fig. 2). Substrate (T/NT) was placed at the outlet, about 19 cm away from the raw materials. Ultrapure N2 was used as the carrier gas. Firstly, the furnace was flushed with a vast volume of N2 several times to remove any residual oxygen, and was then heated up to 950 °C rapidly (40 °C min−1) and held for 5 min. The carrier gas flow (100 sccm) was pre-heated at the same temperature as hot center 1, to avoid the desublimation of the CdS molecules to large sized grains in the cool carrier gas flow before they arrived at the substrate site. The two zones of the furnace underwent the same temperature procedure also, under a pressure of about 500 Pa, followed by natural cooling.
2.4 CVD assembly of the PbSe NP sensitized TiO2 (indexed as PbSe/T) and PbSe/CdS/NT electrodes
The precursors used in the CVD synthesis of the PbSe NPs were a stoichiometric mixture of PbI2 and Se powders. In short, the raw material powders were ground thoroughly and uniformly put in a long fused silica boat. Then the boat was placed into hot center 2 of the furnace (Fig. 2). Hydrogen (10% argon in volume) was taken as the reducing and carrier gas (100 sccm) and was pre-heated in hot zone 1. The two hot zones underwent the same temperature procedure for the purpose of acquiring high activity reaction gas molecules. The furnace was initially flushed with a mass of H2 several times. Source materials were heated up to 950 °C rapidly (40 °C min−1) for acquiring the mixed vapor molecules of PbI2 and Se at the same time, and was held at this temperature for several minutes, under a pressure of about 500 Pa. The substrate was placed at the outlet, with a distance of about 22 cm from precursor (Fig. 2). PbSe/CdS/NT was fabricated following the same procedure mentioned above, but taking CdS/NT as the substrate.
As mentioned above, in the CVD assembly procedure, the as-prepared sensitizer NPs were deposited directly onto the surface of the TiO2 NRs. Direct physical contact heterojunctions were formed at all interfaces of the electrodes, which would be helpful for photoinduced charge transfers across the junctions. Note that the substrates (i.e., the T sample, which used in CVD steps in each experiment cycle) were cut from the same large T sample (2.5 × 5 cm2) to obtain NRs with identical lengths and morphologies.
2.5 Characterization
The effectiveness of the CVD synthesis of the PbSe NPs, and the assembly of the hybrid photoelectrodes were identified by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The morphology and size of the NPs of the electrodes were surveyed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The powder XRD was surveyed by a Bruker D8 Advance XRD system (Cu K1 radiation at 40 kV and 30 mA, Germany). A Sirion 200 (FEI, Holand) field emission scanning electron microscope (FSEM) was used to characterize morphology of samples, while EDX was used to study the chemical composition. XPS was surveyed by a VG Multilab 2000 (VG, America) using monochromatic Al Kα radiation and an energy pass of 25 eV. The near-IR spectrum was surveyed by a Thermo/Nicolet Nexus FT-IR Series Spectrometer system.
PEC characterization was surveyed in a three-electrode electrochemical quartz cell with a flat incident-light window, with a Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) reference electrode, and a platinum wire counter electrode. The working electrode, with an exposed area of 0.5 × 0.5 cm2, was illuminated from the front side. Electrical contact was taken from the FTO layer of samples by silver epoxy and a copper wire. The electrolyte was a mixture of 0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3 aqueous solution, where Na2S in solution acts as a hole scavenger and is oxidized to S22−, to prevent the photocorrosion of the metal selenide. Na2SO3 was added to reduce disulphides back to sulphide, to ensure efficient hydrogen production at the cathode.9,13,19 The light source was a solar-simulated light source (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2, Newport). Current density/voltage (I/V) measurements were surveyed by a three-electrode computer-controlled electrochemical workstation (Autolab PGSTAT 302N, Metrohm).
3 Results and discussions
Using the CVD method we deposited an appropriate amount of PbSe and CdS NPs in sequence onto the N doped TiO2 NR array and assembled a PbSe/CdS/NT hybrid photoelectrode. The outer margin of the sample was cut off and the relatively homogeneous central part was used to assemble the PEC cells.
3.1 Morphology

Fig. 3 shows the morphology of the CdS/T and PbSe/CdS/NT electrode respectively. After deposition of the CdS and PbSe NPs, the morphology of the TiO2 NR array was not damaged, i.e. conformal deposition. Which is one of the merits of the CVD strategy for assembling the heterostructure NP/NR array, compared to that of solution processing. Furthermore, the interspace between the NRs has not been filled after NP deposition, maintaining the cross section of light harvesting pristine NR arrays. The composite NPs of PbSe/CdS grew to a size of about 20 nm (Fig. 3d), with the PbSe NPs having a relative larger grain size (Fig. 4b and d) compared to those of the CdS NPs (Fig. 3c and 4a). In addition, the EDX spectra (Fig. 3a and b, inset) indicate the deposition of CdS and PbSe/CdS NPs on the surface of the TiO2 NRs.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of the as-prepared (a) CdS/T and (b) PbSe/CdS/NT samples and the corresponding EDX data (insets). High magnification SEM images of (c) CdS/T and (d) PbSe/CdS/NT, showing a conformal coating layer of CdS and PbSe/CdS NPs respectively. 
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM images of a single rod of CdS/T with CdS NPs, with a diameter of 4–8 nm, and (b) PbSe NPs with sizes of about 20 nm. (c) A cluster of PbSe/T and (d) its local high magnification image [red circle of (c)]. 

Fig. 4a shows that the CdS NPs are 4–8 nm in diameter, and the PbSe NPs with a size of about 20 nm (Fig. 4b), loaded on the surface of top half of the TiO2 NRs (Fig. 4c and d). Note that if the PbSe NPs attached to TiO2 directly at such a large particle sizes, then the conduction band-edge, of the PbSe NPs would be located below that of TiO2 (Fig. 9b).8 This will hinder the efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons from PbSe NP conduction bands to that of TiO2, and would then influence the electrode's performance in the solar energy conversion process. On the basis of the surface analysis results by SEM and TEM, we conclude that the CdS/T and PbSe/CdS/NT hetero-nanostructures could be well fabricated by a series of CVD step processes.
3.2 Phase structures

Fig. 5a shows the XRD data of T, CdS/T, and PbSe/T samples, and the referenced FTO glass. To obtain high intensity and clearly distinguished XRD data, more CdS and PbSe NPs were deposited on the T substrate for XRD measurement (Fig. 5b and c). The XRD data of NT was not listed, as no obvious difference was observed compared to the T sample, indicating that there was no damage to the crystal structure of the TiO2 NRs after the N-doping step. The TiO2 NRs can be indexed as the rutile phase (PDF2 code: 01-086-0147). The presence of the diffraction peaks (101), (112) and (002) indicates that the as-grown NRs are not highly oriented (Fig. 1e), which might improve the quantity of the deposited sensitizers. CdS on the surface of the TiO2 NRs has a hexagonal phase (PDF2 code: 01-077-2306). Whereas, the PbSe crystals can be indexed as the cubic clausthalite phase (PDF2 code: 01-089-7105), and its XRD data agreed well with the standard reference diffraction peaks listed in the top panel of Fig. 5a. The XRD data indicates the effectiveness of synthesis of PbSe and the deposition of CdS and PbSe onto the surface of TiO2 by the CVD strategy.
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD data of TiO2 (on FTO glass), CdS/T and PbSe/T samples with FTO glass as a reference [reference peaks of PbSe in Powder Diffraction File-2 (PDF2) were listed in the top panel]. The digital pictures of (b) PbSe/TiO2 and (c) CdS/TiO2 with a thick layer of NPs on the TiO2 NR array for high XRD intensity. 
3.3 XPS Analysis
The element chemical state and quantity of doped N was investigated by XPS to determine the effectiveness of N-doping into the TiO2 lattice. Fig. 6a shows the XPS spectrum of the CdS/NT sample. Fig. 6b shows the high-resolution core level spectrum of N 1s, at the binding energy of 395.6 eV, which is characteristic of N3− that corresponds to TiN.10–14 The binding energy of N 1s starts at ∼397.6 eV and ends at ∼391.3 eV. Quantified by the area of the N 1s peak, the content of substitutional N in the TiO2 lattice is about 6.8 at.%. As the heat-treatment temperature increased, the N-doping level increased, however, the trouble is the sharp decrease of conductivity of FTO layer. The Cd 3d core level XPS (Fig. 6c) has two characteristic peaks, one at 405.3 eV (3d5/2) and the other at 412.1 eV (3d3/2) binding energy. The S 2p core level spectrum at 161.95 eV is indexed as sulfide (Fig. 6d). The ratio of Cd and S atoms is about 1. All these XPS results identified the deposition of CdS NPs on the surface of the NRs.16
 Fig. 6  (a) XPS spectrum of CdS/NT and (b) N 1s, (c) Cd 3d and (d) S 2p core level energy spectra. 

Fig. 7a shows the XPS spectrum of PbSe/T. Peaks at 137.6 and 142.5 eV correspond to the Pb 4f core level of PbSe (Fig. 7b), while the peak at 53.9 eV corresponds to the Se 3d core level of PbSe (Fig. 7c). No impurity peaks were observed, such as the Pb 4f of PbO (138.85 eV), or Se 3d of SeO2 (59.8 eV).17,18 The XPS data, up to now, further confirmed the synthesis of the PbSe NPs and deposition of the CdS and PbSe NPs onto the surface of the N-doped TiO2 NRs. With the results mentioned above, we concluded the effectiveness of the synthesis of PbSe NPs, and the assembly of the PbSe/CdS/NT composite photoelectrode, with direct physical contact heterojunctions, by this CVD strategy. The instability of the PbSe NP sensitized electrodes is a problem that we are working on. The PbSe NPs turned out to be oxidized gradually, both Pb and Se elements, when these electrodes were exposed to a moist atmosphere or were in contact with electrolyte directly (ESI†).
 Fig. 7  (a) XPS spectrum of PbSe/T, and (b) the Pb 4f and (c) Se 3d core level energy spectra. 
3.4 PEC Activity
The PEC performance of the five photoelectrodes (Fig. 8) was investigated by a computer-controlled electrochemical workstation under the illumination of simulated sun light.
 Fig. 8  Current density curves of the five photoelectrodes versus applied potential voltage, measured under light (a) and dark conditions (b). The dark current density curve of TiO2 was covered by that of NT (in red) in panel (b). 

3.4.1 PEC Properties. 

Fig. 8 shows the current density versus applied potential voltage (I/V) curves of the five photoelectrodes measured under light illumination (Fig. 8a) and dark conditions (Fig. 8b). The photocurrent of the NT electrode shows only a slightly enhanced density compared to that of the T electrode, which corresponds with the results given in the literature.9 The reason of it is that the band gap structure of NT did not change much compared to that of the pristine T electrode, for a small amount of doped N-atoms (Fig. 6b). For the QD-sensitized electrodes, the PEC performance is demonstrated a strong dependence on the band-gap level structure in the respective electrodes.9,20 The photocurrent density of the PbSe/T electrode is similar to that of NT, because the photogenerated electrons could not transfer from the conduction band of PbSe to that of TiO2 efficiently when the size of the PbSe NPs is large (about 20 nm) (Fig. 9b, see details below). However, the construction of cascade band-edge structures in the CdS/T electrode (Fig. 9a) is responsible for the enhanced PEC performance compared to that of the T electrode. The PbSe/CdS/NT electrode shows a higher photocurrent than that of the CdS/T photoelectrode, which is suggested to be due to the presumable formation of a stepwise band-edge structure. So, we investigated the type of structure of the band-edge levels of the PbSe/CdS/NT electrode to interpret its increased photo current response. The method we used is the electrochemical analysis methodology provided by Lee et al. under the same electrolyte circumstances.9
 Fig. 9  Scheme illustration of relative Fermi levels and the band-edge positions of the CdS/T, PbSe/T and PbSe/CdS/NT photoelectrodes after Fermi level alignment in the electrolyte. The Fermi levels (EF) indicated in (a), (b) and (c) are OCPs (vs. Ag/AgCl) measured in the dark. 

3.4.2 Structure of the band-edge levels in the electrodes
As mentioned above, for direct heterojunction between the PbSe NPs and TiO2, according to both the calculated and empirical energy diagram of electronic states of the PbSe NPs, the size of the PbSe NPs should be less than 5 nm to permit the transfer of photogenerated electrons from PbSe to TiO2.2,6,8 However, to use more IR solar energy, we should grow PbSe NPs with relatively larger grain size for a narrow band gap. To resolve the problem of photogenerated electron transfer across the conduction band of the composite materials, we introduced an intermediate layer of CdS NPs between PbSe and TiO2, together with N-doping into the TiO2 lattice, to coordinate the structure of band-dge levels of the hybrid electrode. Furthermore, such a PbSe/CdS/NT photoelectrode is also a panchromatic photoanode which harvests solar energy from the ultraviolet (UV), visible light, and near-IR region (ESI†).
According to the work of Lee et al.,9 we could determinate the type of band-edge structure possessed by a photoelectrode by measuring the current density under dark conditions in a given electrolyte with a positive bias. When a photoelectrode is sunk into the electrolyte, which contains a redox couple, the Fermi level shifts to be identical after thermodynamic equilibrium between the electrodes and electrolyte. The Fermi level alignment causes a shift of band-edges simultaneously, and results in a band bending and the formation of depletion region on each side of junction (Fig. 9). Now, the Fermi level could be qualitatively evaluated by the open circuit potential voltage measured in the dark (dark-OCP),9,20i.e., the values of the Fermi levels of the electrodes are equivalent to the dark-OCP data respectively.

Fig. 9 shows the dark-OCP data of the CdS/T, PbSe/T and PbSe/CdS/NT photoelectrodes, which were recorded after 150 seconds, for achieving thermodynamic equilibrium in the electrolyte. Fig. 8b shows the I/V curves of the five photoelectrodes measured in the dark. According to the trend of each curve, at the positive bias (not shown here), the PbSe/CdS/NT electrode shows the highest dark current response, indicating its superior ability for electron transfer and transport. Because, for n-type semiconductors, the charge transfer under dark conditions is dominated by the majority carrier, i.e. electrons, through the conduction band. These results suggest the presumable formation of a stepwise structure of band-edge levels.9 Here, the PbSe/T electrode becomes an exception to this band-edge level structure determination method, for it shows an enhanced dark current density compared to that of the CdS/T electrode. Obviously, the PbSe/T electrode possesses a type of band-edge level structure that shows an inferior photocurrent to that of the CdS/T electrode. This phenomenon indicates an existing factor that greatly influenced the PEC performance. Such an exception was suggested to be attributed to the formation of excited excitons in the PbSe NPs, which are induced by impact ionization driven by an applied potential. Impact ionization occurs when kinetic energy of an electron equals the band-gap of the semiconductor, which is accelerated by an applied bias.21 This kind of current density enhancement, coming from excited excitons, might also exist in the PbSe/CdS/NT electrode and contribute to the current density, both under light irradiation and dark conditions.
4 Conclusions
In summary, we have introduced a new CVD method to assemble a PbSe and CdS NP co-sensitized N-doped TiO2 nanorod array (PbSe/CdS/NT) photoelectrode. Characteristic data confirmed the synthesis and deposition of sensitizer NPs onto the surface of the NRs, and the morphology characteristic results revealed the conformal coating of sensitizer' s layer. The near-IR absorbance spectrum shows the enhanced optical absorption of PbSe NPs in the range of about 1500–2500 nm (ESI†). This hybrid PbSe/CdS/NT photoelectrode showed an enhanced PEC performance compared to that of PbSe or CdS single sensitized TiO2 NR array photoanodes. In addition, electrochemical analysis suggested that a presumable cascade structure of band-edge levels in this photoanode could be attributed to the enhanced PEC performance. Carrier multiplication in the PbSe NPs, via impact ionization, may also contribute to both the photo and dark current density.
There are still some drawbacks to our CVD method that we are working on, (i) the instability of the PbSe sensitized electrodes, i.e. the photo corrosion of PbSe NPs (ESI†). This problem could be alleviated by depositing inert metal oxide layers.22 (ii) Grain size control of the sensitizer NPs. By the wet chemical route, the size of NPs can be well tuned by a surfactant. Here, we control size the of NPs by tuning the partial pressure of the carrier and reaction gases, reaction time and the quantity of the precursors. (iii) A big challenge of the CVD method is the uniformity of NP deposition onto a large scale substrate compared to that of the solution-processes.23
This work was supported by the 973 Program (2011CB933300), NNSF (11074082), NCET (080230) of China.
Notes and references
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cui, J. Xu, T. Zhu, G. Paradee, S. Ashok and M. Gerhold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183111 CrossRef .
Z. Q. Yan, S. Y. Guang, X. Y. Su and H. Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8894–8900 CAS .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Kuo, M. S. Su, C. S. Ku, S. M. Wang, H. Y. Lee and K. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11605–11612 RSC .
Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, J. Puthussery, S. Gaik, R. Ihly, H. W. Hillhouse and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1960–1969 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Acharya, T. R. Alabi, N. Schmall, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, M. Kirsanova, A. Nemchinov, E. Khon and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19531–19535 CAS .
Y. L. Lee, C. F. Chi and S. Y. Liau, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 922–927 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. N. Tafen, J. P. Lewis, Z. L. Hong, A. Manivannan, M. J. Zhi, M. Li and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12290–12297 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731–737 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hoang, S. W. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hensel, G. M. Wang, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 478–483 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Kim, S. Park, K. J. Kim and B. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18618–18624 CAS .
A. Kumar, A. R. Madaria and C. W. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7787–7792 CAS .
Y. X. Yin, Z. G. Jin and F. Hou, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 495608 CrossRef .
M. Law, J. M. Luther, Q. Song, B. K. Hughes, C. L. Perkins and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5974–5985 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Wang, Y. Geng, Y. T. Qian, M. R. Ji and X. M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1479–1481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra, P. P. Das and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6784–6791 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Joo, T. Kim, K. H. Kim, K. Rhie, J. Hong and K. H. Shin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 253505 CrossRef .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
M. Graetzel, R. A. J. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Near-IR absorption spectra, stability test of photoelectrode. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nj40509aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Digital pictures of N-doped TiO2 and (b) TiO2 samples (2.5 cm × 2.5 cm). (c) SEM image of N-doped TiO2, showing a uniform morphology at a large scale. (d) High magnification and (e) lateral images.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the two-zone horizontal tube furnace and the position of substrates.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of the as-prepared (a) CdS/T and (b) PbSe/CdS/NT samples and the corresponding EDX data (insets). High magnification SEM images of (c) CdS/T and (d) PbSe/CdS/NT, showing a conformal coating layer of CdS and PbSe/CdS NPs respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM images of a single rod of CdS/T with CdS NPs, with a diameter of 4–8 nm, and (b) PbSe NPs with sizes of about 20 nm. (c) A cluster of PbSe/T and (d) its local high magnification image [red circle of (c)].	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD data of TiO2 (on FTO glass), CdS/T and PbSe/T samples with FTO glass as a reference [reference peaks of PbSe in Powder Diffraction File-2 (PDF2) were listed in the top panel]. The digital pictures of (b) PbSe/TiO2 and (c) CdS/TiO2 with a thick layer of NPs on the TiO2 NR array for high XRD intensity.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) XPS spectrum of CdS/NT and (b) N 1s, (c) Cd 3d and (d) S 2p core level energy spectra.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XPS spectrum of PbSe/T, and (b) the Pb 4f and (c) Se 3d core level energy spectra.	 

 	Fig. 8  Current density curves of the five photoelectrodes versus applied potential voltage, measured under light (a) and dark conditions (b). The dark current density curve of TiO2 was covered by that of NT (in red) in panel (b).	 

 	Fig. 9  Scheme illustration of relative Fermi levels and the band-edge positions of the CdS/T, PbSe/T and PbSe/CdS/NT photoelectrodes after Fermi level alignment in the electrolyte. The Fermi levels (EF) indicated in (a), (b) and (c) are OCPs (vs. Ag/AgCl) measured in the dark.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Near-IR absorption spectra, stability test of photoelectrode. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nj40509a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2012
