Fabrication and application of complex microcapsules: a review  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SM01634A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SM01634A
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 570-590Fabrication and application of complex microcapsules: a review

        
          
            Mohamed Gibril 
            Bah†
, 
      
        
          
            Hafiz Muhammad 
            Bilal†
 and 

        
          
            Jingtao 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: wjingtao928@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      12th August 2019
    , Accepted 26th November 2019First published on 27th November 2019AbstractThe development of new functional materials requires cutting-edge technologies for incorporating different functional materials without reducing their functionality. Microencapsulation is a method to encapsulate different functional materials at nano- and micro-scales, which can provide the necessary protection for the encapsulated materials. In this review, microencapsulation is categorized into chemical, physical, physico-chemical and microfluidic methods. The focus of this review is to describe these four categories in detail by elaborating their various microencapsulation methods and mechanisms. This review further discusses the key features and potential applications of each method. Through this review, the readers could be aware of many aspects of this field from the fabrication processes, to the main properties, and to the applications of microcapsules.
Mohamed Gibril Bah
Mohamed Gibril Bah graduated from Njala University in Sierra Leone with a Bachelor of Science with Honors in Environmental Chemistry in 2009. He also obtained his master’ degree in the field of Chemical Engineering from the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology at Tianjin University, China. His research interests include the fabrication of complex microcapsules with keen interest in the new subfield of nano-medicine called biomimicry and renewable energy systems.
Hafiz Muhammad Bilal
Hafiz Muhammad Bilal is currently a PhD student in the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, China; prior to this, he received his MS degree in MS Chemical Engineering from the Institute of Chemical Engineering and Technology, University of the Punjab, Pakistan. His research focuses on the fabrication of complex microparticles assisted by droplet-based microfluidics and continuous oil–water separation using super-hydrophobic materials.
Jingtao Wang
Jingtao Wang received his PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2006. Currently, he is a professor in the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, China. His research fields include the fabrication of soft particles and microcapsules assisted by droplet-based microfluidics, the numerical simulation of the rheological behaviors of droplets and multiple emulsions, and industrial crystallization.
1. Introduction
In the last decade, researchers have become increasingly interested in the study of the fabrication of integrated chemical structures. One of the most successful stories of this process is the construction of hollow compartments which resemble nano- and micro-scale capsules with an aqueous core surrounded by a shell mainly composed of lipids or polymers.1–3
A microcapsule is a small sphere. Its wall is called a shell/coating and the material inside the microcapsule is termed a core/an internal phase. The most important application of microcapsules is to store compounds inside them.4 Furthermore, they could be employed to control the release of the compounds,5 to prevent the core material from environmental influences (like temperature, light, oxygen, and moisture), and to enhance the shell-life of the compounds.4,6 The sizes of microcapsules could vary from nano-meters to microns, and to millimeters.7 Microencapsulation is the process of synthesizing microcapsules in which tiny particles or droplets are embedded inside a heterogeneous or homogenous matrix (the shell) to produce capsules with many convenient features.2
A wide range of shell materials is available for microencapsulation. The choice of shell material determines the physical and chemical features of the capsules. Thus, in order to achieve the desired objective of encapsulation, the selection of the shell material must consider some important factors, such as the product requirements, the environmental conditions, the release characteristics and the compatibility with the microencapsulation method.8 Natural, semi-synthetic or synthetic copolymers could be selected as the shell materials for the fabrication of microcapsules. For example, polyvinyl alcohol, ethyl cellulose, cellulose acetate, and gelatin have been successfully employed as coating materials for encapsulation.8,9
The core material is also critical to the features of the capsules. Liquids and solid particles could be encapsulated to achieve certain specific tasks such as the protection of reactive materials, the safe handling of toxic or noxious materials, and the controlled release of drugs.8
There are various techniques available for microencapsulation, but no encapsulation method is adaptable to all situations.10 The choice of an appropriate microencapsulation technique is mainly affected by the physical and chemical features of the core and shell materials, and the expected application of the product. The techniques could be divided into several categories, including physical, physicochemical, electrostatic and mechanical processes. The chemical methods include in situ and interfacial polymerization methods; the physicochemical methods consist of the coacervation, sol–gel encapsulation, and supercritical CO2-assisted methods; the mechanical processes include spray drying, pan coating, the multiorifice-centrifugal process and rotating fluidized bed granulation.8
Currently, microencapsulation techniques are developing rapidly. Due to the growing significance of microencapsulation in different human activities, these technologies have gained much attention in different fields, such as cosmetics, drug delivery systems, food preservatives, and electronic devices (commercialized E-papers).11 Detailed discussions about the different fabrication techniques, various characteristics, and applications of microcapsules will be given in the following sections.
2. Microcapsule structures

Fig. 1 shows the different morphologies of a microcapsule. Generally, it consists of a shell material and a core material as indicated by the arrows in Fig. 1. Based on their different structures, microcapsules are classified into three categories: a single core, multiple cores, and the matrix type.12
 Fig. 1  Morphologies of microcapsules: (a) a microcapsule with a single core, (b) a microcapsule with multiple cores and (c) a matrix microcapsule.12 

Fig. 2 further illustrates the different structures of a microsphere and a microcapsule. The microcapsule is a spherical particle with core materials (fill materials) and an outer shell; the microsphere is an unfilled particle. However, both terms are used synonymously in this field.
 Fig. 2  Different microparticle structures.13 
The choice of shell material determines the properties of microcapsules or microparticles. Polymers are one class of the most used shell materials in the fabrication of microcapsules. When selecting the appropriate polymer material, many factors should be taken into account. The polymer should be compatible, and unreactive with the core material. It should have the desired shell properties such as flexibility, stability, strength, optical characteristics and appropriate permeability. Normally, hydrophilic polymers, hydrophobic polymers, or a mixture of both could be employed in the encapsulation process.14
Generally, the interior materials of microparticles could be in the form of droplets, solids or dispersions. The composition of core materials could change according to the requirements of the final product. Thus, it provides good flexibility and allows the skillful design of the preferred features of microparticles.
3. Chemical methods to fabricate microcapsules
3.1. 
          In situ polymerization methods
The in situ polymerization technique is simple and preferred for the industrial production of microcapsules. As a chemical method, it has become one of the most important methods for the preparation of microcapsules.15–38 Thus, researchers continue to conduct investigations on microcapsules with high qualities and unique functions. For example, a microcapsule with a core of ammonium polyphosphate and with a shell of glycidyl methacrylate was fabricated via the in situ polymerization method.15,16
The monomer or reactant for polymerization is provided either from the inside or from the outside of the core. A shell or a membrane on the core surface could be formed through polymerization.17 As shown in Fig. 3, the monomers of A and B are dissolved in the continuous phase, and they react with each other to form polymers. At the interface of the core, controlled deposition and precipitation of the polymers occur upon adding precipitants, or upon changing the pH and temperature.18
 Fig. 3  (a) Monomers are dissolved in the continuous phase. (b) Polymer formation. (c) Deposition and precipitation of the polymer at the interface. (d) Microcapsule formation.18 
Arshady and George19 differentiated three types of in situ polymerization by utilizing the solubility of monomers and polymers. First, when a monomer is not soluble in the continuous phase, monomer droplets are produced and suspended. Then, suspension polymerization occurs and results in the production of polymer microcapsules. On the other hand, under another set of conditions, precipitation and polycondensation will occur when the polymer is dissolvable in the dispersion medium instead of the monomer. In the reaction, due to the flocculation and aggregation, the polymer with a low molecular weight could produce particles with large sizes and irregular shapes. Finally, if the continuous phase is a good solvent for the monomer rather than the polymer, dispersion polycondensation will occur. Under such conditions, microcapsules with a narrow size distribution will be produced.19
In in situ polymerization, formaldehyde constituents, urea or melamine is often used to produce microcapsules. Veatch and Burhans21 produced hollow capsules by using the resins of phenol, formaldehyde, and melamine. Soloway22 and Macaulay23 encapsulated carbon black and natural liquid products by employing urea-formaldehyde resins and surfactants.
Shell materials might generate cracks during long-term utilization under the influence of the outside environment. In the beginning, these cracks are small, but their accumulated impact will affect the material hugely and ultimately results in the destruction of the shell.27 Thus, the microcapsule must have sufficient strength in the processing of the host polymer to avoid the damage. To achieve a durable shell-life, capsules must resist the leakage and diffusion of the encapsulated healing agent for a significant time span. A distinctive hardened composite system was achieved when microcapsules were introduced into epoxy resins through the in situ polymerization of urea-formaldehyde. These integrated features can be obtained by encapsulating various healing agents.28 The idea of self-healing is applied where the destruction can be fixed with the material already present within the composition, when the damage is very hard to identify or when field repair is impossible. The self-healing agent is normally encapsulated and embedded in the composite “matrix”. When the microcapsule is ruptured, the self-healing agent is discharged to the cracks to form a cross-linking structure and ultimately restore/repair the composite.29,30
Recently, microcapsules containing healing agents have been employed to develop self-healing polymeric composites.31 White and coworkers31 first reported a self-healing microcapsule to improve the fracture properties of thermosetting polymers. They used dicyclopentadiene as the liquid healing agent which was encapsulated in the poly(urea-formaldehyde) (PUF) capsule. Similarly, in other studies, various polymeric materials and self-healing materials have been successfully applied to achieve the self-healing purpose of microcapsules, such as PUF microcapsules containing epoxy resins, poly(melamine-formaldehyde) microcapsules containing epoxy resins, and polyurethane shell materials. The shell material of PUF microcapsules is hydrophilic since the hydroxyl, amino, and carbonyl groups exist in these capsules. This nature limits the application of the PUF shell material because of the low heat resistance, the poor anti-ageing properties and the big amount of free formaldehyde. The application of poly(melamine-formaldehyde) is also limited due to its high cost. However, these problems could be solved and the performance could be improved for urea-formaldehyde (UF) resins by modifying them using a certain amount of melamine.32,33
As the shell material, melamine-formaldehyde (MF) is utilized in microcapsules to enhance the thermal stability of the microcapsule with a core of decarbomodiphenyl ether (DBDPO). Initially, the melamine-formaldehyde prepolymer was produced and was added into an aqueous solution. Then, DBDPO particles were introduced into the aqueous solution as the core material. Finally, a cross-linked membrane with a high heat-resistance was prepared by acidification and heating.26 The reaction between the melamine and formaldehyde generally consists of two stages. In the first stage, a hydroxymethyl pre-condensate was formed; in the second stage, a cross-linked structure was generated by the condensation of the poly-condensate. The molar ratio of the formaldehyde to melamine has a great impact on the morphology and characteristics of the poly-condensate product. When formaldehyde is available in a huge amount, a large quantity of hydroxymethyl is produced, which leads to a highly cross-linked MF product which is thermally stable. In contrast, a small amount of formaldehyde produces a smaller amount of hydroxymethyl, which leads to the product with a low degree of cross-linking and low thermal stability.20,26,34–36
The complicated chemistry of amino resins is critical to the formation of a polymer network in the encapsulation technique involving urea and/or melamine and formaldehyde. In recent years, a certain number of investigations have been done to examine the effect of specific parameters on the fabrication process of microcapsules. Theoretical models have been reported to describe the microencapsulation through the in situ polymerizations of amino resins. However, in order to develop a full understanding of the encapsulation, more and deeper research studies are necessary to investigate the microcapsules from different aspects including their chemical structures, combustion behaviors, morphologies, and thermal properties.18,37,38
3.2. Layer-by-layer assembly methods
In recent years, many research studies have been done on microcapsules due to their interesting and important application in the biomedical field which involves their controlled-release, targeted delivery, biocompatibility, and biodegradability. Various techniques have been developed to fabricate complex microcapsules, such as the double emulsion method, complex coacervation, and layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly. Among them, LBL assembly has become a straightforward, unique and multipurpose process for microcapsule production, and has drawn much attention in the biomedical field.39–42
In the biomedical field, the LBL assembly method has been one of the most important techniques for the production of thin films.43–45 LBL microcapsules are usually generated through the successive deposition of complementary polymeric compounds or polyelectrolytes onto colloidal particles, followed by the elimination of the colloidal template.45Fig. 4 shows the illustration of the general procedure of a LBL method. In the work done by Ai et al.,46 substrates were washed with distilled water to remove any extra polyelectrolyte in order to prevent the cross-contamination of the polyelectrolyte solution after each deposition stage. Experimental parameters, such as the ionic strength, polyelectrolyte concentration, and pH, are adjusted at the molecular stage to tune the thickness, roughness, porosity of the scaffolds.46
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the layer-by-layer deposition method.13 
The LBL method is regarded as a methodology which is facilitated by templates such as the colloidal template.47 In this method, the template is used in the formation of microcapsules, and thus, the “sacrificial template” must be removed, which makes the process a little complicated. Many types of substrate materials, e.g. liposomes or vesicles, have been utilized as the templates in LBL methods besides the colloidal template because of their diverse sizes, morphologies and chemical characteristics. However, limited attention has been given to the fabrication of microcapsules through a layer-by-layer procedure without the introduction of templates.39 In such a process, electrostatic forces are utilized to produce a multilayered film by changing the assembly of the differently-charged polyelectrolyte.
Besides the classical LBL process mediated by the “electrostatic interactions”, it is also feasible to fabricate microcapsules through LBL methods mediated by other interactions like hydrogen bonding, chemical bonding, host–guest interaction, and acid–base interaction. This has broadened the application of the materials (for example, used as building blocks), and has enlisted a wide variety of chemical compounds (for example, nanoparticles, various kinds of bio-molecules). Film structures fabricated by the LBL method not only provide a medium for encapsulation but are also helpful in customizing the optical, mechanical and other physico-chemical properties of the encapsulated materials.47,48
The LBL method is also useful in the control of shell features such as permeability, elasticity, morphology, biocompatibility and mechanical stability. Over the last decade, many studies have been reported about the encapsulation and controlled release of hollow shells.49–51 Recently, hollow capsules prepared by layer-by-layer assembly have gained huge attraction in different areas such as drug delivery systems, biosensors, micro-cages, and micro-reactors. They could be produced by the consecutive deposition of anionic and cationic polyelectrolytes on micro- and nano-scale templates. The physicochemical characteristics of these capsules can be adjusted by choosing the appropriate combination of polymers and templates. Some parameters (like temperature, pH, and ionic strength) are quite crucial to the change in shell permeability. For example, the variation in the polarity or pH will result in structural deformity on the capsule surface.
Among these factors, temperature is very important for controlled release. Investigations on LBL methods for different polymeric substances demonstrated that high temperature would lead to variations in the morphology and mechanical properties of the shell. At high temperature, the shell becomes soft and structural rearrangement occurs, which will lead to the shrinking and swelling of capsules. Most of the time, the shrinkage occurs along with the densification and thickening of the shell when ≥50 °C. For example, a 10% shrinkage was measured for PSS/PAH capsules after heat treatment at 80 °C for 5 hours, which reduced the permeability of the capsule. Temperature-responsive capsules based on hydrogen-bonded poly(2-oxazoline) (PAOx)/tannic acid (TA) were fabricated, and they could release loaded molecules at a physiological temperature of 37 °C. However, besides this, a further study is needed to investigate their mechanical properties and morphological changes to improve the release mechanism for their in vivo application.52
Lately, LBL assembly methods have been employed to synthesize biogenic molecules which are useful in the biomedical field. These molecules could be fabricated according to the desired requirements and could hybridize with organic and inorganic ligands. They are promising in the fields of biomimetics and component-based materials. Although significant studies have been done on biogenic capsules, there are still some issues that need further studies, e.g. their targeted delivery, immunogenicity, and long-term circulation.53
Compared to other methods, LBL methods are more effective in the fabrication of complex microcapsules. LBL methods are capable of regulating the physicochemical and topographical features of the multi-layer shell by changing the assembly parameters and solution properties. Through this method, multipurpose bi-layer capsules could be produced successfully with better-controlled size, shape, texture and membrane thickness.54,55
Apart from the remarkable progress made in the development of the LBL technique, there are still some challenges which limit the application of the LBL method.56 First, the obvious disadvantages are the slow fabrication procedure and the wastage of resources. Second, the optimization of process parameters and the design of highly-flexible multilayer capsules are necessary for the fabrication of suitable multilayer capsules for their biomedical application. Third, the structure and function of biomimetic tissues produced by LBL methods are still nowhere near the satisfactory position and require further investigations. Hence, further studies to develop LBL methods in these fields are necessary and will substantially make the methods better.56
3.3. Interfacial polymerization methods
Interfacial polymerization is based on the reaction–diffusion mechanism rather than the thermodynamic equilibrium process. It is based on the Schotten–Baumann reaction, in which the irreversible polymerization of two multifunctional monomers takes place at the interface of two immiscible phases in a heterogeneous system.57,58 Basically, this polymerization is a kind of polycondensation reaction in which highly-reacting monomers are dissolved into two non-mixing liquids. Then, the contact of the monomers on the interface leads to a localized reaction and the generation of a polymer. It is well known that interfacial polymerization is a convenient way for encapsulation of a liquid core material because there is no need for the pre- and post-processing of the template.59 Most of the time, this method is commonly used on oil/water (O/W) or water/oil (W/O) interfaces.60–63
Interfacial polymerization to produce microcapsules is a two-step process.64 Firstly, two monomers are dissolved into two immiscible phases separately. Then, the monomer molecules diffuse to the interface of the two phases and react with each other on/near the interface to generate a polymer membrane. In this process, the polymer shell is comparatively easy to produce, which is very convenient for the encapsulation of various materials like drugs, insecticides, and inks.65–68
The encapsulation through the process of interfacial polymerization is limited due to the generated thin shell and its weak mechanical properties.59,68 Nowadays, encapsulation with a thin shell is gaining more and more attention due to the high core-to-shell ratio which makes it possible to transport a large amount of core materials with a smaller amount of shell materials. Thus, an effective and stimuli-responsive release mechanism is quite essential to achieve high carrying capacity and the desired release rate. In order to achieve these purposes, pH has been widely used as a suitable stimulus. At present, systems based on pH rely on the low or high pH value to initiate the release of the effective payload. Polyampholytes are the only class of materials which contain both high and low pH trigger-release mechanisms due to their polymeric structures which consist of both the cationic and anionic groups. They have been applied in gels, films, and capsules with thin shells. Although the dual acid and base release mechanism has been observed in a polyampholyte hydrogel, the release of the core material from the capsule still needs to be explored.69
Microcapsules produced by interfacial polymerization have been employed to encapsulate a large range of substances, such as active cells, biocatalysts, adhesives, agrochemicals, sweeteners, perfumes, and drugs. The composition of the emulsion dominates the type of material to be encapsulated and the characteristics of the capsule membrane. Since most of the emulsions contain water and non-polar organic solvent, the materials to be encapsulated must be soluble either in water or in the non-polar organic solvent. The strict solubility profile limits the types and quantities of materials which could be encapsulated by this technique.68 Consequently, a deeper study of the various aspects of interfacial polymerization is necessary to overcome the hurdles in its industrial applications.
3.4. Self-assembly methods
It is well known that microcapsules are very important in many fields such as the pharmaceutical, agricultural and materials industries.70,71 There are quite some methods to fabricate microcapsules, and the self-assembly method is one of the useful microcapsule fabrication methods. Self-assembly is a force balance procedure in which different structures or templates are spontaneously generated from the building blocks (units) without the driving force from the outside. The building units could be molecules or microparticles which could rearrange spontaneously to form some structural patterns via different interactions including hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, electrostatic forces, and π–π interactions without any outside assistance.72–74Fig. 5 shows the illustration of a self-assembly process.
 Fig. 5  Self-assembly process.3 
The self-assembly is a natural process which is controlled by the material properties inherent to the building units. When the essential constituents are molecules, the process is known as molecular self-assembly which mainly affects intermolecular interactions. Microparticles or nano-particles could also be the building blocks of self-assembly if they have the property of directional exchanges or they are compliant due to the adaptability of their surface groups.88 Up to now, a wide range of structures has been produced by using the self-assembly method, such as sheets, filaments, and giant complex microcapsules. Progressively, the self-assembly method has been scrutinized as a practical chemical processing method due to the significant comfort of the spontaneous process and the generated complex structures.73,74
Conventionally, the self-assembly method is employed to make self-activating asymmetric molecules which rearrange into supra-molecular assemblies. Amphiphilic surfactants and polymers are preferable as they consist of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups.74 Various types of micelles can be fabricated by the self-assembly of the amphipathic chain constituents of a copolymer block in a particular solvent. The structures of the micelles could be spherical, rod-like or vesicle-like. In order to produce stable hollow microspheres, spherical micelles or vesicle-like structures are generated first through the self-assembly method, and then, the cross-linking reaction is followed.73 Hollow nano-spheres were produced by the self-assembly of the triblock copolymer “polyisoprene-block-poly(2-cinnamoylethyl methacrylate)-block-poly(tert-butyl acrylate)”. Vesicle-like micelles are formed by the assembly of PI-b-PCEMA-b-PtBA in a selective solvent, and then, the PCEMA shell is locked by photo-cross-linking and the PI core is degraded by ozonolysis to produce stable hydrophilic hollow nano-spheres.75
As one class of microcapsules, colloidosomes, which have a shell of aggregated colloids, have been generated through the self-assembly method.76 In this process, water-in-water emulsions are used as the templates, and the self-assembly of colloidal particles occurs on the interfaces of the droplets to generate the shells of the microcapsules.76
Recently, efficient energy storage approaches have become very important due to the energy crisis.77,78 Thus, phase change materials (PCMs), which have the capability to store and release energy through repeated phase changing (generally melting and freezing), have drawn much attention globally.79–87 They have been regarded as one class of practical renewable energy materials in the use of solar energy, in the energy-saving of buildings, and in battery thermal management.80,82 Paraffin waxes, mixtures of fatty acids and eutectics, fatty alcohols, and some inorganic materials are the most used phase change materials since they have high enthalpies.80 However, the use of PCMs without any suitable wrap is not suggested since they might generate volatile organic components (VOCs) or cause leakage during the melting process. Thus, the utilization of PCMs needs packaging techniques to hold the liquid or solid materials in the carriers which could separate them from the surroundings.
Thus, phase change microcapsules are fabricated since microencapsulation could contain liquid or solid PCMs as the core in a solid shell. The shell will protect the core materials from the outside interference and allow the core material to withstand the repeated phase change behaviors. The microencapsulation of paraffin in the shell of various organic materials, such as poly(methyl methacrylate), polystyrene and melamine-formaldehyde, has been investigated over the last few years. Although good results have been obtained through these research studies, there are still some disadvantages like their low thermal conduction, low mechanical strength, and little thermal and chemical stability.84–86 Thus, to solve these problems, various materials and different methods have been tried. Among them, calcium carbonate is regarded as a good inorganic carrier material due to its good thermal conductivity and good mechanical characteristics. Thus, micro-PCMs with a shell of calcium carbonate were fabricated by utilizing the self-assembly method. These microcapsules are spherical and compact with a diameter changing from 1 to 5 microns. Due to the calcium carbonate shell, the thermal conductivities of the PCMs were remarkably increased. Thus, considering its availability, low cost and other outstanding properties, calcium carbonate is really promising in future applications.79,87
The self-assembly method has improved the microencapsulation process by overcoming many challenges.89 It is also helpful in the fabrication of phase change microcapsules with good heat conductivity, good energy storage capability, and good mechanical properties. However, more research studies are still necessary for the fabrication of microcapsules at the nano-scale, in which device design and process optimization might need to be studied further.
4. Physical methods – spray drying methods
There are some physical methods used in the fabrication of microcapsules. In this review, the discussion will focus on spray drying methods.90–109
4.1. Brief introduction
Powders with definite properties are vital in some industrial processes since they could be both the key ingredients and the final product. Spray drying has been one of the most effective and appropriate techniques to produce rounded particles with a narrow size distribution and controllable morphology and composition.90 Spray drying is a process to convert the feed in the fluid state (such as solution, dispersion or paste) into dry powder using a hot drying gas stream. Fig. 6 shows the general process of spray drying to produce coated particles. It is a continuous process91–93 and mainly involves three steps: droplet production (atomization); droplet-to-particle conversion by drying (solvent vaporization); and particle collection (separation from the drying gas).90 This process contains several operations including homogenization, evaporation and coating. Due to the quick evaporation of water and the quick drying of particles, it has a high production ratio. In the feeding part, the feed into the sprayer could be a solution, suspension or emulsion. In the drying stage, a hot gas stream is utilized to atomize the liquid feed to obtain powders rapidly. Normally, air is employed, but in some special cases, nitrogen is also used. Spray drying could produce various particles from very fine powders (10–50 μm) to large size particles (2–3 mm) depending on the initial feed.
 Fig. 6  Spray drying and coating.109 
Spray drying has been applied in many fields for different purposes.94–96 One of them is the encapsulation of active ingredients into a coating of a protective matrix, which has been applied for the food and pharmaceutical industries.
4.2. Applications in food industries
In the food industry, generally, water must be removed to ensure the microbiological stability of the product, prevent the chemical or biological degradation, and minimize the storage and transportation costs.94 Meanwhile, sometimes, the food ingredients need to be encapsulated to maintain their fine qualities like their flavors, vitamins, nutrition, and aroma.
Various kinds of methods have been developed for the encapsulation of food ingredients, but spray drying is most commonly used in food industry due to its cheap cost and convenient apparatus,97 and due to the likelihood of the continuous manufacture of custom-made particles for a particular purpose. Every particle in the final powder product can be tailored not only in terms of its physical, chemical and nutraceutical characteristics but also in terms of the release mechanism of the coating materials. A large number of coating materials are available including hydrates, celluloses, gums, lipids, proteins, and their mixtures.97,98 The drying of milk is also a good example of the microencapsulation process, in which the fat milk (the core material) is prevented from oxidation via a mixture of lactose and milk proteins. The microencapsulation of flavor is the methodology to turn liquid flavor substances into solids which can be easily treated.99 This process provides protection against their degradation, and also assists in the regulation of the release mechanism of the flavor materials during food handling and storage. Different kinds of methods for microencapsulation have been used, but spray drying is the best for the manufacture of flavor powders.99
4.3. Applications in pharmaceutical industries
Spray drying is an interesting technology for producing specific pharmaceutical products containing gelatin since the heating period is shorter. Natural polymers such as albumin and gelatin are excellent materials for the fabrication of microcapsules containing drugs since they are biocompatible, bio-adhesive, and inexpensive, and they can easily form films and gelatinize into particles. It is well known that vitamin C is an important nutrient for most organisms. Gelatin cannot be used directly as the coating material for vitamin C since it could dissolve rapidly in water and lead to a rapid release of the drug. Thus, in order to obtain a good release rate, gelatin should be cross-linked with other materials to generate a shell material with a low dissolution rate. Oxidized corn starch (OCS) is a good cross-linker as it has a large number of carboxyl and carbonyl groups and could cross-link with gelatin to generate fine shell materials to allow the controlled release of drugs. Spray drying was employed to produce microcapsules with a gelatin/OCS cross-linked shell, and the good results obtained for drug release behaviors show the good scientific and commercial prospects of this technique.100
It has been confirmed that fish oil has a substantial amount of n-3-polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) which are very effective in enhancing cardiovascular care just like ω-3FAs.101,102 Although incorporation of fish oil into food formulations has been tried, it is not so successful due to the presence of highly-unsaturated molecules which are sensitive to oxidation. The oxidation during the fish oil processing and storage will damage the quality of the oil.102 In order to maintain the oil quality for an extended long time, avoiding contact of the oil with the surroundings is quite critical. Thus, microencapsulation through spray drying has been applied all over the world to increase the shelf lives of oils.102–104,108 The conventional method for the encapsulation of fish oil through spray drying is based on the feed of the o/w emulsion. Thus, in order to avoid the preparation of an emulsion of fish oil and water since it might result in a stronger lipid oxidation during spray-drying, the microencapsulation of fish oil by using an organic solvent was carried out.108 It was shown that spray drying with an organic solvent could improve the encapsulation efficiency and the oxidation stability of fish oil compounds compared to the conventional method.
4.4. Brief discussion
Although spray drying has been widely used and could produce dry powders which have a good quality, are easy to handle, and could prevent the active ingredients from unwanted oxidation,105–109 this technique still has some disadvantages. For example, it might damage heat-sensitive compounds, and it is inconvenient to remove the solvents used during the drying process.107 Thus, more studies are needed in the future to solve these problems.
5. Physico-chemical methods
In this paper, the discussion in this section will focus on sol–gel encapsulation and supercritical-CO2-assisted methods.
5.1. Sol–gel encapsulation methods

5.1.1. Brief introduction. 
Sol–gel methods for microencapsulation are regarded as an emerging technology, which is promising to stabilize natural fragrances and aromas for a longer time.110–114 The sol–gel method is associated with the assembly of the reactions which introduce a diverse kind of alkoxide precursor to fabricate various products, and is mostly utilized to manufacture glasses and ceramic oxides.111 The sol–gel technique is regarded as an adjustable tool to fabricate inorganic materials with skillfully-designed microstructures at low temperature. Moreover, it is also perfect for the fabrication of organic–inorganic hybrid materials since this process is generally performed at low temperature and its products are homogenous on the molecular scale.113
When the sol–gel method is employed to fabricate microparticles, it involves an interfacial polymerization process which combines emulsion chemistry with mild sol–gel preparation of silica glass. In this process, the emulsion droplets are actually “microreactors” providing a platform for the hydrolysis and condensation of Si alkoxides. Generally, ionic and non-ionic surfactants are employed as structuring agents to generate silica microparticles with pores of different sizes. Fig. 7 shows the flow chart of the general fabrication process of microparticles through the sol–gel method.
 Fig. 7  Flow chart of the fabrication process of microparticles through the sol–gel method.112 
The encapsulation of some materials through the sol–gel method provides remarkable physical and chemical protection from their surroundings.112,115 Moreover, this method was highly suitable for microencapsulation of a variety of materials which couldn’t withstand excessive heat, as this technique involved a chemical reaction of suitable monomeric precursors at mild temperature.116,117 Consequently, the versatility of this method is helpful not only in designing the required materials at a mild-temperature but also in meeting certain demands of the encapsulation process.118,119


5.1.2. Applications. 
The materials fabricated by the sol–gel technique have been applied in various areas such as aromas, fragrances, ceramics, the glass industry, energy storage, thin films, and various biological and chemical sensors.118,120–123 In 1987, a simple microencapsulation method was successfully applied to inhibit the deterioration of compounds for the first time, resulting in the commercialization of fragrances and aromas encapsulated through the sol–gel method.108,120–123
PCMs have been extensively utilized in the storage of latent heat for building energy saving, waste heat recovery, and various thermal applications. PCMs are encapsulated within thin but stable shells in order to obtain large heat transfer rates and to avoid corrosion and leakage. Different techniques like in situ and interfacial polymerization are available for the encapsulation of PCMs, but most of the time shell materials for these processes are generally polymers. These polymers are not capable of resisting high temperatures. Thus, most of the reports are about the microencapsulation of PCMs with a low melting temperature such as paraffin wax.124,125 Molten salts containing large latent heat have a broad range of phase change temperatures (300–1000 °C), which will make them appropriate PCMs for high temperature application. SiO2 is a fine shell material for high temperature application since it has large thermal stability and mechanical strength.124,126 Additionally, the microencapsulation of PCMs via the sol–gel process will provide better thermal and mechanical stability for a long period of time.
Sol–gel microencapsulation is also applied in bio-sensors. A significant achievement of this technology is the successful introduction of different biological elements such as enzymes, bacteria, proteins, and even whole cells. The most interesting feature of this encapsulation technology is that the encapsulated biological substance does not lose its structure features and retains its original characteristics. A long time ago, the so-gel method is not suitable for the encapsulation of different biological materials, as the presence of alcohols and the low pH will destroy the proteins. This problem has been solved by the modification of the preparation method: the buffer solution is introduced after the acid or base catalyzed hydrolysis reaction and the amount of alcohol is significantly reduced. Thus, sol–gel microencapsulation is suitable for the entrapment of biological species to develop fine bio-sensors.


5.1.3. Discussion. 
Microencapsulation of different materials by the sol–gel method has been well established. However, the encapsulation of some salts as the core materials in the shell based on silica has not been done. The main reason for this problem is the material incompatibility with the current techniques of sol–gel encapsulation. The development of the encapsulation method for these salts will further increase the thermal performance and provide better control of the encapsulation process. Zhang et al.122 made an attempt in this regard by encapsulating potassium nitrate through a water-limited silica coating method, and demonstrated the excellent thermal stability and reliability of the microcapsules.
Microcapsules containing PCMs (Micro-PCMs) have poor mechanical strengths and could crack easily during their application. Thus, to avoid their mechanical failure, a shell of titanium dioxide and silica has been successfully applied to enhance the thermal stability and mechanical strength of micro-PCMs. This application shows that it has high storage capability and good thermal stability, which means that it has good potential for energy storage.127 However, further research studies are still needed to increase the efficiency of these micro-PCMs and to optimize the performance of these materials.127,128

5.2. Supercritical CO2-assisted methods

5.2.1. Introduction. 
Supercritical fluids have drawn a lot of attention recently and have been applied in many fields. Microencapsulation is one of the applications of this technique. Up to now, the investigation and advancement in microencapsulation assisted by supercritical fluids mainly focus on the encapsulation of polymers.129 Actually, there are many traditional techniques to fabricate polymer particles, such as spray-drying and cryogenic solvent, and so on. However, these methods have some drawbacks: ineffectiveness in treating glassy materials, lack of the capability for large-scale encapsulation, and possible health and environmental problems due to their toxic residual solvents. Hence, microencapsulation techniques assisted by supercritical fluids have been developed to minimize or reduce the problems of traditional methods.131–136
Supercritical fluids are solvents at temperatures and pressures beyond the critical values.132 They are in a single phase and have physical and chemical features in between the liquid and gas phases. Supercritical fluids have viscosities and diffusion coefficients close to those of gases and have densities close to those of liquids. They are extremely compressible, and a slight variation of temperature or pressure could create a big change in their density. The special properties of supercritical fluids are the reason that they are utilized instead of other solvents.
The general procedure to fabricate microcapsules through the supercritical-fluid-assisted method is:133 firstly, supercritical fluids containing active-ingredients and shell materials are maintained at elevated temperature and pressure; then, they are discharged to the atmosphere through tiny nozzles; finally, the rapid decrease of pressure results in the desolvation of the shell material and the active ingredient is coated with the shell polymers to produce microcapsules. The procedure assisted by supercritical (SC) carbon dioxide (CO2) is shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Supercritical CO2-assisted method.13 
Since CO2 is an inert, non-toxic and non-flammable gas which has a low critical temperature (31.06 °C) and could be obtained with high purity and low cost,130 supercritical CO2 has been mostly utilized in microencapsulation assisted by supercritical fluids. Thus, the supercritical-CO2-assisted encapsulation is an environment friendly method for the fabrication of microcapsules.135,136


5.2.2. Applications. 
According to the role of supercritical CO2 and the use of the second solvent, the mostly used supercritical-CO2-assisted encapsulation methods are divided into three categories:137 gas anti-solvent (GAS) method, particles from gas saturated solutions (PGSS) method and rapid expansion of supercritical solutions (RESS) method.
The gas anti-solvent (GAS) method is also termed a supercritical fluid anti-solvent (SAS) method.37 In this method, a solute will precipitate from an organic solvent due to the addition of the antisolvent CO2.138 In order to realize this process, the supercritical CO2 and the organic solvent must be miscible and the solubility must be quite high; in addition, the solubility of the solute in the supercritical fluid must be low.
Supercritical CO2 methods have been widely utilized in the food area due to their easy steps, low residual solvents, and moderate working temperatures.139 Mezzomo et al.140 studied the encapsulation of the extract from wine industry residues by using the GAS method. In this work, the co-precipitation of grape pomace extract is done under a high pressure in order to preserve the biological compounds (such as the phenolic components) in the extract. Under the operating conditions employed in this work, the generated microparticles have a good spherical shape, and the co-precipitation efficiencies are quite high.140 Similarly, Karim et al.141 encapsulated fish oil through the GAS method by using hydroxypropyl methylcellulose as the polymer. In their work, the major operating parameters were optimized, and under the optimized conditions, the generated microparticles of the fish oil have spherical structures with no inner void. A modified GAS method was employed to fabricate insulin/hydroxy-propyl-methylcellulose (HPMC)–poly-lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) nanoparticles in order to achieve the steady release of insulin in the stomach and intestines.142 The temperature, pressure, and PLGA to HPMC ratio have severe effects on the size, size distribution and yields of the nanoparticles. Although the GAS method has been used in many fields, it still has some drawbacks, such as the long washing time before the particle aggregation and the presence of the residual toxic solvents.138
The particles from gas-saturated solutions (PGSS) method (combined with supercritical fluid technology) has been employed to fabricate microparticles because the conventional methods have some disadvantages like high energy requirements, multistage processes, and low encapsulation efficiencies.143 The PGSS method has been endorsed for the manufacture of solid–liquid composites due to its promising results. This technique is based on the large solubility of supercritical carbon dioxide in various materials like molten fats, lipids and polymers at medium pressures. The PGSS method consists of two stages: in the first stage, the saturation of the solute with carbon dioxide is done in a static mixer at high pressure; in the second stage, the gas saturated solution is expanded to atmospheric pressure via a nozzle. The temperature decreases rapidly due to the Joule–Thomson effect, which results in the generation of particles.144 Hence, the advantages of the PGSS method are: the less utilization of CO2 compared to the RESS method, and no need for “the dissolution of substances in supercritical CO2”, which is necessary in the RESS method.145
Another method for microencapsulation assisted by supercritical fluids is the rapid expansion of supercritical solutions (RESS) method. When the supercritical solution contains non-volatile solutes, its rapid expansion will result in the loss of the solvent power, and further lead to the precipitation of the solute.146,147 Generally, the expansion of the supercritical solutions occurs when they are across a fine throttling device, like a capillary or an orifice nozzle.148 Most of the time, this method produces particles with very small sizes. Various researchers have employed the RESS method to fabricate single-component particles with fine particle size distributions. This process can produce particles which have the capacity to encapsulate a large number of inorganic, organic and polymeric materials.146

6. Microfluidics
6.1. Brief introduction
Microfluidics is an interdisciplinary subject which involves chemistry, materials, physics, and engineering.149–163 It is mainly concerned with the precise handling of a small quantity of fluids in microchannels with the dimensions of microns. Droplet-based microfluidics is one subcategory of microfluidics, which deals with small droplets (from picoliters to nanoliters) generated through the interaction between two immiscible liquids flowing in microchannels.
There are many microfluidic devices and the geometries of the microchannels are extremely diverse.150,154,155 Generally speaking, microfluidic devices could be divided into two categories: two-dimensional (2D) devices in which the fluids flow in channels etched in substrates, and three-dimensional (3D) devices which are constructed by the nesting of capillary tubes. T-junction and flow-focusing microchannels have been the two of the most widely used geometries for droplet generation. Simple droplets are generated through these simple microfluidic devices, and their sizes could be controlled by the capillary number and the flow rate ratio of the dispersed phase to the continuous phase. Besides simple droplets, complex multiple emulsion globules have also been fabricated through complex consecutive capillary microfluidic devices.150
The droplets generated through microfluidics are generally uniform, and they could transport, mix and react individually. Thus, they could be treated as independent microreactors, and naturally, they are promising to synthesize dispersed particles. Furthermore, since they could have multilayer inner structures and numerous daughter droplets in each layer (see Fig. 9), the multiple emulsion globules could be used as templates to fabricate complex microcapsules with skillfully designed internal structures. Thus, droplet-based microfluidics has been employed, together with other chemical and physical techniques, to fabricate solid microparticles, core–shell microcapsules, multicompartment microcapsules, etc., which are very useful in some fields like the food, cosmetic, and medical industries.149,150
 Fig. 9  Multiple emulsion globules.150 
6.2. Microparticles based on simple droplets
Based on simple droplets generated in different microfluidic devices, together with other chemical or physical methods, many types of microparticles have been fabricated, including solid polymeric microparticles,159 core–shell microcapsules (vesicles152 and colloidosomes156), and multicompartment microcapsules.160
Solid polymeric microparticles were fabricated based on polymer droplets generated by using a V-shaped microfluidic device.159 The diameter of the microparticles was in the range of 80–920 nm with a relatively low polydispersity. The surfaces of the microparticles were tailored for drug adhesion.
Giant unilamellar vesicles were fabricated by Matosevic and Paegelmore based on droplets formed in a lipid-containing oil flow in a microfluidic assembly line.152 The droplet size determines the vesicle size, and small-molecule cargos could be encapsulated into the vesicles efficiently.
Droplets stabilized using colloidal particles are called Pickering emulsions, which could be used as templates to fabricate inorganic–polymer hybrid hollow microcapsules. Actually, conventional methodologies available to generate inorganic–organic composite microcapsules either involve multiple steps or lack size control. A simple tubular microfluidic device was used to fabricate poly(NIPAAm)–AuNP composite hollow microcapsules with a good monodispersity.156 The droplets with Pickering effects were formed first, and then, UV-induced interfacial free-radical polymerization (IFRP) was employed to impregnate AuNPs into the shells of the microcapsules.
By using a capillary microfluidic device, Min et al.160 developed biodegradable microcarriers with distinct compartments. Firstly, monodisperse droplets containing two immiscible polymers were generated. Then, the solvent in the droplets was depleted in order to cause phase separation, which finally resulted in the fabrication of the expected uniform microcapsules.
6.3. Microparticles based on double emulsions
As mentioned in the previous section, microfluidics could be employed to generate double-emulsions (DEs) in a precisely controlled manner.153,157 Since the internal structures of the globules of DEs are complex, generally composed of controlled numbers of daughter droplets, it is natural to use them to fabricate microcapsules with complex internal structures, such as core–shell microcapsules and multicompartment microcapsules. These complex microcapsules have a broad range of applications in many fields such as drug delivery systems, additives in the food industry, and oil recovery.
Based on double emulsions generated in a microfluidic device, thick-shell microcapsules with varying sizes and shell thicknesses have been fabricated.151 The microfluidic device is constructed by aligning two cylindrical glass capillaries within a square capillary. Through the interactions among the outer flow, the inner flow and the middle phase, double emulsions are generated. By using glass-coated stamped microfluidic devices, Thiele et al.155 fabricated uniform polymersomes based on double-emulsion templates. Through the self-assembly of amphiphilic diblock copolymers, polymersomes with a spherical core and a macromolecular bilayer shell were prepared, which are useful in controlled release systems.
Besides these core–shell microcapsules, microcapsules with much more complex internal structures have been fabricated, such as multicompartment microcapsules.158 Double emulsions containing various numbers of daughter droplets have been widely used as templates to produce compartmental microcapsules. Such complex structures are convenient for the incorporation of various materials, including hydrophilic or hydrophobic, organic or inorganic materials, into the shell and the compartments of the microcapsules to obtain desired functions.
6.4. Stimuli and responses of microcapsules
Microcapsules which could respond to outside stimuli have gained much attention among the researchers all over the world due to their potential applications in many fields like pharmaceutics, bioengineering, and biomimetics.161 Based on the double emulsion generated in microfluidic devices, dextrose reactive colloidal gel microcapsules were fabricated. As the shell consists of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-3-amidophenylboronic acid-co-acrylic acid) (P(NIPAM-co-AAPBA-co-AAc)) and PNIPAM is sensitive to heat, the shell could respond to the temperature change.162 Also, pH-sensitive microcapsules were fabricated based on the oil-in-water-in-oil double emulsions formed in microfluidic devices by free-radical polymerization. Microcapsules of poly(2-(trimethylamine)ethyl methacrylate) might be applied in cancer therapy since they were uniform in size, were compatible with living tissue, and could respond to pH changes.163
6.5. Future applications of microfluidics in microcapsules
The application of microcapsules is determined not only by the properties of their core and shell materials but also by their structures and sizes. When the core and shell materials are fixed, in order to make use of microcapsules on an industrial scale under some fixed standard, microcapsules must be fabricated continuously under precise control to obtain products with uniform structures and sizes. The homogeneity in the size and structure of microcapsules is necessary as the function of microcapsules is severely affected by their sizes and structures. For instance, uniform sizes and structures are important for the microcapsules to encapsulate active-ingredients quantitatively and to release them at a stable and precisely controlled rate.158 In addition, the complex internal structures of microcapsules are also very important to their functions.160 For microcapsules with multiple inner compartments, it is possible to encapsulate multiple different materials and to realize controlled reactions within the microcapsules.
Thus, in order to generate those complex microcarriers with uniform sizes and structures, precise control of the flows is necessary. Up to now, microfluidics has been the only technique which could manipulate small quantities of fluids to fabricate a large number of the desired microcapsules. Thus, the application of microfluidics in the preparation of microcapsules will continue and will be developed further. Although microfluidics has been developed very well and could generate various uniform microcapsules with skillfully-designed structures, there are still several problems to be solved in the future. One of the problems is how to simplify microfluidic devices further to generate more complicated microparticles. The other is how to make microcapsules with complex internal structures smaller and smaller. Currently, the sizes of complex microcapsules generated by microfluidics are generally in microns. The microfluidic techniques should be improved further in the future to generate complex microparticles at the nano-scale.
7. Applications of microcapsules
There are many various applications of microcapsules. However, in this paper, the discussion will focus on biomimetic microreactors, drug delivery systems, phase change materials (PCMs) and self-healing materials.
7.1. Biomimetic microreactors
Interpreting and duplicating the ability of living organisms to synthesize materials have drawn much attention recently. They could assist in the fabrication of new materials with expected features for their mechanical, medical or energy applications.164 Historically, biomimeticists took inspiration from biological assembly and focused on mimicking biosystems.165 Currently, biomimetics is applicable to the molecular level due to the recent achievements in the areas of molecular biology, molecular engineering, and nanoscience.166 Biomimetics has been applied in many areas, for instance, the controlled release of proteins,167 the conversion and storage of solar energy,145 and the development of biological materials.168 The duplication of biological systems is the major routine to synthesize biomaterials. Generally, normal tissues contain complex three-dimensional structures for the mechanics and functionality of biological organisms. Most of the time, such structures are mimicked during the synthesis of biomaterials. These synthetic materials have various types of three-dimensional structures and could control their macroscopic characteristics explicitly by changing the processing methods. However, they have less control over the function and response of tissues. Thus, in order to duplicate the original tissues, efforts have been made to add biological signals.168
Complex microcapsules have been used in the bio-pharmaceutical field, especially for targeted drug delivery and release. In addition, microcapsules have been employed as the carriers of immunizing agents and additives to upgrade adaptation reactions in the immune system. Microcapsules could also be used to change the site of absorption for drugs with low toxicity, which is advantageous to patients.169,170 Furthermore, magnetic response microcapsules could be generated by merging magnetic and polymer materials, which could be used for the guidance and separation of cells and biomolecules.171 Proteins segregated by a magnetic force may achieve a simple solution for sample storage and decontamination. Maintaining the intrinsic protein structures is dominant for many applications, which makes moderate separation techniques (such as magnetic separation) preferable for macromolecule enhancement.171
The biomimetic approach has been utilized in the petroleum industry for the separation of oil and water. Yang et al.172 were inspired by the ability of Salvinia molesta leaves to absorb oil and put forward a facile method to produce superhydrophobic hairs with eggbeater heads for the effective separation of oil and water by using 3D printing. This technique only utilizes the difference between the capillary forces acting on two different phases and shows good results regarding the separation of the oil and water.
Other applications of these biomimetic microreactors are hybrid microcapsules which have applications in biocatalysis, biosensing and drug delivery. Shi et al.173 fabricated flower like hybrid microcapsules through the biomimetic biomineralization technique. Through Cu3(PO4)2 induced by enzymes, protein-hybrid micro-flowers were prepared. Similarly, Wang et al.174 prepared a multienzyme system based on hollow hydrogel microcapsules. This system is a good enzyme cascade reaction system and could perform like a cascade biocatalyst. Currently, a lot of research is being carried out on artificial photosynthesis which is just a replica of the natural synthesis to store solar energy.175 The encapsulation through biomimetic microreactors is also widely applied in the field of synthetic biology since chemical reactions and biological processes in lipid vesicles are of considerable importance in the area of bottom-up synthetic biology.176,177
7.2. Drug delivery systems
As a drug delivery system, microcapsules have many significant advantages, for example, the protection of the encapsulated active ingredients and the possible controlled release of the encapsulated drugs. Moreover, since multiple particles could be dispersed over a long distance in the gastrointestinal tract, it could create low local concentrations and thus decrease the cytotoxicity and weaken the unpredictability in the transition time and adsorption rate.8 Thus, they are always of remarkably high importance in the controlled delivery of drugs.
The drug delivery process through microcapsules includes three stages: drug loading, drug transport, and drug release. In the first stage, drugs of interest are loaded into the engineered microcapsules during the preparation of these microparticles. In this step, the encapsulation of chemical agents, functional molecules and multiple kinds of drugs could be done.
In the second stage, during the drug transport process, the microparticles are generally moving in a liquid environment. These microparticles can be deformed to a dimple shape as it could minimize the drag force when they are propelled toward a target point in the liquid phase. In order to control precisely the moving track of the microparticles, generally, some magnetic nano-particles will be inserted into the microcapsule. Thus, by using the outer magnetic force field, the microparticles will move in the patient's body according to the path required by the doctor. In addition, in order to visualize the moving traces of microparticles, some fluorescent nanoparticles are also encapsulated into the microcapsules.
In the third stage, the encapsulated drugs are released at some expected site according to some expected release rate. This process could be realized by choosing “smart” materials which are employed to construct microparticles and are sensitive to an external stimulus such as the change in pH or temperature.178,179 Smart materials could respond to changes in stimulus factors by modifying their structures or chemical characteristics, which could cause drug release. Furthermore, the drug release rates could be adjusted by controlling the external change.
Recently, microfluidics has been developed rapidly, which is really helpful in the development of microcapsules for drug delivery.180–182 Microfluidic devices could be used for the controlled delivery of drugs in a preprogrammed manner and in small quantities. The uniform droplets generated through the interaction between two immiscible phases in the micro-channels will be very good tiny reactors and could be used as fine templates to fabricate microcapsules. Multicompartmental microcapsules fabricated through microfluidics could be used to mimic the structure of the cell and could be loaded with different core materials in a single system. Hence, they are really promising for the encapsulation, retention, and delivery of various materials.
7.3. Phase change materials
Over the last few decades, the utilization of energies has been elevated rapidly all over the world, especially for fossil energy.183 Consequently, conventional fuels are depleting, which results in the scarcity of energy resources and environmental problems such as the emission problem of greenhouse gases. Currently, the building sector is a major consumer of energies due to rapid population growth and improved lifestyle. Thus, reducing the energy consumption of buildings has become very important.
In recent years, phase change materials have been developed to reduce energy consumption and regarded as a prominent methodology. This type of material could absorb and release heat through phase change processes like melting and freezing. They could be encapsulated to generate phase change microcapsules (PCMs) which have been applied in various fields such as textiles, buildings, food packaging and medical therapies.184–187 By mixing into insulating foams or coatings, PCMs can be embodied into textile products. The core materials of the PCMs in the fabrics will convert from the solid to a liquid phase when the temperature reaches the melting point, and meanwhile, heat will be absorbed from the surroundings; oppositely, when the temperature reaches the freezing point, the heat inside the PCMs will be released.188 Thus, PCMs could be utilized to generate protective textile products to make the wearer comfortable by controlling the temperature under varying climate conditions.189,190 For example, during the Athens Olympic Games in 2004, the Australian Institute of Sports used the precool vest which was designed to lower the temperature of the athletes.
Similarly, the application of PCMs in the construction field has been a subject of significant interest. There is large potential for the construction of low-energy buildings with zero-energy balances by utilizing PCMs which give the possibility of tuning the storage and release of the energy of the building finely.184,191,192 PCMs have also been applied for the storage of thermal energy. They have the potential to preserve solar and other energies as latent heat over a particular temperature range, which results in the reduction of energy consumption.193 Solar thermal energy storage (TES) systems have been regarded as the general system for providing hot water or heating service in buildings due to their low cost.194
Various researchers have investigated the application potential of PCMs as heat storage media due to their high capacity of energy storage. Compared to water-based TES systems, the energy storage density of PCM-based TES systems has been elevated remarkably.194 Further investigations are necessary for PCMs in order to establish good adaptability in applications based on various thermal solar systems and to enhance their performance. Their cost should be worthy of investment.195
7.4. Self-healing materials
Micro-cracking caused by mechanical or thermal fatigue is a big problem. When cracks appeared within polymeric materials, the stability of the structure is substantially damaged and will cause a big economic loss.196,197 Self-healing composites have great potential to solve the issues of micro-cracking and hidden damage.195 Self-healing is defined as follows: “When two fractions of broken or damaged surfaces are brought into contact at a temperature above the glass transition, the connecting point becomes invisible from any surface located within the bulk and increasing mechanical strength is developed until original properties are restored”.198 Microencapsulation is an effective method mostly applied in self-healing for different systems like surface coating, corrosion protection, and medical supplies.197,199
Microcapsules with repairing agents are placed inside the coating to repair cracks. When the coating on the metal substrate cracked, the repairing agents are released via the capillary action to repair the damage and to avoid further corrosion.200–202 Different kinds of micro- or nano-containers, such as inorganic particles, have been applied as carriers for different healing agents and corrosion inhibitors. These materials have shown important advantages in corrosion inhibition.201 Similarly, organic coatings have also been applied as carriers for different healing agents and corrosion inhibitors, especially for deep-sea equipment and tools.202
Various researchers have successfully applied self-healing materials in different biomedical fields, e.g. dental and acrylic-based orthopedic cements. These self-healing materials have been successfully employed to increase the resistance to cracks and damage. However, further studies are still needed for long-term crack repair.203,204
The thermodynamic and kinetic healing mechanisms of self-healing materials should be investigated further in order to optimize the materials. These materials should be robust enough against some severe conditions, such as high temperature, high pressure and mechanical mixing, which are often overlooked during the design of the materials. Consequently, in order to achieve a good long-term performance, systematic knowledge about self-healing substances is necessary since the life cycle of self-healing materials is very difficult to anticipate. Thus, more and deeper investigations in this area are essential to realize the practical application of self-healing materials.205
8. Conclusions
The principal aim of this work is to describe the different fabrication techniques available in the formulation of microcapsules. Fig. 10 summarizes the key features and potential applications of the various methods. It could be stated that the fabrication of complex microcapsules is a cutting-edge technology which should combine different promising methods to create an appropriate procedure. Methods of microencapsulation, such as physical, chemical, and physicochemical methods, have been discussed in this paper. The application of these methods is really helpful to overcome the various difficulties and challenges encountered during the encapsulation. By introducing self-healing agents into the shells of microcapsules, the cracks or damage in the materials could be repaired; by producing biogenic microcapsules, smart materials with good biodegradability and biocompatibility have been developed; by employing drug-release methods with various mechanisms, controlled drug release could be triggered; and by improving the mechanical stability, the leakage in the phase change materials could be avoided.
 Fig. 10  Flowchart summarizing the key features and potential applications of the various methods. 
Microencapsulation is useful in maintaining food quality, especially for long-term storage by avoiding oxidative damage which results in bad taste and aroma. The application of microencapsulation in the pharmaceutical field has been well established. Microcapsules play a very important role in controlled drug delivery systems, especially for complex multicompartment microcapsules. Multicompartment microcapsules are also very useful in biomimetics since their structures are very close to those of living cells.
Although the techniques of microencapsulation have been developed rapidly in recent years, there are still a lot of requirements for further research in some areas to overcome the limitations of the methods and to make them more efficient. A deeper understanding of polymer chemistry, colloidal science, nanotechnology, and engineering is essential to improve the various fabrication techniques and to enhance the performance of microcapsules.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21576185 and 21376162).
Notes and references
J. Gaitzsch, X. Huang and B. Voit, Engineering Functional Polymer Capsules toward Smart Nanoreactors, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(3), 1053–1093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Poshadri and K. Aparna, Microencapsulation technology: a review, Journal of Research ANGRAU., 2010, 38(1), 86–102 Search PubMed .
X. Huang and B. Voit, Progress on multi-compartment polymeric capsules, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 435–443 RSC .

          E. Drioli, C. A. Quist-Jensen and L. Giorno, Molecular Weight Cutoff, Encyclopedia of Membranes,  2016, pp. 1326–1327 Search PubMed .
S. Bansode, S. Banarjee, D. Gaikwad, S. Jadhav and R. Thorat, Microencapsulation: a review, Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res., 2010, 1(2), 38–43 CAS .
M. Peanparkdee, S. Iwamoto and R. Yamauchi, Microencapsulation: a review of applications in the food and pharmaceutical industries, Rev. Agric. Sci., 2016, 4, 56–65 CrossRef .

          J. T. Goodwin and G. R. Somerville, Physical methods for preparing microcapsules. Microencapsulation, Springer,  1974, pp. 155–163 Search PubMed .
M. Singh, K. Hemant, M. Ram and H. Shivakumar, Microencapsulation: a promising technique for controlled drug delivery, Res. Pharm. Sci., 2010, 5(2), 65 CAS .
H. J. Huang, W. K. Yuan and X. D. Chen, Microencapsulation based on emulsification for producing pharmaceutical products: a literature review, Dev. Chem. Eng. Miner. Process., 2006, 14(3–4), 515–544 Search PubMed .
N. Wilson and N. Shah, Microencapsulation of vitamins, ASEAN Food J., 2007, 14(1), 1 Search PubMed .
B. Boh and B. Sumiga, In situ polymerisation microcapsules, Bioencapsulation Innovations, 2013, 3, 4–5 Search PubMed .
S. K. Das, S. Nakka, R. Rajabalaya, H. Mukhopadhyay, T. Halder and M. Palanisamy, 
            et al., Microencapsulation techniques and its practice, Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Tech., 2011, 6(2), 1 Search PubMed .
K. Manjanna, B. Shivakumar and T. P. Kumar, Microencapsulation: an acclaimed novel drug-delivery system for NSAIDs in arthritis, Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carrier Syst., 2010, 27(6), 509–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Teh, R. Lin, L.-H. Hung and A. P. Lee, Droplet microfluidics, Lab Chip, 2008, 8(2), 198–220 RSC .
M. Zuo, T. Liu, J. Han, Y. Tang, F. Yao and Y. Yuan, 
            et al., Preparation and characterization of microcapsules containing ammonium persulfate as core by in situ polymerization, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 249, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jang, J. Sung and H. Choi, Synthesis of microcapsule containing oil phase via in-situ polymerization, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40(4), 1031–1033 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kage, H. Kawahara, N. Hamada, T. Kotake and H. Ogura, Operating conditions and microcapsules generated by in situ polymerization, Adv. Powder Technol., 2002, 13(3), 265–285 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nguon, F. Lagugné-Labarthet, F. A. Brandys, J. Li and E. R. Gillies, Microencapsulation by in situ polymerization of amino resins, Polym. Rev., 2018, 58(2), 326–375 CrossRef CAS .
R. Arshady and M. H. George, Suspension, dispersion, and interfacial polycondensation: a methodological survey, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1993, 33(14), 865–876 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mylvaganam and L. Zhang, In situ polymerization on graphene surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(6), 2817–2823 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Veatch and R. W. Burhans, Process of producing hollow particle and resulting product,  1978, p. 105 Search PubMed .

          S. Soloway, Encapsulation in natural products, US Pat., 3137631,  1964 Search PubMed .

          N. Macaulay, Recording paper coated with microscopic capsules of coloring material, capsules and method of making, US Pat., 3016308,  1962 Search PubMed .
Z. She, M. N. Antipina, J. Li and G. B. Sukhorukov, Mechanism of protein release from polyelectrolyte multilayer microcapsules, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11(5), 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Erokhina, L. Benassi, P. Bianchini, A. Diaspro, V. Erokhin and M. Fontana, Light-driven release from polymeric microcapsules functionalized with bacteriorhodopsin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(28), 9800–9804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Luo, W. Yang, S. Jiang, J.-M. Feng and M.-B. Yang, Microencapsulation of decabromodiphenyl ether by in situ polymerization: preparation and characterization, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2007, 92(7), 1359–1364 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fereidoon, M. G. Ahangari and M. Jahanshahi, Effect of nanoparticles on the morphology and thermal properties of self-healing poly(urea-formaldehyde) microcapsules, J. Polym. Res., 2013, 20(6), 151 CrossRef .
E. N. Brown, M. R. Kessler, N. R. Sottos and S. R. White, In situ poly(urea-formaldehyde) microencapsulation of dicyclopentadiene, J. Microencapsulation, 2003, 20(6), 719–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xue, H. Wang, J. Pei, R. Li, J. Zhang and Z. Fan, Study on self-healing microcapsule containing rejuvenator for asphalt, Constr. Build. Mater., 2017, 135, 641–649 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, D. Fu and A. Qu, Effects of dispersive methods on properties of microcapsules for self-healing materials, Compos. Interfaces, 2015, 22(9), 837–845 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Esser-Kahn, N. R. Sottos, S. R. White and J. S. Moore, Programmable microcapsules from self-immolative polymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(30), 10266–10268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-M. Tong, T. Zhang, M.-Z. Yang and Q. Zhang, Preparation and characterization of novel melamine modified poly(urea–formaldehyde) self-repairing microcapsules, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 371(1–3), 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
F. Salaün, E. Devaux, S. Bourbigot and P. Rumeau, Influence of process parameters on microcapsules loaded with n-hexadecane prepared by in situ polymerization, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 155(1–2), 457–465 CrossRef .
J. Ohshita, A. Yamashita, T. Hiraoka, A. Shinpo, A. Kunai and M. Ishikawa, Polymeric organosilicon systems. 27. Preparation and reactions of poly[(ethoxysilylene)phenylenes] and thermal properties of the resulting polymers, Macromolecules, 1997, 30(6), 1540–1549 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J.-H. Park, Y.-K. Moon, E.-B. Ko, D.-H. Lee and Y. Hu, 
            et al., Preparation of graphene/MgCl2-supported Ti-based Ziegler-Natta catalysts by the coagglomeration method and their application in ethylene polymerization, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38(1), 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Li, N. Kawazoe and G. Chen, Single mammalian cell encapsulation by in situ polymerization, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4(47), 7662–7668 RSC .
N. V. N. Jyothi, P. M. Prasanna, S. N. Sakarkar, K. S. Prabha, P. S. Ramaiah and G. Srawan, Microencapsulation techniques, factors influencing encapsulation efficiency, J. Microencapsulation, 2010, 27(3), 187–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Li, C. M. Wang, X. G. Xie and G. B. Du, A computational exploration of the mechanisms for the acid-catalytic urea-formaldehyde reaction: new insight into the old topic, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2012, 25(2), 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zhou, X. Guo, Q. Hu, C. Qin and H. Liu, 
            et al., Layer-by-layer assembled biopolymer microcapsule with separate layer cavities generated by gas-liquid microfluidic approach, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 81, 13–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Akyuz, I. Sargin, M. Kaya, T. Ceter and I. Akata, A new pollen-derived microcarrier for pantoprazole delivery, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 71, 937–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bekhit, L. Sánchez-González, G. B. Messaoud and S. Desobry, Design of microcapsules containing Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis in alginate shell and xanthan gum with nutrients core, LWT–Food Sci. Technol., 2016, 68, 446–453 CrossRef CAS .
D. da Silva Bastos, M. do Pilar Gonçalves, C. T. de Andrade, K. G. de Lima Araújo and M. H. M. da Rocha Leão, Microencapsulation of cashew apple (Anacardium occidentale, L.) juice using a new chitosan–commercial bovine whey protein isolate system in spray drying, Food Bioprod. Process., 2012, 90(4), 683–692 CrossRef .
P. Gentile, I. Carmagnola, T. Nardo and V. Chiono, Layer-by-layer assembly for biomedical applications in the last decade, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26(42), 422001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. S. Angelatos and F. Caruso, Template synthesis of nanostructured materials via layer-by-layer assembly, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20(3), 848–858 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, N. Tang, P. Cheng, J. Xiang and W. Du, 
            et al., Bioinspired stability improvement of layer-by-layer microcapsules using a bioadhesive for enzyme encapsulation, React. Funct. Polym., 2016, 99, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ai, S. A. Jones and Y. M. Lvov, Biomedical applications of electrostatic layer-by-layer nano-assembly of polymers, enzymes, and nanoparticles, Cell Biochem. Biophys., 2003, 39(1), 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Guzmán, A. Mateos-Maroto, M. Ruano, F. Ortega and R. G. Rubio, Layer-by-Layer polyelectrolyte assemblies for encapsulation and release of active compounds, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 249, 290–307 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Decher, Fuzzy nanoassemblies: toward layered polymeric multicomposites, Science, 1997, 277(5330), 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. van Dongen, H.-P. M. de Hoog, R. J. Peters, M. Nallani, R. J. Nolte and J. C. van Hest, Biohybrid polymer capsules, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109(11), 6212–6274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Landfester, A. Musyanovych and V. Mailänder, From polymeric particles to multifunctional nanocapsules for biomedical applications using the miniemulsion process, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48(3), 493–515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mehnath, M. Arjama, M. Rajan, G. Annamalai and M. Jeyaraj, Co-encapsulation of dual drug loaded in MLNPs: implication on sustained drug release and effectively inducing apoptosis in oral carcinoma cells, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2018, 104, 661–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Paramasivam, M. Vergaelen, M.-R. Ganesh, R. Hoogenboom and A. Sundaramurthy, Hydrogen bonded capsules by layer-by-layer assembly of tannic acid and poly(2-n-propyl-2-oxazoline) for encapsulation and release of macromolecules, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5(45), 8967–8974 RSC .
M. Xuan, J. Zhao, J. Shao, C. Du, W. Cui and L. Duan, 
            et al., Recent progresses in layer-by-layer assembled biogenic capsules and their applications, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 487, 107–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tong, X. Song and C. Gao, Layer-by-layer assembly of microcapsules and their biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41(18), 6103–6124 RSC .
M. Jaganathan, D. Madhumitha and A. Dhathathreyan, Protein microcapsules: preparation and applications, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 209, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Zhong, B. Li, K. Mequanint and G. Luo, 
            et al., Biomedical Applications of Layer-by-Layer
Self-Assembly for Cell Encapsulation: Current Status and Future Perspectives, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8(1), 1800939 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Tan, S. Chen, X. Peng, L. Zhang and C. Gao, Polyamide membranes with nanoscale Turing structures for water purification, Science, 2018, 360(6388), 518–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. W. Gooch, LC Polymer, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Polymers,  2011, p. 422 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, X. Liu and D. W. Lee, Fabrication and characterization of microcapsules with polyamide–polyurea as hybrid shell, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47(4), 2040–2044 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ichiura, M. Morikawa and J. Ninomiya, Preparation of smart paper part I—formation of nylon microcapsules on paper surface using interfacial polymerization, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41(21), 7019–7024 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, P. Liu, L. Ju, L. Wang and S. Zhao, Polypyrrole nanocapsules via interfacial polymerization, Macromol. Res., 2010, 18(7), 648–652 CrossRef CAS .

          P. W. Morgan, Interfacial polymerization, Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. J. Raaijmakers and N. E. Benes, Current trends in interfacial polymerization chemistry, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 63, 86–142 CrossRef CAS .

          H. B. Scher. Microencapsulation of pesticides by interfacial polymerization: process and performance considerations, Pesticide Chemistry: Human Welfare and the Environment, Elsevier,  1983, pp. 295–300 Search PubMed .
S. Karode, S. Kulkarni, A. Suresh and R. Mashelkar, Molecular weight distribution in interfacial polymerization—model development and verification, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1997, 52(19), 3243–3255 CrossRef CAS .
P. Perignon and G. Ongmayeb, Interfacial polymerization versus cross-linking microencapsulation, Bioencapsulation Innovations, 2013, P8–P10 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang and D. Rochefort, Characterisation and applications of microcapsules obtained by interfacial polycondensation, J. Microencapsulation, 2012, 29(7), 636–649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kobašlija and D. T. McQuade, Polyurea microcapsules from oil-in-oil emulsions via interfacial polymerization, Macromolecules, 2006, 39(19), 6371–6375 CrossRef .
H.-C. Wang, J. M. Grolman, A. Rizvi, G. S. Hisao, C. M. Rienstra and S. C. Zimmerman, pH-triggered release from polyamide microcapsules prepared by interfacial polymerization of a simple diester monomer, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6(3), 321–325 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, W. Yang, D. Trau and R. Renneberg, Microencapsulation of uncharged low molecular weight organic materials by polyelectrolyte multilayer self-assembly, Langmuir, 2000, 16(23), 8932–8936 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dharmendra, P. Manisha, K. M. Kymonil and S. S. Awasthi, Aceclofenac delivery by microencapsulation using LBL self-assembly for delayed release, Pak. J. Pharm. Sci., 2011, 24(4), 495–502 CAS .
C. J. Brinker, Y. Lu, A. Sellinger and H. Fan, Evaporation-induced self-assembly: nanostructures made easy, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11(7), 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Self-assembly at all scales, Science, 2002, 295(5564), 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Texter and M. Tirrell, Chemical processing by self-assembly, AIChE J., 2001, 47(8), 1706 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stewart and G. Liu, Hollow nanosphere from polyisopropane-block-poly(2-cinnamoylethyl methacrylate)-block-poly(tert-butyl acrylate), Chem. Mater., 1999, 11(4), 1048–1054 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Poortinga, Microcapsules from self-assembled colloidal particles using aqueous phase-separated polymer solutions, Langmuir, 2008, 24(5), 1644–1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nomura, C. Zhu, N. Sheng, G. Saito and T. Akiyama, Microencapsulation of metal-based phase change material for high-temperature thermal energy storage, Sci.
Rep., 2015, 5, 9117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, C. Lin and Y. He, Effect of surface active agent on thermal properties of carbonate salt/carbon nanomaterial composite phase change material, Appl. Energy, 2015, 156, 478–489 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lecompte, P. Le Bideau, P. Glouannec, D. Nortershauser and S. Le Masson, Mechanical and thermo-physical behaviour of concretes and mortars containing phase change material, Energy Build., 2015, 94, 52–60 CrossRef .
S. Yu, X. Wang and D. Wu, Self-assembly synthesis of microencapsulated n-eicosane phase-change materials with crystalline-phase-controllable calcium carbonate shell, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28(5), 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Kalnæs and B. P. Jelle, Phase change materials and products for building applications: a state-of-the-art review and future research opportunities, Energy Build., 2015, 94, 150–176 CrossRef .
A. Safari, R. Saidur, F. Sulaiman, Y. Xu and J. Dong, A review on supercooling of Phase Change Materials in thermal energy storage systems, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 70, 905–919 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Zeng, S.-L. Sun, L. Zhou, Y.-H. Chen, L. Shu and L.-P. Yu, 
            et al., Preparation, morphology and thermal properties of microencapsulated palmitic acid phase change material with polyaniline shells, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2017, 129(3), 1583–1592 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, T. Zou, X. Liang, S. Wang, X. Liu and X. Gao, 
            et al., Self-assembly synthesis and properties of microencapsulated n-tetradecane phase change materials with a calcium carbonate shell for cold energy storage, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5(4), 3074–3080 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Guo, J. Su, X. Zhang, N. Han and X. Wang, Microstructure and thermal reliability of microcapsules containing phase change material with self-assembled graphene/organic nano-hybrid shells, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(6), 364 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Wang and D. Wu, Design and synthesis of multifunctional microencapsulated phase change materials with silver/silica double-layered shell for thermal energy storage, electrical conduction and antimicrobial effectiveness, Energy, 2016, 111, 498–512 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, S. Wang, R. Luo, C. Zhu, T. Akiyama and Z. Zhang, Microencapsulation of phase change materials with binary cores and calcium carbonate shell for thermal energy storage, Appl. Energy, 2016, 171, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Evers, J. A. Luiken, P. G. Bolhuis and W. K. Kegel, Self-assembly of microcapsules via colloidal bond hybridization and anisotropy, Nature, 2016, 534(7607), 364 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Lan, Z. Yu, C. S. Tan, R. M. Parker and C. Abell, 
            et al., Cucurbit[n]uril-based microcapsules self-assembled within microfluidic droplets: a versatile approach for supramolecular architectures and materials, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50(2), 208–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stunda-Zujeva, Z. Irbe and L. Berzina-Cimdina, Controlling the morphology of ceramic and composite powders obtained via spray drying – a review, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43(15), 11543–11551 CrossRef CAS .
M.-I. Ré, Microencapsulation by spray drying, Drying Technol., 1998, 16(6), 1195–1236 CrossRef .
M.-I. Ré, Formulating drug delivery systems by spray drying, Drying Technol., 2006, 24(4), 433–446 CrossRef .
S. Keshani, W. R. W. Daud, M. Nourouzi, F. Namvar and M. Ghasemi, Spray drying: an overview on wall deposition, process and modeling, J. Food Eng., 2015, 146, 152–162 CrossRef .
A. Gharsallaoui, G. Roudaut, O. Chambin, A. Voilley and R. Saurel, Applications of spray-drying in microencapsulation of food ingredients: an overview, Food Res. Int., 2007, 40(9), 1107–1121 CrossRef CAS .

          T. M. Ho, T. Truong and B. Bhandari, Spray-drying and non-equilibrium states/glass transition, Non-Equilibrium States and Glass Transitions in Foods, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 111–136 Search PubMed .

          D. Zhang, M. Zhang and X. Gu, Seaweed-Derived Hydrocolloids as Food Coating and Encapsulation Agents, Bioactive Seaweeds for Food Applications, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 153–175 Search PubMed .
K. G. H. Desai and H. Jin Park, Recent developments in microencapsulation of food ingredients, Drying Technol., 2005, 23(7), 1361–1394 CrossRef CAS .
R. Murugesan and V. Orsat, Spray drying for the production of nutraceutical ingredients—a review, Food Bioprocess Technol., 2012, 5(1), 3–14 CrossRef .
A. Soottitantawat, H. Yoshii, T. Furuta, M. Ohkawara and P. Linko, Microencapsulation by spray drying: influence of emulsion size on the retention of volatile compounds, J. Food Sci., 2003, 68(7), 2256–2262 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dang, M. Yang, Z. Shan, S. Mansouri, B. K. May and X. Chen, 
            et al., On spray drying of oxidized corn starch cross-linked gelatin microcapsules for drug release, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 74, 493–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Us-Medina, L. M. Julio, M. R. Segura-Campos, V. Y. Ixtaina and M. C. Tomás, Development and characterization of spray-dried chia oil microcapsules using by-products from chia as wall material, Powder Technol., 2018, 334, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aghbashlo, H. Mobli, A. Madadlou and S. Rafiee, Fish oil microencapsulation as influenced by spray dryer operational variables, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2013, 48(8), 1707–1713 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shamaei, S. S. Seiiedlou, M. Aghbashlo, E. Tsotsas and A. Kharaghani, Microencapsulation of walnut oil by spray drying: effects of wall material and drying conditions on physicochemical properties of microcapsules, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2017, 39, 101–112 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kalkan, S. K. Vanga, R. Murugesan, V. Orsat and V. Raghavan, Microencapsulation of hazelnut oil through spray drying, Drying Technol., 2017, 35(5), 527–533 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Carneiro, R. V. Tonon, C. R. Grosso and M. D. Hubinger, Encapsulation efficiency and oxidative stability of flaxseed oil microencapsulated by spray drying using different combinations of wall materials, J. Food Eng., 2013, 115(4), 443–451 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zuo, J. Zhan, C. Luo, B. Dong, F. Xing and D. Chen, Characteristics and release property of polylactic acid/sodium monofluorophosphate microcapsules prepared by spray drying, Adv. Powder Technol., 2017, 28(11), 2805–2811 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hee, C. Tan, R. Rahman, M. Noranizan, R. Smith Jr and G. Chong, Production of virgin coconut oil microcapsules from oil-in-water emulsion with supercritical carbon dioxide spray drying, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2017, 130, 118–124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Encina, G. Márquez-Ruiz, F. Holgado, B. Giménez, C. Vergara and P. Robert, Effect of spray-drying with organic solvents on the encapsulation, release and stability of fish oil, Food Chem., 2018, 263, 283–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hampel, E. Roydeva, A. Bück and E. Tsotsas, Coating of finely dispersed particles by two-fluid nozzle, Particuology, 2018, 38, 80–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ashraf, A. M. Khan, M. Sarfraz and M. Ahmad, Effectiveness of silica based sol-gel microencapsulation method for odorants and flavors leading to sustainable environment, Front. Chem., 2015, 3, 42 Search PubMed .
L. R. Allain, K. Sorasaenee and Z. Xue, Doped Thin-Film Sensors via a Sol–Gel Process for High-Acidity Determination, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69(15), 3076–3080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ciriminna, M. Sciortino, G. Alonzo, A. D. Schrijver and M. Pagliaro, From molecules to systems: sol–gel microencapsulation in silica-based materials, Chem. Rev., 2010, 111(2), 765–789 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Lee, J. Kim, C. H. Hwang, H. E. Kim and S. H. Jeong, Strategy for Preparing Mechanically Strong Hyaluronic Acid–Silica Nanohybrid Hydrogels via In Situ Sol–Gel Process, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2018, 303(9), 1800213 CrossRef .
P. Vidinha, V. Augusto, M. Almeida, I. Fonseca, A. Fidalgo and L. Ilharco, 
            et al., Sol–gel encapsulation: an efficient and versatile immobilization technique for cutinase in non-aqueous media, J. Biotechnol., 2006, 121(1), 23–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Campàs and J.-L. Marty, Encapsulation of enzymes using polymers and sol-gel techniques, Immobilization of enzymes and cells, Springer,  2006, pp. 77–85 Search PubMed .
R. Ciriminna, A. Fidalgo, V. Pandarus, F. Beland, L. M. Ilharco and M. Pagliaro, The sol–gel route to advanced silica-based materials and recent applications, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113(8), 6592–6620 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Dave, B. Dunn, J. S. Valentine and J. I. Zink, Sol-gel encapsulation methods for biosensors, Anal. Chem., 1994, 66(22), 1120A–1127A CrossRef CAS .
A. Mujahid, P. A. Lieberzeit and F. L. Dickert, Chemical sensors based on molecularly imprinted sol-gel materials, Materials, 2010, 3(4), 2196–2217 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gupta and N. Chaudhury, Entrapment of biomolecules in sol–gel matrix for applications in biosensors: problems and future prospects, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22(11), 2387–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rahimi-Nasrabadi, H. Pourmohamadian, G. Sheikhzadeh and H. Tabrizi, Fabrication and characterization of microencapsulated PA with SiO shell through sol-gel synthesis via sodium silicate precursor, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 14 Search PubMed .
H. Yuan, H. Bai, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang and L. Yang, Synthesis and characterization of stearic acid/silicon dioxide nanoencapsules for solar energy storage, Sol. Energy, 2018, 173, 42–52 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Wang and D. Wu, Silica encapsulation of n-octadecane via sol–gel process: a novel microencapsulated phase-change material with enhanced thermal conductivity and performance, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 343(1), 246–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-Y. Wang, P.-S. Tsai and Y.-M. Yang, Preparation of silica microspheres encapsulating phase-change material by sol-gel method in O/W emulsion, J. Microencapsulation, 2006, 23(1), 3–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, A. Balram, H. Tiznobaik, D. Shin and S. Santhanagopalan, Microencapsulation of molten salt in stable silica shell via a water-limited sol-gel process for high temperature thermal energy storage, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2018, 136, 268–274 CrossRef .
T. Feczkó, L. Trif and D. Horák, Latent heat storage by silica-coated polymer beads containing organic phase change materials, Sol. Energy, 2016, 132, 405–414 CrossRef .
X. Liu and Y. Lou, Preparation of microencapsulated phase change materials by the sol–gel process and its application on textiles, Fibres Text. East. Eur., 2015, 63–67 Search PubMed .
M. Li, J. Liu and J. Shi, Synthesis and properties of phase change microcapsule with SiO2-TiO2 hybrid shell, Sol. Energy, 2018, 167, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Nistor, D. Donescu, A. Perichaud, W. Ballout and M. Ghiurea, Microencapsulation of an acrylate monomer in silica particles by sol–gel process, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 57(2), 164–171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tatarenko and A. Lazarev, Microcapsulation during pulsed expansion of TiO2 suspension in polyethylene glycol solution in supercritical CO2 into background gas, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 10(8), 1171–1175 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu and M. Yates, Development of a carbon dioxide-based microencapsulation technique for aqueous and ethanol-based latexes, Langmuir, 2002, 18(16), 6066–6070 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chattopadhyay, R. Huff and B. Y. Shekunov, Drug encapsulation using supercritical fluid extraction of emulsions, J. Pharm. Sci., 2006, 95(3), 667–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Meziani, P. Pathak and Y.-P. Sun, Supercritical fluid technology for nanotechnology in drug delivery, Nanotechnology in drug delivery, Springer,  2009, pp. 69–104 Search PubMed .
S. S. Jyothi, A. Seethadevi, K. S. Prabha, P. Muthuprasanna and P. Pavitra, Microencapsulation: a review, Int. J. Pharmacol. Biol. Sci., 2012, 3(1), 509–531 Search PubMed .
E. K. Silva and M. A. A. Meireles, Encapsulation of food compounds using supercritical technologies: applications of supercritical carbon dioxide as an antisolvent, Food Public Health, 2014, 4(5), 247–258 CrossRef .
H. Gao, G. Hu, K. Liu and L. Wu, Preparation of waterborne dispersions of epoxy resin by ultrasonic-assisted supercritical CO2 nanoemulsification technique, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 39, 520–527 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, N. Finn and M. Yates, Encapsulation and sustained release of a model drug, indomethacin, using CO2-based microencapsulation, Langmuir, 2005, 21(1), 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yousif, A. Al-Marzouqi and M. Mohsin, Microencapsulation of Ibuprofen into Polyvinylpyrrolidone Using Supercritical Fluid Technology, J. Chem. Eng. Process Technol., 2016, 7(4), 1000306 Search PubMed .
M. Kalani and R. Yunus, Application of supercritical antisolvent method in drug encapsulation: a review, Int. J. Nanomed., 2011, 6, 1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Jin, Y. Zhao and X. Guo, Preparation of coenzyme Q10 liposomes using supercritical anti-solvent technique, J. Microencapsulation, 2012, 29(1), 21–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mezzomo, D. Oliveira, S. Comim and S. Ferreira, Encapsulation of extract from winery industry residue using the supercritical anti-solvent technique, Braz. J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 33(3), 589–598 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. Karim, K. Ghafoor, S. Ferdosh, F. Al-Juhaimi, E. Ali and K. B. Yunus, 
            et al., Microencapsulation of fish oil using supercritical antisolvent process, J. Food Drug Anal., 2017, 25(3), 654–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zabihi, M. Yang, Y. Leng and Y. Zhao, PLGA–HPMC nanoparticles prepared by a modified supercritical anti-solvent technique for the controlled release of insulin, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2015, 99, 15–22 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, H. Lan, B. He, W. Hong and J. Li, Encapsulation of menthol in beeswax by a supercritical fluid technique, Int. J. Chem. Eng., 2010, 2010 Search PubMed .
Á. Martín, S. Varona, A. Navarrete and M. J. Cocero, Encapsulation and co-precipitation processes with supercritical fluids: applications with essential oils, Open Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 4(1), 31–41 CrossRef .
M. Bahrami and S. Ranjbarian, Production of micro- and nano-composite particles by supercritical carbon dioxide, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2007, 40(2), 263–283 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, T. E. Paxton and D. L. Tomasko, Microencapsulation of naproxen using rapid expansion of supercritical solutions, Biotechnol. Prog., 1996, 12(5), 650–661 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khapli and R. Jagannathan, Supercritical CO2 based processing of amorphous fluoropolymer Teflon-AF: surfactant-free dispersions and superhydrophobic films, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2014, 85, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mishima, K. Matsuyama, D. Tanabe, S. Yamauchi, T. J. Young and K. P. Johnston, Microencapsulation of proteins by rapid expansion of supercritical solution with a nonsolvent, AIChE J., 2000, 46(4), 857–865 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fontana, M. P. Ferreira, A. Correia, J. Hirvonen and H. A. Santos, Microfluidics
as a cutting-edge technique for drug delivery applications, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2016, 34, 76–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Wang, J. Wang and J. J. Han, Fabrication of Advanced Particles and Particle-Based Materials Assisted by Droplet-Based Microfluidics, Small, 2011, 7(13), 1728–1754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Chen, J. Brignoli and A. R. Studart, Mechanics of thick-shell microcapsules made by microfluidics, Polymer, 2014, 55, 6837–6843 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matosevic and B. M. Paegel, Stepwise synthesis of giant unilamellar vesicles on a microfluidic assembly line, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2798–2800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Levenstein, L. A. Bawazer, C. S. Mc Nally, W. J. Marchant, X. Gong and F. C. Meldrum, 
            et al., A reproducible approach to the assembly of microcapillaries for double emulsion production, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2016, 20(10), 143 CrossRef .
J. M. Chen, M.-C. Kuo and C.-P. Liu, Control of Droplet Generation in Flow-Focusing Microfluidic Device with a Converging-Diverging Nozzle-Shaped Section, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50(10R), 107301 CrossRef .

          J. Thiele, Fabrication of Polymersomes using Microfluidic Devices, University of Bayreuth,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Lone, G. S. Ghodake, D. S. Lee and I. W. Cheong, Facile preparation of highly monodisperse poly (NIPAAm)–AuNP composite hollow microcapsules by simple tubular microfluidics, New J. Chem., 2013, 37(4), 877–881 RSC .
M. Eggersdorfer, W. Zheng, S. Nawar, C. Mercandetti, A. Ofner and I. Leibacher, 
            et al., Tandem emulsification for high-throughput production of double emulsions, Lab Chip, 2017, 17(5), 936–942 RSC .
W. Wang, M.-J. Zhang and L.-Y. Chu, Functional polymeric microparticles engineered from controllable microfluidic emulsions, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 47(2), 373–384 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Kucuk and M. Edirisinghe, Microfluidic preparation of polymer nanospheres, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16(12), 2626 CrossRef PubMed .
N. G. Min, M. Ku, J. Yang and S.-H. Kim, Microfluidic production of uniform microcarriers with multicompartments through phase separation in emulsion drops, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(5), 1430–1438 CrossRef CAS .
I. U. Khan, C. A. Serra, N. Anton and T. Vandamme, Microfluidics: a focus on improved cancer targeted drug delivery systems, J. Controlled Release, 2013, 172(3), 1065–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Zhang, W. Wang, R. Xie, X. J. Ju, L. Liu, Y. Y. Gu and L. Y. Chu, Microfluidic fabrication of monodisperse microcapsules for glucose-response at physiological temperature, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 4150–4159 RSC .
J. Wei, X. J. Ju, R. Xie, C. L. Mou, X. Lin and L. Y. Chu, Novel cationic pH-responsive poly(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) microcapsules prepared by a microfluidic technique, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 357, 101–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Cacace, A. T. Rowland, J. J. Stapleton, D. C. Dewey and C. D. Keating, Aqueous emulsion droplets stabilized by lipid vesicles as microcompartments for biomimetic mineralization, Langmuir, 2015, 31(41), 11329–11338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, L. Duan, W. Qi, K. Wang, Y. Cui and X. Yan, 
            et al., Microcapsules containing a biomolecular motor for ATP biosynthesis, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(15), 2933–2937 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sarikaya, C. Tamerler, A. K.-Y. Jen, K. Schulten and F. Baneyx, Molecular biomimetics: nanotechnology through biology, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2(9), 577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Shah and S. P. Schwendeman, A biomimetic approach to active self-microencapsulation of proteins in PLGA, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 196, 60–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Ratner and S. J. Bryant, Biomaterials: where we have been and where we are going, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2004, 6, 41–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, J. Shen, V. Larcinese-Hafner, P. Erni and L. Ouali, Hybrid microcapsules with tunable properties via Pickering emulsion templates for the encapsulation of bioactive volatiles, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(104), 102595 RSC .
D. K. Mishra, A. K. Jain and P. K. Jain, A review on various techniques of microencapsulation, Int. J. Pharm. Chem. Sci., 2013, 2(2), 962–977 Search PubMed .
J. Thévenot, H. Oliveira, O. Sandre and S. Lecommandoux, Magnetic responsive polymer composite materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(17), 7099–7116 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Li, X. Zheng, Z. Chen, Q. Zhou and Y. Chen, 3D-Printed Biomimetic Super-Hydrophobic Structure for Microdroplet Manipulation and Oil/Water Separation, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(9), 1704912 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, S. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Yang and Z. Jiang, Preparation and enzymatic application of flower-like hybrid microcapsules through a biomimetic mineralization approach, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2(27), 4289–4296 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Liu, C. Shao, F. Bian and Y. Zhao, Biomimetic enzyme cascade reaction system in microfluidic electrospray microcapsules, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(6), eaat2816 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, J. Wang, T. Li, J. Wang, M. Xu and W. Yu, 
            et al., Review on optofluidic microreactors for artificial photosynthesis, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9(1), 30–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Trantidou, M. Friddin, Y. Elani, N. J. Brooks, R. V. Law and J. M. Seddon, 
            et al., Engineering compartmentalized biomimetic micro- and nanocontainers, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(7), 6549–6565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Elani, R. V. Law and O. Ces, Vesicle-based artificial cells as chemical microreactors with spatially segregated reaction pathways, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Choi, K. D. Seo, B. C. Kim and D. S. Kim, Recent advances in engineering microparticles and their nascent utilization in biomedical delivery and diagnostic applications, Lab Chip, 2017, 17(4), 591–613 RSC .
C.-X. Zhao, Multiphase flow microfluidics for the production of single or multiple emulsions for drug delivery, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65(11–12), 1420–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Riahi, A. Tamayol, S. A. M. Shaegh, A. M. Ghaemmaghami, M. R. Dokmeci and A. Khademhosseini, Microfluidics for advanced drug delivery systems, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2015, 7, 101–112 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, Y. Jeong, T. Kwon, D. Lee, D. Y. Oh and T.-J. Park, 
            et al., Liquid-capped encoded microcapsules for multiplex assays, Lab Chip, 2017, 17(3), 429–437 RSC .

          W. Tong and C. Gao, Multilayer Microcapsules with Tailored Structures and Properties as Delivery Carriers for Drugs and Growth Factors, Polymeric Biomaterials for Tissue Regeneration, Springer,  2016, pp. 75–99 Search PubMed .
S. A. Memon, Phase change materials integrated in building walls: a state of the art review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 870–906 CrossRef .
A. Mohamed, A. Hasan and K. Sirén, Fulfillment of net-zero energy building (NZEB) with four metrics in a single family house with different heating alternatives, Appl. Energy, 2014, 114, 385–399 CrossRef .
W. Su, J. Darkwa, G. Kokogiannakis, T. Zhou and Y. Li, Preparation of microencapsulated phase change materials (MEPCM) for thermal energy storage, Energy Procedia, 2017, 121, 95–101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shim, E. McCullough and B. Jones, Using phase change materials in clothing, Text. Res. J., 2001, 71(6), 495–502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Giro-Paloma, M. Martínez, L. F. Cabeza and A. I. Fernández, Types, methods, techniques, and applications for microencapsulated phase change materials (MPCM): a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 53, 1059–1075 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Pause, Phase change materials and their application in coatings and laminates for textiles, Smart Textile Coatings and Laminates, Elsevier,  2010, pp. 236–250 Search PubMed .

          S. Coyle and D. Diamond, Smart Nanotextiles: materials and their application, Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, Elsevier,  2010, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .

          C. Ho, J. Fan, E. Newton and R. Au, Improving thermal comfort in apparel, Improving comfort in clothing, Elsevier,  2011, pp. 165–181 Search PubMed .
F. Kuznik, J. Virgone and J. Noel, Optimization of a phase change material wallboard for building use, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2008, 28(11–12), 1291–1298 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Mapston and C. Westbrook, Prefabricated building units and modern methods of construction (MMC), Materials for Energy Efficiency and Thermal Comfort in Buildings, Elsevier,  2010, pp. 427–454 Search PubMed .

          B. Jelle and S. Kalnæs, Phase Change Materials for Application in Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cost-Effective Energy Efficient Building Retrofitting, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 57–118 Search PubMed .
W. Su, J. Darkwa and G. Kokogiannakis, Development of microencapsulated phase change material for solar thermal energy storage, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 112, 1205–1212 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wani and P. K. Loharkar, A Review of Phase Change Materials as an Alternative for Solar Thermal Energy Storage, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4(9), 10264–10267 Search PubMed .
S. R. White, N. R. Sottos, P. H. Geubelle, J. S. Moore, M. R. Kessler and S. Sriram, 
            et al., Autonomic healing of polymer composites, Nature, 2001, 409(6822), 794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Zhang, H.-C. Yu, M.-C. Shen, Y.-T. Chern and C.-C. Li, Synthesis and application of self-healing microcapsules containing curable glue, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 240, 122161 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, G. Sun, X. Zhu, A. Guarin, B. Li and Z. Dai, 
            et al., A comprehensive review on self-healing of asphalt materials: mechanism, model, characterization and enhancement, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 256, 65–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Koh, N.-K. Kim, J. Shin and Y.-W. Kim, Polyurethane microcapsules for self-healing paint coatings, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(31), 16214–16223 RSC .
K. Cao, Z. Yu and D. Yin, Preparation of Ce-MOF@TEOS to enhance the anti-corrosion properties of epoxy coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 135, 613–621 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ubaid, A. B. Radwan, N. Naeem, R. Shakoor, Z. Ahmad and M. Montemor, 
            et al., Multifunctional self-healing polymeric nanocomposite coatings for corrosion inhibition of steel, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2019, 372, 121–133 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Wang, A. Liu, W.-J. Fan, R. Ding and H. Tian, 
            et al., Self-healing and anti-corrosion performances of 1,2,4-triazole modified nano-silica hydrogels, Colloid Interface Sci. Commun., 2018, 27, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Xie, H. Zhou, F. R. Tay, M. D. Weir and M. A. S. Melo, 
            et al., Development of a new class of self-healing and therapeutic dental resins, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2019, 163, 87–99 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang and G. Li, Advances in healing-on-demand polymers and polymer composites, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 57, 32–63 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Zhu, M. Z. Rong and M. Q. Zhang, Self-healing polymeric materials based on microencapsulated healing agents: from design to preparation, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 49, 175–220 CrossRef .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Mohamed Gibril Bah
	Mohamed Gibril Bah graduated from Njala University in Sierra Leone with a Bachelor of Science with Honors in Environmental Chemistry in 2009. He also obtained his master’ degree in the field of Chemical Engineering from the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology at Tianjin University, China. His research interests include the fabrication of complex microcapsules with keen interest in the new subfield of nano-medicine called biomimicry and renewable energy systems.

Hafiz Muhammad Bilal
	Hafiz Muhammad Bilal is currently a PhD student in the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, China; prior to this, he received his MS degree in MS Chemical Engineering from the Institute of Chemical Engineering and Technology, University of the Punjab, Pakistan. His research focuses on the fabrication of complex microparticles assisted by droplet-based microfluidics and continuous oil–water separation using super-hydrophobic materials.

Jingtao Wang
	Jingtao Wang received his PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2006. Currently, he is a professor in the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, China. His research fields include the fabrication of soft particles and microcapsules assisted by droplet-based microfluidics, the numerical simulation of the rheological behaviors of droplets and multiple emulsions, and industrial crystallization.

 	Fig. 1  Morphologies of microcapsules: (a) a microcapsule with a single core, (b) a microcapsule with multiple cores and (c) a matrix microcapsule.12	 

 	Fig. 2  Different microparticle structures.13	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Monomers are dissolved in the continuous phase. (b) Polymer formation. (c) Deposition and precipitation of the polymer at the interface. (d) Microcapsule formation.18	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the layer-by-layer deposition method.13	 

 	Fig. 5  Self-assembly process.3	 

 	Fig. 6  Spray drying and coating.109	 

 	Fig. 7  Flow chart of the fabrication process of microparticles through the sol–gel method.112	 

 	Fig. 8  Supercritical CO2-assisted method.13	 

 	Fig. 9  Multiple emulsion globules.150	 

 	Fig. 10  Flowchart summarizing the key features and potential applications of the various methods.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
