Structurally modified T-metal complexes and organic dyes as photosensitizers and earth-abundant T-metal catalysts for photo-driven hydrogen evolution  ...  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SE00177B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SE00177B
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1891-1922Structurally modified T-metal complexes and organic dyes as photosensitizers and earth-abundant T-metal catalysts for photo-driven hydrogen evolution in artificial photosynthetic systems

        
          
            Rahat 
            Gupta
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Priya 
            Sahni
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Simran 
            Sharma
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anindya 
            Roy
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Amlan K. 
            Pal
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu, Nagrota Bypass Road, Jammu and Kashmir 181221, India. E-mail: amlan.pal@iitjammu.ac.in
Received 
      8th February 2022
    , Accepted 2nd March 2022First published on 10th March 2022AbstractThe ever-persisting problem of energy crisis can be mitigated with renewable energy research leading to green energy sources, e.g., hydrogen. This work introduces explicitly photocatalytic hydrogen production employing 4d/5d-T-metal complexes and organic dyes as photosensitizers (PSs) and 3d-T-metal complexes (Co, Ni) with oxime, salen, porphyrin, and polypyridyl based ligands as catalysts. The review is focused on the judicious design of both PSs and catalysts to enhance the overall catalytic activity of artificial photosynthetic systems. Photoinduced electron transfer pathways involving the active sites of the catalysts have been made part of the discussion that elucidates how to design a robust and efficient photocatalytic hydrogen production system rationally. Reduction potentials of the catalysts and photosensitizers, change in the free energy values and DFT calculations have also been discussed to access the thermodynamic feasibility of the photo-induced electron transfer processes. Electrochemical studies, flash photolysis investigations, and various spectroscopic and microscopic techniques, e.g., photoluminescence, transient absorption, and emission, scanning/transmission electron microscopy studies, have been included in the discussion to validate the proposed catalytic mechanisms.Rahat GuptaRahat Gupta completed his BSc from Govt. Gandhi Memorial Science College in 2017. He received his MSc from the University of Jammu in 2019. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD in renewable/green energy research under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.Priya SahniPriya Sahni completed her BSc from Govt. Gandhi Memorial Science College in 2012. She received her MSc from the University of Jammu in 2014. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in molecular and photoredox catalysis based on high valent metal complexes under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.Simran SharmaSimran Sharma completed her BSc from Govt. Degree College at Kathua in 2017. She received her MSc and MPhil degrees from the University of Jammu in 2019 and 2021, respectively. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in research based on thermally activated delayed fluorescence and photoredox catalysis under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.Anindya RoyAnindya Roy completed his BSc from the University of Calcutta in 2016. He received his MSc degree from the Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad in 2018. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD in photoredox catalysis under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.Amlan K. PalDr Amlan K. Pal received his PhD (2014) from the Department of Chemistry, University of Montreal, under the supervision of Prof. Garry S. Hanan. He pursued his postdoctoral work in the field of solid state lighting at Prof. Eli Zysman-Colman's research group (2015–2017), University of St Andrews, UK. Then he worked in the fields of photoredox catalysis and self-assembly of light harvesting complexes as a Leverhulme Early Career Fellow (2017–2019) at the School of Chemistry, University of St Andrews, UK. Since 2020, he has been working as an assistant professor at the Indian Institute of Technology Jammu in the fields of renewable and green energy research, photoredox catalysis and solid state lighting.
1. Introduction
Ever since the energy crisis problem was scientifically justified in the early 1960s, artificial photosynthetic systems (APSs) have been the focus of considerable research. In the present scenario, where most of our energy demands are fulfilled by non-renewable sources of energy, such as coal, petroleum, etc., the day is not far when the human race will be deprived of these resources. Moreover, these non-renewable sources of energy pose a serious threat to the environment as they release hazardous greenhouse gases such as CO2, methane, etc. contributing to global warming and various types of pollution problems, thereby distressing the health of living organisms.1–3 Hence the need of the hour is to divert the attention towards the development of renewable sources of energy which could be used as alternatives to these traditional non-renewable sources of energy.3,4 The most potent and sustainable energy system is possibly molecular hydrogen (H2), as H2 can be produced by water splitting. It is an ideal environmentally friendly energy carrier with a high energy density (143 MJ kg−1) giving rise to a benign combustion product (water).5,6 In comparison to biofuel or hydropower which requires large space for power generation, hydrogen production doesn't require such large areas. Nowadays, NASA is directing its attention towards using hydrogen as a potential renewable source of energy and the water that is generated as a by-product, as a result of the combustion of hydrogen being used for drinking purposes by astronauts.7 These facts give a clear indication that hydrogen fuel is a non-hazardous source of energy and therefore better than nuclear power, natural gas, and coal which are all either pollution causing or difficult to procure. If we talk about hydrogen fuel cells, these are more competent than many other sources of energy even than many green energy solutions. Because of such an efficiency of these fuel cells, more energy per pound of fuel can be produced. For example, electricity is generated with an efficiency of 33–35% in conventional combustion-based power plants, whereas with hydrogen fuel cells, the efficiency reaches up to 65%. Similar is the case with vehicles where hydrogen fuel cells consume 40–60% of the fuel's energy and offer a 50% reduction in fuel consumption.7
Hydrogen can also be generated by electrocatalytic splitting of water and the field has been well exploited in the past 50 years. However, in industries, 95% of the hydrogen is still produced from steam methane reforming and coal gasification, whereas only a very small amount (4%) of hydrogen is produced by non-cost-effective electrocatalysis.8 Photocatalytic hydrogen production is a topic of recent interest and extensive research is underway in this field for the development of such systems that could provide hydrogen at a very low cost. Moreover, much attention is being paid towards the development of such a system that could harness solar energy for hydrogen production as solar energy is accessible in most of the parts of the earth and therefore can be easily accessed for hydrogen production. In this context, a natural photosynthetic system (NPS) that uses CO2, H2O, and sunlight to produce O2 and carbohydrates in an energy uphill reaction (ΔG > 0) directs researchers to the design of APSs.5,6 NPSs usually encompass two main large protein structures, namely photosystem I (P700) and photosystem II (P680), which are assisted by several other redox co-factors. NPSs mainly comprise three main steps: (i) the first step involves the harvesting of sunlight and its utilization for the creation of local charge separation between PS I and PS II. (ii) The other step involves the spatial charge separation in which a proton-coupled electron transfer step takes place between redox co-factors, followed by (iii) the multielectron redox catalysis at the active sites, which results in the generation of carbohydrates and oxygen. Based on the model, structural elements, and functions of NPSs, several types of APSs have been developed in the past few years. In the present scenario, growing interest is on two different types of APS systems, namely single- and two-photosensitizer systems to photo-produce H2. In the single photosensitizer model, both the hydrogen evolving catalyst and the oxygen-evolving catalyst are present on the same photosensitizer. Although the model looks quite simple and easy to construct, it suffers from two main disadvantages one of which is related to the difficulty in finding a suitable material for the photosensitizer with a suitable band gap for overall water reduction. In more technical terms, the excited state reduction potential of an ideal photosensitizer must be more positive than the oxidation potential of water (+0.82 V vs. NHE at pH 7); meanwhile, on the other side, it should have more negative excited-state oxidation potential than −0.41 V (vs. NHE at pH 7), which is the reduction potential of water.5 Also, even in the case of a material whose excited-state energy matches with the redox potential of water, only ultraviolet radiation, which constitutes only less than 5% of the Sun's spectrum, can be utilized to drive both the H2 and O2 evolution reactions in the single photosensitizer model. To surpass these shortcomings, a two-photosensitizer model with the z-scheme configuration was developed. In this model, H2 and O2 evolving catalysts are present on different photosensitizers. In this case, the oxidation potential of the excited-state of PS I should be sufficiently negative than the reduction potential of water; however, on the other hand, the oxidation potential of the excited-state of PS II should be more positive than the oxidation potential of water. One of the most apparent advantages includes the system's capability of working in visible and infrared light. However, the overall structure of the system is more intricate than that of the single photosensitizer model. Moreover, control of kinetic balances of the electron transfer processes for an efficient charge separation along with the reduction in energy caused by charge combination is quite thought-provoking (Scheme 1). Currently, these two photosensitizer systems are studied separately for the reductive and oxidative half-reactions because of the intricacies that arise in designing a complete APS system. Particularly, the field of APSs for hydrogen generation has been undergoing intensive development for the last two decades with an outcome of various robust and efficient APSs.9–14
 Scheme 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the natural photocatalytic system (NPS) involving PS I and PS II. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15 (Copyright 2019, US Government). (b and c) Schematic illustration of the charge separation processes in an APS; (b) representation of a single photosensitizer APS bearing both H2 and O2 evolving catalysts on a single photosensitizer and (c) representation of a double photosensitizer APS carrying H2 and the O2 evolving catalysts on two different photosensitizers. 
In this review, we will highlight various hybrid systems, consisting of transition metal complexes and organic dyes as the photosensitizer along with organometallic complexes of earth-abundant metals such as Co and Ni as hydrogen evolving catalysts. The review begins with a basic discussion about the various components required for photocatalytic hydrogen production followed by some common mechanisms involving cobalt and nickel-based catalysts for photo-driven hydrogen production. In the main section, cobalt and nickel molecular catalysts (with bidentate bpy, phen, salen, oxime, or tetradentate porphyrin, etc.) are used along with transition metal complexes as photosensitizers. New hybrid systems, e.g., supramolecular dyads using tridentate ligands, such as 4-Pytpy = 4-(4-pyridinyl)-2,2; 6,2′′-terpyridine, have been included. We have also included a series of [Ru(tpy)2]2+ complexes as PSs, where the ligands are judiciously endowed with improved photophysical properties in conjunction with cobalt-based catalysts. Even though there were a handful of related reviews in the year 2010–2018, to the best of our knowledge, no review has discussed photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in such an elaborate way as proposed in this review. The review work by Nam et al. in 2018 emphasizes mostly thermal H2 evolution using earth-abundant metal complexes with a narrow emphasis on photocatalytic H2 evolution (2011–2017).16 The review article by Artero and Fontecave concentrates on electrocatalysis, water oxidation catalysts, Rh, Pd, Pt-based photocatalysts and a few examples of H2ase mimics and Co, Ni-based molecular catalysts.17 The perspective by Zhang and co-workers comprises mostly QDs as PSs and water-soluble H2ases as catalysts with semiconductor nanoparticles/wires as PSs and only a few cobalt/nickel-based catalysts.18 A perspective by Sun et al. only covers transition metals as PSs and natural/mimics of H2ases as catalysts.19 We propose to review the photo-production of H2 where all the different combinations of PSs and catalysts are covered. Mechanistic details in conjugation with the best possible reasons for the better performance of one system over the other are also discussed. A recent SciFinder search with ‘photocatalytic hydrogen production’ and ‘light-driven hydrogen production’ shows the growing interest in this field (Chart 1). This review can serve as a single platform for a wide variety of researchers in a detailed and comprehensive fashion covering 20 years of research work.
 Chart 1  Graphs showing SciFinder search with the terms (a) photocatalytic hydrogen production and (b) light-driven hydrogen production, conducted on June 2021. 
2. Components of APSs for H2 generation and mechanisms
2.1 Photosensitizer
Photosensitizers are the reagents that absorb the incident radiation and thereby cause chemical or physical alteration of another chemical entity. Particularly talking about artificial photocatalytic systems, a photosensitizer acts as a light harvester and transfers electrons to the electron acceptor, similar to photosynthetic pigments.18 Whenever a photosensitizer absorbs an incident photon, whose energy corresponds to one of the possible transitions of the photosensitizer, there occurs a transfer of an electron from the ground state to the excited state, thereby generating an excited state photosensitizer (PS*). The excited state PS* exhibits a different electronic structure and redox potential than the ground state photosensitizer. The PS* can transfer an electron to the electron acceptor to generate a charge-separated state. The transfer of electrons can take place by two competitive processes, oxidative quenching or reductive quenching. In oxidative quenching, the PS* first transfers an electron to the electron acceptor and therefore forms an oxidized photosensitizer PS+ which is reverted to its original state by accepting an electron from the electron donor. On the other hand, in the case of reductive quenching, the PS* is first reduced to a more powerful reducing species PS− by the acceptance of electrons from the electron donor. This reduced photosensitizer then transfers the electron to the electron acceptor and therefore attains its original state. However, the dominant pathway of the electron transfer is determined based on quenching studies.20 For a photosensitizer to work efficiently, the primary requirement is to have a broad spectral absorption i.e., it must be able to absorb most of the light that falls on its surface. Also, the photosensitizer must possess a large extinction coefficient, long excited-state lifetime, superior photostability, and suitable band structure. A large number of photosensitizers such as organic dyes, transition metal complexes, and semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are potentially being used as light-harvesting photosensitizers. Generally, it has been observed that most of the organic dyes, except a few, undergo reductive quenching in their excited state thereby generating a reduced anion that decomposes very easily. QDs, on the other hand, have certain advantages owing to their unique size-dependent absorption and large absorption cross-section over a broad spectral range even after the accumulation of holes or electrons, thereby allowing the coupling of single-photon electron events with multielectron redox reactions.21–23 Materials with these characteristics are sought after to be used as light-harvesting photosensitizers.24 Some most commonly used transition metal complexes and organic dye photosensitizers are shown in Chart 2.
 Chart 2  Examples and optoelectronic properties of some archetypical PSs. aData in degassed MeCN, from ref. 25, bdata in degassed MeCN, from ref. 26, cdata in degassed MeCN, from ref. 27, and ddata in degassed methanol, from ref. 28. 
2.2 Sacrificial electron donor
A sacrificial electron donor (SED) in the reductive half-reaction of artificial photosynthesis is required for providing electrons for proton reduction and also for the regeneration of the photosensitizer. Generally, when a SED is combined with a semiconductor photosensitizer, it must fulfill two requirements. First, the energy level of the SED must be higher than that of the valence band of the semiconductor. Second, the transfer of an electron from the SED to semiconductor should take place prior to the decay of the photoexcited state of the semiconductor. A SED can also act as a proton source. However, this is not always the case, and therefore, an external proton source is used. Some most commonly used SEDs are triethylamine (TEA), triethanolamine (TEOA), ascorbic acid (H2A), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), etc. The structures of these are shown in Chart 3.
 Chart 3  Molecular structures of some commonly used (a) catalysts and (b) sacrificial electron donors for photocatalytic hydrogen production. 
2.3 Catalyst
A catalyst in the reductive half-reaction in artificial photosynthesis is required for accepting electrons from the excited state PS* (oxidative quenching) or the reduced photosensitizer PS− generated by reductive quenching. The electrons accepted are, therefore, utilized for the reduction of protons to molecular hydrogen.24 Since the reduction of protons to molecular hydrogen has a large activation barrier, which causes a large overpotential and low rate, a catalyst is required to bring down this barrier for efficient electron transfer and generation of hydrogen.18 Traditionally used colloidal Pt or Pt-based complexes offer a magnificent catalytic activity for hydrogen generation; however, they are very expensive and therefore have a limited supply. Hence, for the past many years, attention has been diverted towards the development of noble metal-free catalysts. In this context, molecular catalysts, particularly biomimetic complexes of earth-abundant elements such as Fe, Co, and Ni, are being potentially exploited for proton reduction. The use of a molecular catalyst not only lowers the energy barrier for efficient electron transfer but also allows us to have an insight into the mechanistic details of photocatalytic hydrogen production at the molecular level. Moreover, these molecular catalysts possess tunable redox properties and also the structures of these molecular catalysts can be modified conveniently and therefore can be linked to PSs due to the versatility of the ligands.6,29 Co(II), Co(III) and Ni(II) complexes are being extensively used as catalysts in conjugation with transition metal photosensitizers and organic dyes. Structures of some of the most commonly used catalysts for proton reduction are shown in Chart 3.
2.4 General mechanisms
Precise knowledge of the essential steps and the mechanisms involved in photo-driven hydrogen production is of great importance as it helps in designing and constructing a potential artificial photocatalytic system. In the past few decades, significant advancements have been made for understanding the mechanism of light-driven hydrogen production which paved a way for the development of new artificial photocatalytic systems.
When Co(II)/(III) transition metal complexes are used as the catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen production, the mechanism regarding the photosensitizers is the same as already discussed above. However, in terms of catalysts, the mechanism follows different kinds of pathways. In the case of Co(II) complexes being used as catalysts, the mechanistic process begins with the initial reduction of Co(II) species to generate Co(I) species which consequently undergoes protonation to generate Co(III)–H species (cycle a, Scheme 2). Now this Co(III)–H species may give hydrogen via two pathways as shown in Scheme 2. In one of the pathways, the Co(III)–H species may undergo further protonation to produce hydrogen along with the regeneration of Co(II) species.30,31 In the alternative pathway, if the Co(III)–H species is not reactive enough, then it is first reduced to give Co(II)–H species which catalyzes the hydrogen production after protonation.32,33 However, in the case of Co(III) complexes being used as the catalyst, the Co(III) species is first converted to Co(I) by accepting two electrons from the photosensitizer (cycle b, Scheme 2)34 and the rest of the mechanism remains the same as described in the case of Co(II) complexes.
 Scheme 2  Catalytic cycles of Co(II/III) catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen production via different pathways. 
In the case of Ni(II) catalysts, two pathways, like Co(II/III), are followed. In one of the pathways, the catalytic process begins with the initial reduction of Ni(II) species by the acceptance of an electron from the PS to give a Ni(I) species which is believed to be a highly reactive and essential intermediate for photocatalytic hydrogen production (cycle a, Scheme 3). This Ni(I) species undergoes protonation to give Ni(III)–H species which subsequently converts to Ni(II)–H species after accepting another photoexcited electron. The Ni(II)–H species then catalyzes hydrogen evolution via protonation35 as shown in cycle a, Scheme 3. However, in another pathway (cycle b, Scheme 3), the Ni(II) species is first converted into Ni(0) species by the acceptance of two electrons from the photosensitizer. This Ni(0) species then undergoes protonation to produce Ni(II)–H species which consequently upon protonation gives hydrogen along with the regeneration of the Ni(II) catalyst (cycle b, Scheme 3).36–38
 Scheme 3  Photocatalytic paths for hydrogen evolution using Ni(II) molecular catalysts. 
3. H2 evolution using transition metal complexes and organic dyes as photosensitizers and cobalt/nickel based molecular catalysts
Bernhard and co-workers in 2005 synthesized a library of 32 heteroleptic Ir(III) complexes using combinatorial synthesis in conjugation with high-throughput screening techniques, each with two cyclometalating ligands and one diamine ligand.39 The parallel high-throughput analytical techniques utilized have not only allowed the easy identification of promising PSs but also provided considerable insight into the mechanism involved. Various photophysical parameters including excited-state lifetime, molar absorptivity, and photoluminescence quantum efficiency were measured which enabled them to choose six potential photosensitizers out of those thirty-two. However, only the best three examples would be considered here, which are [Ir(ppy)2(phen)]+, [Ir(F-mppy)2(bpy)]+ (F-mppy = 5-methyl-2-(4-fluoro)phenylpyridinato) and [Ir(F-mppy)2(phen)]+. All three photosensitizers were tested for their hydrogen evolution efficiency along with [Co(bpy)3]Cl2 (the electron relay) and TEOA (the sacrificial electron donor) in 1:1 (v/v) H2O/CH3CN solution irradiated using a blue LED. 37% HCl was added to adjust the pH downwards. Two reference photosensitizers [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and [Ru(dmphen)]2+ (dmphen = 2,9-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline) were also tested along with [Co(bpy)3]Cl2 in order to have a comparison with the above mentioned Ir(III) complexes. It was interesting to note that [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and [Ru(dmphen)]2+ were not at all quenched by TEOA but surprisingly all the aforementioned Ir(III) complexes were not only quenched by TEOA but also by [Co(bpy)3]Cl2. Hence, the Ir(III) complexes were found to be more strongly quenched than their [Ru]2+ counterparts. All three Ir(III) complexes were found to be better reducing agents than the most commonly used photosensitizers [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and [Ru(dmphen)]2+. For complex [Ir(ppy)2(phen)]+, the excited-state reduction potential was found to be −0.88 V vs. SCE which accounts for its better performance in hydrogen evolution with a TON of 17 (based on the catalyst) in comparison to the 2 and 12 for [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and [Ru(dmphen)]2+, respectively. Similarly for [Ir(F-mppy)2(phen)]+ and [Ir(F-mppy)2(bpy)]+ the TONs were found to be 17 and 18, respectively. The excited state reduction potentials of the other two Ir complexes, [Ir(F-mppy)2(phen)]+ and [Ir(F-mppy)2(bpy)]+, were found to be −0.86 V and −0.82 V vs. SCE, respectively. Hence, the F-mppy complexes were more strongly quenched than their ppy counterpart. Therefore, the cause of better hydrogen evolution of the F-mppy complexes might be attributed to the enhancement in the competence of the second pathway for hydrogen production which was the result of the quenching of the excited photosensitizer.39 In addition to this, the TON of hydrogen production based on the PS [Ru(dmphen)]2+ was found to be concentration-dependent – with decreasing concentration from 320 to 0.5 μM the TON was found to be gradually increasing from 130 to 9200. At a low concentration of the PS, an increase in the concentration of the PS caused an initial increase in the amount of hydrogen produced. However, at a certain point, the hydrogen evolution reached a saturation point. This was because of the fact that at a certain fixed concentration of the PS, all the light from the LED source will be absorbed by the chromophore and therefore, any further addition of the PS would not make any further difference in the hydrogen evolution. When the photosensitizer concentration is low, the amount of hydrogen produced increases substantially with increasing photosensitizer concentration.
In 2008, Artero et al. reported the synthesis of photocatalysts C1–C4 by replacing the axial ligand of cobaloxime moieties with pyridine residues of the compound [(bpy)2Ru(L-pyr]2+ (L-pyr = (4-pyridine)oxazolo[4,5-f]phenanthroline).40 Such a combination for the formation of these supramolecules was chosen based on the potential abilities of the cobaloxime and ruthenium tris(diamine) moieties to act as a photocatalyst and photosensitizer, respectively.41,42 In these types of molecular devices, it was believed that via fine-tuning both the distance between the metal centres and the nature of the bridges, intramolecular electron transfer from the metal center to the catalytic center could be improved and charge recombination processes could be limited.43,44 All the photocatalysts were employed for hydrogen evolution using 100 equivalents of each of Et3N and Et3NHBF4 as the sacrificial electron donor and proton source, respectively. The reaction mixture was irradiated with a CdI-doped Hg light source (λirr > 350 nm). No hydrogen was produced when the catalyst was omitted. Using C1 as a photocatalyst, a TON of 56 was achieved over 4 h of irradiation. Under identical reaction conditions and the same time of irradiation, the TONs for C2 and C3 were found to be only 17 and 12, respectively. Upon increasing the concentration of both Et3N and Et3NHBF4 to 300 equivalents, a TON of 85 was achieved for C1 after 5 h of irradiation. However, the maximum TOF was obtained in the first hour of irradiation but hydrogen production was sustained in the following time with a TOF of 7–8 h−1. Using a UV cut-off filter, a TON of 103 was found for photocatalyst C1 over 15 h of irradiation. Complex C4, which was a close analog of C1, showed a two-fold increase in photocatalytic activity, giving a TON of 104 within 4 h using 100 equivalents of each of Et3N and Et3NHBF4. The photocatalytic activities of these supramolecular assemblies, C1–C4, were compared with that of the multicomponent system [Ru(bpy)3]2+/cobaloxime. However, a TON of only 2 was obtained after 4 h of irradiation for the multicomponent system. The better performance of the supramolecular assembly than that of the multicomponent system may be attributed to the presence of a conjugated bridging ligand which facilitated photogenerated electron transfer either through bonds or by an outer sphere mechanism which was further favoured by the spatial proximity of the ruthenium center and the catalytic cobaloxime moiety. Hence, the supramolecular moieties were found to be 1.5–8.5 times more efficient than the multicomponent system.40 However, such supramolecules were found to be active under near UV irradiation and completely inactive in the visible region (>380 nm). In order to improve this shortfall, Artero et al. in 2008 developed two more types of supramolecular assemblies, one based on Ru, [(dmphen)2Ru(L-pyr)Co(dmgBF2)2(OH2)]PF6 (L-pyr = 4-pyridineoxazolo[4,5-f]phenanthroline) (C5), and the other based on Ir, [(ppy)2Ir(L-pyr)Co(dmgBF2)2(OH2)]PF6 (C6) (Fig. 1).45 Such systems were found to actively work in the visible region. These complexes were also assessed for their photocatalytic activity by dissolving them in acetone and using 300 equivalents of Et3N as a sacrificial electron donor and 300 equivalents of Et3NH+ as a proton source, and the reaction mixture was irradiated with a 150 W Hg lamp coupled to a UV cut-off filter (λirr > 380 nm).45 The results were reported in terms of turnovers (moles of H2 produced per mol of cobalt catalyst). Complex C5 showed photocatalytic activity under visible light, though the TON was as low as only 9, achieved during 4 h of irradiation. In comparison to this, complex C6 showed significant enhancement in photocatalytic activity yielding a TON of 140 after 8 h with 300 equivalents of both Et3N and Et3NH+. Increased turnovers (TON = 210) were obtained in a 15 h experiment using 600 equivalents of each of Et3N and Et3NH+. In addition to this, a multi-component system consisting of [Ir(ppy)2(phen)]+ and [Co(dmgBF2)2(OH2)2] in the presence of 300 equivalents of each of Et3N and Et3NH+ was also studied for its photocatalytic activity. The system displayed an activity roughly similar to that of complex C6 though it was found to be less stable owing to the fact that the maximum turnover number obtained after 15 h of experiment with 600 equivalents of both Et3N and Et3NH+ didn't exceed 165. On using [Re(CO)3Br(phen)] as a photosensitizer in this multicomponent system along with [Co(dmgBF2)2(OH2)2], photoinduced hydrogen production appeared to be faster with about 140 turnovers achieved in 4 h. This enhanced activity was proposed to rely on the improved stability of the photocatalyst which was confirmed by the fact that up to 273 turnovers were achieved in 15 h of experiment using 600 equivalents of both Et3N and Et3NH+.45
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of the various components used as dyads and multicomponent systems for photocatalytic hydrogen production.45 
In 2008, Eisenberg and co-workers developed a homogeneous catalytic system for photochemical hydrogen generation from aqueous protons using [Co(dmgH)2PyCl]3+ (Py = pyridine) as a molecular catalyst for hydrogen evolution, Pt(II)-terpyridyl acetylide as a photosensitizer and TEOA as a sacrificial electron donor.46 [Co(dmgH)2PyCl]3+ was chosen owing to its ability to produce H2 at −0.09 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) with ∼100 turnovers.42 However, it was employed for the first time for photocatalytic hydrogen production. Pt(II) was found to undergo reductive quenching by TEOA and oxidative quenching by methyl viologen (MV). In earlier reports, the Pt(II) complex was found to be effective for hydrogen production in the presence of electron relays, such as MV, TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor, and colloidal Pt as the catalyst.47 However, when the Co(III) complex was replaced for colloidal Pt in this four-component system no hydrogen evolution was seen as the electron relay was not able to reductively quench the Co(III) complex. Therefore, the system was revised and the electron relay was removed. Ultimately it was found that the Co(III) complex was able to oxidatively quench the Pt(II) complex with a quenching rate constant kq of 1.27 × 109 M−1 s−1. The maximum hydrogen production was observed using the Pt(II) complex (1.11 × 10−5 M), catalyst (1.99 × 10−4 M), and TEOA (1.61 × 10−2 M) in CH3CN/water (3:2 v/v) solvent at a pH of 8.5, giving turnovers of ∼400 based on the Pt chromophore after 10 h of irradiation. Changing the pH to less than 7 ceased hydrogen evolution which might be either due to the protonation of TEOA or inhibition of proton loss from [TEOA]+. On increasing the pH to greater than 12, the driving force for H2 production was greatly reduced and the protonation of the Co complex which was necessary for H2 evolution became unfavourable.
In 2012, Zhao et al. reported the synthesis of a Co(III) complex (C7) containing the pentadentate ligand DPA (DPA = N,N-bis(2-pyridinylmethyl)-2,2′-bipyridine-6-methanamine) (Scheme 4).32 Initially, the complex [Co(DPA-bpy)]Cl2 was synthesized whose aqueous solution upon refluxing in aqueous AgPF6 yielded [Co(DPA-bpy)(OH2)](PF6)3 (C7) which subsequently was applied for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in 10 mL, 1.0 M acetate buffer at pH 4.0 containing 0.1 M ascorbic acid as the sacrificial electron donor and 0.5 mM [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as the photosensitizer. The reaction mixture was irradiated using an LED centered at 450 nm. Hydrogen was produced after irradiation giving a TON of >1600 mol H2 (mol Cat)−1. However, the hydrogen evolution ceased after 3 h. Nearly 90% hydrogen was produced within the first hour of irradiation which corresponded to a TOF of 1500 mol H2 (mol cat)−1 h−1. Controlled experiments performed by omitting the photosensitizer, ascorbic acid or the catalyst revealed that all components were necessary for hydrogen production.32 Besides this, photocatalytic hydrogen production was found to depend on the concentration of C7. Photocatalytic experiments performed using different concentrations of C7 (0.5–50 μM) at pH = 4 revealed that at lower concentration the hydrogen production efficiency was greater (at 0.5 μM, TON and TOF were 4400 (mol cat)−1 and 4000 (mol cat)−1 h−1, respectively, whereas at 50 μM, TON and TOF were 450 (mol cat)−1 and 410 (mol cat)−1 h−1, respectively). Furthermore, the hydrogen evolution efficiency was found to be dependent on the concentration of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and ascorbic acid. When carrying out the HER at a higher concentration of ascorbic acid (0.5 μM) and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (2 μM) with 5 μM C7, the TON was found to increase during the first hour of irradiation from 1600 to 2100 (mol cat)−1 corresponding to a TOF of > 1900 (mol cat)−1 h−1 indicating that the reduced form of C7 was highly efficient for hydrogen evolution.32 Attempts were made to identify the factors responsible for the degradation of the photocatalytic activity of the system by the addition of any one of the three components to the reaction mixture after the cessation of hydrogen production. However, the addition of any one of these components gave a similar amount of hydrogen evolution and no further improvement in hydrogen production was observed suggesting that all three components degraded during the process. The addition of both the photosensitizer and the catalyst resumed the hydrogen production by 37% whereas the addition of ascorbic acid and the photosensitizer improved the hydrogen production by 10%. However, no significant amount of hydrogen production was observed by the addition of the catalyst and ascorbic acid suggesting a complete degradation of the photosensitizer. According to the authors, the degradation of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was because of the substitution of the bpy ligand by the ascorbate anion.32 Also, it was suggested that the ascorbate anion could coordinate to the catalyst leading to unwanted by-products.32 The formation of such unwanted by products caused a technical delay in photocatalytic hydrogen production activity using a SED and ultimately resulted in lowering the solar conversion efficiency.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of a Co(III) photocatalyst (C7) containing a pentadentate ligand.32 
In the same year, Eisenberg and co-workers reported a series of Co(III) dithiolene complexes (C8–C11) which were found to be exceptionally active for photocatalytic hydrogen production by reduction of aqueous protons.11 The choice of dithiolene ligands was made based on the fact that they display intense colors and reversible electron transfer series, thereby causing minor or structural changes during the redox processes.48 All the photocatalysts were paired with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (photosensitizer) and ascorbic acid (H2A, sacrificial electron donor) in 1:1 (v/v) CH3CN/H2O solution at pH = 4.0. The reaction mixture was irradiated with an LED centered at 520 nm. And hydrogen evolution was observed after irradiation. For complexes C8–C11, the TONs were found to be 2700, 2300, 6000, and 9000, respectively. Similarly, the TOFs were found to be 880, 690, 1400, and 3400 h−1 for C8–C11, respectively. Among all the catalysts, C11 was found to be the most active. In the mechanism, reductive quenching of excited *[Ru(bpy)3]2+ by H2A to give [Ru(bpy)3]+ was proposed to be the predominant step. However, the possibility that complexes C8–C11 could also oxidatively quench *[Ru(bpy)3]2+ was also examined. Consequently, complex C8 was found to oxidatively quench *[Ru(bpy)3]2+ following a good Stern–Volmer behavior with a quenching rate constant of 4 × 10 M−1 s−1. Similar behaviour was observed for complexes C9–C11 (kq = 1.25–1.7 × 1010 M−1 s−1). Even though the oxidative quenching rate constants for complexes C8–C11 were greater by two orders of magnitude than the reductive quenching rate constant by H2A (kq = 1.3 × 108 M−1 s−1), still in this case, the rate of reductive quenching of *[Ru(bpy)3]2+ by H2A was greater because of the much larger concentration of H2A (0.1 M) than that of the catalyst (5 × 10−6 M). In addition to this, correlation between hydrogen evolution and the electronic effects of the ligand on the Co(III) dithiolene complexes was also observed. The catalyst with the more electron-withdrawing group was found to be more active which consequently accounted for the better activity of complex C11.11 This argument was in agreement with the experimentally determined reduction potentials for the [CoL2]−/[CoL2]2− couple ranging from −0.04 V to −0.70 V vs. SHE. Complex C11 in its monomeric form was found to have the least negative reductive potential (−0.04 V vs. SHE) and was most active among these catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, whereas complex C9 with two methyl substituents was found to have the most negative reduction potential (−0.70 V vs. SHE) and was least active for hydrogen evolution (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the photocatalysts C8–C11.11 
In 2014, Castellano et al. reported six [Co]2+ based molecular catalysts (C12–C17) for photocatalytic hydrogen production (Fig. 3).49 A homogeneous mixture of each of the catalysts with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (photosensitizer) and ascorbic acid (sacrificial electron donor) in pure water at pH = 4 was assessed for photocatalytic hydrogen production. The reaction mixture was irradiated with a blue LED centered at 452 nm. All the catalysts were found to be photo-catalytically active for hydrogen production. Out of all six catalysts, catalyst C12 was found to be most promising, giving an impressive TON and TOF of ∼4200 (H2/Co) and ∼3160 (H2/Co per h), respectively, thereby producing 0.08 H2/L solution per h at room temperature with a quantum yield of 7.5 ± 0.8%. Dependence of the TON on the concentration of C12 was also examined which was found to increase considerably on decreasing the concentration of C12 reaching up to the value of more than 10000 (H2/Co) at sub-micromolar concentrations. However, in this case, hydrogen production was found to be limited by the photostability of the photosensitizer. It was further found that the hydrogen production was improved by lowering the temperature of the system which was the result of the reduction in the photosubstitution reaction with the ascorbate. On applying the complexes C16 and C17 as photocatalysts, reduction in the hydrogen evolution efficiency was observed in comparison to the other complexes (C12–C15) indicating that the complexes having cis opening coordinating sites (C16–C17) have an advantage over those having trans opening coordinating sites (C12–C15). To access the homogeneity of the system several independent experiments were conducted ranging from the Hg poisoning test to the dynamic light scattering experiments. However, no substantial change in the hydrogen evolution efficiency or formation of any nanoparticles was observed during these experiments, respectively, strongly indicating the involvement of the molecular catalysts in these cases. A series of static and dynamic spectroscopic measurements were carried out to know the route of electron transfer. The studies revealed that excited *[Ru(bpy)3]2+ was first reductively quenched (kq = 2.6 × 107 M−1 s−1) by ascorbic acid to generate [Ru(bpy)3]+ with an efficiency of 55 ± 5%. The generated [Ru(bpy)3]+ then transferred an electron (ket = 2 × 109 M−1 s−1) with an efficiency of 85 ± 10% to the catalyst, which was then believed to enter the hydrogen evolution cycle subsequently.49 Detailed mechanistic studies including UV-vis spectroscopy and electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) revealed that hydrogen evolution efficiency was decreased due to the decomposition of the photosensitizer, and [Ru(bpy)2HA]+ was determined to be the decomposition product which resulted from the dechelation of the bipyridine from [Ru(bpy)3]2+, and its established mechanism involved the population of the thermally accessible ligand field states arising after photoexcitation.50,51 This degradation resulted in technical delay of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution by using a SED and eventually resulted in lowering of solar conversion efficiency. As observed in this case the ascorbate anion acted both as a quencher and potential ligand and the decomposition product [Ru(bpy)2HA]+ formed was supposed to competitively absorb photons in the blue region. A molar extinction coefficient of 6000 M−1 cm−1 at 452 nm (obtained from a UV-vis spectroscopic study) was observed for the estimated degradation product which was different from that of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (ε = 15000 M−1 cm−1) which was also confirmed by ESI-MS.49 The formation of this undesired product inhibited the complete regeneration of the catalytic cycle. Furthermore, temperature was found to have a considerable effect on the rate of hydrogen evolution. Decreasing the temperature resulted in an increase in the amount of hydrogen evolved; however, the initial rate was found to be low which was the result of the slower rates of numerous reactions involved in the hydrogen evolution cycle. On the other hand, increasing the temperature slightly above room temperature had an inimical effect on the hydrogen production efficiency, which was the result of the excitation of the ligand field states, thereby promoting substitution reactions. In addition to this, experiments were conducted using deuterated water in order to identify the source of protons. Replacement with D2O resulted in the evolution of D2 as the major product (84%) along with other by products: H2 (1%) and HD (15%). HD resulted because of the proton exchange between the initial H2A, its decomposition product and D2O, whereas H2 resulted from the spectrometer outgassing. Moreover, analysis of the headspace of the reactor by MS in the presence of water again detected H2 as the major product. All these observations led to the conclusion that the H2 evolved was not the by-product of the dehydrogenation of H2A and the actual source of protons was water.
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures of Co(II) photocatalysts (C12–C17).49 
In another study, the authors have also pointed out the labile nature of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ in aqueous solution, especially in the presence of a coordinating ligand, e.g., ascorbate, where they compared its hydrogen evolution efficiency with another photosensitizer [Ru(dpp)3]2+ (dpp = 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline). [Ru(dpp)3]2+ was found to be more stable in terms of ligand substitution owing to the rigid framework of the dpp ligand in comparison to the prototype [Ru(bpy)3]2+.52 The combination of [Ru(dpp)3]2+ (1.44 × 10−6 M) as the PS with [Co(dmgH)2pyCl] (2.5 × 10−3 M) as the molecular catalyst and DMT (N,N-dimethyl-p-toluidine) (7 × 10−2 M) as the SED gave an impressive TON of ∼10000 (w.r.t. to PS). In addition to this, for the above-mentioned system, the quantum yield for hydrogen production was found to be 6.5 ± 0.4%.52
In 2014, Lloret-Fillol et al. reported the synthesis and characterisation of a pentadentate ligand 1,4-di(picolyl)-7-(p-toluenesulfonyl)-1,4,7-triazacyclononane (Py2tstacn) and its corresponding complex with the Co(II) ion [Co(CF3SO3)(Py2tstacn)][CF3SO3] (C18).53 The choice of the tacn moiety was due to its redox innocence and high electron-donating nature that can stabilize the metal center at its high oxidation state. However, since the photocatalytic reduction of protons typically involves a metal center at its low oxidation state, e.g., M0 or MI, the authors chose to substitute the tacn ligand with the electron-withdrawing tosyl group. The introduction of the tosyl group stabilized the metal center at its low oxidation state as required maintaining the high chelation nature. Complex C18 (5 μM) was used as a molecular catalyst for photochemical hydrogen production along with [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 (100 μM) as a photosensitizer in (2:8:0.2, v/v/v) CH3CN/H2O/Et3N solvent solution. The reaction was irradiated at 447 nm. The system gave a TON of 690 (based on the catalyst) and a TOF of 703 h−1 for hydrogen production. One of the major disadvantages of the water reduction catalyst is the inhibition of the hydrogen evolution activity in the presence of oxygen.32,54 However, in this case, complex C18 was found to retain a significant amount of catalytic activity even in the presence of oxygen. On carrying out the reaction in the presence of the Co(II) catalyst (50 μM) and [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 (250 μM) under air in a solvent mixture of CH3CN/H2O/Et3N (3:7:0.2, v/v/v), a TON and TOF of 63 and 44 h−1 were achieved, respectively. However, the same reaction performed under inert conditions gave a TON and TOF of 260 and 174 h−1, respectively. Even though the presence of O2 reduced the evolution of hydrogen, still an activity up to 25% of the catalyst was maintained.53
Zhan et al. in 2015 reported a dinuclear Co(II)-triazenido complex (C19) by the reaction of CoCl2·6H2O and 1-[(2-methoxy)benzene]-3-[benzothiazole]triazene (HL) (Fig. 4) in the presence of Et3N.55 The choice of the triazenido ligand was made based on greater basicity imparted by the central nitrogen on [N⋯N⋯N]− rather than the neutral nitrogen which made the triazenido ligand a more electron-donating candidate and more susceptible to accept H+, consequently giving rise to efficient hydrogen evolution. This dinuclear Co(II) catalyst was then used as a molecular catalyst for hydrogen production in an aqueous solution at a pH of 4.0 under air along with [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as the light-absorbing photosensitizer and ascorbic acid as the sacrificial electron donor. The reaction mixture was irradiated using a blue LED having λmax = 469 nm. The system performed well giving a TON of 4367 mol of H2 (mol of cat)−1. To investigate the effect of air on hydrogen evolution, the reaction was also performed both in the presence and absence of air. However, in both cases, the amount of hydrogen evolved was almost similar indicating that air didn't affect the hydrogen evolution. Furthermore, to find out the factors responsible for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in the above system, one of the three components ([Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, ascorbic acid or C19) or CoCl2·6H2O was added to the reaction vessel after the cessation of hydrogen evolution to see if H2 evolution could be resumed. However, the addition of any of these resulted in no significant improvement in the amount of hydrogen generated.55
 Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structure of the dinuclear Co(II) catalyst (C19) under discussion. (b) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible irradiation (λirr = 469 nm) when using 0.70 mM [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, 0.12 M ascorbic acid, and different concentrations of C19, 0.02 mM (represented in black), 0.05 mM (represented in red) and 0.10 mM (represented in blue). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 (Copyright 2015, Hydrogen Energy Publications, LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd). 
In 2015, Utschig and co-workers developed a novel solar fuel biohybrid for light-driven hydrogen production using a native electron transfer protein ferredoxin (Fd).56 The Ferredoxin scaffold was used for binding the Ru(II)-PS and cobaloxime catalyst (Co) (Fig. 5). The cobaloxime used in this study was found to covalently bind with Fd upon mixing. The cobaloxime was found to form an axial ligand to the His-90 of Fd which was confirmed by EPR analysis. The Ru PS underwent a bromine substitution reaction of cysteine thiols and formed covalent thiolate linkages with Cys18 thereby directly connecting the protein and the photosensitizer. However, the incorporation of Ru was less (0.4 ± 0.2 Ru/Fd from ICP-AES) which was supported by the surface mapping of Fd, which suggested that Cys18 was buried deeper in the protein matrix compared to His 90, which hindered the access of the Ru PS to the Cys residue. The distances from the Ru PS to the [2Fe2S] cluster to the Co catalyst were all 12–15 Å which facilitated electron transfer between the three redox species. Upon illumination with visible light the Ru–Fd–Co complex produced molecular hydrogen in 10 mM MES buffer having pH = 6.3 using 100 mM sodium ascorbate as a sacrificial electron donor. The initial rate of H2 production was found to be 60 mol H2 (mol Ru PS)−1 and the hydrogen production continued for 6–8 h. The maximum TON that was observed in 6 h was 320 mol H2/mol Ru PS (130 mol H2/mol Fd).56
 Fig. 5  (A) Photocatalytic reduction of protons using the Ru–Fd–Co hybrid system with two potential pathways for electron transfer; black arrows represent the transfer of the photoinduced electrons from the PS to the catalyst via the [2Fe–2S] cluster of Fd (1A70), whereas the green arrow represents the direct electron transfer from the PS to the catalyst.(B and C) Molecular structures of (B) cobaloxime catalyst (Co), Co(dmgBF2)2·2H2O and (C) ruthenium photosensitizer (Ru PS), [Ru(4-CH2Br-4′–CH3–2,2′-bpy)(bpy)2]2+, used in the study. (D) Representative time course profile of H2 production from the Ru–Fd–Co hybrid upon visible light illumination. The assay conditions are 2 mM Ru–Fd–Co hybrid (0.6 Ru/Fd, 0.9 Co/Fd) in 10 mM MES pH 6.3, and 100 mM sodium ascorbate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56 (Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In 2015, Hanan and co-workers reported successful high-temperature microwave synthesis of photosensitizer [Ru(qpy)3]2+ (qpy = 4,4′:2′,2′′:4′′,4′′′-quaterpyridine).57 The most commonly used PS for the HER remains the archetypical [Ru(bpy)3]2+. However, designing Ru(II) complexes with extended red-shifted absorption bands and emission bands is quite critical.25,58 One of the possible ways to improve the photophysical properties of Ru based PSs lies in the modification of the coordinating ligands.59 Improvement in the photophysical properties of [Ru(bpy)3]2+can also be achieved with the functionalization in the bpy ligand.60 In this context, with the aim of developing Ru(II) complexes having extended absorption and emission bands, 4,4′:2′,2′′:4′′,4′′′-quaterpyridine was used as a ligand for Ru(II), thereby extending the π conjugation of the bpy molecule. The complex thus synthesized was spectroscopically compared with prototype [Ru(bpy)3]2+. After comparison, owing to its high quantum yield and long excited-state lifetime, [Ru(qpy)3]2+ was found to be a potential candidate to act as a photosensitizer.57 Classic [Co(dmgH)2]2+ was used as the catalyst along with TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor and aqueous tetrafluoroborate as a source of protons. The reaction mixture was irradiated using different wavelengths, blue (452 nm), green (525 nm) and red (630 nm). Under blue light irradiation, hydrogen evolution started as soon as the lamp was turned on without any induction period. Under green light irradiation, an inverted result was obtained. After an induction period of 10 minutes [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was found to be more efficient giving a TOF of 2500 mmol molps−1 min−1, whereas [Ru(qpy)3]2+ reached only 1100 mmol molps−1 min−1. However, in a long run [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was found to decompose quickly, giving a TON of 330 after 35 h of irradiation, whereas [Ru(qpy)3]2+ gave a TON of 495. Under red light irradiation, a prominent difference in the efficiencies of [Ru(qpy)3]2+ and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was observed. A maximum TOF of 650 mmol molps−1 min−1 was observed for [Ru(qpy)3]2+, whereas for [Ru(bpy)3]2+ it was only 30 mmol molps−1 min−1. Similarly, the TONs for [Ru(qpy)3]2+ and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ were found to be 375 and 30, respectively. The better performance of [Ru(qpy)3]2+ might be explained based on the possible spatial interaction with the catalyst through nitrogen heteroatoms in pendant pyridines when compared to its phenyl analog.61
Ir–Co dyads are known to be effective photocatalysts for hydrogen production because of the superiority of the Ir(III) complexes in terms of photophysical and electrochemical tunability.62 However, supramolecular assemblies of Ir–Co with tetradentate ligands are quite rare. With the aim of constructing a supramolecular assembly of Ir–Co with terdentate ligands, Hanan et al. in 2016 used the assembly of [Ir(4-Pytpy)(4-MeO-tppy)]+ {4-Pytpy = 4-(4-pyridinyl)-2,2:6,2′′-terpyridine and 4′-MeO-tppy = 2,6-diphenyl-4-(4-methoxyphenyl)pyridine}44 (termed hereafter [Ir-Py]+) with cobaloxime.62 The complex [Ir-Py]+ possessed two cyclometalation sites on the same tridentate ligand with the LUMO being centered on the N^N^N tridentate ligand. The absorption of [Ir-Py]+ was red-shifted in comparison to that of cis-cyclometalating [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ and [Ir(phbpy)2]+ (phbpy = 6-phenyl-2,2′-bipyridine) complexes and this allowed a wider range of visible absorption. In addition to this, the presence of the pendant pyridine moiety on terpyridine allowed easy and effective tethering of the cobaloxime, which represented an effective assembly for the directional electron transfer required for the HER. The [Ir-Py-Co]+ dyad was synthesized by the replacement of the chloro ligand from [Co(dmgH)(dmgH2)Cl2]+ by the free pyridine of [Ir-Py]+. The spectrochemical and electrochemical properties of the dyad [Ir-Py-Co]+ thus formed were compared with those of the other two mentioned complexes [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+, [Ir(phbpy)2]+, and the precursor complex [Ir-Py]+. After comparison, [Ir-Py-Co]+ was found to be an ideal candidate for molecular hydrogen evolution. This might be due to the following reasons: (1) there would be a directed photoinduced electron transfer from the cyclometalated iridium fragment towards the terpyridine which was the LUMO of the MLCT excited state and was closer to the cobalt catalyst and (2) extended absorption of the [Ir-Py-Co]+ dyad up to 600 nm allowed hydrogen evolution at lower energy compared to classical Ir(III) complexes. Three wavelengths, blue (452 nm), green (525 nm), and yellow (595 nm), were used for the photochemical HERs. In order to compare the photocatalytic activity of [Ir-Py-Co]+, a non-linked [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ system with [Co(dmgH)2PyCl] at the same molar concentration was also analyzed. All the reactions were performed in acetonitrile using triethanolamine as the sacrificial electron donor. Under blue and green light irradiation no induction period was observed. Under blue light irradiation the [Ir-Py-Co]+ reached a TON of 225 over 35 h, whereas [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] gave only 22 over the same period. In terms of rate, the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] system showed a spike with the lamp being turned on, giving a value of 4500 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 though the system decomposed soon. However, the covalently linked system maintained its sustainability giving a hydrogen evolution rate of 130 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 during the first 15 h. In fact, the [Ir-Py-Co]+ dyad was found to last for about 66 h giving a total TON of 440 if 4 equivalents of dmgH2 were added to the reaction mixture. For green light irradiation, the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] system was found to have very low molar absorptivity (ε < 1000 M−1 cm−1 at λabs ∼500 nm), while the [Ir-Py-Co]+ dyad was found to have good absorption (ε ∼10000 M−1 cm−1 at λabs ∼500 nm). As a result, there was a decrease in the hydrogen evolution activity. However, the [Ir-Py-Co]+ system maintained its sustainability giving a TON of 113, whereas for the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] reference system, the TON was only 12. Under yellow light irradiation, the [Ir-Py-Co]+ system gave a low production of hydrogen (TOF = 4 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 after 5 h), whereas for [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl], no activity was observed. Even though the activity of [Ir-Py-Co]+ was less the system maintained its sustainability throughout the reaction. Therefore, under all these conditions, the [Ir-Py-Co]+ system was found to be more efficient than the reference system. Coordination of cobaloxime to the PS was found to be a crucial factor for the efficiency and stability of the system.62
Continuing the work with Ir(III)–Co(III) dyads, Elias and co-workers developed another efficient Ir–Co dyad [Irpiq-L-Co] (piqH = 1-phenylisoquinoline and L = 2,2′:5′,4′′-terpyridine) for the HER which worked efficiently at longer irradiation wavelengths including yellow and red light wavelengths (Fig. 6).63 The dyad [Irpiq-L-Co] exhibited cyclometalated piq ligands with enhanced conjugation with respect to ppy ligands (ppyH = 2-phenylpyridine) which induced a higher red-shifted molar absorption (λabs ∼440 nm) than that of [Irppy-bpy] (λabs ∼412 nm). In addition to this, the ancillary ligand L helped to connect the PS unit to the Co(III) catalyst, thereby allowing a vectorial electron transfer. From spectroscopic and electrochemical studies, the dyad [Irpiq-L-Co] was found to be an ideal candidate for the HER. Controlled reactions with [Irpiq-bpy] and [Irppy-bpy] without pendant rings were also performed along with [Co(dmgH)2PyCl] in the same molar ratio to compare their activities with that of the dyad [Irpiq-L-Co]. All the photocatalytic reactions were performed in acetonitrile with 0.5 M TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor and 0.05 HBF4 as the proton source. Four different types of LEDs centered at 452 (blue), 525 (green), 595 (yellow), and 630 (red) nm were used as the source of irradiation.63 Under blue light irradiation, the reference system [Irppy-bpy]/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] triggered hydrogen which rapidly reached a TOFmax of 4400 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 although the system degraded quickly to attain a modest TON of 30 after 30 min. [Irpiq-bpy]/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] reacted quite slowly and gave a TOF of 370 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1. However, the system was quite sustainable giving a TON of 70 after 7 h. Among all these complexes, [Irpiq-L-Co] proved to be the most efficient giving a TOF of 16000 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 and a final TON of 180 after 2.5 h. Under green light irradiation, the activity was less because of less overlap of the absorption spectra of the PSs with the emission spectra of the LED. For [Irppy-bpy]/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] and [Irpiq-bpy]/[Co(dmgH)2PyCl] systems the TONs were found to be 16 (after 4 h) and 30 (after 22 h), respectively. Still in this case also [Irpiq-L-Co] was found to be most efficient giving a TOFmax of 3500 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 and TON of 251 after 3 h. Under yellow light irradiation, the dissociated systems were not photoactive; however, [Irpiq-L-Co] generated a TON of 180 after 18 h with a TOFmax of 270 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1. Under red light irradiation, although [Irpiq-L-Co] exhibited somewhat low but non-negligible hydrogen production with a TON of 80 after 110 h and a TOFmax of 15 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1, this system was not as efficient as the [Ru(qpy)3]2+-Co system (TON = 380 after 20 h) as discussed in the earlier report.57 Despite this fact, the system was robust enough to function for about 100 h. The higher efficiency of the [Irpiq-L-Co] system may be attributed to the spatial interaction between the PS and the catalyst through a coordination bond which stabilized the system and enhanced the electron transfer.57,62,64
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of [Irppy-bpy], [Irpiq-bpy], and the dyad [Irpiq-L-Co] under discussion.63 
Extending the work with the Ir–Co dyads, Elias and co-workers synthesized two more dyads IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co and IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co which were found to be efficient photocatalysts for photo-driven hydrogen evolution.65 The reaction conditions were the same as described in their earlier work containing the dyad [Irpiq-L-Co]. The systems were found to be effective under blue (λirr = 452 nm) and green light (λirr = 525 nm) irradiation. Under blue light irradiation, the TOFmax rate of IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co was greater than that of IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co with 12300 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1vs. 8200 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1, respectively, but a lower TON was obtained for IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co (TON = 260 in 1.3 h) than for IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co (TON = 290 in 2.8 h). Under green light irradiation the overlays of absorption spectra of PSs and emission spectra of the LED were weaker thereby resulting in less hydrogen evolution efficiency. In this case, for the IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co system both the TON (170 in 30.3 h) and TOFmax (150 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1) were higher than those of IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co (TON of 150 in 27.3 h and TOFmax of 140 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1). However, under yellow (λirr = 595 nm) and red-light (λirr = 630 nm) irradiation both the systems didn't give any hydrogen activity owing to the fact that the absorption spectra of the PSs can't be superposed with the emission spectra of the LEDs.65
In 2017, Hanan and co-workers reported the synthesis of a bisamide-Ru(II) polypyridyl PS (PS1) and applied it for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution along with the cobalt complex [Co(dmgH)2(DMAP)Cl] (DMAP = 4-dimethylaminopyridine) (C20) as the hydrogen evolution catalyst and using TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor in DMF-TEOA solution (pH∼8.9) (Fig. 7).66PS1 was synthesized from [Ru(bpy)2Cl2] and the ligand N,N′-diphenyl-[2,2′-bipyridine]-4,4′-dicarboxamide as described by Beer et al.67,68 The Co(III) catalyst, C20, was synthesized according to a literature procedure.69 To compare the efficiency of this system, it was compared to [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with the same catalyst. Three different light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with λirr = 452 (blue), 523 (green), and 630 (red) nm were used for photoexcitation. An overlap of the LEDs and the absorption spectra of PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was observed in each of these cases. The PS1-C20 system was found to be more efficient in all the cases. Under blue light irradiation, PS1 photosensitized the catalytic activity of the Co(III) complex giving a peak TOF of 36000 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1, which ultimately decreased to give a TON of 7800 after 20 h with a ΦH2 value of 18.4%. The reference system [Ru(bpy)3]2+-C20 gave a TOF of 14000 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 and reached a TON of 2600 in the same time with a ΦH2 value of 7.5%. Under green light irradiation, the overlap of the emission spectrum of the LED and the absorption spectra of PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was less than that under blue light irradiation. For PS1 the reaction rate and the stability of the PS were found to be similar as with those under blue light irradiation. However, the hydrogen evolution was different. The TOFs were found to be 30100 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 and 3500 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1 along with the TONs of 7200 and 1100 (after 20 h) for PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+, respectively. Under these conditions the ΦH2 values of PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ were 45.6% and 9.5%, respectively. Under red light irradiation, a large difference in the hydrogen evolution activities was observed for PS1-C20 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+-C20. PS1 exhibited a maximum TOF of 3050 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1, whereas for the reference system [Ru(bpy)3]2+, it was only 18. The corresponding TONs were found to be 4200 and 71 for PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with associated ΦH2 values of 5.3% and 2.3%, respectively. Both the systems were active even after 80 h of illumination. Although PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ had low molar absorptivities in the red energy region, still the conversion of absorbed photons to H2 was efficient. The better performance of the PS1-C20 system might be attributed to the pre-HER catalyst formed within this process which was supported by the shift in 1H and 13C NMR spectra. For the understanding of the mechanism, under blue, green, or red light irradiation, PS1 was excited thereby delivering electrons to the Co(III) catalyst which was reduced to yield Co(II) species. After this reduction, the chloride ligand detached from the Co(II) center and got incorporated into the amide pocket of PS1. The introduction of this Cl− ion into the amide pocket enhanced the photophysical properties of PS1, as also established by Beer et al. in an earlier study,67,68 and further improved the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of PS1 in comparison to that of the reference PS, [Ru(bpy)3]2+.
 Fig. 7  Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution using Ru(II)-polypyridyl complexes (PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+) as PSs and Co(III)-photocatalysts, particularly effective under red light (λirr = 630 nm) irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66 (Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons). 
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ and its derivatives are being widely used as photosensitizers (PSs) while the bis(terpyridine) analogs are being disregarded because of their low quantum yield and short excited-state lifetimes which is the result of the low-lying non-radiative metal-centered excited state which is easily populated at room temperature.58 On this note, Hanan and co-workers prepared a new terpyridine ligand 4′-(4-bromophenyl)-4,4′′′:4′′,4′′′-dipyridinyl-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine (Bipytpy) and used it to prepare the heteroleptic complex [Ru(Tolyltpy)(Bipytpy)](PF6)2 (PS2) (Tolyltpy = 4′-tolyl-2,2′:6′,2′-terpyridine) and compared its properties with those of [Ru(Tolyltpy)2](PF6)2 (Fig. 8).70 The complex PS2 was found to exhibit enhanced photophysical properties with a higher quantum yield (ΦPL = 7.4 × 10−4) and a longer excited-state lifetime (τPL = 3.8 ns) compared with those of [Ru(Tolyltpy)2](PF6)2 (ΦPL = 3 × 10−5 and τPL = 0.74 ns). Due to these enhanced photophysical properties, the complex PS2 was chosen for the HER as a photosensitizer along with two different catalysts [Co(dmgH)(dmgH2)Cl2] (1 mM) and [Co(H2O)6](BF4)2 (1 mM). The reaction was performed in DMF using TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor and HBF4 as a proton source under blue light irradiation (λirr = 450 nm). The HER was also performed using [Ru(bpy)3]2+/[Co(H2O)6](BF4)2 for direct comparison. For the PS2/[Co(H2O)6](BF4)2 system hydrogen evolution started with almost no induction period giving a TON of 134 along with a TOF of 57 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1. For [Ru(bpy)3]2+/[Co(H2O)6](BF4)2 the induction period was almost negligible and the system was found to be more active reaching a TOF of 6850 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1. However, the activity decreased adversely within few hours giving a TON of 750 (based on the PS) after 9.5 h. In comparison to these systems, system PS2/[Co(dmgH)(dmgH2)Cl2] was found to be more robust and stable enough to carry out hydrogen production for a longer period of time ∼12 days (296 h) giving a TON of 764 (based on the PS) and a TOF of 51 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1. The better performance of PS2/[Co(dmgH)(dmgH2)Cl2 was due to the directional electron flow from the PS to the localised Bipytyp ligand, which already bears a coordination site (pendant pyridine ring) for interacting with the catalyst.70 This directional flow of electrons was based on the non-symmetric design of PS2 which was validated by electrochemical experiments. Three reversible reduction and one reversible oxidation processes were observed in the cyclic voltammogram of PS2, out of which the oxidation process at +1.21 V vs. SCE was assigned to the Ru(II) to Ru(III) oxidation. On the other hand, the three reversible reduction processes were assigned after comparison with those of the homoleptic complex [Ru(Tolyltpy)2]2+ measured under the same conditions. For PS2, the first reduction happened at a slightly less negative potential than that of [Ru(Tolyltpy)2]2+ and was, therefore, assigned to the reduction of Bipytpy. The second reduction process was assigned to the reduction of Tolyltpy as it occurred at a potential similar to that of the homoleptic complex. The third reduction process was clearly assigned to the second reduction of Bipytpy as this cathodic wave was absent in the homoleptic complex. These assignments were in close agreement with the results obtained from DFT calculations. In the case of the homoleptic complex [Ru(Tolyltpy)2]2+ both the LUMO and LUMO + 1 were centered on Tolyltpy, whereas in the case of PS2, the LUMO and LUMO + 1 were localised on Bipytpy and Tolyltpy, respectively.
 Fig. 8  (a) Molecular structure of PS2 and (b) directional e− transfer from PS2 to the photocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70 (Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). 
Extending the work with bis(terpyridine)Ru(II) complexes, Hanan and his group reported a series of non-symmetric 2,6-di(pyridin-2yl)pyrimidine ligands with peripheral pyridine substituents in different positions and the corresponding Ru(II) complexes (PS3–PS6) (Fig. 9).71 The presence of the pyrimidine ring stabilized the LUMO and thus led to red-shifted emission, prolonged excited-state lifetime (τPL = 8.8–30 ns) and high luminescence quantum yield (ΦPL = 4.2–17.5 × 10−4) in comparison to analogous terpyridines. Furthermore, all these complexes were easier to reduce than earlier reported terpyridine complexes. All these complexes were tested for the hydrogen evolution reaction using the catalyst [Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2 which was prepared in situ from [Co(H2O)6](BF4)2 (1 mM) and dimethylglyoxime (dmgH2; 6 mM).70,72 The tests were conducted in DMF with 1 M TEOA as a SED and 0.1 M tetrafluoroboric acid (HBF4) as a proton source. The reaction mixture was irradiated using blue (λirr = 445 nm) and red light (λirr = 630 nm) for over 24 h and 60 h, respectively. The respective TONs and TOFs for PS3–PS6 are tabulated in Table 1. Complexes PS3 and PS4 were found to have higher activity than PS5 and PS6. The lower activity of PS5 and PS6 was attributed to their slightly decreased estimated driving forces for both electron transfer processes. However, complexes PS3 and PS5 were found to be more stable with half-life times of 4.5 and 5.6 h, respectively, compared to the 2.1 and 2.4 h for PS4 and PS6, respectively. The higher stability of PS3 and PS5 resulted in higher TONs than those of the slightly more active complexes PS4 and PS6.71
 Fig. 9  Molecular structures of the Ru(II)-PSs (PS3–PS6) under discussion.71 
Table 1 TONs and TOFs of hydrogen evolution when using PS3–PS671




0.1 mM PS
Catalyst

λ
irr (nm)
Duration (h)
TOFcat
TONcat





PS3


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

445
24
66
29



PS3


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

630
60
10
14



PS4


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

445
24
74
13



PS4


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

630
60
20
13



PS5


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

445
24
32
15



PS5


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

630
60
6
11



PS6


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

445
24
48
9



PS6


[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

630
60
12
6




Chen et al. in 2017 prepared and characterized a linear pentadentate aminopyridine ligand 2,6-bis[(methyl(pyrid-2-yl-methyl)amino)-N-methyl]pyridine (PyMepam).73 The choice of the pentadentate amino pyridine ligand was made on the basis of its easy synthesis, versatility and redox properties. The ligand was able to combine rapidly with Co(II) ions resulting in the formation of a complex having the formula [Co(PyMepam)](BF4)2 (C21). The complex was found to be suitable for photocatalytic hydrogen production via the reduction of water. Using complex C21 (0.1 mM) as the molecular catalyst along with [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 (0.5 mM) as the photosensitizer and 10 vol% TEA in CH3CN–H2O (1/1, v/v) mixed solvent at a pH of 10, the system displayed a high TON of 290 after 4 h of irradiation under visible light (λirr > 400 nm). Controlled experiments performed by omitting any of these three components resulted in no hydrogen evolution suggesting that all three components were necessary for hydrogen evolution. For comparison, a simple metal salt [Co(H2O)6](PF6) was also tested for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution along with [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 under the same aforementioned reaction conditions. However, it also resulted in a negligible amount of hydrogen evolution emphasizing the fact that the hydrogen production by complex C21 was indeed derived from itself rather than the metal ions liberated or the ligand alone.73
In 2018, Hung and Beyene reported a highly active photocatalytic hydrogen evolution system in a neutral aqueous medium using the water-soluble Co(II)-meso-tetrakis(p-sulfonylphenyl)porphyrin complex (C22) (30 μM) as the hydrogen evolution catalyst, [Ru(bpy)3]2+(1.2 mM) as the light-absorbing photosensitizer and ascorbic acid (0.3 M) as the sacrificial electron donor.74 The system performed well under optimized reaction conditions giving a TON and a TOF of 6400 and 120 min−1, respectively, with a hydrogen evolution rate of 1.3 μmol min−1 in 1 M phosphate buffer at a pH of 6.8 upon irradiating the reaction mixture with a blue LED (λirr = 420 nm) at 0.6 W cm−2. Controlled reaction performed under the same reaction conditions in the dark as well as with light irradiation in the absence of the photosensitizer or catalyst or SED gave only a trace amount of hydrogen evolution revealing that light and all three components were necessary for efficient hydrogen evolution. The addition of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ after the cessation of hydrogen evolution resumed the hydrogen generation, whereas the addition of the SED, as well as the catalyst, didn't resume the hydrogen evolution indicating that the inhibition of the catalytic activity was due to the degradation of the PS. These facts accounted for the high photostability and robust nature of C22. An insight into the mechanistic details was given by fluorescence emission quenching experiments as well as redox potential energy level analysis (Fig. 10b). On this basis, the rate of reductive quenching of *[Ru(bpy)3]2+ by H2A (kq = 7.5 × 106 s−1) was found to be greater than that of oxidative quenching by C22 (kq = 1.7 × 104 s−1). Therefore, the proposed mechanism began with the reductive quenching of *[Ru(bpy)3]2+ to give the reduced species [Ru(bpy)3]+, which then transferred electrons to the Co(II) catalyst which then got reduced to Co(I) species. This Co(I) species underwent protonation to produce a Co(III)–H intermediate which after another protonation gave hydrogen along with the regeneration of the Co(II) catalyst.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photocatalytic system for H2 generation under discussion. (b) Thermodynamic redox potential analysis of the molecules involved in the photocatalytic H2 evolution process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74 (Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In 2019, Lloret-Fillol et al. synthesized two new biotinylated Co(II) complexes C23 and C24 based on 1,4-di(picolyl)-1,4,7-triazacyclononane (HPy2tacn) using firm spacers of two different types for forming a covalent linkage between the biotin and the catalytic Co(II) center.75 The structures of these complexes are shown in Fig. 11. These complexes were further incorporated into streptavidin and were termed C23⊂SA and C24⊂SA. Incorporation of C23 and C24 in streptavidin was reckonable as observed by the displacement of 2-(4′-hydroxyazobenzene) benzoic acid from streptavidin. These C23 and C24 complexes along with those incorporated into streptavidin were employed for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution as hydrogen evolution catalysts. The catalytic efficiency of C24 and C24⊂SA (5 μM) was investigated along with [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 (250 μm) as the light-harvesting photosensitizer and TEOA (5 μM) as the sacrificial electron donor in water. Owing to the lower solubility of the Ir PS in the aqueous solution, acetonitrile (30% volume) was also used as a co-solvent. The reaction mixture was irradiated using visible light irradiation (1100 W m−2, λirr > 400 nm). For C24, the catalytic activity was found to increase from pH = 7, and the maximum catalytic activity was obtained at pH = 10.5 (a TON of 89; TOF of 49 h−1). However, the catalytic activity of C24⊂SA was found to be greater than that of C24 at all values of pH and a change in catalytic activity was observed from pH 10.5 to 11.5. For the catalytic activity of both C24 and C24⊂SA, a pH bell-shaped profile was seen. The cause for such behavior was the reduction in the electron donor concentration at lower pH, whereas at higher pH, the downfall in the catalytic activity was because of the unavailability of protons. The TON (after 4 h of irradiation) and the initial TOF obtained at pH 11.5 were 166 and 88 h−1 for C24⊂SA and 46 and 16 h−1 for C24, respectively. Similarly, for C23⊂SA the TON (after 4 h of irradiation) and the initial TOF were found to be 51 and 10.3 h−1, whereas for C23 the values were 7 and 1.8 h−1, respectively. At pH 12.5, the catalytic activity of C24⊂SA was found to be 10- and 14-fold higher in terms of TON and TOF, respectively. C23 was found to have lower catalytic activity than C24. Despite this fact, the augmentation in the catalytic activity due to the protein environment was noteworthy, with an enhancement factor of 7.3 and 3.6 in TON at pH 11.5 for C23⊂SA and C24⊂SA, respectively, which suggested that the protecting effect by the protein pocket was greater in the case of C23 than for C24 due to the absence of a spacer.75
 Fig. 11  (a) Biotinylated Co(II) complexes (C23 and C24) and artificial metalloenzymes (C23⊂SA and C24⊂SA). (b) Overlay of representative snapshots obtained by MD simulations for C23 and C24. Conformational dynamics of the binding pockets are also shown, where the most important residues surrounding the biotin complexes are represented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75 (Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). 
Eisenberg et al. reported the use of [bis((3r,7r)-1,3,5,7-tetraphenyl-1,5,3,7-diazadiphosphocane)acetonitrile]Ni(II) tetrafluoroborate (C25) as a photocatalyst for hydrogen production.37 The reason for choosing C25 as the photocatalyst was its earlier use as an effective electrocatalyst for hydrogen production from acidic non-aqueous solution with low overpotentials (TOF > 350 h−1, 0.30 V) as shown by DuBois and co-workers.76–78 However, in the present system, complex C25 was applied as a photocatalyst for light-driven hydrogen evolution from water using an organic dye Eosin Y (EY) or [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as the light-harvesting photosensitizer and ascorbic acid as the sacrificial electron donor in 1:1 (v/v) H2O/CH3CN at pH = 2.25. EY was found to be moderately stable under photocatalytic conditions when using light irradiation λirr > 410 nm and decomposed in 8–48 h depending on the concentration of the catalyst and irradiation power. The main reason for pairing catalyst C25 with [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 was to evaluate the long-term stability of C25 as the catalyst. The initial rate of hydrogen production was invariant when using various concentrations of EY or [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as the PS. However, prolonged irradiation (1 h) decreased the rate suggesting the degradation of at least one of the components in the system. Following total bleaching of the PS, the system's activity was completely restored by the addition of either EY or [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2. The regeneration of the system's activity in fact was an indication that the catalyst C25 was stable during irradiation and the system's instability was due to the degradation of either EY or [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2. The stability of the catalyst was further supported by 31P{1H} and 1H NMR data which showed the same peaks in the NMR spectra for the catalyst before and after the degradation of the reaction mixture. When the system consisting of C25, [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, and ascorbic acid was used, a TON of 2700 (based on the catalyst) was obtained. This greater stability of the catalyst C25 in this photocatalytic system and other multicomponent electrocatalytic systems79 paved a way for its incorporation into other multicomponent photocatalytic systems.
In another study, Eisenberg et al. used the Ni(II) complex [Ni(pyS)3]− (pyS = pyridine-2-thiolate) (C26) as a photocatalyst for light-driven hydrogen evolution along with fluorescein (Fl) as the photosensitizer and TEA as the sacrificial electron donor (Fig. 12). For most of the organic dyes, it has been observed that an unstable radical anion PS− is generated by reductive quenching of the PS* that readily undergoes decomposition. However, in this case, the new homogeneous system was found to have the potential to oxidatively quench the PS*, thus enhancing the lifetime of the system. The reaction mixture containing all the aforementioned components in EtOH/H2O (1:1, v/v) was irradiated using a green LED centered at 520 nm.80 The rate of hydrogen production was found to be maximum at pH = 12.0–12.4. Keeping the concentration of Fl and TEA fixed, the initial rate of hydrogen production was first-order dependent on the Ni(II) catalyst. When the concentration of C26 was 4.0 μM, the system displayed a high activity giving a TON of 5500 (based on the catalyst) after 40 h and an initial TOF of 250 h−1. At a higher concentration of the catalyst, even though a larger amount of hydrogen was evolved the TON did not increase linearly because of the limited lifetime of the system. On varying the concentration of Fl, the TOF reached a maximum value at 1.0 mM indicating that at this value of Fl, the system became limited by the concentration of the catalyst. However, the system had a longer lifetime at higher concentrations of Fl suggesting that Fl decomposed during photolysis which was further supported by the disappearance of the characteristic Fl absorption in UV-visible studies during hydrogen evolution. To have an insight into the elementary steps during photolysis, photochemically driven electron transfer steps were studied individually through 1Fl* quenching in CH3CN/H2O solvent mixtures. In 1:1 or 9:1 (v/v) CH3CN/H2O solvent mixtures at pH = 12.2, the fluorescence of Fl, which was excited at 460 nm, was quenched by TEA following a linear Stern–Volmer behavior, giving a rate constant kq = 5.5 × 107 M−1 s−1. In addition to this, C26 was also found to quench the fluorescence of Fl with a rate constant kq = 9.6 × 109 M−1 s−1 which was greater than that for TEA by two orders of magnitude. Despite this fact, the dominant pathway was found to be reductive quenching by TEA due to its greater concentration than that of C26. However, at a lower concentration of TEA (7 mM), C26 was found to be more competitive towards oxidative quenching of PS*, thereby reducing the amount of the unstable radical anion generated and consequently increasing the lifetime of the system. Electrochemical studies were performed to have an insight into the catalytic mechanism. Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of Ni(II) in dry DMF containing 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) showed no reduction wave from −0.4 to −2 V vs. SCE in the absence of available protons, indicating that C26 was not able to accept an electron from 1Fl* (Ered = −1.7 V vs. SCE) or Fl− (Ered = −1.3 V vs. SCE). Hence, it was concluded that a protonated form of C26 which was termed C26-H was the actual electron acceptor in this case. This C26-H was believed to be the potent oxidant for 1Fl* based on the new cathodic feature that appeared at −1.3 V vs. SCE after the addition of 1 equivalent of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the solution of C26 in DMF.80
 Fig. 12  The possible structures of nickel species involved in hydrogen evolution.80 
Bonin et al. in 2016 reported the design and synthesis of two novel nickel quinolinethiolate complexes, namely [Ni(Hqt)2(4,4′-Z-2,2′-bpy)] (Hqt = 8-quinolinethiol, Z = H [C27] or CH3 [C28], bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine).81 The choice of the 8-quinolinethiol ligand was made on the basis of its non-toxic nature and interesting extracting properties. Moreover, the presence of N and S atoms afforded suitable conditions for its coordination with transition metals, Furthermore, the N and S ligand sites were accessible for protonation, thereby allowing these systems to readily assemble two protons and two electrons required for hydrogen evolution. These two complexes were employed for the HER under photocatalytic conditions using xanthene dyes (EY or Fl) as the photosensitizers and TEA as the sacrificial electron donor. First of all, the HER was carried out with EY as the PS (1 mM), complex C28 (1.0 × 10−5 M) as the catalyst, and TEA as the sacrificial electron donor at a pH of 12.3 in CH3CN/H2O under visible light irradiation (λirr > 420 nm) to give a TON of 1203. Keeping the concentration of the PS, catalyst, and TEA constant, the effect of four different solvent mixtures, namely CH3CN/H2O, DMF/H2O, acetone/H2O, and EtOH/H2O on hydrogen evolution was assessed. The highest TON for hydrogen evolution was obtained with the EtOH/H2O mixture (TON = 3110). This observation suggested that the solvent properties, such as polarity, dielectric constant, and diffusion coefficient, had a significant effect on hydrogen evolution during the catalytic process.82 In order to reconnoiter the effect of both the PSs and the catalysts on hydrogen evolution, separate experiments were carried out keeping the concentration of all the components as described above and carrying out the reaction in an EtOH/H2O mixture at pH = 12.3. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 13. The system C27/Fl gave a TON of 5923, whereas C28/Fl gave a TON of 7643. However, the TONs for hydrogen production were low with EY as the PS (2671 for C27 and 3672 for C28). The higher catalytic efficiency of C28 than that of C27 may be attributed to the electron-donating substituents on bipyridine which gave a more basic nickel hydride intermediate for hetero coupling of Ni–H− and N–H+ to form H2. It is also important to note that the color of the reaction mixture utilizing EY as the PS changed from red to yellow as soon as the irradiation began, whereas the reaction with Fl showed no change in color. This was probably due to the cleavage of C–Br bonds in EY, and hence Fl was found to be more stable as the PS than EY due to the absence of heavy bromide substituents. Fluorescence quenching experiments were carried out separately in 8:1:1 (v/v/v) DMF/EtOH/H2O to investigate the dominant reaction pathway. It was suggested from the experiment that TEA reductively quenched the fluorescence of Fl (excited at 460 nm) following a linear Stern–Volmer behavior and yielding a quenching rate constant kq = 5.5 × 107 M−1 s−1. Both the catalysts were also able to oxidatively quench Fl* giving the value of kq as 5.6 × 109 and 6.0 × 109 M−1 s−1 for C27 and C28, respectively. Despite yielding higher oxidative quenching rate constants which were larger than the reductive quenching rate constant, the dominant pathway was evaluated to be reductive quenching of Fl* by TEA due to the higher concentration of TEA in the reaction mixture. Furthermore, for Fl, the oxidation potentials of the singlet excited state (1Fl*/1Fl*ox = −1.70 V) and the triplet excited state (3Fl*/3Fl*ox = −1.26 V) were found to be more negative than the first reduction potentials of C27 and C28. Therefore, the electron transfer from 1Fl* and 3Fl* was thermodynamically feasible, but again due to the large concentration of TEA the excited Fl (Fl*) was first reductively quenched to give Fl−, which then transferred electrons to the catalyst C27 or C28 through oxidative quenching. The proposed mechanism for hydrogen evolution involving hetero coupling between Ni–H− and N–H+ to evolve hydrogen is shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  (a) Effect of the photosensitizer (Fl or EY, 1.0 mM) on H2 evolution with catalyst C27 or C28 (5.0 × 10−6 M), in an EtOH/H2O (1:1, v/v) mixture containing TEA (2–15% v/v) at a pH of 12.3 under visible light irradiation (λirr > 420 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 81 (Copyright 2016, Elsevier BV). (b) Proposed mechanism for the photosensitized catalytic hydrogen production with nickel molecular catalysts C27 and C28. 
Luo et al. in 2017 synthesised and reported the use of a linear trimeric thiolato complex of nickel Ni3(L N2S2)3 (C29) (L N2S2 = N,N′-dimethyl-N-N′-bis(2-mercaptoethyl)-ethylenediamine) as the hydrogen evolution catalyst for electrocatalytic as well as photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.83 The advantage of this trimeric Ni(II)-thiolato complex as the catalyst lies in the ease of electronic tunability and high solubility in a purely aqueous system with a significantly high TON. A typical reaction was carried out in 10 mL aqueous solution containing C29 (1 × 10−5 M) as the catalyst, fluorescein (Fl) (1 × 10−3 M) as the light-harvesting PS and TEA as the sacrificial electron donor at pH = 11.6. The reaction mixture was irradiated using a Xe light source (300 W, λirr > 420 nm). The system gave a considerable amount of hydrogen evolution with a TON of 790 over 24 h of irradiation corresponding to a TOF of 60 h−1 based on the catalyst. Controlled experiments performed by omitting any of the three components or the irradiation source resulted in a negligible amount of hydrogen evolution. In all the experiments performed, hydrogen was evolved with an induction period of ∼0.5–1 h. The appearance of this induction period may be attributed to the formation of homogeneous species or heterogeneous nanoparticles from the photo-decomposition of the nickel complex. The homogeneity of the system was investigated through the Hg poisoning test. Even after the addition of a large amount of Hg to the system, the activity of the catalyst was unaffected and maintained throughout the photolysis. The rate of hydrogen production decreased after 12 h of irradiation. The addition of Fl or TEA showed negligible restoration of the activity, whereas the addition of C29 restored the initial activity of the system suggesting that the system was limited by the catalyst. To determine the dominant reaction pathway, the luminescence of the excited PS Fl* was taken as the function of both TEA and C29 concentrations, separately. Although the rate constant for reductive quenching (kq = 1.2 × 107 M−1 s−1) of Fl* by TEA was less than the rate constant for oxidative quenching (kq = 1.13 × 1010 M−1 s−1) of Fl* by C29, the dominant pathway was found to be reductive quenching because of the higher concentration of TEA than that of C29 in the system.83 The successful utilization of C29 as the catalyst for light-driven hydrogen production paved a way for the construction of a noble metal-free catalyst using the multinuclear Ni(II) complex.
Thiosemicarbazone metal complexes are considered to be an emerging class of photocatalysts that exhibit high redox activity, in which the presence of S and N donors permits the proton relay process. In this context, in 2019, Orio et al. utilized a thiosemicarbazone Ni(II) complex (NiTSC-OMe, C30, TSC-OMe = N,N′-((1Z,1′Z)-(((2E,3E)-butane-2,3-diylidene)bis(hydrazine-2,1-diylidene))bis((l1-sulfanyl)methanylylidene))bis(4-methoxyaniline)) as a molecular catalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen production.84 Three different types of light-harvesting photosensitizers [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6, [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, and [ZnTMePy]PCl4 (TMePy = 4,4′,4′′,4′′′-(porphyrin-5,10,15,20-tetrayl)tetrakis(1-methylpyridin-1-ium)) were tested along with the above Ni(II) catalyst. Several experiments were carried out using TEA or ascorbic acid (0.2 M) as the sacrificial electron donor in various pH buffer solutions (from pH = 2.5 to 10). In addition, different concentrations of the catalyst and the photosensitizers were tested using varied solvent mixtures. In all the cases, no hydrogen evolution was detected using [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 or [ZnTMePy]PCl4 as the photosensitizer. However, when [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 was used as the photosensitizer, a photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of 140 μL from 1 mL of H2O was recorded. The effect of proton concentration was examined for this system using buffer solutions of different pH values ranging from 8 to 10. With buffer solution having pH 8, no hydrogen evolution was detected. However, with those having pH 9 and 10, hydrogen evolution was detected with TONs of 105 and 125, respectively. A further effect of the catalyst concentration was also studied by varying the concentration from 10−5 to 5 × 10−8 M. The volume of hydrogen evolved increased when the concentration of the catalyst was decreased from 10−5 to 10−6 M reaching a maximum volume of 204 μL. The catalytic activity of the system increased when the concentration of the catalyst was changed from 10−5 to 5 × 10−8 M. It was observed that when the concentration of the catalyst was 5 × 10−8 M, the system displayed a TON and TOF of 11333 and 7971 h−1, respectively. Mechanistic studies revealed that [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 could undergo both reduction quenching by TEA and oxidative quenching by the catalyst. Even though the rate constant for the oxidative quenching of the excited PS by the Ni(II) catalyst (kq = 4.99 × 1010 M−1 s−1) was greater than the rate constant of the reductive quenching of the excited PS by TEA (kq = 4.35 × 107 M−1 s−1), the major electron pathway was the reductive quenching of the excited photosensitizer by TEA because of its higher concentration than that of the catalyst. Hence, hydrogen production in this system was initiated by reductive quenching of the excited photosensitizer by TEA.84
Nickel(II) bis(diphosphine) complexes, known as ‘DuBois’ catalysts, are of topical interest for the HER as active photocatalysts. The protonation steps in the hydrogen evolution mechanism are assisted by the proton relay effect of the pendant amines, thus in turn reducing the overpotential of the proton reduction. Natali and Bergamini in 2019 prepared and characterized a Ni(II) bis(diphosphine) complex [Ni III(P2PhN2PhCH2COOH)2](BF4)2 (C31) bearing a carboxylic acid functionality at the periphery.85 The system thus developed was found to work under various conditions, e.g., (i) homogeneous electrocatalysis using TFA as the proton source and acetonitrile as the solvent, (ii) homogeneous photocatalysis in aqueous solution involving [Ru(bpy)3]2+as the PS and ascorbic acid as the SED, and (iii) heterogeneous electrocatalysis in aqueous solution by embedding the nickel complex onto the surface of mesoporous TiO2. However, this work is only focused on the homogeneous photocatalytic aspect of their study. Complex C31 was evaluated for the HER under homogeneous photocatalysis in aqueous solution using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as the light-harvesting sensitizer and ascorbic acid as the sacrificial electron donor. The effect of pH on hydrogen evolution was observed by irradiation of a 5 mL aqueous solution which contained 50 μM catalyst, 0.5 mM [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and 0.5 M ascorbic acid, and the optimum pH, in this case, was found to be 5. Besides, photocatalytic activity towards hydrogen evolution at pH 5 was exploited by changing the catalyst concentration within the range of 10–150 μM. Hydrogen evolution continued up to 6–7 h of continuous irradiation with visible light and the best results both in terms of the amount of hydrogen evolved and production rate were obtained at 100 μM. However, a remarkable TON of up to 272 and a maximum TOF of up to 1.14 min−1 were observed at the lowest concentration of the catalyst. Steady-state and time-resolved optical spectroscopies were performed in order to investigate this remarkable photocatalytic performance. The luminescence of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was progressively quenched by a successive increase in the amount of the catalyst added giving yields between 15 and 60% within the concentration range of 25–150 μM, while with 0.5 M ascorbic acid, the emission of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ was quenched more efficiently with an emission yield of ∼90%. These results indicated that the primary photoinduced process in this system was the reductive quenching of the excited photosensitizer by the sacrificial electron donor.85
Kumato et al. in 2019 synthesized and characterized octahedral Schiff's base complexes (C32–C34) and employed them for photocatalytic hydrogen production from water in conjugation with [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ as the PS and TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor under visible light irradiation (λirr > 420 nm) at room temperature (Fig. 14).86 In a previous study, structurally analogous Ni(II) complexes were found to be degraded to generate the catalytically active species by aggregation.87 The limitation was overcome by designing Ni complexes (C32–C34) with lower overpotentials due to the ligand-based proton-coupled electron transfer phenomenon. Despite not showing catalytic currents in CVs, C32–C34 exhibited remarkable hydrogen evolution performance. Under the optimal reaction conditions of 20 μM catalyst, 2.0 mM PS, 2.5 vol% SED and 17.5 vol% H2O, TONs of 957, 946, and 928 were obtained for C32, C33, and C34, respectively, after 24 h of irradiation. On replacing TEOA with TEA, the TONs were almost doubled (2017, 2948 and 2702 for C32, C33, and C34, respectively). The non-innocent nature of the ligand induced the formation of the Ni(II)–H− hydride intermediate which in close proximity to the cationic secondary amine released hydrogen by heterolytic coupling. When [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ was added to the reaction mixture after 24 h, the hydrogen evolution was improved suggesting that the decomposition of the PS was the cause of the reduction in photocatalytic activity. In addition to this, on replacing [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ with [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+ (dtbbpy = 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine), a remarkable improvement in the TONs was observed (5012, 5239, and 5104 for C32, C33 and C34, respectively). Quenching experiments performed with [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ in order to understand the role of oxidative and reductive quenching cycles in the photoredox catalysis gave a linear Stern–Volmer behavior for C32 with a Stern–Volmer (KSV) constant of 5 × 104 M−1 which was higher by 4 orders of magnitude than that for TEOA (KSV = 23 M−1). Despite this fact, the reductive quenching pathway was followed as the concentration of TEOA in the photocatalytic system was greater than that of C32 by 4 orders of magnitude. Besides, the excited-state oxidation potential of [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ was estimated to be −0.66 V, while the reductive potential of C32 was −1.01 V vs. SCE which clearly indicated that the oxidative quenching of [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ should not follow. Further, to elucidate why C32–C34 behaved as molecular catalysts despite being CV inactive, the complexes C32–C34 were treated with 1 equivalent of [Co(Cp*)2] (Cp* = 1,2,3,4,5-pentamethylcyclopentadiene) which resulted in the formation of [Co(Cp*)2][C32], [Co(Cp*)2][C33], and [Co(Cp*)2][C34].86 On employing these complexes for the HER under the aforementioned reaction conditions higher photocatalytic activities were observed than those for the precursors C32–C34. In addition to this, TOFs of [Co(Cp*)2][C32]-[Co(Cp*)2][C34] reached maximum values after a shorter period of time than those for C32–C34. These results gave an indication that [C32]−–[C34]− were the true catalytically active species in the catalytic cycle (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Proposed mechanism for catalytic hydrogen production using C32–C34. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86 (Copyright 2020, The Royal Society Of Chemistry). 
It is often found that naturally occurring [NiFe]-H2ases, [NiFeSe]-H2ases that possess a terminal selenocysteine residue coordinated to the Ni center instead of a cysteine, are efficient for the photocatalytic HER with a large degree of tolerance to oxygen. This fact in combination with the rarely used [NiSe]-H2ases inspired Luo et al. to synthesize and study the nickel pyridine–selenolate complex [Ni(4,4′-dmbpy)(2-pySe)2] (C35) (where 4,4′-dmbpy = 4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine, and 2-pySe = pyridine-2-selenolate) as a molecular catalyst (4 × 10−6 M) for photocatalytic hydrogen production along with fluorescein (Fl) as the photosensitizer (2 × 10−3 M) and TEA (0.36 M) as the SED in 1:1 CH3CN/H2O at a pH of 11.07.13 The reaction mixture was irradiated using visible light (λirr > 420 nm) at 20 °C. The system gave a total amount of 1.2 mL H2 corresponding to a TON of 1340 (based on the catalyst) after 8 h of irradiation. The reaction was found to be pH sensitive. A decrease in the pH to 9.5 led to a decrease in H2 production because of the protonation of TEA which resulted in its poor electron-donating ability. Similarly, increasing the pH to 12.3 decreased photogenerated H2 because of the low concentration of protons. Moreover, the formation of nickel hydride species was not feasible at a high pH. The dominant reaction pathway of the system was determined by the luminescence of excited Fl* in 1:1 (v/v) CH3CN/H2O at pH = 11.07. Although the rate constant (kq = 2 × 107 M−1 s−1) for reductive quenching of Fl* by TEA to give [Fl]− was ∼400 times less than the rate constant (kq = 9.0 × 109 M−1 s−1) for oxidative quenching by the catalyst C35, the reductive quenching pathway was found to be the dominant one due to the higher concentration of TEA than that of the catalyst. In addition to this, the CV experiment in 1:1 CH3CN/H2O showed no reduction wave at potentials less negative than −1.5 V (vs. SCE) suggesting that the catalyst was not able to accept an electron from [Fl]−. Therefore, it was suggested that the protonated form of the catalyst might be the electron acceptor as also suggested in a different study.80
In continuation with the search for a mimic of the naturally occurring Ni–S moiety in [NiFe]-H2ases, Ni-dithiolene complexes have long been investigated for their attractive electronic properties. The delocalized electron density over the NiS4 core as observed by theoretical and experimental studies suggested that the dithiolene complexes act as excellent electron reservoirs and centers for proton reduction following catalytic intermediates. Mitsopoulou et al. in 2018 prepared and characterized two Ni(II)-dithiolene complexes, namely [Ni(C3{S2C2Ph2}2)] (C36) and [Ni(C3{p-OMe-C6H4}2)] (C37) and applied these complexes in a photo-driven hydrogen evolution experiment in conjugation with [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as the photosensitizer and ascorbic acid/sodium ascorbate as the sacrificial electron donor in a 1:1 CH3CN/H2O solvent system at pH = 4.88 Initially, the concentration of [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 was 0.35 mM. After irradiating the reaction mixture at 400–700 nm, hydrogen evolution was observed with initial values of TONC36 = 17 and TONC37 = 31 during the first 2 h of irradiation. The hydrogen evolution reached a plateau within 5 h of irradiation and the TONs obtained after 24 h of irradiation were 25 and 73 for C36 and C37, respectively. Keeping the concentration of [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 at 0.35 mM, the concentration of C37 was altered within a range of 1–10 μM and the optimal values were obtained at 1 μM. Similarly, on varying the concentration of [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 within a range of 0.1–0.5 mM, it was found that the lower concentration values were more beneficial for the overall performance of the catalytic system. In addition to this, a change of the CH3CN/H2O ratio to 6:4 initially gave more evolution of hydrogen for the first 6 h of irradiation; however, its performance was lowered in comparison to the case of 1:1 ratio after 24 h of irradiation. Changing the ratio of the CH3CN/H2O mixture caused the catalyst to precipitate. Hence the optimal ratio for solvent CH3CN/H2O was found to be 1:1 (v/v). To have an insight into the cause for the cessation of hydrogen evolution activity, a fresh solution of C37, [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, and ascorbate buffer was added after the hydrogen evolution reached a saturation point. The addition of either C37 or [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 resumed the hydrogen evolution activity, whereas the addition of ascorbate had no effect on hydrogen evolution. These observations suggested that the degradation of either C37 or [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 had an inimical effect on hydrogen evolution. A possible hydrogen evolving mechanism would involve protonation of the catalyst at a sulfur site after reduction, and subsequent protonation or reduction leading to hydrogen evolution, in an ECCE or ECEC process.88 Further, a mercury poisoning test was performed to reconnoiter if nickel or NiSx nanoparticles were responsible for the catalytic activity.17 For this, two identical samples containing 6.4 μM C37 and 0.35 mM [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 in 0.1 M ascorbic acid–sodium ascorbate at pH = 4 were irradiated for 24 h, one of which contained elemental Hg. The two curves in the plot of TON vs. irradiation time with and without the presence of Hg suggested that hydrogen evolution was nearly identical indicating that either the nanoparticles were not formed or their formation was minimal which was not responsible for any catalytic activity.
Ni-salicylaldimine catalysts containing pendant ether arms in the secondary coordination sphere were developed to bind hydrated alkali metal cations and to develop hydrogen bonding stabilization for an enhanced hydrogen evolution reaction.89 The coordinated and hydrated alkali metal cations can therefore act as non-amine proton relays to improve the HER by directing water molecules close to the metal center. Moreover, the presence of unbound ether groups could further develop hydrogen-bonding interactions with water, which would elevate the local concentration of water in the vicinity of the catalytically active metal center to enhance the multielectron and multiproton transfer processes in the HER. In order to investigate the effects of redox non-innocence of the balancing ligand and the effect of the secondary coordination sphere on photocatalytic H2 evolution, Soo et al. developed a robust and active Ni(II)-salicylaldimine complex (C38) (salicylaldimine = 6,6′-((1E,1′E)-((4-chloro-1,2-phenylene)bis(azanylylidene))bis(methanylylidene))bis(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)phenol)) as a hydrogen evolving catalyst under visible light irradiation (λirr > 420 nm) along with [IrIII(ppy)2(dtbbpy)] as the PS and TEA as the sacrificial electron donor and the reductive quencher.90 Under optimized reaction conditions, the system gave a TON of 3880 within 6 h of irradiation with water and methanol as the proton source. It is important to note that the maximum TON was obtained when the concentration of the catalyst was 2.0 μM. When the concentration of the catalyst was reduced to 1.0 μM, the TON was comparable to the one obtained with a 2.0 μM concentration of the catalyst, although only for the first 2 h of irradiation. After the initial 2 h of irradiation, the hydrogen evolution activity decreased drastically. The experiments revealed that at a concentration of the catalyst greater than 2.0 μM, the performance of hydrogen evolution per unit catalyst was lowered, which might be due to the formation of the binuclear or polynuclear salicylaldimine complexes in the solution.91 Controlled experiments conducted with 2.0 μM catalyst in anhydrous methanol reduced the TON to almost 1900 suggesting that H2O was a more effective proton source. Using [Ru(bpy)3](PF6) as the photosensitizer gave a TON of only 52, suggesting that a sufficiently reducing photosensitizer was required for the optimal activity. In all the experiments, the rate of hydrogen activity decreased after 6 h of irradiation. Under optimized reaction conditions with 2.0 μM catalyst C38, when 1.0 μM fresh [Ir] PS was added to the reaction mixture after 6 h, hydrogen evolution did not resume which revealed that the deactivation of the photosensitizer was not the main cause for the decrease in H2 evolution activity. On the other hand, the addition of 1 equivalent of the catalyst led to an 80% recovery of hydrogen production in the following 6 h which suggested that the deactivation of the catalyst was the main cause for the reduction in hydrogen evolution activity. pH of the solution was also found to have a considerable effect on the hydrogen evolution rate. The evolution started from a pH of 8.4 and became optimal at a pH around 10.0. However, on increasing the pH to 11, the hydrogen evolution was terminated. It was because of the fact that TEA would protonate at a pH below 8.4 which would inhibit its function as a quencher. At a pH above 10, a decrease in proton concentration would disturb the protonation of the Ni catalyst, leading to a drastic decrease in the rate of hydrogen evolution. Further, to have an insight into the elementary reaction steps during the photolysis, nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopic (TAS) and transient emission spectroscopic (TES) experiments were conducted with 355 nm pulsed irradiation of 0.10 mM [Ir] PS in methanol containing 5% water. By monitoring the quenching of the photoluminescence lifetime of [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]* in the presence of either TEA or C38 with varying concentrations, the Stern–Volmer plots gave a quenching rate constant kq = 5.66 × 106 M−1 s−1 in the presence of TEA. Surprisingly, the catalyst was found not to quench the [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]* complex suggesting that [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]* was more likely to be reductively quenched by TEA to form [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)] first, which then transferred an electron to the catalyst C38. C80 then consequently entered the catalytic cycle to evolve the hydrogen gas.90 These results paved a pathway for the development of hydrogen evolving catalysts that could work in visible light in an aqueous solution involving alternative proton shuttles other than amines in the secondary coordination sphere.
Liu et al. in 2020 reported a photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction using a Ni(II) pentadentate Schiff's base ligand complex (C39) (Schiff's base ligand = 6,6′-((1E,1′E)-((azanediylbis(propane-3,1-diyl))bis(azanylylidene))bis(methanylylidene))bis(2,4-di-tert-butylphenol)).92 The analogous tetradentate Schiff base complexes with Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn were proven to exhibit high catalytic HER activities.93,94 The photocatalytic HER with C39 was investigated in an aqueous medium (H2O/MeOH = 2:1, v/v) using Eosin Y (EY) as the light-harvesting photosensitizer and TEA or TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor. The concentration of the EY was kept greater than that of the catalyst by one order of magnitude to ensure intermolecular electron transfer during catalysis. The reaction mixture was irradiated with a white LED at 298 K and hydrogen evolution was quantified by gas chromatography. The HER was first performed using TEA as the sacrificial electron donor and the optimal pH was found to be 12. The system gave a TON of 8 after 4 h of irradiation. However, on replacing TEA with TEOA, the catalytic performance of the system was improved and a total of 350 μL of hydrogen was evolved in 6 h of irradiation.92
Despite the fact that a DuBois-type Ni catalyst containing diphosphine ligands95 and mixed donor atom complexes involving redox non-innocent ligands having nitrogen and π-back donating sulphur atoms36 acts as an electron reservoir, the sulphur atoms present in the dithiolene ligands are less prone to protonation than the other common moieties and therefore the respective complexes are quite sensitive to the reaction conditions, thereby limiting the efficiency of the catalysis in homogeneous solutions.96 In an attempt to modify the chemical properties of the catalyst and to increase the catalytic efficiency for hydrogen evolution, the structure of the ligand could be modified by the introduction of strong electron-withdrawing groups which would increase the basicity of the metal center, thereby facilitating hydride formation. Generally, it has been observed that the S^N ligand framework promotes proton-coupled electron transfer processes97 which do not involve the formation of high energy catalytic intermediates. Moreover, the ligating nitrogen atom acts as a proton relay that facilitates the formation of Ni-hydride.98 Furthermore, the existence of nucleophilic nitrogen atoms on the ligand encourages the protonation of the ligand, thereby reducing the overpotential of the catalyst.86,99 Tetradentate Ni(II) complexes having S and N donor atoms that are linked by hydrocarbon groups act as active electrocatalysts and photocatalysts.87,100 In these complexes hydrogen is usually produced involving a Ni(II) intermediate in which the protonated sulphur atom acts as a proton relay. In this context, Mitsopoulou et al. in 2020 synthesised and characterized three mononuclear complexes bearing the non-innocent o-aminobenzenethiolate (2-amnt) ligand and different diamine ligands, namely [Ni(2-amnt)(o-pd)] (C40) (o-pd = o-phenylenediamine), [Ni(2-amnt)(3,4-daba)] (C41) (3,4-daba = 3,4-diaminobenzoic acid), and [Ni(2-amnt)(dmnt)] (C42) (dmnt = diaminomaleonitrile).101 All the complexes were applied for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution as catalysts along with fluorescein (Fl) as the light-harvesting photosensitizer and TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor in DMF/H2O at pH = 9.8. First of all, the catalytic activity of C40 was assessed under different concentrations of C40, PS, and TEOA, and different ratios of DMF/H2O. Under optimal reaction conditions [PS] = 1 mM, [C40] = 10−5 M, and TEOA = 0.5 M in an Ar saturated 1:2 (v/v) DMF/H2O mixture, 1.01 mL of hydrogen was produced after 24 h of irradiation which corresponded to a TON of ∼24000 (regarded to the initial concentration of C40). The Hg poisoning test was employed to investigate whether NiSx particles were responsible for the catalytic activity or not. The test showed a large decrease in the yield of C40 (237 TON), which suggested that C40 did not act as a molecular catalyst under photocatalytic conditions. Also, the absorbance intensity of Fl at 480 nm decreased in the presence of TEOA in aqueous solution in 48 h, which indicated decomposition of Fl. This fact was in accordance with the literature due to the instability of Fl− formed after reductive quenching.80,81 On addition of C40 to the Fl-TEOA system, the intensity of the band at 480 nm decreased but at a slower rate than when C40 was not added to the system. However, the absorption band of C40 at 486 nm was still there after 24 h of irradiation, whereas the one at 819 nm was diminished which indicated the annihilation of C40 in the photocatalytic system. Similarly, the catalytic activity of C41 was assessed under different concentrations of Fl and TEOA in DMF/H2O. Under the optimized reaction conditions of 0.1 mM C41, 0.5 mM Fl, and 0.5 M TEOA in DMF/H2O = 1:2 solvent mixture, the system reached a TON of 834 in 24 h of irradiation. On increasing the ratio of DMF/H2O to 1:45, the performance of the catalytic system was restricted to a TON of 414 which might be due to the lower solubility of C41 in an aqueous solvent system. On performing the mercury poisoning test for C41 in different ratios of DMF/H2O (1:2, 1:45), the two curves obtained in the plot of TON vs. irradiation time were identical, indicating that either the nanoparticles were not formed or their formation had no effect on the catalytic activity which suggested that C41 acted as a robust catalyst under photocatalytic conditions. Further, the effect of Fl concentration on the catalytic system was investigated which indicated that Fl was the limiting reagent. An increase in TON was observed on adding Fl to the irradiated system after the cessation of hydrogen evolution, whereas the addition of C41 or TEOA did not resume the hydrogen evolution activity. C42 was also employed for the HER along with the same PS and TEOA in the same solvent system; however, hydrogen evolution was not observed.101
In addition to the above-mentioned complexes, some other polypyridyl complexes of Co(II/III) and Ni(II) were also assessed for the photocatalytic HER. A brief discussion of each of them is given below (Chart 4). Complex C43 was applied in the photocatalytic HER along with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (PS) and ascorbic acid (SED).14 Under visible light irradiation (λirr = 452 nm), the system gave an appreciable amount of hydrogen with TOF = 0.18 s−1 and a TON of 1625 over 13 h of irradiation.14 The choice of the ligand bpyPyMe was made on the basis of the previous findings which involved [Co(bpy)3]2+, displaying a strongly delocalised electronic structure102 and was believed to involve redox activity of the bpy ligands for catalysis (proton reduction).103 The newly synthesised ligand bpyPyMe, which possessed two redox active bpy moieties, was believed to be stable towards ligand hydrogenation. Furthermore, the pentadentate nature of the ligand was supposed to provide stability to the catalyst. In addition to this, the π accepting properties of the two bpy moieties were supposed to cause the reduction potential of the metal to be more positive (compared to the pure pyridine ligand sets such as PY5Me2 where PY5Me2 = 2,6-bis(1,1-di-2-pyridinylethyl)-pyridine). Under visible light irradiation (λirr = 452 nm), the system gave an appreciable amount of hydrogen with TOF = 0.18 s−1 and a TON of 1625 over 13 h of irradiation.14 Another complex (C44) was obtained by replacing the methyl group with a hydroxy group in C43.104 The presence of a dissociative bromide ligand and the hydroxy group enhanced its water solubility. Using complex C44 with [Re(bpy)(CO)3(py)]+ (PS) and TEOA (SED) and light irradiation (λirr = 385 nm), the system gave a TOF of 0.26 s−1 and a TON of 1380. In another study, Tong and Thummel et al. prepared a square planar tetradentate polypyridine ligand, 8-(1′′,10′′-phenanthrol-2′′-yl)-2-(pyrid-2′-yl)quinolone (ppq), and its corresponding complex with Co(II), namely [CoCl2(ppq)]2+ (C45).105 Using C45 as the hydrogen evolution catalyst along with [Ru (bpy)3]2+ (PS) and ascorbic acid (SED) under visible light irradiation (λirr = 469 nm), the system gave an initial TOF and TON of 0.17 s−1 and ∼300, respectively. In the same study by Tong and Thummel, another complex, C46, was used with a tetradentate ligand, which was similar to the ligand used for the synthesis of C45. The only difference between these two ligands was that the quinoline and the pyridine subunits of the tetradentate ligand in C46 were joined together by dimethylene bridges which increased the conjugation and made the ligand more rigid.105 Under the same photocatalytic conditions as described for C45, complex C46 was found to be more active and gave a TON of 745 during 12 h of irradiation. The better performance of the catalyst C46 with respect to C45 was because of the enhanced rigidity introduced in the structure of the ligand due to the dimethylene bridges which not only lowered the energy barrier for reorganization but also improved the robustness of the catalyst by inhibiting the dissociation of the pyridine moiety. Macrocyclic polypyridyl complexes bearing cobalt metal at the center are known to be highly efficient catalysts,104,106 and are known to exhibit higher stability than commonly used diamines or cobaloxime. Moreover, it is very easy to tune their electronic properties as they can be easily derivatised.104,106 In this respect, Joliat and Alberto et al. prepared a macrocyclic ligand in which two bpy units were tethered together by two cyano-methylene units and used this ligand for complexation with Co(II) (C47).107 Under visible light irradiation (λirr = 453 nm), C47 along with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and ascorbic acid in the presence of TCEP (TCEP = tris(2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride) gave a TON of 6700 and a TOF of 0.058 s−1 at 10 μM concentration of C47. On decreasing the concentration to 1 μM, the TON and TOF rose to 21900 and 0.78 s−1. Another macrocyclic ligand consisting of two bpy units attached to each other by two keto bridges and its corresponding Co(II) complex (C48) were studied by Alberto et al.108 Under the same photocatalytic conditions as described for C47, the system gave a TON and TOF of 677 and 0.027 s−1, respectively. In another study, Mulfort et al. investigated another macrocyclic ligand (in which two bpy units were linked mutually at their 6,6′ sites via two amine groups) and its corresponding Co(II) complex (C49).109 Its photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency was assessed using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as the PS and ascorbic acid as the SED under visible light irradiation (λirr = 455 nm). When the concentration of C49 was 5 μM, the system gave a TON and TOF of 1330 and 0.58 s−1, respectively, during 4 h of irradiation. Heptacoordinated complexes of cobalt are quite rare, representing less than 1% of the known structures. Moreover, such complexes have never been found to have any practical applications. However, Ruggi et al. in 2017 described the synthesis, characterisation and photocatalytic studies of the first heptacoordinated complex of cobalt in a completely aqueous medium.110 Using an LED centered at 475 nm and C50 as the hydrogen evolving catalyst along with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as the PS and ascorbic acid as the SED, the system yielded a TON of ∼1000 in 3 h at 10 μM concentration of C50. On decreasing the concentration to 0.1 μM, the TON rose to > 16000.110 Multinuclear complexes of transition metal complexes could also be used to catalyze the HER by placing them in close proximity to each other, thereby inducing cooperative effects. In this respect, a dinuclear cobalt HER catalyst (C51) with a polypyridyl ligand was reported by Long et al.111 Using a xenon arc lamp (cut off filter at λirr < 400 nm) and using C51 as the hydrogen evolving catalyst along with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as the PS and ascorbic acid as the SED, the system afforded a TON of 339 after 6 h of irradiation. Another Co(III) complex (C52) containing a pentadentate ligand was studied and applied for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution by Zhao et al.112 The complex C52 in unification with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (PS) and ascorbic acid (SED) was irradiated using an LED (λirr = 450 nm). The system performed well and gave a TON (based on the catalyst) of 1690 during 3 h of irradiation. In another study, Verani et al. studied and applied a Ni(II) complex (C53) for photocatalytic hydrogen production using fluorescein (Fl) as the photosensitizer and TEA as the sacrificial electron donor in an EtOH/H2O (1:1, v/v) solvent mixture at pH = 12.113 Upon irradiating the reaction mixture with an LED (λirr = 520 nm), the system afforded a TON and TOF of 3500 and 0.041 s−1. Apart from these cobalt and nickel complexes, mono- and di-nuclear iron complexes are being extensively used for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. A few examples of them are discussed here: a one pot synthesis of a binuclear Fe(II) macrocyclic metallotecton which consisted of two units of the cationic iron complex bearing the ligand (6-pyridin-2-yl-[1,3,5]-triazine-2,4-diamine) (C54) connected to each other by two [μ-PHO3CH3]− bridges was reported by Doung et al. in 2020.114 This [FeFe] metallotecton was then employed for photocatalytic hydrogen production as a catalyst for proton reduction along with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as the photosensitizer, TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor and 48% HBF4 in water as a proton source in DMF solution.114 The system was irradiated with blue light (λirr = 452 nm). Upon illumination, the system displayed a hydrogen production of about 1.30 mmol per hour with a TON of 326 mol of H2 per mol of PS and a TOF of 4189 mmol of H2 per mole of PS per minute.114 In recent years, the use of Fe(III) complexes in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution is a pivotal area of research.19 Fe(III) polypyridyl complexes have been already applied for electrocatalytic proton reduction.115–117 In this respect, different chromophores or photosensitizers (PS) such as fluorescein (Fl), eosin Y (EY) and tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)-ruthenium(II)chloride [Ru(bpy)3]2+ were examined and fluorescein was found to have the highest activity in reducing active Fe(III) electrocatalysts.118 For designing a photocatalytic system which utilises these catalysts, incorporation of a chromophore that reduces these catalysts is necessary.119 In this context, McNamara and coworkers used triethylamine (TEA) as a sacrificial electron donor owing to its ability to reduce fluorescein as also suggested by the decrease in fluorescence intensity upon gradual addition of TEA. Under optimal reaction conditions (1.9 mM Fl, 5% TEA, and 2 μM catalyst in an EtOH:H2O (1:1, v/v) mixture) under green light irradiation (λirr = 520 nm), the photocatalytic system with catalyst C55 yielded a TON of hydrogen evolution of 2100 over 24 h of irradiation (Chart 4). In the series, the catalyst C57 achieved a TON of 1000 which was consistent with its least activity as an electrocatalyst as also observed by the authors. However, the lowest activity of catalyst C56 (TON = 740) as a photocatalyst was found puzzling based on its higher activity as an electrocatalyst. For catalyst C56, the plateau for hydrogen production was reached in only 6 h in contrast to those observed for C55 and C57 which were found to be steadily rising until the duration of the experiment of 24 h, suggesting that C56 decomposed faster than C55 and C57. This was attributed to the decrease in photostability due to the presence of the unfavourable seven membered chelate ring of the sulfinato moiety. In line with the observed TONs, the quantum efficiencies of hydrogen evolution were found to be 3.1%, 1.9% and 3.4% for C55, C56 and C57, respectively.
 Chart 4  Chemical structures of the complexes C43–C57 used in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. 
Data depicting the performances of Co(II/III) and Ni(II) complexes as catalysts and transition metal complexes and organic dyes as PSs are tabulated in Table 2.
Table 2 Performances of Co(II/III) and Ni(II) complexes as catalysts and transition metal complexes and organic dyes as PSs




Catalyst
TONcat (irradiation time, h)
TOF

Φ
H2

Photosensitizer
SED
Medium

λ
irr (nm)





a Composite system (combination of a photosensitizer and catalyst).
b Irradiation time not given.
c TON based on the photosensitizer.
d Initial TOF.
e Maximum TOF, otherwise, the time period for which it was calculated is given.
f pH not mentioned.






[Co(bpy)3]2+

17b
—
—
[Ir(ppy)2(phen)]+
TEOA
H2O/CH3CNf
Blue LED



[Co(bpy)3]2+

18b
—
—
[Ir(F-mppy)2(bpy)]+
TEOA
H2O/CH3CNf
Blue LED



[Co(bpy)3]2+

17b
—
—
[Ir(F-mppy)2(phen)]+
TEOA
H2O/CH3CNf
Blue LED



[Co(bpy)3]2+

2b
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
TEOA
H2O/CH3CNf
Blue LED



[Co(bpy)3]2+

12b
—
—
[Ru(dmphen)]2+
TEOA
H2O/CH3CNf
Blue LED



C1



56 (4 h)
—
—
—
TEA
Acetone solutionf
>380



C2



17 (4 h)
—
—
—
TEA
Acetone solutionf
>420



C3



12 (4 h)
—
—
—
TEA
Acetone solutionf
>420



C4



104 (4 h)
—
—
—
TEA
Acetone solutionf
>420



C5



9 (4 h)
—
—
—
TEA
Acetone solutionf
>380



C6



210 (15 h)
42 h−1d
—
—
TEA
Acetone solutionf
>380



[Co(dmgBF2)2(OH2)2]

273 (15 h)
53 h−1d
—
[Re(CO)3Br(phen)]
TEA
Acetone solutionf
>380



[Co (dmgH)2PyCl]

400 (10 h)
—
—
Pt(II) complex
TEOA
CH3CN/H2Of
>410



C7

1600 (3 h)
1500 h−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Acetate buffer (pH = 4)
450



C8

2700 (12 h)
880 h−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)
520



C9

2300 (12 h)
690 h−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)
520



C10

6000 (12 h)
1400 h−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)
520



C11

9000 (12 h)
3400 h−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)
520



C12

∼4200 (2.5 h)
∼3160 h−1
7.5%
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Aqueous solution (pH = 4)
452



C18

690 (2 h)
703 h−1d
—
[Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6
TEA
CH3CN/H2O/Et3Nf
447



C19

4367b
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Acetate buffer (pH = 4)
469



[Co(dmgH)2]2+

495 (35 h)c
—
—
[Ru(qpy)3]2+
TEOA
DMF (pH ∼9)
525



[Co(dmgH)2]2+

330 (35 h)c
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
TEOA
DMF (pH ∼9)
525



[Co(dmgH)2]2+

375 (20 h)c
—
—
[Ru(qpy)3]2+
TEOA
DMF (pH ∼9)
630



[Co(dmgH)2]2+

30 (20 h)c
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
TEOA
DMF (pH ∼9)
630



[Ir-Py-Co]+



225 (35 h)c
169 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
DMFf
452



[Ir-Py-Co]+



113 (25 h)c
104 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
DMFf
525



[Ir-Py-Co]+



3 (17 h)c
8 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
DMFf
595



[Irpiq-L-Co]



180 (2.5 h)c
16000 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
452



[Irpiq-L-Co]



251 (3 h)c
3500 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
525



[Irpiq-L-Co]



180 (18 h)c
270 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
595



[Irpiq-L-Co]



80 (110 h)c
15 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
630



[IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co]



260 (1.3 h)c
12300 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
452



[IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co]



170 (30.3 h)c
150 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
525



[IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co]



290 (2.8 h)c
8200 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
452



[IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co]



150 (27.3 h)c
140 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—


TEOA
CH3CNf
525



C20

7800 (20 h)c
36000 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
18.4%

PS1

TEOA
DMF/TEOA solution (pH ∼8.9)
452



C20

7200 (20 h)c
30100 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
45.6%

PS1

TEOA
DMF/TEOA solution (pH ∼8.9)
523



C20

4200 (80 h)c
3050 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
5.3%

PS1

TEOA
DMF/TEOA solution (pH ∼8.9)
630



[Co(dmgH)(dmgH2)Cl2

134b,c
57 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—

PS2

TEOA
DMFf
450



[Co(H2O)6](BF4)2

764 (296 h)c
51 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e
—

PS2

TEOA
DMFf
450



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

29 (24 h)
66 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS3

TEOA
DMFf
445



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

14 (60 h)
10 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS3

TEOA
DMFf
630



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

13 (24 h)
74 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS4

TEOA
DMFf
445



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

13 (60 h)
20 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS4

TEOA
DMFf
630



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

15 (24 h)
32 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS5

TEOA
DMFf
445



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

11 (60 h)
6 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS5

TEOA
DMFf
630



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

9 (24 h)
48 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS6

TEOA
DMFf
445



[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2

6 (60 h)
12 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e
—

PS6

TEOA
DMF (pH = 8.9)
630



C21

290 (4 h)
—
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6
TEA
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 10)
>400



C22

6400 (2 h)
120.8 min−1e
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Phosphate buffer (pH = 6.8)
420



C23

7 (4 h)
1.8 h−1d
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6
TEOA
CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)
>400



C23⊂SA

51 (4 h)
10.3 h−1d
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6
TEOA
CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)
>400



C24

46 (4 h)
16 h−1d
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6
TEOA
CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)
>400



C24⊂SA

166 (4 h)
88 h−1d
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6
TEOA
CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)
>400



C25

2700 (150 h)
20 h−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 2.25)
>410



C26

5500 (40 h)
250 h−1d
—
Fl
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12–12.4)
520



C27

5923 (8 h)
—
—
Fl
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)
>420



C27

2671 (8 h)
—
—
EY
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)
>420



C28

7643 (8 h)
—
—
Fl
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)
>420



C28

3672 (8 h)
—
—
EY
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)
>420



C29

790 (24 h)
60 h−1d
—
Fl
TEA
Aqueous solution (pH = 11.6)
>420



C30

11333 (2 h)
7971 h−1e
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6
TEA
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 10)
White LED



C31

272 (7 h)
1.14 min−1e
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Aqueous solution (pH = 5)
>400



C32

957 (24 h)
48 h−1 (7 h)
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+
TEOA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C32

2017 (24 h)
165 h−1 (4 h)
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+
TEA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C32

5012 (24 h)
1072 h−1 (2 h)
—
[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+
TEA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C33

946 (24 h)
50 h−1 (7 h)
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+
TEOA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C33

2948 (24 h)
330 h−1 (2 h)
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+
TEA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C33

5293 (24 h)
1082 h−1 (2 h)
—
[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+
TEA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C34

928 (24 h)
43 h−1 (11 h)
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+
TEOA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C34

2702 (24 h)
243 h−1 (3 h)
—
[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+
TEA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C34

5104 (24 h)
932 h−1 (2 h)
—
[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+
TEA
DMF/H2Of
>420



C35

1340 (8 h)
—
—
Fl
TEA
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 11.07)
>420



C36

25 (24 h)
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)
400–700



C37

73 (24 h)
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)
400–700



C38

3380 (6 h)
—
—
[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+
TEA
MeOH/H2O (pH = 10)
>420



C39

8 (4 h)
—
—
EY
TEA
MeOH/H2O (pH = 12)
White LED



C40

∼24000 (24 h)
—
—
Fl
TEOA
DMF/H2O (pH = 9.8)
>420



C41

834 (24 h)
—
—
Fl
TEOA
DMF/H2O (pH = 9.8)
>420



C43

1625 (13 h)
0.18 s−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.0)
452



C44

1380 (10 h)
0.26 s−1d
—
[Re(bpy)(CO)3py]
H2A
Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.1)
385



C45

300 (12 h)
0.17 s−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)
469



C46

745 (12 h)
0.24 s−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)
469



C47

6700 (70 h)
0.058 s−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)
453



C48

677 (87 h)
0.027 s−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Ascorbate buffer (pH = 5)
453



C49

1380 (4 h)
0.58 s−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)
455



C50

1000 (3 h)
0.09 s−1d
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Acetate buffer (pH = 4)
475



C51

339 (6 h)
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Acetate buffer (pH = 4.1)
>400



C52

1390 (3 h)
—
—
[Ru(bpy)3]2+
H2A
Acetate buffer (pH = 5)
450



C53

3500 (24 h)
0.041 s−1d
—
Fl
TEA
EtOH/H2Of
520



C54

326c
4189 min−1


[Ru(bpy)3]2+
TEOA
DMFf
452



C55

2100 (24 h)




Fl
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.5)
520



C56

740 (6 h)




Fl
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.5)
520



C57

1000(24 h)




Fl
TEA
EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.5)
520




4. Conclusion and future perspective
Inspired by the NPS, various APSs have been developed in the past few decades. However, due to the intricacy in constructing and designing a complete system for overall water splitting, it is common to divide the system into oxidative and reductive half-reactions. Particularly, in the field of the reductive half part, extensive development has been made for photocatalytic hydrogen production. In this context, we have reported several potential systems for photo-driven hydrogen production. The field of cobalt and nickel-based molecular catalysts is well exploited for photocatalytic hydrogen production along with different photosensitizers, such as organic dyes, transition metal complexes and semiconductor QDs. The use of cobalt thiolene complexes fabricated with different substituents by Eisenberg et al. revealed that the ligand with more electron-withdrawing substituents was found to be more effective for hydrogen production. Amongst C8–C11, C11 containing the CN− substituents over the dithiolene ligand was found to be most effective giving a hydrogen evolution TON of 9000 and a TOF of 3400 h−1.11 [Ru(tpy)2]2+ complexes were earlier not employed for photocatalytic hydrogen production because of their low quantum yield and low excited state lifetime.58 However, the synthesis of the [Ru(tpy)2]2+ complexes where tpy ligands were judiciously substituted as reported by Hanan et al. made it possible to use them for photocatalytic hydrogen production.70,71 The use of the catalyst C25 with [Ru(bpy)2]2+ and H2A gave a TON of 2700. Furthermore, the stability of the catalyst before and after photocatalysis paved a way for its incorporation into other multicomponent systems.37 Besides, the catalysts C32–C34, despite not showing any catalytic currents in CVs, were found to be active for photocatalytic hydrogen production.86 The use of the mononuclear complex C40 along with Fl and TEOA under optimized reaction conditions gave 1.01 mL hydrogen after 24 h of irradiation which corresponded to a TON of ∼24000 (based on the catalyst).101 Despite the fact that there has been a lot of development in the field of artificial photocatalytic systems for hydrogen evolution, there are certainly critical and stimulating concerns that need to be addressed cautiously. For example, large-scale photocatalytic hydrogen production from a molecular catalyst in combination with transition metal complexes or organic dyes as photosensitizers is not commercially viable. The challenging part lies in the development of an efficient artificial photocatalytic system that could produce hydrogen at a price comparable to that of hydrogen production using fossil fuels. The focus should be on synthesizing and designing earth-abundant biomimetic complexes which not only possess excellent hydrogen evolution efficiency but are also economically cost effective. Robustness, durability and stability of the components of the system are certain other vital issues that need to be taken care of. Although the poor stability of organic dyes and transition metal complexes as photosensitizers can be surpassed by using semiconductor photosensitizers, molecular catalysts also suffer from decomposition or degradation during the course of the reaction, thereby reducing the catalytic efficiency of the system. In some cases it has also been observed that molecular catalysts and transition metal photosensitizers may also undergo substitution reactions with the sacrificial donor, thereby producing unwanted by products, consequently causing degradation of the components as well as the catalytic efficiency of the system. Such a substitution reaction can be suppressed by introducing rigidity into the ligand structure of the transition metal complexes or molecular catalysts. Despite carrying out experimental and computational studies on these systems for understanding the detailed mechanism involved in the artificial photocatalytic systems, complete scientific and exact understanding of the charge transfer dynamics and H2 evolution mechanism are still not clear. Thorough knowledge of the theory and mechanisms is necessary to construct an effective photocatalytic hydrogen evolving system; therefore, more emphasis should be exercised in the direction of having a complete understanding of the processes taking place in an artificial photocatalytic system. Inspired by natural photosynthesis, a number of synthetic systems designed toward such an ideal model use single chromophores for both light-harvesting and electron-transfer (ET) functions, but most of these systems suffer from inefficient coupling of single-photon/electron events with multielectron redox reactions necessary for fuel generation (i.e., hydrogen from water and hydrocarbons from CO2). Therefore, new systems for solar fuel generation must be able to accumulate and transfer multiple electrons and/or holes to catalytic sites. The need is to develop systems having high extinction coefficients across a broad spectral range in the solar spectrum so that they could simultaneously absorb multiple photons, even after electrons or holes are accumulated, and can link catalysts. We believe that such improvements could facilitate development in the field of artificial photocatalytic systems for hydrogen evolution which would ultimately help to solve the ever-persisting energy crisis problem and make the human race less dependent on non-renewable sources of energy.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest
Acknowledgements
AKP thanks the Science and Engineering Research Board for a startup research grant (SRG/2020/000080) and Indian Institute of Technology Jammu for a seed grant (SGT-100028). RG acknowledges the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research for a Junior Research Fellowship (File no. 09/1325(12518)/2021-EMR-I). SS thanks the University Grants Commission for a Junior Research Fellowship (certificate no. DEC19C00758).
References
G. A. Olah, G. K. S. Prakash and A. Goeppert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12881–12898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lelieveld, K. Klingmüller, A. Pozzer, R. T. Burnett, A. Haines and V. Ramanathan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2019, 116, 7192–7197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berardi, S. Drouet, L. Francàs, C. Gimbert-Suriñach, M. Guttentag, C. Richmond, T. Stoll and A. Llobet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7501–7519 RSC .

          TWI-Global, What Are the Pros and Cons of Hydrogen Fuel Cells?, https://www.twi-global.com/technical-knowledge/faqs/what-are-the-pros-and-cons-of-hydrogen-fuel-cells Search PubMed.
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 21–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ott, M. Kritikos, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3285–3288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-B. Li, Z.-J. Li, S. Yu, G.-X. Wang, F. Wang, Q.-Y. Meng, B. Chen, K. Feng, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2597–2602 RSC .
W. R. McNamara, Z. Han, C.-J. Yin, W. W. Brennessel, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2012, 109, 15594–15599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xie, Y.-W. Tao, C. Peng and G.-G. Luo, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2019, 110, 107598 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nippe, R. S. Khnayzer, J. A. Panetier, D. Z. Zee, B. S. Olaiya, M. Head-Gordon, C. J. Chang, F. N. Castellano and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3934–3945 RSC .
K. A. Brown and P. W. King, Photosynth. Res., 2020, 143, 193–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, Y.-M. Lee and W. Nam, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 355, 54–73 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2338–2356 RSC .
Y. Xu and B. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 3084–3096 RSC .
M. Wang, L. Chen, X. Li and L. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 12793–12800 RSC .
W. T. Eckenhoff and R. Eisenberg, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13004–13021 RSC .
R. Tong, K. W. Ng, X. Wang, S. Wang, X. Wang and H. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23202–23230 RSC .
R. Tong, Z. Sun, X. Wang, S. Wang and H. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 26136–26144 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tong, Z. Sun, X. Wang, L. Yang, J. Zhai, S. Wang and H. Pan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 18912–18921 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Z. Wu, B. Chen, Z.-J. Li and C.-H. Tung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2177–2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Pal, S. Nag, J. G. Ferreira, V. Brochery, G. La Ganga, A. Santoro, S. Serroni, S. Campagna and G. S. Hanan, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 1679–1689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Komreddy, K. Ensz, H. Nguyen, D. P. Rillema and C. E. Moore, J. Mol. Struct., 2021, 1223, 128739 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pal, D. B. Cordes, A. M. Z. Slawin, C. Momblona, E. Ortí, I. D. W. Samuel, H. J. Bolink and E. Zysman-Colman, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 10361–10376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Kristoffersen, S. R. Erga, B. Hamre and Ø. Frette, J. Fluoresc., 2018, 28, 1065–1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wen and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2355–2364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and W.-D. Zhang, Carbon, 2019, 145, 488–500 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Xie, W.-X. Jiang, N.-S. Wang and S.-Z. Zhan, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2020, 34, e5390 CAS .
W. M. Singh, T. Baine, S. Kudo, S. Tian, X. A. N. Ma, H. Zhou, N. J. DeYonker, T. C. Pham, J. C. Bollinger, D. L. Baker, B. Yan, C. E. Webster and X. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5941–5944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Niu, S. Shen, N. Zhang, J. Chen and L. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, J. Dong, X. Li, F. Wang, L. Wu and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15868–15874 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zeng and W.-D. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 596, 75–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, L. Shen, W. W. Brennessel, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14659–14669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. McLaughlin, T. M. McCormick, R. Eisenberg and P. L. Holland, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7989–7991 RSC .
J.-M. Lei, Q.-X. Peng, S.-P. Luo, Y. Liu, S.-Z. Zhan and C.-L. Ni, Mol. Catal., 2018, 448, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Goldsmith, W. R. Hudson, M. S. Lowry, T. H. Anderson and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7502–7510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Vos and J. M. Kelly, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4869–4883,  10.1039/B606490F .
M. Razavet, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4786–4795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rau, D. Walther and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2007, 915–919,  10.1039/B615987G .
C. Königstein, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1995, 90, 141–152 CrossRef .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, A. Pereira and M. Fontecave, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5567–5569,  10.1039/B812605B .
P. Du, K. Knowles and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12576–12577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, J. Schneider, P. Jarosz and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7726–7727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sproules and K. Wieghardt, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 837–860 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Khnayzer, V. S. Thoi, M. Nippe, A. E. King, J. W. Jurss, K. A. El Roz, J. R. Long, C. J. Chang and F. N. Castellano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1477–1488 RSC .
B. Durham, J. V. Caspar, J. K. Nagle and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4803–4810 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Allen, R. P. White, D. P. Rillema and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 2613–2620 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Khnayzer, B. S. Olaiya, K. A. El Roz and F. N. Castellano, ChemPlusChem, 2016, 81, 1090–1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Call, Z. Codolà, F. Acuña-Parés and J. Lloret-Fillol, Chem. - Eur. J., 2014, 20, 6171–6183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Basu, S. Mazumder, X. Shi, R. J. Staples, H. B. Schlegel and C. N. Verani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7139–7143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Zhou, L.-Z. Fu, L.-Z. Tang, Y.-X. Zhang and S.-Z. Zhan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 5099–5105 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Soltau, J. Niklas, P. D. Dahlberg, O. G. Poluektov, D. M. Tiede, K. L. Mulfort and L. M. Utschig, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10628–10631 RSC .
E. Rousset, D. Chartrand, I. Ciofini, V. Marvaud and G. S. Hanan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9261–9264 RSC .
A. K. Pal and G. S. Hanan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6184–6197 RSC .
E. Constable, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 842–855 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kaes, A. Katz and M. W. Hosseini, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 3553–3590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. F. DiSalle and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11819–11821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jacques, O. Schott, K. Robeyns, G. S. Hanan and B. Elias, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 2016, 1779–1783 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lentz, O. Schott, T. Auvray, G. Hanan and B. Elias, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 10875–10881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schulz, M. Karnahl, M. Schwalbe and J. G. Vos, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 1682–1705 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lentz, O. Schott, T. Auvray, G. S. Hanan and B. Elias, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 15567–15576 RSC .
O. Schott, A. K. Pal, D. Chartrand and G. S. Hanan, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4436–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Beer, S. W. Dent and T. J. Wear, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1996, 2341–2346,  10.1039/DT9960002341 .
P. D. Beer, F. Szemes, V. Balzani, C. M. Salà, M. G. B. Drew, S. W. Dent and M. Maestri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 11864–11875 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, J. Schneider, G. Luo, W. W. Brennessel and R. Eisenberg, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4952–4962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rupp, T. Auvray, E. Rousset, G. M. Mercier, V. Marvaud, D. G. Kurth and G. S. Hanan, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 9127–9134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Rupp, T. Auvray, N. Shevchenko, L. Swoboda, G. S. Hanan and D. G. Kurth, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 292–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Auvray, R. Sahoo, D. Deschênes and G. S. Hanan, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 15136–15143 RSC .
X.-W. Song, Y. Meng, C.-L. Zhang, C.-B. Ma and C.-N. Chen, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 76, 52–54 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Beyene and C.-H. Hung, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2036–2043 RSC .
A. Call, C. Casadevall, A. Romero-Rivera, V. Martin-Diaconescu, D. J. Sommer, S. Osuna, G. Ghirlanda and J. Lloret-Fillol, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5837–5846 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rakowski Dubois and D. L. Dubois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974–1982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rakowski DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 62–72 RSC .
A. D. Wilson, R. H. Newell, M. J. McNevin, J. T. Muckerman, M. Rakowski DuBois and D. L. DuBois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 358–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Métayé, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, W. R. McNamara, M.-S. Eum, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1667–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rao, W.-Q. Yu, H.-Q. Zheng, J. Bonin, Y.-T. Fan and H.-W. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Fleming, A. W. E. Knight, J. M. Morris, R. J. S. Morrison and G. W. Robinson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 4306–4311 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xie, J. Zhu and G.-G. Luo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 2772–2780 CrossRef CAS .
S. Panagiotakis, G. Landrou, V. Nikolaou, A. Putri, R. Hardré, J. Massin, G. Charalambidis, A. G. Coutsolelos and M. Orio, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Bergamini and M. Natali, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14653–14661 RSC .
S. Inoue, Y.-N. Yan, K. Yamanishi, Y. Kataoka and T. Kawamoto, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2829–2832 RSC .
S. Inoue, M. Mitsuhashi, T. Ono, Y.-N. Yan, Y. Kataoka, M. Handa and T. Kawamoto, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 12129–12138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zarkadoulas, E. Koutsouri, E. Semidalas, V. Psycharis, C. P. Raptopoulou and C. A. Mitsopoulou, Polyhedron, 2018, 152, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shao, S. K. Muduli, P. D. Tran and H. S. Soo, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2948–2951 RSC .
X. L. Ho, H. Shao, Y. Y. Ng, R. Ganguly, Y. Lu and H. S. Soo, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 1469–1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Cozzi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 410–421 RSC .
Z.-Q. Liu, X.-S. Hong, D. Huo, W.-J. Jiang, W.-J. Long, J.-D. Leng and L. Tong, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 4956–4962 CrossRef .
C.-B. Li, Y. Chu, J. He, J. Xie, J. Liu, N. Wang and J. Tang, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6324–6331 CrossRef CAS .
C.-B. Li, P. Gong, Y. Yang and H.-Y. Wang, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 3158–3164 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Helm, M. P. Stewart, R. M. Bullock, M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Science, 2011, 333, 863–866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zarkadoulas, E. Koutsouri and C. Mitsopoulou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2424–2434 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. V. Huynh and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 5004–5064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Virca, J. R. Lohmolder, J. B. Tsang, M. M. Davis and T. M. McCormick, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018, 122, 3057–3065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koshiba, K. Yamauchi and K. Sakai, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 635–640 RSC .
G.-G. Luo, Y.-H. Wang, J.-H. Wang, J.-H. Wu and R.-B. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7007–7010 RSC .
F. Kamatsos, M. Drosou and C. A. Mitsopoulou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 19705–19716 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Szalda, C. Creutz, D. Mahajan and N. Sutin, Inorg. Chem., 1983, 22, 2372–2379 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Krishnan, B. S. Brunschwig, C. Creutz and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 2005–2015 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bachmann, M. Guttentag, B. Spingler and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 6055–6061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tong, A. Kopecky, R. Zong, K. J. Gagnon, M. S. G. Ahlquist and R. P. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7873–7884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guttentag, A. Rodenberg, C. Bachmann, A. Senn, P. Hamm and R. Alberto, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 334–337 RSC .
E. Joliat, S. Schnidrig, B. Probst, C. Bachmann, B. Spingler, K. K. Baldridge, F. von Rohr, A. Schilling and R. Alberto, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 1737–1745 RSC .
E. Joliat-Wick, N. Weder, D. Klose, C. Bachmann, B. Spingler, B. Probst and R. Alberto, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 1651–1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kohler, J. Niklas, R. C. Johnson, M. Zeller, O. G. Poluektov and K. L. Mulfort, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 1697–1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lucarini, M. Pastore, S. Vasylevskyi, M. Varisco, E. Solari, A. Crochet, K. M. Fromm, F. Zobi and A. Ruggi, Chem. - Eur. J., 2017, 23, 6768–6771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Di Giovanni, C. Gimbert-Suriñach, M. Nippe, J. Benet-Buchholz, J. R. Long, X. Sala and A. Llobet, Chem. - Eur. J., 2016, 22, 361–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vennampalli, G. Liang, L. Katta, C. E. Webster and X. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 10094–10100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. A. Kankanamalage, S. Mazumder, V. Tiwari, K. K. Kpogo, H. Bernhard Schlegel and C. N. Verani, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13357–13360 RSC .
S. Rajak, O. Schott, P. Kaur, T. Maris, G. S. Hanan and A. Duong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 2699–2708 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Connor, K. J. Mayer, C. S. Tribble and W. R. McNamara, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5408–5410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Cavell, C. L. Hartley, D. Liu, C. S. Tribble and W. R. McNamara, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 3325–3330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Hartley, R. J. DiRisio, T. Y. Chang, W. Zhang and W. R. McNamara, Polyhedron, 2016, 114, 133–137 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Wise, D. Liu, K. J. Mayer, P. M. Crossland, C. L. Hartley and W. R. McNamara, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 14265–14271 RSC .
C. L. Hartley, R. J. DiRisio, M. E. Screen, K. J. Mayer and W. R. McNamara, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 8865–8870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Rahat Gupta	Rahat Gupta completed his BSc from Govt. Gandhi Memorial Science College in 2017. He received his MSc from the University of Jammu in 2019. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD in renewable/green energy research under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.
Priya Sahni	Priya Sahni completed her BSc from Govt. Gandhi Memorial Science College in 2012. She received her MSc from the University of Jammu in 2014. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in molecular and photoredox catalysis based on high valent metal complexes under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.
Simran Sharma	Simran Sharma completed her BSc from Govt. Degree College at Kathua in 2017. She received her MSc and MPhil degrees from the University of Jammu in 2019 and 2021, respectively. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in research based on thermally activated delayed fluorescence and photoredox catalysis under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.
Anindya Roy	Anindya Roy completed his BSc from the University of Calcutta in 2016. He received his MSc degree from the Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad in 2018. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD in photoredox catalysis under the supervision of Dr Amlan. K. Pal at the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu.
Amlan K. Pal	Dr Amlan K. Pal received his PhD (2014) from the Department of Chemistry, University of Montreal, under the supervision of Prof. Garry S. Hanan. He pursued his postdoctoral work in the field of solid state lighting at Prof. Eli Zysman-Colman's research group (2015–2017), University of St Andrews, UK. Then he worked in the fields of photoredox catalysis and self-assembly of light harvesting complexes as a Leverhulme Early Career Fellow (2017–2019) at the School of Chemistry, University of St Andrews, UK. Since 2020, he has been working as an assistant professor at the Indian Institute of Technology Jammu in the fields of renewable and green energy research, photoredox catalysis and solid state lighting.

 	Scheme 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the natural photocatalytic system (NPS) involving PS I and PS II. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15 (Copyright 2019, US Government). (b and c) Schematic illustration of the charge separation processes in an APS; (b) representation of a single photosensitizer APS bearing both H2 and O2 evolving catalysts on a single photosensitizer and (c) representation of a double photosensitizer APS carrying H2 and the O2 evolving catalysts on two different photosensitizers.	 

 	Chart 1  Graphs showing SciFinder search with the terms (a) photocatalytic hydrogen production and (b) light-driven hydrogen production, conducted on June 2021.	 

 	Chart 2  Examples and optoelectronic properties of some archetypical PSs. aData in degassed MeCN, from ref. 25, bdata in degassed MeCN, from ref. 26, cdata in degassed MeCN, from ref. 27, and ddata in degassed methanol, from ref. 28.	 

 	Chart 3  Molecular structures of some commonly used (a) catalysts and (b) sacrificial electron donors for photocatalytic hydrogen production.	 

 	Scheme 2  Catalytic cycles of Co(II/III) catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen production via different pathways.	 

 	Scheme 3  Photocatalytic paths for hydrogen evolution using Ni(II) molecular catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of the various components used as dyads and multicomponent systems for photocatalytic hydrogen production.45	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of a Co(III) photocatalyst (C7) containing a pentadentate ligand.32	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of the photocatalysts C8–C11.11	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures of Co(II) photocatalysts (C12–C17).49	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structure of the dinuclear Co(II) catalyst (C19) under discussion. (b) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible irradiation (λirr = 469 nm) when using 0.70 mM [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, 0.12 M ascorbic acid, and different concentrations of C19, 0.02 mM (represented in black), 0.05 mM (represented in red) and 0.10 mM (represented in blue). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 (Copyright 2015, Hydrogen Energy Publications, LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Photocatalytic reduction of protons using the Ru–Fd–Co hybrid system with two potential pathways for electron transfer; black arrows represent the transfer of the photoinduced electrons from the PS to the catalyst via the [2Fe–2S] cluster of Fd (1A70), whereas the green arrow represents the direct electron transfer from the PS to the catalyst.(B and C) Molecular structures of (B) cobaloxime catalyst (Co), Co(dmgBF2)2·2H2O and (C) ruthenium photosensitizer (Ru PS), [Ru(4-CH2Br-4′–CH3–2,2′-bpy)(bpy)2]2+, used in the study. (D) Representative time course profile of H2 production from the Ru–Fd–Co hybrid upon visible light illumination. The assay conditions are 2 mM Ru–Fd–Co hybrid (0.6 Ru/Fd, 0.9 Co/Fd) in 10 mM MES pH 6.3, and 100 mM sodium ascorbate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56 (Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of [Irppy-bpy], [Irpiq-bpy], and the dyad [Irpiq-L-Co] under discussion.63	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution using Ru(II)-polypyridyl complexes (PS1 and [Ru(bpy)3]2+) as PSs and Co(III)-photocatalysts, particularly effective under red light (λirr = 630 nm) irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66 (Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Molecular structure of PS2 and (b) directional e− transfer from PS2 to the photocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70 (Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  Molecular structures of the Ru(II)-PSs (PS3–PS6) under discussion.71	 


PS3
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	445	24	66	29

PS3
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	630	60	10	14

PS4
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	445	24	74	13

PS4
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	630	60	20	13

PS5
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	445	24	32	15

PS5
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	630	60	6	11

PS6
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	445	24	48	9

PS6
	
[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	630	60	12	6

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photocatalytic system for H2 generation under discussion. (b) Thermodynamic redox potential analysis of the molecules involved in the photocatalytic H2 evolution process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74 (Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Biotinylated Co(II) complexes (C23 and C24) and artificial metalloenzymes (C23⊂SA and C24⊂SA). (b) Overlay of representative snapshots obtained by MD simulations for C23 and C24. Conformational dynamics of the binding pockets are also shown, where the most important residues surrounding the biotin complexes are represented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75 (Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  The possible structures of nickel species involved in hydrogen evolution.80	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Effect of the photosensitizer (Fl or EY, 1.0 mM) on H2 evolution with catalyst C27 or C28 (5.0 × 10−6 M), in an EtOH/H2O (1:1, v/v) mixture containing TEA (2–15% v/v) at a pH of 12.3 under visible light irradiation (λirr > 420 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 81 (Copyright 2016, Elsevier BV). (b) Proposed mechanism for the photosensitized catalytic hydrogen production with nickel molecular catalysts C27 and C28.	 

 	Fig. 14  Proposed mechanism for catalytic hydrogen production using C32–C34. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86 (Copyright 2020, The Royal Society Of Chemistry).	 

 	Chart 4  Chemical structures of the complexes C43–C57 used in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.	 



[Co(bpy)3]2+
	17b	—	—	[Ir(ppy)2(phen)]+	TEOA	H2O/CH3CNf	Blue LED

[Co(bpy)3]2+
	18b	—	—	[Ir(F-mppy)2(bpy)]+	TEOA	H2O/CH3CNf	Blue LED

[Co(bpy)3]2+
	17b	—	—	[Ir(F-mppy)2(phen)]+	TEOA	H2O/CH3CNf	Blue LED

[Co(bpy)3]2+
	2b	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	TEOA	H2O/CH3CNf	Blue LED

[Co(bpy)3]2+
	12b	—	—	[Ru(dmphen)]2+	TEOA	H2O/CH3CNf	Blue LED

C1


	56 (4 h)	—	—	—	TEA	Acetone solutionf	>380

C2


	17 (4 h)	—	—	—	TEA	Acetone solutionf	>420

C3


	12 (4 h)	—	—	—	TEA	Acetone solutionf	>420

C4


	104 (4 h)	—	—	—	TEA	Acetone solutionf	>420

C5


	9 (4 h)	—	—	—	TEA	Acetone solutionf	>380

C6


	210 (15 h)	42 h−1d	—	—	TEA	Acetone solutionf	>380

[Co(dmgBF2)2(OH2)2]
	273 (15 h)	53 h−1d	—	[Re(CO)3Br(phen)]	TEA	Acetone solutionf	>380

[Co (dmgH)2PyCl]
	400 (10 h)	—	—	Pt(II) complex	TEOA	CH3CN/H2Of	>410

C7
	1600 (3 h)	1500 h−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Acetate buffer (pH = 4)	450

C8
	2700 (12 h)	880 h−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)	520

C9
	2300 (12 h)	690 h−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)	520

C10
	6000 (12 h)	1400 h−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)	520

C11
	9000 (12 h)	3400 h−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)	520

C12
	∼4200 (2.5 h)	∼3160 h−1	7.5%	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Aqueous solution (pH = 4)	452

C18
	690 (2 h)	703 h−1d	—	[Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	TEA	CH3CN/H2O/Et3Nf	447

C19
	4367b	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Acetate buffer (pH = 4)	469

[Co(dmgH)2]2+
	495 (35 h)c	—	—	[Ru(qpy)3]2+	TEOA	DMF (pH ∼9)	525

[Co(dmgH)2]2+
	330 (35 h)c	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	TEOA	DMF (pH ∼9)	525

[Co(dmgH)2]2+
	375 (20 h)c	—	—	[Ru(qpy)3]2+	TEOA	DMF (pH ∼9)	630

[Co(dmgH)2]2+
	30 (20 h)c	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	TEOA	DMF (pH ∼9)	630

[Ir-Py-Co]+


	225 (35 h)c	169 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	DMFf	452

[Ir-Py-Co]+


	113 (25 h)c	104 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	DMFf	525

[Ir-Py-Co]+


	3 (17 h)c	8 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	DMFf	595

[Irpiq-L-Co]


	180 (2.5 h)c	16000 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	452

[Irpiq-L-Co]


	251 (3 h)c	3500 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	525

[Irpiq-L-Co]


	180 (18 h)c	270 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	595

[Irpiq-L-Co]


	80 (110 h)c	15 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	630

[IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co]


	260 (1.3 h)c	12300 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	452

[IrppyF2-2244tpy-Co]


	170 (30.3 h)c	150 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	525

[IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co]


	290 (2.8 h)c	8200 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	452

[IrppyF2-2254tpy-Co]


	150 (27.3 h)c	140 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
	TEOA	CH3CNf	525

C20
	7800 (20 h)c	36000 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	18.4%	
PS1
	TEOA	DMF/TEOA solution (pH ∼8.9)	452

C20
	7200 (20 h)c	30100 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	45.6%	
PS1
	TEOA	DMF/TEOA solution (pH ∼8.9)	523

C20
	4200 (80 h)c	3050 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	5.3%	
PS1
	TEOA	DMF/TEOA solution (pH ∼8.9)	630

[Co(dmgH)(dmgH2)Cl2
	134b,c	57 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
PS2
	TEOA	DMFf	450

[Co(H2O)6](BF4)2
	764 (296 h)c	51 mmolH2 molps−1 min−1e	—	
PS2
	TEOA	DMFf	450

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	29 (24 h)	66 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS3
	TEOA	DMFf	445

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	14 (60 h)	10 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS3
	TEOA	DMFf	630

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	13 (24 h)	74 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS4
	TEOA	DMFf	445

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	13 (60 h)	20 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS4
	TEOA	DMFf	630

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	15 (24 h)	32 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS5
	TEOA	DMFf	445

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	11 (60 h)	6 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS5
	TEOA	DMFf	630

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	9 (24 h)	48 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS6
	TEOA	DMFf	445

[Co(dmgH)2(H2O)2](BF4)2
	6 (60 h)	12 mmolH2 molcat−1 min−1e	—	
PS6
	TEOA	DMF (pH = 8.9)	630

C21
	290 (4 h)	—	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	TEA	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 10)	>400

C22
	6400 (2 h)	120.8 min−1e	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Phosphate buffer (pH = 6.8)	420

C23
	7 (4 h)	1.8 h−1d	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	TEOA	CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)	>400

C23⊂SA
	51 (4 h)	10.3 h−1d	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	TEOA	CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)	>400

C24
	46 (4 h)	16 h−1d	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	TEOA	CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)	>400

C24⊂SA
	166 (4 h)	88 h−1d	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	TEOA	CH3CN/H2O in phosphate buffer (pH = 11.5)	>400

C25
	2700 (150 h)	20 h−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 2.25)	>410

C26
	5500 (40 h)	250 h−1d	—	Fl	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12–12.4)	520

C27
	5923 (8 h)	—	—	Fl	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)	>420

C27
	2671 (8 h)	—	—	EY	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)	>420

C28
	7643 (8 h)	—	—	Fl	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)	>420

C28
	3672 (8 h)	—	—	EY	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.3)	>420

C29
	790 (24 h)	60 h−1d	—	Fl	TEA	Aqueous solution (pH = 11.6)	>420

C30
	11333 (2 h)	7971 h−1e	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]PF6	TEA	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 10)	White LED

C31
	272 (7 h)	1.14 min−1e	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Aqueous solution (pH = 5)	>400

C32
	957 (24 h)	48 h−1 (7 h)	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+	TEOA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C32
	2017 (24 h)	165 h−1 (4 h)	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+	TEA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C32
	5012 (24 h)	1072 h−1 (2 h)	—	[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+	TEA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C33
	946 (24 h)	50 h−1 (7 h)	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+	TEOA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C33
	2948 (24 h)	330 h−1 (2 h)	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+	TEA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C33
	5293 (24 h)	1082 h−1 (2 h)	—	[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+	TEA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C34
	928 (24 h)	43 h−1 (11 h)	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+	TEOA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C34
	2702 (24 h)	243 h−1 (3 h)	—	[Ir (ppy)2(bpy)]+	TEA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C34
	5104 (24 h)	932 h−1 (2 h)	—	[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+	TEA	DMF/H2Of	>420

C35
	1340 (8 h)	—	—	Fl	TEA	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 11.07)	>420

C36
	25 (24 h)	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)	400–700

C37
	73 (24 h)	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	CH3CN/H2O (pH = 4)	400–700

C38
	3380 (6 h)	—	—	[Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+	TEA	MeOH/H2O (pH = 10)	>420

C39
	8 (4 h)	—	—	EY	TEA	MeOH/H2O (pH = 12)	White LED

C40
	∼24000 (24 h)	—	—	Fl	TEOA	DMF/H2O (pH = 9.8)	>420

C41
	834 (24 h)	—	—	Fl	TEOA	DMF/H2O (pH = 9.8)	>420

C43
	1625 (13 h)	0.18 s−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.0)	452

C44
	1380 (10 h)	0.26 s−1d	—	[Re(bpy)(CO)3py]	H2A	Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.1)	385

C45
	300 (12 h)	0.17 s−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)	469

C46
	745 (12 h)	0.24 s−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)	469

C47
	6700 (70 h)	0.058 s−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)	453

C48
	677 (87 h)	0.027 s−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Ascorbate buffer (pH = 5)	453

C49
	1380 (4 h)	0.58 s−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Ascorbate buffer (pH = 4.5)	455

C50
	1000 (3 h)	0.09 s−1d	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Acetate buffer (pH = 4)	475

C51
	339 (6 h)	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Acetate buffer (pH = 4.1)	>400

C52
	1390 (3 h)	—	—	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	H2A	Acetate buffer (pH = 5)	450

C53
	3500 (24 h)	0.041 s−1d	—	Fl	TEA	EtOH/H2Of	520

C54
	326c	4189 min−1	
	[Ru(bpy)3]2+	TEOA	DMFf	452

C55
	2100 (24 h)	
	
	Fl	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.5)	520

C56
	740 (6 h)	
	
	Fl	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.5)	520

C57
	1000(24 h)	
	
	Fl	TEA	EtOH/H2O (pH = 12.5)	520

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
