Recent progress in covalent organic framework thin films: fabrications, applications and perspectives  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00376A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00376A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 488-516Recent progress in covalent organic framework thin films: fabrications, applications and perspectives

        
          
            Han 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuotong 
            Zeng†
b, 
      
        
          
            Piao 
            Xu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Lianshan 
            Li†
c, 
      
        
          
            Guangming 
            Zeng
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Rong 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyong 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Danlian 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cui 
            Lai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Danni 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huan 
            Yi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Qin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shujing 
            Ye
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoya 
            Ren
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wangwang 
            Tang
          
        
      a
aCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University and Key Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control (Hunan University), Ministry of Education, Changsha 410082, P. R. China. E-mail: zgming@hnu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410011, P. R. China. E-mail: xiaorong65@csu.edu.cn
cCAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellent in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: zytang@nanoctr.cn
Received 
      9th September 2018
    First published on 19th December 2018AbstractAs a newly emerging class of porous materials, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have attracted much attention due to their intriguing structural merits (e.g., total organic backbone, tunable porosity and predictable structure). However, the insoluble and unprocessable features of bulk COF powder limit their applications. To overcome these limitations, considerable efforts have been devoted to exploring the fabrication of COF thin films with controllable architectures, which open the door for their novel applications. In this critical review, we aim to provide the recent advances in the fabrication of COF thin films not only supported on substrates but also as free-standing nanosheets via both bottom-up and top-down strategies. The bottom-up strategy involves solvothermal synthesis, interfacial polymerization, room temperature vapor-assisted conversion, and synthesis under continuous flow conditions; whereas, the top-down strategy involves solvent-assisted exfoliation, self-exfoliation, mechanical delamination, and chemical exfoliation. In addition, the applications of COF thin films including energy storage, semiconductor devices, membrane-separation, sensors, and drug delivery are summarized. Finally, to accelerate further research, a personal perspective covering their synthetic strategies, mechanisms and applications is presented.
Han Wang
Han Wang received her ME from the Chinese Academy of Science in 2016. Currently, she is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Guangming Zeng in the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, China. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional covalent organic materials in photocatalysis and biosensors.
Zhuotong Zeng
Zhuotong Zeng, BM and MM, graduated from Xiangya Medical College of Central South University in July 2012. He engaged in the study of mouse models and drosophila models of Parkinson disease during his Masters degree in the State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics. He has been working since September 2012 as a medical PhD candidate on clinical and experimental research of systemic sclerosis and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of dermatosis at the Dermatological Department of the Second Xiangya Hospital, under Professor Xiao Rong's supervision.
From left to right (first row): Dr Yang Liu, Dr Shujing Ye, Dr Huan Yi, Dr Lei Qin and Dr Danni Jiang (second row): Dr Xiaoya Ren, Professor Piao Xu, Professor Danlian Huang, Professor Lin Tang, Professor Cui Lai and Professor Wangwang Tang

Lianshan Li
Lianshan Li received his PhD from Peking University in 2010. He then did his postdoctoral research in the Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, on conjugated polymer research. He joined the Faculty of the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST), China, as an associate professor in 2012. His current research activities are related to membrane separation, including separation of large molecules from organic solvents, miscible organic solvent separation or ion separation.
Guangming Zeng
Prof. Guangming Zeng has taught courses and performed research on Environmental Science and Health at Hunan University since 1988. He has been the Head of the School of Environmental Science and Engineering since 1994 at the same University. He is one of the 2017 Highly Cited Researchers in the world issued by Clarivate Analytics. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional nanomaterials in the environment and energy field.
Rong Xiao
Professor Rong Xiao has been engaged in clinical work since 1987 at the Second Xiangya Hospital, which is the best hospital in Hunan Province of 60 million people. In 2008, he was named the Chinese Outstanding Young Dermatologist. In the past decade, he mainly focused on the epigenetics pathogenesis of scleroderma and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of dermatosis. His honors include the 2017 National Science and Technology Progress Award of China (the second Award, ranked third).
Zhiyong Tang
Prof. Zhiyong Tang obtained his PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2000 under the direction of Prof. Erkang Wang. After finishing his postdoctoral training at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology and the University of Michigan, he returned to China and took a position as a professor at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology at the end of 2006. His main research interests are focused on the preparation, assembly and application of functional nanomaterials in the environmental and energy field.
1. Introduction
For decades, porous materials have attracted sustained attention due to their abundant voids, which enable them to host other functional molecules.1–5 Owing to their unique features, porous organic materials, such as hypercrosslinked polymers (HCPs),6,7 conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs),8–10 and porous aromatic frameworks (PAF),11–13 have been widely studied. However, the construction of persistent porous structures linked by covalent bonds is still a complicated problem despite the remarkable progress in recent years.14–16 Also, crystalline networks with ordered pores are urgently needed. Covalent organic frameworks (COFs), as a class of newly emerging porous materials, have attracted particular interest. Quite different from classical short-range covalent polymers connected via irreversible condensation,17 COFs show highly ordered crystalline structures through reversible reactions.18 Compared to the traditional crystalline porous solids such as zeolites19,20 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),21–23 COFs with precisely pre-designable structures and tailored functionalities can achieve structural and chemical control specific to functions.24 Moreover, they possess the advantages of structural diversity,25 low density,26 high thermal stability,27,28 and permanent porosity.29
In 2005, Yaghi and co-workers, for the first time, synthesized a type of pure two-dimensional (2D) organic framework, namely COF-1 and COF-5, which was composed of organic building subunits connected through strong covalent bonds by reticular chemistry.30 Afterward, a great variety of COFs have emerged, including imine-linked COFs,31–34 hydrazone-linked COFs,35,36 and keto–enol-linked COFs (Fig. 1).37–39 The abovementioned unique characters and common nature of organic polymers endow them great application potential in energy storage,40–42 drug delivery,43,44 adsorption,45,46 separation,47 catalysis,48 optoelectronics,49,50 and sensing.51 However, all of these applications are currently established based on insoluble and unprocessable COF powders. Early in 2007, Kitagawa and Matsuda demonstrated that porous polymers are insoluble and difficult to prepare as thin layers despite the availability of nanosized channels or cavities.52 Thus, the ultimate goal is to construct various nanodevices with controllable arrangements of porous module channels. Indeed, the difficulties in membrane formation greatly hinder the practical applications of COFs. For example, an anthraquinone-based COF powder was incorporated into carbon black to act as an electrode material, leading to a higher capacitance compared with that of the electrode without COF loading; however, only 2.5% of diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ) moieties were available in the system due to the randomly oriented COF powder and non-optimal interface.38 Thus, new strategies for the fabrication of COFs into crystalline and ordered thin films are highly required for their further practical applications.
 Fig. 1  Selected examples of existing COFs with different covalent linkages. (a) Boron-containing COF-5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2005, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Imine-linked COF-300. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (c) Hydrazine-linked COF-42. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) Keto–enol-linked COF TpPa-1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (e) Azine-linked Py–azine COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (f) NTU-COF-1 with two types of covalent bonds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The bottom-up approach is the first important strategy that enables COFs to be deposited on specific substrates or polymerized at interfaces with a controllable thickness and surface. Dichtel and co-workers pioneered the research on the growth of COF films on single-layer graphene (SLG) via a bottom-up method under solvothermal conditions.53 The as-prepared COF films exhibited improved crystallinity over the bulk COF powders, which are ideal for organic electronic devices. This intriguing research has opened the door for the fabrication of COF thin films. Subsequently, several innovative and modified methods for COF film growth related to the bottom-up strategy have been employed, and oriented thin films supported by various substrates have been obtained. To date, four major methods have been used for the fabrication of COF thin films on different substrates or at interfaces: (1) solvothermal synthesis, (2) interfacial polymerization, (3) synthesis under continuous flow conditions, and (4) room temperature vapor-assisted conversion. All four strategies will be discussed in detail in Section 2.
Another attractive method is top-down synthesis, which bulk COF powders are directly exfoliated into free-standing COF films, namely COF nanosheets (CONs). As is known, dimensionality is one of the most important parameters that affect the properties of materials.54,55 Bulk lamellar COFs are stacked by atomic thick layers via weak van der Waals force. Inspired by the excellent properties of graphene, which is exfoliated from its parent graphite,56–58 Félix Zamora's group first exfoliated COF-8 into CONs with a thickness as low as 4–8 nm.59 The dimension-related properties enable the thin layered COF-8 nanosheets to be incorporated into devices or act as nanosensors. Subsequently, various functional CONs have been delaminated from their bulk counterparts via various methods, such as solvent-assisted exfoliation, mechanical delamination, and self-exfoliation. All these different methods will be discussed comprehensively in the following section.
Though there are many critical reviews focused on the reticular chemistry of COF powders,60–65 reviews related to COF thin films are rare. In this review article, we focus on the recent developments on the fabrication of COF thin films supported not only on substrates, but also in the free-standing form. First, we summarize the synthetic strategies related to the bottom-up and top-down methods. Second, we discuss the existing applications of thin films in different fields, such as energy storage, semiconductor devices, membrane-separation and sensors. Finally, we demonstrate a personal perspective regarding their future development. It is worth mentioning that since the development of single-layered COF has been recently reviewed,66 we focus on few-layered COF thin films and exfoliated CONs herein by collecting recent important developments in this exciting field and present the critical issues, challenges, and perspectives.

Fig. 2 and 3 are a guide for readers to better understand the monomers and reversible reactions utilized for the construction of COF thin films.
 Fig. 2  Versatile linkages involved in the COF thin films formation comprising boron-based linkage (boroxine and boronate ester), imine-based linkage (for example, hydrazine and β-ketoenamine), triazine-based linkage and Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling. 
 Fig. 3  Building blocks bearing catechol, boronic acid, aldehyde, amine and other units involved in the COF thin film formation. 
2. Bottom-up strategy for the fabrication of COF thin films
As stated above, the excellent properties and imperious demands of COF thin films have triggered substantial research interests for their synthesis. The bottom-up strategy, which is usually related to functional coatings on selected surfaces, has been widely used for the fabrication of COF thin films. The key to this strategy is controlling the growth orientation of the film and avoiding random extension. To date, a number of highly oriented COF thin films have been synthesized on various substrates and interfaces via the bottom-up strategy. However, finding appropriate synthetic conditions for the growth of COF thin films is not easy. Generally, solvothermal synthesis is the most frequently utilized method for the production of flat COF thin films. Additionally, other brilliant methods have also been employed, which involve interfacial synthesis, room temperature vapor-assisted conversion, and synthesis under continuous flow conditions. In this section, we summarize these approaches based on existing studies.
2.1 Solvothermal synthesis
As the simplest method, solvothermal synthesis involves the coating of COF powders on an arbitrary support by immersing appropriate substrates into the COF reaction mixture, followed by washing with related organic solvents and drying under a stream of N2. The first successful production of continuous COF thin films was achieved based on the traditional COF synthesis route using the solvothermal method, which had no specific requirements for the surface of the supporting substrates. For instance, in the case of COF-5,30 the traditional synthesis route is as follows: the polymerization of 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene (HTTP, 1) and 1,4-phenylenebis(boronic acid) (PBBA, 5) is conducted in a Pyrex tube with mesitylene and dioxane as solvents. The reaction mixture is heated to 100 °C for 72 h to yield a free-flowing gray-purple powder. To deposit the COF powder on the substrate for thin film formation, the most native way may be to directly submerge the substrate into the bulk COF reaction liquid.
SLG with remarkable photoelectric properties, especially a 2D atomically-precise structure, is a suitable interface for coating 2D layered materials and can be transferred to other substrates.67 Dichtel and co-workers demonstrated that oriented COF thin films can be formed on SLG supported by different substrates such as SLG/Cu, SLG/SiC, and SLG/SiO2 under straightforward solvothermal conditions.53 Specifically, COF-5 thin films were formed under the solvothermal condensation of HHTP (1) and PBBA (5) at 90 °C in a solution of mesitylene and dioxane in the presence of SLG/Cu substrate (Fig. 4a–c). The hexagonal lattice of the COF-5 grains was aligned parallel to the substrate surface, which was verified by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and grazing incidence diffraction (GID). This simple synthetic method is general for the transfer of SLG to other substrates including transparent fused SiO2 (SLG/SiO2). Importantly, the supporting substrates have a great impact on the quality of thin films, including uniformity and thickness. In the same reaction time, thicker films were obtained on SLG/Cu compared with that of SLG/SiO2. Subsequently, they further fabricated HHTP–DPB COF thin films with a thickness of 132 ± 18 nm and a series of Zn phthalocyanine (ZnPc, 4) COF thin films with an average thickness of 370 ± 30 nm on the transparent SLG/SiO2 substrate.68,69
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the solvothermal synthesis of COF-5 thin films. (b) X-ray scattering data of COF-5 powder (inset: schematic of randomly oriented COF-5 grains in the powder); GID data from a COF-5 film on SLG/Cu (inset: schematic of oriented COF-5 grains in the film). (c) Top-view SEM image of the COF-5 thin film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Cross-section SEM image of the BDT-COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. (e) Top-view SEM image of the BDT-COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Top-view SEM image of the DAB–TFP COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. (g) Cross-section SEM image of the DAB–TFP COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Soon after, Bein et al. fabricated a novel thiophene-based BDT-COF thin film containing an electron donor unit.70 Different from Dichtel's work,53,68,69 a lower concentration of starting monomers with indium-doped tin oxide (ITO)-coated or NIO/ITO-coated glass substrates was employed. As a result, a smooth and continuous organic thin film with a thickness of 150 nm on the ITO-coated glass substrate was observed from the top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 4d and e, respectively). X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement was employed to analyze the crystallinity of the thin films. The absence of peaks in the low 2θ region (<20°) is related to their mesoporous structure, while the strong and sharp diffraction peak at 26.1° corresponds to the π–π stacking of the COF layers. Also, GID investigation was further utilized to reveal the preferred orientation of the COF thin films, where the synthesis of COF layers with a preferential orientation to the surface of ITO-coated glass was verified by the reflection concentrated near q(z) = 0. They also grew BDT-COF thin films with high quality on other polycrystalline inorganic substrates, including NiO/ITO-coated glass and Au substrates, which led to the conclusion that in contrast to the previous assumption, the π–π interaction is not necessary for oriented film growth. Later, Liu and co-workers prepared another electron donor-containing TTF-COF using the conventional solvothermal method.71In situ oriented growth of TTF-COF thin films on an Si/SiO2 substrate and transparent ITO-coated glass were also obtained.
Although boronic ester COFs and some Schiff base COFs show poor oxidative and hydrolytic stability, β-ketoenamine-linked COFs are another class of COFs that exhibit excellent chemical stability in water and aqueous acid. In 2015, Dichtel et al. developed β-ketoenamine-linked anthraquinone-based COF (DAAQ–TFP COF) thin films via a modified solvothermal synthesis.72 Considering that a fast reaction rate led to an out-of-order thin film, triformylphluroglucinol (TFP, 17) was added slowly to a mixture of 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ, 25) and the Au substrate instead of directly putting the substrate in the reaction liquid. The absence of an N–H stretch together with the presence of a C–N stretch at 1250 cm−1 and CC stretch at 1560 cm−1 in the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) characterization verified the production of the β-ketoenamine linkage. The vertically oriented, layered structure was further confirmed by GIDX, with the (001) peaks observed at Q⊥ = 1.8 Å−1 and Q‖ = 0. As demonstrated by the authors, the upper limit thickness of this DAAQ–TFP COF thin film was 300–400 nm in practice, which is related to the initial concentration of the reactive monomers. Then, other β-ketoenamine COF (DAB–TFP COF) thin films were successfully prepared on various metals and oxides through the solvothermal strategy.73 In a previous report,74 a DAB–TFP COF was fabricated by condensing p-phenylenediamine (DAB, 22) with TFP (17) in a sealed glass. As this classical reaction condition was not suitable for the growth of a homogenous COF thin film, Lu et al. modified the synthesis method by growing COF thin films on an ITO substrate in an autoclave. From the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images, the as-prepared DAB–TFP COF thin film was smooth and homogeneous with a thickness of approximately 200 nm (Fig. 4f and g, respectively). XRD and GID measurements confirmed the crystallinity of the thin films. The XRD pattern of the obtained thin films revealed no reflection in the low 2θ region, while a strong reflection at 27° attributed to the π–π stacking of the DAB–TFP COF layers emerged. In the GID image, the in-plane and out-of-plane diffractions of the thin films were observed clearly, which corresponded to the bulk DAB–TFP COF. In addition to the ITO substrate, DAB–TFP COF thin films were also able to grow on other substrates, such as silicon, fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and platinum.
In the classical imine-linked COF fabrication, aldehyde and amine moieties produce amorphous polyimine sediments during the solvothermal synthesis in the presence of an aqueous acetic acid catalyst, which hinders the nucleation and growth of COF. Very recently, Yaghi and co-workers introduced a new homogenous synthetic route to fabricate imine-linked COF.75 In this newly developed route, the tert-butyloxycarbonyl (Boc) group was employed to protect the amine to avoid the formation of amorphous polyimine. More importantly, this method is also helpful for the oriented growth of imine-linked COF thin films. As an example, LZU-1 COF thin films were obtained by immersing the substrate into the reaction system, which contained 4-(tert-butoxycarbonylamino)-aniline (NBDPA, 30) to protect the amine moieties. With the homogenous formation of protonated COF crystals, the nucleation of COFs favor the nucleation barrier, thus facilitating the growth of COF thin films. The as-prepared COF thin films were highly oriented and uniform with a thickness of 190 nm, which could be tailored by varying the concentration of the growth liquor and reaction time.
2.2 Interfacial synthesis
Interfacial synthesis is a widely used approach for the fabrication of polymer thin films such as polyamide nanofilms and graphdiyne nanosheets.76–78 In this approach, the reaction between monomers occurs at the interface. Thus, the COF growth is limited to the confined interface region, leading to the formation of thin films. Two types of interfaces have been used in the synthesis of COF thin films, i.e., liquid/air interface and liquid/liquid interface.
Recently, Bao and co-workers developed a new synthetic method to grow COF thin films at the solution/air interface since interfaces such as the liquid/air interface are beneficial to the growth of COF thin films due to the good control of COF nucleation and the thickness.79 Trisamine 2,6-dicarbaldehyde-4,8-dioctyloxybenzo[1,2-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene (BDTA, 18) and bisaldehyde tris(4-aminophenyl)amine (TAPA, 27) were selected as the building blocks to form polyTB COF. For the formation of polyTB thin films, a highly reflective thin film was first obtained via the reaction of BDTA and TAPA for 2 days in a covered petri dish at the solution/air interface. However, the prepared COF thin films were too rough to be incorporated into devices. To obtain COF films with a smooth surface, the authors improved the method by using the diluted mother solution filtered during the synthesis of the bulk polyTB as the film growing solution at the solution/air interface. The control of the thickness was achieved by varying the incubation time. In this work, the thinnest and thickest films were 1.8 nm and 29 nm, respectively, and both had an average roughness of 0.2 nm. More recently, Zhang and co-workers prepared a monolayer imine-linked COF at the water/air interface using dynamic imine chemistry.80 Terephthalaldehyde (13) and 1,3,5-trihexyl-2,4,6-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene (33) were selected as monomers. The three hydrophobic n-hexyl groups of the monomer 33 would sit upright on the surface and extend into the air, while the phenyl rings may be fixed by the hydrophilic amino groups at the water/air interface, which made monomer 33 ideal for the interfacial reaction. Moreover, reversible imine linkage would induce self-correction and therefore lead to few defects. In a typical experiment, a dilute mixture of monomers in chloroform was spread on the water/air interface and left overnight. A smooth, free-standing monolayer sheet was then obtained with a thickness of 0.7 nm under the well-designed control.
For liquid/liquid interfacial polymerization, two non-miscible liquids are utilized to create the interface at the junction. For example, Dey et al. successfully synthesized a series of large-scale thin films at the interface of water/dichloromethane.81 As an example, Tp (17) was dissolved in dichloromethane, and 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-diamine (Bpy, 42)-p-toluene sulfonic acid (PTSA) salt was added in water on the top layer. The reaction was conducted for 72 h at room temperature to obtain free-standing Tp–Bpy thin films with a highly crystalline nature. The thickness of the thin films was well-adjusted by the selection of precursor concentration. Also, the thin films could be easily transferred to arbitrary substrates, such as metallic wires, holey grids and glass surfaces, while, the integrity of the crystalline structure and its physical shape were retained. In another report, an imine-linked TAPB–PDA COF thin film was presented at the liquid/liquid interface via the polymerization of terephthalaldehyde (PDA, 13) and 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene (TAPB, 26).82 Different from the traditional interfacial reaction, Sc(OTf)3 was employed to facilitate imine formation and limit the polymerization at the interface. The Lewis acid catalyst Sc(OTf)3 with water tolerance shows better solubility in the water phase than in the organic phase. As a result, the Sc(OTf)3 catalyst was preferentially dissolved in the water phase, while the COF monomers with preferred organic solubility were transferred to the organic phase. This spatial segregation of COF monomers and catalyst enabled the site-selective polymerization to provide a thin film at the organic/water interface. Specifically, water was added to a mixture solution of PDA, TAPB and 1,4-dioxane/mesitylene, which contained small amounts of Sc(OTf)3 (Fig. 5a). The lateral dimension of the as-prepared thin films was greatly dependent on the size of the reaction vessel. Also, the thickness of the COF thin films could be easily adjusted by varying the original monomer concentration and/or the volume of the organic phase. Importantly, the thin films were readily transferable to various substrates with their integrity retained, even for the thinnest film.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the interfacial synthesis of Tp–Bpy COF thin films. (b) AA stacking mode of Tp–Bpy COF. (c) SEM image of Tp–Bpy COF thin films. (d) AFM image of Tp–Bpy COF thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
2.3 Room temperature vapor-assisted conversion
Considering the instability of fragile building blocks that are sensitive to the harsh conditions used in solvothermal synthesis, Bein and co-workers devised a mild method named room temperature vapor-assisted conversion synthesis.83 Benzodithiophene-based BDT-COF and COF-5 were employed to verify this strategy. Taking BDT-COF as an example, a mixture of benzodithiophene diboronic acid (BDTBA, 8), HHTP (1), dry acetone and absolute EtOH was first filtered through a syringe filter after ultrasonication. Then, the obtained BDTBA/HHTP mixture was drop-casted on a glass substrate, followed by putting the substrate in a desiccator together with a small glass vessel loaded with mesitylene and dioxane. A dark-green organic layer with a thickness of 7.5 μm was obtained after 72 h at room temperature. It should be noted that control of the thickness can be achieved by tailoring the droplet volume and the concentration. Specifically, when the droplet volume decreased to 2/5 of the former volume and the other conditions kept the same, the thickness of the COF thin films could be reduced to 2 μm. Based on this, changing the concentration of the droplet to 1/3 of the previous concentration, a homogeneous BDT-COF film with a thickness of 300 nm was obtained. This excellent method allows the construction of COF thin films with fragile precursors and on sensitive substrates, and therefore leads to wider applications.
2.4 Synthesis under continuous flow conditions
In contrast to the conventional static growth procedure, recently, Dichtel et al. synthesized a smooth and dense COF thin film under continuous flow conditions.84 Considering the poor control over the polymerization in the previous method, they modified the growth of the 2D COF thin films using a flow cell, which enabled the formation of the COF. To synthesize COF-5 in a flow cell, the monomers HHTP (1) and PBBA (5) were first reacted slowly at 25 °C, and then COF-5 formed after 2 min of induction period when the temperature rose to 90 °C. Specifically, the reaction mixture was pumped through a reservoir heated to 90 °C, and then it entered a flow cell equipped with a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) substrate for monitoring of the mass deposited. The authors investigated the relation between the reaction conditions (temperature, resident time, reaction mixture composition, and flow rate) and thin film formation. For example, the resident time changes the average polymerization degree of the reaction mixture when it reaches the substrate. Specifically, a short resident time results in monomers and small oligomers encountering the QCM substrate, while a longer resident time allows larger species to reach the growth substrate. Meanwhile, a series of boronate ester-linked COFs, DPB-COF, TP-COF, and COF-10 were grown in flow to confirm the suitability of the method. As a result, for the first time, a constant deposition rate was achieved and the film thickness could be controlled under continuous flow conditions.
The COF thin films fabricated via the bottom-up strategy are summarized in Table 1. As mentioned previously, while there are several methods with respect to the bottom-up strategy, the simple and straightforward solvothermal synthesis is the most frequently used method. However, limitations still exist: (1) unreacted monomers and small oligomers may contaminate the thin films and block their pores and (2) it is difficult to monitor nucleation during film formation. Synthesis under continuous flow conditions solves the problem of thin film contamination; however, at the cost of monomer waste. Thus, approaches related to the reuse of unreacted monomers need to be explored. In that case, room temperature vapor-assisted conversion synthesis and interfacial synthesis seem to be attractive, but their applicability requires further research. In short, more comprehensive studies about optimal reaction conditions such as temperature, concentration and reaction times for COF thin film growth are clearly warranted, and the influence of the chosen substrate should be discussed deeper. Moreover, additional methods are still needed.
Table 1 COF thin films on different substrates with controllable thickness for various applications




COF
Substrates (interface)
Fabrication method
Thickness (nm)
Applications
Ref.





a Different growth times.
b The thickness can be varied by changing the initial monomer concentration.
c 1 COF layer.





COF-5
SLG/Cu
Solvothermal synthesis
195 ± 20a



53



SLG/SiO2
95 ± 5a


SLG/SiC
73 ± 3a


NiPc–PBBA COF
SLG/SiO2
210 ± 25
Semiconductor devices


HHTP–DPB COF
SLG/SiO2
Solvothermal synthesis
132 ± 18
Fluorescent sensors

68



ZnPc–Py COF
SLG/SiO2
Solvothermal synthesis
400 ± 12



69



ZnPc–NDI COF
580 ± 84


ZnPc–PPE COF
200 ± 18


ZnPc–DPB COF
296 ± 6


BDT-COF
ITO-coated glass
Solvothermal synthesis
150



70



NiO/ITO-coated glass
150


Au




SiO2
150


TTF-COF
Si/SiO2
Solvothermal synthesis
150



71



ITO-coated glass
150


COFDAAQ–BTA
3D graphene
Solvothermal synthesis
180
Capacitive electrode

118



DAAQ–TFP COF
Au
Solvothermal synthesis
200b
Supercapacitors

72



polyTB
Mother liquor solution/air
Interfacial synthesis
2–200
FETs

79



BDT-COF
Glass
Room temperature vapor-assisted conversion
300



83



DAB–TFP COF
ITO-coated glass
Solvothermal synthesis
200



73



COF-5
QCM
Synthesis under continuous flow conditions





84



COFTFPy–PPDA
SLG
Solvothermal synthesis
50
FETs

132



LZU-1
Si
Solvothermal synthesis
190



75



BDT-COF
Glass-coated indium-doped ITO
Solvothermal synthesis
200
Semiconductor materials

129



COF-LZU1
Si–SiO2
Solvothermal synthesis





189



Si–APTES
423


Si–OTS




TT-COF
Glass-substrate
Solvothermal synthesis
200
Photoelectric device

215



TAPB–PDA COF
PES
Interfacial synthesis
10.4 ± 2.6c
NF membrane

82 and 152



BDT–ETTA COF
FTO/ITO
Solvothermal synthesis
100–500
Photocathodes

179



COF-366-Co
HOPG
Solvothermal synthesis
250
Electrocatalyst

178



Py-tTII COF
ITO transparent electrodes
Solvothermal synthesis
450
NIR photodetector

165



Tp–Bpy COF
Dichloromethane/water
Interfacial synthesis
160 ± 10
NF membrane-separation

81



Tp–Azo COF
150 ± 10


Tp–Ttba COF
130 ± 10




Tp–Tta COF
190 ± 10




CTF
Polyimide
Solvothermal synthesis
15.1
Photocatalyst

177



Polyimine network
Air/water
Interfacial synthesis
0.7



80





3. Top-down strategy for the fabrication of COF thin films
Different from the bottom-up strategy, the top-down method involves the simple preparation of free-standing single-/few-layered COF thin films from bulk materials, instead of growing them on specific substrates or interface. Compared to the bottom-up method, which is usually expensive and needs strict conditions, the top-down method is cheaper and more straightforward. As is known, bulk 2D COF crystals are layered structures with different layers stacked along the vertical direction via weak interactions including van der Waals force and/or hydrogen bonding. The top-down synthesis is designed to break the π–π interactions between the COF layers by internal or external force to produce single or few-layered free-standing COF thin films. In this section, we demonstrate various synthetic methods associated with the top-down strategy including solvent-assisted exfoliation, mechanical delamination, chemical exfoliation and self-exfoliation. The distinction between these different methods comes from the source of the peel strength. For example, the self-exfoliation method mainly relies on the internal force, while solvent-assisted exfoliation and mechanical delamination are caused by external force. In the following section, the different methods will be elaborated separately.
3.1 Solvent-assisted exfoliation
As the most commonly used method for COF exfoliation, numerous examples of solvent-assisted exfoliation can be found in the literature.59,85–88 This review selects several representative cases to elucidate this simple but effective method. Inspired by the successful exfoliation of graphene by sonication in well-chosen solvents,89 Berlanga et al., for the first time, obtained delaminated CONs with 10–25 layers using the solvent-assisted exfoliation method.59 Boronic ester-linked COF-8 was selected as the bulk sample, which was synthesized via the condensation of HHTP (1) and BTPB (9), as demonstrated in previous literature.90 The authors expected to weaken the π–π interactions between the COF layers via mechanical force such as sonication with the help of a suitable solvent. This is possible given that sonication can accelerate the intercalation of solvent molecules into the COF, which increases the interlayer space and therefore weakens its interlayer interaction. Moreover, the solvent plays an important role in the exfoliation of layered COFs, which not only exfoliates layered COFs but also stabilizes the as-formed nanosheets. Specifically, suitable surface tension between the layer crystal and solvent is the key to lowering the energy and improving the efficiency of exfoliation. A particular solvent with a COF-matched surface energy enables a balance in the exfoliation energy.89,91 Low exfoliation rates are observed when an improper solvent is used. Furthermore, an appropriate solvent can also prohibit the aggregation of the nanosheets.92 Among the solvents utilized, CH2Cl2 stood out due to its excellent properties such as suitable surface energy, volatility and high chemical purity. A certain amount of COF-8 powder was dissolved in anhydrous CH2Cl2 and the mix liquor was sonicated for 15 min. The consequent suspension was then centrifuged for 5 min, leading to a colorless solution. Finally, the solid residue of the solution was characterized via infrared radiation (IR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and others. Specifically, the IR signature of the delaminated CONs was same as that of the COF-8 bulk powder. As revealed by the XPS data, the exfoliated CONs showed different graphic features, which indicated the disruption of the interlayer interactions and the presence of randomly oriented sheets. The as-prepared sheet-like structure was further confirmed by AFM and TEM. It is worth mentioning that the obtained CONs could be transferred to any substrate without affecting their original properties. To better understand the influence factors with respect to the COF exfoliation, further research on the effects of the COF structure on the exfoliation was conducted.85 A series of poly(aryleneethynylene) COFs with different pore sizes (from 1.4 to 3.3 nm) was employed to study the impact of porosity and reaction time. This type of COF was constructed by carbon–carbon bonds via Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling procedures.93 The results showed that a smaller pore size and longer sonication time led to thinner CONs, which means a higher degree of exfoliation. Importantly, the impact of porosity can be weakened by an increase in sonication time.
However, the application of the as-synthesized boronate ester COF thin films was limited due to their poor hydrolytic and oxidative stability as well as their high interlayer stacking energies. Since acyl hydrazones can overcome the above drawbacks, Dichtel and co-workers prepared 2D hydrazone-linked COF-43 thin films under mild conditions, which further proved the feasibility of the solvent-assisted exfoliation method (Fig. 6a).86 COF-43 was fabricated via the method reported previously and confirmed by PXRD.36 Interestingly, the crystallinity of COF-43 became weak when the powder was submerged in dioxane, H2O, and DMF which was different from that in other common solvents such as THF, CHCl3 and MeOH. Thus, to prove that the weakness in crystallinity resulted from the exfoliation of the multilayers rather than the disruption of covalent bonds, the authors first eliminated the hydrolysis process, which was proven by FT-IR and solid-state IR spectroscopy and demonstrated the integrity of hydrazine links. Then, the AFM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) data from the contrast experiment further verified the exfoliation of layered COF-43 and the function of solvent in the case of COF-43 exfoliation. Specifically, the exfoliating solvents led to thinner COF-43 nanosheets, while non-exfoliating solvents resulted in poorly constructed COF-43 multilayers. Very recently, other imine-linked TPA-COF thin films were prepared by Zhang and co-workers via simply sonicating a TPA-COF–ethanol mixture.87 TPA-COF powder was dispersed in ethanol and the mixture was sonicated for 3 h. After 24 h reaction, the upper colloidal suspension containing exfoliated TPA-COF nanosheets was collected and centrifuged. The free-standing TPA-COF thin films were left as sediments. TEM characterization confirmed the 2D nanosheet structure and the AFM image showed that the thickness of as-synthesize TPA-COF thin film was 3.5 ± 0.3 nm, which is equivalent to 9 ± 1 layers (Fig. 7a and b, respectively). Interestingly, this ultrathin quality enabled the visualization of the detailed structural features of the TPA-COF nanosheets, such as pore channels and building units, via the low-dose imaging technique in TEM for the first time (Fig. 7c and d).
 Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of the solvent-assisted exfoliation of COF-43. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanical delamination of TpPa COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 7  (a) AFM image of TPA-COF nanosheets with the thickness indicated. (b) TEM image of TPA-COF nanosheets with the inset photograph showing the Tyndall effect of the TPA-COF nanosheet suspension. (c) Low-dose high-resolution motion-corrected TEM image of the TPA-COF nanosheets with the insert showing the fast Fourier transform (FFT) characterization. (d) Enlarged HRTEM image with the insert showing the simulated HRTEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM image of TpPa-2 before grinding. (f) HRTEM image of TpPa-2 after grinding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Mechanical delamination
Another effective and precaution-free method, namely mechanical delamination, was employed by Banerjee et al.94 When fabricating TpPa-1 and TpPa-2 using a solvent-free room-temperature mechanochemical method, it was discovered that exfoliated COF layers also existed.95 As demonstrated by the authors, mechanical grinding broke the strong π–π interactions between the COF layers, which made the exfoliation of COF possible. Considering this, they further prepared a series of TpPa and TpBD COF thin layers under the same conditions (Fig. 5b). A certain amount of bulk COF material was put in a mortar with several drops of methanol and then fully ground with a pestle at room temperature for 30 min. Then, the collected powder was dispersed in methanol solution and centrifuged until a clear liquid was obtained. Free-standing COF thin films were obtained after completely evaporating the solvents. The TEM image and AFM measurement confirmed the existence of flat nanosheet-like structures with a thickness of 3–10 nm, corresponding to ∼10–30 COF layers (Fig. 7e and f, respectively). Meanwhile, the FT-IR and Raman spectra indicated the structural integrity of the COF thin films after delamination except for a decrease in crystallinity, which was verified by their PXRD profiles. Moreover, the COF thin films remained stable in both acidic and basic solutions, similarly to their parent COFs.
Different from the mortar and pestle system, another scalable and simple mechanical delamination method involving ball milling was employed to delaminate an anthraquinone-based COF (DAAQ–TFP-COF).96 The vibratory ball worked at room temperature and the DAAQ–TFP-COF material was put in a milling pot without any other exfoliating agents to obtain DAAQ–TFP-COF nanosheets. Their thickness was tailored by changing the vibration frequency and time. By elegantly selecting the vibration frequency of 50 Hz for 0.5 h, a free-standing DAAQ–TFP-COF thin film with a thickness of 3–5 nm was obtained. Subsequently, Hu and co-workers also fabricated melamine/o-phthalaldehyde condensed CONs using a modified ball milling method.97 The COF was prepared via the solvothermal procedure.98 Then the as-prepared COF was wet-ball milled in the presence of DMF at 225 rpm for 24 h and sonicated 30 min for dispersion. The obtained mixture was centrifuged to collect the supernatant, which was regarded as CONs. Comparing the XRD patterns of the bulk COF and the as-synthesized CONs, the intensity of the characteristic diffraction peak at around 23.5° dropped remarkably for CONs, indicating their successful production considering the crystalline damage caused by the external ball milling force. On the other hand, the COF and CONs shared similar chemical structures despite this slight change, as evidenced by their FT-IR spectra. TEM images verified the multi-hole nanosheets. XPS was employed to investigate the bond state and atom composition of the samples. The characteristic peaks of C1s in the high-resolution XPS spectra were assigned to C–C (284.7 eV), C–N (285.4 eV), CN (287.4 eV), and CO (280.0 eV). Two typical peaks were revealed in N1s high-resolution XPS spectra, corresponding to NC (389.5 eV) and N–H (399.9 eV). Also, the atomic percentage of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen was 64.86%, 27.57%, and 7.62%, respectively. As a result, the CONs were successfully exfoliated from their COF counterparts by ball milling.
3.3 Chemical exfoliation
Considering the poor dispersion stability and difficulty in controlling the thickness of exfoliated CONs,35,99,100 Khayum et al. synthesized the N-hexylmaleimide-functionalized CONs chemically exfoliated from an anthracene-based COF via [4+2] cycloaddition reaction (Fig. 8a and b).101 Additionally, a centimeter-scale self-standing COF thin film was further obtained at the water/air interface via layer by layer assembly. As is known, the 9- and 10-position of anthracene units are easily attacked via [4+2] cycloaddition reaction.102 The π–π stacking between layers and planarity of each layer were weakened with the intercalation of N-hexylmaleimide into the COF backbone, which led to the exfoliation of COF. In this exfoliation process, the anthracene-based imine-linked COF DaTp was first condensed by 2,6-diaminoanthracene (Da, 24) and Tp (17) through the standard solvothermal protocol. Then the [4+2] cycloaddition reaction was employed to introduce N-hexylmaleimide into DaTp, which led to weaker π–π interactions between the COF layers, thereby resulting in exfoliated DaTp COF nanosheets. Considering that the long alkyl chains and dipole forces make it possible for DaTp COF nanosheets to form thicker thin films by layer by layer assembly, a conventional air/water interfacial layer by layer assembly method was employed to control the thickness.103 A suspension of DaTp COF nanosheets in dichloromethane (DCM) was added dropwise to a beaker of water, where the water served as the liquid phase considering that the hydrophobic alkyl chains enable the levitation of the nanosheets on the surface of water, while DCM with a lower surface energy and higher vapor pressure acts as the spreading solvent. A temporary DCM–water bilayer was generated by quickly spreading the nanosheet suspension on the water surface, and a semi-transparent COF thin film was obtained after rapidly evaporating the DCM layer within 60 seconds. SEM, AFM and optical microscopy images further indicated the formation of a continuous, defect-free, and free-standing COF thin film with a thickness of 5–6 nm (Fig. 8c–f). To verify the control of the thickness of the layer by layer assembly, three parallel experiments with different suspensions were also conducted, which indicated that a higher concentration led to thicker films.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the chemical exfoliation of DaTp to DaTp-CONs. (b) Energy-optimized structure of the cycloadduct of N-hexylmaleimide and anthracene. (c) Optical image of DaTp. (d) SEM image (5 μm) of DaTp with an inserted TEM image (100 nm). (e) SEM image (5 μm) of DaTp-CONs with an inserted TEM image (100 nm). (f) Optical image of DaTp-CONs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Later, the same group further expanded their research to synthesize CONs via post-synthetic modifications.5 Hydroxyl (–OH) units are the perfect moiety for modification due to their facile derivatizable nature under moderate conditions.104 Considering this, the authors elaborately chose 4-aminosalicylhydrazide (ASH, 36) as one of the linkers for the construction of the COF, while 4-aminobenzohydrazide (APH, 34) without hydroxyl was chosen for comparison. 1,3,5-Triformylphloroglucinol (Tp, 17) and diamines (APH, 34, or ASH, 36) were condensed in the presence of PTSA through a neoteric solid-state mixing procedure to synthesize TpAPH and TpASH. Also, a three-step approach was employed to obtain functional target CONs. First, with the addition of glycidol (Glc), the phenolic hydroxyl groups were converted to alkyl hydroxyl groups to make TpASH-Glc CONs by opening the epoxy ring. Then, the as-synthesized surface alkyl hydroxyl groups were transformed to amines in the presence of APTES for the production of amine-functionalized CONs. Finally, the cellular targeting ligand folic acid (FA) was utilized to fabricate the targeted CONs (TpASH-FA). As demonstrated by the authors, the as-prepared CONs exhibited excellent aqueous dispersibility due to their surface functionalization.
3.4 Self-exfoliation method
In contrast to the development of CONs with the aid of an external force, the self-exfoliation method more likely depends on well-designed building blocks to induce peeling-off by an internal force. For example, in the work by El-Kaderi et al.,105 the π–π interactions between as-prepared COF layers were reduced due to the insertion of triptycene units. Based on this, two methyl groups were introduced into the 9,10-position of triptycene tricatechol (TPTC, 2) to further enlarge the distance between the COF layers, which enabled the exfoliation of a monolayer COF thin film.106 More recently, Rahul Banerjee and co-workers incorporated guanidinium units into the COF backbone to obtain self-exfoliated ionic covalent organic thin films.107 The authors fabricated three different CONs (TpTGCl (Fig. 9a and b), TpTGBr, and TpTGI) through Schiff-based condensation using the conventional solvothermal synthesis. From the PXRD pattern, the crystallinity of the obtained CONs was relatively low. The weak π–π stacking between the layers was verified by the broad peak at 2θ = ∼27.3°. On the other hand, with molecular dynamics (MD) simulation studies, the average interlayer π–π stacking distance of TpTGCl was increased from initially 3.338 Å to ∼5.5–6 Å. The authors ascribed this to the inherent positive charge of the guanidinium units and the existence of loosely bound chloride ions, and concluded that ionic CONs with 3–6 layers were successfully synthesized, which was further proven by TEM analysis and AFM measurements (Fig. 9c–h).106,108 Compared to other breaking-off methods, the self-exfoliation method seems to be simpler due to its internal synthesis and avoided restacking. Moreover, it is possible to use ionic building units not only to initiate the self-exfoliation process but also as targeted functional groups, which broaden the applications of COF thin films.
 Fig. 9  (a) Modeling of TpTGCl in eclipsed mode (top-view). (b) Stacking model showing individual layers (side-view). (c–e) TEM images of TpTGCl, TpTGBr, and TpTGI, respectively (inset shows zoomed in images; scale bar = 20 nm). (f–h) AFM images and height profiles of TpTGCl, TpTGBr, and TpTGI, respectively (AFM scale bars represent 200 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The free-standing COF thin films fabricated via the top-down strategy are summarized in Table 2. Four major fabrication methods related to top-down strategies have been explored. Obviously, solvent-assisted exfoliation is the most frequently used method. Compared with other methods, this method enables the high-yield and large-scale production of ultrathin nanosheets in solution at low cost since it is quite simple. Chemical exfoliation and the self-exfoliation process can introduce functional groups, which not only avoid aggregation but also have targeted functions. However, for solvent-free mechanical delamination, toxic organic solvents are well avoided. Although the aforementioned methods have their respective advantages and have been used for the successful preparation of free-standing COF thin films, they still have some limitations. On the one hand, true single-layered nanosheets are difficult to obtain and the aggregation of monolayers exists due to the stacking interaction; on the other hand, the yield of CONs is relatively low, which hinders their industrial applications. Furthermore, the generality of these methods is yet to be proven. It is worth mentioning is that the colloidal suspensions of COFs provide new opportunities for free-standing COF thin films.109,110 Solution-casting of COF colloids enables free-standing films with controlled sizes and thicknesses to be obtained. For example, Dichtel et al. reported a COF-5 film formed by evaporating the solvent from a colloidal suspension.109 The as-prepared film retained the crystallinity of the original colloidal solution and exhibited a preferential orientation compared with that of the thin films obtained from in situ growth on substrates. These results represent an important aspect for the development of free-standing COF thin films using the top-down strategy and further studies are also needed to decode the film aggregation mechanism.
Table 2 Free-standing COF thin films with different thickness for various applications




COF
Fabrication methods
Thickness (nm)
Applications
Ref.





a After 120 min sonication.
b X = Cl−, Br−, I−.
c Medium DaTp-CONs concentration.





COF-8
Solvent-assisted exfoliation
4–10



59



CMP-0
Solvent-assisted exfoliation
2.4 ± 0.2a



85



COF-43
Solvent-assisted exfoliation
1.32 ± 0.37



86



TpPa
Mechanical delamination
3–10



93



TpBD


COFBDBA–TPTC
Self-exfoliation method
0.75



105



COFBPDBA–TPTC
0.72


TpTGxb
Self-exfoliation method
2–5
iCONs@Polysulfone (PSF) MMMs

106



DaTp
Chemical exfoliation
5–6c



100



DAAQ–ECOF
Mechanical delamination
3–5
Cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries

216



TpASH
Chemical exfoliation
15
Drug delivery

5



COF (melamine-OPA)
Mechanical delamination


TPU/COFs nanocomposites

96



TPA-COF
Solvent-assisted exfoliation
3.5 ± 0.3
DNA detection

87



TpBDH
Solvent-assisted exfoliation
1.5–5.1



173



TfpBDH
Chemical sensing


COF-1
Solvent-assisted exfoliation
0.5
Molecular sieving membranes

88





4. Applications of COF thin films
The application of bulk COFs suffers due to their insoluble and unprocessable characters. Thus, it is necessary to facilely synthesize long-range ordered COF thin films for better performances. As demonstrated above, various synthetic methods have been employed for the fabrication of COF thin films. However, different synthetic methods lead to different properties and therefore different applications. In this section, we discuss the existing works on COF thin films employed to achieve specialized functions and summarize the applications covering energy storage, separation membranes, chemical sensors, etc.
4.1 Energy storage
With the growth of the population and industrial explosion, one of the most serious problems facing the world is energy shortage. Thus, clean, renewable energy sources and energy storage devices including lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors, and solar cells are urgently needed.111–113 COF thin films with enhanced specific areas, ultrathin thickness and accessible functional sites are considered promising platforms for energy storage applications. Some intriguing progress has been made in energy storage based on COF thin films in recent years.

4.1.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
Theoretically, ultrathin COF thin films with limited layers enable the reduction of the ion/electron migration length and facilitate ion/electronic diffusion. Moreover, a mass of available Li sites on or near the surface also allows rapid charge–discharge cycles and the full utilization of redox sites. Anthraquinone, as a redox-active unit, has attracted considerable attention in the application of energy storage.114–116 Wang et al. conducted research on the usage of free-standing anthraquinone-based COF thin films in Li+ batteries. Compared with bulk COF powder, the exfoliated COF thin films exhibited enhanced efficiency for redox-active site utilization and rapid kinetics for lithium storage due to their shorter Li+ diffusion pathways. In a typical experiment, a redox-active DAAQ–ECOF with a thickness of 5 nm was prepared via the mechanical milling method. In the process of charge–discharge at 20 mA g−1, DAAQ–ECOF delivered 96% (145 mA h g−1) of its theoretical capacity after 70 cycles, while only 73% was achieved by its pristine counterpart DAAQ–TFP-COF. After 1800 cycles of charge/discharge, DAAQ–ECOF still possessed a reversible capacity of 107 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 and 98% capacity retention. Interestingly, with careful molecular design, the capacity could be improved to 210 mA h g−1 and the discharge voltage could be increased to 3.6 V. In another study, Chen et al. explored the Li+ conductivity of CONs, which is important for the construction of lithium batteries. The target product Li–CON-TFSI was synthesized via a three-step method. Briefly, they first synthesized the cationic CON with chloride counterions (CON-Cl) via the self-exfoliation method. Then, intermediate CON-TFSI was formed through ion exchange between CON-Cl and lithium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (LiTFSI). Li–CON-TFSI was finally obtained after drying the mixture of LiTFSI salt and CON-TFSI, which was dissolved in ethyl alcohol liquor. The as-prepared Li–CON-TFSI showed a significant increase in conductivity of 2.09 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 70 °C, which was higher than that of MOF/COF-based electrolytes with plasticizers.


4.1.2 Capacitors. 
As is known, anthraquinone-based materials are also frequently used as organic redox couples for electrochemical capacitors;117,118 however, the electroactivity of anthraquinone is relatively low, leading to bad cycling stability.119,120 Zha et al. developed a type of anthraquinone-containing COF thin film on 3D graphene (COFDAAQ–BTA-3DG) as a promising negative electrode for hybrid electrochemical capacitors.121 The layered COFDAAQ–BTA-3DG enabled an increased mass loading of anthraquinone and improved accessibility of anthraquinone moieties up to 13.45% in alkaline media. The capacitance of the as-prepared COFDAAQ–BTA-3DG was 31.7 mF cm−2, which can be well-used as a capacitive electrode in alkaline conditions. Later, Dichtel and co-workers also synthesized an anthraquinone-based DAAQ–TFP COF thin film on an Au substrate.72 Cyclic voltammetry experiments confirmed that a larger percentage of anthraquinone in DAAQ–TFP COF thin films was electroactive compared with that of COF powder.38 Although poor proton transfer in the thin-film electrode led to slow charge transfer, a much large proportion of accessible anthraquinone subunits enabled increased conductivity through the electron self-exchange process. Furthermore, as demonstrated by galvanostatic charge discharge cycle (GCDC) experiments, the charge storage capabilities increased by 7.5 times with the utilization of the DAAQ–TFP COF thin films. The results revealed that the DAAQ–TFP COF thin films have great potential to be incorporated into supercapacitors.


4.1.3 Solar cells and fuel cells. 
Early in 2011, Dichtel and co-workers noted that the high crystallinity and orientation of COF thin films on SLG/SiO2 substrates have the potential to construct photovoltaic devices with designed functional π-electron systems. They pioneered the research by growing crystal and aligned triphenylene–pyrene COF thin films and phthalocyanine COF thin films on the SLG/SiO2 surface for further photovoltaic applications.53 TP-COF was synthesized by the polymerization of HHTP (1) and pyrene-2,7-diboronic acid (PDBA, 6), while the NiPc–PBBA COF was condensed by Ni octahydroxyphthalocyanine (NiPc, 3) and PBBA (5). The GID data for the TP-COF thin films and NiPc–PBBA COF thin films revealed the vertical alignment of their 2D lattices. The photoluminescence of the TP-COF thin films showed the characteristic pyrene excimer emission peak over all excitation wavelengths, indicating the efficient energy transfer from HHTP to pyrene. For the NiPc–PBBA COF thin films, the adsorption bands in the visible region of the spectrum were derived from the Ni phthalocyanine chromophores. Thus, both the TP-COF thin films and NiPc–PBBA COF thin films are ideal precursors for photovoltaic applications. Besides, Montoro et al. demonstrated the potential of COF thin films for fuel cells.122 RT-COF-1Ac and RT-COF-1AcB were prepared based on the condensation of TAPB (26) and 1,3,5-benzenetricarbaldehyde (BTA, 14). Additionally, a post-synthetic strategy was employed to obtain LiCl@RT-COF-1 from the reaction between RT-COF-1 and LiCl. The films of RT-COF-1Ac, RT-COF-1AcB, and LiCl@RT-COF-1 were selected to test their performance as solid electrolytes in proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) (Fig. 10). Characterized by a series of measurements, the RT-COF-1AcB films displayed the best performance. For the RT-COF-1AcB film-based PEMFCs, an optical balance between high conductivity values and low H2 fuel crossover under 1.1 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 323 K led to the maximum current density (53.1 mA cm−2) and maximum power density peak (12.95 mW cm−2).
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of the PEMFCs with the membrane electrode assemblies (MEA) of RT-COF-1Ac, RT-COF-1AcB, and LiCl@RT-COF-1 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 

4.2 Semiconductor devices
The structural features of COFs are advantageous for carrier transportation in semiconductor electronic devices. Significant research on the fabrication of functional electron units in 2D layered COFs to construct electronic devices with high performance has been reported.123,124 Despite the promising results, it is hard to incorporate bulk COFs into devices with full contact, which leads to weak performances due to the insolubility of COF powders. In addition, their low intrinsic conductivity also hinders their applications.125 Single- or few-layered COF thin films offer considerable potential for the fabrication of semiconductor devices. The unique properties of electronic COF thin films enable them to be used as semiconductor devices with high performance.
The tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) building block has been used as an electroactive unit to synthesize semiconducting COFs.126,127 Although the charge-carrier mobility in bulk COF is high, the COF powder nature weakens its applications. Cai et al. reported oriented TTF-COF thin films and their doping-related conductivity.71 The porous nature of TTF-COF thin films enables the infiltration of electron acceptors such as I2 and tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) as charge-transfer partners.128 The authors fabricated TTF-COF thin films with Au/Cr electrodes to detect the conductivity. Comparing the I–V curves of the TTF-COF thin film device before and after exposure to I2, the electronical conductivity of the device significantly increased with the existence of I2 vapor. In 24 h exposure, the conductivity increased to a maximum of 0.28 S m−1, which was three orders of magnitude higher than that of the pristine film and among the highest for COF materials. However, when it was removed from the I2 vapor, the conductivity of the device decreased to 1.0 × 10−3 S m−1. The authors also used TCNQ as a non-volatile dopant to further verify the doping influence. Similar to I2 doping, the conductivity increased after immersing the TTF-COF thin film into a solution with TCNQ, which remained stable even after removing it from the solution. In addition, PXRD analysis was performed to verify the retained crystallinity of TTF-COF after doping. Since electronic transport properties significantly depend on the film morphology and molecular arrangement,129–131 Medina et al. investigated the directed charge carrier transport and the additional electrical properties using an oriented BDT-COF thin film device as a model system.132 The charge-carrier transport along the columnar stacks is an important factor for judging the overall performance of COF thin film-based devices. An oriented BDT-COF thin film was grown on a glass-coated ITO electrode using the method mentioned above. Also, MoOx and Au were utilized as top electrodes. Comparing the performance of the BDT-COF thin film with a thickness of 80–200 nm, they concluded that a thinner COF-film leads to higher hole mobilities. As demonstrated by the authors, the thickness dependence originated from the inherent electron-defects in the BDT-COF stacks. Thicker films mean more layers and therefore more electronic defects in the stack. The defects cannot be efficiently evaded given that the charges cannot transport along alternative paths. The average hole mobility tripled under illumination compared with that in the dark due to the increased charge density, allowing the electronic trap states to be filled. Further, hole-only devices (HODs) were constructed to measure the columnar hole mobility in a diode configuration. Borate ester linking groups within the BDT-COF thin films enabled high resistivity towards charge migration. The characterization of the BDT-COF thin films revealed the potential of BDT-COF thin films as semiconductor device materials.
Field-effect transistors (FETs) are organic-based electronic devices that can be used for the detection of charge transport efficiency in organic materials.133 However, in-plane charge transport and transport in a few molecular layers limit the performance of FETs.134 Bao and co-workers synthesized an imine-based COF (named “polyTB”) film at the solution/air interface and incorporated it into a thin-film FET as a semiconductor active layer.79 However, the average mobility of the transistors was relatively low due to the thin film defects. Later, Wang and co-workers prepared other imine-linked COFTFPy–PPDA thin films on SLG via solvothermal synthesis for the fabrication of vertical field-effect transistor (VFET) devices (Fig. 11a).132,135 VFET is an efficient electronic device constructed with the drain electrode vertically stacking the source electrode and channel layer.136 The thickness of the deposited semiconducting substrate has a great influence on the short channel length. In their report, the SLG/COF-VFET device was constructed by incorporating COFTFPy–PPDA thin films with an average thickness of 50 nm as the transport channel, while SLG acted as the source electrode (Fig. 11b). Due to the synergistic effect of the heterostructure of the COFTFPy–PPDA thin film and conductivity of SLG, remarkable ambipolar charge transport behaviour in the as-prepared SLG/COF-VFET device was observed under the adjustment of the supplied voltages, which may originate from the lower injection barriers for electrons and holes injection as well as the tuneable work function and density of state of SLG (Fig. 11c–e). The narrow band gap (1.61 eV) of COFTFPy–PPDA can also be ascribed to the lower injection barrier for the transport of both charge carriers. A High Jon/off ratio of 105 in the n-type regime and 106 in the p-type regime was obtained under the condition of low manipulating voltages. The highest on-current density achieved was 6.8 A cm−2 for hole transport and 4.1 A cm−2 for electron transport. Thus, COFTFPy–PPDA thin films with remarkable ambipolar behaviour and excellent semiconducting performance were demonstrated to have prospective application in semiconductor devices.
 Fig. 11  (a) COFTFPy–PPDA film on SLG/SiO2–Si. (b) Module of the constructed COF/SLG-VFET device (side-view). (c) The relevant levels of materials in the SLG/COF-VFET and the band diagrams in the case of a (d) negative gate voltage and (e) positive gate voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Membrane-separation
Molecular separations, especially gas separation and water purification, have aroused much attention for decades due to their importance to the development of clean energy and environmental protection.137–140 Among the known separation strategies, membrane-based separation with the advantages of easy design, low energy consumption and environmental friendliness, has been given preference.141–143 Among the traditional membranes, graphene-based materials with artificially drilled holes as porous fillers exhibit moderate performances due to their defect structure and poor compatibilities.144 Also, although inherit porous materials such as zeolites,145 MOFs146–148 and zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs)149 show significant potential for membrane separation owing to their ordered pore channels, these material-based membranes, which are usually prepared within polymeric matrices or by growing them on a support, show lower performance of permeance and separation due to the covering effect within the hybrid matrices and poor adhesion or improper growth on the support.150–152 COF thin films with ultrathin layers, large areas, tunable pore sizes and chemical functionality are beneficial for the fabrication of membranes. Also, membranes based on COF thin films are expected to exhibit both high permeability and high selectivity.
Recently, COF thin films have been widely used in the fabrication of nanofiltration (NF) membranes, especially thin film composite (TFC) membranes. Kandambeth et al. prepared two types of COF membranes (COMs), M-TpBD and M-TpTD, to explore their applications in wastewater treatment and organic solvent recovery.153 The COMs with a continuous surface were prepared via an optimized sequential reagent addition approach. In brief, aromatic diamine, PTSA and H2O were firstly mixed to obtain an organic salt. Then the mixture and Tp (17) were shaken completely using a vortex shaker to form the dough. Knife-casting and baking were further used to make the COMs, which could be exfoliated from the glass surface. The M-TpBD membrane rejection for Rose Bengal (RB) was 99%, while that of the M-TpTD membrane was 84% due to its smaller pore size. Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. 12, M-TpBD was selective for nitroaniline over RB, indicating that dye molecules with molecular dimensions above 1 nm could be rejected by MTpBD. The COMs also showed high performance for organic solvent permeance. The acetonitrile permeance capability of M-TpTD was 2.5 orders of magnitude higher compared with that of previously reported polyamide-based nanofiltration membranes.154 Later, the same group synthesized another series of COF thin films (Tp–Bpy and Tp–Azo) with the thickness of ∼50–200 nm through an interfacial process at room-temperature without knife-casting or baking.81 The as-prepared free-standing COF thin films could be used as molecular sieve analogues to separate organic solvent. Tp–Bpy and Tp-Azo were selected for incorporation with macroporous polyester-3329 supports. Both COF thin films exhibited high solvent-permeance and solution-rejection performances. Importantly, the Tp-Bpy thin films exhibited brilliant acetonitrile permeance of up to 339 L m−2 h−1 bar−1. More recently, Matsumoto et al. reported a type of poly(ether sulfone) (PES)-supported NF membrane integrated with COF thin films for the rejection of rhodamine WT (R-WT).82 The COF-PES membranes displayed A higher R-WT rejection of 91% compared with that of PES alone. Then, the same group incorporated another TAPB–PDA COF active layer into THE PES NF membrane to form asymmetric membranes.155 The TAPB–PDA COF-PES membranes exhibited higher R-WT rejection and lower water permeability compared with that of THE PES support alone. In another report, Fan et al. prepared COF-LZU1 membranes on alumina tubes via solvothermal synthesis.156 The membranes exhibited a remarkable water permeance of up to 760 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 and excellent rejection rates above 90% for water-soluble dyes with molecular dimensions larger than 1.2 nm.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the nanofiltration assembly in the case of the selective molecular separation of nitroaniline (NA) from a mixture of NA and rose bengal (RB) (where, F denotes the feed and P the permeate). (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the M-TpBD thin film (scale bar 10 μm). (c) Schematic representation of the molecular sieving mechanism for M-TpBD. (d) UV-vis spectra related to the selective recovery of NA from a mixture of RB and NA from water. (e) UV-vis spectra of vitamin-B12 (V-B12) and the filtrate water after passing through M-TpBD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides, COF thin film membranes can also be used in gas separation. A recent computational study reported by Zhong and co-workers exhibited the remarkable performance of ultrathin COF membranes comprised with few stacked layered COF nanosheets. The CO2 permeation flux was high and the CO2/N2 separation selectivity varied from non-selective to high selectivity largely depending on the stacking model.157 Recently, Li et al. introduced a novel high-quality COF-1 membrane by assembling exfoliated COF-1 nanosheets on the surface of a porous ceramic support.88 The single-gas permeation of the COF-1 membranes showcased a Knudsen diffusion mechanism. The as-synthesized COF-1 membranes had a higher H2 permeance than MOF membranes and grapheme sheets.158–160 Moreover, the permeation performance of the COF-1 membrane was maintained under high temperature, which was also better than that of MOF membranes.161
In addition to COF thin films used as TFC membrane forms, COF thin film-based mixed-matrix membranes (MMMs) constructed by incorporating a COF layer into polymeric matrices have also been studied. Notably, compared to the bulk COF-based MMMs,162–165 the enhanced stability and compatibility within polymeric matrices resulting from the nanosheet morphology endow the MMMs with better performances. For example, Zhao et al. prepared two types of COF nanosheet-based MMMs for gas separation.166 NUS-2 and NUS-3 nanosheets were obtained with a size of 50–100 nm via solvent-assisted exfoliation. Poly(ether imide) (Ultem) and polybenzimidazole (PBI) were selected as the polymeric matrices. The obtained nanosheets were then blended into the polymeric matrices to produce MMMs (NUS-2@Ultem, NUS-3@Ultem, NUS-2@PBI, and NUS-2@PBI). The as-prepared MMMs showed a defect-free structure with good mechanical properties as a result of the superb compatibility between the CON fillers and polymeric matrices. The CON-containing MMMs exhibited higher gas permeability and/or selectivity than that of the pure polymer membranes. In the case of the single gas tests, 20 wt% NUS-2@PBI exhibited an H2/CO2 permselectivity of up to 31.4 under the condition of higher pressure, which exceeded the 2008 Robeson upper bound.167 On the other hand, when conducting mixed gas tests, the performance deteriorated slightly due to the competition between CO2 and H2 in the membranes. As for water treatment, Banerjee et al. fabricated stable guanidinium-based CONs (TpTGCl) via the self-exfoliation method and incorporated the as-synthesized CONs with PSF to form MMMs, namely, TpTGCl@PSF.107 The TpTGCl@PSF possessed an inherent antimicrobial property by retarding bacterial growth compared to normal filler paper.100 As this hydrophilic membrane enables the permeation of water, this aqueous stable and antibacterial TpTGCl@PSF membrane is expected to be applied in water purification.
4.4 Sensors
Beyond energy storage, semiconductor devices and separation membranes, sensor systems are another intriguing field for the application of COF thin films.168–170 Although COFs with good photophysical properties are expected to act as efficient sensors,171–173 the aggregation layers via π–π stacking, ineffective interaction with analytes and poor electron mobility greatly hinder the sensing ability of bulk COF. Thus, COF thin films with high surface areas, ultrathin thickness and highly accessible active sites are considered to exhibit better performances. Early in 2011, Dichtel and co-workers synthesized HHTP–DPB COF films, which had strong photoluminescent (PL) due to the cofacially packed diphenylbutadiyne moieties.68 The vertically arranged HHTP–DPB COF films grew continuously on the SLG surface with a thickness of 132 ± 18 nm, showing the potential for fluorescent sensing.
2,4,6-Trinitrophenol (TNP), as one of the most dangerous nitroaromatic explosives, causes some acute diseases including liver injury, headache and diarrhea, and environmental pollution.174–176 Das et al. reported the utilization of TfBDH-CONs to selectively detect TNP via both turn-on and turn-off sensing mechanisms.177 In detail, two types of imide-based COFs (TpBDH and TfpBDH) were synthesized via solvothermal condensation and then exfoliated to TpBDH-CONs and TfpBDH-CONs with ∼5–15 stacked layers through solvent-assisted exfoliation. In the solution phase, the PL spectra of TpBDH-CONs showed no change upon the addition of nitroaromatic analytes such as TNP, 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT), 2-nitrophenol (NP), 2,6-dinitrotoluene (DNT), and 2,6-dinitrophenol (DNP). Interestingly, TfpBDH-CONs exhibited a different phenomenon, where the PL emission decreased significantly with the titration of nitroaromatics (TNP, TNT, NP, DNT and DNP), and high sensitivity and selectivity for TNP were obviously observed with 63% quenching efficiency (Fig. 13a and b). In the solid state, “turn-on” sensing behaviour was observed in the TfpBDH-CONs-coated paper with an increase of TNP concentration (Fig. 13c and d). As demonstrated by the authors, the “turn-off” phenomenon in the solution phase was caused by the electronic charge transfer between the picrate anion (TNP−) to π-electronic cloud of the protonated TfpBDH-CONs, while the “turn-on” phenomenon in the solid state was determined by the proton transfer from TNP to the basic nitrogen atom of the imine (–CN) bond. Similarly, Zhang et al. prepared a fluorescent polyimide COF (PI-COF) via the condensation of tetra(4-aminophenyl) porphyrin (TAPP, 41) and perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCA, 42) and then obtained PI-CONs with a thickness of 1 nm through solvent-assisted exfoliation.178 Benefiting from the fluorescent properties together with the electron-deficient imide structure and electronic benzene ring, PI-CONs showed an excellent fluorescence quenching response to TNP with a minimum detection limit of 0.25 μM, and remarkable selectivity for TNP detection over other nitroaromatics such as DNT, TNT and NP.
 Fig. 13  (a) PL quenching of “turn-off” sensing in the solution phase. (b) Selectivity of TfpBDH-CONs towards analytes based on fluorescence quenching. (c) PL enhancement of “turn-on” sensing in the solid phase. (d) Selectivity of TfpBDH-CONs towards analytes based on fluorescence enhancement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to chemosensors, COF thin films can also be utilized as biosensors due to their adsorption affinities. Wang et al. constructed an imine-linked COF thin film (Si-AMS-NH2-4) on an amino-functionalized silicon substrate (Si-AMS) via the reaction of BTA (14) and DAB (22).179 The as-prepared COF thin films could be used as biosensors related to bovine serum albumin (BSA) adsorption and probes for DNA immobilization. In aqueous solutions, the functional units on biomolecules undergo electrolysis, which allows them to adhere on amino-functional COF thin films through electrostatic interactions. In their report, electrochemical methods were employed to perform biomolecule immobilization on Si-AMS-NH2-4 and electron impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was utilized to identify the BSA adsorption or DNA immobilization on the Si-AMS-NH2-4 surface. As demonstrated by the authors, the electrochemical activity of Si-AMS-NH2-4 was strengthened when biomolecules were adsorbed onto the COF thin film, which was observed from the declined charge transfer resistance values of the composite electrodes. Recently, Peng et al. synthesized ultrathin CONs for the fluorescence detection of DNA. They first prepared ultrathin TPA-COF nanosheets with a thickness of 3.5 ± 0.3 nm via solvent-assisted exfoliation. Then, two types of hairpin DNA probes (H1 and H2) were designed, and a fluorescent dye was utilized to mark H1. The fluorescence of the dye was quenched when H1 and H2 were adsorbed on the TPA-COF NSs surface as the result of the π–π stacking interactions between the surface and probe. A hybridization chain reaction (HCR) between H1 and H2 was triggered by the presence of the target DNA,180 producing a long double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), which showed poor interaction with COF nanosheets. Thus, the fluorescence of the dye could be recovered when the HCR-generated long dsDNA broke away from the TPA-COF nanosheet surface, which enabled the detection of the target DNA.
4.5 Other applications
Besides the abovementioned applications, COF thin films can also be used in other fields such as catalysis181–183 and drug delivery.5 For example, Yadav et al. developed a triazine-based COF thin film on a PI sheet as an efficient photocatalyst for solar fuel production from CO2.181 The newly designed COF thin films showed almost 3.7 times higher photocatalytic NADH regeneration and 3.4 times higher formic acid formation compared with that of the monomer. The polymeric structure, optical band gap and highly ordered π-electron channels enabled the excellent performance of the COF thin film photocatalyst. As another example, Yaghi and co-workers prepared a series of COF thin films with different electronic withdrawing characters by growing COF-366-Co, COF-366-(OMe)2-Co, COF-366-F-Co and COF-366-(F)4-Co on the HOPG surface for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 14).182 The accessible and electrochemically-active metal centers endowed the COF thin films with remarkably improved catalytic properties over the bulk COF powders. XAS and cyclic voltammetry revealed that the electron withdrawing groups indeed enhanced the catalytic performance of the compounds although the current density for CO formation did not meet the linear trend of the electron withdrawing groups in materials.
 Fig. 14  (a) Structure of cobalt-porphyrin-based COF backbone. (b) Schematic illustration of electrolysis cell for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Another graceful application of COF thin film is targeted drug delivery, which was presented by Banerjee et al.5 Although biocompatible polymers, nanomaterials and MOFs are greatly used in the field of drug delivery, their limitations, such as poor chemical stability, released toxic metal ions, and limited functional design weaken their performance.184,185 Thus, COF thin films with metal-free, good aqueous dispersibility and designable function are suitable for drug delivery. Surface amine (–NH2) groups are often used to anchor targeting ligands for site-specific drug delivery in the construction of targeted drug delivery systems.104,186,187 The authors elaborately chose TpASH with available hydroxyl (–OH) groups, which are convenient for the bonding of surface amine (–NH2) groups and COF exfoliation.72,83 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), as an antimetabolite-based anticancer chemotherapy drug, was selected to be loaded onto the COF thin film surface.188 The TpASH COF thin films loaded with the targeted drug 5-FU enabled the release of the specific drug to the cancer cells and was expected to minimize the unwanted side effects of nonspecific targeting. The 5-FU loaded samples showed good anticancer activity, and only 14% of the cells were viable at a dosage of 50 μg mL−1. The targeted drug-loaded COF thin film (TpASH-FA-5-FU) preferentially delivered the drug (5-FU) to folate overexpressed breast cancer cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis, which led to cell death via apoptosis.
As a result, the designable building backbones, adjustable thickness and accessible active sites of COF thin films endow them with many enhanced features and functions, such as topological tunability, chemical stability, semiconducting behavior and improved capacitance, which are beneficial for applications in energy storage, semiconductor devices, membrane separation, sensors and drug delivery. Moreover, other intriguing and/or unpredictable performances will be discovered and explored in the near future.
5. Outlook
From the above discussions, it is obvious that COF thin films inherit the merits of their bulk counterparts while possessing some excellent new features. Bulk COF is usually synthesized as an insoluble powder, which hinders its performance due to its poor processability.38,48,125 Whereas, COF thin films with single or few layers enable strong interactions between molecules since their active sites are highly accessible on the surface and the synergistic effects of thin films and substrates also have advantages for improving their performance in various applications. Although some intriguing improvements have been made, this field is still in its infancy and several important challenges remain. As a prerequisite for device fabrication, it is significant to develop novel synthetic strategies, investigate the fundamental mechanisms, and therefore expand their applications.
5.1 Synthetic strategy exploration
Although several strategies for the fabrication of COF thin films on selected substrates or as free-standing forms have been developed, simple but efficient synthetic strategies are always highly desirable. Among the existing methods related to the bottom-up strategy, solvothermal synthesis is the most widely used due to its easy operation feature. However, the problems with this method arise from two aspects. On the one hand, it is complicated to control the thickness of COF thin films, and on the other hand the thin films are usually contaminated by precipitated COF powders, oligomers or unreacted monomers. Although synthesis under flow conditions can avoid these problems by controlling the flow rate and tubing length, the lack of collecting and reusing monomers from the outflow lead to the serious wastage of monomers. As for free-standing thin films, possible restacking impedes the achievement of single- or few-layered COF thin films and large lateral dimensions. Also, their crystallinity is not sufficiently high. Additionally, in both strategies, the yield of the as-prepared COF thin films is too low for practical applications. Hence, new synthetic methods with scalability and morphology control need to be introduced. One of the feasible strategies is to combine two different methods. This idea is very liberating since solvent-assisted exfoliation and mechanical delamination can be employed together to accelerate the reaction rate and increase the yield. Furthermore, the methods used for other materials may also be suitable for the fabrication of COF thin films. For example, the layer-by-layer templating technique has been widely used to synthesize nanostructured materials with different morphologies for decades.189–191 Recently, surface-grafted gels (SURGELs), a type of antimicrobial polymer thin film, were prepared via the deposition of surface-anchored MOFs (SURMOFs) on gold substrates using the layer-by-layer method.192 Considering that COFs have much in common with MOFs, the layer-by-layer strategy has potential for the construction of COF thin films. Moreover, click reactions,193 three-layer method148 and facile surfactant-assisted synthetic methods194 have been successfully used for the fabrication of MOF thin films. Likewise, these methods represent new opportunities for the fabrication of COF thin films with modified approaches. For example, the surfactant-assisted synthesis used for the fabrication of MOF thin films has the limitation that surfactants may occupy the active sites on the thin films, leading to a weak performance. Thus, in the future synthetic methods, surfactants that have weak interaction with COF thin films and can be washed after the reaction are preferable.
5.2 Mechanism study
Although COF thin films have been widely studied not only in synthesis but also for applications, the fundamental mechanisms, such as growth orientation, crystallinity and occurrence of defects, still remain unclear. Indeed, very little is known about the conditions under which nucleation can be well controlled. Also, the growth orientation is critical since island growth may impede the formation of uniform and flat thin films. Meanwhile, the balance of the thermodynamics of covalent bond formation, defect correction and interactions between COFs and substrates during the growth of COF thin films still remains to be decoded, which is successfully achieved in well-developed polymers from irreversible reactions.195,196 Thus, to overcome these challenges, computational methods are very useful tools, which enable the prediction of structure and function, as well as the simulation of stacking interactions and orientation growth. Dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT) was employed by Wang and co-workers197 to investigate the interactions between a planar COF and graphene and clarify the assembly mechanism. The calculation results showed that the COF network grows on the graphene surface with an ordered hexagonal and square structure. On the other hand, computational methods make it possible to forecast theoretical properties such as ion exchange, band gap and charge-carrier mobility, which in reverse, reflect the structural features.
Another strategy to speed up the progress of mechanism studies is the utilization of suitable characterization methods. In most studies, TEM and SEM images are used to analyse the morphology of COF thin films, where TEM is more likely to be employed to materials with heavier elements and SEM usually lacks the ability to assume the delicate surface morphology. For PXRD, it gives only limited information about the crystal texture of COF thin films, where precise conformations and positions of building blocks within the framework are absent. On the other hand, GID and grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) can provide detailed information on the orientation of thin films, including out-of-plane and on-plane diffraction. These efficient techniques reveal concrete information about the structure and orientation of thin films compared to TEM, SEM and PXRD. Very recently, Liu and co-workers198 creatively used reaction time and concentration as effective handles to elucidate the intermediate state (the disoriented phase as well as disordered phase) during the process of COF thin film growth. An unusual re-entrant transition in orientation was observed using GIWAS for the first time. Thus, advanced characteristic techniques are urgently needed to better understand the growth mechanism of COF thin films. Interestingly, new characteristic methods are conducive to obtain more information about the growth of COF thin films; whereas, the existing form of COF thin films enables the utilization of characterization that cannot be used in bulk COFs. For example, a triphenylene–pyrene based TP-COF deposited on an SLG/SiO2 substrate made it possible to observe the COF thin film via UV/Vis/NIR spectroscopy in transmission mode.53 Also, the optical property of LZU-1 COF thin films was measured for the first time by ellipsometry.75 It is worth mentioning is that the techniques used for other materials may also work for the study of COF thin films. For example, the optical nano-imaging technique has been used to test the out-of-plane and in-plane dielectric constants of MoS2 and h-BN crystals, which is a potential method to monitor the nanoscale optical quality of COF thin films.199
5.3 Application expansion
As mentioned above, COF thin films are highly desirable for the use of COFs in various applications. On the one hand, although COF thin films display enormous potential in the electronic field in theory, such as portable electronics and hybrid electric vehicles, their use is far from mature, especially in large industrial equipment. Thus, great effort is still needed in this area. On the other hand, to date, the majority of COF thin films applications are limited to optoelectronic devices, chemical sensors and membrane separation. Thus, their potential applications related to other fields urgently need to be developed, especially in the field of energy and environment. As is known, energy shortage and environmental pollution restrict the development of modern society.200–207 Although numerous nanomaterials have been used,208–215 it is sensible to utilize the pre-designable feature of COF thin films to bind various functional building blocks to broaden their applications. For example, N-rich frameworks are beneficial for CO2 adsorption, and incorporating triazine-containing molecules allows COF thin films to have high CO2 adsorption performances.216,217 Furthermore, COF thin films can act as 2D templates by introducing adsorbed molecules into the system, which provides a strategy to form sophisticated functional surfaces and has attracted considerable scientific attention in recent years.218–220 COF thin films with high surface areas and defined pore sizes are promising materials for templates. Interestingly, in the design of bulk COFs, heteropore COFs possessing two or more types of pores have been successfully achieved, which can also be utilized for the fabrication of COF thin films.221–224 Materials with the dual function of pollution detection and degradation are highly desirable in pollution abatement.225–227 COF thin films with two different pore sizes favor this functional construction. Incorporating COF thin films into other materials is another potent strategy to produce multifunctional composites that have new properties superior to that of individual moieties due to the synergetic effect and therefore enhance the application performance. Recently, Qiu and co-workers228 grew an MOF on a COF membrane to synthesize a COF-MOF composite membrane. The as-prepared composite membrane exhibited higher separation selectivity for H2/CO2 gas mixtures than its individual parts. Considering this, the construction of COF thin films with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) may enhance their photocatalytic degradation ability for organic pollutants similar to h-BN/g-C3N4 composites.229–234 Moreover, biological application is one of the important aspects for material application, which needs close attention in the future. Pioneering studies have uncovered the great potential of COFs in the biological field.43,44 Generally, COFs with a total organic metal-free backbone rule out the unwanted toxic metals, and tunable porosity enables the convenience of loading guest/drug molecules.5 However, their poor dispersibility and unprocessable quality affect the biocompatibility and stability of bulk COFs and further weaken their performance. COF thin films with the highly accessible surfaces, pronounced water stability and diverse functions inspire us to hope for their superior performance in the biological field. Specifically, highly oriented COF thin films are beneficial for loading bioactive compounds, which provide a platform for cell-culture substrates.235–238 This also enables the biotransformation of surface-attached bacterial biofilms with small chemical compounds as well as spatially localized delivery of high concentrations of bioactive molecules such as antibiotics.
6. Conclusions
In summary, this critical review highlighted the accomplished synthesis of COF thin films deposited on selected substrates or as free-standing forms using the bottom-up and top-down strategies such as solvothermal synthesis, room temperature vapor-assisted conversion synthesis, solvent-assisted exfoliation, and mechanical delamination. Moreover, representative selections of COF thin film applications such as semiconductor devices and fluorescence sensors were presented. In addition, future prospects with respect to synthetic strategy, mechanism and applications were provided. Despite the significant progress in this appealing research area, improved synthetic methods, well-dispersed nanosheets and diversified applications are urgently in need. Since this field is rapidly growing, what we provided herein is a momentary view. Nevertheless, we expect that this preliminary discussion will garner multidisciplinary interest from the scientific community and industry and therefore expand the future applications.
Abbreviation

[60]PCBM[6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester
[70]PCBM[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
AFMAtomic force microscopy
APH4-Aminobenzohydrazide
APTsActive pharmaceutical ingredients
APTES(3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
ASH4-Aminosalicylhydrazide
BDBenzidine
BDBA1,4-Benzenediboronic acid
BDHPyromellitic-N,N/-bisaminoimide
BDTBenzodithiophene
BDTA2,6-Dicarbaldehyde-4,8-dioctyloxybenzo[1,2-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene
BDTBABenzodithiophene diboronic acid
Boc
tert-Butyloxycarbonyl
Bpy2,2′-Bipyridine-5,5′-diamine
BTABenzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde
BTPB1,3,5-Tris[4-phenylboronicacid]benzene
BSABovine serum albumin
CH2Cl2Dichloromethane
CMCurcumin
CMPConjugated microporous polymers
COFsCovalent organic frameworks
COMsCOF membranes
CONsCOF nanosheets
dsDNADouble-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid
Da2,6-Diaminoanthracene
DAAQAnthraquinone/2,6-diaminoanthraquinone
DAB
p-Phenylenediamine
DCMDichloromethane
DFTDensity functional theory
DMF
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DNT2,6-Dinitrotoluene
DNP2,6-Dinitrophenol
DPB4,4′-Diphenylbutadiynebis(boronic acid)
EBEthidium bromide
ECOFsExfoliated COFs
EISElectron impedance spectroscopy
EtOHAlcohol
FAFolic acid
FETsField-effect transistors
FT-IRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
FTOFluorine doped tin oxide
FUFluorouracil
g-C3N4Graphite carbon nitride
GCDCGalvanostatic charge–discharge cycles
GIDGrazing incidence diffraction
GIWAXSGrazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering
GlcGlycidol
h-BNHexagonal boron nitride
HCRHybridization chain reaction
HHTP2,3,6,7,10,11-Hexahydroxytriphenylene
HODsHole-only devices
HRTEMHigh-resolution TEM
IRInfrared radiation
ITOIndium-doped tin oxide
LEDLight-emitting diode
Li+Lithium-ion
LiTFSILithium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide
LPELiquid phase exfoliation
MDMolecular dynamics
MeOHMethanol
MMMsMixed matrix membranes
MOFsMetal–organic frameworks
MoS2Molybdenum disulfide
NBDPA4-(tert-Butoxycarbonylamino)-aniline
NDINaphthalenediimide
NFNanofiltration
NiPcNi phthalocyanine
NP2-Nitrophenol
OLEDsOrganic light-emitting diodes
OSTOctadecyltrichlorosilane
PaBenzene-1,4-diamine
PBBA1,4-Phenylenebis(boronic acid)
PBIPolybenzimidazole
PDA
p-Phenylenediamine
PDBAPyrene-2,7-diboronic acid
PEMFCsProton-exchange membrane fuel cells
PESPoly(ether sulfone)
PLPhotoluminescent
polyTBConjugated 2D crystalline network based on TAPA and BDTA subunits
PPDA
p-Phenylenediamine
PPEPhenylbis(phenylethynyl)
PIPolyimide
PSFPolysulfone
PTCAPerylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride
PTSA
p-Toluenesulfonic acid
PXRDPowder X-ray diffraction
PyPyrene
QCMQuartz crystal microbalance
RBRose bengal
R-WTRhodamine WT
SAEDSelected area electron diffraction
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SLGSingle-layer graphene
SURGELsSurface grafted gels
SURMOFSurface anchored MOFs
TAPATris(4-aminophenyl)amine
TAPB1,3,5-Tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene
TAPPTetra(4-aminophenyl)porphyrin
TCNQTetracyanoquinodimethane
TD4,4′-Diamino-p-terphenyl
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TEMPO(2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxidanyl
TFCThin film composite
Tfp1,3,5-Tris(4-formylphenyl)benzene
TFP/Tp1,3,5-Triformylphluroglucinol
TFPATris(4-formylphenyl)amine
TFPy1,3,6,8-Tetrakis(p-formylphenyl)pyrene
TGx (X = Cl, Br, I)A series of amines
THFTetrahydrofuran
TNP2,4,6-Trinitrophenol
TNT2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene
TPTriphenylene–pyrene
TPA-COFAn imine-linked COF based on TAPA and TFPA
TPTCTriptycene tricatechol
TPUThermoplastic polyurethanes
TTFTetrathiafulvalene
UltemPoly(ether imide)
UV/Vis/NIRUltraviolet/visible/near infrared
VFETVertical field-effect transistor
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
ZnPcZn phthalocyanine

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The study is financially supported by the Program for the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81773333, 51521006, 51709101, 51779090, 51579098, 51408206, 51508177, 51579096), the National Program for Support of Top-Notch Young Professionals of China (2014, 2012), Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project (No. 2016RS3026, 2017SK2241), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT-13R17).
Notes and references
M.-H. Sun, S.-Z. Huang, L.-H. Chen, Y. Li, X.-Y. Yang, Z.-Y. Yuan and B.-L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3479–3563 RSC .
M. R. Benzigar, S. N. Talapaneni, S. Joseph, K. Ramadass, G. Singh, J. Scaranto, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2680–2721 RSC .
A. G. Slater and A. I. Cooper, Science, 2015, 348, aaa8075 CrossRef .
S. Kitagawa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 514–516 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mitra, H. S. Sasmal, T. Kundu, S. Kandambeth, K. Math, D. D. Diaz and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4513–4520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Tan and B. Tan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3322–3356 RSC .
Y. L. Luo, B. Y. Li, W. Wang, K. B. Wu and B. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5703–5707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Xu, S. B. Jin, H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8012–8031 RSC .
N. Chaoui, M. Trunk, R. Dawson, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3302–3321 RSC .
Y. Z. Liao, Z. H. Cheng, W. W. Zuo, A. Thomas and C. F. J. Faul, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38390–38400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, F. X. Sun, L. N. Li, P. Cui and G. S. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5260 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Konstas, J. W. Taylor, A. W. Thornton, C. M. Doherty, W. X. Lim, T. J. Bastow, D. F. Kennedy, C. D. Wood, B. J. Cox, J. M. Hill, A. J. Hill and M. R. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6639–6642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Li, T. Ben, B. Y. Zhang, Y. Fu and S. L. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2420 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8328–8344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Zhang and S. N. Riduan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2083–2094 RSC .
P. Kaur, J. T. Hupp and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 819–835 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dawson, A. I. Cooper and D. J. Adams, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 530–563 CrossRef CAS .
T. Q. Ma, E. A. Kapustin, S. X. Yin, L. Liang, Z. Y. Zhou, J. Niu, L. H. Li, Y. Y. Wang, J. Su, J. Li, X. G. Wang, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, J. L. Sun and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2018, 361, 48–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Weckhuysen and J. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7022–7024 RSC .
Y. Li, H. X. Cao and J. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4096–4104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Peng, Z. Huang, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6267–6295 RSC .
M. T. Zhao, K. Yuan, Y. Wang, G. D. Li, J. Guo, L. Gu, W. P. Hu, H. J. Zhao and Z. Y. Tang, Nature, 2016, 539, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, M. Tsujimoto, D. Packwood, N. T. Duong, Y. Nishiyama, K. Kadota, S. Kitagawa and S. Horike, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2602–2609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Pang, T. Y. Zhou, R. R. Liang, Q. Y. Qi and X. Zhao, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3866–3870 RSC .
C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2017, 355, eaal1585 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Han, X. W. Wu, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8277–8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. R. Fang, Z. B. Zhuang, S. Gu, R. B. Kaspar, J. Zheng, J. H. Wang, S. L. Qiu and Y. S. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4503 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, S. S. Tao and D. L. Jiang, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Uribe-Romo, J. R. Hunt, H. Furukawa, C. Klock, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4570–4571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Vyas, M. Vishwakarma, I. Moudrakovski, F. Haase, G. Savasci, C. Ochsenfeld, J. P. Spatz and B. V. Lotsch, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8749–8754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ding, J. Gao, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. G. Song, C. Y. Su and W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19816–19822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Vitaku and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12911–12914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Stegbauer, K. Schwinghammer and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2789–2793 RSC .
F. J. Uribe-Romo, C. J. Doonan, H. Furukawa, K. Oisaki and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11478–11481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M. V. Mane, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19524–19527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. E. Silberstein, T. T. Truong, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16821–16824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Liu, Q. Su, P. Y. Ju, B. X. Guo, H. Zhou, G. H. Li and Q. L. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 664–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Sun, A. Klechikov, C. Moise, M. Prodana, M. Enachescu and A. V. Talyzin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1034–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Ghazi, L. Y. Zhu, H. Wang, A. Naeem, A. M. Khattak, B. Liang, N. A. Khan, Z. X. Wei, L. S. Li and Z. Y. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601250 CrossRef .
A. M. Khattak, Z. A. Ghazi, B. Liang, N. A. Khan, A. Iqbal, L. S. Li and Z. Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16312–16317 RSC .
L. Y. Bai, S. Z. F. Phua, W. Q. Lim, A. Jana, Z. Luo, H. P. Tham, L. Z. Zhao, Q. Gao and Y. L. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4128–4131 RSC .
Q. R. Fang, J. H. Wang, S. Gu, R. B. Kaspar, Z. B. Zhuang, J. Zheng, H. X. Guo, S. L. Qiu and Y. S. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8352–8355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meri-Bofi, S. Royuela, F. Zamora, M. L. Ruiz-Gonzalez, J. L. Segura, R. Munoz-Olivas and M. J. Mancheno, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17973–17981 RSC .
Y. F. Zeng, R. Y. Zou, Z. Luo, H. C. Zhang, X. Yao, X. Ma, R. Q. Zou and Y. L. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1020–1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Qian, C. X. Yang and X. P. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y. B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. B. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhunia, S. K. Das, R. Jana, S. C. Peter, S. Bhattacharya, M. Addicoat, A. Bhaumik and A. Pradhan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23843–23851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Keller, D. Bessinger, S. Reuter, M. Calik, L. Ascherl, F. C. Hanusch, F. Auras and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8194–8199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dalapati, S. B. Jin, J. Gao, Y. H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17310–17313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kitagawa and R. Matsuda, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2490–2509 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Colson, A. R. Woll, A. Mukherjee, M. P. Levendorf, E. L. Spitler, V. B. Shields, M. G. Spencer, J. Park and W. R. Dichtel, Science, 2011, 332, 228–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. M. Zeng, L. Tang, J. Chen, Y. Zhu, X. X. He and Y. He, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 989–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lai, M. M. Wang, G. M. Zeng, Y. G. Liu, D. L. Huang, C. Zhang, R. Z. Wang, P. Xu, M. Cheng, C. Huang, H. P. Wu and L. Qin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 390, 368–376 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Huang, X. Wang, C. Zhang, G. M. Zeng, Z. W. Peng, J. Zhou, M. Cheng, R. Z. Wang, Z. X. Hu and X. Qin, Chemosphere, 2017, 186, 414–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Berlanga, M. L. Ruiz-Gonzalez, J. M. Gonzalez-Calbet, J. L. G. Fierro, R. Mas-Balleste and F. Zamora, Small, 2011, 7, 1207–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Bisbey and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 533–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Cooper, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1483 RSC .
N. Huang, P. Wang and D. L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16068 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. DeBlase and W. R. Dichtel, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 5297–5305 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
C. Y. Lin, D. T. Zhang, Z. H. Zhao and Z. H. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703646 CrossRef PubMed .
X. H. Liu, C. Z. Guan, D. Wang and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6912–6920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Li, Y. W. Zhu, W. W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B. Y. Han, D. Chen, R. D. Piner, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4359–4363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Spitler, B. T. Koo, J. L. Novotney, J. W. Colson, F. J. Uribe-Romo, G. D. Gutierrez, P. Clancy and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19416–19421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Spitler, J. W. Colson, F. J. Uribe-Romo, A. R. Woll, M. R. Giovino, A. Saldivar and W. R. Dichtel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2623–2627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Medina, V. Werner, F. Auras, R. Tautz, M. Dogru, J. Schuster, S. Linke, M. Doblinger, J. Feldmann, P. Knochel and T. Bein, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4042–4052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Cai, Y. B. Zhang, A. B. Pun, B. He, J. H. Yang, F. M. Toma, I. D. Sharp, O. M. Yaghi, J. Fan, S. R. Zheng, W. G. Zhang and Y. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4693–4700 RSC .
C. R. DeBlase, K. Hernandez-Burgos, K. E. Silberstein, G. G. Rodriguez-Calero, R. P. Bisbey, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Gou, Q. Zhang, Y. L. Wu, Y. J. Zhao, X. F. Shi, X. Fan, L. Z. Huang and G. Lu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39198–39203 RSC .
S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M. V. Mane, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19524–19527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zhao, L. Guo, F. Gandara, Y. H. Ma, Z. Liu, C. H. Zhu, H. Lyu, C. A. Trickett, E. A. Kapustin, O. Terasaki and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13166–13172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Karan, Z. W. Jiang and A. G. Livingston, Science, 2015, 348, 1347–1351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Jimenez-Solomon, Q. L. Song, K. E. Jelfs, M. Munoz-Ibanez and A. G. Livingston, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 760–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Matsuoka, R. Sakamoto, K. Hoshiko, S. Sasaki, H. Masunaga, K. Nagashio and H. Nishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3145–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Feldblyum, C. H. McCreery, S. C. Andrews, T. Kurosawa, E. J. G. Santos, V. Duong, L. Fang, A. L. Ayzner and Z. N. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13894–13897 RSC .
W. Y. Dai, F. Shao, J. Szczerbinski, R. McCaffrey, R. Zenobi, Y. H. Jin, A. D. Schluter and W. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 213–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dey, M. Pal, K. C. Rout, H. S. Kunjattu, A. Das, R. Mukherjee, U. K. Kharul and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13083–13091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Matsumoto, L. Valentino, G. M. Stiehl, H. B. Balch, A. R. Corcos, F. Wang, D. C. Ralph, B. J. Marinas and W. R. Dichtel, Chem, 2018, 4, 308–317 CAS .
D. D. Medina, J. M. Rotter, Y. H. Hu, M. Dogru, V. Werner, F. Auras, J. T. Markiewicz, P. Knochel and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1016–1019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Bisbey, C. R. DeBlase, B. J. Smith and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11433–11436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Berlanga, R. Mas-Balleste and F. Zamora, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7976–7978 RSC .
D. N. Bunck and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14952–14955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Peng, Y. Huang, Y. H. Zhu, B. Chen, L. Y. Wang, Z. C. Lai, Z. C. Zhang, M. T. Zhao, C. L. Tan, N. L. Yang, F. W. Shao, Y. Han and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8698–8704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, K. Zhang and T. Tsuru, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8433–8436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Y. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cote, H. M. El-Kaderi, H. Furukawa, J. R. Hunt and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12914–12915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Bergin, V. Nicolosi, P. V. Streich, S. Giordani, Z. Y. Sun, A. H. Windle, P. Ryan, N. P. P. Niraj, Z. T. T. Wang, L. Carpenter, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland, J. P. Hamilton and J. N. Coleman, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1876–1881 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C. D. Wood, H. Niu, J. T. A. Jones, Y. Z. Khimyak and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7710–7720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, S. Kandambeth, B. P. Biswal, B. Lukose, S. M. Kunjir, M. Chaudhary, R. Babarao, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17853–17861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Biswal, S. Chandra, S. Kandambeth, B. Lukose, T. Heine and R. Banerjeet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5328–5331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Q. Y. Wang, P. P. Shao, Y. Z. Han, X. Gao, L. Ma, S. Yuan, X. J. Ma, J. W. Zhou, X. Feng and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4258–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Mu, J. Zhan, X. M. Feng, B. H. Yuan, S. L. Qiu, L. Song and Y. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23017–23026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Qu, X. M. Xu, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Li, W. Y. Zha, S. W. Wen, H. L. Xie and J. X. Wang, React. Funct. Polym., 2016, 102, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
N. Huang, X. S. Ding, J. Kim, H. Ihee and D. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8704–8707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ascherl, T. Sick, J. T. Margraf, S. H. Lapidus, M. Calik, C. Hettstedt, K. Karaghiosoff, M. Doblinger, T. Clark, K. W. Chapman, F. Auras and T. Bein, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 310–316 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Khayum, S. Kandambeth, S. Mitra, S. B. Nair, A. Das, S. S. Nagane, R. Mukherjee and R. Banerjee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15604–15608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Thapaliya, B. Captain and F. M. Raymo, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 3973–3981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, G. N. Guo, H. Y. Sheng, S. L. Qin, B. W. Wang, D. D. Han, T. T. Li, D. Yang and A. G. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3823–3830 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Cook, Y. R. Zheng and P. J. Stang, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 734–777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kahveci, T. Islamoglu, G. A. Shar, R. Ding and H. M. El-Kaderi, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1524–1527 RSC .
T. Y. Zhou, F. Lin, Z. T. Li and X. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 7745–7752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mitra, S. Kandambeth, B. P. Biswal, M. A. Khayum, C. K. Choudhury, M. Mehta, G. Kaur, S. Banerjee, A. Prabhune, S. Verma, S. Roy, U. K. Kharu and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2823–2828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Baek, G. Yun, Y. Kim, D. Kim, R. Hota, I. Hwang, D. Xu, Y. H. Ko, G. H. Gu, J. H. Suh, C. G. Park, B. J. Sung and K. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6523–6528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Smith, L. R. Parent, A. C. Overholts, P. A. Beaucage, R. P. Bisbey, A. D. Chavez, N. Hwang, C. Park, A. M. Evans, N. C. Gianneschi and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 58–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Das, T. Skorjanc, S. K. Sharma, F. Gandara, M. Lusi, D. S. S. Rao, S. Vimala, S. K. Prasad, J. Raya, D. S. Han, R. Jagannathan, J. C. Olsen and A. Trabolsi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9558–9565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhong, Y. D. Deng, W. B. Hu, J. L. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 RSC .
S. Ummartyotin and Y. Infahsaeng, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 55, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Liao, H. G. Wang, M. F. Zhu and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705710 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Gao, S. Y. Gan, H. Y. Li, D. X. Han, F. H. Li, Y. Bao and L. Niu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 275602 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Gerhardt, L. C. Tong, R. Gomez-Bombarelli, Q. Chen, M. P. Marshak, C. J. Galvin, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601488 CrossRef .
G. Pognon, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1340–1348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. W. Wang, H. Yi, X. F. Wang, X. R. Yan and Z. H. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pognon, T. Brousse, L. Demarconnay and D. Belanger, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Comte, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Zha, L. R. Xu, Z. K. Wang, X. G. Li, Q. M. Pan, P. G. Hu and S. B. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17837–17843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Montoro, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, E. Polo, R. Escudero-Cid, M. L. Ruiz-Gonzalez, J. A. R. Navarro, P. Ocon and F. Zamora, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10079–10086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Si, Q. Wei, X. Hong, S. Cai and Y. Cai, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2017, 1, 132–138 CrossRef .
A. K. Mandal, J. Mahmood and J. B. Baek, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 373–391 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Mei, Y. Diao, A. L. Appleton, L. Fang and Z. N. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6724–6746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Segura and N. Martin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1372–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Ding, Y. H. Li, H. Hu, Y. M. Sun, J. G. Wang, C. X. Wang, C. Wang, G. X. Zhang, B. S. Wang, W. Xu and D. Q. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 14614–14618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. V. Bertrand, V. K. Michaelis, T. C. Ong, R. G. Griffin and M. Dinca, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 4923–4928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Poelking, M. Tietze, C. Elschner, S. Olthof, D. Hertel, B. Baumeier, F. Wurthner, K. Meerholz, K. Leo and D. Andrienko, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 434–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mishra and P. Bauerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Liu, C. C. Chen, Z. R. Hong, J. Gao, Y. Yang, H. P. Zhou, L. T. Dou, G. Li and Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3 Search PubMed .
D. D. Medina, M. L. Petrus, A. N. Jumabekov, J. T. Margraf, S. Weinberger, J. M. Rotter, T. Clark and T. Bein, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2706–2713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Braga and G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1473–1486 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dinelli, M. Murgia, P. Levy, M. Cavallini, F. Biscarini and D. M. de Leeuw, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 116802 CrossRef .
B. Sun, C. H. Zhu, Y. Liu, C. Wang, L. J. Wan and D. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4367–4374 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Ben-Sasson and N. Tessler, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4729–4733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Haszeldine, Science, 2009, 325, 1647–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Miller, D. R. Dreyer, C. W. Bielawski, D. R. Paul and B. D. Freeman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4662–4711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Duan, W. Q. Jin and S. Kitagawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 332, 48–74 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, Y. Y. Wei, L. B. Li, T. Zhang, H. H. Wang, J. Xue, L. X. Ding, S. Q. Wang, J. Caro and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 155 CrossRef PubMed .
X. R. Wang, C. L. Chi, K. Zhang, Y. H. Qian, K. M. Gupta, Z. X. Kang, J. W. Jiang and D. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14460 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zhang, J. A. Schott, Y. C. Li, W. C. Zhan, S. M. Mahurin, K. Nelson, X. G. Sun, M. P. Paranthaman and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603797 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16018 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Koenig, L. D. Wang, J. Pellegrino and J. S. Bunch, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 728–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Chen, C. C. Shih, Y. J. Fu, S. H. Huang, C. C. Hu, K. R. Lee and J. Y. Lai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 2781–2789 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Cui, K. J. Chen, H. B. Xing, Q. W. Yang, R. Krishna, Z. B. Bao, H. Wu, W. Zhou, X. L. Dong, Y. Han, B. Li, Q. L. Ren, M. J. Zaworotko and B. L. Chen, Science, 2016, 353, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cadiau, K. Adil, P. M. Bhatt, Y. Belmabkhout and M. Eddaoudi, Science, 2016, 353, 137–140 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rodenas, I. Luz, G. Prieto, B. Seoane, H. Miro, A. Corma, F. Kapteijn, F. X. L. I. Xamena and J. Gascon, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 48–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Yao and H. T. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4470–4493 RSC .
Z. X. Kang, M. Xue, L. L. Fan, L. Huang, L. J. Guo, G. Y. Wei, B. L. Chen and S. L. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4053–4060 RSC .
Z. P. Lai, G. Bonilla, I. Diaz, J. G. Nery, K. Sujaoti, M. A. Amat, E. Kokkoli, O. Terasaki, R. W. Thompson, M. Tsapatsis and D. G. Vlachos, Science, 2003, 300, 456–460 CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, X. Feng, H. W. Li, Y. F. Chen, J. S. Zhao, S. Wang, L. Wang and B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4259–4263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, B. P. Biswal, H. D. Chaudhari, K. C. Rout, H. S. Kunjattu, S. Mitra, S. Karak, A. Das, R. Mukherjee, U. K. Kharul and R. Banerjee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603945 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhang, Z. J. He, K. M. Gupta and J. W. Jiang, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2017, 3, 735–743 RSC .
L. Valentino, M. Matsumoto, W. R. Dichtel and B. J. Marinas, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 14352–14359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Fan, J. H. Gu, H. Meng, A. Knebel and J. Caro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4083–4087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tong, Q. Y. Yang, Q. T. Ma, D. H. Liu and C. L. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 124–131 RSC .
Y. Peng, Y. S. Li, Y. J. Ban, H. Jin, W. M. Jiao, X. L. Liu and W. S. Yang, Science, 2014, 346, 1356–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. N. Song, X. J. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. G. Li, Y. T. Mao, H. J. Ploehn, Y. Bao and M. Yu, Science, 2013, 342, 95–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Kim, H. W. Yoon, S. M. Yoon, B. M. Yoo, B. K. Ahn, Y. H. Cho, H. J. Shin, H. Yang, U. Paik, S. Kwon, J. Y. Choi and H. B. Park, Science, 2013, 342, 91–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Li, J. Sculley and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Peng, G. D. Xu, Z. G. Hu, Y. D. Cheng, C. L. Chi, D. Q. Yuan, H. S. Cheng and D. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18505–18512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Wu, Z. Z. Tian, S. F. Wang, D. D. Peng, L. X. Yang, Y. Z. Wu, Q. P. Xin, H. Wu and Z. Y. Jiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 528, 273–283 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Z. Qiao, Z. Wang, S. Zhao, P. Li, J. Wang and S. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 9167–9174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shan, B. Seoane, E. Rozhko, A. Dikhtiarenko, G. Clet, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 14467–14470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Kang, Y. W. Peng, Y. H. Qian, D. Q. Yuan, M. A. Addicoat, T. Heine, Z. G. Hu, L. Tee, Z. G. Guo and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1277–1285 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Robeson, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 320, 390–400 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bessinger, L. Ascherl, F. Auras and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12035–12042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Rao, Y. Fang, S. De Feyter and D. F. Perepichka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2421–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Chen, L. S. Li, T. Fang and Z. Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5136–5140 RSC .
G. Q. Lin, H. M. Ding, D. Q. Yuan, B. S. Wang and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3302–3305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, B. Aguila, J. Perman, L. D. Earl, C. W. Abney, Y. C. Cheng, H. Wei, N. Nguyen, L. Wojtas and S. Q. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2786–2793 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Q. Gao, J. F. Wang, Y. F. Chen, Z. H. Chen, H. S. Xu, W. Tang, K. Leng, G. H. Ning, J. S. Wu, Q. H. Xu, S. Y. Quek, Y. X. Lu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2335 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Joarder, A. V. Desai, P. Samanta, S. Mukherjee and S. K. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 965–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wollin and H. H. Dieter, Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2005, 49, 18–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Wyman, M. P. Serve, D. W. Hobson, L. H. Lee and D. E. Uddin, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, 1992, 37, 313–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Das, B. P. Biswal, S. Kandambeth, V. Venkatesh, G. Kaur, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, S. Verma and R. Banerjee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3931–3939 RSC .
C. L. Zhang, S. M. Zhang, Y. H. Yan, F. Xia, A. N. Huang and Y. Z. Xian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13415–13421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Wang, M. M. Kang, S. M. Sun, Q. Liu, Z. H. Zhang and S. M. Fang, Chin. J. Chem., 2014, 32, 838–843 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Dirks and N. A. Pierce, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 15275–15278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Yadav, A. Kumar, N. J. Park, K. J. Kong and J. O. Baeg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9413–9418 RSC .
C. S. Diercks, S. Lin, N. Komienko, E. A. Kapustin, E. M. Nichols, C. H. Zhu, Y. B. Zhao, C. J. Chang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1116–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sick, A. G. Hufnagel, J. Kampmann, I. Kondofersky, M. Calik, J. M. Rotter, A. Evans, M. Doblinger, S. Herbert, K. Peters, D. Bohm, P. Knochel, D. D. Medina, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2085–2092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Horcajada, T. Chalati, C. Serre, B. Gillet, C. Sebrie, T. Baati, J. F. Eubank, D. Heurtaux, P. Clayette, C. Kreuz, J. S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, V. Marsaud, P. N. Bories, L. Cynober, S. Gil, G. Ferey, P. Couvreur and R. Gref, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 172–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Alhmoud, B. Delalat, R. Elnathan, A. Cifuentes-Rius, A. Chaix, M. L. Rogers, J. O. Durand and N. H. Voelcker, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1137–1145 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lohse, T. Stassin, G. Naudin, S. Wuttke, R. Ameloot, D. De Vos, D. D. Medina and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 626–631 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, J. Gao and D. L. Jiang, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 905–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Liang, A. Y. Park and J. L. Guan, Nat. Protoc., 2007, 2, 329–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. S. Angelatos and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 848–858 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, S. Kowarik, F. Schreiber, M. Paulus, M. Tolan, C. Sternemann, F. Evers, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15118–15119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Hoffmann, G. Zaiats, I. Wappes and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9767–9774 CrossRef .
W. C. Zhou, S. Begum, Z. B. Wang, P. Krolla, D. Wagner, S. Brase, C. Woll and M. Tsotsalas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1528–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Goto, H. Sato, S. Shinkai and K. Sada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14354–14355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Zhao, Y. X. Wang, Q. L. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, J. F. Ping, Z. C. Zhang, Q. P. Lu, Y. F. Yu, H. Xu, Y. L. Zhao and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7372–7378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Carrot, S. Diamanti, M. Manuszak, B. Charleux and I. P. Vairon, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 4294–4301 CrossRef CAS .
G. Moad, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1079–1131 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Gunasinghe, D. G. Reuven, K. Suggs and X. Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3048–3052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. He, F. Liu, C. Stevens, M. A. Brady, S. Cai, C. Wang, T. P. Russell, T. W. Tan and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5090–5095 RSC .
D. B. Hu, X. X. Yang, C. Li, R. N. Liu, Z. H. Yao, H. Hu, S. N. G. Corder, J. N. Chen, Z. P. Sun, M. K. Liu and Q. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1471 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Zhang, J. Q. Wang, Y. G. Lin, Y. L. Si, C. Huang, J. Yang, B. Huang and W. Li, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 865–871 CrossRef .
M. Chen, P. Xu, G. M. Zeng, C. P. Yang, D. L. Huang and J. C. Zhang, Biotechnol. Adv., 2015, 33, 745–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Ren, G. M. Zeng, L. Tang, J. J. Wang, J. Wan, Y. N. Liu, J. F. Yu, H. Yi, S. J. Ye and R. Deng, Sci. Total Environ, 2018, 610, 1154–1163 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cheng, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, C. Lai, P. Xu, C. Zhang and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 582–598 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Guo, Z. W. Peng, D. L. Huang, P. Xu, G. M. Zeng, S. Zhou, X. M. Gong, M. Cheng, R. Deng, H. Yi, H. Luo, X. L. Yan and T. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 347, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hu, D. L. Huang, G. M. Zeng, M. Cheng, X. M. Gong, R. Z. Wang, W. J. Xue, Z. X. Hu and Y. N. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 338, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Huang, L. S. Liu, G. M. Zeng, P. Xu, C. Huang, L. J. Deng, R. Z. Wang and J. Wan, Chemosphere, 2017, 174, 545–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Bao, H. Wang, W. C. Zhang, Z. C. Xie and T. Fang, Environ. Pollut., 2016, 219, 696–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wan, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, L. Hu, P. Xu, C. Huang, R. Deng, W. J. Xue, C. Lai, C. Y. Zhou, K. X. Zheng, X. Y. Ren and X. M. Gong, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 343, 332–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. Lai, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, C. P. Yang, Y. Wang, Y. Y. Zhou and M. Cheng, Water Res., 2016, 95, 103–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, D. L. Huang, Y. G. Liu, Z. W. Peng, G. M. Zeng, P. Xu, M. Cheng, R. Z. Wang and J. Wan, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2018, 38, 455–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yi, D. Huang, L. Qin, G. Zeng, C. Lai, M. Cheng, S. Ye, B. Song, X. Ren and X. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 408–424 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Huang, Z. X. Hu, Z. W. Peng, G. M. Zeng, G. M. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Cheng, J. Wan, X. Wang and X. Qin, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 210, 191–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Huang, W. J. Xue, G. M. Zeng, J. Wan, G. M. Chen, C. Huang, C. Zhang, M. Cheng and P. A. Xu, Water Res., 2016, 106, 15–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Huang, X. Qin, Z. W. Peng, Y. G. Liu, X. M. Gong, G. M. Zeng, C. Huang, M. Cheng, W. J. Xue, X. Wang and Z. X. Hu, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2018, 153, 229–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Xue, D. L. Huang, G. M. Zeng, J. Wan, C. Zhang, R. Xu, M. Cheng and R. Deng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 341, 381–389 CrossRef PubMed .
K. X. Yao, Y. L. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. F. Zhao and Y. Ding, Carbon, 2017, 122, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Y. Liu, R. Krishna, Y. Yu, Y. Cui, S. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Song and Z. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26678–26686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Berrocal, J. Teyssandier, O. J. G. M. Goor, S. De Feyter and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3372–3378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Zhan and Y. Tian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 688–696 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hadad, X. X. Ke, M. Carraro, A. Sartorel, C. Bittencourt, G. Van Tendeloo, M. Bonchio, M. Quintana and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 885–887 RSC .
C. Qian, S. Q. Xu, G. F. Jiang, T. G. Zhan and X. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 17784–17789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Zhou, S. Q. Xu, Q. Wen, Z. F. Pang and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15885–15888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qian, Q. Y. Qi, G. F. Jiang, F. Z. Cui, Y. Tian and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6736–6743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Mo, X. H. Liu and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11694–11700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Xu, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, C. L. Feng, S. Hu, M. H. Zhao, C. Lai, Z. Wei, C. Huang, G. X. Xie and Z. F. Liu, Sci. Total Environ, 2012, 424, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Tang, G. M. Zeng, J. L. Gong, J. Liang, P. Xu, C. Zhang and B. B. Huang, Sci. Total Environ, 2014, 468, 1014–1027 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Qian, C. Dai, C. X. Yang and X. P. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24999–25005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Fu, S. Das, G. L. Xing, T. Ben, V. Valtchev and S. L. Qiu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7673–7680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Jiang, X. Z. Yuan, G. M. Zeng, Z. B. Wu, J. Liang, X. H. Chen, L. J. Leng, H. Wang and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 715–725 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhou, C. Lai, D. L. Huang, G. M. Zeng, C. Zhang, M. Cheng, L. Hu, J. Wan, W. P. Xiong, M. Wen, X. F. Wen and L. Qin, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, P. Xu, M. Chen, G. Zeng, C. Zhang, C. Zhou, Y. Yang, D. Huang, C. Lai, M. Cheng, L. Hu, W. Xiong, H. Guo and M. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15503–15516 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, C. Lai, P. Xu, G. Zeng, D. Huang, Z. Li, C. Zhang, M. Cheng, L. Hu, J. Wan, F. Chen, W. Xiong and R. Deng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6941–6949 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhou, C. Lai, C. Zhang, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, M. Cheng, L. Hu, W. P. Xiong, M. Chen, J. J. Wang, Y. Yang and L. B. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 6–18 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Such, A. P. R. Johnston and F. Caruso, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 19–29 RSC .
S. Wuttke, D. D. Medina, J. M. Rotter, S. Begum, T. Stassin, R. Ameloot, M. Oschatz and M. Tsotsalas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801545 CrossRef .
H. Y. Zhao, Z. Jin, H. M. Su, X. F. Jing, F. X. Sun and G. S. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6389–6391 RSC .
M. Tsotsalas, J. Liu, B. Tettmann, S. Grosjean, A. Shahnas, Z. Wang, C. Azucena, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, J. Lahann, J. Overhage, S. Brase, H. Gliemann and C. Woll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contribute equally to this article.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Han Wang
	Han Wang received her ME from the Chinese Academy of Science in 2016. Currently, she is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Guangming Zeng in the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, China. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional covalent organic materials in photocatalysis and biosensors.

Zhuotong Zeng
	Zhuotong Zeng, BM and MM, graduated from Xiangya Medical College of Central South University in July 2012. He engaged in the study of mouse models and drosophila models of Parkinson disease during his Masters degree in the State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics. He has been working since September 2012 as a medical PhD candidate on clinical and experimental research of systemic sclerosis and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of dermatosis at the Dermatological Department of the Second Xiangya Hospital, under Professor Xiao Rong's supervision.

From left to right (first row): Dr Yang Liu, Dr Shujing Ye, Dr Huan Yi, Dr Lei Qin and Dr Danni Jiang (second row): Dr Xiaoya Ren, Professor Piao Xu, Professor Danlian Huang, Professor Lin Tang, Professor Cui Lai and Professor Wangwang Tang
	

Lianshan Li
	Lianshan Li received his PhD from Peking University in 2010. He then did his postdoctoral research in the Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, on conjugated polymer research. He joined the Faculty of the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST), China, as an associate professor in 2012. His current research activities are related to membrane separation, including separation of large molecules from organic solvents, miscible organic solvent separation or ion separation.

Guangming Zeng
	Prof. Guangming Zeng has taught courses and performed research on Environmental Science and Health at Hunan University since 1988. He has been the Head of the School of Environmental Science and Engineering since 1994 at the same University. He is one of the 2017 Highly Cited Researchers in the world issued by Clarivate Analytics. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional nanomaterials in the environment and energy field.

Rong Xiao
	Professor Rong Xiao has been engaged in clinical work since 1987 at the Second Xiangya Hospital, which is the best hospital in Hunan Province of 60 million people. In 2008, he was named the Chinese Outstanding Young Dermatologist. In the past decade, he mainly focused on the epigenetics pathogenesis of scleroderma and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of dermatosis. His honors include the 2017 National Science and Technology Progress Award of China (the second Award, ranked third).

Zhiyong Tang
	Prof. Zhiyong Tang obtained his PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2000 under the direction of Prof. Erkang Wang. After finishing his postdoctoral training at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology and the University of Michigan, he returned to China and took a position as a professor at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology at the end of 2006. His main research interests are focused on the preparation, assembly and application of functional nanomaterials in the environmental and energy field.

 	Fig. 1  Selected examples of existing COFs with different covalent linkages. (a) Boron-containing COF-5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2005, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Imine-linked COF-300. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (c) Hydrazine-linked COF-42. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (d) Keto–enol-linked COF TpPa-1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (e) Azine-linked Py–azine COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (f) NTU-COF-1 with two types of covalent bonds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Versatile linkages involved in the COF thin films formation comprising boron-based linkage (boroxine and boronate ester), imine-based linkage (for example, hydrazine and β-ketoenamine), triazine-based linkage and Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling.	 

 	Fig. 3  Building blocks bearing catechol, boronic acid, aldehyde, amine and other units involved in the COF thin film formation.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the solvothermal synthesis of COF-5 thin films. (b) X-ray scattering data of COF-5 powder (inset: schematic of randomly oriented COF-5 grains in the powder); GID data from a COF-5 film on SLG/Cu (inset: schematic of oriented COF-5 grains in the film). (c) Top-view SEM image of the COF-5 thin film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Cross-section SEM image of the BDT-COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. (e) Top-view SEM image of the BDT-COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Top-view SEM image of the DAB–TFP COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. (g) Cross-section SEM image of the DAB–TFP COF thin film on ITO-coated glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the interfacial synthesis of Tp–Bpy COF thin films. (b) AA stacking mode of Tp–Bpy COF. (c) SEM image of Tp–Bpy COF thin films. (d) AFM image of Tp–Bpy COF thin films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 


COF-5	SLG/Cu	Solvothermal synthesis	195 ± 20a	
	
53

SLG/SiO2	95 ± 5a
SLG/SiC	73 ± 3a
NiPc–PBBA COF	SLG/SiO2	210 ± 25	Semiconductor devices
HHTP–DPB COF	SLG/SiO2	Solvothermal synthesis	132 ± 18	Fluorescent sensors	
68

ZnPc–Py COF	SLG/SiO2	Solvothermal synthesis	400 ± 12	
	
69

ZnPc–NDI COF	580 ± 84
ZnPc–PPE COF	200 ± 18
ZnPc–DPB COF	296 ± 6
BDT-COF	ITO-coated glass	Solvothermal synthesis	150	
	
70

NiO/ITO-coated glass	150
Au	

SiO2	150
TTF-COF	Si/SiO2	Solvothermal synthesis	150	
	
71

ITO-coated glass	150
COFDAAQ–BTA	3D graphene	Solvothermal synthesis	180	Capacitive electrode	
118

DAAQ–TFP COF	Au	Solvothermal synthesis	200b	Supercapacitors	
72

polyTB	Mother liquor solution/air	Interfacial synthesis	2–200	FETs	
79

BDT-COF	Glass	Room temperature vapor-assisted conversion	300	
	
83

DAB–TFP COF	ITO-coated glass	Solvothermal synthesis	200	
	
73

COF-5	QCM	Synthesis under continuous flow conditions	
	
	
84

COFTFPy–PPDA	SLG	Solvothermal synthesis	50	FETs	
132

LZU-1	Si	Solvothermal synthesis	190	
	
75

BDT-COF	Glass-coated indium-doped ITO	Solvothermal synthesis	200	Semiconductor materials	
129

COF-LZU1	Si–SiO2	Solvothermal synthesis	
	
	
189

Si–APTES	423
Si–OTS	

TT-COF	Glass-substrate	Solvothermal synthesis	200	Photoelectric device	
215

TAPB–PDA COF	PES	Interfacial synthesis	10.4 ± 2.6c	NF membrane	
82 and 152

BDT–ETTA COF	FTO/ITO	Solvothermal synthesis	100–500	Photocathodes	
179

COF-366-Co	HOPG	Solvothermal synthesis	250	Electrocatalyst	
178

Py-tTII COF	ITO transparent electrodes	Solvothermal synthesis	450	NIR photodetector	
165

Tp–Bpy COF	Dichloromethane/water	Interfacial synthesis	160 ± 10	NF membrane-separation	
81

Tp–Azo COF	150 ± 10
Tp–Ttba COF	130 ± 10	

Tp–Tta COF	190 ± 10	

CTF	Polyimide	Solvothermal synthesis	15.1	Photocatalyst	
177

Polyimine network	Air/water	Interfacial synthesis	0.7	
	
80


 	Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of the solvent-assisted exfoliation of COF-43. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanical delamination of TpPa COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) AFM image of TPA-COF nanosheets with the thickness indicated. (b) TEM image of TPA-COF nanosheets with the inset photograph showing the Tyndall effect of the TPA-COF nanosheet suspension. (c) Low-dose high-resolution motion-corrected TEM image of the TPA-COF nanosheets with the insert showing the fast Fourier transform (FFT) characterization. (d) Enlarged HRTEM image with the insert showing the simulated HRTEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM image of TpPa-2 before grinding. (f) HRTEM image of TpPa-2 after grinding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the chemical exfoliation of DaTp to DaTp-CONs. (b) Energy-optimized structure of the cycloadduct of N-hexylmaleimide and anthracene. (c) Optical image of DaTp. (d) SEM image (5 μm) of DaTp with an inserted TEM image (100 nm). (e) SEM image (5 μm) of DaTp-CONs with an inserted TEM image (100 nm). (f) Optical image of DaTp-CONs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Modeling of TpTGCl in eclipsed mode (top-view). (b) Stacking model showing individual layers (side-view). (c–e) TEM images of TpTGCl, TpTGBr, and TpTGI, respectively (inset shows zoomed in images; scale bar = 20 nm). (f–h) AFM images and height profiles of TpTGCl, TpTGBr, and TpTGI, respectively (AFM scale bars represent 200 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 


COF-8	Solvent-assisted exfoliation	4–10	
	
59

CMP-0	Solvent-assisted exfoliation	2.4 ± 0.2a	
	
85

COF-43	Solvent-assisted exfoliation	1.32 ± 0.37	
	
86

TpPa	Mechanical delamination	3–10	
	
93

TpBD
COFBDBA–TPTC	Self-exfoliation method	0.75	
	
105

COFBPDBA–TPTC	0.72
TpTGxb	Self-exfoliation method	2–5	iCONs@Polysulfone (PSF) MMMs	
106

DaTp	Chemical exfoliation	5–6c	
	
100

DAAQ–ECOF	Mechanical delamination	3–5	Cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries	
216

TpASH	Chemical exfoliation	15	Drug delivery	
5

COF (melamine-OPA)	Mechanical delamination	
	TPU/COFs nanocomposites	
96

TPA-COF	Solvent-assisted exfoliation	3.5 ± 0.3	DNA detection	
87

TpBDH	Solvent-assisted exfoliation	1.5–5.1	
	
173

TfpBDH	Chemical sensing
COF-1	Solvent-assisted exfoliation	0.5	Molecular sieving membranes	
88


 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of the PEMFCs with the membrane electrode assemblies (MEA) of RT-COF-1Ac, RT-COF-1AcB, and LiCl@RT-COF-1 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) COFTFPy–PPDA film on SLG/SiO2–Si. (b) Module of the constructed COF/SLG-VFET device (side-view). (c) The relevant levels of materials in the SLG/COF-VFET and the band diagrams in the case of a (d) negative gate voltage and (e) positive gate voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the nanofiltration assembly in the case of the selective molecular separation of nitroaniline (NA) from a mixture of NA and rose bengal (RB) (where, F denotes the feed and P the permeate). (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the M-TpBD thin film (scale bar 10 μm). (c) Schematic representation of the molecular sieving mechanism for M-TpBD. (d) UV-vis spectra related to the selective recovery of NA from a mixture of RB and NA from water. (e) UV-vis spectra of vitamin-B12 (V-B12) and the filtrate water after passing through M-TpBD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) PL quenching of “turn-off” sensing in the solution phase. (b) Selectivity of TfpBDH-CONs towards analytes based on fluorescence quenching. (c) PL enhancement of “turn-on” sensing in the solid phase. (d) Selectivity of TfpBDH-CONs towards analytes based on fluorescence enhancement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Structure of cobalt-porphyrin-based COF backbone. (b) Schematic illustration of electrolysis cell for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
[60]PCBM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester
[70]PCBM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
APH	4-Aminobenzohydrazide
APTs	Active pharmaceutical ingredients
APTES	(3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
ASH	4-Aminosalicylhydrazide
BD	Benzidine
BDBA	1,4-Benzenediboronic acid
BDH	Pyromellitic-N,N/-bisaminoimide
BDT	Benzodithiophene
BDTA	2,6-Dicarbaldehyde-4,8-dioctyloxybenzo[1,2-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene
BDTBA	Benzodithiophene diboronic acid
Boc	
tert-Butyloxycarbonyl
Bpy	2,2′-Bipyridine-5,5′-diamine
BTA	Benzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde
BTPB	1,3,5-Tris[4-phenylboronicacid]benzene
BSA	Bovine serum albumin
CH2Cl2	Dichloromethane
CM	Curcumin
CMP	Conjugated microporous polymers
COFs	Covalent organic frameworks
COMs	COF membranes
CONs	COF nanosheets
dsDNA	Double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid
Da	2,6-Diaminoanthracene
DAAQ	Anthraquinone/2,6-diaminoanthraquinone
DAB	
p-Phenylenediamine
DCM	Dichloromethane
DFT	Density functional theory
DMF	
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DNT	2,6-Dinitrotoluene
DNP	2,6-Dinitrophenol
DPB	4,4′-Diphenylbutadiynebis(boronic acid)
EB	Ethidium bromide
ECOFs	Exfoliated COFs
EIS	Electron impedance spectroscopy
EtOH	Alcohol
FA	Folic acid
FETs	Field-effect transistors
FT-IR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
FTO	Fluorine doped tin oxide
FU	Fluorouracil
g-C3N4	Graphite carbon nitride
GCDC	Galvanostatic charge–discharge cycles
GID	Grazing incidence diffraction
GIWAXS	Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering
Glc	Glycidol
h-BN	Hexagonal boron nitride
HCR	Hybridization chain reaction
HHTP	2,3,6,7,10,11-Hexahydroxytriphenylene
HODs	Hole-only devices
HRTEM	High-resolution TEM
IR	Infrared radiation
ITO	Indium-doped tin oxide
LED	Light-emitting diode
Li+	Lithium-ion
LiTFSI	Lithium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide
LPE	Liquid phase exfoliation
MD	Molecular dynamics
MeOH	Methanol
MMMs	Mixed matrix membranes
MOFs	Metal–organic frameworks
MoS2	Molybdenum disulfide
NBDPA	4-(tert-Butoxycarbonylamino)-aniline
NDI	Naphthalenediimide
NF	Nanofiltration
NiPc	Ni phthalocyanine
NP	2-Nitrophenol
OLEDs	Organic light-emitting diodes
OST	Octadecyltrichlorosilane
Pa	Benzene-1,4-diamine
PBBA	1,4-Phenylenebis(boronic acid)
PBI	Polybenzimidazole
PDA	
p-Phenylenediamine
PDBA	Pyrene-2,7-diboronic acid
PEMFCs	Proton-exchange membrane fuel cells
PES	Poly(ether sulfone)
PL	Photoluminescent
polyTB	Conjugated 2D crystalline network based on TAPA and BDTA subunits
PPDA	
p-Phenylenediamine
PPE	Phenylbis(phenylethynyl)
PI	Polyimide
PSF	Polysulfone
PTCA	Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride
PTSA	
p-Toluenesulfonic acid
PXRD	Powder X-ray diffraction
Py	Pyrene
QCM	Quartz crystal microbalance
RB	Rose bengal
R-WT	Rhodamine WT
SAED	Selected area electron diffraction
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SLG	Single-layer graphene
SURGELs	Surface grafted gels
SURMOF	Surface anchored MOFs
TAPA	Tris(4-aminophenyl)amine
TAPB	1,3,5-Tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene
TAPP	Tetra(4-aminophenyl)porphyrin
TCNQ	Tetracyanoquinodimethane
TD	4,4′-Diamino-p-terphenyl
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TEMPO	(2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxidanyl
TFC	Thin film composite
Tfp	1,3,5-Tris(4-formylphenyl)benzene
TFP/Tp	1,3,5-Triformylphluroglucinol
TFPA	Tris(4-formylphenyl)amine
TFPy	1,3,6,8-Tetrakis(p-formylphenyl)pyrene
TGx (X = Cl, Br, I)	A series of amines
THF	Tetrahydrofuran
TNP	2,4,6-Trinitrophenol
TNT	2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene
TP	Triphenylene–pyrene
TPA-COF	An imine-linked COF based on TAPA and TFPA
TPTC	Triptycene tricatechol
TPU	Thermoplastic polyurethanes
TTF	Tetrathiafulvalene
Ultem	Poly(ether imide)
UV/Vis/NIR	Ultraviolet/visible/near infrared
VFET	Vertical field-effect transistor
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
ZnPc	Zn phthalocyanine
Footnote
† These authors contribute equally to this article.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
