Tuning the luminescence performance of metal–organic frameworks based on d 10 metal ions: from an inherent versatile behaviour to their response to ex ...  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CE01706A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CE01706A
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 8556-8573Tuning the luminescence performance of metal–organic frameworks based on d10 metal ions: from an inherent versatile behaviour to their response to external stimuli

        
          
            Javier 
            Cepeda
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Antonio 
            Rodríguez-Diéguez
          
          
        
      *c
aDepartamento de Química Aplicada, Facultad de Química, Universidad del País Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea, UPV/EHU, 20018, San Sebastián, Spain. E-mail: javier.cepeda@ehu.eus
bDepartamento de Ciencia y Tecnología de Polímeros, Facultad de Química, Universidad del País Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea, UPV/EHU, 20018, San Sebastian, Spain
cDepartamento de Química Inorgánica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Granada, Avenida de la Fuente Nueva S/N, 18071 Granada, Spain. E-mail: antonio5@ugr.es
Received 
      5th August 2016
    , Accepted 22nd September 2016First published on 26th September 2016AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are an interesting class of porous crystalline solids assembled from organic ligands and metal clusters (or simply metal cations), which have shown a rich variety of promising applications. In recent years, these interesting materials have become one of the most actively studied areas in the field of new materials development. One of the most interesting aspects of MOFs is their optical properties and porosity, which may be smartly coupled with the aim of creating multifunctional materials. This work gives an overview of the most significant achievements on this particular theme by bringing an up-to-date collection of work focused on tuning the luminescent emission of MOFs, according to structural changes derived from their porous nature.Javier CepedaJavier Cepeda, born in 1984, earned his degree in Chemistry from the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Spain, in 2007. In 2012, he undertook a scientific visit with Prof. Paul A. Wright's group (Saint Andrews, Scotland), and he finished his doctoral degree in 2013 under the supervision of Dr. Oscar Castillo and Prof. Antonio Luque, achieving the Extraordinary Doctorate Award. Since 2013, he has worked as temporary lecturer at UPV/EHU and, since 2015, he has combined his teaching activities with a postdoctoral research position. His research interests lie in the field of metal–organic frameworks, mainly focusing on their magnetic and luminescence properties.Antonio Rodríguez-DiéguezAntonio Rodríguez-Diéguez completed his PhD studies in Chemistry at the University of Granada in 2005. Since 2008, he has worked as Leading Researcher of different projects funded by the Junta de Andalucía (Spain) and, concurrently, he is Professor at the Inorganic Chemistry Department of the University of Granada. Over this period, his research interests have included crystalline analysis by XR diffraction, the improvement of solvothermal methods, studies of magnetic and luminescent properties and, recently, the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks for therapeutic applications.
1. Introduction
Today, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) do not need to be introduced in all areas related to chemistry and materials science, since they hold a central place in the development of porous functional materials.1 This particular class of coordination polymers has awakened a special interest due to its topological diversity of open structures that obey a well established rational design,2 in addition to a wide set of potential properties originating from their hybrid nature.3 As a consequence, these materials are bringing an important contribution to be applied in some highlighted areas, such as luminescence, gas adsorption, magnetism, drug delivery, and optical storage.4 The above-mentioned design of MOFs is successfully achieved by deconstructing the structures into nodes (metal ions or clusters) and linkers (organic ligands), following the strategy of reticular chemistry.5 In this regard, synthetic conditions often play a significant role in the construction of MOFs, since they direct the binding between the initial constituents into secondary and molecular building blocks (SBUs and MBBs).1b,2a,6 Although they are generally prepared using solvothermal methods, conventional or even novel and less-explored routes are also starting to be employed.7 Hereafter, these SBUs and MBBs govern self-assembling process in a highly ordered and crystalline manner, such that structures contain a uniformly distributed network of voids. Therefore, the selection of linkers plays a main role in directing the topology of the structures. Accordingly, synthetic chemists have devoted much effort to designing novel organic ligands for the preparation of new MOF materials.8 The choice of metal centres is also of importance, since these afford most of the previously mentioned properties and characteristics. Specifically, coordination polymers containing d10 metals, such as Cd2+ or Zn2+, have attracted extensive interest in recent decades, given their ability to render fascinating structures.4a,9 This fact is a consequence of the absence of ligand field constraints, associated with the d10 configuration of these ions, which provides flexible coordination environments that can be adapted to a wide variety of geometries. Hence, they allow fine tuning of the structures and/or topologies. Moreover, the closed-shell configuration also possesses some additional advantages regarding the photoluminescence properties.10 On the one hand, the absence of potential quenching processes derived from d–d transitions permits efficient luminescent emission. On the other hand, the resulting polymers contain excited states of a ligand-centred (LC) and/or a ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) nature, a coexistence that may give access to interesting luminescent emissions.
As we will explain in greater detail during the following sections, two major approaches can be distinguished to tune the luminescence performance of Zn/Cd-based MOFs. The first concerns a change in the luminescence of the neat material when subjected to variations that are inherent to the crystal structure. To start with, it deals with the emission capacity of MOFs in terms of their luminescence lifetime, discerning between the fluorescent and phosphorescent components present in the few examples that report afterglow or long-lasting phosphorescence. Then, it continues with an analysis of how the emission intensity may be promoted or inhibited according to structural features. In particular, varying the excitation wavelength, changing the interpenetration degree, and doping the host materials with lanthanide luminophores are described in detail. Moreover, these parameters may also be coupled with the response of the material according to temperature. The second approach focuses on the influence of external species upon the luminescence behaviour, taking advantage of their porous nature. The next sections are devoted to modifying the colour of the emission by encapsulating lanthanide ions or other luminescent complexes. Selected recognition of ions, solvents, or molecules is developed during the remaining sections, which opens up a route to the construction of multifunctional materials.
Therefore, bearing the above considerations in mind, in this article we perform a detailed discussion of the possibilities offered by Zn/Cd MOFs to be used as luminescent devices for a broad set of applications in the near future. While we will provide the reader with a number of recent studies, we would like to refer to reviews by Allendorf,11 Binnemans,12 Chen,3a Rocha,13 and Müller-Buschbaum14et al. for a comprehensive and more general view on this topic.
2. Structure related inherent tuning
2.1. Fluorescence and phosphorescence behaviour
Afterglow, long-lasting phosphorescence (LLP) and persistent luminescence are highly desired phenomena because they imply luminescence processes with decay times ranging from seconds to hours, after the removal of the excitation source. Thus, materials possessing this property may have an immediate impact in many commercial applications in the fields of traffic signs, light-emitting diodes, flat panel displays, and similar devices,15 as well as in developing chemical sensors, optical recording devices, biological imaging and security systems.16 Luminescent MOFs containing noble metals or lanthanides usually present photoemission lifetimes in the range of hundreds of microseconds (μs) to a few milliseconds (ms), far from the persistent luminescence that requires emission decays of tens of ms. However, a few MOFs with LLP behaviour are starting to emerge. In this line, materials with formulae {[Zn(tipa)Cl]NO3·2DMF}n and {[Cd2(tipa)2Cl4]·6DMF}n (tipa = tri(4-imidazolylphenyl)amine), reported by Yuan et al.,17 are good examples of metal–organic long-lived phosphors. Although both compounds exhibit open architectures, the crystal structures are somewhat different. The first consists of a 3D twofold interpenetrated utp framework, whereas the second originates from the non-interpenetrated packing of 2D kgd networks (Fig. 1). This fact is a consequence of the different secondary building units established in each case, given the tetrahedral and octahedral coordination environments established around the metal centres, probably owing to the size of the metal ions. Despite their different structural features, both compounds show the capacity to entrap iodine molecules (as I3− anions) into their pores. This capacity proceeds via single-crystal to single-crystal transformations that undergo a simple anion-exchange (for the cationic zinc framework) or a more complicated process involving breakage/formation of M–Cl bonds (for the neutral cadmium structure).
 Fig. 1  Compounds {[Zn(tipa)Cl]NO3·2DMF}n and {[Cd2(tipa)2Cl4]·6DMF}n. Molecular structures [(a) and (c)] and structural transformations derived from the adsorption of I3− ions [(b) and (d)]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
More interestingly, these compounds exhibit a temperature-dependent photoluminescent emission consisting of sharp shifts of the single broad emission maxima. In particular, upon cooling the solid samples from 298 to 77 K, the zinc counterpart exhibits a blue shift from 414 nm to 396 nm (Δ = 18 nm), whereas the band at 401 nm for the cadmium compound is red-shifted to 454 nm. These shifts are accompanied by unexpected macroscopic persistent emission at 77 K (lasting ca. 2 seconds), once the UV excitation has been removed, which is perceptible by the naked eye (Fig. 2). It is worth noting that the emission turns from the initial blue to a green afterglow as time passes. Taking into account the similar emissions of both compounds compared with that of the tipa ligand, it is shown that the long-persistent phosphorescent emissions in these MOFs arise from a ligand-centred triplet state, whose emission decay is prolonged through a mechanism of excited-state equilibration.18
 Fig. 2  Temperature-dependent emission for (a) {[Zn(tipa)Cl]NO3·2DMF}n and (b) {[Cd2(tipa)2Cl4]·6DMF}n compounds (λexc = 365 nm). (c) Afterglow evolution of Zn (1) and Cd (2) compounds. (d) Afterglow photographs of zinc (top) and cadmium (bottom) compounds at 77 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Another example of phosphorescent behaviour in MOFs is constituted by two zinc-terephthalate (TPA)-based compounds. Both [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n, and the widely explored MOF-5, show an obvious afterglow emission at room temperature,19 a fact that clearly facilitates their applicability. The [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n is formed from the linkage of paddle-wheel [Zn2(COO)4] dinuclear SBUs, giving rise to 2D layers that are stacked on each other in an offset fashion and in an ABCABC sequence. The resulting architecture shows a 2D → 3D polythreading that preserves 1D channels of 8.7 × 8.7 Å2. The well known MOF-5 was the first robust MOF prepared and is possibly one of the most explored MOFs for many different purposes.20 This presents a 3D cubic architecture built from [Zn4O] clusters arranged into octahedral subunits that are joined by TPA ligands, leading to a microchannel network enclosing a BET surface area of 3900 m2 g−1. Both [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n and MOF-5 present dual-emission fluorescent/phosphorescent behaviour. Fluorescent emissions at 326 and 434 nm are observed with very different quantum yields of 2.25 and 46.27%, respectively. Phosphorescent emissions at 503 and 513 nm (associated lifetimes of ca. 472 and 153 ms) possess much lower quantum yields, according to the inherent weaker intensity at these wavelengths. As a result, green emissions are observed by the naked eye after the removal of UV light (Fig. 3). The distinct photoluminescence features may be ascribed to the different stacking fashions of the ligands and metal clusters present in the MOFs. These results are somewhat surprising, considering the very weak phosphorescence (of ca. 0.5 ms) shown by pure TPA,21 particularly for [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n, with a lifetime enhanced by nearly three orders of magnitude. Such an achievement prompted the authors to analyse the electronic structure of [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n by periodic density functional theory (PDFT). According to the electron-density distribution of the HOMO and LUMO (highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals) upon the [Zn2(COO)4] cluster and the TPA ligand, respectively, it is concluded that the photoluminescence performance occurs via MLCT (metal to ligand charge transfer). Furthermore, it is also deduced that the long afterglow observed possesses a dual origin: (i) the participation of the zinc ion in the frontier orbital distribution promotes spin–orbit coupling that improves the electron–hole separation time during the charge transfer process; (ii) the non-radiative losses are minimised by the coordination of the TPA ligand, which may increase the intersystem crossing between the singlet and triplet excited states.
 Fig. 3  Normalised photoluminescence spectra of (a) [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n and (b) MOF-5. (c) Time-resolved phosphorescence decay curves and (d) photographs of the afterglow at different times. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similar fluorescent/phosphorescent behaviour has been recently described for a [Zn(μ-6ani)2]n (where 6ani = 6-aminonicotinate) compound that crystallizes in a chiral space group in the form of a racemic twin.22 Its crystal structure consists of stacked neutral layers of the Shubnikov sql topology established from the coordination of four 6ani ligands to almost tetrahedral zinc atoms. Within the ABAB sequential packing, the main structural features to be highlighted are the strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding and π–π interactions, which may significantly affect the photoluminescent properties. This compound exhibits an intense and broad emission band centred at 380 nm and a shoulder at 461 nm that slowly decays up to 650 nm. This feature endorses the material with a time-dependent multicoloured emission that has been carefully characterized by lifetime decay curves and TRES (time-resolved emission spectra) experiments (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (a) Experimental and theoretical excitation and emission spectra of [Zn(μ-6ani)2]n showing the molecular orbitals involved in the charge transfer mechanisms; (b) micro-PL images taken at different excitation lines; (c) time-resolved emission spectra at 10 K of [Zn(μ-6ani)2]n at different delays (λex = 333 nm). Excitation band pass = 5 nm, emission band pass = 2.5. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It can be seen that, at 10 K, the initial bright blue emission (with very short lifetimes of 6–8 ns) turns immediately (after 5 ms) into a pale green light that lasts for more than two seconds (associated lifetimes of 0.70–1.11 s). A further inspection of the electronic levels by TD-DFT (time-dependent DFT) sheds light on the photoluminescence performance, indicating that fluorescence arises from the ligand-centred molecular orbitals, whereas the phosphorescence mainly involves an LMCT mechanism.
2.2. Influence of the excitation wavelength
The hybrid nature of MOFs, which facilitates a rational design through an ever increasing number of synthetic procedures, stands as a clear advantage over other materials with respect to exhibiting a second harmonic generation (SHG). This is a property of practical importance in many areas, such as the laser industry and optoelectronic technologies.23 Bearing in mind that a SHG requires an acentric structure, the most direct way to obtain SHG-active MOFs lies in the use of asymmetrical or even chiral ligands. Among others, V-shaped ligands (in which the two benzene rings are not coplanar) may induce helicity or a flexuous nature in the polymeric chains and therefore the homochiral MOFs. This is the case with the homochiral {[Zn(L1)(oba)]·H2O}n compound [L1 = 1,1′-oxybis(3,5-dipyridine-benzene), oba = 4,4′-oxybis(benzoate)],24 which is based on double-stranded 65 helical chains established from the coordination of carboxylate groups of the oba ligands and the pyridine rings of the L1 ligand. The overall 3D architecture, grown by further connection of each helix to six neighbouring ones through the oba anions, can be regarded as an open qtz topological network, which crystallizes as a triply interpenetrated framework that still leaves helical channels. Preliminary studies on the powdered sample indicate that it is SHG-active, with an efficiency of approximately 0.8 times that of urea. Moreover, as measured by solid-state circular dichroism, the compound exhibits an obvious positive Cotton effect, which suggests a same-handed conformation for the entire bulk sample. Under excitation at 380 nm, this compound exhibits an emission band peaking at 460 nm, which is remarkably red-shifted with respect to the intraligand fluorescent emission (of π*–π nature) of L1.25
An alternative way to achieve tuneable luminescence in terms of structural design, although very uncommonly achieved, deals with the coordination of metal centres with symmetrical ligands in a non-centrosymmetric manner to render acentric MOFs. The MOF with formula [Zn(BPHY)(SA)]n (BPHY = 1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)hydrazine, SA = succinate), reported by Guo et al.,26 is a good example.
Within the crystal structure, each ZnII ion is surrounded by two N atoms from two μ-BPHY and two O atoms from two μ-SA ligands, giving a distorted tetrahedral polar ZnO2N2 chromophore. These polar centres are connected by BPHY and SA ligands, both with asymmetrical conformations, to afford a 3D acentric MOF with a 6·6·6·6·6(2) topology (Fig. 5). The large SHG response (with a second-order susceptibility of 4.14 pm V−1 (9.88 × 10−9 esu)) is stronger than many acentric MOFs constructed from chiral ligands. This property is attributed mainly to the electronic asymmetry, enhanced by a synergistic effect of the donor–acceptor system of –NHPy groups with polarization of the polar ZnO2N2 units.27 When this MOF is excited with variable light in the range 325–340 nm, it exhibits tunable UV-to-vis photoluminescence from 390 to 445 nm. Specifically, the shift of the excitation light towards longer wavelengths brings a lower emission of the 390 nm maximum and, simultaneously, an increase in the 445 nm peak (Fig. 6). The theoretical evaluation of the density of states (DOS) shows that the top of the valence band are dominated by a mixture of p–π orbitals on the carboxylate and Py groups of the ligands, whereas the bottom of the conduction band is established by p–π* antibonding orbitals. Therefore, it is reasonable to attribute the emission peaks at 390 and 445 nm to the π–π* transition of BPHY and intergroup π–π* transitions between SA and BPHY, respectively.
 Fig. 5  (a) Conformations of ligands by their coordination to the metal atom and (b) dipoles in the framework in different views in [Zn(BPHY)(SA)]n. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 6  Solid-state emission spectra of [Zn(BPHY)(SA)]n at variable excitation wavelengths. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
An obvious tuneable luminescence, achieved by varying the excitation wavelength, was also observed for an acylamide-based 3-fold interpenetrated MOF, namely {[Zn2(L2)(obb)2]·2DMF·2H2O}n [where obb = 4,4′-oxybis(benzoate), L2 = N1,N4-di(pyridin-4-yl)terephthalamide].28 In spite of the flexible character of both ligands, the architecture of this MOF obeys a well-known strategy for obtaining 3D frameworks exhibiting open channels, in which a dicarboxylate ligand is combined with a pyridyl-based linker to give rise to α-Po networks (pcu topology). In this sense, the crystal structure is formed from 2D layers established by the coordination of the largely folded obb dicarboxylate ligands to the zinc atoms, which in turn form dinuclear building units. Hereafter, L2 ligands act as pillaring linkers among the layers, following a bridging bidentate coordination mode, in such a way that an overall 3D backbone is achieved. Due to the interpenetration, the huge hypothetical void is substantially reduced to 22.3% of the cell volume, despite which the framework exhibits selective adsorption of CO2 molecules over other gas guests (CO, CH4, and N2). The selectivity is well explained according to the high affinity of the acylamide functional groups of L2 ligands towards the CO2 molecules (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Triply interpenetrated 3D framework of {[Zn2(L2)(obb)2]·2DMF·2H2O}n MOF. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Under monochromatic excitation at 285 nm, the material emits with a maximum centred at around 431 nm, possibly derived from the acylamide groups and ether acid, given that both of them are luminous. Nonetheless, under 350 nm light irradiation, an additional emission at 494 nm gradually gains intensity, along with an increase in the excitation wavelength, an effect that is accompanied by an almost proportional decrease in the 431 nm peak. Moreover, this peak suffers a blue-shift of 24 nm, since it eventually appears at 468 nm (Fig. 8). This luminescence evolution is translated to an obvious colour change in the CIE chromaticity diagram from an initial light blue to the final blue, except for the green luminescence observed at a λexc of 320 nm.
 Fig. 8  Evolution of the emission of {[Zn2(L2)(obb)2]·2DMF·2H2O}n according to the excitation wavelength. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The doubly interpenetrated MOFs resulting from the coordination of biphenyldicarboxylate (bpdc) and 1,4-bis(4-pyridyl)-2,3-diaza-1,3-butadiene (bpdb) ligands to zinc(II) atoms, namely {[Zn3(μ4-bpdc)(μ-bpdb)]·5DMF}n and {[Zn2(μ4-bpdc)2(μ-bpdb)]·7DMF}n, are also samples of a tuneable emissive response according to variable excitation wavelengths.29 Both crystal structures follow the above-mentioned self-assembling pattern that leads to pcu topological porous frameworks. The only difference between them concerns the SBUs formed by the dicarboxylic ligand, which correspond to trimeric and dimeric cores for the first and second compounds, respectively. Bulk samples of these compounds exhibit closely related emission spectra in good agreement with their almost identical composition. Under excitation at 257 nm, both samples emit three main peaks centred at 420, 485, and 529 nm, which may correspond to bpdb and bpdc intraligand charge transfer or the LMCT mechanism. Unexpectedly, these emissions become almost negligible under excitation at 344 nm, but are again observed, with slight shifts with regard to the initial spectrum, when the sample is excited at 385 nm (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Emission spectra of {[Zn3(μ4-bpdc)(μ-bpdb)]·5DMF}n and {[Zn2(μ4-bpdc)2(μ-bpdb)]·7DMF}n according to the excitation wavelength. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.3. Dependence of the interpenetration degree
Although a direct relationship between the interpenetration phenomenon and the luminescence properties could not be established, mainly owing to the difficulty in controlling the associated structural feature, it has been observed that both phenomena affect each other. Thus, provided that the parameters governing the interpenetration dominate, modulating the emission of the materials would be allowed. In this sense, it must be pointed out that several strategies have already been reported, though success is limited to a few systems. On the one hand, factors such as the concentration of reactants, synthesis temperature, the use of non-conventional synthetic procedures, or the presence of a templating agent in the reaction mixture, proved to be valid.30 Two 2D non-interpenetrated or interpenetrated structures, {[Zn2(L3)(btmbb)(H2O)4]·2H2O}n and [Zn2(L3)(btmbb)2]n [where H4L3 = 5,5′-(1,4-phenylenebis(methylene))bis(oxy)diisophthalic acid and btmbb = 4,4′-bis((1H-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl)methyl)biphenyl], can be obtained by subtly modifying the temperature of the solvothermal reaction.31 It is shown that the variation in non-interpenetrated/interpenetrated structures is due to the conformations of the bis(triazole) ligands and the different spatial orientations of the tetracarboxylate ligands as a consequence of the presence/absence of the two coordination water molecules. This fact imposes different dihedral angles between the side and central aromatic rings of the L3 ligand as well as anti or syn conformations in the bis(triazole) ligands. Accordingly, this leads to a variable aperture in the network that governs the overall packing. The emission maxima of these compounds are observed at 384 and 412 nm, and are broader and red-shifted with regard to the H4L3 (366 with λexc = 280 nm) and btmbb (352 with λexc = 280 nm) ligands (Fig. 10). Therefore, it can be concluded that the LLCT responsible for the emission of these compounds appears to be substantially influenced by the conformation and the accumulation of changes in the ligands.
 Fig. 10  Solid-state emission spectra of non-interpenetrated {[Zn2(L3)(btmbb)(H2O)4]·2H2O}n (1) and interpenetrated [Zn2(L3)(btmbb)2]n (2) compounds. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The modification of organic ligands has been undoubtedly the most effective method to control interpenetration, since slight lengthening or shortening of the linkers are more effective ways to modify the dimensions of the network apertures. In a typical example of structural design, four different bipyridyl ligands are employed to finely tune the [ZnL4(bpy)]n framework [employing the bipyridyl ligands, bipy = 4,4′-bipyridine, bpe = trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene, bpa = 1,2-bis(4-pyridinyl)ethane, bpp = 1,3-bis(4-pyridinyl)propane, L4 = 4,4′-(carbonylimino)dibenzoate].32 The length of the pillar does not directly influence the pore systems of the resulting structures, owing to the different coordination patterns acquired by the ligands. However, it clearly modulates the degree of interpenetration of the frameworks, especially 3-fold, 6-fold, 6-fold, and 2D → 3D polycatenation, following the above-mentioned order. This fact is translated to the luminescence properties of the materials. Two of the four compounds exhibit very weak emission, lower than that of the ligand, whereas the remaining two compounds show an emission enhancement and small red shifts.
A similar emission shift is also observed for the metal–organic frameworks, {[Zn2(FA)2(bix)2]·3H2O}n and [Zn(FA)(bib)]n [FA = fumarate, bix = 4,4′-bis(imidazol-1-ylmethyl)benzene, bib = 1,4-bis(imidazolyl)butane], reported by Yang and coworkers.33 As a matter of fact, the first compound (with a 4-fold interpenetration) emits an intense emission band at 440 nm (λexc = 365 nm), whereas the second (5-fold interpenetration) gives an emission centred at 420 nm (λexc = 369 nm).
2.4. Doping MOFs with lanthanides
An alternative strategy to endow the light emitted across the entire visible spectrum with high colour purity is to perform a judicious doping of an appropriate host material with luminous lanthanide ions occupying the metal position in the structure. Thereby, the combination of red (Eu3+, Pr3+, Sm3+), green (Tb3+, Er3+), and blue (Tm3+, Ce3+, Dy3+) emissive ions into isostructural ligand-based luminescent MOFs gives access to white-light emission.34 This approach is successfully employed for the heterometallic {[LnOH(H2O)6][Zn2Ln4(4-Htbca)2(4-tbca)8(H2O)12]}n·6nH2O [where LnIII = Eu and Tb] MOF prepared by Liu et al.,35 with bifunctional 4-(1H-tetrazol-5-yl)biphenyl-3-carboxylic acid (4-H2tbca). As inferred from its chemical formula, this compound consists of an anionic backbone, in which ZnN4 and LnO8 chromophores are linked by means of 4-Htbca and 4-tbca linkers, showing four different coordination modes. The resulting 2D layers, simplified as (3,6)-connected kgd networks, form octagonal motifs with quadrangle-like cavities, in which cationic [LnOH(H2O)6]2+ complexes and lattice molecules are sited. The solid-state emission spectra of the Eu and Tb counterparts show the characteristic intra-ionic transitions, although a broad band centred at 400 nm (blue emission), attributed to the π* → π ligand, is also observed in the terbium counterpart. Therefore, it was found that the overall colour of the Tb host doped with an Eu3+-based complex could be tuned from green to red, crossing the white light region, simply by varying the ratio of the doping ion from 0.4–1.5 mol%. Fortunately, a material was achieved (0.5% of Eu3+@Tb) whose emission falls within the CIE coordinates (0.330, 0.328), with a quantum yield of 11.4%, which can be considered as a very promising result. The main reason for such a broad variation in the emission colour seems to lie with a Tb3+-to-Eu3+ energy transfer, confirmed by luminescence decay measurements.
3. Tuning by external modification
3.1. Encapsulation of lanthanide(III) ions in MOFs
When tuning the luminescence properties of a poorly emissive MOF material in order to achieve an increase in its emission brightness or a change in its colour, a very useful strategy is to encapsulate luminescent molecules or complexes within the structure. Taking into account that this approach relies on the availability of empty pores in MOF structures, the stability of these materials is crucial, especially their stability in air and water, to accomplish post-synthetic modifications.36 In this sense, the encapsulation of lanthanide(III) ions is a very recurrent strategy that occupies a main position in the area of molecular photonics. Their wide employment comes from the inherent photoluminescence properties of these ions, as well as the ease with which they are combined to tune multiband emissions, just by adjusting the stoichiometry of the hetero-lanthanide cocktail.37 This reaction is particularly advantageous for obtaining white-light,38 given the demand for more environmentally friendly, safer and energy-efficient white phosphor materials to be used as white-light-emitting diodes (WLEDs).39 JUC-113 is an appropriate host material that has proven its capacity to foster lanthanide ions.40 Its crystal structure originates from the joining of centrosymmetric [Zn3(COO)6] units by flexible TCPB3− ligands (TCPB3− = 1,3,5-tri(4-carboxyphenoxy)benzene) into double-(6,3)-layers. The packing of these layers by aromatic π⋯π interactions leads to a 3D framework with channels of about 4.0 × 4.0 Å2. The as-synthesized JUC-113 yields a blue emission (owing to the band ranging from 400 to 500 nm), which is attributed to the emission of the organic linker. When single crystals of the compound are immersed in DMF solutions containing TbCl3 or EuCl3 for several hours (1 and 2 represent 5 and 8 h), they load maximum amounts of 9.59 and 5.91% (w/w) of the lanthanides in the JUC-113⊃Tb/Eu, respectively. The encapsulation of Tb and Eu allows their sensitization by the host, in such a way that the emission is modulated to green (λem = 543 nm) and red (λem = 612 nm) light (Fig. 11). Moreover, JUC-113 can be loaded with a mixture of Eu(III) and Tb(III), which allows adjustment of the emission of the resulting JUC-113⊃Ln1 material (with 1.05% Eu and 1.56% Tb), under irradiation at 254 nm, to the CIE chromaticity coordinates (0.3292, 0.3543), which are very close to the pure white light coordinates (0.333, 0.333).
 Fig. 11  (a) CIE chromaticity diagram for JUC-113 (1), JUC-113⊃Tb1 (2) JUC-113⊃Tb2 (3), JUC-113⊃Eu1 (4), JUC-113⊃Eu2 (5), JUC-113⊃Ln1 (6), and JUC-113⊃Ln2 (7) excited at 283 nm. (b) Chromaticity coordinates of JUC-113⊃Ln1 under 254 nm excitation. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Metal-adeninate frameworks (bio-MOFs)41 are appealing candidates for this kind of process because of their permanent microporosity, high surface areas, and chemical stability, due to the presence of basic biomolecular building units. In particular, the so-called bioMOF-1, {(dma)2[Zn8(ad)4(BPDC)6O]·8DMF·11H2O}n (ref. 42) (where ad = adeninate, BPDC = biphenyldicarboxylate, and dma = dimethylammonium), serves as a good platform, in which dma cations can be replaced by lanthanide ions to obtain a material that approaches white-light emission.43 Cation-exchange takes place in the large channels of the 3D crystal structure (described by a pcu topology), which is established by infinite zinc-adeninate columnar SBUs composed of apex-sharing octahedral cages brought together by BPDC linkers (Fig. 12). The emission spectrum of bioMOF-1 presents a broad band covering the 350–550 nm range, with a maximum centred at around 400 nm that originates at the ligands, thus inferring a deep blue colour from the sample. After loading the material with Eu3+ and Tb3+ ions (through corresponding soakings in acetonitrile solutions), the emission spectra of the hybrid Eu3+@bioMOF-1 and Tb3+@bioMOF-1 are dominated by the characteristic narrow emission bands of the lanthanides [579, 590, 614, 647, and 695 nm corresponding to 5D0 → 7FJ (J = 0–4) for Eu3+@bioMOF-1; 490, 544, 583, and 622 nm from 5D0 → 7FJ (J = 6–3) transitions for Tb3+@bioMOF-1]. Yet, the strong emission of neat bioMOF is also remarkable, particularly for the terbium counterpart, given the less effective bioMOF → Ln3+ energy transfer.
 Fig. 12  Crystal structure of bioMOF-1 showing zinc-adeninate columnar SBUs (a) and a view of the 3D framework generated by BPDC linkers (b). Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
In fact, the absolute quantum yield data for these materials confirm the aforementioned hypothesis. The magnitude of this decreases from the parent bioMOF-1 to the hybrid materials, according to the energy transfer efficiency (ηET) between the MOF and the lanthanide (66.5 and 32.4% for Eu3+@bioMOF-1 and Tb3+@bioMOF-1, respectively). Interestingly, both lanthanide ions can be encapsulated simultaneously, in such a way that the purple-reddish and deep blue colours of the hybrid Eu3+@bioMOF-1 and Tb3+@bioMOF-1 materials, respectively, converge into a light pink colour (close to white light with respect to the CIE coordinates).
Similar to the case of zeolites, lanthanide-encapsulated MOFs can be embedded into organic polymers with the aim of preparing thin films. The interest in these materials lies in their easier industrial applicability compared to as-prepared bulk MOFs, as well as their attractive and distinctive properties, for instance in terms of stability. As a consequence, research on luminescent MOF-based thin films opens up a broad development of prospects44 and could be employed for the efficient use of solar energy.12 This is exactly the focus of the work reported by Shen and co-workers, in which thin films of Ln3+@bioMOF-1 are studied.45 In a first attempt, it is observed that the pure bioMOF-1 film shows a red shift in the emission compared to the bulk sample, which changes according to the amount of polymer added for the preparation of the film. Once the encapsulation of the lanthanides takes place in the framework, the emission spectra of Eu3+@bioMOF-1 and Tb3+@bioMOF-1 thin films reveal a less efficient energy transfer from the MOF structure to the lanthanides, with regard to the powder samples. The lower efficiency is probably owing to additional charge transfer processes (non-radiative losses) occurring via the polymeric matrix. A more successful result is obtained by using a thin film derived from a lanthanide-MOF, i.e. a MOF with structural lanthanide ions, [Ln(BPDC)(Ad)] (Ln3+ = Y, Eu, and Tb), which show a much more brilliant emission that can be easily tuned (using the molar proportion of Y0.9Tb0.0999Eu0.0001) to obtain a very promising thin film with white-light emission [CIE coordinates of (0.3000, 0.2951)] but a somewhat low quantum yield (8.4%).
Compound of formula {[Zn3(L5)(H2O)2]·3DMF·7H2O}n [L5 being 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexakis(3-carboxyphenyloxymethylene)benzene], is a highly porous material with huge voids (of ≈6800 Å3) that allow loading of the widely used anticancer drug, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).47 In detail, its structure consists of an intricate 3D framework based on trinuclear [Zn3(CO2)6] clusters established from the coordination of L5 ligands to the metal atoms, which are eventually joined into interconnected [Zn3L5]4 cubic cages with square windows of about 11 × 11 Å2. Once the evacuated framework of {[Zn3(L5)(H2O)2]·3DMF·7H2O}n reaches the maximum uptake (0.369 mg of 5-FU per 1 mg of compound), the drug is progressively released over 72 h. This behaviour is a result of the hydrogen bonding and π⋯π interactions established between the drug and the walls of the framework, and is highly desirable with respect to drug-delivery nanocarriers.48 In any case, with regard to the main aspect of this work, single EuIII and TbIII, as well as double EuIII/TbIII encapsulations, were performed by soaking fresh samples of {[Zn3(L5)(H2O)2]·3DMF·7H2O}n in DMF solutions containing chloride salts of the lanthanides with the following molar ratios: Eu1/Tb0, Eu0.8/Tb0.2, Eu0.7/Tb0.3, Eu0.6/Tb0.4, Eu0.3/Tb0.7, and Eu0/Tb1 (total: 1 mmol in 5 mL DMF). Under irradiation at 365 nm, the samples doped with EuIII or TbIII emit their respective red and green colours, whereas the variation in the molar ratios leads to a modulation of the colour (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  (a) Images of EuIII/TbIII-doped samples of {[Zn3(L5)(H2O)2]·3DMF·7H2O}n (from top to bottom: Eu1/Tb0, Eu0.8/Tb0.2, Eu0.7/Tb0.3, Eu0.6/Tb0.4, Eu0.3/Tb0.7, and Eu0/Tb1). (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Additionally, analysis of the emission decay curves reveals that lifetimes are somewhat long for the samples, in which a single lanthanide(III) is inserted (τ1 = 506.0354 and τ2 = 1143.3214 ms for europium containing compound; τ1 = 827.8168 and τ2 = 1250.0443 ms for terbium containing compound), whereas shorter lifetimes are measured for co-doped samples, suggesting charge transfer between the host structure and the lanthanide ions.
3.2. Encapsulation of luminescent complexes
While filling the MOF materials with lanthanide ions at various concentrations has been consolidated as a good approach for developing white light, as shown in the previous examples, their low quantum yield remains a major drawback that hinders their use as efficient WLEDs.49 Nonetheless, apart from the strategy of combining trichromatic emitters, i.e. red, green and blue lights, other plausible methods to generate phosphor-based white light focus on dichromatic emitters that blend blue and yellow light. In fact, recent advances in this field have shown that high quantum yields may be achieved by encapsulating a yellow-emitting IrIII complex in the cavities of a blue-emitting MOF, provided that the aggregation of the complexes is prevented and their oscillation constrained when confined to the pores.50 Proof for this last claim is demonstrated in the work by Sun et al.,51 which reports the insertion of an [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ (Hppy = 2-phenylpyridine, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) complex into a mesoporous MOF. The 3D non-interpenetrated framework of {(dma)15[(Cd2Cl)3(TATPT)4]·12DMF·18H2O}n (H6TATPT being 2,4,6-tris(2,5-dicarboxylphenylamino)1,3,5-triazine) is built on cuboid Cd2(μ2-Cl)(CO2)8 SBUs. Each SBU is eight-coordinated to four TATPT linkers to form a truncated tetrahedral cage of dimensions 19.2 × 16.7 × 16.3 Å3, with a window size of ≈15.5 × 15.5 Å2. Hereafter, eight of the latter cages are arranged at the vertices of a cube to give rise to a truncated octahedral cage through corner sharing, which encloses mesopores of 27.2 × 23.1 × 27.2 Å3, such that the resulting framework, with tbo topology, accommodates dma cations and crystallization water molecules. In good agreement with the molecular size of the encapsulant [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ (≈10 × 11 Å2), the framework is able to embed almost ≈7.5 wt% of this, which results in the appearance of a band centred at 530 nm, in addition to that at 425 nm attributed to the MOF. It is observed that the former band increases its intensity with a higher concentration of the encapsulant, obtaining a quantum yield of 28.7% for a composite material with 8.8 wt%. There is no evidence for energy and electron/charge transfer between the two species in this system, owing to the fact that the emission peak at 530 nm is independent from the first, and that it depends monotonically on the concentration. To obtain white-light emission, the concentration of the iridium complex is balanced from 1.0 to 3.7 wt%, with the optimal concentration being 3.5 wt%, given the appropriate CIE coordinates (0.31, 0.33) and high quantum yield of 20.4%. Given that the emission intensity is hardly affected by the temperature, at least up to 115 °C, WLED assemblies using the material were fabricated by two different methods. As depicted in Fig. 14, a commercially available UV LED or an InGaAsN chip were coated by the composite to obtain a bright white light.
 Fig. 14  Fabrication of a WLED by coating the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+@MOF upon (a) a commercial UV LED and (b) UV InGaAsN chip. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Another well-known photoactive complex that can be hosted in the pores of a MOF is tris(2,2′-bipyridine)ruthenium [Ru(bpy)3] and its derivatives, whose field of action not only affects solid-state red-light-emitting devices52 but also extends to electrochemical cells,53 owing to its excellent optical and electronic properties.54 In particular, Tang et al.55 chose [Ru(bpy)2(dpbpy)] (dpbpy = 4,4′-diphosphonate-2,2′-bipyridine) as a fluorescent guest to assemble into the IRMOF-10 host matrix,56 which possesses an isoreticular framework to that of MOF-5, but replaced the TPA linker by the enlarged bpdc. Pristine IRMOF-10 shows, under UV excitation, a light-blue emission (λem = 470 nm), which is noticeably changed to a pink colour upon incorporation of [Ru(bpy)2(dpbpy)] molecules, due to the occurrence of a new emission band at ca. 600 nm. In order to obtain a deeper insight into the distribution of the complex along the pores of IRMOF-10, a detailed study by means of confocal fluorescence microscopy is employed with different loadings of the complex in single crystals of the MOF (2.25 and 4.97 wt% of the complex in Ru@IRMOF-10, Fig. 15). The images clearly reveal different emissions for the crystal interior and exterior: the band at 470 nm dominates the emission spectrum close to the crystal centre, whereas the emission is mainly located at ca. 600 nm near the outside surface, which signifies a non-uniform distribution of the complex. Interestingly, the composite Ru@IRMOF-10 was further studied to develop up-conversion under irradiation with an 800 nm laser beam, for which power-dependent emission spectra were recorded. In contrast to the experiment with UV excitation, only the red emission (ca. 600 nm) is observed, suggesting that a near-IR laser can directly excite the encapsulated Ru complex. Nonetheless, up-conversion involving a two-photon excitation process may not be discarded. In any case, the luminescence lifetime of the [Ru(bpy)2(dpbpy)] is significantly increased from 0.35 to 1.01 μs, which is explained by the more rigid microenvironment provided by the pores, which diminishes the non-radiative losses. The fluorescence lifetime of the MOF host is also enhanced (from 5.55 to 37.01 ns), a fact that supports energy transfer from the MOF to the guest by decreasing the possibility of transfer of the excited electron back to the ground state. Inspired by the energy/charge transfer and long-lived charge separation of Ru@IRMOF-10, this material has also been checked for photon-to-electron conversion through its functionalization into a thin film on a rutile nanoarray. Measurements of the steady-state photocurrents of the system confirm the existence of an enhanced electron injection from the excited state of the Ru complex to the conduction band of TiO2, compared to the pristine Ru complex itself. Moreover, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) values surpass those achieved for the pure Ru/TiO2 system, which indicates that the implementation of the present system in solar panels may lead to more efficient utilization of solar energy.
 Fig. 15  Top: Selective fluorescence microscopy images for (a) IRMOF-10, (b) Ru@IRMOF-10 (2.25%), and (c) Ru@IRMOF-10 (4.97%). Bottom: Corresponding emissive spectra at selected points. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The Alq3 complex [tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminium], is one of the most successful materials ever used in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), which has prompted extensive research on its chemical and physical properties to improve its performance.57 According to the above-mentioned statements regarding the accommodation of the luminophores into nanochannels (preventing their aggregation), in order to promote composites with improved photophysical properties, Alq3 was encapsulated in porous IFMC-8 material.58 This MOF with formula {[Zn2(HBTT)Cl2]·CH3OH·3DMA}n, based on 1,3,5-tris(2H-tetrazol-5-yl)benzene (H3BTT), is established by centrosymmetric dinuclear [Zn2(μ-2H-tetrazol-5-yl)2] SBUs, in which zinc(II) atoms complete their tetrahedral coordination environments with chloride and monodentate 2H-tetrazol-5-yl ligands. The subsequent linkages formed by BTT ligands, which join four SBUs together into a binodal (4,4)-connected network, render an open framework that accumulates a void percentage of roughly 66% of the unit cell volume. The appropriate pore size (of 18.1 Å) allows the effective inclusion of Alq3 molecules (maximum diameter of 8–9 Å) (Fig. 16a). Unlike the intensity enhancement observed for the previous example, a large shift in the emission maximum is inferred from the fluorescence spectra in ethanol with variable amounts of added ICM-8. In particular, it is observed that the band moves from 517 nm (for the pure Alq3) to 476 nm when 0.09 g of ICM-8 has been dispersed (Fig. 16b). Furthermore, a similar blue shift is observed when the amount of the MOF is kept constant, according to the decrease in the Alq3 concentration in the solutions (Fig. 16c). More importantly, the excited-state lifetime of the Alq3 is substantially enlarged in the 31.2–65.4% range, once it is encapsulated within the MOF, indicating that efficient shielding occurred for the Alq3 molecules.
 Fig. 16  (a) Unit cell of ICM-8 encapsulating Alq3 complex. Photoluminescence spectra (λexc = 345 nm) for (b) variable amounts of ICM-8 in 500 μmol L−1 of Alq3, and (c) the same amount of ICM-8 dispersed in varying concentrations of Alq3. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3. Luminescence response for ion sensing
The ordered and crystalline porous structure in MOFs is a key feature for targeting a wide range of functional properties, typically in guest species recognition.59 Taking into account that this review focuses on luminescence responses with regard to structural features, compounds showing a modulation of the luminescence in response to an external stimuli, for instance following an induced reversible structural transformation, are of particular interest. Although many alternatives have been explored, structural transformation by a dissolution/reorganization process remains relatively understudied.60 Nonetheless, this strategy has been successfully employed to evaluate the potential performance of some anionic frameworks in the selective detection of metal cations. The heterometallic {[Yb2(L6)6Cd2][Cd(H2O)6]·6H2O}n (with L6 = oxidiacetate) MOF behaves as a promising cation-exchange detector, due to the presence of hexaaquo cadmium complexes within its neat 3D crystal structure.61 The anionic backbone allows the replacement of the [Cd(H2O)6]2+ counterions by [Mn(H2O)6]2+ or [Zn(H2O)6]2+ moieties through a single-crystal-to-single-crystal transformation. In this way, two new isostructural compounds (called Yb–Cd–Mn and Yb–Cd–Zn), which present no remarkable differences compared to the as-prepared framework, are obtained. The presence of these cations in the structure may bring important benefits regarding the NIR emission because they may conceivably enhance the luminescence via d → f energy transfer.62 A first analysis of the luminescence behaviour of Yb–Cd–Zn reveals a narrow sharp emission band centred at 998 nm, assigned to the 2F5/2 → 2F7/2 transition of the Yb3+ ion.63 Among all the metal ions that can be exchanged in DMF solution, it is notable that an impressive turning-on occurs by exchanging from 1 to 3 equivalents of Ni2+, in such a way that the peak at 998 nm becomes at least twice as intense as that in the absence of Ni2+ (Fig. 17). The addition of the Ni2+ ion may change the level of the excited state of the [Cd(H2O)6]2+ moiety, thus resulting in a more efficient energy transfer to the Yb3+ ion. However, the addition of other metal ions (Ca2+, Co2+, or Mg2+) causes a progressive decrease in the emission signal.
 Fig. 17  Emission spectra of Yb–Cd–Zn in DMF (10−3 M) at room temperature (excited at 400 nm) in the presence of 0–3 equiv. of different metal ions. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The heterometallic {[H(H2O)8][DyZn4(imdc)4(im)4]}n (ref. 64) (Dy–Zn, imdc = 4,5-imidazoledicarboxylate, im = imidazole) compound presents a selective turn-off luminescence response upon Fe3+ sequestration. The 3D open framework, which contains microchannels, is built by the junction of eight-coordinated Dy(III) and five-coordinated Zn(II) ions through imdc3− linkers, while im molecules act as terminal ligands and complete the coordination sphere of the zinc atoms. Exciting the MOF from 250 to 290 nm results in only narrow emission bands, attributed to the Dy f–f transitions, so the sample emits in the yellow region of the spectrum. A remarkable feature of the emission is its high lifetime and quantum yield of the 4F9/2 → 6H13/2 transition of the lanthanide ion, with values of 54.65(8) μs and 5.5%. The intrinsic heterometallic nature of the MOF, containing a closed-shell ion in the framework, allows for an excitation-dependent modulated emission, as seen in ref. 28 and 29. In fact, when the MOF is excited from 300 to 350 nm, it shows a ligand-based π–π broad emission band in addition to the narrow bands of the Dy3+, which renders a cool white light. Nevertheless, returning to the cation detection, the emission of Dy–Zn was analyzed with regard to many different ions (i.e. Al3+, Ca2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Cr3+, Cu2+, Fe3+, Hg2+, K+, Li+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Na+, Ni2+, Pb2+, and Zn2+). Interestingly, it was observed that both the fluorescence of Dy3+ and the wide ligand-based emission band are completely quenched in the presence of iron(III) (Fig. 18). Moreover, other metal ions do not disturb the detection of Fe3+ ions, which could only be explained in terms of a reaction between the MOF and iron ions (for which a quenching constant of very low concentration, Ksv = 9.29 × 105 M−1, is estimated). Indeed, the results with various Fe3+ concentrations indicate that they replace Zn2+ ions in the framework by undergoing very slight structural transformations to lead to {[H(H2O)8][DyZn4−xFex(imdc)4(im)4−x(OH)x]·nH2O}n. The selective quenching of the luminescence towards Fe3+ ions of this heterometallic can be considered as a very promising result. For comparative purposes, this is remarkably better than that estimated for Eu3+@bioMOF-1 (Ksv of 3.38 × 103 M−1).42
 Fig. 18  Room temperature emission spectra of Dy–Zn MOF in DMSO (0.5 mM) with various metal ions (2.5 mM) when excited at 290 nm. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Photoluminescent detection of different metal cations has also been reported through an exchange process in a {[(C2H5)4N]3[H3O]2[Cd6Br(H2-DHBDC)8(DMF)4]}n (ref. 65) MOF (Fig. 19). This consists of a 3D anionic framework tailored by the connection of [Cd3BrO2(CO2)7] and [Cd3O2(CO2)8] units through H2-DHBDC2− ligands, and containing channels that are partly occupied by exchangeable triethylammonium cations.
 Fig. 19  View of the framework of {[(C2H5)4N]3[H3O]2[Cd6Br(H2-DHBDC)8(DMF)4]}n. Reprinted from ref. 65, Copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier. 
Solid-state emission spectra of the MOF and pure H4DHBDC reveal that the coordination of the ligand promotes a small red shift and a notable enhancement in the intensity, in which an excited-state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT) mechanism is involved (the interested reader may find additional information on this mechanism in ref. 66). Then, solid samples were immersed in DMSO solutions containing Na+, K+, Ca2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Al3+, Zr4+, or no cations, taking into account the presence of uncoordinated –OH moieties in the framework. As expected, a variable shift of the band (which involves a subsequent colour change) to lower wavelengths was observed (Fig. 20). By way of conclusion, the emission changes from 460 to 560 nm, where alkaline ions produce the least shift, whereas the Al3+ causes a blue shift of 78 nm.
 Fig. 20  Emission of {[(C2H5)4N]3[H3O]2[Cd6Br(H2-DHBDC)8(DMF)4]}n in the presence of different ions under excitation at 360 nm. Reprinted from ref. 65, Copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier. 
Unlike the previous compounds, the profound research on MOFs has also allowed the synthesis of some cationic backbones. Often made of neutral ligands and metal ions, these MOFs contain extra-framework anions, filling the voids or being weakly coordinated to the metal centres.67 Their exchange by other anions with different shapes and sizes tends to promote changes in the structure and hence in their physical properties.68 In this respect, Manna et al.69 reported a porous MOF made of a one-dimensional coordination polymer of zinc(II) and a linear bis-chelating ligand (L7 = 4,4′-(1,2-ethanediyl)bis[N-(2-pyridinylmethylene)aniline]) synthesized by Schiff-base condensation of 4,4′-ethylenedianiline and 2-pyridine-carboxaldehyde. In the 3D crystal building, the chains are hydrogen-bonded, leaving one-dimensional pore channels. Although initially it contains two-coordinated methanol molecules ({[Zn(L7)(MeOH)2](NO3)2·xG}n where G = guest molecules), the MOF undergoes an SC-to-SC transformation. During this process, water molecules replace the pristine solvent molecules, which gives a flexible character to the framework, prompting anion exchange studies. Two types of anions were analyzed: (i) anions with a weak or non-coordinating capacity, ClO4− and N(CN)2− (type A), and (ii) anions with strong coordinating power, N3− and SCN− (type B). Based on reversibility experiments and selective anion-exchange (in binary mixtures) experiments, the following affinity order was achieved: SCN− > N3− > N(CN)2− > ClO4−. Focusing on the emission experiments of the anion-exchanged compounds, a significant dependency was observed for emission intensity. In particular, a large enhancement of fluorescence is detected for type A anions but a remarkable turning-off is inferred for those of type B (Fig. 21). This behaviour is easily explained on the basis of different electronic interactions of the anions with the framework walls and the metal ion, which affects the intraligand interactions and luminescence performance in a positive or negative way.
 Fig. 21  (a) Effects of anion exchange on the luminescence properties and (b) bar diagram showing the emission enhancement or quenching in {[Zn(L7)(MeOH)2](NO3)2·xG}n. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Soon afterwards, the same research group published a related work with the same achiral ligand (L7), which, in a proper solvent system, gave rise to a homochiral compound. In this case, {[Zn(L7)(H2O)2](NO3)2·xG}n (ref. 70) crystallizes in the chiral hexagonal P6522 space group, given the left-handed helical arrangement of the hydrogen-bonded coordination polymer, which results from the coordination of the L7 ligand (possessing a syn conformation) (Fig. 22). Anion exchange experiments were performed using both A and B counterions, yet a different structural response was observed. The first type of anions exhibit a clear structural change upon exchange, whereas the latter seem to maintain the unaltered structure and also the enantioselectivity, as confirmed by circular dichroism measurements. Unlike the preceding example, all exchanged anions show a turning-off effect compared to the neat nitrate-containing framework, in good agreement with its absence of free solvent molecules occupying the voids.
 Fig. 22  (a) Perspective view and (b) chemical structure of single helical chain; (c) space-filling view of the left-handed helix; (d) overall six-fold helical structure (each helix is shown in different colours) in {[Zn(L8)(H2O)2](NO3)2·xG}n. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
3.4. Molecular recognition
The selective luminescent response of MOFs is not only limited to charged ions, but is also extended to a wide diversity of neutral molecules. Unlike previous cases, in which ions are captured, molecular recognition of neutral molecules in MOFs originates necessarily from the flexibility of the framework to adapt towards the guests by means of weak interactions. In this context, it can be pointed out that low-dimensional materials, in which porosity is introduced by supramolecular interactions, may afford a promising dynamism over high-dimensional counterparts formed by metal-linker coordination bonds.71 Moreover, when these flexible nanospaces are decorated by chromophoric organic linkers, a rapid fluorescence readout may be obtained when appropriate guests are accommodated. For instance, in addition to the above-mentioned wavelength shifts and increased or decreased emission intensity, new emission bands can also be generated owing to charge transfer or exciplex/excimer formation.72 In a successful attempt to seek luminescence tuning by aromatic amine confinement, the work by Haldar and co-workers was given a substantial boost, given the capacity of the flexible {[Zn(ndc)(o-phen)2]·DMF}n MOF (ndc = 2,6-napthalenedicarboxylate, o-phen = 1,10-phenanthroline) to recognize different aromatic amines.73 The importance of simple devices for detecting aromatic amines comes from their relevance in drug synthesis and from their carcinogenic effects in humans.74 The good performance of this material originates from its crystal structure, which consists of zigzag chains established by the sequential coordination of ndc2− and o-phen ligands to the zinc(II) ion, and these are further assembled into a 3D porous supramolecular structure through π⋯π and C–H⋯π interactions. When the structure is loaded with different aromatic amines (N-methyl aniline (NMA), N,N′-dimethyl aniline (DMA), and N,N′-dimethyl-p-toluidine (DMPT)), they initially replace the DMF molecules in single crystals (1b, 1c, and 1d structures, respectively) and become arranged in a face-to-face fashion with o-phen by means of strong π⋯π interactions (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  (a–c) Face-to-face interactions among stacked amines and o-phen ligands in {[Zn(ndc)(o-phen)2]·DMF}n. (d) Images of crystals under visible and UV light irradiation. (e) Emission spectra upon excitation at 350 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
This fact indicates that a new CT occurs between the o-phen and amines, which is indeed observed in the emission spectra as a broad band with a significant red-shift with regard to the ndc-based emission. It is worth noting that, despite the similar arrangement of the amines, the monomeric emission of naphthalene (λem = 425 nm) is only observed for the 1b compound, which suggests that an efficient energy transfer from the excited state of ndc to the guest o-phen is taking place in the 1c and 1d compounds, caused by DMA and DMPT molecules. Time-resolved single-photon counting experiments upon the latter compounds confirm such behaviour, by showing quite high excited-state lifetimes associated with the CT complex (λem = 576 and 595 nm, respectively, for 1c and 1d) and negligible lifetimes for ndc donor emission (λem = 410 nm).
A strong colour change is also monitored for the previously described [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n.19 Apart from the afterglow shown by this compound, it also exhibits solvatochromic emission behaviour after immersing the MOF into different solvents. Specifically, the maximum of the phosphorescent emission wavelength (originally at λem = 503 nm) is slightly red-shifted (Δ of 6 nm) when the MOF exchanges its coordination DMF molecules for water molecules, according to the structural transformation occurring during the treatment to lead to [Zn(μ4-TPA)(H2O)]n. Meanwhile, a more obvious luminescence change was observed when treating [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n with pyridine (PY), which gave rise to [Zn(μ4-TPA)(PY)]n. Paying attention to the emission of 1-PY, blue shifts of 114 nm and 67 nm (from 326 and 503 nm for the pristine material) for fluorescent and phosphorescent λem maxima, respectively, were monitored. Accordingly, the phosphorescent emission moves from the initial bright cyan (colour coordinates: 0.178, 0.440) to yellow (colour coordinates: 0.439, 0.549). This transformation results in a deep drop in the lifetime (from 472 to 30 ms) and can be reversed by simply heating the sample at 50 °C for 6 hours, which involves the release of pyridine from the structure.
3.5. Detection of explosives
Notwithstanding the above-mentioned properties derived from the encapsulation of solvent molecules into MOFs, they also provide a good opportunity to obtain probe materials for the detection of small hazardous molecules, as proven with the NENU-522 MOF.75 Specifically, much effort is being devoted to the fast, efficient, and reliable detection of explosives, given its profound implications on both security and environmental issues.76 The single-crystal X-ray structure of this MOF, [Zn4O(L8)3(H2O)2]3[Zn4O(L)3]·xDMF (where L8 = 9H-carbazole-3,6-dicarboxylate), consists of two kinds of [Zn4(μ4-O)] clusters, distinguished by the presence of coordinated water molecules in one of them. The Zn4O SBUs are organised into truncated cages delimited by 30 ligands and 14 clusters, linked together by the L8 ligands to give rise to a 3D microporous framework with pores of about 1 nm in diameter (Fig. 24). These pores are suitable for accommodating up to 1.28 Ln3+ ions (Ln3+ = Sm3+, Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+), which affords composite materials with a clearly different luminescent emission. Among them, Sm3+@NENU-522 and Dy3+@NENU-522 materials are of high interest, since they approach the coordinates of white light, i.e. (0.3233, 0.2606) and (0.3301, 0.3742), respectively. This is also the case with Eu3+/Tb3+@NENU-522 (0.2917, 0.3211).
 Fig. 24  (a) Microporous cage of NENU-522 and (b) its interconnection along the 3D structure. (c) Emission spectra of Tb3+@NENU-522 in different concentrations of TNP. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Taking into account that, despite the presence of lanthanide ions, this material still possesses available pores; it permits the simultaneous adsorption of numerous explosives bearing good electron acceptors (for instance –NO2 groups), such as the hazardous explosives, nitrobenzene (NB), 2,6-dinitrotoluene (2,6-DNT), 1,3-dinitrobenzene (1,3-DNB), 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT), and 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP). In general, the electron-withdrawing capacity of these groups often quenches the luminescence, a fact that may be easily employed for sensing purposes. Tb3+@NENU-522 was selected to accomplish a sensing study, given its good luminescent performance. Overall, it shows the most effective detection for TNP (with complete quenching in the presence of 80 ppm), following the order: TNP > TNT > 2,6-DNT > 1,3-DNP > NB, which is in good agreement with the decreasing number of –NO2 substituents in the explosive molecule.
4. Conclusions
In this highlight, some of the most representative examples of metal–organic frameworks exhibiting unusual and/or tuneable luminescence properties are shown. In particular, the selected materials are based on closed-shell d10 metal atoms (ZnII or CdII), since they are well-suited to the construction of fascinating open architectures, given their large coordination plasticity, while they also afford interesting photoluminescence properties. On the one hand, the intrinsic hybrid nature of these materials gives them the opportunity to experience different charge transfer processes that enable various emission phenomena, from the habitual fluorescence to the less frequent phosphorescence. Moreover, taking into account that these processes are strongly connected to some intrinsic features of the structure, the photoluminescent emission may show a dependence on subtle changes, such as the excitation wavelength and the interpenetration degree. On the other hand, the porous nature of MOFs supports the uptake of many different guests, which may also influence the emission in several useful ways. Among others, two major aims can be derived from the latter performance: tuning the emission colour and/or the selective detection of particular ions or molecules. The first takes advantage of the emissive properties of the encapsulated or doped species to generate new composite or solid-solution-like materials, in which their luminescence is enhanced or modulated. The second, developed under many sections of this highlight, deals with the changes observed in the emission spectra of the compounds (through an increase/decrease in the intensity or a shift of the maxima), depending on the incorporation of specific cations or anions. Therefore, this work shows a selection of MOFs that make an important contribution to many top-rated topics, such as long-lived emission, ions and explosives detection, white-light emission, luminescent second-harmonic generators, and materials for dye-sensitized solar cells, all of which could signify a further step towards the quest for enhanced luminescent devices.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Junta de Andalucía (FQM-1484) and the University of the Basque Country (GIU14/01). J. Cepeda thanks the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) for his postdoctoral fellowship.
Notes and references

  (a) Ch. Janiak and J. K. Vieth, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 2366 RSC ; 
  (b) D. J. Tranchemontagne, J. L. Mendoza-Cortés and M. O'Keeffe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1257 RSC ; 
  (c) H.-C. J. Zhou and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5415 RSC .

  (a) V. Guillerm, D. Kim, J. F. Eubank, R. Luebke, X. Liu, K. Adil, M. S. Lah and M. Eddaoudi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6141 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, V. Ch. Kravtsov, R. Larsen and M. Eddaoudi, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1488 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Eddaoudi, D. F. Sava, J. F. Eubank, K. Adil and V. Guillerm, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 228 RSC .

  (a) Y. Cui, B. Li, H. He, W. Zhou, B. Chen and G. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 483 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. S. Quah, W. Chen, M. K. Schreyer, H. Yang, M. W. Wong, W. Ji and J. J. Vittal, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7954 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. U. Czaja, N. Trukhan and U. Müller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1284 RSC .

  (a) R.-B. Lin, S.-Y. Liu, J.-W. Ye, X.-Y. Li and J.-P. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500434 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. Cui, Y. Yue, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J.-R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477 RSC ; 
  (e) M. Kurmoo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1353 RSC ; 
  (f) P. Horcajada, T. Chalati, C. Serre, B. Gillet, C. Sebrie, T. Baati, J. F. Eubank, D. Hertaux, P. Clayette, C. Kreuz, J.-S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, V. Marsaud, P.-N. Bories, L. Cynober, S. Gil, G. Férey, P. Cuvreur and R. Gref, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 172 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) P. Falcaro, R. Ricco, C. M. Doherty, K. Liang, A. J. Hill and M. J. Styles, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5513 RSC ; 
  (h) S. Mendiratta, C.-H. Lee, M. Usman and K.-L. Lu, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 054204 CrossRef .

  (a) M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 675 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) M. O'Keeffe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1215 RSC ; 
  (c) 
            A. Schoedel and O. M. Yaghi, The Chemistry of Metal–Organic Frameworks: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2000, ch. 3 Search PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, H. Li and T. L. Groy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 9096 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Zhang and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5444 RSC ; 
  (b) G. Férey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 191 RSC ; 
  (c) N. Stock and S. Biswas, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 933 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) C. Janiak and J. K. Vieth, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 2366 RSC .

  (a) W. Lu, Z. Wei, Z.-Y. Gu, T.-F. Liu, J. Park, J. Park, J. Tian, M. Zhang, Q. Zhang, T. Gentle III, M. Bosch and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5561 RSC ; 
  (b) Z.-J. Lin, J. Lü, M. Hong and R. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5867 RSC .
Y.-X. Sun and W.-Y. Sun, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 4045 RSC .

  (a) R. C. Evans, P. Douglas and C. J. Winscom, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 2093 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q.-D. Liu, R. Wang and S. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2073 RSC ; 
  (c) A. Barbieri, G. Accorsi and N. Armaroli, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2185 RSC .
M. D. Allendorf, C. A. Bauer, R. K. Bhakta and R. J. T. Houk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1330 RSC .
K. Binnemans, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 4283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Almeida Paz, J. Klinowski, S. M. F. Vilela, J. P. C. Tomé, J. A. S. Cavaleiro and J. Rocha, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1088 RSC .
J. Heine and K. Müller-Buschbaum, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9232 RSC .

  (a) J. Qiu, K. Miura, H. Inouye, Y. Kondo, T. Mitsuyu and K. Hirao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1763 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. C. Kang, R. S. Liu, J. C. Chang and B. J. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3966 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W.-J. Yang, L. Luo, T.-M. Chen and N.-S. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3883 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Q. Zhao, F. Li and C. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3007 RSC ; 
  (b) Z. An, C. Zheng, Y. Tao, R. Chen, H. Shi, T. Chen, Z. Wan, H. Li, R. Deng, X. Liu and W. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 685 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Li, X. Tang, L. Zhang, C. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Bo, Y. Q. Dong, Y.-H. Tian, Y. Dong and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1184 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Y.-K. Deng and D. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) N. D. McClenaghan, Y. Leydet, B. Maubert, M. T. Indelli and S. Campagna, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1336 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. T. Indelli, M. Ghirotti, A. Prodi, C. Chiorboli, F. Scandola, N. D. McClenaghan, F. Puntoriero and S. Campagna, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 5489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang and D. Yan, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4519 RSC .

  (a) M. Müller, S. Turner, O. I. Lebedev, Y. Wang, G. v. Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 25, 1878 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) H. F. Greer, Y. Liu, A. Greenaway, P. A. Wright and W. Zhou, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 2104 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Han, Y. Wei, C. Valente, I. Lagzi, J. J. Gassensmith, A. Coskun, J. F. Stoddart and B. A. Grzybowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16358 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) Y. Li and R. T. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 726 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) E. Biemmi, S. Christian, N. Stock and T. Bein, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 117, 111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, L. Zhao, Q. Peng, D. Fan, W. Z. Yuan, Y. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4438 RSC .
J. Cepeda, E. San Sebastian, D. Padro, A. Rodriguez-Diéguez, J. A. García, J. M. Ugalde and J. M. Seco, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8671 RSC .
M. A. van der Veen, T. Verbiest and D. E. De Vos, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 166, 102 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, J. Hu, M. Zhang, Q. Yang, Y. Li and H. Zheng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2111 CAS .
S. Lentijo, J. A. Miguel and P. Espinet, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 9169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Guo, G. Xu, X. M. Jiang, M. J. Zhang, B. W. Liu and G.-C. Guo, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 4278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. D. Huang, R. G. Siong, J. Han and B. R. Weiner, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1999, 294, 95 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Reinsch, M. A. van der Veen, B. Gil, B. Marszalek, T. Verbiest, D. de Vos and N. Stock, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 17 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Sun, D. J. Collins, Y. Ke, J.-L. Zuo and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 3768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-G. Lin, G.-J. Cao, J.-D. Lin and Y.-L. Wang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 9075 RSC .
B. Fernández, G. Beobide, I. Sánchez, F. Carrasco-Marín, J. M. Seco, A. J. Calahorro, J. Cepeda and A. Rodríguez-Diéguez, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1282 RSC .

  (a) O. Shekhah, H. Wang, M. Paradinas, C. Ocal, B. Schüpbach, A. Terfort, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 481 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Ma, D. Sun, M. Ambrogio, J. A. Fillinger, S. Parkin and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1858 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Zhang, L. Wojtas, R. W. Larsen, M. Eddaoudi and M. J. Zaworotko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17040 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Kim, S.-T. Yang, S. B. Choi, J. Sim, J. Kim and W.-S. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3070 RSC .
X. He, X.-P. Lu, Y.-Y. Tian, M.-X. Li, S. Zhu, F. Xing and R. E. Morris, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9437 RSC .
X.-M. Lian, W. Zhao and X.-L. Zhao, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 200, 265 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Yang and Z.-H. Sun, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2013, 29, 94 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. He, D. Guo, C. He, X. Zhang, X. Zhao and C. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6132 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J.-C. G. Bünzli, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 293–294, 19 CrossRef .
Z.-F. Liu, M.-F. Wu, S.-H. Wang, F.-K. Zheng, G.-E. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Xiao, A.-Q. Wu, G.-C. Guo and J.-S. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4634 RSC .

  (a) Y.-Q. Chen, G.-R. Li, Z. Chang, Y.-K. Qu, Y.-H. Zhang and X.-H. Bu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3678 RSC ; 
  (b) J.-H. Liao, W.-T. Chen, C.-S. Tsai and C.-C. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 3377 RSC .

  (a) P. Falcaro and S. Furukawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8431 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. F. Sava, L. E. Rohwer, M. A. Rodriguez and T. M. Nenoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X.-T. Rao, Q. Huang, X.-L. Xang, Y. J. Cui, Y. Yang, C.-D. Wu, B.-L. Chen and G.-D. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3210 RSC ; 
  (b) Y.-T. Huang, Y.-C. Lai and S.-L. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X.-M. Fang, M. Roushan, R.-B. Zhang, J. Peng, H.-P. Zeng and J. Li, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1710 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y.-S. Zhao, H. Fu, F. Hu, A. Peng, W. Yang and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 79 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, F. Sun, T. Borjigin, N. Zhao and G. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 3716 RSC .

  (a) A. C. McKinlay, R. E. Morris, P. Horcajada, G. Frey, R. Gref, P. Couvreur and C. Serre, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6260 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Pérez-Yáñez, G. Beobide, O. Castillo, J. Cepeda, A. Luque, A. T. Aguayo and P. Román, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 5330 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) J. An, R. P. Fiorella, S. J. Geib and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. An, S. J. Geib and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen and B. Yan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 451, 63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Lu and B. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5526 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Zhang and J. H. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5607 RSC .
X. Shen and B. Yan, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1875 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Y. Liu and J. F. Ma, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 14591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. D. Wyatt and D. M. Wilson, Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 2009, 66, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Chakrabarty and P. J. Stang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14738 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Takeshita, Y. Banno, M. Nakamura, M. Otsuka, H. Teramachi, T. Tsuchiya and Y. Itoh, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2011, 24, 1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Q. Ma, C. Abney and W. B. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1248 RSC ; 
  (b) D. Zhao, S. W. Tan, D. Q. Yuan, W. G. Lu, Y. H. Rezenom, H. L. Jiang, L. Q. Wang and H. C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Rao, Q. Huang, X. Yang, Y. Cui, Y. Yang, C. Wu, B. Chen and G. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3210 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. T. Huang, Y. C. Lai and S. L. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8614 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S.-M. Li, X.-J. Zheng, D.-Q. Yuan, A. Ablet and L.-P. Jin, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Costa, E. Ortí, H. J. Bolink, F. Monti, G. Accorsi and N. Armaroli, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Sun, X. L. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Qin, P. Li, Z. M. Su, D. X. Zhu, G. G. Shan, K. Z. Shao, H. Wu and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2717 Search PubMed .
G. Kalyuzhny, M. Buda, J. McNeill, P. Barbara and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Bolink, L. Cappelli, E. Coronado and P. Gavina, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 5966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Xiang, J. Fielden, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba, Z. Huang, N. Zhang, Z. Luo, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 918 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. A. Kent, D. Liu, A. Ito, T. Zhang, M. K. Brennaman, T. J. Meyer and W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14982 RSC .
Y. Tang, W. He, Y. Lu, J. Fielden, X. Xiang and D. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25365 CAS .
N. L. Rosi, J. Kim, M. Eddaoudi, B. Chen, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang and S. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
G.-S. Ynag, M.-N. Li, S.-L. Li, Y.-Q. Lan, W.-W. He, X.-L. Wang, J.-S. Qin and Z.-M. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17947 RSC .

  (a) J. Xan, C. M. Shade, D. A. Chengelis-Czegan, S. Petoud and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1220 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) C. X. Chen, Q. K. Liu, J. P. Ma and Y. B. Dong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9027 RSC ; 
  (c) W. M. Bloch, R. Babarao, M. R. Hill, C. J. Doonan and C. J. Sumby, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9027 RSC .

  (a) H. C. Wu, P. Thanasekaran, C. H. Tsai, J. Y. Wu, S. M. Huang, Y. S. Wen and K. L. Lu, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Y. Karabach, M. F. C. G. da Silva, M. N. Kopylovich and A. J. L. Pombeiro, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2200 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J.-J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. A. Gamboa and A. Lachgar, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X.-G. Wang, B. Yuan, C.-Y. Shao, Y.-Y. Chen, B.-B. Zhou, M.-S. Li, X.-M. An, P. Cheng and X. J. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 4456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. D. Ward, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2634 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. A. Vigato, V. Peruzzo and S. Tamburini, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 1099 CrossRef .

  (a) 
            J. Y. Li, Rare Earth Luminescent Materials and Applications, Chemical Industry Press, Beijing,  2003, p. 8 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) L. N. Sun, H. J. Zhang, C. Y. Peng, J. B. Yu, Q. G. Meng, L. S. Fu, F. Y. Liu and X. M. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7249 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Quici, M. Cavazzini, G. Marzanni, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli, B. Ventura and F. Barigelletti, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Li, D. Wang, Z. Liao, Y. Kang, W.-H. Ding, X.-J. Zheng and L. P. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4211 RSC .
S.-M. Chen, Y.-F. Chen, L. Liu, T. Wen, H.-B. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 235, 23 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Zhao, S. Ji, Y. Chen, H. Guo and P. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8803 RSC ; 
  (b) V. S. Padalkar and S. Seki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 169 RSC .

  (a) B.-C. Tzeng, T.-H. Chiu, B.-S. Chen and G.-H. Lee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5237 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Q. Y. Yang, K. Li, J. Luo, M. Pana and C. Y. Su, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4234 RSC .

  (a) T. K. Maji, R. Matsuda and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 142 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J.-P. Ma, Y. Yu and Y. B. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2946 RSC .
B. Manna, A. K. Chaudhari, B. Joarder, A. Karmakar and S. K. Ghosh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Manna, B. Joarder, A. V. Desai, A. Karmakar and S. K. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 12399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. Haldar, S. K. Reddy, V. M. Suresh, S. Mohapatra, S. Balasubramanian and T. K. Maji, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4347 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S.-I. Noro, Y. Hijikata, M. Inukai, T. Fukushima, S. Horike, M. Higuchi, S. Kitagawa, T. Akutagawa and T. Nakamura, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 280 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Xiang, Y. He, Z. Zhang, H. Wu, W. Zhou, R. Krishna and B. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 954 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) D. Liu, K. Lu, C. Poon and W. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) D. Ma, B. Li, X. Zhou, Q. Zhou, K. Liu, G. Zeng, G. Li, Z. Shi and S. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8964 RSC .
V. Martínez-Martínez, S. Furukawa, Y. Takashima, I. L. Arbeloa and S. Kitagawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26084 Search PubMed .
R. Haldar, R. Matsuda, S. Kitagawa, S. J. George and T. K. Maji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Hall, H. R. Mellor, R. Callaghan and T. W. Hambley, J. Med. Chem., 2007, 50, 3403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xie, S.-R. Zhang, D.-Y. Du, J.-S. Qin, S.-J. Bao, J. Li, Z. M. Su, W.-W. He, Q. Fu and Y.-Q. Lan, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 3290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Hu, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5815 RSC ; 
  (b) M. E. Germain and M. J. Knapp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2543 RSC ; 
  (c) S. J. Toal and W. C. Trogler, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2871 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Javier Cepeda	Javier Cepeda, born in 1984, earned his degree in Chemistry from the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Spain, in 2007. In 2012, he undertook a scientific visit with Prof. Paul A. Wright's group (Saint Andrews, Scotland), and he finished his doctoral degree in 2013 under the supervision of Dr. Oscar Castillo and Prof. Antonio Luque, achieving the Extraordinary Doctorate Award. Since 2013, he has worked as temporary lecturer at UPV/EHU and, since 2015, he has combined his teaching activities with a postdoctoral research position. His research interests lie in the field of metal–organic frameworks, mainly focusing on their magnetic and luminescence properties.
Antonio Rodríguez-Diéguez	Antonio Rodríguez-Diéguez completed his PhD studies in Chemistry at the University of Granada in 2005. Since 2008, he has worked as Leading Researcher of different projects funded by the Junta de Andalucía (Spain) and, concurrently, he is Professor at the Inorganic Chemistry Department of the University of Granada. Over this period, his research interests have included crystalline analysis by XR diffraction, the improvement of solvothermal methods, studies of magnetic and luminescent properties and, recently, the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks for therapeutic applications.

 	Fig. 1  Compounds {[Zn(tipa)Cl]NO3·2DMF}n and {[Cd2(tipa)2Cl4]·6DMF}n. Molecular structures [(a) and (c)] and structural transformations derived from the adsorption of I3− ions [(b) and (d)]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 2  Temperature-dependent emission for (a) {[Zn(tipa)Cl]NO3·2DMF}n and (b) {[Cd2(tipa)2Cl4]·6DMF}n compounds (λexc = 365 nm). (c) Afterglow evolution of Zn (1) and Cd (2) compounds. (d) Afterglow photographs of zinc (top) and cadmium (bottom) compounds at 77 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 3  Normalised photoluminescence spectra of (a) [Zn(μ4-TPA)(DMF)]n and (b) MOF-5. (c) Time-resolved phosphorescence decay curves and (d) photographs of the afterglow at different times. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Experimental and theoretical excitation and emission spectra of [Zn(μ-6ani)2]n showing the molecular orbitals involved in the charge transfer mechanisms; (b) micro-PL images taken at different excitation lines; (c) time-resolved emission spectra at 10 K of [Zn(μ-6ani)2]n at different delays (λex = 333 nm). Excitation band pass = 5 nm, emission band pass = 2.5. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Conformations of ligands by their coordination to the metal atom and (b) dipoles in the framework in different views in [Zn(BPHY)(SA)]n. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Solid-state emission spectra of [Zn(BPHY)(SA)]n at variable excitation wavelengths. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Triply interpenetrated 3D framework of {[Zn2(L2)(obb)2]·2DMF·2H2O}n MOF. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Evolution of the emission of {[Zn2(L2)(obb)2]·2DMF·2H2O}n according to the excitation wavelength. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Emission spectra of {[Zn3(μ4-bpdc)(μ-bpdb)]·5DMF}n and {[Zn2(μ4-bpdc)2(μ-bpdb)]·7DMF}n according to the excitation wavelength. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Solid-state emission spectra of non-interpenetrated {[Zn2(L3)(btmbb)(H2O)4]·2H2O}n (1) and interpenetrated [Zn2(L3)(btmbb)2]n (2) compounds. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CIE chromaticity diagram for JUC-113 (1), JUC-113⊃Tb1 (2) JUC-113⊃Tb2 (3), JUC-113⊃Eu1 (4), JUC-113⊃Eu2 (5), JUC-113⊃Ln1 (6), and JUC-113⊃Ln2 (7) excited at 283 nm. (b) Chromaticity coordinates of JUC-113⊃Ln1 under 254 nm excitation. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Crystal structure of bioMOF-1 showing zinc-adeninate columnar SBUs (a) and a view of the 3D framework generated by BPDC linkers (b). Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Images of EuIII/TbIII-doped samples of {[Zn3(L5)(H2O)2]·3DMF·7H2O}n (from top to bottom: Eu1/Tb0, Eu0.8/Tb0.2, Eu0.7/Tb0.3, Eu0.6/Tb0.4, Eu0.3/Tb0.7, and Eu0/Tb1). (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 14  Fabrication of a WLED by coating the [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+@MOF upon (a) a commercial UV LED and (b) UV InGaAsN chip. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 15  Top: Selective fluorescence microscopy images for (a) IRMOF-10, (b) Ru@IRMOF-10 (2.25%), and (c) Ru@IRMOF-10 (4.97%). Bottom: Corresponding emissive spectra at selected points. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Unit cell of ICM-8 encapsulating Alq3 complex. Photoluminescence spectra (λexc = 345 nm) for (b) variable amounts of ICM-8 in 500 μmol L−1 of Alq3, and (c) the same amount of ICM-8 dispersed in varying concentrations of Alq3. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Emission spectra of Yb–Cd–Zn in DMF (10−3 M) at room temperature (excited at 400 nm) in the presence of 0–3 equiv. of different metal ions. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Room temperature emission spectra of Dy–Zn MOF in DMSO (0.5 mM) with various metal ions (2.5 mM) when excited at 290 nm. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  View of the framework of {[(C2H5)4N]3[H3O]2[Cd6Br(H2-DHBDC)8(DMF)4]}n. Reprinted from ref. 65, Copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  Emission of {[(C2H5)4N]3[H3O]2[Cd6Br(H2-DHBDC)8(DMF)4]}n in the presence of different ions under excitation at 360 nm. Reprinted from ref. 65, Copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Effects of anion exchange on the luminescence properties and (b) bar diagram showing the emission enhancement or quenching in {[Zn(L7)(MeOH)2](NO3)2·xG}n. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Perspective view and (b) chemical structure of single helical chain; (c) space-filling view of the left-handed helix; (d) overall six-fold helical structure (each helix is shown in different colours) in {[Zn(L8)(H2O)2](NO3)2·xG}n. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a–c) Face-to-face interactions among stacked amines and o-phen ligands in {[Zn(ndc)(o-phen)2]·DMF}n. (d) Images of crystals under visible and UV light irradiation. (e) Emission spectra upon excitation at 350 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Microporous cage of NENU-522 and (b) its interconnection along the 3D structure. (c) Emission spectra of Tb3+@NENU-522 in different concentrations of TNP. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
