CO 2 photo-reduction: insights into CO 2 activation and reaction on surfaces of photocatalysts  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE00383D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE00383D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177-2196CO2 photo-reduction: insights into CO2 activation and reaction on surfaces of photocatalysts

        
          
            Xiaoxia 
            Chang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tuo 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jinlong 
            Gong
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: jlgong@tju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 22-87401818
Received 
      5th February 2016
    , Accepted 17th March 2016First published on 17th March 2016AbstractLarge amounts of anthropogenic CO2 emissions associated with increased fossil fuel consumption have led to global warming and an energy crisis. The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into solar fuels such as methane or methanol is believed to be one of the best methods to address these two problems. In addition to light harvesting and charge separation, the adsorption/activation and reduction of CO2 on the surface of heterogeneous catalysts remain a scientifically critical challenge, which greatly limits the overall photoconversion efficiency and selectivity of CO2 reduction. This review describes recent advances in the fundamental understanding of CO2 photoreduction on the surface of heterogeneous catalysts and particularly provides an overview of enhancing the adsorption/activation of CO2 molecules. The reaction mechanism and pathways of CO2 reduction as well as their dependent factors are also analyzed and discussed, which is expected to enable an increase in the overall efficiency of CO2 reduction through minimizing the reaction barriers and controlling the selectivity towards the desired products. The challenges and perspectives of CO2 photoreduction over heterogeneous catalysts are presented as well.
Xiaoxia Chang
Xiaoxia Chang received his bachelor degree in chemical engineering from Tianjin University in 2012. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Professor Jinlong Gong at Tianjin University. His research focuses on photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to solar fuels via heterogeneous photocatalysts.
Tuo Wang
Tuo Wang received his BS degree from Tianjin University and PhD degree (with Professor John G. Ekerdt) from the University of Texas at Austin, both in chemical engineering. After gaining another year of research experience as a postdoctoral associate, he joined Novellus Systems, Inc. (currently Lam Research Corp.) as a process development engineer in Tualatin, Oregon. Since August 2012, he has been an associate professor in chemical engineering in Tianjin University. His current research focuses on the fabrication of nanostructured and single-crystal materials for energy conversion and storage systems.
Jinlong Gong
Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Professor George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral research fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Pei Yang Chair Professorship in chemical engineering. He was a visiting scientist at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in 2007. He has served on the editorial boards for several journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Chemical Science, and AIChE Journal. He has also served as an executive editor for Chemical Engineering Science and Renewable Energy. He is an elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). He has published more than 150 papers in peer-refereed journals and been listed as a co-inventor in 52 patents and applications. His research interests in catalysis include catalytic conversion of green energy, novel utilization of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.

Broader context
The excessive utilization of fossil fuels is accompanied by an energy crisis and adverse global environmental changes. Solar energy is a theoretically infinite energy source and can provide sufficient power for our energy demands if it can be efficiently harvested and transformed. Therefore, the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O into useful fuels, such as methane, methanol, and even long-chain hydrocarbons and oxygenates, is believed to be one of the best methods to reduce CO2 emission and address at the energy crisis. However, CO2 is an extremely stable molecule and its reduction is thermodynamically and kinetically difficult. In addition to light harvesting and charge separation, the surface reduction of CO2 is usually in fierce competition with hydrogen evolution and deserves more attention. This review focuses on surface reactions and emphasizes the strategies to enhance the adsorption/activation of CO2 molecules and the factors determining the reaction pathways and selectivity for reduction products. Prospects for the challenges and future development of CO2 photoreduction over heterogeneous catalysts are also proposed.

1. Introduction
Fossil fuels have been used at an ever increasing pace as the main energy sources, which are nevertheless limited and being depleted. The excessive utilization of fossil fuels is accompanied by large amounts of anthropogenic CO2 emissions, leading to adverse global environmental changes.1,2 Since solar power is a theoretically infinite energy source, the solar-driven reduction of CO2 into chemicals and fuels such as formic acid, methane or methanol has been considered as a promising approach to address the problems of global warming and energy crisis.3,4 However, CO2 is an extremely stable molecule and its CO bond possesses a higher dissociation energy of ∼750 kJ mol−1 than many other chemical bonds such as C–H (∼430 kJ mol−1) and C–C (∼336 kJ mol−1), which indicates that a high energy input is needed for the transformation of CO2.5,6 In addition, carbon is in its highest oxidation state in CO2 and the reduction of CO2 can lead to a large variety of products with different carbon oxidation states ranging from CO, CH4 to higher hydrocarbons in the gas phase, as well as various oxygenates in the liquid phase such as CH3OH and HCOOH.7 Although a number of solar-active catalysts have been reported for CO2 photoreduction, most of them suffer from low energy conversion efficiency, uncontrollable selectivity, instability and incapability to completely suppress the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in the presence of water.8,9 Therefore, the design and fabrication of highly active photocatalytic systems with high conversion efficiency and selectivity for CO2 reduction remain a grand challenge.
It is generally accepted that there are three major crucial steps in photocatalysis: solar light harvesting, charge separation and transportation, and surface reactions. Significant achievements have been made in optimizing the first two steps as they involve the same issues in solar-driven water splitting and CO2 reduction reaction systems.5,9–16 The major difference between these two photoconversion systems is the surface reaction of charge carriers. Numerous efforts have been devoted into improving the efficiency of the third step in solar water splitting than in CO2 photoreduction.17,18 However, the reduction of CO2 is usually in fierce competition with HER in the presence of water, which partly leads to low efficiency and selectivity towards CO2 photoconversion.19,20 Therefore, attention should be paid to the third step in photocatalytic CO2 reduction, i.e., surface reactions of CO2 with photogenerated electrons.
There are several excellent reviews covering the design and fabrication of various semiconductor photocatalysts for CO2 reduction, as well as the description of the CO2 reduction process on semiconductors.4,5,8,9,14,19 To differentiate from these recent review articles, this work emphasizes the strategies to enhance the adsorption and activation of CO2 molecules and the factors determining the reaction pathways and selectivity for reduction products. Usually, H2O is more preferentially adsorbed onto the catalyst surfaces than CO2. The enhancement of CO2 adsorption and activation would be efficient to suppress the competing HER and improve the overall efficiency of CO2 photoreduction. Upon activation, the adsorbed CO2 molecules are subsequently reduced by surface charge carriers. The reaction involves multiple proton-coupled electron transfer and can lead to the formation of many different products depending on the reaction pathways, which makes the process rather complex.4 Therefore, the reaction mechanism and pathways of CO2 reduction as well as their dependent factors will be particularly discussed. The knowledge of the CO2 reduction mechanism is critical to improve the overall efficiency and selectivity for CO2 photoreduction through lowering the reaction barriers, tuning the reaction parameters (e.g., pH of the electrolytes and the external bias), and guiding the reaction pathways. The challenges and perspectives of photocatalytic CO2 reduction on heterogeneous catalysts are proposed as well. Compared with the previously available reviews on CO2 photoreduction, this review puts emphases on (i) fundamental principles of CO2 reduction reaction, (ii) recent advances in enhancing CO2 adsorption/activation for improved photoconversion efficiency and (iii) discussion about the factors determining the reaction pathways and selectivity for reduction products.
2. Basic principles of CO2 photoreduction
2.1 Background and fundamentals
Since the seminal investigation by Halmann in 1978, the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into fuels with H2O, using solar energy as the driving force has drawn much attention.5,6,21,22 Generally, there are two configurations of photoconversion systems for CO2 reduction. The first configuration of the photocatalytic system (PC) utilizes a suspension of photocatalyst particles in a solvent for the reduction of dissolved CO2 (Fig. 1a). This kind of system is made up of simple devices and accessible photocatalysts, thus being a relatively convenient subject to study, where the driving force for CO2 reduction is entirely solar energy. However, both the reduction and oxidation reactions occur on the different surface sites of the same photocatalyst particle, leading to the mixing of all products. In particular, in the absence of hole scavengers, such as H2O2, Na2SO3 and alcohol etc., the reduction products from CO2 could be re-oxidized by photogenerated holes or the produced oxygen.14 The utilization of hole scavengers will result in additional costs. The other configuration is known as the photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell system, composed of a semiconducting photoelectrode (working electrode), a counter electrode and usually a reference electrode. The photoelectrode harvests light to generate charge carriers and performs a half-cell reaction, normally on the photocathode to reduce CO2, whereas the other half-cell reaction takes place on the counter electrode (Fig. 1b). Hence, the reduction and oxidation products can be spatially separated in different half-cells by a proton exchange membrane (Nafion), which can exclude the possibility of re-oxidation of reduction products. In addition, compared to the PC system, the PEC system may achieve higher efficiency because an external bias can be applied to promote the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes.19 Therefore, it is beneficial to carry out CO2 photoreduction using a PEC system although the preparation of photoelectrodes is complicated and normally an external bias is needed.
 Fig. 1  (a) Photocatalyst particles suspended in a CO2-containing electrolyte performing both photocatalytic CO2 reduction and water oxidation reactions. (b) A photoelectrochemical cell with a photocathode as a working electrode (WE) for CO2 reduction, a counter electrode (CE) for water oxidation and a reference electrode (RE) immersed in a CO2-containing electrolyte. 
It is widely accepted that the overall process of photocatalytic CO2 reduction involves three crucial steps (as shown in Fig. 2) in both PC and PEC configurations.6,19 In the first step (i), the incident photons with energy equal to or higher than the band-gap energy (Eg) of the photocatalyst are absorbed to generate electron–hole (e−–h+) pairs. The photogenerated electrons and holes then migrate independently to the surface of the photocatalyst particles (in PC system) or the cathode and the anode (in PEC system) in the second step (ii). In the third step (iii), the photogenerated electrons reduce CO2 into fuels, while the holes oxidize H2O into O2. During steps (ii) and (iii) a large fraction of electrons and holes may be consumed through recombination (iv). Among the above three steps, the first two are the same as those in solar water splitting. The primary difference between water splitting and CO2 reduction could be the surface reaction of the photogenerated electrons (step iii). The proton reduction often occurs in competition with CO2 reduction especially in the presence of H2O.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of different steps in photocatalytic CO2 reduction with H2O over a heterogeneous photocatalyst. The dotted lines indicate the thermodynamic potentials for water oxidation and CO2 reduction into CO, CH4 and CH3OH. 
In the past few decades, significant achievements have been made in optimizing the first two steps than the complex third one for CO2 photoreduction. For example, a series of strategies have been employed to increase the visible-light excitation of semiconductors with a wide bandgap for CO2 photoreduction, such as dye and quantum dot sensitization,23–26 ion doping,27–29 and surface plasmonic enhancement.30–32 In addition, some novel visible-light-responsive semiconductors have also been utilized for CO2 photoreduction, such as ZnTe,33,34 graphitic-C3N4,35,36 BiVO4,37,38 Cu2O,39,40 InTaO4,27,41 and CuFeO2.42,43 On the other hand, in order to achieve efficient charge separation and transportation, various nanostructured photocatalysts (in forms of nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, nanobelts, etc.) have been developed for CO2 photoreduction.44–47 Moreover, the construction of different junctions with facilitating effects on charge separation and transportation has also been extensively applied for CO2 photoreduction, such as facet-based homojunctions,48,49 crystalline phase-based homojunctions,50,51 and heterojunctions.11,52–55
2.2 The challenges of CO2 photoreduction in aqueous solutions: thermodynamics and kinetics
Possible reactions and various products related to CO2 reduction and the corresponding standard redox potentials obtained from thermodynamic data are shown in Table 1.7 Usually, HER is prevalent in acidic solutions owing to the high number of protons and CO2 easily turns into CO32− or HCO3− in basic solutions. Therefore, many CO2 reduction studies have been conducted in close neutral electrolytes.19,56 The potentials in Table 1 are referred to a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) reference at pH 7 in an aqueous solution. CH4, CO, CH3OH, HCOOH, C2H6, C2H5OH and even H2C2O4 are the possible products from CO2 reduction depending on the different reaction mechanisms and pathways. Since HER always competes with the reduction of CO2, its equilibrium potential is also presented in Table 1.
Table 1 The main products of CO2 and water reduction and the corresponding reduction potentials with reference to NHE at pH 7 in aqueous solution, 25 °C and 1 atm gas pressure7




Product
Reaction

E
0 (V vs. NHE)
Equation




Hydrogen
2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2
−0.41
(1)


Methane
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
−0.24
(2)


Carbon monoxide
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.51
(3)


Methanol
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
−0.39
(4)


Formic acid
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.58
(5)


Ethane
2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O
−0.27
(6)


Ethanol
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O
−0.33
(7)


Oxalate
2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4
−0.87
(8)




In spite of many years' efforts, the conversion efficiency and product selectivity of CO2 photoreduction in aqueous solutions are still very low. To date, the highest solar-to-fuel energy conversion efficiency of ∼1% under AM 1.5G without any external bias has been reported by Kang et al. using a wired CuFeO2/CuO photocathode and this value is comparable to the efficiency of photosynthesis occurring in most of the plants.43 Interestingly, a record high energy conversion efficiency of 15.8% for solar water reduction has been recently obtained by Gao and colleagues under AM 1.5G at 0.65 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using a Pt/n+/p-InPNP photocathode.57 The great difference of acquired energy conversion efficiencies between the two photoconversion systems is a result of several factors.
(i) CO2 is one of the most stable and chemically inert molecules with a linear geometry.58 The breaking of CO bonds and the bending of the linear molecular structure need a large input of energy and appropriate catalysts.59 The free energy change for the conversion of one H2O molecule to H2 and 1/2O2 under standard conditions is 237.2 kJ mol−1.60 However, the reduction of CO2 with H2O into hydrocarbon fuels such as CH4 and CH3OH is an uphill reaction with a higher positive change in the Gibbs free energy of 818.3 kJ mol−1 and 702.2 kJ mol−1, respectively, which makes the CO2 reduction quite a grand challenge.8
(ii) One famous mechanism for CO2 photoreduction involves the first step of the formation of a CO2˙− intermediate, which has a very negative equilibrium potential of −1.9 V versus NHE (eqn (9)).61,62 Therefore, a high overpotential is needed to convert a CO2 molecule and the real applied potentials for CO2 reduction are significantly more negative than the equilibrium ones in Table 1. CO2 + e− → CO2˙− (−1.90 V vs. NHE, pH 0)(9)
This reaction is widely recognized as the first step to activate CO2 for the subsequent reaction, which is always considered as the rate-limiting step due to a large reorganizational energy between the linear molecule of CO2 and bent radical anion of CO2˙−.56Fig. 3 shows the band-gap positions of some typical semiconductors and the standard reduction potentials for CO2 reduction reactions. Thermodynamically for the photoreduction reactions, the conduction band edge of semiconductors is required to be above the standard reduction potential, whereas photo-oxidation reactions can occur only when the valence band edge of semiconductors is below the standard oxidation potential.19 It can be seen that photogenerated electrons in the conduction band edge of all the candidate semiconductors do not have enough driving force to carry out the one-electron reduction of CO2 to CO2˙−.63,64 The thermodynamic difficulty in the activation of the CO2 molecule would lead to the low efficiency of CO2 photoreduction.
 Fig. 3  Conduction band (red squares) and valence band (blue squares) positions of some candidate semiconductor photocatalysts and the redox potentials versus NHE of CO2 reduction and water splitting at pH 0. 
(iii) Another mechanistic route involves a series of multiple proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) processes to bypass the formation of a high-energy CO2˙− radical.65 Through transferring the protons with electrons, the large activation barriers caused by significant reorganization energies as well as the formation of unstable intermediates can be more readily avoided.66 However, PCET has a considerable kinetic dependence on both the concentration of available protons in the solution and the partial electron density on the surface of heterogeneous catalysts.67 Moreover, if CH4 and CH3OH are the main target products, the generation of CH4 and CH3OH needs the transfer of eight and six electrons, respectively, which is more difficult than the two-electron reaction of H2 evolution from H2O (Table 1). Significant achievements have been made in the reaction of CO2 reduction into CO and HCOOH. The conversions of CO2 into more valuable products such as CH4, CH3OH or C2H4, which involve multiple PCET have only been demonstrated with low conversion efficiency and selectivity.4,8,9,19 Therefore, in addition to the thermodynamic limitations, there are also many kinetic challenges in CO2 reduction to hydrocarbon fuels.
(iv) The solubility of CO2 in water is very low (e.g., 0.033 mol L−1 at 25 °C under 1 atm)68 and the adsorption and activation of CO2 are generally more difficult than that of H2O. The reduction of H2O to H2 is kinetically more favorable and becomes a fiercely competing reaction with the reduction of CO2, which leads to a low selectivity for carbonaceous products.
Furthermore, as shown in Table 1, many possible products of CO2 photoreduction could be presented both in the gaseous and liquid phases, which makes the product separation and detection quite a complex process. Therefore, the enhancement in the adsorption and activation of CO2 and the decrease of the overpotential for CO2˙− intermediate formation are urgently demanded, which will be discussed in Section 3. Currently, the mechanisms and pathways of CO2 photoreduction on heterogeneous catalysts are still unclear. It is also a great challenge to guide the CO2 reduction pathways for the desired products in aqueous solutions. The dependent factors on the reaction intermediates and pathways of CO2 photoreduction will be discussed in Section 4.
3. Adsorption and activation of CO2
The adsorption and activation of CO2 on the surface of heterogeneous catalysts are both crucial for the subsequent reduction steps and the suppression of the competing HER. It is understood that CO2 adsorption leads to the formation of a partially charged species CO2δ˙− through interactions with surface atoms.58,69,70 Although the gaseous CO2 molecule has a linear structure and does not have a dipole moment, each of the oxygen atoms in it has a lone pair of electrons and can donate these electrons to surface Lewis acid centers (Fig. 4a). Moreover, the carbon atom could also gain electrons from Lewis base centers such as oxide ions, forming a carbonate-like species (Fig. 4b). Certainly, the CO2 molecule can act as an electron donor and acceptor simultaneously to form mixed coordination (Fig. 4c).
 Fig. 4  The possible structures of adsorbed CO2δ˙− on catalysts.58,69,71 Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. 
Furthermore, the CO2δ˙− adsorbate no longer has the linear symmetry of the free CO2 molecule and thus has a lower barrier for accepting an electron because the LUMO level decreases as the molecule bends.4 The chemisorption of CO2 can be promoted by several strategies such as the increase of catalyst surface area, surface defects, basic sites and noble-metal cocatalysts promoted surfaces, which will be discussed in the following sections.56,58
3.1 Increase of surface area for CO2 adsorption and activation

3.1.1 Structural and morphological control of semiconductor catalysts. 
The adsorption, photoinduced activation and reduction of CO2 on TiO2 surfaces have been extensively studied theoretically and experimentally.70,72,73 For example, the CO2 adsorption sites on the predominant anatase TiO2(101) were well identified using first-principles calculations. He et al. found that the anatase (101) facet played a critical role in adsorbing CO2 and facilitating the electron transfer from the surface of TiO2 to CO2 in the process of photochemical reduction of CO2, besides its role in generating and separating electron–hole pairs during photoexcitation.74,75 In addition, the adsorption isotherms of CO2 on pure and nitrogen modified TiO2 photocatalysts can be well described using the Freundlich adsorption equation and the Freundlich constant of 1/n is between 0.1 and 0.5, which indicates that the adsorption of CO2 onto TiO2 photocatalysts is a favorable process.73 Therefore, the increase of TiO2 surface area especially the preferential exposure of (101) facets could enhance the adsorption capacity of TiO2 photocatalysts for CO2.8 Usually, owing to the higher thermodynamic stability of (101) facets, most anatase TiO2 crystals feature the exposure of (101) rather than (001) facets, which is beneficial for the adsorption of CO2.76 However, Han et al. found that (101) facets exhibited lower photocatalytic activity than (001) facets due to the high density of active unsaturated Ti atoms and active surface oxygen atoms on (001) facets.77 Therefore, in order to balance the adsorption effect of (101) facets and the high photocatalytic activity of (001) facets on anatase TiO2 for a high CO2 photoreduction efficiency, Yu et al. controlled the ratio of (001) and (101) facets through adjusting the amounts of HF during the preparation of TiO2 nanosheets (Fig. 5a).48 The highest CH4 yield of 1.35 μmol h−1 g−1 for CO2 photoreduction was achieved at an optimal exposed (101) and (001) facets ratio of 45:55 by adding 4.5 mL HF during the preparation process (Fig. 5b). In addition, the co-exposed facets can form a surface facet-based homojunction within a single TiO2 particle, which is beneficial for charge separation and transportation.48,78
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the spatial separation of redox sites on TiO2 samples prepared by varying HF amounts of 0, 4.5 and 9 mL; (b) comparison of the photocatalytic CH4-generation activity of P25 and the TiO2 samples prepared by varying HF amounts from 0 to 9 mL. Reaction conditions: 100 mg catalysts in 10 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp.48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of ultrathin nanosheet-scaffolded ZnGa2O4 microspheres; (d) photocatalytic CH4-production by various ZnGa2O4 samples over an average reaction time of 9 hours. Reaction conditions: 100 mg catalysts in 0.4 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with an IR cut filter.79 Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The structural and morphological control of other semiconductors was also applied for CO2 photoreduction. Liu et al. synthesized single-crystalline, ultrathin ZnGa2O4 nanosheets with over 99.6% exposed (110) facets for CO2 photoreduction through an easy solvothermal route (Fig. 5c).79 The thickness dimension down to several nanometers with regard to the nanosheets offered a high specific surface area and led to a strong CO2 adsorption ability. Combined with the high crystallinity, the as-prepared ultrathin ZnGa2O4 nanosheets exhibited a ∼35% enhancement of photocatalytic conversion performance of CO2 to CH4 with an apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) of 0.035% at 280 ± 15 nm compared with meso-ZnGa2O4 (Fig. 5d). Mao et al. synthesized two kinds of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) through a pyrolysis process of urea or melamine. The product derived from urea (u-g-C3N4) showed a mesoporous flake-like structure with a larger surface area and higher photoactivity for CO2 reduction than the non-porous flaky product obtained from melamine (m-g-C3N4). The higher surface area of u-g-C3N4 can lead to more efficient surface adsorption and faster photogenerated carrier separation, and then to the improvement of photoactivity. The as-prepared m-g-C3N4 only produced C2H5OH with an amount of 8.7 μmol under 12 h visible-light irradiation, whereas C2H5OH and CH3OH could be obtained over u-g-C3N4 with amounts of 10.8 and 15.1 μmol, respectively. The measured AQE values for m-g-C3N4 and u-g-C3N4 were 0.08% and 0.18%, respectively, under 420 nm monochromatic irradiation.80


3.1.2 Utilization of porous materials. 
In addition to semiconductor catalysts, some porous materials such as zeolites and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) can also be utilized in photocatalytic reactions.81,82 Such porous materials with super-high surface areas, tunable porosities and dimensionalities are suitable for capturing small CO2 or H2O molecules in their cavities.83,84 Therefore, the incorporation of CO2 reduction sites into these porous materials is a promising strategy to provide a suitable catalyst structure, in which CO2 can be efficiently adsorbed, activated and then reduced by photogenerated electrons.
Zeolites are porous aluminosilicates with an essential structure of a negatively charged framework consisting of interlocking SiO4 and AlO4 tetrahedra joined together in various regular arrangements through shared oxygen atoms, which results in high porosity and large adsorption capacities for gases.83,84 Therefore, zeolites can be utilized in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to take advantage of their high surface area and pore volume, tunable pore size and good stability, although they are normally UV-responsive.85 Anpo and co-workers performed a series of CO2 photoreduction reactions over zeolite catalysts containing highly dispersed TiO2.81,86–89 They introduced TiO2 species into the framework of mesoporous zeolites (Ti-MCM-41 and Ti-MCM-48) by hydrothermal synthesis and performed CO2 photoreduction with H2O to produce CH4 and CH3OH in the gas phase over the obtained catalysts. These Ti-containing zeolite catalysts exhibited ∼10-times higher photocatalytic efficiency for the generation of CH4 than the bulk TiO2 powdered catalysts and high selectivity for the generation of CH3OH, while the latter catalysts led to the formation of CH4 alone. This is because of the formation of charge transfer excited complexes of (Ti3+–O−)* under the UV irradiation on the isolated TiO2 species in zeolites. The electron transfer from OH− into the trapped hole center of O− led to the formation of OH˙ radicals and finally led to the generation of CH3OH through the combination of methyl and OH˙ radicals. These results indicated that the zeolite structure with large pore sizes having a three-dimensional channel structure was suitable not only for achieving a high dispersion state of the TiO2 species but also for achieving a large amount of adsorbed CO2 and a high efficiency to generate CH3OH.87 The same group also synthesized Ti-SBA-15 using a block copolymer template under acidic conditions. The obtained catalyst with a high surface area of 1040 m2 g−1 and an average pore diameter of 69 Å exhibited 20-times higher photocatalytic activity compared with Ti-MCM-41 and Ti-MCM-48 with an average pore diameter of 27–29 Å for CO2 reduction into CH4 and CH3OH under UV irradiation. The increase of CO2 photoreduction activity was ascribed to the larger pore size and the resulting higher dispersion of TiO2 species in Ti-SBA-15.88 In brief, the utilization of mesoporous materials (MCM-41, MCM-48, SBA-15, etc.) for highly dispersed TiO2 species leads to relatively high efficiency for CO2 photoreduction into CH4 or/and CH3OH, which makes them promising candidates for CO2 photoreduction. However, most of the reported zeolite-based photocatalysts are only UV-responsive and their conversion efficiency for CO2 reduction is still very low. Therefore, the development of highly efficient visible-light active porous materials for CO2 photoreduction is an urgent demand.
As a new family of inorganic–organic hybrid supramolecular materials, MOFs emerge as promising catalysts for CO2 photoconversion due to their super-high surface area and excellent adsorption capacity for CO2 molecules. MOFs can be constructed by linking metal ions or small metallic nanoclusters into one-, two- or three-dimensional structures through multi-functional organic linkers.90 By changing the linkers, various properties such as the pore size, electronic properties and catalytic capabilities can be adjusted.19 In addition, in order to make the MOFs more selective toward CO2 adsorption, surface functionalization, in particular surface amine-functionalization, has been performed to provide adsorption sites for CO2. In some cases, the organic linkers in MOFs already contain amine groups during their synthesis, which endow the resulting materials with excellent CO2 adsorption features.84 To date, several different MOFs have been utilized for CO2 photoreduction. Lin and colleagues first demonstrated a MOF-based heterogeneous catalytic system by doping different molecular complexes into UiO-67(Zr) for water oxidation and photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light irradiation.91,92 The MOF constructed by incorporating [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl] (dcbpy = 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid) into the UiO-67 framework served as an active catalyst for photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO with a turnover number (TON) of 10.9, three times higher than that of the homogeneous complex [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl].91 As for the adsorption of CO2, Liu et al. first directly demonstrated that MOFs such as zeolitic imidazolate framework 8 (ZIF-8, composed of Zn(mIm)2 units; mIm = methyl imidazole) could effectively adsorb CO2 dissolved in water and promote photocatalytic activity of a semiconductor in CO2 reduction into liquid fuels in an aqueous electrolyte. The as-prepared Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 hybrid nanorods with 25 wt% ZIF-8 (inset of Fig. 6a) inherited both high CO2 adsorption capacity of ZIF-8 (Fig. 6a) and high crystallinity of Zn2GeO4, and thus exhibited 3.8 times higher dissolved CO2 adsorption than the bare Zn2GeO4. Therefore, compared with the Zn2GeO4 nanorod photocatalyst, the obtained Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 hybrid nanorods achieved a 62% enhancement in photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into CH3OH (Fig. 6b).93 In addition, an appropriate modification can enhance the visible light absorption capability of MOF materials. Li and colleagues first reported the photoreduction of CO2 to HCOO− under visible light using an amine-functionalized Ti-centered MOF, NH2-MIL-125(Ti). This kind of MOF has the formula of Ti8O8(OH)4(bdc-NH2)6 (bdc = benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate) with dangling NH2 groups which are free from coordination. The presence of NH2 in the organic linkers does not change the structure but increases the visible-light absorption of the UV-responsive MIL-125(Ti) material with the absorption band from 350 nm to 550 nm (Fig. 6c). In addition, upon light illumination of the MOF, an electron transfers from the photoactive organic ligand to the metal–oxo cluster in NH2-MIL-125(Ti) to generate Ti3+, which is beneficial for the CO2 adsorption and reduction (Fig. 6d).94 In addition to the enhancement of CO2 adsorption, MOFs can also promote the electron transfer in some cases. Wang and co-workers first demonstrated that a cobalt-containing zeolitic imidazolate framework (Co-ZIF-9) could act as a robust MOF cocatalyst and promote the capture and photoconversion of CO2 into CO by cooperating with a Ru-based photosensitizer or CdS as a light harvester. The total catalytic TON of the obtained Co-ZIF-9 was about 450 within 2.5 hours and it retained its original reactivity during the prolonged reaction. The AQE of this MOF-promoted CO2 photoreduction system was estimated to be 1.58% under 420 nm monochromatic irradiation. It was also demonstrated that the Co-ZIF-9 cocatalyst could not only promote the CO2 capture and reduction, but also play a crucial role in facilitating electron transfer from the light harvester system to reaction centers.8,95 Therefore, MOF materials deserve more attention as they are able to absorb visible light, promote the electron transfer and the most importantly enhance the CO2 adsorption. However, the main bottleneck of MOFs for CO2 photoreduction is their poor stability in aqueous solutions.82 A long term reaction of CO2 photoreduction with H2O could lead to the structurally irreversible deactivation of MOFs. Therefore, the stability of MOFs in aqueous solutions should be improved for their further applications in photocatalysis.
 Fig. 6  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms (273 K) of the as-prepared samples. The inset is a schematic of Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 hybrid nanorods; (b) CH3OH generation amounts over different samples as a function of the light irradiation time. Reaction conditions: 200 mg catalysts in 100 mL 0.1 M Na2SO3; 500 W Xe arc lamp.93 Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) UV/Vis spectra of MIL-125(Ti) and NH2-MIL-125(Ti). The inset shows the sample images; (d) the mechanism for the CO2 photoreduction over NH2-MIL-125(Ti) under visible light irradiation.94 Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 

3.2 Surface defects for CO2 adsorption and activation

3.2.1 Oxygen vacancies. 
Surface defects, such as oxygen vacancies and step edges, are among the most reactive sites on the surfaces of metal oxides, which can modify the structure and change the electronic and chemical properties of the semiconductor surface.9,96 Surface oxygen vacancies are proposed to take part in many chemical reactions and can play important roles in governing the adsorption and activation of CO2.70 Lee et al. investigated the adsorption of CO2 molecules at the oxygen vacancy defects (VO) on the TiO2(110) surface using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). As shown in the STM image of the TiO2(110) surface after exposure to CO2 at 55 K (Fig. 7a), all the VO sites are occupied by the CO2 features (marked with diamonds), which are brighter than the bridging hydroxyl features (OHb, marked with circles). The inset images in Fig. 7a show the same surface area before and after the thermal diffusion of two CO2 molecules away from their VO sites, which can clearly reveal the VO sites under CO2. Hence, they found that in the presence of oxygen vacancies, one of the oxygen atoms in a CO2 molecule was located just above the plane of the bridging bonded oxygen (Obr) rows and then eliminates the defect with the tilt of the molecular axis (Fig. 7b).97 This attraction between the surface oxygen vacancies and the oxygen atoms in CO2 molecules would lower the activation barrier and enhance the trapping and activation of CO2.
 Fig. 7  (a) STM image (1.5 V, 5 pA, 15 nm × 15 nm) of the TiO2(110) surface after adsorption of CO2 at 55 K. The CO2 and OHb features are marked with diamonds and circles, respectively. The inset images (5.1 nm × 2.6 nm) show the same surface area before (upper) and after (lower) the thermal diffusion of two CO2 molecules (dotted ellipse in the upper inset) away from their VO sites, leaving two intact VO sites visible (dotted ellipse in the lower inset).97 (b) A schematic showing a VO, a OHb and a CO2 molecule adsorbed at a VO site on the reduced TiO2.97 Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Therefore, the introduction of oxygen vacancies onto the surface of stoichiometric photocatalysts can promote the CO2 adsorption and activation.27,98–101 Ye and co-workers synthesized self-doped SrTiO3−δ through a one-step combustion method followed by calcination in Ar at temperatures ranging from 1200 to 1400 °C for CO2 photoreduction under visible light. The presence of Ti3+ indicated the generation of oxygen vacancies and induced an in-gap band to enhance the visible light adsorption. The pulsed adsorption of CO2 and temperature programmed desorption (TPD) experiments demonstrated that the CO2 adsorption can be enhanced by increasing the oxygen vacancies in SrTiO3. The as-prepared SrTiO2.83 sample treated at an optimized temperature of 1300 °C exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction to CH4 with an AQE of 0.21% at 600 nm.98 Later on, they also prepared an oxygen-vacancy-rich ultrathin W18O49 nanowire (Fig. 8a) and demonstrated a high activity for CO2 photoreduction to CH4 with an average generation rate of 666 ppm g−1 h−1 over the as-prepared photocatalyst, which was several hundred times higher than that of commercial WO3 due to the presence of oxygen vacancies (Fig. 8b).99 Li and colleagues prepared Cu(I)/TiO2−x with plenty of oxygen vacancies on the surface by thermal annealing in an inert environment. Through in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) analysis, it was first demonstrated that the CO2− species, generated upon an electron attachment to CO2, were spontaneously dissociated into CO even in the dark on the surface of Cu(I)/TiO2−x. This phenomenon is due to the presence of surface oxygen vacancies which can provide active sites for the adsorption of oxygen atoms from CO2 (Fig. 8c).100
 Fig. 8  (a) FESEM and TEM (inset) images of the W18O49 nanowires; (b) time courses of CH4 generation amounts over the as-synthesized W18O49 nanowires and commercial WO3 under visible light. Reaction conditions: 100 mg catalysts in 0.8 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with 420 nm cut-off filter (30 mW cm−1).99 Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (c) A possible mechanism for spontaneous dissociation of CO2 on a defective Cu(I)/TiO2−x catalyst in the dark at room temperature.100 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 Sulfur vacancies. 
In addition to the oxygen vacancies, other defects such as surface sulfur vacancies on sulfide-based photocatalysts can achieve the similar results. By adding excess Cd2+ in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), the as-prepared CdS–DMF induced sulfur vacancies on the surface, which can act as adsorptive sites for the CO2 molecule and increase the photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction to CO.102,103 Quantized ZnS crystallites with low density of surface defects are indispensable for the effective CO2 reduction to formate with an AQE of 0.24 at 313 nm due to the stabilization of e−–h+ pairs against the recombination and the enhanced CO2 adsorption by surface traps. In addition, upon adding excess precursors of Zn(ClO4)2·6H2O into the system, the as-prepared ZnS–DMF(ClO4) hexagonal nanocrystallites had a high coverage of surface sulfur vacancies, inducing a change in product distribution between CO and HCOOH without losing photocatalytic activity. A mechanism was proposed that CO2 interacts with the Zn atoms of ZnS–DMF and can be reduced to CO2˙− by the photogenerated electrons. Then the radical can be attacked by adsorbed hydrogen atoms leading to the formation of formate with a low density of surface sulfur vacancies. However, when there are many sulfur vacancies with a low population of adsorbed hydrogen atoms, the CO2˙− radical has to accept additional electrons or react with another CO2 molecule to form a Zn2+OCOCO2 complex, which can be reduced to CO.104,105 Therefore, in addition to the enhanced adsorption and activation of CO2, the surface defects can also have an effect on the reaction pathways of CO2 conversion.
In summary, the introduction of defects can provide the adsorptive sites for the activation of CO2, lower the barriers for the subsequent reduction reactions and change the product distributions of CO2 conversion. Moreover, attention should be paid to optimize the density and distribution of the defects for higher photoconversion efficiency of CO2 reduction because the defects can also lead to the recombination of charge carriers in some cases.8 Li and co-workers studied the effect of defects on photocatalytic activity and found that both surface and bulk defects in TiO2 nanocrystals played critical roles in photocatalysis.106 Surface defects can serve both as charge carrier traps and adsorption sites where the charge transfer to adsorbed species can prevent the charge recombination. However, the bulk defects only act as charge traps where charge recombines.107 Therefore, the charge separation and the photocatalytic efficiency can be significantly improved through decreasing the relative concentration ratio of bulk defects to surface defects.106

3.3 Surface basic sites for CO2 adsorption and activation
As mentioned in the beginning of this section, CO2 can act as an electron acceptor when the electrophilic C atom interacts with the surface electron centers or Lewis basic sites.58 Therefore, another surface modification strategy for improving CO2 adsorption and activation is the introduction of functional basic sites on the surface of photocatalysts.
Some solid basic hydroxides or oxides such as NaOH, MgO, CaO, ZrO2 and Ga2O3 can act as electron donors for the interaction with the carbon atom in CO2.108–110 Ye and co-workers modified the surface of TiO2 with solid NaOH and demonstrated that NaOH could promote the chemisorption, activation and photoreduction of CO2 into CH4 on TiO2 without loading any noble metal cocatalysts. The optimized NaOH loading amount was 3 wt% and the corresponding sample generated 52 μmol g−1 CH4 within 6 hours with an AQE of 0.34% at 367.9 ± 10 nm, while the bare TiO2 could hardly show any activity for CH4 evolution.109 Although MgO is an insulating material, Kohno et al. found that MgO exhibited activity for the reduction of CO2 to CO under irradiation with H2 as a reductant, which, however, cannot be explained by the conventional band theory.111 Therefore, through electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra, photoluminescence (PL) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy analyses, a new mechanism was proposed that the activation of CO2 adsorbed on MgO under irradiation could generate the CO2− radical, which was then reduced to the surface bidentate formate by H2 or CH4 under dark conditions. This surface bidentate formate can further reduce CO2 in the gas phase to CO under photoirradiation.111,112 This proposed mechanism can also explain the CO2 photoreduction on ZrO2.113 However, the mechanism of CO2 photoreduction over Ga2O3 was slightly different from that on ZrO2 or MgO, which involved the surface monodentate bicarbonate species instead.114 Recently, the loading of MgO onto the surface of TiO2 for improved photocatalytic CO2 reduction was well demonstrated by Wang and co-workers.108,110 They found that the addition of MgO onto TiO2 could enhance the generation of CO during CO2 photoreduction with H2O vapor under ambient conditions and a more significant enhancement in CH4 formation with 2.2 μmol in 10 hours was observed by adding MgO into Pt–TiO2 (Fig. 9a and b). Apart from basic hydroxides and oxides, as common Lewis bases the amine groups have been widely employed for CO2 capture in industry.115 The chemical interactions between amine groups and CO2 lead to the formation of carbamate/bicarbamate which can transform to carbonate through hydrolysis. Liao et al. synthesized amine-functional TiO2 nanoparticles by a solvothermal approach between TiCl4 and monoethanolamine (MEA). The as-prepared MEA-functionalized TiO2 (MEA–TiO2) samples exhibited much higher rates of 67 ppm h−1 for CO2 photoreduction into CO than bare TiO2 or hydroxyl-functionalized TiO2 (EG–TiO2), which was due to the improved chemisorption and activation of CO2 and charge transfer from excited TiO2 on MEA–TiO2 (Fig. 9c and d).116 Also having rich nitrogen-containing groups on the surface, C3N4 is expected to be an excellent photocatalysts to promote CO2 adsorption and activation. Wang and co-workers demonstrated that the graphitic carbon nitride can function both as a capture/activation substrate of CO2 and a photocatalyst for CO2 photoreduction. Thereinto, CoOx modified mesoporous g-C3N4 exhibited a CO generation amount of 10.2 μmol in 2 hours with an AQE of 0.25% at 420 nm. Due to the low-cost and large CO2 adsorption capacity of C3N4 materials, they deserve more attention.35
 Fig. 9  (a) Proposed functioning mechanisms of the MgO layer and Pt nanoparticles over TiO2 for photoreduction of CO2 in the presence of H2O; (b) amounts of CO and CH4 formed in the photoreduction of CO2 in the presence of H2O over different photocatalysts. Reaction conditions: 20 mg catalysts in 2.0 MPa CO2 with H2O vapor; 100 W Xe lamp (λ = 320–780 nm); irradiation time: 10 h.108 Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A proposed mechanism of MEA–TiO2 capture of CO2 on the TiO2 surface and the photoreduction to CO and CH4. (d) The amount of CO generated as a function of the irradiation time for the different samples under UV/Vis light in the presence of CO2 and water vapor.116 Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
3.4 Noble-metal cocatalysts for CO2 adsorption and activation
In a study of photoinduced CO2 activation and dissociation on reduced TiO2-supported noble metals by means of FTIR, it was found that the capacity towards CO2 dissociation was correlated with the work function of the polycrystalline metals on the reduced TiO2.117 Through the comparison of the work function between reduced TiO2 and polycrystalline noble metals, it can be stated that upon illumination the electrons may flow from TiO2 to the noble metals (Pt, Ir and Rh) which have a larger work function at the interface. Then, the electron back donation from noble metal d-orbitals into the (C–O) π* orbital of CO2 leads to the formation of bent CO2δ˙− species and then the adsorbed CO. However, there was no adsorbed CO generation on Ru/TiO2 due to the smaller work function of Ru and no driving force for electrons to flow from TiO2 onto Ru.117 Tanaka et al. found that the step sites on Pt were the active sites for CO2 dissociation to form chemisorbed oxygen atoms and CO accompanied by the appearance of bidentate carbonate species on the TiO2 support.118 In addition to CO2 activation, noble metals on the surface of semiconductors may also act as electron trapping centers and promote the electron–hole separation, thus leading to a significant enhancement in the activity for CO2 photoreduction.
In summary, an appropriate surface modification onto heterogeneous photocatalysts can greatly enhance the CO2 adsorption and activation and lower the barriers for the subsequent CO2 reduction. However, it should be mentioned that the interface between a photocatalyst and a cocatalyst is also critical for the separation and transportation of charge carriers18 and the cocatalyst may compete with the underlying photocatalyst for light absorption.119 Therefore, the photocatalyst/cocatalyst structure should be appropriately designed and engineered to enhance the activity for CO2 photoreduction.
4. Reaction mechanism and pathways of CO2 reduction
Upon CO2 adsorption and activation on the surface of catalysts, the subsequent electron transfer to the adsorbed CO2 initiates a series of chemical reactions which eventually determine the distribution of final products and the efficiency of the photocatalytic process. As shown in Table 1, the multistep reduction of one CO2 molecule may involve as many as eight electrons/protons as well as the cleavage of CO bonds and the formation of C–H bonds. Therefore, this complex process leads to the formation of different products according to the different reaction pathways taken. To date, many studies have been dedicated to elucidate the reaction mechanism and pathways of CO2 reduction. Nevertheless, most of these studies were conducted on metallic electrodes in electrocatalysis or TiO2 particles in photocatalysis. Related studies on PEC systems and other materials are still urgently demanded. Generally, the final gaseous and liquid products of CO2 photoreduction are identified and quantified by gas and high performance liquid chromatography (GC and HPLC), respectively.7 During the CO2 reduction process, it is thought to form several radical intermediates, which are usually unstable and have an unpaired electron and hence are paramagnetic. The recombination of the radical intermediates at different stages partially accounts for the number of possible pathways and the final products. Therefore, a number of techniques including EPR spectroscopy,4in situ DRIFTS,120 transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS),121 and STM97 can be employed to explore the reaction mechanism and pathways. The complex process of CO2 photoreduction can be affected by many factors such as the CO2 adsorption mode, pH of the electrolyte, surface functional groups, surface cocatalysts and the external bias, which will be discussed in the following section.
4.1 Understanding of CO2 adsorption modes
As mentioned in Section 3, there are mainly three kinds of CO2˙− adsorption modes on the surface of catalysts (Fig. 4). Each possible binding mode may lead to a different reaction mechanism/pathway and hence a different distribution of products. Zapol and co-workers carried out first-principles calculations to explore reaction mechanisms of the 2e− reduction of CO2 to HCOOH or CO in photocatalytic CO2 reduction over anatase TiO2.75 They organized the reaction pathways into two categories according to the anchoring atoms of CO2˙− on the surface by the calculated energies.
As for the oxygen coordination mode (Fig. 4a), the following reaction step is the preferential binding between the carbon atom in CO2 and a hydrogen atom to form HCOO−, which can subsequently combine with a proton to produce HCOOH (eqn (10)–(12)). The hydrogen atom can originate from the reduction of a proton by a conduction-band electron.71,75 The breaking of the C–O bond in the CO2 molecule does not occur in this situation and the final product is formic acid. Formic acid can be further reduced by electrons and hydrogenated to form different products, which have not been verified experimentally yet. ˙COOads− + H+ → HCOOads˙(10) HCOOads˙ + e− → HCOO−(11) HCOO− + H+ → HCOOH(12)
As for the carbon or mixed coordination mode (Fig. 4b and c), which involves the carbon atom in the CO2 molecule, the anchoring of the carbon atom on the surface makes it difficult to undergo hydrogenation. Therefore, a hydrogen atom attacks one oxygen atom in CO2˙− to form carboxyl ˙COOH instead (eqn (13)), which can preferentially combine with a hydrogen radical to form formic acid in a medium with a high dielectric constant such as water. However, it is more likely that the attachment of a hydrogen atom to the oxygen atom in CO2˙− can lead to an immediate cleavage of the bond between this oxygen atom and the carbon atom with a carbon monoxide molecule left adsorbed (eqn (14)).122 This mechanism is more favored when CO2˙− is bound to the surface through the carbon atom and in this situation the cleavage of the C–O bond occurs first. The adsorbed carbon monoxide can easily desorb from the surface of catalysts with weak CO adsorption properties and thus the major product is carbon monoxide.71 If the catalyst has moderate adsorption strength, the adsorbed carbon monoxide can accept additional electrons to form carbon radicals and subsequently combine with up to four H˙ radicals to form CH˙, carbene, a methyl radical and eventually methane, which have been detected by EPR spectroscopy.123,124 Thereinto, if the methyl radical combines with a hydroxyl radical instead of a hydrogen radical, then methanol is produced.4 Therefore, carbon monoxide has been widely identified as a primary reaction intermediate for the formation of hydrocarbons and the combination of CO with methanol and/or methane is a rather common set of products observed in many experiments mentioned above. ˙COOads− + H+ → ˙COOHads(13) ˙COOHads + e− → COads + OH−(14)
In addition, CO could also be formed by the reaction between CO2˙− and adsorbed hydrogen (eqn (15)). ˙COOads− + Hads → COads + OH−(15)
In summary, if CO2˙− obtained by CO2 adsorption and activation is bound to the surface atoms through the oxygen atom(s) (Fig. 4a), it prefers to combine with a hydrogen atom to form a formate anion and then a proton to form formic acid, in which the cleavage of the C–O bond does not occur and formic acid may become the final product. If the carbon atom in CO2˙− is bound to the surface (Fig. 4b and c), it is preferential that CO2˙− combines with a hydrogen atom to form a carboxyl radical and then disintegrates into the adsorbed carbon monoxide, in which the cleavage of the C–O bond occurs early. The adsorbed carbon monoxide can be further hydrogenated to form various hydrocarbon products. Therefore, it can be expected that the product distribution of CO2 photoreduction may be controlled through the rational design of the catalyst surface for the preferred CO2 binding mode. However, the understanding of the photocatalytic mechanism and pathways is still very limited and the adjustment of the CO2 surface binding mode is a significant challenge.
4.2 Effects of pH
In addition to the CO2 adsorption mode, the pH of the electrolyte also has a significant impact on the CO2 photoreduction mechanism and pathways. The pH value determines CO2 solubility and the relative concentration of CO32−, HCO3− and molecular CO2, thus leading to different adsorption modes. In this system, CO2 can act not only as a reactant but also as a buffer due to a series of buffer reactions (eqn (16) and (17)).71 Although the solubility of CO2 is very low especially in aqueous solutions, it can partially hydrate to form carbonic acid and then may dissociate into bicarbonate or carbonate at a higher pH value. Thereinto, eqn (16) leads to the CO2 saturated bulk solutions having pH values of around 6–8 for bicarbonate concentrations of 0.05–2 M, respectively.71 The different chemical species (i.e., CO32−, HCO3− or molecular CO2) have different adsorption characteristics on the catalyst surface and lead to different reactions with the corresponding standard redox potentials.8 Therefore, the reaction mechanism/pathway and the main final products may differ from each other. CO2 + H2O ↔ H2CO3 ↔ H+ + HCO3− (pKa = 6.4)(16) HCO3− ↔ H+ + CO32− (pKa = 10.3)(17)
In addition, the photoreduction of CO2 involves the multiple proton-coupled electron transfer process (Table 1) and has a considerable kinetic dependence on the concentration of available protons in the solution. The pH of the electrolyte can also have an impact on the competing HER. At a low pH value, proton reduction to hydrogen dominates. Hori et al. carried out a series of galvanostatic CO2 electroreduction reactions using a range of electrolyte from 0.03 M to 1.5 M KHCO3 and found different product distributions with the changes in local pH values.125 Gattrell et al. estimated the electrode surface pH and CO2 concentrations (Fig. 10a) along with the calculated reaction rates from data obtained by Hori's group (Fig. 10b).71 The reaction rates for CO2 reduction improved with the increase in pH values, especially the generation of hydrocarbons, which was in contrast to that for HER. The decrease in local CO2 concentration at high pH resulted from the higher reaction rates for CO2 reduction. It was accepted that the higher local pH (i.e., a lower availability of protons) could slow the generation rate of hydrocarbons. Therefore, the contrast between the improved hydrocarbon generation rate and the increase of local pH hinted the important role of adsorbed hydrogen in the CO2 reduction (possibly due to a reaction as in eqn (15)).
 Fig. 10  (a) Estimated local H+ and CO2 concentrations as a function of the surface pH value of KHCO3 at concentrations ranging from 0.03 M to 1.5 M using a boundary layer of 0.01 cm. (b) The influence of surface pH on the product distributions. Data calculated by Hori et al. showing the total CO2 reduction reaction rate and CO + hydrocarbons rate.125 Conditions: 5 mA cm−2; potential −1.28 V vs. NHE at 1.5 M varying to −1.42 V at 0.03 M KHCO3; 19 °C, CO2 bubbled.71 Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. 
Therefore, it can be seen that the pH value of the electrolyte plays a critical role in determining the preferred reaction mechanism/pathway and then the final products. It is important to control the local pH value at the catalyst surface. However, the gradual consumption of H+ during the reaction leads to an increasing pH value at the catalyst surface, which makes the availability of protons much complex and uncontrollable.
4.3 Effects of surface functional groups
Surface functional groups on the photocatalysts also prove to be a controlling factor in the reaction activity and selectivity for CO2 reduction. In particular, for the reaction in aqueous solutions, the product selectivity is greatly affected by the hydrophilic–hydrophobic properties of the catalyst surface which determine the availability of surface hydroxide groups. In fact, some reports have demonstrated that CH4 and CH3OH are formed competitively from methyl radicals. According to the hydrophilic–hydrophobic theory and the relative amount of water in the system, one product between CH4 and CH3OH will be favored.
Anpo and co-workers synthesized two types of Ti-β zeolites by a hydrothermal synthesis method under different conditions using OH− and F− as anions of the structure-directing agents, which led to the coexistence of hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties. PL measurements through the separate addition of CO2 and H2O indicated different H2O adsorption affinities between the two samples. The CO2 photoreduction was performed under UV irradiation in the presence of H2O over the two catalysts and led to the generation of CH3OH and CH4 with trace amounts of CO and C2H4. Ti-β(OH) with hydrophilic properties exhibited much higher reactivity compared to Ti-β(F) with hydrophobic properties, although the selectivity for the formation of CH3OH from Ti-β(F) reached up to 41%, higher than 11% from Ti-β(OH) (Fig. 11a). As a result of hydrophobicity, Ti-β(F) interacted much less with H2O leading to its lower overall conversion efficiency but higher selectivity for CH3OH. In addition, they also investigated the effect of F atoms on CO2 photoreduction with H2O over another catalyst, Ti/FSM-16. They found that through the fluorination of Ti/FSM-16, the yields of CH4 reduced, whereas the yields of CH3OH increased compared with the original catalysts without fluorination, indicating an increase in the selectivity for CH3OH (Fig. 11b). This was ascribed to the hydrophobicity of the catalysts through the fluorination.81,126 Later on, they used a series of Ti-containing porous silica thin films with different pore structures as photocatalysts for CO2 reduction with H2O and found different product distributions (Fig. 11c). FTIR investigations showed that these photocatalysts had different adsorption properties for H2O molecules and different concentrations of OH groups on the surface, which was found to play a critical role in the selectivity for the formation of CH3OH (Fig. 11d).127,128 It was found that photocatalysts with small amounts of surface hydroxide groups showed high selectivity for the formation of CH3OH.
 Fig. 11  (a) The product distribution of the photoreduction of CO2 with H2O on TiO2 powder (P25), Ti-β(F) and Ti-β(OH); (b) the effect of the fluorination of FSM-16 on the product distribution in the CO2 photoreduction with H2O over bare Ti/FSM-15 and Ti/FSM-15 obtained after 12.5% and 25% NH4F treatment.126,129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 and 129. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2001 American Chemical Society. (c) Yields of CH4 and CH3OH in the photoreduction of CO2 with H2O on Ti-containing porous silica film photocatalysts. (d) The relationship between the selectivity for the formation of CH3OH and the amounts of surface OH groups. Ti-PS(c) had a cubic structure and Ti-PS(h, 25)/Ti-PS(h, 50) had a hexagonal structure with a Si/Ti ratio of 25 and 50, respectively. Reaction conditions: 50 mg catalysts in 36 μmol CO2 and 180 μmol H2O, UV irradiation at 50 °C, reaction time is 6 h.127,128 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 and 128. Copyright 2002 Springer and 2002 Elsevier. 
In addition to hydroxyl radicals, other surface functional groups, such as amine, can alter the reaction mechanism and pathways of CO2 reduction. As mentioned in Section 3.3, the amine groups enable C–N bonding with CO2 to form carbamate which then transforms to carbonate through hydrolysis.116 This adsorption mode of carbon coordination (Fig. 4b) will lead to the formation of the carboxyl radical (˙COOH) which then disintegrates into adsorbed carbon monoxide (eqn (13) and (14)). Therefore, it is expected that the product distribution of CO2 reduction could be controlled through the manipulation of surface functional groups.
4.4 Effects of cocatalysts
It is widely known that the incorporation of cocatalysts could greatly improve the performance of photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. Cocatalysts can effectively enhance the surface reaction kinetics through lowering the activation energy or overpotential for CO2 reduction. Gunlazuardi et al. found that the activation energy for commercial P25 and 3 wt% CuO loaded TiO2 was ∼26 and 12 kJ mol−1, respectively, indicating the catalytic role of Cu species in enhancing the methanol generation in CO2 photoreduction.130 Moreover, the formation of the Schottky barrier between photocatalysts and cocatalysts, usually noble-metal-based nanoparticles, can also promote the charge separation and transportation leading to a high partial electron density around the cocatalysts. Zou et al. have demonstrated that the generation rate of CH4 in CO2 photoreduction over meso-ZnGa2O4 could be significantly enhanced up to 50.4 ppm h−1 by loading 1 wt% RuO2 as a cocatalyst to improve the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.131 In addition, the loading of cocatalysts could suppress the photocorrosion and increase the stability of unstable photocatalysts.
As for the diversity of products from CO2 photoreduction, cocatalysts could also affect the selectivity of products. Hori and co-workers carried out a series of investigations on CO2 electroreduction and found that electrocatalytic metals could be generally divided into four groups based on the product selectivity.132–134 The different product distributions are mainly the results from different intermediate CO adsorption properties, hydrogen evolution and CO2 activation overpotentials of various metal electrodes. The metals with high hydrogen evolution and CO2 activation overpotentials, as well as negligible CO adsorption properties, such as Pb and Hg, exhibit the major production of formate. The major product is CO when the electrocatalytic metals have a medium hydrogen evolution overpotential and weak CO adsorption strength, such as Au and Zn. When the electrocatalytic metals have a low hydrogen evolution overpotential and strong CO adsorption strength, such as Pt and Fe, the main reaction is the reduction of water to H2. However, Cu is a special catalyst for CO2 reduction as it can promote the reaction of CO to more reduced species, such as CH4 and CH3OH in significant amounts.56,71
As for the CO2 photoreduction, Ishitani et al. first investigated the effects of the deposited metals on TiO2 for CO2 photoreduction.135 They found that the loading of metals, such as Pd, Pt, Au etc., could greatly promote the photoactivity and the selectivity of TiO2 for CO2 reduction. For example, they found that using TiO2 treated by calcination and washing procedures for removal of the organic adsorbates, CO was photocatalytically generated as a major product, along with a very small amount of CH4, from an aqueous suspension under CO2 atmosphere. However, upon depositing Pd on the surface of TiO2, the as-prepared Pd–TiO2 photocatalyst exhibited a preferential generation of CH4 in place of CO (Fig. 12a and b).136 Similar phenomena were also identified by Biswas and co-workers for the nanoparticle size effect of Pt on CO2 reduction.137 They demonstrated a facile fabrication of Pt–TiO2 nanostructured films for efficient CO2 photoreduction through versatile gas-phase deposition methods. The as-prepared sample had a unique one-dimensional structure of TiO2 single crystals coated by ultrafine Pt nanoparticles with an optimized size of 0.5–2 nm (Fig. 12c) and exhibited extremely high CO2 photoreduction efficiency with highly selective formation of CH4. The maximum CH4 yield reached up to 1361 μmol g−1 h−1 with an AQE of 2.33% in the effective UV range (250 to 388 nm) over Pt–TiO2, whereas P25 and pristine TiO2 columnar films only led to the formation of CO (Fig. 12d). In addition, either larger or smaller Pt particles could result in lower performance for CO2 photoreduction. Smaller Pt particles possess smaller work functions leading to a restraining electron transfer from the CB of TiO2 to Pt. The larger particles can capture both electrons and holes acting as recombination centers and may compete with the TiO2 photocatalysts for light absorption. Therefore, the size of cocatalysts should be optimized for an appropriate surface area, light absorption efficiency and charge-carrier transportation.
 Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism of CO2 photoreduction over TiO2 and Pd–TiO2 photocatalysts; (b) the amount of products generated as a function of the irradiation time over TiO2 and Pd–TiO2 photocatalysts. Reaction conditions: 150 mg catalysts in 1.5 mL H2O under 650 Torr CO2, λ > 310 nm light irradiation at 5 °C.136 Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) A model and FESEM image of Pt loaded columnar TiO2 thin films. (d) CO and CH4 yields of CO2 photoreduction over P25, pristine TiO2 columnar films (TiO2 film), and Pt–TiO2 films with different Pt deposition times. Reaction conditions: 20 mg catalysts in H2O vapor, CO2 flow rate was maintained at 3 mL min−1, λ = 250–388 nm light irradiation with intensity of 19.6 mW cm−2.137 Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the particle size, the structure of cocatalysts could also influence the activity and selectivity for CO2 reduction. Zhu et al. have demonstrated that the edge sites of Au nanoparticles or nanowires have the highest selectivity for CO generation.138 The 8 nm Au nanoparticles with an optimum ratio of edge sites, which are highly active for CO2 reduction, exhibited 90% faradaic efficiency (FE) for CO generation, superior to smaller particles with more corner sites that are active for HER. The Au nanowires with a greater proportion of edge sites to corner sites (Fig. 13a and b) showed a FE of 94% for CO at a less negative potential than the Au nanoparticles (Fig. 13c and d).139
 Fig. 13  (a) Edge site weight percentage for a 2 nm wide Au nanowire and nanoparticle as a function of the number of Au atoms; (b) idealized ratios of edge/corner for the Au nanowire and nanoparticle; FE for CO in CO2 electroreduction under different potentials over (c) Au nanoparticles with different sizes and (d) Au nanowires with different lengths.138,139 Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 and 139. Copyright 2013 and 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Generally, the loaded cocatalysts could serve as electron traps and lead to high local electron densities around them, which may prefer the multiple electron transfer process of CH4 generation reaction. Moreover, the addition of cocatalysts could modify the hydrophilicity of the photocatalyst surface leading to a different availability of surface hydroxide groups so that the product distribution of CO2 photoreduction could be controlled and adjusted.
4.5 Effects of external bias
As shown in Table 1, different products from CO2 reduction will dominate at different applied potentials. The effects of external bias on the product distribution of CO2 electroreduction on a Cu electrode have been well investigated by several groups, such as Frese,140 Hori and their co-workers.125 Gattrell et al. estimated the partial currents for various products according to the data obtained by Hori's group (Fig. 14a).71 Initially, the current is predominantly for HER. Until around −0.95 V versus standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), CO and formate begin to generate and the increased rate of HER begins to decrease. At less negative potentials, the products of CO2 reduction are mainly CO and formate until around −1.12 V versus SHE, where hydrocarbons begin to form with first ethylene and then methane. The generation rate of hydrocarbons increases significantly with the negative shift of potentials showing a stronger potential dependence. At around −1.35 V, the generation of C2H4 and CH4 begins to dominate the total current density. In addition, different electrode materials may exhibit different responses to external potentials for CO2 reduction. Lee and colleagues reported highly efficient electrochemical reduction of CO2 using a Cu2O electrode to produce C2H4 primarily. Compared with the Cu electrode, Cu2O exhibited more efficient conversion of CO2 at low potentials. The FEs for various products at different potentials could support the proposed mechanism for the formation of hydrocarbons via CO as an intermediate species since the FEs of CO decreased with the increase of the FEs of hydrocarbons (Fig. 14c and d).141
 Fig. 14  (a) Partial current densities on a Cu electrode for different products as a function of the external bias; conditions: CO2 bubbled 0.1 M KHCO3 at 19 °C;71 reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. (b) Generation amounts of CO as a function of the reaction time using WO3 as a photoanode and Cu as a CE. Conditions: visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm) under different external biases in CO2 purged 0.5 M KHCO3;142 faradaic efficiencies for CH4, C2H4 and CO on (c) Cu2O and (d) Cu electrodes at different reduction potentials. Conditions: CO2 saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 solution.141 Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 and 142. Copyright 2013 and 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As for CO2 photoreduction, Lee and co-workers demonstrated a photoanode-driven PEC system consisting of a WO3 photoanode and a Cu cathode under visible light illumination with different external biases.142 CH4 was the major reduction product followed by C2H4 and CO. The amounts of CH4 and C2H4 increased with the increasing bias potentials from 0.55 V to 0.75 V versus RHE. However, the CO evolution rate under 0.75 V was much lower than that under 0.55 V versus RHE (Fig. 14b), indicating the different potential dependence of various products and the possibility that CO is an intermediate in CO2 reduction.
It is apparent that the external bias on the cathode plays an important role in the product distribution of CO2 reduction. Therefore, it can be inferred that the selectivity for products of CO2 reduction can be controlled through adjusting the external bias on the cathode. The applied potential should be negative enough to avoid the competitive HER and promote CO2 conversion. As for CO2 reduction in PEC systems, in addition to the externally applied bias, the photovoltage of the photocatalysts under illumination should also be taken into consideration. Some strategies for the enhancement of CO2 adsorption/activation and the effects of some dependent factors on the CO2 reduction mechanism/pathways are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Some examples of enhancing CO2 adsorption/activation for improved photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction and the effects of some dependent factors on CO2 photoreduction activity and mechanism/pathways




Strategy
Photocatalyst
Synthesis method
Reaction conditions
Reaction activity
Ref.




Increase surface area
Structural or morphological control


Anatase TiO2 with co-exposed (001) and (101) facets
Adjusting HF amounts in the solvothermal method
100 mg catalysts in 10 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp
The highest CH4 generation rate was 1.35 μmol g−1 h−1 over HF4.5

48



ZnGa2O4 nanosheets with a high specific surface area
Solvothermal method with ethylenediamine/H2O binary solvents
100 mg catalysts in 0.4 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with an IR cut filter
ZnGa2O4 nanosheets exhibited a CH4 generation rate of 6.9 ppm h−1 with an AQE of 0.035% at 280 ± 15 nm; ∼35% enhancement compared with meso-ZnGa2O4

79



Graphitic C3N4 derived from urea with a higher surface area than that from melamine
Pyrolysis process of urea/melamine at 580 °C for 3 h
200 mg catalysts in 100 mL 1.0 M NaOH; visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm)
The CH3OH and C2H5OH amounts over u-g-C3N4 were 15.1 and 10.8 μmol, respectively, in 12 h reaction; the measured AQE for u-g-C3N4 was 0.18% at 420 nm

80



Utilization of porous materials


TiO2 species included within the framework of MCM-41/48
Hydrothermal synthesis under basic conditions
Appropriate amount of catalysts in 120 μmol gaseous H2O at 55 °C; UV irradiation (λ = ∼280 nm)
Ti-MCM-48 exhibited ∼10-times higher photoactivity for CH4 generation than that of the bulk TiO2 powders

87



TiO2 species included within the framework of SBA-15
Hydrothermal synthesis under acidic conditions
Appropriate amount of catalysts in 120 μmol gaseous H2O at 55 °C; UV irradiation (λ = ∼280 nm)
Ti-SBA-15 exhibited 20-times higher photoactivity for CH4 and CH3OH evolution compared with Ti-MCM-41/48

88



[Re(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl] into the framework of UiO-67
A mix-and-match synthetic strategy under solvothermal conditions
Samples contained 1–2 μmol Re complex in 2 mL acetonitrile with 0.1 mL triethylamine; 450 W Xe-lamp with a 300 nm cut-off filter
The as-prepared sample exhibited a total CO-turnover number of 10.9 in 20 h reaction; 3-times higher than that of bare [Re(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl]

91



Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 hybrid nanorods
Growing ZIF-8 nanoparticles on Zn2GeO4 nanorods
200 mg catalysts in 100 mL 0.1 M Na2SO3; 500 W Xe arc lamp
Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 nanorods with 25 wt% ZIF-8 exhibited a 62% increase in CH3OH generation compared with bare Zn2GeO4

93



NH2-functionalized MIL-125(Ti)
Hydrothermal synthesis
50 mg catalysts in 60 mL MeCN/TEOA (v/v = 5:1); 500 W Xe lamp with UV-cut and IR-cut filters
HCOO− generation amounts in 10 h reached 8.14 μmol under visible light

94



Cobalt-containing zeolitic imidazolate framework (Co-ZIF-9)
Solvothermal method
0.8 μmol Co-ZIF-9 in 5 mL acetonitrile/H2O (v/v = 4:1) and 1 mL triethanolamine; Xe lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter
Co-ZIF-9 exhibited a total turnover number of 450 within 2.5 h for CO2 photoreduction with an AQE of 1.58% at 420 nm

95







Surface defects
Oxygen vacancies


Self-doped SrTiO3−δ
One-step combustion followed by calcination in Ar
300 mg catalysts in 2% H2O + 98% CO2 gas precursors; 300 W Xe lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter
The as-prepared SrTiO2.83 exhibited the highest activity for CH4 generation with an AQE of 0.21% at 600 nm

98



Ultrathin W18O49 nanowires
Solvothermal method
100 mg catalysts in 0.8 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter (30 mW cm−1)
W18O49 nanowires exhibited an average CH4 generation rate of 666 ppm g−1 h−1

99



Cu(I)/TiO2−x nanoparticles
Precipitation followed by thermal treatment
50 mg catalysts under 2 mL min−1 CO2 flow; 150 W solar simulator (∼90 mW cm−1)
Cu(I)/TiO2−x exhibited the maximum CO production rate of 4.3 μmol g−1 h−1

100



N-Doped InTaO4 with oxygen vacancies
Solid-state reaction and calcination in NH3 at 800 °C
100 mg catalysts in 50 mL H2O; visible light irradiation (λ = 390–770 nm) for 2 h
N-Doped InTaO4 increased the CH3OH yield to double that of the original InTaO4

27



Defect-rich CeO2 nanorods
One step hydrothermal synthesis
50 mg catalysts in 400 ppm CO2; 500 W Xe lamp
CO generation amounts in 6 h reached 24–28 μmol g−1

101



Sulfur vacancies


Colloidal CdS in DMF with surface sulfur vacancies
Adding excess Cd2+ into the precursors in an ice bath
Appropriate amount of catalysts in DMF and TEA; visible light irradiation
Surface sulfur vacancies drastically increase the photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction to CO

103



Hexagonal ZnS in DMF with surface sulfur vacancies
Adding excess Zn2+ into the precursors in an ice bath at 0 °C
2 mL DMF containing 10 mM ZnS and 1 M TEA; 500 W Hg lamp with a filter (λ > 290 nm)
The as-prepared samples exhibited both HCOO− and CO generation with an AQE of 0.24 at 313 nm for formate generation

104







Surface basic sites
NaOH–TiO2 composites
Impregnation method
80 mg catalysts in 80 kPa CO2 with H2O vapour; 300 W Xe lamp
3 wt% NaOH loading NaOH–TiO2 exhibited the highest CH4 generation amount of 52 μmol g−1 in 6 hours with an AQE of 0.34% at 367.9 ± 10 nm

109



Insulation material of MgO
Calcination
300 mg catalysts in 150 μmol CO2 and 50 μmol H2 or CH4; 500 W Hg lamp
CO2 adsorbed on MgO is activated to CO2− under illumination and further reduced to bidentate formate in H2 or CH4 in the dark

111



Pt–MgO/TiO2
Photodeposition and impregnation methods
20 mg catalysts in 2.0 MPa CO2 with H2O vapour; 100 W Xe lamp (λ = 320–780 nm)
Pt–1.0 wt% MgO/TiO2 exhibited the highest CH4 generation amount of 2.2 μmol in 10 hours

108



MEA-functionalized TiO2
Solvothermal method
20 mg catalysts in 0.1 mL H2O; Xe lamp
The as-prepared samples exhibited CO and CH4 generation amounts of 66.7 and 8.61 ppm h−1, respectively

116



CoOx-graphitic carbon nitride
Thermal treatment
50 mg catalysts in a solution of 4 mL acetonitrile, 2 mL triethanolamine, 1 μmol CoCl2, 15 mg bipyridine at 60 °C; 300 W Xe lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter
CoOx-mesoporous g-C3N4 exhibited the highest CO generation amount of 10.2 μmol in 2 hours with an AQE of 0.25% at 420 nm

35







Surface noble-metal co-catalysts
3.0 wt% CuO loaded TiO2
Impregnation and sonication
300 mg catalysts in 300 mL 1 M KHCO3; CO2 bubbled for 30 min; 10 W UV lamp (2.45 mW cm−1)
Methanol generation amounts in 6 h reached 2655 μmol g−1, 2.4 times higher than that of P25 due to the lower activation energy

130



RuO2 loaded meso-ZnGa2O4
Hydrothermal synthesis
100 mg catalysts in 0.4 mL H2O and atmospheric CO2; 300 W Xe lamp
CH4 yields reached up to 50.4 ppm h−1 due to the enhancement of charge separation

131



Pt–TiO2; Ir–TiO2; Rh–TiO2; Ru–TiO2
Precipitation followed by thermal treatment
Appropriate amount of catalysts in CO2 under 220 Hg lamp; FTIR to identify the adsorbed intermediates
Adsorbed CO was generated on Pt/Ir/Rh–TiO2 not on Ru/TiO2 due to the different work functions

117



Pd–TiO2
Photochemical deposition
150 mg catalysts in 1.5 mL H2O; 500 W Hg lamp with a filter (λ > 310 nm)
Pd–TiO2 exhibited a preferential generation of CH4 instead of CO for TiO2

135



Pt–TiO2 columnar films
Aerosol chemical vapor deposition
The flow rate of CO2 and water vapor was 3 mL min−1; 400 W Xe lamp in the UV range (250–388 nm), 19.6 mW cm−1
Selective formation of CH4 with a yield of 1361 μmol g−1 h−1 with an AQE of 2.33% in the effective UV range (250 to 388 nm)

137





5. Conclusions and perspectives
To date, significant achievements have been made in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O based on heterogeneous catalysis. The insights into photocatalysis and the mechanism of CO2 photoreduction have been accumulated for the design and fabrication of efficient photocatalytic systems. However, the photoconversion efficiency and selectivity for desired products of CO2 photoreduction are even lower than those in natural photosynthesis or in photocatalytic H2 evolution. Besides light harvesting and charge generation, charge separation and transportation, which are common to both H2O splitting and CO2 reduction, the surface reactions deserve much more attention in CO2 photoreduction. In particular, the adsorption and activation of CO2 onto the surface of catalysts play important roles in suppressing the competitive HER to increase the selectivity towards the carbonaceous products. The increase of the catalyst surface area through structural and morphological control during the fabrication process and the utilization of porous materials can be efficient approaches to promote the CO2 adsorption and activation. In addition, the introduction of surface defects (e.g., oxygen and sulfur vacancies), surface basic sites and noble-metal cocatalysts are widely selected strategies to maximize the adsorption and activation of the acidic CO2 molecules. Furthermore, the selectivity of products from CO2 photoreduction is another important parameter that should be carefully considered in order to produce more valuable hydrocarbons and reduce the cost of product separation. The knowledge of the CO2 reduction mechanism and pathways as well as their dependent factors can help us to increase the selectivity towards desired products by tuning the reaction parameters (e.g., pH of the electrolytes and the external bias) and guiding the reaction pathways. Therefore, the effects of the CO2 adsorption mode, pH of the electrolyte, surface functional groups, the loaded cocatalysts and the externally applied bias on the selectivity of products are particularly discussed in this review. These may provide insights into the rational design and fabrication of photocatalytic systems for efficient CO2 photoreduction.
The mechanism of CO2 reduction needs to be more deeply investigated in the future studies. The finding of the reaction barriers and rate-determining steps in CO2 photoreduction is important for the further improvement of the conversion efficiency. The in-depth understanding of the reaction pathways of CO2 reduction at the molecular level through in situ characterization techniques is desirable. The desorption and suppression of re-oxidation for reduced CO2 products are also critical. More attention should also be paid to the other half-reaction of water oxidation in the future studies. It is accepted in overall solar water splitting that the O2-evolution half reaction is the more challenging and rate-limiting step because it involves a four-proton coupled four-electron transfer process, which has been widely studied. The typical strategies for enhanced O2-evolution in solar water splitting can also be used in designing the multifunctional catalysts for efficient CO2 photoreduction and water oxidation. In addition, the organic adsorbates on the surface of photocatalysts formed during the fabrication process can greatly affect the photocatalytic products. Ishitani and co-workers found that the acetic acid adsorbed on the surface of TiO2 particles could lead to the formation of a significant amount of CH4 as a major product. After removing the organic adsorbates through calcination and washing, the obtained TiO2 generated CO as the major product.136 Therefore, the utilization of isotope labeling of 13CO2 as a reactant to determine whether the products are derived from CO2 or from carbon impurity intermediates is essentially important. Many p-type semiconductors including ZnTe,33 Cu2O,40 and GaP143 are used in CO2 photoreduction due to their relatively negative conduction-band-edge position, which can be a large driving force for the reduction reaction. (Fig. 3) However, most of them suffer from photocorrosion and have poor stability in aqueous electrolytes. Therefore, the stability of these photocatalysts should be substantially improved maybe through the coating of surface protective layers employing advanced techniques such as atomic layer deposition, electron beam evaporation and sputter deposition for future large scale production.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the National Science Foundation of China (U1463205, 21525626, and 51302185), Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20120032110024, 20130032120018), the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars (MoE), and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (B06006) for financial support.
References
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, J. P. Jones, G. K. Surya Prakash and G. A. Olah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7995–8048 RSC .
M. Mikkelsen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, Q. Zhang, G. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, W. Zhang, J. Ren and R. Xu, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 1086 RSC .
X. Li, J. Wen, J. Low, Y. Fang and J. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2014, 57, 70–100 CrossRef .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Yan, T. Wang, Z. J. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Gong and N. Guan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5881 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Wang, L. Zhang, W. X. Fang, J. Ren, Y. Y. Li, H. C. Yao, J. S. Wang and Z. J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8631–8639 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
Y. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Chen, H. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987–10043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kang, T. W. Kim, S. R. Kubota, A. C. Cardiel, H. G. Cha and K. S. Choi, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12839–12887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Zhang, J. Zhang, A. Li and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8356–8359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander III, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhai, S. Xie, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5776–5779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-V. Nguyen, J. C. S. Wu and C.-H. Chiou, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 2073–2076 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, R. L. Thompson, J. Baltrus and C. Matranga, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett 2nd and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, R. L. Thompson, P. Ohodnicki, J. Baltrus and C. Matranga, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13452 RSC .
C.-W. Tsai, H. M. Chen, R.-S. Liu, K. Asakura and T.-S. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10180–10186 CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Li, E. A. Ackerman, M. Gajdardziska-Josifovska and H. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 400, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Richardson, M. L. N. Perdigoto, W. Wang and R. J. G. Lopes, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, H. Li, P. Li and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14232–14236 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, S.-W. Cao and C. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25939–25947 CAS .
J.-W. Jang, S. Cho, G. Magesh, Y. J. Jang, J. Y. Kim, W. Y. Kim, J. K. Seo, S. Kim, K.-H. Lee and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5852–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Jang, J.-W. Jang, J. Lee, J. H. Kim, H. Kumagai, J. Lee, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3597–3604 CAS .
J. Lin, Z. Pan and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, K. Wang, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11492–11501 RSC .
Y. Liu, B. Huang, Y. Dai, X. Zhang, X. Qin, M. Jiang and M.-H. Whangbo, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 210–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, T. Peng, X. Zhang, K. Li and L. Zan, Catal. Commun., 2012, 28, 38–41 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ba, L.-L. Yan, S. Huang, J. Yu, X.-J. Xia and Y. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24467–24478 CAS .
M. Schreier, P. Gao, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo, T. Moehl, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 855–861 CAS .
P.-W. Pan and Y.-W. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 1546–1549 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, A. Wuttig, J. W. Krizan, Y. Hu, Z. M. Detweiler, R. J. Cava and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12415–12422 CAS .
U. Kang, S. K. Choi, D. J. Ham, S. M. Ji, W. Choi, D. S. Han, A. Abdel-Wahab and H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2638–2643 CAS .
K. Kočí, L. Obalová, L. Matějová, D. Plachá, Z. Lacný, J. Jirkovský and O. Šolcová, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 494–502 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Kou, X. Chen, Z. Tian, J. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14385–14387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, F. Han, B. Shi, S. Farsinezhad, G. P. Dechaine and K. Shankar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12732–12735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yan, J. Wang, H. Gao, N. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 758–763 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Xu, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9547–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, S. Ciston, Z. Saponjic, L. Chen, N. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and K. Gray, J. Catal., 2008, 253, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, H. Xu, L. Liu, T. Kako, N. Umezawa, H. Abe and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5606–5609 CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, J. Gao, X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, G. Chen, C. Zhang and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3637–3643 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Cao, X.-F. Liu, Y.-P. Yuan, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-S. Liao, J. Fang, S. C. J. Loo, T. C. Sum and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 940–946 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, K. Li and J. Tang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1086–1093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Li, Electrocatalytic Reduction of CO2 to Small Organic Molecule Fuel on Metal Catalysts, Advances in CO2 Conversion and Utilization, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  2010, vol. 1056, pp. 55–76 Search PubMed .
L. Gao, Y. Cui, R. H. J. Vervuurt, D. van Dam, R. P. J. van Veldhoven, J. P. Hofmann, A. A. Bol, J. E. M. Haverkort, P. H. L. Notten, E. P. A. M. Bakkers and E. J. M. Hensen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Freund and M. W. Roberts, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1996, 25, 225–273 CrossRef .
C. Song, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 2–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Surdhar, S. P. Mezyk and D. A. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 3360–3363 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Schwarz and R. W. Dodson, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huynh and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 5004–5064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J. M. Saveant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
K. Hara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L57–L59 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Freund and R. P. Messmer, Surf. Sci., 1986, 172, 1–30 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 745 CAS .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rasko and F. Solymosi, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7147–7152 CrossRef CAS .
B. Michalkiewicz, J. Majewska, G. Kądziołka, K. Bubacz, S. Mozia and A. W. Morawski, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21474–21481 CAS .
H. He, P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6196 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11914–11916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152–3153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, H. Su, R. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Yan, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2356–2361 CAS .
J. Mao, T. Peng, X. Zhang, K. Li, L. Ye and L. Zan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1253 CAS .
K. Ikeue, H. Yamashita, M. Anpo and T. Takewaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8350–8355 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
C. J. Rhodes, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2007, 103, 287–325 RSC .
N. Gargiulo, F. Pepe and D. Caputo, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 1811–1822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Bae and R. Q. Snurr, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11586–11596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anpo, H. Yamashita, Y. Ichihashi, Y. Fujii and M. Honda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2632–2636 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, H. Yamashita, K. Ikeue, Y. Fujii, S. G. Zhang, Y. Ichihashi, D. R. Park, Y. Suzuki, K. Koyano and T. Tatsumi, Catal. Today, 1998, 44, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Hwang, J.-S. Chang, S.-E. Park, K. Ikeue and M. Anpo, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 311–319 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 1, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiu, M. Xue and G. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6116–6140 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Wang, C. Wang and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2630–2640 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z.-X. Low, L. Li, A. Razmjou, K. Wang, J. Yao and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11563 CAS .
Y. Fu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Ding, X. Fu and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Yao, J. Lin, Z. Ding and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1034–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Campbell and C. H. Peden, Science, 2005, 309, 713–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, D. C. Sorescu and X. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10066–10069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xie, N. Umezawa, N. Zhang, P. Reunchan, Y. Zhang and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4211 CAS .
G. Xi, S. Ouyang, P. Li, J. Ye, Q. Ma, N. Su, H. Bai and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2395–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, C. Zhao and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7904–7912 CAS .
D. Jiang, W. Wang, E. Gao, S. Sun and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2005–2007 RSC .
M. Kanemoto, H. Hosokawa, Y. Wada, K. Murakoshi, S. Yanagida, T. Sakata, H. Mori, M. Ishikawa and H. Kobayashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 2401 RSC .
H. Fujiwara, H. Hosokawa, K. Murakoshi, Y. Wada, S. Yanagida, T. Okada and H. Kobayashi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 8270–8278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanemoto, T. Shiragami, C. Pac and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fujiwara, H. Hosokawa, K. Murakoshi, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 5154–5159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kong, Y. Li, X. Chen, T. Tian, P. Fang, F. Zheng and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16414–16417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428–4453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, W. Fan, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2451–2453 RSC .
X. Meng, S. Ouyang, T. Kako, P. Li, Q. Yu, T. Wang and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11517–11519 RSC .
S. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3644–3653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kohno, H. Ishikawa, T. Tanaka, T. Funabiki and S. Yoshida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 1108–1113 RSC .
K. Teramura, T. Tanaka, H. Ishikawa, Y. Kohno and T. Funabiki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kohno, T. Tanaka, T. Funabiki and S. Yoshida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 5302–5307 RSC .
H. Tsuneoka, K. Teramura, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8892–8898 CAS .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, R. B. May, G. K. Prakash, G. A. Olah and S. R. Narayanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20164–20167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, S. W. Cao, Y. Yuan, Q. Gu, Z. Zhang and C. Xue, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10220–10222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Raskó, Catal. Lett., 1998, 56, 11–15 CrossRef .
K. Tanaka and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 3977–3980 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trotochaud, T. J. Mills and S. W. Boettcher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 931–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, C. Zhao, H. Zhao, D. Pitts and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3664–3666 RSC .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, I. A. Shkrob, D. J. Gosztola and T. Rajh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 878–885 CAS .
S. S. Tan, L. Zou and E. Hu, Catal. Today, 2008, 131, 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, H. Yamashita, Y. Ichihashi and S. Ehara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 396, 21–26 CrossRef .
S. Neatu, J. A. Macia-Agullo, P. Concepcion and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15969–15976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309 RSC .
K. Mori, H. Yamashita and M. Anpo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3165 RSC .
K. Ikeue, S. Nozaki, M. Ogawa and M. Anpo, Catal. Lett., 2002, 80, 111–114 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ikeue, S. Nozaki, M. Ogawa and M. Anpo, Catal. Today, 2002, 74, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ikeue, H. Yamashita, M. Anpo and T. Takewaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8350–8355 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nasution, E. Purnama, S. Kosela and J. Gunlazuardi, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 313–319 CrossRef .
S. C. Yan, S. X. Ouyang, J. Gao, M. Yang, J. Y. Feng, X. X. Fan, L. J. Wan, Z. S. Li, J. H. Ye, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6400–6404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1985, 1695–1698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi, A. Murata and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1986, 897–898 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi and S. Suzuki, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 17–19 RSC .
O. Ishitani, C. Inoue, Y. Suzuki and T. Ibusuki, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 72, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2594–2600 CAS .
W. N. Wang, W. J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, O. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, Y. J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Kim, D. P. Summers and K. W. Frese, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1988, 245, 223–244 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, S. Lee, J. D. Ocon, B. Jeong, J. K. Lee and J. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 824–830 RSC .
G. Magesh, E. S. Kim, H. J. Kang, M. Banu, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2044 CAS .
G. T. Zeng, J. Qiu, Z. Li, P. Pavaskar and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3512–3516 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xiaoxia Chang
	Xiaoxia Chang received his bachelor degree in chemical engineering from Tianjin University in 2012. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Professor Jinlong Gong at Tianjin University. His research focuses on photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to solar fuels via heterogeneous photocatalysts.

Tuo Wang
	Tuo Wang received his BS degree from Tianjin University and PhD degree (with Professor John G. Ekerdt) from the University of Texas at Austin, both in chemical engineering. After gaining another year of research experience as a postdoctoral associate, he joined Novellus Systems, Inc. (currently Lam Research Corp.) as a process development engineer in Tualatin, Oregon. Since August 2012, he has been an associate professor in chemical engineering in Tianjin University. His current research focuses on the fabrication of nanostructured and single-crystal materials for energy conversion and storage systems.

Jinlong Gong
	Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Professor George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral research fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Pei Yang Chair Professorship in chemical engineering. He was a visiting scientist at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in 2007. He has served on the editorial boards for several journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Chemical Science, and AIChE Journal. He has also served as an executive editor for Chemical Engineering Science and Renewable Energy. He is an elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). He has published more than 150 papers in peer-refereed journals and been listed as a co-inventor in 52 patents and applications. His research interests in catalysis include catalytic conversion of green energy, novel utilization of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.

Broader context
The excessive utilization of fossil fuels is accompanied by an energy crisis and adverse global environmental changes. Solar energy is a theoretically infinite energy source and can provide sufficient power for our energy demands if it can be efficiently harvested and transformed. Therefore, the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O into useful fuels, such as methane, methanol, and even long-chain hydrocarbons and oxygenates, is believed to be one of the best methods to reduce CO2 emission and address at the energy crisis. However, CO2 is an extremely stable molecule and its reduction is thermodynamically and kinetically difficult. In addition to light harvesting and charge separation, the surface reduction of CO2 is usually in fierce competition with hydrogen evolution and deserves more attention. This review focuses on surface reactions and emphasizes the strategies to enhance the adsorption/activation of CO2 molecules and the factors determining the reaction pathways and selectivity for reduction products. Prospects for the challenges and future development of CO2 photoreduction over heterogeneous catalysts are also proposed.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Photocatalyst particles suspended in a CO2-containing electrolyte performing both photocatalytic CO2 reduction and water oxidation reactions. (b) A photoelectrochemical cell with a photocathode as a working electrode (WE) for CO2 reduction, a counter electrode (CE) for water oxidation and a reference electrode (RE) immersed in a CO2-containing electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of different steps in photocatalytic CO2 reduction with H2O over a heterogeneous photocatalyst. The dotted lines indicate the thermodynamic potentials for water oxidation and CO2 reduction into CO, CH4 and CH3OH.	 

Hydrogen	2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2	−0.41	(1)
Methane	CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	−0.24	(2)
Carbon monoxide	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.51	(3)
Methanol	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	−0.39	(4)
Formic acid	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.58	(5)
Ethane	2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O	−0.27	(6)
Ethanol	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O	−0.33	(7)
Oxalate	2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4	−0.87	(8)
CO2 + e− → CO2˙− (−1.90 V vs. NHE, pH 0)	(9)

 	Fig. 3  Conduction band (red squares) and valence band (blue squares) positions of some candidate semiconductor photocatalysts and the redox potentials versus NHE of CO2 reduction and water splitting at pH 0.	 

 	Fig. 4  The possible structures of adsorbed CO2δ˙− on catalysts.58,69,71 Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the spatial separation of redox sites on TiO2 samples prepared by varying HF amounts of 0, 4.5 and 9 mL; (b) comparison of the photocatalytic CH4-generation activity of P25 and the TiO2 samples prepared by varying HF amounts from 0 to 9 mL. Reaction conditions: 100 mg catalysts in 10 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp.48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of ultrathin nanosheet-scaffolded ZnGa2O4 microspheres; (d) photocatalytic CH4-production by various ZnGa2O4 samples over an average reaction time of 9 hours. Reaction conditions: 100 mg catalysts in 0.4 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with an IR cut filter.79 Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms (273 K) of the as-prepared samples. The inset is a schematic of Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 hybrid nanorods; (b) CH3OH generation amounts over different samples as a function of the light irradiation time. Reaction conditions: 200 mg catalysts in 100 mL 0.1 M Na2SO3; 500 W Xe arc lamp.93 Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) UV/Vis spectra of MIL-125(Ti) and NH2-MIL-125(Ti). The inset shows the sample images; (d) the mechanism for the CO2 photoreduction over NH2-MIL-125(Ti) under visible light irradiation.94 Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) STM image (1.5 V, 5 pA, 15 nm × 15 nm) of the TiO2(110) surface after adsorption of CO2 at 55 K. The CO2 and OHb features are marked with diamonds and circles, respectively. The inset images (5.1 nm × 2.6 nm) show the same surface area before (upper) and after (lower) the thermal diffusion of two CO2 molecules (dotted ellipse in the upper inset) away from their VO sites, leaving two intact VO sites visible (dotted ellipse in the lower inset).97 (b) A schematic showing a VO, a OHb and a CO2 molecule adsorbed at a VO site on the reduced TiO2.97 Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) FESEM and TEM (inset) images of the W18O49 nanowires; (b) time courses of CH4 generation amounts over the as-synthesized W18O49 nanowires and commercial WO3 under visible light. Reaction conditions: 100 mg catalysts in 0.8 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with 420 nm cut-off filter (30 mW cm−1).99 Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (c) A possible mechanism for spontaneous dissociation of CO2 on a defective Cu(I)/TiO2−x catalyst in the dark at room temperature.100 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Proposed functioning mechanisms of the MgO layer and Pt nanoparticles over TiO2 for photoreduction of CO2 in the presence of H2O; (b) amounts of CO and CH4 formed in the photoreduction of CO2 in the presence of H2O over different photocatalysts. Reaction conditions: 20 mg catalysts in 2.0 MPa CO2 with H2O vapor; 100 W Xe lamp (λ = 320–780 nm); irradiation time: 10 h.108 Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A proposed mechanism of MEA–TiO2 capture of CO2 on the TiO2 surface and the photoreduction to CO and CH4. (d) The amount of CO generated as a function of the irradiation time for the different samples under UV/Vis light in the presence of CO2 and water vapor.116 Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 
˙COOads− + H+ → HCOOads˙	(10)
HCOOads˙ + e− → HCOO−	(11)
HCOO− + H+ → HCOOH	(12)
˙COOads− + H+ → ˙COOHads	(13)
˙COOHads + e− → COads + OH−	(14)
˙COOads− + Hads → COads + OH−	(15)
CO2 + H2O ↔ H2CO3 ↔ H+ + HCO3− (pKa = 6.4)	(16)
HCO3− ↔ H+ + CO32− (pKa = 10.3)	(17)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Estimated local H+ and CO2 concentrations as a function of the surface pH value of KHCO3 at concentrations ranging from 0.03 M to 1.5 M using a boundary layer of 0.01 cm. (b) The influence of surface pH on the product distributions. Data calculated by Hori et al. showing the total CO2 reduction reaction rate and CO + hydrocarbons rate.125 Conditions: 5 mA cm−2; potential −1.28 V vs. NHE at 1.5 M varying to −1.42 V at 0.03 M KHCO3; 19 °C, CO2 bubbled.71 Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The product distribution of the photoreduction of CO2 with H2O on TiO2 powder (P25), Ti-β(F) and Ti-β(OH); (b) the effect of the fluorination of FSM-16 on the product distribution in the CO2 photoreduction with H2O over bare Ti/FSM-15 and Ti/FSM-15 obtained after 12.5% and 25% NH4F treatment.126,129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 and 129. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2001 American Chemical Society. (c) Yields of CH4 and CH3OH in the photoreduction of CO2 with H2O on Ti-containing porous silica film photocatalysts. (d) The relationship between the selectivity for the formation of CH3OH and the amounts of surface OH groups. Ti-PS(c) had a cubic structure and Ti-PS(h, 25)/Ti-PS(h, 50) had a hexagonal structure with a Si/Ti ratio of 25 and 50, respectively. Reaction conditions: 50 mg catalysts in 36 μmol CO2 and 180 μmol H2O, UV irradiation at 50 °C, reaction time is 6 h.127,128 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 and 128. Copyright 2002 Springer and 2002 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism of CO2 photoreduction over TiO2 and Pd–TiO2 photocatalysts; (b) the amount of products generated as a function of the irradiation time over TiO2 and Pd–TiO2 photocatalysts. Reaction conditions: 150 mg catalysts in 1.5 mL H2O under 650 Torr CO2, λ > 310 nm light irradiation at 5 °C.136 Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) A model and FESEM image of Pt loaded columnar TiO2 thin films. (d) CO and CH4 yields of CO2 photoreduction over P25, pristine TiO2 columnar films (TiO2 film), and Pt–TiO2 films with different Pt deposition times. Reaction conditions: 20 mg catalysts in H2O vapor, CO2 flow rate was maintained at 3 mL min−1, λ = 250–388 nm light irradiation with intensity of 19.6 mW cm−2.137 Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Edge site weight percentage for a 2 nm wide Au nanowire and nanoparticle as a function of the number of Au atoms; (b) idealized ratios of edge/corner for the Au nanowire and nanoparticle; FE for CO in CO2 electroreduction under different potentials over (c) Au nanoparticles with different sizes and (d) Au nanowires with different lengths.138,139 Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 and 139. Copyright 2013 and 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Partial current densities on a Cu electrode for different products as a function of the external bias; conditions: CO2 bubbled 0.1 M KHCO3 at 19 °C;71 reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. (b) Generation amounts of CO as a function of the reaction time using WO3 as a photoanode and Cu as a CE. Conditions: visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm) under different external biases in CO2 purged 0.5 M KHCO3;142 faradaic efficiencies for CH4, C2H4 and CO on (c) Cu2O and (d) Cu electrodes at different reduction potentials. Conditions: CO2 saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 solution.141 Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 and 142. Copyright 2013 and 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Increase surface area	Structural or morphological control
Anatase TiO2 with co-exposed (001) and (101) facets	Adjusting HF amounts in the solvothermal method	100 mg catalysts in 10 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp	The highest CH4 generation rate was 1.35 μmol g−1 h−1 over HF4.5	
48

ZnGa2O4 nanosheets with a high specific surface area	Solvothermal method with ethylenediamine/H2O binary solvents	100 mg catalysts in 0.4 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with an IR cut filter	ZnGa2O4 nanosheets exhibited a CH4 generation rate of 6.9 ppm h−1 with an AQE of 0.035% at 280 ± 15 nm; ∼35% enhancement compared with meso-ZnGa2O4	
79

Graphitic C3N4 derived from urea with a higher surface area than that from melamine	Pyrolysis process of urea/melamine at 580 °C for 3 h	200 mg catalysts in 100 mL 1.0 M NaOH; visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm)	The CH3OH and C2H5OH amounts over u-g-C3N4 were 15.1 and 10.8 μmol, respectively, in 12 h reaction; the measured AQE for u-g-C3N4 was 0.18% at 420 nm	
80

Utilization of porous materials
TiO2 species included within the framework of MCM-41/48	Hydrothermal synthesis under basic conditions	Appropriate amount of catalysts in 120 μmol gaseous H2O at 55 °C; UV irradiation (λ = ∼280 nm)	Ti-MCM-48 exhibited ∼10-times higher photoactivity for CH4 generation than that of the bulk TiO2 powders	
87

TiO2 species included within the framework of SBA-15	Hydrothermal synthesis under acidic conditions	Appropriate amount of catalysts in 120 μmol gaseous H2O at 55 °C; UV irradiation (λ = ∼280 nm)	Ti-SBA-15 exhibited 20-times higher photoactivity for CH4 and CH3OH evolution compared with Ti-MCM-41/48	
88

[Re(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl] into the framework of UiO-67	A mix-and-match synthetic strategy under solvothermal conditions	Samples contained 1–2 μmol Re complex in 2 mL acetonitrile with 0.1 mL triethylamine; 450 W Xe-lamp with a 300 nm cut-off filter	The as-prepared sample exhibited a total CO-turnover number of 10.9 in 20 h reaction; 3-times higher than that of bare [Re(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl]	
91

Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 hybrid nanorods	Growing ZIF-8 nanoparticles on Zn2GeO4 nanorods	200 mg catalysts in 100 mL 0.1 M Na2SO3; 500 W Xe arc lamp	Zn2GeO4/ZIF-8 nanorods with 25 wt% ZIF-8 exhibited a 62% increase in CH3OH generation compared with bare Zn2GeO4	
93

NH2-functionalized MIL-125(Ti)	Hydrothermal synthesis	50 mg catalysts in 60 mL MeCN/TEOA (v/v = 5:1); 500 W Xe lamp with UV-cut and IR-cut filters	HCOO− generation amounts in 10 h reached 8.14 μmol under visible light	
94

Cobalt-containing zeolitic imidazolate framework (Co-ZIF-9)	Solvothermal method	0.8 μmol Co-ZIF-9 in 5 mL acetonitrile/H2O (v/v = 4:1) and 1 mL triethanolamine; Xe lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter	Co-ZIF-9 exhibited a total turnover number of 450 within 2.5 h for CO2 photoreduction with an AQE of 1.58% at 420 nm	
95



Surface defects	Oxygen vacancies
Self-doped SrTiO3−δ	One-step combustion followed by calcination in Ar	300 mg catalysts in 2% H2O + 98% CO2 gas precursors; 300 W Xe lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter	The as-prepared SrTiO2.83 exhibited the highest activity for CH4 generation with an AQE of 0.21% at 600 nm	
98

Ultrathin W18O49 nanowires	Solvothermal method	100 mg catalysts in 0.8 mL H2O; 300 W Xe arc lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter (30 mW cm−1)	W18O49 nanowires exhibited an average CH4 generation rate of 666 ppm g−1 h−1	
99

Cu(I)/TiO2−x nanoparticles	Precipitation followed by thermal treatment	50 mg catalysts under 2 mL min−1 CO2 flow; 150 W solar simulator (∼90 mW cm−1)	Cu(I)/TiO2−x exhibited the maximum CO production rate of 4.3 μmol g−1 h−1	
100

N-Doped InTaO4 with oxygen vacancies	Solid-state reaction and calcination in NH3 at 800 °C	100 mg catalysts in 50 mL H2O; visible light irradiation (λ = 390–770 nm) for 2 h	N-Doped InTaO4 increased the CH3OH yield to double that of the original InTaO4	
27

Defect-rich CeO2 nanorods	One step hydrothermal synthesis	50 mg catalysts in 400 ppm CO2; 500 W Xe lamp	CO generation amounts in 6 h reached 24–28 μmol g−1	
101

Sulfur vacancies
Colloidal CdS in DMF with surface sulfur vacancies	Adding excess Cd2+ into the precursors in an ice bath	Appropriate amount of catalysts in DMF and TEA; visible light irradiation	Surface sulfur vacancies drastically increase the photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction to CO	
103

Hexagonal ZnS in DMF with surface sulfur vacancies	Adding excess Zn2+ into the precursors in an ice bath at 0 °C	2 mL DMF containing 10 mM ZnS and 1 M TEA; 500 W Hg lamp with a filter (λ > 290 nm)	The as-prepared samples exhibited both HCOO− and CO generation with an AQE of 0.24 at 313 nm for formate generation	
104



Surface basic sites	NaOH–TiO2 composites	Impregnation method	80 mg catalysts in 80 kPa CO2 with H2O vapour; 300 W Xe lamp	3 wt% NaOH loading NaOH–TiO2 exhibited the highest CH4 generation amount of 52 μmol g−1 in 6 hours with an AQE of 0.34% at 367.9 ± 10 nm	
109

Insulation material of MgO	Calcination	300 mg catalysts in 150 μmol CO2 and 50 μmol H2 or CH4; 500 W Hg lamp	CO2 adsorbed on MgO is activated to CO2− under illumination and further reduced to bidentate formate in H2 or CH4 in the dark	
111

Pt–MgO/TiO2	Photodeposition and impregnation methods	20 mg catalysts in 2.0 MPa CO2 with H2O vapour; 100 W Xe lamp (λ = 320–780 nm)	Pt–1.0 wt% MgO/TiO2 exhibited the highest CH4 generation amount of 2.2 μmol in 10 hours	
108

MEA-functionalized TiO2	Solvothermal method	20 mg catalysts in 0.1 mL H2O; Xe lamp	The as-prepared samples exhibited CO and CH4 generation amounts of 66.7 and 8.61 ppm h−1, respectively	
116

CoOx-graphitic carbon nitride	Thermal treatment	50 mg catalysts in a solution of 4 mL acetonitrile, 2 mL triethanolamine, 1 μmol CoCl2, 15 mg bipyridine at 60 °C; 300 W Xe lamp with a 420 nm cut-off filter	CoOx-mesoporous g-C3N4 exhibited the highest CO generation amount of 10.2 μmol in 2 hours with an AQE of 0.25% at 420 nm	
35



Surface noble-metal co-catalysts	3.0 wt% CuO loaded TiO2	Impregnation and sonication	300 mg catalysts in 300 mL 1 M KHCO3; CO2 bubbled for 30 min; 10 W UV lamp (2.45 mW cm−1)	Methanol generation amounts in 6 h reached 2655 μmol g−1, 2.4 times higher than that of P25 due to the lower activation energy	
130

RuO2 loaded meso-ZnGa2O4	Hydrothermal synthesis	100 mg catalysts in 0.4 mL H2O and atmospheric CO2; 300 W Xe lamp	CH4 yields reached up to 50.4 ppm h−1 due to the enhancement of charge separation	
131

Pt–TiO2; Ir–TiO2; Rh–TiO2; Ru–TiO2	Precipitation followed by thermal treatment	Appropriate amount of catalysts in CO2 under 220 Hg lamp; FTIR to identify the adsorbed intermediates	Adsorbed CO was generated on Pt/Ir/Rh–TiO2 not on Ru/TiO2 due to the different work functions	
117

Pd–TiO2	Photochemical deposition	150 mg catalysts in 1.5 mL H2O; 500 W Hg lamp with a filter (λ > 310 nm)	Pd–TiO2 exhibited a preferential generation of CH4 instead of CO for TiO2	
135

Pt–TiO2 columnar films	Aerosol chemical vapor deposition	The flow rate of CO2 and water vapor was 3 mL min−1; 400 W Xe lamp in the UV range (250–388 nm), 19.6 mW cm−1	Selective formation of CH4 with a yield of 1361 μmol g−1 h−1 with an AQE of 2.33% in the effective UV range (250 to 388 nm)	
137


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
