Rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals: synthesis, surface modification and application  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM00031K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM00031K
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6831-6847Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsRare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals: synthesis, surface modification and application

        
          
            Chunxia 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 13002, P. R. China. E-mail: jlin@ciac.jl.cn
Received 
      15th January 2010
    , Accepted 31st March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      25th May 2010
    AbstractThis feature article highlights the recent advances on the chemical synthesis, surface modification and applications of rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrysals. In the past decade, great progress in the size and shape control of rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals has been made by developing solution phase-based methods such as thermal decomposition, hydro(solvo)thermal reaction, hydrothermal in situ conversion route, and ionic liquids-based synthesis. The main challenge of fluoride nanocrystals for biological applications is that it is hard to obtain ideal nanocrystals with smaller size (sub-50 nm), higher luminescence yield, better dispersity and stability in aqueous solvents, and superior biocompatibility. In order to overcome these shortcomings, a series of strategies of surface modification have been outlined in this review. Finally, we introduce the application of rare earth fluorides, with special emphasis on β-NaY(Gd)F4:Yb3+, Er3+ upconversion nanopaticles (UCNPs) in biomedical applications including biological labels, multimodal bioimaging, photodynamic therapy and drug delivery.Chunxia LiChunxia Li was born in Shandong, China, in 1977. She received her B.S. (2002) and M.S. (2005) in chemistry from Northeast Normal University. Then she has been a graduate student in Jun Lin's group at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, and received a Ph.D. degree in 2008. After graduation, she has been working as an Assistant Professor in CIAC. Her current research interests include the controllable synthesis of rare earth luminescence nanomaterials and their bioapplications.Jun LinJun Lin, born in Changchun in 1966, received B.S. and M.S. degrees from Jilin University, China in 1989 and 1992 respectively, and a Ph.D. degree from the CIAC, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1995. He has studied and worked for more than 4 years in CityU (HK, 1996), INM (Germany, 1997), VCU/UNO (USA, 1998–1999). He came back to China in 2000, and since then has been working as a professor in CIAC. His research interests include bulk and nanostructrued luminescent materials for lightening, displaying and biological applications. He has published more than 300 peer-reviewed journal articles in related fields.
1. Introduction
The rare earth (RE) elements are composed of the lanthanide (Ln) series (from lanthanum to lutetium), yttrium, and scandium. With abundant and unique energy level structures arising from 4fn inner shell configurations, Ln3+ ions can exhibit sharp fluorescent emission via intra-4f or 4f–5d transitions. The luminescence features of Ln3+ ions include high luminescence quantum yield, narrow bandwidth, long-lived emission, large Stokes shifts, ligand-dependent luminescence sensitization, which have received startling interest because of the continuously expanding need for luminescent materials meeting the stringent requirements of telecommunication, lighting, electroluminescent devices, (bio-) analytical sensors, bio-imaging set-ups and solar cells.1 It is well-established that in the luminescence of Ln3+ ions, the highest phonon frequencies of the host lattice are responsible for nonradiative relaxations. To overcome the phonon decay problem, it is necessary to choose an appropriate lattice with lower phonon energy (the highest vibration frequency vmax of host lattice). Rare earth fluorides including binary REF3 and complex AREF4 (RE = rare earth; A = alkali) have been considered as an excellent luminescent rigid host matrix for various optically active Ln3+ ions, because they normally possess a high refractive index and low phonon energy (< 400 cm−1), which leads to the low probability of non-radiative decay and consequently the luminescence quantum yields are usually higher than in oxide hosts and in most inorganic matrixes.2 So rare earth fluorides have been considered as excellent down-conversion (DC) and upconversion (UC) luminescence rigid host matrices for various optical active Ln3+ ions. Furthermore, the fluoride host materials with composition MGdF4 (M = Li, Na or K) and GdF3 are of particular interest, since Eu3+ doped crystals of these materials are a kind of quantum cutting phosphors, i.e., the absorption of one photon in the vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) range results in the emission of two photons in the visible range. This leads to application in mercury free fluorescent tubes or plasma display panels.3 So rare earth fluorides are of significant importance in modern chemistry and material science.
The DC process is the conversion of higher-energy photons into lower-energy photons, which is also extensively exploited in semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) and organic dyes.4 In contrast, UC is the generation of higher-energy photons from lower-energy radiation on the basis of sequential adsorption and energy-transfer steps.5 The upconversion principles have been studied thoroughly and some excellent reviews have been published by Auzel.6 Three main types of absorption mechanisms have been recognized: excited state absorption (ESA) by a single ion, energy transfer up-conversion (ETU) or APTE (addition de photon par transferts d'energie) between two neighbouring ions, and photon avalanche (PA), a more complex process also involving two neighbouring ions. ETU is by far the most efficient process and is, in addition, independent of the pump power. These excitation mechanisms are different from so-called multiphoton excitation in which photons are absorbed simultaneously.7 To increase the NIR absorption strength of upconversion lanthanide ions in fluorides host lattice, Yb3+ is often co-doped with the other ions (Er3+, Tm3+, and Ho3+), as a sensitizer for the upconversion process.
The tremendous recent advances in nanotechnology have led to the development of new types of probes based on nanoparticles. Among various forms of probes, upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) have been developed as a new class of fluorescence bioprobes and as promising alternatives to conventional organic dyes and semiconductor quantum dots luminescence labels, due to their many attractive merits such as high quantum yields, narrow emission peak, long lifetimes, large Stokes shifts, superior photostability, and low toxicity. In particular, UCNPs for both in vitro and in vivo optical bioimaging application holds such advantages as absence of photodamage to live organisms, very low autofluorescence background, high signal-to-noise ratio and detection sensitivity, and high light penetration depth in biological tissues.8 In addition, IR light with a strong penetration ability is safe to the human body and less harmful to cells.9 Moreover, multiplexed biological labeling can be achieved conveniently by changing different activator ions and concentrations under the single-wavelength excitation, which can extend their capabilities for simultaneous imaging and tracking of multiple molecular targets, e.g. allowing scientists to understand, classify and differentiate complex human diseases.10 To date, Yb/Er (or Yb/Tm) co-doped NaYF4 nanocrystals have been reported as the most efficient NIR-to-visible up-conversion material known.11 Especially β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs have been used for the detection of DNA,12 avidin,13 and immunolabeling.14
In this feature article, we mainly focus on the recent progress in the various chemical syntheses of rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals, and the strategies for surface modification of nanoparticles as well as their application, with special emphasis on β-NaY(Gd)F4:Yb3+, Er3+ upconversion nanopaticles (UCNPs) in biomedical applications including biological labels, multimodal bioimaging, photodynamic therapy (PDT) and drug delivery based on our recent efforts and others in this area. In addition, readers who are interested in a more detailed description of the behaviors of these nanoparticles, or biotechnology applications, are referred to other specific reviews.15
2. Chemical synthesis of rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals
In the last decades, dramatic efforts have been dedicated to the synthesis of rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals with uniform size and shapes. In particular, high quality (monodisperse, single-crystalline, well-shaped, and phase-pure) fluoride nanocrystals have been fabricated successfully due to their potential applications in biology and medicine. So far, the representative and typical chemical synthesis methods can be divided into four categories: thermal decomposition, hydro(solvo)thermal reaction, hydrothermal in situ conversion route, and ionic liquids-based synthesis.
2.1 Thermal decomposition
High quality rare earth fluoride nanocrystals with smaller sizes can be synthesized efficiently with control over size and shape in non-aqueous media by a thermal decomposition process, which involves dissolving organic precursors in high-boiling organic solvents with the assistance of surfactants, and decomposing those precursors at elevated temperature.16 The commonly used organic precursors are rare earth organic acid salts [e.g. trifluoroacetate, acetonacetate (acac), oleate, acetate, etc.], and the surfactants typically contain polar capping groups and long hydrocarbon chains such as oleic acid (OA) and oleylamine (OM). In principle, the ratios of the starting reagents including organic precursors, surfactant, and solvent as well as the reaction temperature and time are critical parameters for the precise control over crystal phase, size and morphologies of the nanocrysals.17 Yan et al. first reported the preparation of highly monodisperse LaF3 triangular nanoplates (Fig. 1A) from a single-source precursor (SSP) La(CF3COO)3 in oleic acid/1-octadecene (ODE).18 Then with this unique SSP method, they also presented the systematic and general synthesis of high-quality REF3 nanoparticles with diverse shapes in OA/OM/ODE.19 The typical SmF3 hexagonal nanoplate superlattices with different orientations are shown in Fig. 1B, C. Inspired by this, in 2006, three groups (Yan, Yi and Capobianco) reported independently and almost at the same time the synthesis of NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ (Tm3+) upconverison nanocrystals by multiple-source precursors (MSP) cothermolysis of RE(CF3COO)3 and CF3COONa in high temperature organic solutions.20 Especially Yan et al. Refined this technique to the general synthesis of the whole rare earth fluorides NaREF4 nanocrystals (Fig. 1D-F) with multiform crystal phases and morphologies by manipulating the ratio of Na/RE, solvent composition, reaction temperature and time.20a Subsequently, these three groups reported a series of outstanding works about the controlled synthesis, luminescence properties and surface modification of rare earth fluoride nanocrystals.21
 Fig. 1  Schematic pattern and representative shapes of various rare earth fluoride nanoparticles by single-source precursor (SSP) or multiple-source precursors (MSP) thermal decomposition of rare earth trifluoroacetate RE(CF3COO)3. TEM images (A–I) of typical fluoride nanoparticles. (A) edge-to-edge superlattices of LaF3 triangular nanoplates, inset is the SAED pattern (Adapted from ref. 18); the edge-to-edge (B) and face-to-face (C) superlattices of SmF3 hexagonal nanoplates, insets show results of FFT analyses (Adapted from ref. 19); α-NaYF4 nanopolyhedra (D), β-NaYF4 nanorods (E) and β-NaHoF4 hexagonal nanoplates (F) (Adapted from ref. 20a); KY3F10 nanoparticles (G) (ref. 23); LiYF4 diamond-shaped nanoparticles (H) (ref. 25); and KPrF4 nanopolyhedra (I) (ref. 22b). (Copyright 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, American Chemical Society, Wiley-VCH and Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.). 
Besides REF3 and NaREF4, other rare earth fluorides such as AREF4 (A = K, Li), KRE3F10 and BaREF5 can also be synthesized using a similar method.22 More recently, Capobianco et al. synthesized colloidal Yb3+/Ln3+ co-doped KY3F10 nanoparticles (Ln = Eu or Er) with an average size of 15 nm (Fig. 1G) 23 and BaYF5:Yb3+,Tm3+ rectangular-shaped nanocrystals.24 Also, they have demonstrated the synthesis of colloidal LiYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ diamond-shaped nanocrystals (Fig. 1H), which produce intense multiple luminescence ranging from the deep-UV to NIR regions following excitation with NIR light (980 nm) via the upconversion process. In addition to the aforementioned upconversion emissions, a strong Stokes emission was also observed at ∼1.46 μm, which is an interesting wavelength for telecommunication applications. This is the first observation, where intense upconversion emissions spanning from the deep-UV to the NIR are achieved from a single dopant/sensitizer ion combination (Yb3+, Tm3+), and is indicative of the high efficiency of the LiYF4 nanocrystalline matrix compared to other fluoride and oxide counterparts.25 Beside this, they also studied the properties of colloidal Gd3+/Tm3+/Yb3+-doped and Ce3+/Tm3+/Yb3+-doped LiYF4 nanoparticles. It is found that these nanoparticles exhibited several upconversion emissions in the UV region when excited with λ = 980 nm radiation. Furthermore, development of a suitable shell, such as a thin layer of silica over the nanoparticles, would extend their application in the field of biomedicine, in which ultraviolet emissions can be used to produce singlet oxygen for photodynamic therapies.26
Apart from the thermal decomposition of trifluoroacetates, Chen et al. have developed another thermal decomposition approach for the preparation of monodisperse β-NaREF4 (RE = Y, Gd) nanocrystals by using simple and inexpensive NaF/RE(oleate)3 as the precursors in OA/ODE. Different from the conventional strategies, no additional capping-reagents or surfactants were needed for size control, while the sizes were tuned by simply adjusting the content of NaF. By the elaborate choice of codoping of Ce(Yb)3+, Ln3+ (Ln = Tb, Eu, Dy, Sm, Er or Tm), multicolor emissions have been successfully obtained.27
Besides the most frequently used organic capping agents OA and OM, Ju et al. first used trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as a ligand for the synthesis of smaller (20 nm), monodisperse, and pure β-NaYF4 hosted upconversion nanocrystals. Unfortunately, the solubility of as-obtained TOPO-capped nanoparticles was low in organic solvent.28 Thus, they further used trioctylphosphine (TOP) to replace TOPO to synthesize NaYF4 nanoparticles with different crystal phases (α- and β-phases) and shapes (nanoparticles, nanoplates, and nanorods) by tuning the ratios of OA/TOP. It is found that the cooperative actions of OA and TOP contributed to the decrease of energy barrier of α → β phase transition.29
Although the thermal decomposition method displays its capability and versatility in the controlling synthesis of high quality rare earth fluorides, it exhibits some drawbacks, including rigorous experimental conditions (∼300 °C, waterless, oxygen-free and inert gas protection), complicated post-treatment process, high-cost and highly toxic precursors in some cases and difficulty to achieve one-pot synthesis despite limited success. In most cases, nanocrystals produced by the thermal decomposition method are stabilized by surfactants (e.g. oleic acid), and are only dispersible in nonpolar solvents (e.g. hexane, toluene) or weak polar solvents (e.g. chloroform). Therefore, post-synthetic processes are required to introduce hydrophilic and biocompatible coatings on those nanocrystals, which will be discussed in detail in the section of surface modification.
2.2 Hydro(solvo)thermal reaction
It is well known that hydro(solvo)thermal method is a typical solution-based approach, which exploits water or a solvent under elevated temperatures and pressures above its critical point to increase the solubility and reactivity of almost all inorganic substances, thereby permitting the subsequent crystallization of the dissolved material/precursor ions from solution under these conditions.30 Compared with the synthesis in the organic solvents, a water-based system should provide a relatively green chemical alternative to the preparation of various nanomaterials because it does not involve toxic organic solvents. The acceptable advantages of this method include easily controllable reaction conditions, the relatively low cost and high yield, the relatively low reaction temperature (in general < 250 °C), easily controlled size, structure and shapes of the products, etc. Furthermore, during the process of hydro(solvo)thermal reaction, one of the promising and popular strategies of shape and size control is to carefully select an appropriate organic additive with functional groups acting as complex agent or structure-directing agent.31 The commonly used organic additives for the fabrication of rare earth fluorides have oleic acid, ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA),32 cetyltrimethylammonuim bromide (CTAB),33 and trisodium citrate (TSC).34 The most representative example for preparing high quality rare earth fluoride colloid nanoparticles is liquid–solid–solution (LSS) strategy developed by Li's group, which is based on a general phase transfer and separation mechanism occurring at the interfaces of the liquid, solid, and solution phases present during the synthesis. Furthermore, linoleate or oleic acid molecules can be effectively absorbed on the surfaces of nanoparticles.35 As an example, β-NaYF436 and β-NaLaF4 nanorods37 with controllable aspect ratios as well as a class of binary REF3 nanoparticles38 can be prepared in very uniform sizes. Typical TEM images of the products are shown in Fig. 2A–C. Additionally, Zhao and co-workers reported the uniform nanostructured β-NaREF4 arrays (Fig. 2E, F) by a facile oleic acid-assisted hydrothermal route.39 This approach avoids the assistance of templates, applied fields, and undercoating on substrates and is industrially feasible, owing to its ease and low cost. Li and co-workers used EDTA as complex agent and CTAB as structure-directing agent to synthesize β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ upconversion nanomaterials including nanotube, nanorod and nanosphere.40
 Fig. 2  Representative shapes of rare earth fluoride nano-/microparticles obtained by hydro(solvo)thermal reaction. TEM images of β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ nanorods (ref. 36a), α-NaYF4 nanospheres (B) and YF3 rice-like nanoparticles (C) (ref. 38) by LSS strategy; SEM images of β-NaHoF4 microtubes (D) (ref. 32a) and nanostructured β-NaREF4 arrays (E, F) (ref. 39a). (Copyright 2006, 2007, American Chemical Society and Wiley-VCH. Reproduced with permission.). 
Recently, we have studied systematically the key roles of organic additive TSC in tailoring the crystal phases, shapes and sizes of β-NaREF4 (RE = Y, Yb, and Lu) and REF3 nano-/microcrystals. Although rare earth fluoride nanomaterials doped with different lanthanide ions or ion pairs have been fabricated by the hydro(solvo)thermal method, little has been done on the systematic manipulation of morphologies and architectures of monodisperse and uniform rare earth fluoride microcrystals via the simple hydrothermal process so far.41 Inorganic microcrystals with novel morphologies are of special significance in understanding the growth behavior and potential technological applications in microelectronic devices.42 Moreover, the influence of fluoride sources (NaF, NH4F, KF, HF, and NaBF4) on the morphologies of products has drawn little attention.43 So we developed a facile, general, template-free and relatively environmentally friendly hydrothermal methodology to prepare the whole rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals with various compositions, crystal structures, uniform sizes and well-defined morphologies by precise tuning of critical parameters such as fluoride sources and pH values in initial solution.44 Here we take β-NaYF4 as a representative example to elucidate the effects of organic additive TSC, fluoride source, and pH value on the complex β-NaREF4 microcrystals. Fig. 3 illustrates our general synthetic methodology for rare earth fluorides and the representative SEM images of β-NaYF4 microcrystals (A–F) obtained using different fluorides and pH value by TSC-assisted hydrothermal method.44a,b We think that there are two kinds of important key factors for determining final shapes of β-NaYF4 microcrystals. The first one is inherent and intrinsic factor (the crystallographic phase of the nucleated seeds). It is found that during the crystal growth all NaYF4 samples undergo the phase conversion from cubic (α) to hexagonal (β) phase accompanied by the morphology variation from spherical nanoparticles to anisotropic microcrystals such as hexagonal microrod, microprism and octadecahedral. This is because the properties of the materials are determined first by their phase and the inherent cell structure of seeds strongly affects further crystal growth.45 The stable thermodynamically β-NaYF4 seeds have anisotropic unit cell structures, which can induce anisotropic growth along their crystallographically reactive directions; thus, anisotropic shapes of microcrystals are expected. The other one is external factors (organic additive TSC, pH values and fluoride sources). TSC plays two roles as complex agent and structure-directing agent. First, TSC can form strong complexes with Ln3+ ions through coordination interaction, which slows down the nucleation and subsequent crystal growth of NaYF4 particles. Second, TSC has the dynamic effect by selectively binding to the different surfaces of crystals, which directly affects the orientation growth rates of different crystal facets, resulting in the formation of different β-NaYF4 microarchitectures under various environments. Beside TSC, the cations NH4+ and Na+ in the reaction system have a guiding effect on the morphology variation products. At the early stages of the reaction, due to the strong interactions between NH4+ and Na+ and F− anions, these two cations can be selectively adsorbed on specific facets of the initial NaYF4 crystals and change their surface energy. However, owing to the different ion radii of NH4+ and Na+, the relative growth rates of various crystal facets are different, leading to the formation of a variety of morphologies.
 Fig. 3  The general synthetic methodology for rare earth fluorides by TSC-assisted hydrothermal method and typical SEM images of β-NaYF4 (A–F) and REF3 (G–I) microcrystals with multiform shapes (Adapted from ref. 44a–c). (Copyright 2007, 2008, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.). 
Apart from the investigation of complex NaREF4 (RE = Y, Yb, Lu), we also utilized the similar method to synthesize the whole binary lanthanide fluoride LnF3 (Ln = La–Lu) with multiform crystal structures (hexagonal and orthorhombic) and morphologies (elongated nanoparticles, spherical and spindle-like aggregates, polyhedral microcrystals). Fig. 3G-I shows the representative morphologies of the LnF3 products. We found that the employment of NaBF4 fluoride source is a critical precondition to obtain LnF3 composition. The organic additive TSC has an important influence on the shapes of the products to some degree.44c
2.3 Hydrothermal in situ conversion route
Most recently, a method based on an in situ chemical conversion reaction (sacrificial precursor method) has also been developed to yield one-dimensional (1D) rare earth fluorides nanostructures. During the reaction, the precursors usually not only act as the reactants but also as a template to control the shape of the products. Such a process endows the method with many advantages. First, template removal can be avoided, which can prevent possible damage to the produced shell. Second, the method is very simple, usually carried out in a hydrothermal system and shows good generality. Recently, we demonstrated the synthesis of 1D β-NaREF4 (RE = Y, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, and Ho) nanowires/nanorods using this hydrothermal in situ conversion method.46 Firstly, we prepared 1D rare-earth hydroxides nanowires/nanorods through a large-scale and facile solution-based hydrothermal process without using any catalyst. Then, the 1D RE(OH)3 nanowires/nanorods were used as both the physical and chemical templates for the preparation of expected 1D NaREF4 nanowires/nanorods. The products inherit the shape and size of the template with high fidelity. The hexagonal structural similarities between β-NaREF4 and RE(OH)3 are fundamental and crucial precondition in preserving unchanging shape during the transformation process. However, if the structure of template and the targeted products is mismatched, the shape of products will vary drastically. As an example, we used similar synthetic pathway to synthesize REBO3. Unexpectedly, complex 3D microflowers are obtained instead of 1D nanowire/nanorods.47 Using a similar method, Zhao et al. reported the production of β-NaMF4 uniform nanotubes with the corresponding rare earth hydroxides M(OH)3 as a parent (where M = Y, Pr, Sm, Gd, Tb, Dy, Er, and their mixture).48 You et al. fabricated uniform NaLuF4 nanowires by using lutetium precursor [Lu4O(OH)9(NO3)] nanowires.49
2.4 Ionic liquids-based synthesis
Ionic liquids (ILs) are non-volatile, non-flammable and thermally stable organic salts, which have been recently suggested as a ‘green’ alternative to the conventional organic solvents for the synthesis of inorganic compounds owing to their low melting point, relatively low viscosity, and wide electrochemical window.50 Among the main advantages of using ILs as solvents or additives in inorganic synthesis is their superior capability for the dissolution and stabilization of metal cations, which endows them with the possibility of acting as capping agents or surfactants. Hence, the application of ILs in the synthesis of rare earth fluoride phosphors also attracted quite attention.51 Nuñez et al. described a facile procedure for the synthesis of highly uniform YF3 rhombus nanoparticles, which involves ionic liquid 1-n-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([BMIM][BF4]) acting not only as a fluoride source but also as a morphology-directing agent.51c Jacob et al. presented the synthesis of different nanosized metal fluorides FeF2, CoF2, ZnF2, LaF3, YF3, and SrF2via a simple, fast and general microwave-assisted ionic liquid route. It has been proven that ILs are a boon and are an important tool in the field of inorganic material synthesis.51d Kong et al. obtained small, water-soluble and pure β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ (Tm3+) upconversion nanophosphors for the first time by an ionothermal method. The key to this synthetic methodology is the use of ionic liquid, [BMIM][BF4], which acts as solvent and template, as well as fluoride source. Due to the overlayer of ILs on their surface, these nanoparticles can be directly dispersed in water and present strong positive charge.51e Chen et al. reported ILs-based “all-in-one” synthesis for LnF3 nanoparticles, in which ILs also play multifold roles as solvents, reaction agents, and templates.51f To sum up, ionic liquid-based synthetic strategy offers a new chance for the manufacturing and application of rare earth fluoride nanophosphors.
The advantages and disadvantages of four synthetic methods mentioned above are summarized in Table 1. Up to date, thermal decomposition and hydro(solvo)thermal reactions are the most widely used and the best methods for the precise control of shape and size of rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals. Hydrothermal in situ conversion route is an effective route to yield one-dimensional (1D) rare earth fluorides nanostructures. In contrast to these three methods, ionic liquid-based synthesis is a relatively green route. Unfortunately, the as-formed nanoparticles by this method are of worse quality such as lower monodispersity, less uniformity and broader size distribution relative to those obtained with the thermal decomposition processes.
Table 1 Summary comparison of four synthetic methods




Synthetic method
Synthesis
Reaction temp./°C
Reaction time
Solvent
Organic additives
Size distribution
Shape control




thermal Decomposition
complicated; extensive; inert atmosphere
250–330
minutes-hours
organic compounds
needed
very narrow
very good


Hydro(solvo)thermal reaction
simple; cheap; high pressure
160–220
hours-days
water, organic compounds
needed
very narrow
very good


Hydrothermal in situ conversion
two-step process; especially for 1D materials
120–180
hours-days
water
not needed
relatively narrow
good


Ionic liquids-based synthesis
ILs as reactant, solvent and template; relatively green
70–160
minutes-hours
ILs, water, alcohol
not needed
broad
not good




In addition to those categories, other methods, such as coprecipitation in the aqueous phase,52 polyol method,53 microwave-assisted synthesis,54 and sonochemical technique55 have also been employed to produce rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals with a wealth of shapes.
3. Crystal phase control of rare earth fluorides
During the crystal growth process, the phase control is crucially important, because the properties of the materials are determined first by their phase.45,56 The crystal structure of NaREF4 exhibits two polymorphic forms, namely, cubic α-phase (metastable high-temperature phase) and hexagonal β-phase (thermodynamically stable low-temperature phase), depending on the synthetic conditions and methods. In the cubic structure (Fmm, Z = 4), the cation sites are equal and Na+ and RE3+ cations are randomly distributed in the cationic sublattice, while in hexagonal structure (P, Z = 1) the cation sites are of three types: a one-fold site occupied by RE3+ (1a), a one-fold site occupied randomly by 1/2Na+ and 1/2RE3+ (1f), and a two-fold site occupied randomly by Na+ and vacancies (2h). Sites 1a and 1f both have C3h symmetry, whereas site 2h has Cs symmetry.57 The crystal structure of fluorides has an important effect on the optical properties of products. It has been reported that β-NaYF4 is a much better host lattice than α-NaYF4 for the luminescence of various optically active lanthanide ions.52a For example, provided that it is activated by Yb3+/Er3+ ion pairs, the green emission of β-NaYF4 is 10 times stronger and overall (green plus red) emissions are 4.4 times greater than those for the α phase.11b Consequently, how to control the crystal structures of fluorides is the key in successfully achieving a bright phosphor. Here we will present several typical and popular methods for the control over crystal structures of fluorides. (i) Adjusting the molar ratio of F−/RE3+ under the same reaction temperature. Hasse et al. have found that if this molar ratio is close to stoichiometric, β-NaYF4 is formed, whereas α-NaYF4 is obtained in the presence of excess metal ions.58 In contrast, Yao et al. have presented that at the low ratio of F−/RE3+ (4:1), α-NaYF4 is obtained, whilst at higher ratio (≥ 6:1), which means F− is in an excess to Y3+, β-NaYF4 can be produced under the same hydrothermal conditions.41a (ii) Changing reaction temperature and time. Generally, higher reaction temperature and longer time are required to provide sufficient free energy to overcome activation barrier for α → β phase transition.20a, 44 (iii) Ligand-mediated phase transition. Yi et al. have reported that monodisperse β-NaYF4 nanocrystals were synthesized in pure oleylamine (OM) by thermal decomposition method. However, when a mixture of oleylamine/oleic acid (OA) was used, α-NaYF4 nanoparticles with a smaller size were obtained. This indicates that oleylamine as ligand/solovent can medicate the phase transfer of NaYF4 from the cubic to hexagonal phase, whereas oleic acid failed to do so.20b Additionally, Yu et al. used OA and/or trioctylphosphine (TOP) as ligands to adjust the crystal phase of NaYF4 in octadecene (ODE). Only cubic-phase NCs were obtained in OA/ODE and TOP/ODE solvents; on the other hand, the hexagonal-phase NCs resulted in OA/TOP/ODE. Moreover, the phase transition from cubic to hexagonal was induced by a ligand formed between oleate and TOP at high temperature.29 (iv) Lanthanide doping. Doping is a widely applied technological process in materials science that involves incorporating atoms or ions of appropriate elements into host lattices to yield hybrid materials with desirable properties and functions. van Veggel et al. have found that undoped GdF3 nanocrystals were formed as a mixture of trigonal and orthorhombic phases, and 15% La3+ doping was sufficient for them to synthesize completely in the trigonal phase.59 Very recently, the dopant-controlled method has also been used to control the crystal phase and size of NaYF4 UC nanocrystals by Liu et al.60 and Wang et al.,61 respectively. Liu et al. reported the simultaneous phase and size control of NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ nanocrystals through the doping of larger Gd3+ ions at precisely defined concentrations. It is found that this approach results in the dramatic shortening of reaction time (down to 2 h) on cubic-to-hexagonal phase transition and a substantial decrease in the reaction temperature (down to 230 °C) needed for preparing ultra-small (10 nm) β-NaYF4 UC nanocrystals. Moreover, compared with conventional thermal decomposition, no toxic organometallic precursors and hazardous coordinating solvents were used, so the problem of substantial environmental pollution can be circumvented. Wang et al. also demonstrated the dopant-controlled phase-selective synthesis of NaYF4 nanocrystals by hydrothermal reaction. Without lanthanide dopants added, pure α-NaYF4 is obtained. However, when the lanthanide ions with larger ionic radius (such as La3+, Ce3+, Pr3+, Nd3+, Sm3+, Eu3+, and Gd3+) were introduced as dopants, the as-synthesized NaYF4 nanocrystals became pure hexagonal phase under the otherwise same reaction conditions. In this study, the lanthanide doping effect on the NaYF4 crystal phases can be ascribed to the system free energy and anisotropic crystal growth. The dopants with larger ionic radius can decrease the energy barrier and tip the balance in favor of the formation of β-NaYF4.
In addition to several methods mentioned above, Patra et al. first reported on the effects of sonication and heating temperature on the structural changes of NaYF4, that is, lattice strain and lattice parameters due to decomposition of layered fluoride structure that is formed between NaYF4 and ammonium fluorolanthates [(NH4)3Y2F7 and NH4Y2F7].62 In conclusion, great efforts have been devoted to the phase-controlled synthesis of rare earth fluorides. Note that the crystal phases of fluorides are affected by multiple factors. Sometimes several factors play simultaneously the role at a certain reaction system. So it is often required to stringent control over several experimental variables for controlling crystal phase of fluorides in different systems.63
It is worth pointing out that the crystal phase, size and shape of fluorides have important effect on their emission properties. For NaREF4, hexagonal phase nanocrystals have higher luminescence efficiency than cubic-phase nanocrystals due to more ordered structure and multisite character in the hexagonal form.20a Recently, Patra et al. investigated the influence of crystal phase on luminescence properties of Eu3+-doped NaYF4 nanocrystals.64 They investigated the influence of crystal phase and excitation wavelength on luminescence properties of NaYF4:Eu3+ nanocrystals.64a It is found that the PL intensity of hexagonal phase sample is stronger than the cubic phase under direct excitation (394 nm) of Eu3+ 4fn energy levels and the reversal result is obtained under Eu3+-O2− charge transfer (CT) excitation (252/256 nm). It is noted that the presence of Eu3+-O2− charge transition band in fluoride crystals is due to the substitute of F− by OH− or O2−.58 In another study, they found that the emission intensity of the peak at 614 nm for Eu3+ ions and decay time are sensitive to crystal phases, which is again tuned by controlling the fluoride concentration and the pH value.64b Besides the crystal phase, shape and size are also important factors in affecting the luminescence properties of fluorides. For instance, Yan et al. reported that the emission intensity of the 19.1 nm β-NaEuF4 nanospheres was 1.5 times as high as that of the 25 nm × 36 nm β-NaEuF4 nanorods.20a This is because the symmetry of all Eu3+ ions in the β-NaEuF4 nanospheres was lower than that in the β-NaEuF4 rods owing to the higher surface atom fraction of nanospheres. The lower the symmetry is around the emitting ion, the stronger is the emission in lattices. We have also observed that the optical properties of the β-NaYF4:Tb3+ phosphors with different microarchitectures (microrod, hexagonal microprism and octadecahedron) are strongly dependent on their morphologies and size.44b
4. Surface modification of rare earth fluoride nanocrystals
Surface modification of nanocrystals is one of the most important research focuses in the fields of materials science and biology.65 The ideal luminescence nanocrystals used for biocompatible applications should meet several requirements, such as being homogeneously dispersed and colloidally stable in aqueous solvents, maintaining a high quantum yield, and showing high specific binding to biological components.66 However, it is extremely difficult to achieve all of these characteristics simultaneously, because the quantum yield of existing inorganic luminescent nanocrystals is usually lower than that of the corresponding bulk materials due to nonradiative decay from defects on the surface of the nanoparticles.67 Furthermore, the high quality nanocrystals acquired by the methods described above are normally prepared in organic solvents, thus the surfaces of the nanocrystals are covered on the hydrophobic capping ligands (such as oleic acid), which is far from ideal for the biological application. So it is necessary to manipulate the surface chemistry to improve the luminescence efficiency and biocompatibility of nanocrystals.
The main strategy to improve luminescent of rare earth fluoride nanocrystals is the use of core–shell structures which involves the growth of a crystalline shell of a suitable inorganic material around each nanoparticle. This system is based on two materials with similar lattice constants to avoid the formation of defects at the core–shell interface. In this structure, the distance between the light-emitting ions in the core and the surface quenchers is increased, thus reducing the nonradiative pathways and increasing the quantum yield of nanomaterials. Some excellent samples include CeF3:Tb3+@LaF3,44f, 53 LaF3:Tm3+@LaF3,68 EuF3@GdF3,69 NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ @NaYF4, 21a,b NaGdF4:Yb3+, Er3+@NaGdF4,21c and KYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ @KYF470etc. In these cases, the shell is inert and its sole role is to protect the luminescence core. Recently, Capobianco et al. proposed a strategy to enhance significantly the intensity of upconversion by employing a novel NaGdF4:Yb3+, Er3+ active-core@NaGdF4:Yb3+ active-shell architecture. The active-shell serves two purposes: (i) to protect the luminescence Er3+ ions from the non-radiative decay and (ii) to transfer NIR absorbed radiation to the luminescence core.71 In addition, NaYF4:Yb3+, Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+, Tm3+ nanocrystals with a sandwich structure were also synthesized, and the fluorescence from Er was greatly enhanced.72 It is noted the formation of these core–shell architectures only is inferred from indirect measurements such as TEM (transmission electron microscopy), XRD (X-ray diffraction), and EDS (energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy). Recently, van Veggel, et al. reported that the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) technique with tunable synchrotron irradiation can be used to provide the direct evidence of a core–shell structure.73
In general, two main techniques have been developed to generate biocompatible fluoride nanocrystals bearing appropriate functional groups (e. g. –COOH, –NH2, or –SH) that can serve as anchor points for further attachment of additional optical reporters or targeted biomolecules. The first one is the encapsulation of SiO2 or polymer, which can be further modified with various functional entities.21b, 74 However, the growth of a thin, uniform SiO2 shell that encapsulates single nanocrystals is at present nontrivial. The other technique involves direct reaction and functionalization of the hydrophobic original surface ligand by ligand exchange75 and ligand oxidation12b,76 routes. A detailed coverage of surface modification has also been provided by Liu.15cTable 2 lists the typical strategies and examples or reagents for the surface modification of rare earth fluoride nanoparticles in recent years.
Table 2 The typical strategies and examples or reagents for the surface modification of rare earth fluoride nanocrystals in recent years




Strategies of surface modification
Representative examples or reagents
Ref.




Core–shell
CeF3:Tb3+@LaF3

44f, 53


LaF3:Tm3+@LaF3

68



EuF3@GdF3

69



NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4

21a,b



NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaGdF4

21c



KYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@KYF4

70



NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaGdF4:Yb3+

71



NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@ NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+

72



SiO2 encapsulation
LaF3:Ln3+@SiO2 (Ln= Eu, Tb, Nd, Yb/Er, and Yb/Tm)

74a



NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Fe3O4@SiO2

74b



NaYF4:Er3+,Tm3+,Ho3+@SiO2

74c



NdF3@SiO2

74d



Polymer encapsulation
Poly (acrylic acid) (PAA)

21b



1-hydroxyethane-1,1-diphosphonic acid (HEDP)

74e



Polyethylenimine (PEI)

74f



Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)

74g



Ligand (oleic acid) exchange
3-Mercaptopropionic acid

75a



PEG-phophate [PEG=poly (ethylene glycol)]

75b



Poly (acrylic acid) (PAA)

75c



Polyethylene glycol 600 diacid

20b



Ligand (oleic acid) oxidation
Lemieux-von Rudloff reagent (KMnO4/NaIO4)

12b



3-chloroperoxybenzoic acid

76a



O3

76b





5. Applications
As far as rare earth fluorides are concerned, two major applications are attracting most of the attention, namely (i) as active optical components in composites and (ii) upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) for biomedical fields. In this section, we will outline the application of rare earth fluorides based on these two aspects.
5.1 Application as active optical components in composites
Because there are some restrictions for powder rare earth fluorides in the application fields of lighting devices, researchers have obtained composites incorporating fluorides nanoparticles in some matrixes such as transparent glass ceramic, thin film and polymers in order to develop fluorides as bulk materials. Wang et al. obtained successfully transparent glass ceramic embedding a series of rare earth fluoride nanoparticles, such as NaYF4:Er3+ (tunable red-green emission),77 YF3:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+ (white light emission),78 LiYbF4:Tb3+ (ultraviolet UC emission of Tb3+ and blue emission of Yb3+),79 TbF3:Yb3+ (cooperative energy transfer upconversion and quantum cutting down-conversion)80 and REF3:Ln3+.81 These nanocomposites have not only comparative low phonon energies ascribed to the precipitated fluorides but also desirable transparency, high chemical and mechanical stability related to the silica-based glass matrix. The key to the achievement of efficient luminescence in these glass ceramics lies in the partition of the optically active RE ions into the fluoride nanoparticles. Thin film materials containing rare earth fluorides nanoparticles are often produced by sol–gel techniques. van Veggel et al. first reported a simple method to produce upconversion white light from sol–gel derived SiO2 thin film made with three combinations of La0.45Yb0.5Er0.05F3, La0.75Yb0.2Tm0.05F3, and Yb0.75La0.2Eu0.05F3 nanoparticles.82 Then they extended this method to obtain highly luminescent sol–gel derived silica and alumina films with LaF3 nanoparticles doped with lanthanide ions (Er3+, Nd3+, and Ho3+).83 Again, they reported the generation of white light from sol–gel derived SiO2 and ZrO2 thin film made with new combinations of LaF3:Ln3+ nanoparticles.84 This method combines the advantage of the improved luminescent properties of Ln3+-doped fluoride nanoparticles, and the simplicity of making thin films using the sol–gel method. More recently, Yan et al. fabricated a novel composite film constructed from both β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ ordered upconversion inorganic nanopatterns and photochromic diarylethene organic species by facile “bottom-up” assembly methods. This composite film is capable of rewritable optical storage with a nondestructive readout.85 The incorporation of nanoparticles (NPs) in polymer matrixes to obtain transparent polymer composites is an available choice to achieve bulk composite materials. Among the broad variety of available polymers, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) has been one of the most widely studied in the last decades due to its outstanding and promising mechanical and chemicophysical properties. Recently, several groups reported the synthesis of rare earth fluorides–PMMA bulk transparent nanocomposites via in situ polymerization route without the need of postdeposition heat treatment. Lin et al.86 and van Veggel et al.87 applied thermal polymerization to prepare oleic acid-stabilized β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+/PMMA monoliths, respectively. Our group also prepared β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ (Tm3+)–PMMA bulk nanocompoistes via an in situ radical photopolymerization method. Photopolymerization has advantages over thermal polymerization, including rapid polymerization rate, low polymerization temperature, low energy consumption, and easy process control.88 The ability to synthesize transparent upconversion polymer nanocomposites can facilitate the manufacture of a three-dimensional volumetric luminescence display.89
5.2 Applications in biomedical fields
The combination of nanotechnology and molecular biology has developed into an emerging research area: nanobiotechnology. As stated in the introduction section, rare earth upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) have been developed as a new class of fluorescence bioprobes owing to their many intriguing advantages. Among the various kinds of upconversion nanoparticles, β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ (Tm3+) UCNPs are known to be the most efficient system, and have always been the active research hotspot. Additionally, Gd3+ is an ideal paramagnetic relaxation agent because of its large magnetic moment and nanosecond time scale electronic relaxation time.90 Recent investigations have indicated that gadolinium (Gd3+)-based rare earth fluorides such as GdF3 and NaGdF4 are a kind of important longitudinal relaxation (T1)-weighted paramagnetic contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).74a, 91 Thus in this section, we will concentrate on the advances of biomedical applications of β-NaY(Gd)F4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs in the recent two years from the four viewpoints of biological labels, multimodal bioimaging, photodynamic therapy and drug delivery.

5.2.1 Biological labels. 
The interaction of biomolecules pairs such as biotin–avidin, antibody–antigen with specific high affinity exist prevailingly in nature. If one of the biomolecular entities conjugates with luminescence nanoparticles, the resulting biofunctional luminescence nanoparticles can specifically bind to the other biomolecular entity. Based on this rudimentary principle, β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs as bioprobes have been used for the detection of DNA,12 avidin,13 and immunolabeling.14 For example, Li et al.12b developed a simple and versatile strategy for converting hydrophobic β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs into water-soluble and carboxylic acid-functionalized analogues by directing oxidizing oleic acid to azelaic acid with the Lemieux–von Rudloff reagent (KMnO4/NaIO4 mixture), which results in the generation of free carboxylic acid group on the surface. Then the newly formed carboxylic acid-modified nanoparticles can covalently link with biomolecules streptavidin to form streptavidin-functionalized UCPNs conjugates by using a typical EDC chemistry92 (Fig. 4A), which further serves as biological labels to detect DNA. This design principle of the DNA sensor is shown in Fig. 4B. By using two shorter DNA to capture a longer target-DNA, a sandwich-type hybridization format is adopted in this DNA sensor. Biotin-labeled capture-DNA can bind to streptavidin-functionalized β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs due to highly specific interaction between avidin and biotin. The excitation spectrum of reported-DNA overlies the green emission band of the β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ nanoparticles, which is a requirement for fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) from UCNPs to reporter-DNA. Upon addition of target-DNA, a broad and featureless emission band (∼580 nm) of the reporter-DNA gradually appears, and signal intensities of green emissions between 514 and 560 nm of UCNPs decreases significantly while those of red emissions between 635 and 680 nm remain largely unchanged (Fig. 4C) due to FRET from UCNPs to reporter-DNA. Thus, they can quantitatively detect the target DNA by monitoring the intensity ratio upon continuous-wave excitation at 980 nm.
 Fig. 4  Synthesis of streptavidin-functionalized NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs (A), schematic of DNA nanosensors based on NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs (B) and luminescence spectra of a mixture of streptavidin-functionalized NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles, capture-DNA, and reporter-DNA in the presence of different concentrations of target-DNA under continuous-wave excitation at 980 nm (C). (Adapted from ref. 12b. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
Similarly, Wang et al.14 employed successfully antibody-conjugated β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs as bioprobes to label effectively cancer cells by specific recognition between antibody and antigen expressed on the cell surface. Fig. 5A shows the schematic diagram of immunolabeling of hela cells. From the upconversion fluorescence images using a confocal microscope equipped with a 980 nm NIR laser, it can be clearly seen that the cells exhibited bright green UC fluorescence (Fig. 5C), confirming the attachment of the antibody–UCNP conjugates on the surface of cells. This fact indicates that the UCNPs with good biocompatibility recognized the targets on the cell membrane due to the antibody conjugation, and the UC fluorescence was strong enough for the cell imaging. The shape and position of the cells in bright field and dark field overlapped very well (Fig. 5D), showing good specific interactions between the UCNPs and the cells. This work suggests that, with proper cell-targeting or tumor-homing peptides or proteins conjugated, the β-NaYF4: Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs can find potential applications in in vivo imaging, detection, and diagnosis of cancers.
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic diagram of immunolabeling of HeLa cells based on NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs and upconverison fluorescence imaging of HeLa cells after incubated with rabbit anti-CEA8 Ab-conjugated UCNPs (B) in bright field, (C) in dark field, and (D) overlays of (B) and (C). (Adapted from ref. 14. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 


5.2.2 Multimodal bioimaging. 
Fluorescence imaging is a very important technique for biological studies and clinical application. β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs have been used for the imaging of cells, tissues and animals.9,93 In particular, multimodal bioimaging is a new frontier in biology and medicine, which combines more than one imaging modality, such as optical, nuclear, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for more accurate imaging and diagnosis.94 Combination of MRI and optical imaging can lead to the development of new approaches to bridge gaps in resolution and depth of imaging between these two modalities. Recent research shows that Gd3+-based rare earth fluoride upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) themselves exhibit multimodal features synergistically, because the rare earth ions such as Yb3+, Er3+ (Tm3+) ions doped in the fluoride rigid matrices contribute to upconversion luminescence (optical modality), and Gd3+ as a paramagnetic relaxation agent can introduce MRI modality. More importantly, unlike other multifunctional nanocomposites exhibiting multiple functions, Gd3+-based UCNPs work on their own, not requiring the addition of any other moieties, which eliminates the need for complicated procedures to combine individual functions as well as preserving the original particle sizes during the design and fabrication of multifunctional nanoparticles. For example, Hyeon et al.91b reported that highly uniform and monodisperse NaGdF4:Yb3+, Er3+/NaGdF4 core–shell UCNPs with different sizes (Fig. 6A–C) can be used as a new type of multimodal imaging probe that works for both simultaneous imaging and MRI. The luminescence was found to be extremely resistant to photobleaching, and no photoblinking occurred. Furthermore, facile cellular uptake of water-dispersible UCNPs was visualized by background-free optical imaging of cancer cells with near-infrared (NIR, 980 nm) excitation (Fig. 6D, E), and positive contrast enhancement by Gd3+ ions was verified in T1-weighted MR images (Fig. 6F). In addition, Prasad et al.75a also reported a novel nanoprobe NaYF4:RE3+, Gd3+ (RE = Yb/Er or Eu) for combined optical and magnetic resonance (MR) dual bioimages. Unfortunately, the application of these two nanoparticles in bioimaging in vivo was not further investigated. Very recently, Li et al. studied in vivo imaging and the biodistribution of the β-NaGdF4: Yb3+, Er3+, Tm3+ with dual-modality functions of near-infrared to near-infrared (NIR-NIR) upconversion luminescence and MRI.91d To sum up, these Gd3+-based non-toxic nanoprobes can be considered as ideal candidates for a new generation of diagnostic probes for routine clinical application owing to the combined presence of efficient optical and MR imaging probes, along with the facility of site-specific delivery.
 Fig. 6  TEM images of NaGdF4:Yb3+, Er3+/NaGdF4 UCNPs dispersed in chloroform with different sizes of 20 nm (A), 31 nm (B), and 41 nm (C); bright field image (D) and luminescence image (E) of cellular uptake of 20 nm UCNPs in SK-BR-3 cells with an incubation time of 4 h; T1-weighted magnetic resonance images of SK-BR-3 cells (1.3 × 107 cells) incubated with 20 nm UCNPs at various concentrations for 24 h (F). (Adapted from ref. 91b. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 


5.2.3 Photodynamic therapy (PDT). 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an emerging treatment modality for a variety of cancers, cardiovascular, and ophthalmic diseases.95 The treatment involves the delivery of light-sensitive drug molecules called photosensitizers to target sites followed by irradiation with appropriate wavelength of light. Upon irradiation, the activated photosensitizers transfer energy to the surrounding oxygen, resulting in reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as singlet oxygen (1O2) or free radicals, which will cause irreversible damage of diseased cells and tissues, leaving the surrounding healthy cells undamaged.96 Some nanomaterials such as semiconductor quantum dots (CdSe,97 CdTe98) have been employed in PDT. However, QDs are a kind of down-conversion luminescence materials with less chemically stability, inherent cytoxicity and intermittence fluorescence property. Therefore, such intrinsic disadvantages would seriously hinder their further application in biomedical field, especially for use in human body.99 In contrast, PEGylated gold nanoparticles with chemical inertness and minimum toxicity hold the promise to be a highly efficient PDT drug delivery platform.100 For example, Burda, et al. developed a highly efficient drug vector for PDT drug delivery by synthesizing PEGylated gold nanoparticle–phthalocyanines (photosensitizer) conjugates, which act as a water-soluble and biocompatible “cage” that allows delivery of a hydrophobic drug to its site of PDT action. This delivery mode greatly improved the transport of the drug to the tumor relative to conventional drug administration.101 Up-conversion nanomaterials (UCNPs) can also be used for PDT because they adsorb infrared irradiation and emit visible light to further excite the photosensitizing molecules. Infrared light can penetrate a few centimetres into soft tissue due to weak absorption in the optical window. Moreover, the particles of nanometre size also facilitate the delivery and excretion of the proposed photosensitizer as a PDT drug. Zhang et al.102 first designed versatile photosensitizers for PDT therapy based on NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs, as shown in Fig. 7. UCNPs are first coated with a porous, thin layer of silica. During the coating process, photosensitizing molecules merocyanine 540 with high absorbance in the spectral window matching the emission of the UCNPs are incorporated into the porous silica shell. Finally, an antibody, specific to antigens expressed on the target cell surface, is covalently attached to the silica-coated nanoparticles. Upon irradiation by infrared light (IR), the UCNPs convert IR light to visible light which activates the photosensitizers to produce reactive oxygen species 1O2, leading to oxidative damage of the neighboring cells to which the nanoparticles are attached via specific antigen–antibody binding. Compared to the PDT drugs currently available, the proposed UCNP-based photosensitizers display the following advantages: (1) excitable at a wavelength in the infrared region where tissue penetration of light is several times deeper; (2) highly specific. The photosensitizers are brought to the target through antigen antibody interaction; (3) expanding the pool of photosensitizing molecules as PDT drugs; (4) versatile for different types of tumors. According to a similar principle, Zhang et al.103 synthesized mesoporous-silica-coated NaYF4@silica nanoparticles with a core–shell structure for synergistic imaging and PDT of cancer cells. Fig. 8A gives the schematic image showing how to load photosensitizer, zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) into mesoporous silica shell on NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+@silica nanoparticles and use them for PDT. The as-formed nanoparticles have uniform mesoporous silica layer with thickness of about 11 ± 1.5 nm (Fig. 8B). Then cell imaging shows the nanoparticles which were incubated with murine bladder cancer cells (MB49) still show bright upconversion luminescence under the excitation of 980 nm laser (Fig. 8C). Fig. 8D shows that the viability of cells incubated with the nanoparticles loaded with ZnPc (white) and exposed to NIR laser for 5 min was significantly lower as compared to the nanoparticles without ZnPc (gray), which substantiates the production of singlet oxygen species to kill cancer cells. In another work, Zhang et al. attached ZnPc to polyethylenimine (PEI)-modified NaYF4 up-conversion nanoparticles and used them as nanotransducers for PDT of cancer cells.104 However, the number of photosensitizers attached is low and the photosensitizers are not stable on the nanoparticle surface and can be detached from the nanoparticles quickly.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the design of the versatile photosensitizer based on UCNPs. (Adapted from ref. 102. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic image showing how to load ZnPc into mesoporous silica shell on NaYF4@silica nanoparticles and use them for PDT. It is noted that TEOS, C18TMS and ZnPc denote tetraethylorthosilicate, octadecyltrimethoxysilane, and photosensitizer zinc phthalocyanine, respectively. (B) TEM image of mesoporous-silica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+@silica nanoparticles. (C) Fluorescence images of total up-conversion fluorescence, showing the uptake of mesoporous-silica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@silica nanoparticles by murine bladder cancer cells (MB49), and (D) viability of cells incubated with the nanoparticles loaded with (white) and without (gray) ZnPc as a function of the nanoparticle concentration. The incubated cells were exposed to NIR laser for 5 min. (Adapted from ref. 103. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 


5.2.4 Drug delivery. 
Finally, we are pleased to present our recent work on the application of up-conversion β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ phosphors in controlled drug delivery system.105 We designed and synthesized a multifunctional material Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ with mesoporous, magnetic and up-conversion luminescence by a novel two-step sol–gel process. The synthesis process is presented in Fig. 9. In the synthesis process, 60 nm magnetic Fe3O4 core particles are coated with nonporous silica layer and mesoporous silica layer in sequence. Then the up-conversion NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ phosphors are deposited on the surface and/or in the pores of the mesoporous silica layer. This nanocomposites Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ show typical ordered mesoporous characteristics, monodisperse spherical morphology with narrow size distribution (around 80 nm) (Fig. 10A, B). Additionally, the composite sample exhibits high magnetization (38.0 emu/g) (Fig. 10C, D) and unique green up-conversion emission (Fig. 10E) under 980 nm laser excitation even after loading drug molecules ibuprofen (IBU). Drug release tests suggest that the multifunctional nanocomposites have a controlled drug release property. Interestingly, the up-conversion emission intensity of the multifunctional carrier increases with the released amount of a model drug (Fig. 10F) due to the decrease of the quenching effect arising from the organic group in IBU, thus making the release process possible to be monitored and tracked by the change in photoluminescence intensity. This composite can act as a multifunctional drug carrier system, which can realize the targeting and monitoring of drugs simultaneously.106
 Fig. 9  The formation process of multifunctional Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites. Typically, the as-prepared monodisperse magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles were treated via a modified Stöber procedure, resulting in the formation of the silica-Fe3O4 composites with nonporous silica layer (denoted as Fe3O4@nSiO2). Consequently, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was selected as the organic template for the formation of outer mesoporous silica layer on Fe3O4@nSiO2. The CTAB removed sample was designated as Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2. Finally, NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ phosphor layer was deposited on the outer mesoporous silica through a modified reported process, realizing the formation of the final multifunctional (magnetic, mesoporous, and up-conversion luminescent) materials (denoted as Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+). (Adapted from ref. 105. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
 Fig. 10  SEM (A) and TEM (B) images of Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ nanocomposites, the magnetic hysteresis loops (C) of pure Fe3O4 (■), Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2 (○), Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ (★), the separation process of the nanocomposites by a magnet (D), up-conversion emission spectrum of the nanocomposites (E), and up-conversion emission intensity of Er3+ in IBU–Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ as a function of the cumulative released IBU (F). (Adapted from ref. 105. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 

6. Summary and outlook
In the past decade, the combination of nanotechnology and molecular biology has greatly accelerated the development of rare earth fluoride systems. In this review, we have discussed the importance of rare earth fluoride nanoparticles and their unique luminescence properties for technological advances. We have outlined the common chemical strategies for the synthesis of rare earth fluoride nano-/microcrystals with control over compositions, sizes, and shapes, and described the ways of surface modification of fluoride nanoparticles and their application. Although the synthesis, surface modification and application of rare earth fluorides have made substantial and rapid progress in the recent few years, as evidenced by the continuously expanding numbers of paper in this area, there still remains major challenges that need to be overcome in the coming years. Firstly, by simple, low-cost, and low-temperature synthetic pathways to fabricate high-quality water-soluble rare earth fluoride because currently the synthesis of rare earth fluoride nanoparticles often require the use of toxic and/or expensive precursors, and the reaction is often performed in an organic phase at high temperature. Thus, the as-formed nanoparticles are usually dispersible only in organic solvents, not in an aqueous phase. Although Liu et al.60 and Schäfer et al.107 reported independently the synthesis of β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ nanoparticles at low temperature, the as-obtained nanoparticles are only dispersed in organic solvents. Secondly, surface modification of nanoparticles is critical for further practical application. The luminescence intensity of nanoparticles after surface modification decreases inevitably to some degree. So far there is not an effective avenue to get access to ideal nanoparticles with superior biocompatibility and high luminescence yield synchronously. So researchers need to develop better strategies to modify the nanoparticles so as to improve their solubility in water, quantum yield and specific binding to biological moieties. Additionally, how to precisely control the number of functional molecules on the surface of nanoparticles is also a difficult issue to be addressed. Finally, compared with successful applications in biological labels and fluorescence imaging, the use of fluoride nanoparticles in the photodynamic therapy (PDT) is still in its infancy and has not received much attention. How to deliver efficiently photosensitizing drugs, confirm exactly the localization of drug in target tissue, and quantitatively monitor the delivery process and cancer therapy are still significant problems to be resolved. Furthermore, fluoride upconverison nanoparticle-based in vivo PDT studies have not been explored in detail. To sum up, fluoride-based chemistry has still an incommensurable untouched space to expand and yield exciting results, and there are almost infinite research opportunities that are being, and will be explored by researchers.
Acknowledgements
This project is financially supported by National Basic Research Program of China (2007CB935502, 2010CB327704), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 50872131, 20921002, 60977013, 20901074).
References

  (a) S. V. Eliseevaa and J.-C. G. Bünzli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 189–227 RSC ; 
  (b) L. D. Carlos, R. A. S. Ferreira, V. De Zea Bermudez and S. J. L. Ribeiro, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 509–534 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, T. Trupke, K. W. Krämer and H. U. Güdel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013505 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J. W. Stouwdam and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 733–737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J.-C. G. Bünzli, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2729–2755 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, H. L. W. Chan, H. L. Li and J. H. Hao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 141106 CrossRef .
R. T. Wegh, H. Donker, K. D. Oskam and A. Meijerink, Science, 1999, 283, 663–667 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feldman, T. Jüstel, C. R. Ronda and P. J. Schmidt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Wright, Top. Appl. Phys., 1976, 15, 239–258 CAS .

  (a) F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–174 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Auzel, J. Lumin., 1990, 45, 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. van der Ende, L. Aartsa and A. Meijerink, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11081–11095 RSC .

  (a) L. Q. Xiong, Z. G. Chen, M. X. Yu, F. Y. Li, C. Liu and H. C. Huang, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5592–5600 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. K. Chatterjee, A. J. Rufaihah and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 937–943 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4765–4769 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Heer, O. Lehmann, M. Hasse and H. U. Güdel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3179–3182 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. S. Yi and G. M. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4460–4464 RSC ; 
  (c) F. Wang and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5642–5643 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) O. Ehlert, R. Thomann, M. Darbandi and T. Nann, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 120–124 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) G. Y. Chen, H. C. Liu, G. Somesfalean, H. J. Liang and Z. G. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20 Search PubMed  385704 (6pp); 
  (f) L. W. Yang, H. L. Han, Y. Y. Zhang and J. X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18995–18999 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) W. B. Niu, S. L. Wu, S. F. Zhang and L. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010 10.1039/c002615h .

  (a) J. F. Suyver, A. Aebischer, D. Biner, P. Gerner, J. Grimm, S. Heer, K. W. Krämer, C. Reinhard and H. U. Güdel, Opt. Mater., 2005, 27, 1111–1130 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. W. Kramer, D. Biner, G. Frei, H. U. Güdel, M. P. Hehlen and S. R. Luthi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1244–1251 CrossRef .

  (a) L. Y. Wang and Y. D. Li, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2557–2559 RSC ; 
  (b) Z. G. Chen, H. L. Chen, H. Hu, M. X. Yu, F. Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. G. Zhou, T. Yi and C. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3023–3029 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. S. Yi, H. C. Lu, S. Y. Zhao, G. Yue, W. J. Yang, D. P. Chen and L. H. Guo, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2191–2196 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Y. Wang, R. X. Yan, Z. Y. Huo, L. Wang, J. H. Zeng, J. Bao, X. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6054–6057 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. C. Lu, G. S. Yi, S. Y. Zhao, D. P. Chen, L. H. Guo and J. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1336–1341 RSC ; 
  (c) D. Y. Kong, Z. L. Wang, C. K. Lin, Z. W. Quan, Y. Y. Li and J. Lin, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 075601 CrossRef .
M. Wang, C. C. Mi, W. X. Wang, C. H. Liu, Y. F. Wu, Z. R. Xu, C. B. Mao and S. K. Xu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1580–1586 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Vetrone and J. A. Capobianco, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2008, 5, 1306–1339 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Shen, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5687–5697 RSC ; 
  (c) F. Wang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC ; 
  (d) P. Rahman and M. Green, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 214–224 RSC ; 
  (e) Z. G. Yan and C. H. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5046–5059 RSC .

  (a) A. H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. W. Quan, D. M. Yang, C. X. Li, D. Y. Kong, P. P. Yang, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10259–10262 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. W. Quan, P. P. Yang, C. X. Li, J. Yang, D. M. Yang, Y. Jin, H. Z. Lian, H. Y. Li and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4018–4025 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Z. W. Quan, D. M. Yang, P. P. Yang, X. M. Zhang, H. Z. Lian, X. M. Liu and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 9509–9517 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Z. W. Quan, Z. L. Wang, P. P. Yang, J. Lin and J. Y. Fang, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 1354–1360 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. N. Shan and Y. G. Ju, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 275603 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Mishra, S. Daniele, G. Ledoux, E. Jeanneau and M.-F. Joubert, Chem. Commun., 2010 10.1039/b921474g .
Y. W. Zhang, X. Sun, R. Si, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3260–3261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. W. Zhang, Y. P. Du, Z. G. Yan, R. Si, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 2320–2332 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. S. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426–6436 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. S. Yi and G. M. Chow, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2324–2329 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. C. Boyer, F. Vetrone, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7444–7445 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13721–13729 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. S. Yi and G. M. Chow, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 341–343 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. C. Boyer, J. Gagnon, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3358–3360 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. C. Boyer, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 847–852 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) A. X. Yin, Y. W. Zhang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Nanoscale, 2010 10.1039/b9nr00397e .

  (a) G. H. Yi, W. B. Lee and G. M. Chow, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 2790–2794 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. P. Du, Y. W. Zhang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Dalton Trans., 2009, 8574–8581 RSC .
V. Mahalingam, F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, A. Speghini and J. A. Capobianco, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3149–3152 RSC .
F. Vetrone, V. Mahalingam and J. A. Capobianco, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1847–1851 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mahalingam, F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, A. Speghini and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4025–4028 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mahalingam, R. Naccache, F. Vetrone and J. A. Capobianco, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9660–9663 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Wei, F. Q. Lu, X. R. Zhang and D. P. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5733–5737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. H. Liu, H. Wang, X. R. Zhang and D. P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 489–496 RSC ; 
  (c) C. H. Liu, H. Wang, X. Li and D. P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3546–3553 RSC .
J. N. Shan, X. Qin, N. Yao and Y. G. Ju, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 445607 CrossRef .
J. N. Shan and Y. G. Ju, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 123103 CrossRef .

  (a) C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Yang, C. M. Zhang, C. Peng, C. X. Li, L. L. Wang, R. T. Chai and J. Lin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4649–4655 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Yang, C. M. Zhang, C. X. Li, Y. N. Yu and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7262–7270 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Yang, C. K. Lin, Z. L. Wang and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 8973–8979 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. Yang, C. X. Li, Z. W. Quan, C. M. Zhang, P. P. Yang, Y. Y. Li, C. C. Yu and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12777–12785 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. D. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. D. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310–325 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. J. Zeng, G. Z. Ren and Q. B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2152–2156 RSC .

  (a) L. F. Liang, H. F. Xu, Q. Su, H. Konishi, Y. B. Jiang, M. M. Wu, Y. F. Wang and D. Y. Xia, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 1594–1596 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. L. Zhuang, L. F. Liang, H. H. Y. Sung, X. F. Yang, M. M. Wu, I. D. Williams, S. H. Feng and Q. Su, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 5404–5410 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. F. Zhang, H. Fan, B. J. Xi, X. Y. Wang, C. Dong and Y. T. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6652–6657 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6050–6055 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. J. Sun, Y. Chen, L. J. Tian, Y. Yu, X. G. Kong, J. W. Zhao and H. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 275609 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. W. Zhao, Y. J. Suan, X. G. Kong, L. J. Tian, Y. Wang, L. P. Tu, J. L. Zhao and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 15666–15672 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Y. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Y. Wang and Y. D. Li, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 727–734 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. F. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 201, 16, 4923–4931 Search PubMed .
L. Y. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3304–3307 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 6661–6665 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Zhang, Y. Wan, T. Yu, F. Q. Zhang, Y. F. Shi, S. H. Xie, Y. G. Li, L. Xu, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7976–7979 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Zhang, J. Li, J. Shan, L. Xu and D. Y. Zhao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 11010–11019 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. H. Zeng, J. Su, Z. H. Li, R. X. Yan and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2119–2123 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. H. Zeng, Z. H. Li, J. Su, L. Y. Wang, R. X. Yan and Y. D. Li, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3549–3555 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. J. Wang, F. Tao, L. Z. Yao, W. L. Cai and X. G. Li, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 290, 296–300 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. L. Zhuang, J. Wang, X. F. Yang, I. D. Williams, W. Zhang, Q. Y. Zhang, Z. M. Feng, Z. M. Yang, C. L. Liang, M. M. Wu and Q. Su, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Wang, G. Xu and G. R. Han, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 1776–1780 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Wang, Q. L. Huang, J. M. Hong, X. T. Chen and Z. L. Xue, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 1972–1974 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Wang, Q. L. Huang, J. M. Hong, X. T. Chen and Z. L. Xue, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2169–2173 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. Zhu, L. Qin, X. D. Liu, J. Y. Li, Y. F. Zhang, J. Meng and X. Q. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5898–5903 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. X. Li, Z. W. Quan, J. Yang, P. P. Yang and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6329–6337 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. X. Li, J. Yang, Z. W. Quan, P. P. Yang, D. Y. Kong and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4933–4942 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. X. Li, J. Yang, P. P. Yang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4317–4326 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. X. Li, Z. W. Quan, P. P. Yang, J. Yang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1353–1361 RSC ; 
  (e) C. X. Li, J. Yang, P. P. Yang, X. M. Zhang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 923–929 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C. X. Li, X. M. Liu, P. P. Yang, C. M. Zhang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2904–2910 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) C. X. Li, C. M. Zhang, Z. Y. Hou, L. L. Wang, Z. W. Quan, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2332–2339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. -W. Jun, J.-S. Choi and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3414–3439 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Xu, C. X. Li, P. P. Yang, C. M. Zhang, S. S. Huang and J. Lin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4752–4758 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Xu, C. X. Li, Z. Y. Cheng, C. M. Zhang, G. G. Li, C. Peng and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 549–557 RSC .
F. Zhang and D. Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, H. P. You, Y. H. Song, J. J. Jia, Y. H. Zheng, L. H. Zhang, K. Liu and H. J. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10193–10201 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Weingärtner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 654–670 CrossRef ; 
  (b) V. I. Pârvulescu and C. Hardacre, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2615–2665 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. van Rantwijk and R. A. Sheldon, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2757–2785 CrossRef ; 
  (d) A. Taubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5380–5382 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Antonietti, D. B. Kuang, B. Samrsly and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4988–4992 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) H. Kaper, F. Endres, I. Djerdj, M. Antonietti, B. M. Smarsly, J. Maier and Y. S. Hu, Small, 2007, 3, 1753–1763 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) G. Bühler, D. Tholmann and C. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2224–2227 CrossRef ; 
  (h) E. R. Parnham and R. E. Morris, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1005–1031 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) C. Zhao and A. M. Bond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4279–4287 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) Z. H. Li, Z. Jia, Y. X. Luan and T. C. Mu, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2008, 12, 1–8 CrossRef .

  (a) T. Zhang, H. Guo and Y. M. Qiao, J. Lumin., 2009, 129, 861–866 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. X. Zhong, J. M. Hong, X. F. Cao, X. T. Chen and Z. L. Xue, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 623–628 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. O. Nuñez and M. Ocaña, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 455606 CrossRef ; 
  (d) D. S. Jacob, L. Bitton, J. Grinblat, I. Felner, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3162–3168 CrossRef ; 
  (e) X. M. Liu, J. W. Zhao, Y. J. Sun, K. Song, Y. Yu, C. Du, X. G. Kong and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6628–6630 RSC ; 
  (f) C. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. C. Zhou and D. Q. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10083–10088 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) C. Chen, L. D. Sun, Z. X. Li, L. L. Li, J. Zhang, J. W. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Langmuir, 2010 DOI:10.1021/la904545a .

  (a) S. Heer, K. Kompe, H. U. Güdel and M. Hasse, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2102–2105 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Karbowiak, A. Mech, L. Kepinski, W. Mielcarek and S. Hubert, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 400, 67–75 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Bednarkiewicz, A. Mech, M. Karbowiak and W. Stręk, J. Lumin., 2005, 114, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Z. W. Quan, P. Y. Jia, C. K. Lin, Y. Luo, Y. Chen, J. Fang, W. Zhou, C. J. O'Connor and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2030–2036 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Wang and T. Nann, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3804–3808 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Zhu, J. Meng and X. Q. Cao, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 3863–3867 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Meng and X. Cao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2505–2511 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C. X. Li, X. M. Zhang, Z. W. Quan, C. M. Zhang, H. Y. Li and J. Lin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4336–4345 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Thoma, H. Insley and G. M. Hebert, Inorg. Chem., 1966, 5, 1222–1229 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ptacek, H. Schäfer, K. Kömpe and M. Hasse, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3843–3848 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Dong, M. Raudsepp and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 472–478 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. H. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Y. Chen, C. Zhang, M. H. Hong and X. G. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Yu, M. Li, M. Y. Xie, L. D. Chen, Y. Li and Q. Y. Wang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 51–60 Search PubMed .
P. Ghosh, A. Kar and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 715–722 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Liang, X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2757–2765 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Ptacek, H. Schäfer, O. Zerzouf, K. Kömpe and M. Hasse, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2434–2438 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. Ghosh and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19283–19292 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Ghosh and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3223–3231 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Frey, S. Peng, K. Cheng and S. H. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2532–2542 RSC .
E. E. Lees, T. Nguyen, A. H. A. Clayton and P. Mulvaney, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1121–1128 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. Bu, Z. Hua, H. Chen and J. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14461–14464 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Li, L. Gao and D. Yan, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 533–535 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Q. M. Huang, J. C. Yu, E. Ma and K. M. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4719–4724 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Diamente, M. Raudsepp and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lezhnina, T. Juestel, H. Kaetker, D. U. Wiechert and U. H. Kynast, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 935–942 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Schäfer, P. Ptacek, O. Zerzouf and M. Haase, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2913–2918 CrossRef ; 
  (b) H. Schäfer, P. Ptacek, K. Hickmann, M. Prinz, M. Neumann and M. Haase, Russ. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 54, 1914–1920 CrossRef .
F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, V. Mahalingam, C. G. Morgan and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2924–2929 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Qian and Y. Zhang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12123–12125 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Abel, J. Boyer and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14644–14645 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Sivakumar, P. R. Diamente and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5878–5884 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Y. Liu, G. S. Yi, H. T. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. W. Zhang and J. M. Xue, Chem. Commun., 2008, 694–696 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Wang, C. C. Mi, Y. X. Zhang, J. L. Liu, F. Li, C. B. Mao and S. K. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19021–19027 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) X. F. Yu, L. D. Chen, M. Li, M. Y. Xie, L. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4118–4123 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) H. Schäfer, P. Ptacek, K. Kömpe and M. Haase, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1396–1400 CrossRef ; 
  (f) F. Wang, D. K. Chatterjee, Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang, X. P. Fan and M. Q. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5786–5791 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) Z. Q. Li and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7732–7735 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Kumar, M. Nyk, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, C. A. Flask and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 853–859 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. C. Boyer, M. P. Manseau, J. I. Murray and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1157–1164 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Naccache, F. Vetrone, V. Mahalingam, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 717–723 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Li, B. Dong, X. Bai, Y. Wang and H. W. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8219–8226 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) N. J. J. Johnson, N. M. Sangeetha, J. C. Boyer and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Nanoscale, 2010 10.1039/b9nr00379g .

  (a) H. Hu, M. X. Yu, F. Y. Li, Z. G. Chen, X. Gao, L. Q. Xiong and C. H. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7003–7009 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. P. Zhou, C. H. Xu, W. Sun and C. H. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3892–3900 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, E. Ma, D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu and Y. S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20843–20846 CrossRef CAS .
D. Q. Chen, Y. S. Wang, K. L. Zheng, T. L. Guo, Y. L. Yu and P. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 251903 CrossRef .
D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, P. Huang, F. Y. Weng, H. Lin and Y. S. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 041909 CrossRef .
D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, Y. S. Wang, P. Huang and F. Y. Weng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6406–6410 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, P. Huang and Y. S. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1686–1690 RSC ; 
  (b) D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, P. Huang, H. Lin, Z. F. Shan and Y. S. Wang, Acta Mater., 2010, 58, 3035–3041 CrossRef CAS .
van Veggel, et al, S. Sivakumar, F. C. J. M. van Veggel and M. Raudsepp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12464–12465 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sudarsan, S. Sivakumar, C. J. M. van Veggel and M. Raudsepp, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4736–4742 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sivakumar, J.-C. Boyer, E. Bovero and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2392–2399 RSC .
C. Zhang, H. P. Zhou, L. Y. Liao, W. Feng, W. Sun, Z. X. Li, C. H. Xu, C. J. Fang, L. D. Sun, Y. W. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 633–637 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Lin, M. T. Berry, R. Anderson, S. Smith and P. S. May, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3406–3413 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Boyer, N. J. J. Johnson and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2010–2012 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Chai, H. Z. Lian, Z. Y. Hou, C. M. Zhang, C. Peng and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 610–616 CrossRef CAS .
E Downing, L. Hesselink, J. Ralston and R. Macfarlane, Science, 1996, 273, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Bertini, C. Luchinat, NMR of Paramagnetic Molecules in Biological Systems; Benjamin/Cumming, Menlo Park, CA,  1991 Search PubMed .

  (a) F. Evanics, P. R. Diamente, F. C. J. M. van Veggel, G. J. Stanisz and R. S. Prosser, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2499–2505 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. I. Park, J. H. Kim, K. T. Lee, K. S. Jeon, H. B. Na, J. H. Yu, H. M. Kim, N. Lee, S. H. Choi, S. I. Baik, H. Kim, S. P. Park, B. J. Park, Y. W. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. Y. Yoon, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon, Y. D. Suh and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4467–4471 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. T. Wong, H. L. W. Chan and J. H. Hao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 022512 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J. Zhou, Y. Sun, X. X. Du, L. Q. Xiong, H. Hu and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3287–3295 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Z. L. Wang, J. H. Hao and H. L. W. Chan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3178–3185 RSC ; 
  (f) H. T. Wong, H. L. W. Chan and J. H. Hao, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 6123–6130 CrossRef CAS .

          G. T. Hermanson, Bioconjugate Techniques, Academic Press Inc., San Diego,  1996, pp. 90–100 Search PubMed .

  (a) D. K. Chatterjee, A. J. Rufaihah and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 937–943 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Nyk, R. Kumar, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3834–3838 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. A. Jalil and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 4122–4128 CrossRef .

  (a) J. H. Gao, H. W. Gu and B. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1097–1107 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Kim, Y. Z. Piao and T. Hyeon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 372–390 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Fang and M. Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6258–6266 RSC ; 
  (d) H. Hu, L. Q. Xiong, J. Zhou, F. Y. Li, T. Y. Cao and C. H. Huang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 3577–3584 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) D. L. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3356–3373 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) L. Li, C.-K. Tsung, T. Ming, Z. H. Sun, W. H. Ni, Q. H. Shi, G. D. Stucky and J. F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2956–2962 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) L. Li, C.-K. Tsung, Z. Yang, G. D. Stucky, L. D. Sun, J. F. Wang and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 903–908 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. E. J. G. J. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. N. Konan, R. Gruny and E. J. Allemann, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2002, 66, 89–106 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. X. He, X. Wu, K. M. Wang, B. H. Shi and L. Hai, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5601–5609 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Roy, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, H. E. Pudavar, E. J. Bergey, A. R. Oseroff, J. Morgan, T. J. Dougherty and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7860–7865 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. M. Hsieh, M. L. Ho, P. W. Wu, P. T. Chou, T. T. Tsaih and Y. Chi, Chem. Commun., 2006, 615–617 RSC ; 
  (b) J. M. Tsay, M. Trzoss, L. X. Shi, X. X. Kong, M. Selke, M. E. Jung and S. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6865–6871 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. C. S. Samia, X. B. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15736–15737 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Shi, B. Hernandez and M. Selke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6278–6279 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Derfus, W. C. W. Chan and S. N. Bhatia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hone, P. I. Walker, R. Evans-Gowing, S. FitzGerald, A. Beeby, I. Chambrier, M. J. Cook and D. A. Russell, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 2985–2987 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, A. C. Sania, J. D. Meyers, I. Panagopoulos, B. Fei and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10643–10647 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, W. Steelant, M. Kumar and M. Scholfield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4526–4527 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Qian, H. C. Guo, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Small, 2009, 5, 2285–2290 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Chatterjee and Y. Zhang, Nanomedicine, 2008, 3, 73–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Gai, P. P. Yang, C. X. Li, W. X. Wang, Y. L. Dai, N. Niu and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1166–1172 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. P. Yang, Z. W. Quan, Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 4786–4795 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. P. Yang, Z. W. Quan, C. X. Li, X. J. Kang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 4341–4347 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) P. P. Yang, Z. W. Quan, L. L. Lu, S. S. Huang and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 692–702 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. P. Yang, S. S. Huang, D. Y. Kong, J. Lin and H. G. Fu, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3203–3211 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. M. Zhang, C. X. Li, S. S. Huang, Z. Y. Hou, Z. Y. Cheng, P. P. Yang, C. Peng and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3374–3383 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. P. Yang, Y. H. Deng, Q. L. Wu, J. Zhou, H. F. Bao, Q. Li, F. Zhang, F. Y. Li, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, Langmuir, 2010 DOI:10.1021/la904596x .
H. Schäfer, P. Ptacek, H. Eickmeier and M. Haase, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3091–3097 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Chunxia Li	Chunxia Li was born in Shandong, China, in 1977. She received her B.S. (2002) and M.S. (2005) in chemistry from Northeast Normal University. Then she has been a graduate student in Jun Lin's group at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, and received a Ph.D. degree in 2008. After graduation, she has been working as an Assistant Professor in CIAC. Her current research interests include the controllable synthesis of rare earth luminescence nanomaterials and their bioapplications.
Jun Lin	Jun Lin, born in Changchun in 1966, received B.S. and M.S. degrees from Jilin University, China in 1989 and 1992 respectively, and a Ph.D. degree from the CIAC, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1995. He has studied and worked for more than 4 years in CityU (HK, 1996), INM (Germany, 1997), VCU/UNO (USA, 1998–1999). He came back to China in 2000, and since then has been working as a professor in CIAC. His research interests include bulk and nanostructrued luminescent materials for lightening, displaying and biological applications. He has published more than 300 peer-reviewed journal articles in related fields.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic pattern and representative shapes of various rare earth fluoride nanoparticles by single-source precursor (SSP) or multiple-source precursors (MSP) thermal decomposition of rare earth trifluoroacetate RE(CF3COO)3. TEM images (A–I) of typical fluoride nanoparticles. (A) edge-to-edge superlattices of LaF3 triangular nanoplates, inset is the SAED pattern (Adapted from ref. 18); the edge-to-edge (B) and face-to-face (C) superlattices of SmF3 hexagonal nanoplates, insets show results of FFT analyses (Adapted from ref. 19); α-NaYF4 nanopolyhedra (D), β-NaYF4 nanorods (E) and β-NaHoF4 hexagonal nanoplates (F) (Adapted from ref. 20a); KY3F10 nanoparticles (G) (ref. 23); LiYF4 diamond-shaped nanoparticles (H) (ref. 25); and KPrF4 nanopolyhedra (I) (ref. 22b). (Copyright 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, American Chemical Society, Wiley-VCH and Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.).	 

 	Fig. 2  Representative shapes of rare earth fluoride nano-/microparticles obtained by hydro(solvo)thermal reaction. TEM images of β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ nanorods (ref. 36a), α-NaYF4 nanospheres (B) and YF3 rice-like nanoparticles (C) (ref. 38) by LSS strategy; SEM images of β-NaHoF4 microtubes (D) (ref. 32a) and nanostructured β-NaREF4 arrays (E, F) (ref. 39a). (Copyright 2006, 2007, American Chemical Society and Wiley-VCH. Reproduced with permission.).	 

 	Fig. 3  The general synthetic methodology for rare earth fluorides by TSC-assisted hydrothermal method and typical SEM images of β-NaYF4 (A–F) and REF3 (G–I) microcrystals with multiform shapes (Adapted from ref. 44a–c). (Copyright 2007, 2008, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.).	 

thermal Decomposition	complicated; extensive; inert atmosphere	250–330	minutes-hours	organic compounds	needed	very narrow	very good
Hydro(solvo)thermal reaction	simple; cheap; high pressure	160–220	hours-days	water, organic compounds	needed	very narrow	very good
Hydrothermal in situ conversion	two-step process; especially for 1D materials	120–180	hours-days	water	not needed	relatively narrow	good
Ionic liquids-based synthesis	ILs as reactant, solvent and template; relatively green	70–160	minutes-hours	ILs, water, alcohol	not needed	broad	not good

Core–shell	CeF3:Tb3+@LaF3	
44f, 53
LaF3:Tm3+@LaF3	
68

EuF3@GdF3	
69

NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4	
21a,b

NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaGdF4	
21c

KYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@KYF4	
70

NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaGdF4:Yb3+	
71

NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@ NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+	
72

SiO2 encapsulation	LaF3:Ln3+@SiO2 (Ln= Eu, Tb, Nd, Yb/Er, and Yb/Tm)	
74a

NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/Fe3O4@SiO2	
74b

NaYF4:Er3+,Tm3+,Ho3+@SiO2	
74c

NdF3@SiO2	
74d

Polymer encapsulation	Poly (acrylic acid) (PAA)	
21b

1-hydroxyethane-1,1-diphosphonic acid (HEDP)	
74e

Polyethylenimine (PEI)	
74f

Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)	
74g

Ligand (oleic acid) exchange	3-Mercaptopropionic acid	
75a

PEG-phophate [PEG=poly (ethylene glycol)]	
75b

Poly (acrylic acid) (PAA)	
75c

Polyethylene glycol 600 diacid	
20b

Ligand (oleic acid) oxidation	Lemieux-von Rudloff reagent (KMnO4/NaIO4)	
12b

3-chloroperoxybenzoic acid	
76a

O3	
76b


 	Fig. 4  Synthesis of streptavidin-functionalized NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs (A), schematic of DNA nanosensors based on NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs (B) and luminescence spectra of a mixture of streptavidin-functionalized NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles, capture-DNA, and reporter-DNA in the presence of different concentrations of target-DNA under continuous-wave excitation at 980 nm (C). (Adapted from ref. 12b. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic diagram of immunolabeling of HeLa cells based on NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs and upconverison fluorescence imaging of HeLa cells after incubated with rabbit anti-CEA8 Ab-conjugated UCNPs (B) in bright field, (C) in dark field, and (D) overlays of (B) and (C). (Adapted from ref. 14. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of NaGdF4:Yb3+, Er3+/NaGdF4 UCNPs dispersed in chloroform with different sizes of 20 nm (A), 31 nm (B), and 41 nm (C); bright field image (D) and luminescence image (E) of cellular uptake of 20 nm UCNPs in SK-BR-3 cells with an incubation time of 4 h; T1-weighted magnetic resonance images of SK-BR-3 cells (1.3 × 107 cells) incubated with 20 nm UCNPs at various concentrations for 24 h (F). (Adapted from ref. 91b. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the design of the versatile photosensitizer based on UCNPs. (Adapted from ref. 102. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic image showing how to load ZnPc into mesoporous silica shell on NaYF4@silica nanoparticles and use them for PDT. It is noted that TEOS, C18TMS and ZnPc denote tetraethylorthosilicate, octadecyltrimethoxysilane, and photosensitizer zinc phthalocyanine, respectively. (B) TEM image of mesoporous-silica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+@silica nanoparticles. (C) Fluorescence images of total up-conversion fluorescence, showing the uptake of mesoporous-silica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@silica nanoparticles by murine bladder cancer cells (MB49), and (D) viability of cells incubated with the nanoparticles loaded with (white) and without (gray) ZnPc as a function of the nanoparticle concentration. The incubated cells were exposed to NIR laser for 5 min. (Adapted from ref. 103. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 9  The formation process of multifunctional Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites. Typically, the as-prepared monodisperse magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles were treated via a modified Stöber procedure, resulting in the formation of the silica-Fe3O4 composites with nonporous silica layer (denoted as Fe3O4@nSiO2). Consequently, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was selected as the organic template for the formation of outer mesoporous silica layer on Fe3O4@nSiO2. The CTAB removed sample was designated as Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2. Finally, NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ phosphor layer was deposited on the outer mesoporous silica through a modified reported process, realizing the formation of the final multifunctional (magnetic, mesoporous, and up-conversion luminescent) materials (denoted as Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+). (Adapted from ref. 105. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM (A) and TEM (B) images of Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ nanocomposites, the magnetic hysteresis loops (C) of pure Fe3O4 (■), Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2 (○), Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ (★), the separation process of the nanocomposites by a magnet (D), up-conversion emission spectrum of the nanocomposites (E), and up-conversion emission intensity of Er3+ in IBU–Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ as a function of the cumulative released IBU (F). (Adapted from ref. 105. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
