Perylene-based molecular device: multifunctional spintronic and spin caloritronic applications   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP05926F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP05926F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 7354-7365Perylene-based molecular device: multifunctional spintronic and spin caloritronic applications†

        
          
            Xuming 
            Wu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shifa 
            Xiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Quan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunhua 
            Tian
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Guoying 
            Gao
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Physical Science and Technology, Lingnan Normal University, 524048 Zhanjiang, China. E-mail: chunhuatian@lingnan.edu.cn
bSchool of Physics and Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: guoying_gao@mail.hust.edu.cn
Received 
      19th December 2022
    , Accepted 9th February 2023First published on 10th February 2023AbstractCarbon-based magnetic molecular junctions are promising candidates for nanoscale spintronic applications because they are atomically thin and possess high stability and peculiar magnetism. Herein, based on first-principles and non-equilibrium Green's function, we designed a carbon-based molecular spintronic device composed of carbon atomic chains, zigzag-edged graphene nanoribbon (ZGNR), and a perylene molecule. Our results show that the device exhibits integrated spintronic and spin caloritronic functionalities, such as the bias-voltage driven spin filtering effect, negative differential resistance effect and giant magnetoresistance, temperature-gradient driven spin Seebeck effect, thermal spin filtering effect, high thermal magnetoresistance, and thermal colossal giant magnetoresistance. Furthermore, considering the phonon vibration effect, the spin and charge thermoelectric figure of merits (ZTsp and ZTch) can be enhanced and the peak of ZTsp is much larger than that of ZTch, indicating the excellent thermospin performance. The asymmetrical contact configuration between the carbon atomic chain and perylene/ZGNR inhibits the phonon thermal conductivity significantly, leading to the optimal ZTsp and ZTch of 2.4 and 0.5 at 300 K, respectively. These results suggest multifunctional spintronic and spin caloritronic applications for the perylene-based molecular device.
1. Introduction
In recent years, the pursuit of continuous miniaturized nanodevices has motivated research on new low-dimensional systems1 because the quantum-confinement effect and thermal management have become increasingly predominant. Miniaturization and low-energy dissipation are two equally urgent requirements for device applications. Spintronics, which involves the interplay of spin and charge transports, presents a promising platform to meet the requirement for next-generation electronic devices.2,3 Spin caloritronics, which combines spintronics and thermoelectrics, offers additional possibilities for waste heat recovery and cooling, occurrence of the spin seebeck effect (SSE), and spin diode effect.4,5 Thus, to meet device miniaturization and low-energy dissipation, it is necessary to explore new 2D systems and realize 2D spintronic and spin caloritronic devices. Although more 2D materials have been discovered in experiments,6 there are only a few 2D ferromagnetic ones. The recently discovered intrinsic 2D ferromagnetic CrI3 monolayer, Cr2Ge2Te3 bilayers, and Fe3GeTe2 monolayer provide new platforms for realizing information storage at the nanoscale.7 However, most of them face some challenges: poor spin polarizability, low Curie temperature and high-power consumption. It is therefore highly desirable to search for 2D magnetic and thermoelectric materials with controllable magnetism and excellent thermoelectricity, which can be used in multifunctional and low-dissipated nanodevices.
Interestingly, carbon-based nano-materials have been regarded as promising candidates to miniaturize devices. Organic molecules, which have many advantage features such as atomic-layer thickness, magnetism, weaker spin-orbit coupling, longer spin-coherence time and distance, have attracted intense attention in the design of carbon-based molecular devices.8 Subsequently, organic molecular spintronics combining spintronics and molecular electronics offer new possibilities for solving the miniaturization of electronic devices.9–11 Theoretical research indicated that utilizing single or several molecules to construct molecular spintronic devices can gain many interesting and novel transport properties, e.g., spin filtering effect (SFE),12,13 spin valve,13 spin rectification,14 spin switch,15 negative differential resistance (NDR),12,16 strong odd–even oscillatory characteristic,17 and magnetoresistance (MR).12,13,18 Many functional single molecule devices including molecular wires, molecular switches, molecular rectifiers, molecular transistors and sensors have been realized.19 Exploring the performance of spintronic effects and spin caloritronic effects in molecular devices is necessary, which can put forward a new route for the designs of new multifunctional and low-dissipate nanodevices.
Graphene has received considerable attention due to its distinctive electronic and mechanical properties, but the zero-band gap nature and non-magnetic property limit its application in transistor, spintronics and thermoelectric devices. An effective method to open the gap and induce magnetism is to reduce the dimensionality. For example, the one-dimensional periodic structure of edge-related graphene nanoribbons (GNR) can be fabricated,20,21 and the clean and precise edge structures of the armchair and zigzag edges can be experimentally cut off from graphene, which are called AGNR and ZGNR, respectively.22,23 ZGNR also exhibits spin polarized edge states and ferromagnetic ordering when the external magnetic field or electric field is applied, and the spin orientation on the edges of ZGNR can be arranged by a suitable magnetic field.23,24 ZGNR also has a long spin diffusion length, fast electron transport, tunable band gap and stability up to near 450 K,25,26 suggesting that ZGNR is suitable as an electrode in molecular spintronic devices.
It has even been proposed that the isolated chain of carbon atoms can be fabricated by several methods, such as removing carbon atoms from graphene through the well-controlled energetic electron irradiation,27 stretching a graphene strip,28 high-energy electron beam29 and connecting to a graphene sheet by covalent bonds.30 The linear chains of carbon atoms have different bonded modifications, such as polyyne and cumulene, which are suitable for construction as the bridge between the GNR and molecule due to their good coupling with carbon-based electrodes and stable chemical properties.31,32 The spin transport behavior of carbon atomic chain-based nanodevices also exhibited interesting effects, including spin filtering, spin NDR, and rectifying behaviors.33–35 However, these works did not concentrate on the spin thermoelectric and charge thermoelectric effects. Furthermore, studies on the relation of the spin transport properties and spin thermoelectric effects in carbon-based molecular devices are also very few. Thus, more work is necessary in this research area to gain a deeper understanding.
The perylene molecule was synthesized 100 years ago by Kardos.36 It is highly stable, and has been widely used in the field of photocatalytic and organic solar cells.37,38 The perylene molecule, ZGNR and carbon atomic chains are easily linked to each other due to their similar chemical covalent bonds, which encourages us to design new and stable molecular devices. In this paper, using four carbon atomic chains connected to perylene and the magnetic ZGNR electrodes, we constructed a carbon-based molecular device of ZGNR/perylene/ZGNR, and explored the spin and thermal transport properties by using density functional theory combined with nonequilibrium Green's function. Rich transport behaviors are predicted, such as SFE, SSE, NDR, high MR, and high spin and charge thermoelectric figure of merit, which indicate the potential applications for the perylene-based molecular device in both spintronic devices and thermoelectric conversion devices.
2. Model and computational method
As shown in Fig. 1, the illustrated molecular device model consists of semi-infinite left and right electrodes ZGNR along the transport z direction, and four carbon atomic chains are used to connect perylene. All of the carbon atoms at the edge are passivated with hydrogen atoms. The spin orientations in the two electrodes can be controlled by applying an external magnetic field. Thus, the ZGNR electrodes show the spin parallel configuration (PC) and anti-parallel configuration (APC). The magnetic moments are mainly distributed at the carbon atomic chains, and at the edges of ZGNR and perylene molecule. The maximum magnetic moments at the edge of ZGNR, carbon atomic chains and perylene are 0.3, 0.1 and 0.03μB per atom, respectively. So, the parallel (antiparallel) spin orientations for all of the C atoms at the ZGNR edge and at the C chains are set for the PC (APC) in our calculations.
 Fig. 1  Schematic view of the perylene-based spintronic device model, which consists of two electrode leads of ZGNR, and the scattering region of the perylene molecule with the bridge of two carbon chains. The shaded areas are the left and right electrodes of ZGNR. The gray and white balls stand for carbon and hydrogen atoms, respectively. 
The structure relaxation and electronic properties of perylene and ZGNR are calculated by using Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) in the VASP.39,40 The energy cutoff, convergence criteria for energy and force are set at 450 eV, 10−5 eV, and 0.01 eV Å−1, respectively. The carbon atomic chain optimization, device optimization and spin transport property calculation are performed by using density functional theory (DFT) combined with non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) implemented in the Atomistix ToolKit (ATK).41,42 The spin-dependent generalized gradient approximation (SGGA) in the form of PBE is adopted.43 We used the double-z plus polarization basis set for the C and H atoms. An energy cutoff of 150 Ry and a Monkhorst–Pack k-mesh of 15 × 1 × 100 are chosen. The positions of the atoms in the device are completely relaxed until the maximum force on the atoms are converged to 0.01 eV Å−1, and the energy convergence criterion is 10−5 eV. The vacuum layer used is at least 15 Å to avoid the spurious interaction between the periodic images, the electrode temperature is set to be 300 K, and the Fermi level (EF) is set as zero in all calculations. The spin-dependent currents through the device are calculated by using the Landauer formula,44,45 (1)The total current I represents the sum of Iσ, where σ represents spin index of spin-up (↑) or spin-down (↓). For every spin state, the electron transmission coefficient Tσ(E, Vb) is given by, Tσ(E, Vb) = Tr[ΓL(E, Vb)GR(E)ΓR(E, Vb)GA(E)],(2)where GR/A is the retarded/advanced Green's function of the scattering region, and ΓL/R is the coupling matrix to the left/right electrode.
The thermal spin transport properties can be obtained by eqn (1). The thermal spin-dependent current can be driven by the temperature difference between the source and drain (ΔT = TL− TR). This is because the non-equilibrium Fermi distribution function no longer remains zero (fL− fR ≠ 0) even if the bias voltage ΔV is zero. In the linear response regime, ΔT = TL≈ TR, and μ = μL= μR can be obtained. Thus, the spin-resolved thermopower and electronic thermal conductance can be expressed by,46,47 (3) (4)Herein, σ = ↑(↓), where κσ,n is defined as: (5)
Then, the spin- and charge-dependent thermopower can be calculated by Sch = (S↑ + S↓)/2 and Ssp = S↑ − S↓,46,48 respectively. The phonon thermal conductance κph can be expressed by κph = −Jph/ΔT, where Jph is the Landauer–Büttiker framework, and κph can be calculated by the Landauer-type formula,49 (6)Here, Tph is the phonon transmission coefficient, which can be calculated by using DFT combined with the NEGF approach.
Finally, we calculated the charge-figure of merit ZTch and spin-figure of merit ZTsp, which describe the conversion efficiency from heat to voltage or spin voltage, respectively. ZTch and ZTsp are defined as,50 (7)where Gch = G↑ + G↓ and Gsp = |G↑ − G↓| are the charge conductance and spin conductance, respectively. κel = κel↑ + κel↓ is the charge thermal conductance.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Bias voltage-driven spin transport properties
In order to understand the electronic structure of the perylene molecule, we present the spin-dependent band structure and main atomic orbital density of states in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI†). Here, we consider the edge without and with hydrogenation because hydrogenation is adopted in the transport properties of the device discussed below. For the case without hydrogenation, Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI†) indicate that the valence bands around the Fermi level mainly originate from the C atomic py states, and the C atomic px states contribute to the valence bands below −0.5 eV. The conduction bands come from the hybridized C atomic pz and px states. The hydrogenation weakens the spin splitting of the C atomic py states around the Fermi level, and it also makes the bands more flat. The H atomic s states are hybridized with the C atomic pz and px states. Furthermore, there is no imaginary frequency in the calculated phonon spectrum (Fig. S3, ESI†), which indicates the dynamic stability of the perylene molecule.

Fig. 2 shows the spin-resolved current–voltage (I–V) curves in the range of bias voltage from −1.0 to 1.0 V with magnetization in PC and APC of the device. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the spin-down current in PC is obviously stronger than the spin-up current, which is indicative of the spin filtering effect. We quantify the spin filtering efficiency (SFE) by SFE (%) = [(I↑ − I↓)/(I↑ + I↓)] × 100, where I↑ and I↓ refer to the current in the spin-up and spin-down channels, respectively. The insets in Fig. 2(a) and (b) indicate that the SFE in PC (APC) varies from 56% (18%) to 68% (100%). Interestingly, the value of SFE is the smallest at the bias voltage of 0.0 V, and then it almost linearly increases at the bias range [0.0, ±0.5]/[0.0, ±0.3] V in PC/APC. Thus, the magnitude of SFE relies on the bias voltage and the spin orientation, which means that the SFE can be flexibly manipulated by the source-drain voltage. It can be seen from Fig. 2(b) that the spin-up currents in APC are much larger than the spin-down currents under the negative bias range (−1.0, −0.2) V, and it is almost forbidden in the positive bias. Meanwhile, this phenomenon is reversed for the spin-down current under the positive bias (0.2, 1.0) V. This feature indicates that the device exhibits the dual spin filtering effect and spin-dependent rectification ratio (RR) in APC. The RR curves in APC are plotted in Fig. 2(c). There is nearly zero spin rectification in the range of [0.0, 0.25] V, but the RR increase rapidly with increasing bias for both spin channels. The maximum RR is over 105 for I↑ and I↓, showing giant rectifying behavior and dual spin diode effect. The value is almost two orders of magnitude higher than that in the Azulene-like molecular devices (up to 103). Furthermore, it is much larger than the molecular device based on trigonal graphene with zigzag edges (the biggest rectification ratio is 25),33,37 and it is comparable to the HSC11BIPY–CC–BIPY molecule diode (up to 106)16 and the naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride-based molecular devices (up to 105).51
 Fig. 2  The spin-resolved and total I–V curves in PC (a) and APC (b), respectively. The insets of (a and b) show the bias-dependent spin polarization. (c) The bias-dependent RR. (d) The spin-dependent electron transmission spectra at zero bias in PC configurations. (e) The bias-dependent MR, the inset of (e) is the enlarged view of MR at the bias range of [−0.4, 0.4] V. (f) is same as (e), but in APC configurations. 
From Fig. 2(a), one can see that both spin-up and spin-down currents rise rapidly before ±0.5 V and then decrease drastically when the bias voltage is larger than ±0.5 V, giving rise to the typical NDR behavior. It should be noted that a similar behavior can also be found in APC. The NDR effect can be used in many fields, such as high-frequency oscillator, mixers, multipliers, analog-to-digital, and others. Interestingly, from Fig. 2(a) and (b), we can see that both total currents in PC and APC almost remain constant (∼1.6 μA) at the bias range of [ ± 0.5, ±0.95] V, which looks like a platform. If the rectification, filtering and other subsequent adjustment are applied to adjust the current, the perfect current output model can be designed in an instantaneous step and steady level (as shown in the bottom right inset of Fig. 2(a) and (b). Thus, such currents can be designed as a spin signal converter of the square wave.52,53 The square wave can be used in switching signal. For example, in the magnetization PC, the large values of the spin-up current in the high platform and the nearly zero values of the spin-up current in the intermediate state can be used to represent the digit signal “(1)–(0)”, respectively. Similarly, in the magnetization APC, the large spin-up and spin-down currents can output the logic digit signal “(−1)–(1)”. Thus, we can successfully store information according to the different digit signal features. In addition, the total current at the bias voltage range of [−0.2, 0.2] V in PC is much larger than that in APC, leading to a giant magnetoresistance (GMR) effect. The GMR is defined as: GMR = (IP − IAPC)/IAPC × 100%, where IPC and IAPC are the total currents in the PC and APC, respectively. As the bias voltage increases to the range of [0.18, 0.20] V, the maximum value of the GMR can reach 108% (Fig. 2(e)), which is much larger than those of the Azulene-like molecular device (105)12 and polyacetylene-based molecular device (4.64 × 104).34 At the low bias range of [−0.3, 0.3] V, the maximum value of GMR also can reach 105% (as shown in the inset of Fig. 2(e)), which is much larger than those for the metal-based GMR device,13 some 2D MXene-Based magnetic tunnel junctions (∼103),54 zigzag MoS2 nanoribbon device (104),55 and CrI3/h-BN/CrI3 magnetic tunnel junction (3600%).56 These interesting effects indicate that the perylene-based molecular device is a promising candidate for 2D spintronic applications.
In order to gain better physical and chemical understandings of the above interesting effects, we show the transmission spectra as a function of electron energy at the bias voltage of 0.0 V and range of [−0.9, −0.4] V, as shown in Fig. 2(d) and (f) and Fig. 3(a)–(f). We know that the spectrum is related to the electron density, large transmission coefficients can provide more effective conductive channels for electron transport, and the stronger spin current can be induced. From Fig. 2(d) and (f), due to the size miniaturization and edge modification by H atoms, we find that ZGNR has a metallic property with spin degeneracy, and the transmission coefficients in the spin-up state around the Fermi level are much larger than those in the spin-down state. This indicates that the more transport channels are available in the spin-up channel with increasing bias voltage, and the spin-down channels are very inhibited. For the magnetization APC, both spin-up and spin-down transmission coefficients nearly remain at zero at the bias of [−0.35, 0.25] V. The transmission coefficients increase rapidly, while the bias continues increasing, i.e., the spin-up and spin-down electrons cannot come across the device at low bias. The currents in both spin channels are then completely inhibited; thus, a large GMR will be induced.
 Fig. 3  The spin-dependent transmission spectra under the bias voltage range of [−0.4, −0.9] V in PC (a–f). The spin-up and spin-down LDOS at the Fermi level under the bias of 0.4 V in PC (g and h) and APC (i and j), respectively. The bias voltage window is marked by the vertical red lines. The isovalue for displaying LDOS in (g–j) is 0.003 e Å−3. 
When applying the increased bias voltage, as displayed in Fig. 3(a)–(f), the effective integral areas of the transmission spectrum are marked by the dotted line area, which is related to the bias window [−Vb/2, Vb/2], and contributes to the integral region of the current. In the magnetization PC, we find that the transmission coefficients in both spin channels continuously enter the effective bias window when the bias voltage is below −0.45 V. However, the spin-up integral area of the transmission coefficient is much larger than that in the spin-down channel. This means that the spin-up current increases rapidly compared to that in the spin-down one, and thus the SFE occurs. Herein, the spin-up current and spin polarization reach the maximum values of 1.7 nA and ∼87%, respectively. When the bias voltage is above −0.45 V, both spin-up and spin-down transmission coefficients run out of the dotted line area. The integral area decreases with increasing bias voltage, and both spin-up and spin-down currents are thus suppressed, giving rise to the NDR effect. Moreover, both spin-up and spin-down transmission coefficients in APC increase much more slowly than that in PC at the bias voltage range of [−0.25, 0.25] V. Thus, the device has tiny tunneling probabilities through barriers, making the total current increase delayed and slow. Such transport behaviors are conducive to the GMR effect.
We further calculate the local density of states (LDOS) of the device to better understand the I–V characteristics, as shown in Fig. 3(g)–(j). Because the spin-resolved LDOS of the device at the bias of [0.0, 0.4] V are similar to each other, we only analyze the spin LDOS in PC at the bias of 0.4 V. From Fig. 3(g), the LDOS values are mainly distributed by the π orbital between the C–C bonds especially in the carbon chains. In the spin-up channel, the LDOS spreads over the whole scattering region, while the spin-down LDOS are much lower than the spin-up ones. Therefore, the plentiful spin-up electrons can smoothly flow through the device, showing the strong metallic property. In contrast, only a small number of spin-down electrons can go through the devices. These results are consistent with the SFE effect, as mentioned above. Meanwhile, both spin-up and spin-down LDOS in APC are delocalized to zero, whereas the electrons are almost blocked in the scattering region. Thus, both spin-up and spin-down transport channels are inhibited, and thus this device exhibits an excellent GMR effect. It should be noted that the RR behavior also can be explained by LDOS and corresponding transport spectrum. Herein, we do not discuss these similar properties in detail.
We know that the transport characteristics of a molecular device are determined by the electronic structures of the molecule, especially the energy positions of the molecular orbitals, which can stand for the transmission channel provided for electron tunneling. Herein, we take the spin-up transport properties of the bias-dependent evolution of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the molecular projected self-consistent Hamiltonian (MPSH) of the four frontier molecular orbitals LUMO, LUMO+1, HOMO, and HOMO−1 in the PC as an example to explain the NDR effect, as shown in Fig. 4 and 5. In Fig. 4, the HOMO orbitals at the range of [−0.6, −0.4] V are distributed in the whole device, but the orbitals of LUMO localize at the left scattering region when the bias voltage is over −0.5 V. This means that the LUMO has weaker coupling with the right electrode, and it will lead to low conductivity and less contribution to the transmission current. Such phenomenon also can be verified by the energy evolution of the frontier molecular orbitals. As we know, the eigenvalues of the frontier MPSH eigenstates evolve non-monotonically under the bias voltage due to the electrostatic effect of the applied bias. Thus, only the energy levels of MPSH eigenstates located in the bias window can be contributed to the current. In Fig. 5, the orbitals of both HOMO and HOMO−1 enter the bias window, and their gaps decrease gradually below the bias of −0.5 V (see the shadow A). This will provide more frontier orbitals around EF, and result in more tunneling channels for the electrons in favor of generating much larger current. Such features are consistent with the behavior of the spin-dependent transmission spectra in Fig. 2(d). Meanwhile, the orbitals of LUMO and LUMO+1 stay away from the bias window and deviate from the EF below the bias of −0.5 V, showing that these frontier orbitals are suppressed and do not contribute to the current. Although the LUMO and LUMO+1 enter the bias window when the bias increases to −0.6 V, the gap of HOMO and HOMO−1 increases greatly. As a result, the total MPSH eigenstates above the bias voltage of −0.6 V become more localized, and there are less MPSH orbitals that contribute to the transmission and the spin current decreases. Therefore, the NDR effect occurs. We also can see that the HOMO and LUMO orbitals at the bias range of [−1.0, −0.7] V do not clearly change (see from Fig. 3(d)–(f)). It also indicates that the total MPSH eigenstates do not dramatically decrease. Thus, the transmission spectra in the region of “C” remain constant, and the electrons stably flow from right to left. Thus, the value of the current is almost maintained at 15 μA, and the platform-like digital current signal appears.
 Fig. 4  The eigenstate distribution of the HOMO and LUMO at the bias range [−0.8, −0.4] V. The isovalue is 0.025 Å−3 eV−1. 
 Fig. 5  The bias-dependent evolution of molecular orbitals for the spin-up state in the PC. The blue lines show the chemical potentials of the left and right electrodes, and the region A/B/C displays the applied different bias voltages. 
3.2. Temperature-gradient driven spin transport properties
The thermally induced spin-dependent currents can be produced by the temperature difference between the source and the drain ΔT = TL − TR, where the TL and TR are the temperatures of the left and right electrodes, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6(a) and (c), the band structures of the two electrodes show the typical metallic characteristic, two symmetric spin-splitting states localized at the upside and downside of the Fermi level, respectively. Thus, the device will provide two opposite spin-dependent channels in PC, which can easily generate the SSE based on the metallic conduction electrons. Meanwhile, as for the spin-splitting transmission spectra in PC and APC under the bias of 0.0 V and −0.4 V as plotted in Fig. 6(b) and (d), it can be found that the spin-dependent transmissions in PC are asymmetric because the perylene molecule in the scattering region breaks the electron symmetry in each spin channel. Thus, the thermally induced spin-polarized current can be generated. Herein, we call this phenomenon as the compensation effect, which shows the net transmission coefficients around the Fermi level and describes the different competition between electron carriers and hole carriers. For example, for the PC, the energy of the spin-up spectrum above the Fermi level is higher than that of the lower side, which means that the transmission capacity of the electron carriers is stronger than that of the hole carriers. This results in electron flow from the left electrode to the right electrode. Similar characteristics occur in the spin-down spectrum; thus, the holes flow from the right electrode to the left electrode in the spin-down channel. This ensures that the perylene-based molecular device can be designed as a spin Seebeck device. It should be noted that the metallic property of the two spin channels in PC makes the Seebeck and thermal spin current smaller than that in the semiconductor channels in APC at the bias of 0.4 V, which means that the device does not have excellent thermoelectric performance in PC under the zero bias.
 Fig. 6  (a and c) The band structures of the left and right electrodes of the device in PC. (b and d) The transmission spectra at 0.0 V in PC and −0.4 V in APC. 
For APC under the bias of 0.4 V, as shown in Fig. 6(d), one can see that the spin-down transport coefficients remain at zero between the gap of [−0.51, 0.48] eV, which is much larger than the narrow gap of 0.18 eV in the spin-up channel. Thus, the spin up transport spectrum is more close to the Fermi level, and the transport of electrons plays a major role in the thermal current. The thermal spin-up current can be easily induced even with the small value of ΔT, but the thermal spin-down current is suppressed due to the large range of energy gap in this channel. Therefore, the perfect thermal SFE can be manipulated by the applied bias voltage. It is known that the thermal current is related to the transport spectrum T(E) and the Fermi Dirac distribution difference of two electrodes fL − fR. We further use the spin-dependent current spectra J(E) in PC and APC (−0.4 V) at TL = 300 K with ΔT = 40 K, 60 K and 80 K to understand the thermal current properties. The J(E) formula is defined as J(E) = T(E)[fL(E, TL) − fR(E, TR)], where the Fermi–Dirac distributions f(E, T) can be calculated by the formula of , and μ is the chemical potential. Herein, f(E, T) below/above the Fermi level stands for the hole/electron transport, while the numerical values are set as negative/positive. In the spin-up channel for PC, both absolute values of J(E) peaks above the Fermi level are obviously larger than those below the Fermi level at both ΔT values, while the range of J(E) is almost equally distributed (see Fig. S4a and b, ESI†). This confirms that the spin-up thermal transport is mainly attributed to the electron carriers, leading to the growth of net electron carrier transport from the drain to the source. On the contrary, in the spin-down channel, the absolute values of J(E) peaks below the Fermi level are larger than those above the Fermi level, so the hole carriers will transport from the source to the drain. As a result, the good SSE is induced. In the case of APC at the bias of −0.4 V, both spin-up and spin-down thermally induced currents are dominated by the electron carriers. This is because the neighboring transmission peaks around the Fermi level are contributed by the electron carriers, as shown in Fig. 7(d). Clearly, the distinction range and the peaks of J(E) above the Fermi level are much larger than those below the Fermi level in both spin-up and spin-down channels (see Fig. S4c and d, ESI†). This indicates that the competition between the hole and electron is weak in APC, and the electron carrier plays a key role in the emergence of the thermal spin current. Such features are consistent with the thermal spin currents being an asymmetric distribution about the x-axis. The spin-up thermal current is much greater than the spin-down one versus TL for different ΔT and versus ΔT for different TL, respectively (see Fig. S5a and c, ESI†). From the above discussion, it is not difficult to imagine that the device has net thermally driven total spin currents Isp (Is= Iup− Idown) in PC at 0.0 V, high thermal spin polarization in APC at −0.4 V, and thermal giant MR effect.
 Fig. 7  The thermal spin-dependent currents versus (a) TL and (c) ΔT in PC at the bias voltage 0.0 V. The charge and spin currents versus (b) TL and (d) ΔT in PC at the bias voltage 0.0 V. (e). The thermal MR versus (e) TL and (f) ΔT. 
To elucidate the above-mentioned analysis, we present the thermally driven charge and spin transport features, thermal spin polarization and thermal MR versus increasing ΔT(TL) with the fixed TL(ΔT) in Fig. S5 (ESI†) and Fig. 7(e) and (f), respectively. We can clearly see that the thermal spin-polarized currents in PC are generated and increase linearly by the temperature gradient, which does not need extra transverse field and threshold temperature due to its metallic conduction states in the spin transport channel (Fig. 6(a) and (c)). As expected, the spin-up currents are positive, while the spin-down ones are negative, indicating the spin Seebeck effect. Obviously, the thermally driven total spin currents Isp increase quickly, whereas the charge current Ich(Ich = Iup + Idown) are suppressed in the small value. From Fig. 7(b) and (d), the magnitude of Isp are dozens of times greater than that of Ich. This feature supports the fact that the nearly pure thermal spin current can be obtained in PC. Therefore, such device is very suitable for spin caloritronic devices. For APC, as shown in Fig. S5(a) (ESI†), owing to the strong nonlinear temperature dependence of the Fermi–Dirac distribution function, the thermal spin-up current decreases in the positive TL. However, it almost retains a constant in the negative TL, showing a thermal diode-like effect. This also means that the device can be used as a thermal bipolar spin diode. We also find that both spin-up and spin-down thermal currents are negative, which again confirm the above analysis that the thermal currents in both spin channels are attributed by the electron carriers. Hence, the spin-down channel is suppressed, while the electrons can easily tunnel in the spin-up channel, leading to high thermal spin polarization, SPth (%) = (|Iup| − |Idown|)/(|Iup| + |Idown|) × 100. From Fig. S5(b) and (d) (ESI†), the SPthversus the increasing ΔT(TL) with the fixed TL(ΔT) are always higher than ∼94% (95%). Such high value also means that this device has excellent thermal spin filtering effect, and thus the net thermal spin current can be obtained. The thermal MR behavior is defined as MRth (%) = [(IAPC − IPC)/IPC] × 100, where IPC and IAPC stand for the total thermal spin currents in PC and APC, respectively. We calculate the thermal MR as a function of the fixed TL/ΔT ranging from −100 K to 500 K and −100 K to 400 K with the different ΔT/TL in Fig. 7(e) and (f). We can see that the maximum values of the thermal MR reach up to 109 and 106, which are much higher than that of the Mn-doped monolayer blue phosphorene (∼105).52 It is worth noting that the lowest MR also can reach 106% and 104%. Such large value of MR indicates that such device has excellent spin transport property of thermal colossal giant magnetoresistance effect. In general, the external magnetic field and bias voltage are effective routes to control and adjust the transport behaviors, so that the perfect SSE, thermal diode-like effect, high thermal SPth, excellent thermal SSE, and high thermal colossal giant magnetoresistance effect can simultaneously be achieved in such device. These peculiar thermal transport characteristics provide support that the spin caloritronics device based on the perylene-based molecular junction has potential applications in future low-power-consumption technology and perfect thermospin devices.

Fig. 8 shows the spin-dependent Sup/Sdown, charge- and spin-thermoelectric coefficients of electronical conductance Gch/Gsp, phonon thermal conductance kph, charge- and spin-thermoelectric figure of merit ZTch/ZTsp of the device as a function of chemical potential at 300 K at the bias voltage of 0.0 V in PC. As shown in the previous analysis about the thermal currents, we know that the device has the spin Seebeck effect in PC. Fig. 8(a) shows that the Sup has a negative value, while the Sdown is positive. These behaviors also can be interpreted by the slope of the transmission function and magnitude of electron at the Fermi level. From Fig. 6(b), the magnitude of the spin-up transmission coefficient is positive and the spin-down one is negative. This confirms the opposite direction of the thermal spin-dependent currents in Fig. 7(a) and (b).
 Fig. 8  Spin-up, spin-down, charge- and spin-thermopower (a), electronic conductance (b), electronic thermal conductance and phonon thermal conductance (c), and thermoelectric figure of merit (d) at 300 K as a function of chemical potential for the device in PC. The inset in (d) is the phonon thermal conductance kphversus temperature T. 
From Fig. 8(a), the Ssp is almost two times larger than the Sch in the chemical potential range of [−0.5, 0.0] eV. In addition, we can see that the Sup is suppressed above the Fermi level. The Sdn shows a large peak at the chemical potential of 0.25 eV, indicating that the large difference value between Sup and Sdn will occur. That is to say, the value of ZTsp is much bigger than ZTch at these chemical potential ranges. From Fig. 8(b) and (c), one can find that the tendency of the spin-dependent conductance and spin-dependent electronic thermal conductance are related to the transmission coefficient. The spin-down electronic conductance Gdn is smaller than the spin-up one Gup around the Fermi level, which is consistent with the previous analysis that the electronic transport of the spin-down channel is much more suppressed than that in the spin-up channel. The spin-dependent electronic thermal conductance relates to the electronic conductance, which can be expressed by, (8)Thus, the behaviors of κel(↑) and κel(↓) are similar to those of G(↓) and G(↑). Fig. 8(c) demonstrates that κph is a constant because it is not related to the chemical potential, but related to the temperature (see the inset of in Fig. 8(d)). Obviously, the κph is 0.61 nW K−1 at the temperature of 300 K, which is lower than that of the Mn-doped monolayer blue phosphorene (0.9 nW K−1).52 This result suggests that the different and asymmetric interaction of the contact configuration between the carbon atomic chains and perylene (ZGNR) can reduce the phonon thermal conductance effectively. Although the κph is nearly two times lower than the total electronic thermal conductance κel (κel = κel(↑) + κel(↓)), it is higher than the κel(↑) and κel(↓) at the chemical potential range of [−1.0, 1.0] eV, indicating that the influence of the phonon scattering at the low chemical potential range is an important factor, which cannot be ignored in thermal spin caloritronic devices. The calculated charge and spin thermoelectric figure of merit ZTsp and ZTch are shown in Fig. 8(d), which indicates the performance of the thermoelectric and spin thermoelectric effects. Interestingly, the maximum ZTsp and ZTch also can reach as high as 2.4 and 0.5 at μ = 0.25 eV based on the metallic spin transport channel rather than the semiconductive behavior in the previous study.52 More importantly, the peak of ZTsp/ZTch is much higher than that of ZTch/ZTsp at the chemical potential μ = 0.15/± 1.0 eV, meaning that the high conversion efficiency of the spin current and the heat current can be flexibly transformed.
To gain further insight into the thermospin effects in this device, it is necessary to explore the tendency of thermal/voltage-induced ZTsp/ZTch with the temperature (voltage) fixed in 300 K at the bias voltage −0.4 eV. As shown in Fig. 9, we find that the curves of ZTsp and ZTch have three large peaks around the chemical potential μ = −0.5/−0.5, −0.38/0.0 and 0.36/0.4 eV with the applied external bias voltage or temperature, and both peaks of ZTsp values are larger than that of ZTch. Meanwhile, with the increase of the bias voltage or temperature, the values of ZTsp and ZTch also increase rapidly. This means that the competition between the spin- and charge-thermal spin currents becomes more strong. For example, the ratios of ZTsp/ZTch at the peaks 1/2/3 (as marked in Fig. 9) at the bias of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 V are 3.92/3.59/3.31, 4.06/3.44/3.97, 4.23/3.88/3.99, and the ratios of ZTsp/ZTch at the temperature of 300, 500 and 800 K are 4.23/3.99/3.88, 3.84/3.99/3.472 and 3.53/3.63/2.31, respectively. The ratios of ZTsp/ZTch as the function of bias voltage at peak 1 and peak 3 become large, but the ratios at peak 2 decrease and then continue to increase. This leads to the conclusion that both ZTsp and ZTch are insensitive to the bias voltage and temperature. An more interesting point is that the maximal peak value of Zhsp (shown in Fig. 9(c) and (f) is 18.0/17.0 when the bias voltage/temperature is applied at 0.2 V/300 K, and it increases rapidly and approaches 36.5/90.0 at 0.6 V/800 K (shown in Fig. 9(a) and (Fig. 9d), which is 2.0/5.3 times of the former. Such obviously enhanced feature of Zhsp above the room temperature or at high bias voltage, which are much larger than the Zhch, meaning that the spin thermoelectric effects can be improved and become stronger in high temperature and large bias voltage. Therefore, a larger and more pure thermal spin current can be induced in the device. As for the increasing ZTch, it indicates that the spin-up or spin-down current increases, while the spin-down or spin-up current decreases. Thus, the symmetric spin current about the zero axes is broken, the competition of the spin-up and spin-down currents becomes weak. Thus, the higher heat-included charge current will be generated, which reveals the high conversion efficiency for converting heat to electricity. These numerical results provide feasible routes for responding to the need of high ZTsp and ZTch in thermoelectric devices, and give us illuminating insights for understanding spin transport properties based on the perylene-based molecular device.
 Fig. 9  The charge- and spin-figure of merit ZTch and ZTsp as a function of chemical potential under the bias voltage of 0.2 (a), 0.4 (b) and 0.6 V (c) with the fixed temperature of 300 K in PC. The charge- and spin-figure of merit ZTch and ZTsp as a function of temperature of 300 (d), 500 (e) and 800 K (f) with the fixed bias voltage −0.4 V in APC. 
4. Conclusion
Based on well-established first-principles calculations, we theoretically investigate the magnetic, electronic, spin transport properties, thermally-induced transport features and thermoelectric conversion efficiency of the perylene-based molecular device. Firstly, it is obvious that the device has various novel effects within the applied extra bias voltage and temperature gradient, such as the SSE, giant rectifying behaviors (the maximum RR value over 105), NDR effect, high GMR (up to 108%), novel logic digit signal, thermal SSE, good SSE, and high thermal MR (with order of magnitude as high as 109 and 106versus the TL or ΔT). The peculiar spin transport properties can be explained by the spin-dependent transmission coefficients, the band structure of the electrode, the spin-resolved LDOS, the eigenstate distribution of the HOMO and LUMO, and the Fermi–Dirac distribution difference of the device. Moreover, we find that the device exhibits high conversion efficiency between heat and spin current with the large value of ZTsp and ZTch by adjusting the temperature gradient and chemical potential. The different ratios of ZTsp/ZTch can be flexibly alternated in different peaks, which indicates the device can be functional for realizing high-performance spintronics and spin caloritronics applications. Our present work can possibly stimulate further experimental and theoretical studies on perylene-based molecular spintronic and spin thermoelectric devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Young Innovative Talents Program in Guangdong Province Colleges and Universities (No. 2022KQNCX042), the National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant (No. 12174127), the Key Scientific Research Platforms and Project in Guangdong Universities under Grant (No. 2019KTSCX090), and the Research Foundation for Advanced Talents of Lingnan Normal University (No. ZL20210206).
References
Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 40–53 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dieny, I. L. Prejbeanu1, K. Garello, P. Gambardella, P. Freitas, R. Lehndorff, W. Raberg, U. Ebels1, S. O. Demokritov, J. Akerman, A. Deac, P. Pirro, C. Adelmann, A. Anane, A. V. Chumak, A. Hirohata, S. Mangin, S. O. Valenzuela, M. C. Onbaşlı, M. d’Aquino, G. Prenat1, G. Finocchio, L. Lopez-Diaz, R. Chantrell, O. Chubykalo-Fesenko and P. Bortolotti, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 446–459 CrossRef .
O. V. Yazyev and M. I. Katsnelson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 047209 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. W. Bauer, E. Saitoh and B. J. van Wees, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 391–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Uchida, S. Takahashi, K. Harii, J. Ieda, W. Koshibae, K. Ando, S. Maekawa and E. Saitoh, Nature, 2008, 455, 778–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, K. Gong, Y. Li, B. Ding, L. Li, Y. Xu, R. Wang, L. Li, G. Zhang and S. Lin, Small, 2022, 18, 2105383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Wang, C.-C. Huang, C.-H. Cheung, C.-Y. Chen, S. G. Tan, T.-W. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, G. Wu, Y.-P. Feng, H.-C. Wu and C.-R. Chang, Ann. Phys., 2020, 532, 1900452 CrossRef .
G. Ke, C. Duan, F. Huang and X. Guo, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 92–112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bogani and W. Wernsdorfer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. McCreery, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 2766–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, T. Chen, X. Li, Z. Xu and X. Xiao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 599, 153993 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Zu, G.-Y. Gao, H.-H. Fu, L. Xiong, S.-C. Zhu, L. Peng and K.-L. Yao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 252403 CrossRef .
P. Tyagi, C. Riso and E. Friebe, Org. Electron., 2019, 64, 188–194 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, W.-Y. Lo, Z. Cai, L. Li and L. Yu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 308–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Sturmeit, I. Cojocariu, A. Windischbacher, P. Puschnig, C. Piamonteze, M. Jugovac, A. Sala, C. Africh, G. Comelli, A. Cossaro, A. Verdini, L. Floreano, M. Stredansky, E. Vesselli, C. Hohner, M. Kettner, J. Libuda, C. M. Schneider, G. Zamborlini, M. Cinchetti and V. Feyer, Small, 2021, 17, 2104779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-P. Zhang, L.-Y. Chen, J.-M. Zhao, Y.-Z. Sun, N.-P. Shi, M.-L. Wang, G.-C. Hu and C.-K. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 20783–20790 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng and K.-Q. Chen, Carbon, 2016, 104, 20–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 27804–27811 RSC .
W. Y. Kim, Y. C. Choi, S. K. Min, Y. Cho and K. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2319–2333 RSC .
L. Tapasetó, G. Dobrik, P. Lambin and L. P. Biró, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 397 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Data, D. R. Strachan, S. M. Khamis and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1912 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kim, S. Coh, C. Kisielowski, M. Crommie, S. G. Louie1, M. L. Cohen and A. Zett, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2723 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 216803 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Yang, W.-Q. Zhou, X.-K. Hong, Y.-S. Liu, X.-F. Wang and J.-F. Feng, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 024706 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Koleini, M. Paulsson and M. Brandbyge, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 197202 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Carrascal, V. M. García-Suárez and J. Ferrer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 195434 CrossRef .
F. Banhart and J. Beilstein, J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 559 CAS .
C. Jin, H. Lan, L. Peng, K. Suenaga and S. Iijima, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 205501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Meyer, C. O. Girit, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, Nature, 2008, 454, 319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, A. V. Andreev and G. F. Bertsch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 85410 CrossRef .
Ž. Crljen and G. Baranović, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 116801 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jia, A. Migliore, N. Xin, S. Huang, J. Wang, Q. Yang, S. Wang, H. Chen, D. Wang, B. Feng, Z. Liu, G. Zhang, D.-H. Qu, H. Tian, M. A. Ratner, H. Xu, A. Nitzan and X. Guo, Science, 2016, 352, 6292 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, Y. Su, P. Zhao, G.-P. Zhang, C.-K. Wang and G. Chen, Org. Electron., 2018, 59, 113 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, S. Yan, L. Xu, D. Liu, Q. Li, L. Wang and M. Long, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 35103 CrossRef .
T. Chen, W. Ding, H. Li and G. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3652 RSC .
S. Chen, P. Slattum, C. Wang and L. Zang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mendori, T. Hiroya, M. Ueda, M. Sanyoushi, K. Nagai and T. Abe, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li and H. Wonneberger, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Taylor, H. Guo and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 245407 CrossRef .
M. Brandbyge, J.-L. Mozos, P. Ordejón, J. Taylor and K. Stokbro, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 165401 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Büttiker, Y. Imry, R. Landauer and S. Pinhas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 31, 6207 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Larade, J. Taylor, H. Mehrez and H. Guo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 75420 CrossRef .
R. Świrkowicz, M. Wierzbicki and J. Barnaś, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 195409 CrossRef .
U. Sivan and Y. Imry, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 33, 551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, X.-H. Cao, S.-Z. Chen, L.-M. Tang, Y.-X. Feng, K.-Q. Chen and W.-X. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19037 RSC .
T. Yamamoto and K. Watanabe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 255503 CrossRef PubMed .
L. D. Hicks and M. S. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 12727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, D. Gao, Y. Huang, T. Zhou and S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 24650–24658 RSC .
X. Wu, L. Hu, D. Gu and G. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 6341 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Osteryoung and R. A. Osteryoung, Square wave voltammetry, Anal. Chem., 1985, 57, 101A CrossRef CAS .
E. Balcı, Ü. Ö. Akkuş and S. Berbe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3609 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Peng, K. Yao, R. Wu, S. Wang, S. Zhu, Y. Ni, F. Zu, Z. Liu and B. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 10074 RSC .
Z. Yan, R. Zhang, X. Dong, S. Qi and X. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 14773 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Band structure, density of states and phonon spectrum of the perylene molecule, and the Fermi–Dirac distribution differences and thermal spin-dependent current in the perylene-based device. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp05926fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic view of the perylene-based spintronic device model, which consists of two electrode leads of ZGNR, and the scattering region of the perylene molecule with the bridge of two carbon chains. The shaded areas are the left and right electrodes of ZGNR. The gray and white balls stand for carbon and hydrogen atoms, respectively.	 
	(1)
Tσ(E, Vb) = Tr[ΓL(E, Vb)GR(E)ΓR(E, Vb)GA(E)],	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  The spin-resolved and total I–V curves in PC (a) and APC (b), respectively. The insets of (a and b) show the bias-dependent spin polarization. (c) The bias-dependent RR. (d) The spin-dependent electron transmission spectra at zero bias in PC configurations. (e) The bias-dependent MR, the inset of (e) is the enlarged view of MR at the bias range of [−0.4, 0.4] V. (f) is same as (e), but in APC configurations.	 

 	Fig. 3  The spin-dependent transmission spectra under the bias voltage range of [−0.4, −0.9] V in PC (a–f). The spin-up and spin-down LDOS at the Fermi level under the bias of 0.4 V in PC (g and h) and APC (i and j), respectively. The bias voltage window is marked by the vertical red lines. The isovalue for displaying LDOS in (g–j) is 0.003 e Å−3.	 

 	Fig. 4  The eigenstate distribution of the HOMO and LUMO at the bias range [−0.8, −0.4] V. The isovalue is 0.025 Å−3 eV−1.	 

 	Fig. 5  The bias-dependent evolution of molecular orbitals for the spin-up state in the PC. The blue lines show the chemical potentials of the left and right electrodes, and the region A/B/C displays the applied different bias voltages.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and c) The band structures of the left and right electrodes of the device in PC. (b and d) The transmission spectra at 0.0 V in PC and −0.4 V in APC.	 

 	Fig. 7  The thermal spin-dependent currents versus (a) TL and (c) ΔT in PC at the bias voltage 0.0 V. The charge and spin currents versus (b) TL and (d) ΔT in PC at the bias voltage 0.0 V. (e). The thermal MR versus (e) TL and (f) ΔT.	 

 	Fig. 8  Spin-up, spin-down, charge- and spin-thermopower (a), electronic conductance (b), electronic thermal conductance and phonon thermal conductance (c), and thermoelectric figure of merit (d) at 300 K as a function of chemical potential for the device in PC. The inset in (d) is the phonon thermal conductance kphversus temperature T.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 9  The charge- and spin-figure of merit ZTch and ZTsp as a function of chemical potential under the bias voltage of 0.2 (a), 0.4 (b) and 0.6 V (c) with the fixed temperature of 300 K in PC. The charge- and spin-figure of merit ZTch and ZTsp as a function of temperature of 300 (d), 500 (e) and 800 K (f) with the fixed bias voltage −0.4 V in APC.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Band structure, density of states and phonon spectrum of the perylene molecule, and the Fermi–Dirac distribution differences and thermal spin-dependent current in the perylene-based device. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp05926f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
