One-step preparation of hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures with enhanced photocatalytic properties   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CE25591J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CE25591J
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 6295-6305One-step preparation of hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures with enhanced photocatalytic properties†

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Ruan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yin 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Danzhen 
            Li
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Zhixin 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiangjun 
            Xian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xianzhi 
            Fu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Shao
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Zheng
          
        
      
Research Institute of Photocatalysis, National Research Center of Environmental Photocatalysis, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis—State Key Laboratory Breeding Base, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350002, P. R. China. E-mail: dzli@fzu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-591-83779256
Received 
      18th April 2012
    , Accepted 9th June 2012First published on 14th June 2012AbstractWe report here a facile one-step strategy to prepare hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures by microwave irradiation. The growth mechanism of the hollow core/shell structures was investigated in detail. ZnO truncated hexagonal pyramids first form on as-grown precursor flakes and then evolve into ZnO hexagonal twin crystals, which subsequently grow up and dissolve internally. The hollowing progress is firstly controlled by the Kirkendall effect and then undergoes an Ostwald ripening process. Hollow structures and the formation of ZnO/ZnS heterostructure bring enhanced photocatalytic activities to ZnO core/ZnS shell structures. The formed ZnO/ZnS heterostructures also fill the surface defects of ZnO crystals and improve the stability of the photocatalysts by overcoming the photocorrosion effect of a single ZnO photocatalyst under UV light irradiation. Superoxide radicals (O˙−2) are the key active species in the photocatalytic system of degradation of p-chlorophenol over hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures. The photocatalysis process has been discussed and a possible mechanism also has been proposed. This work is helpful to controllably construct other hollow core/shell structures, develop ZnO-based photocatalysts without photocorrosion effect and further study the photocatalytic mechanism of similar systems.
1 Introduction
In recent years, systematic control of the morphology of inorganic nanoparticles for synthesizing higher order nano/micro-structures has attracted increased attention. The materials with highly controlled structures and uniform morphologies generally have novel physical and chemical properties that make them have immense potential in high end field applications.1–3 Therein, the construction of hierarchically hollow structures and core/shell heterostructures has become a hot topic.4–6 Hollow materials have a lower density, enhanced specific surface area and tunable refractive index compared to solid counterparts, which grants them broad potential applications in catalysts, photonic crystals, controlled release capsules of various substances as drug delivery, artificial cells and so on.7,8 However, controllable synthesis of mostly hollow materials obtained from multifarious template-engaged methods is still a significant challenge as the problems of employing template technologies and the template-removal step not only complicate the process, but also detrimentally bring in impurity, even irreversibly causing the collapse of the formed shell.9 Similarly, there are lots of drawbacks in the synthesis approaches, such as solution chemistry,10 chemical vapor deposition,11 sol–gel process and electrospinning technique,12 that have been used for constructing complex core/shell heterostructures. The problems hinder the synthesis and application of these morphological materials and force material scientists and engineers to develop novel methods for constructing inorganic materials with hollow or core/shell structures.
Among various inorganic semiconductor materials, ZnO and ZnS are considered as two of the most promising materials due to their excellent optical and electrochemical properties. In order to optimize their properties, extensive efforts have focused on the synthesis of ZnO and ZnS nano/micro-crystals with various morphologies, including hollow structures and core/shell heterostructures.13–16 Both theoretical calculations and experimental results have indicated that hybrid or ZnO/ZnS heterostructures exhibited more excellent performance with respect to the individual components.15 For instance, ZnS/ZnO side-by-side heterojunction nanoribbons have been successfully synthesized by Fan et al., which showed excellent photoluminescence.17 Yu and co-workers18 have prepared a ZnS/ZnO hetero-nanostructure photoanode that markedly enhanced the conversion efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells. Besides, Lu et al.19 have demonstrated the first application of ZnO/ZnS heterostructure nanowire arrays for converting mechanical energy into electricity. However, in these works, the use of substrates and catalysts, or picking the organic matters as solvents, not only makes the reaction steps tedious, but usually brings in impurities could not be easily eliminated. Therefore, for the more effective synthesis of hybrid or ZnO/ZnS heterostructures, there is an urgent need to develop a new and promising method that is simple, convenient and free of contamination.
Compared to the conventional methods, the microwave-assisted method is an attractive and facile approach for the rapid synthesis of nanomaterials with small particle size, narrow particle size distribution and high purity.20,21 In this paper, by using microwave irradiation, we have easily prepared hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures (ZnOS HCSSs) in situ through a one-step self-templated method. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that ZnOS HCSSs have been synthesized. To achieve a further understanding of this distinctive morphology, we have discussed in detail the growth mechanism according to a series of experiments. The morphological evolution is from precursor flakes towards ZnO truncated hexagonal pyramids and then towards ZnO hexagonal twin crystals (bipods), which immediately grow into solid peanuts followed by inner dissolving. The hollowing progress may well be firstly controlled by the Kirkendall effect and then undergo an Ostwald ripening process. For investigating the potential application, ZnOS HCSSs are used in the photocatalytic degradation of p-chlorophenol (p-CP) and show excellent activity under UV light (254 nm) irradiation. The recycled experiments for the photodegradation of p-CP demonstrate that ZnOS HCSSs effectively overcome the photocorrosion of a single ZnO catalyst and show good photocatalytic stability. Although some ZnO/ZnS composites have been applied in photocatalysis before, the reaction mechanism was seldom studied in their photocatalytic systems.15,22,23 Herein, we also investigate the key active species in the photocatalytic reaction system and propose a possible reaction mechanism.
2 Experimental section
2.1 Preparation of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs
All of the chemical reagents in the experiments were analytical grade and used directly without any further purification. Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, purchased from Aladdin Chemical Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) and thiourea (CH4N2S, obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) were used as Zn and S source. In a typical procedure, 18.5 mg (1 mmol) dodecylamine (DDA) (supplied by Alfa Aesar China Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) was added into 60 mL deionized water followed by vigorous stirring for two hours. After the DDA suspension formed, 60 mL deionized water solution containing 5.95 g (20 mmol) Zn(NO3)2·6H2O was added. Then, 40 mL of 750 mmol L−1 thiourea solution was added into the mixture above. After mixing all of the reagents, every 20 mL of nutrient solution reacted at 130 °C for a designated period of time (1, 5, 10, 15, 25, 40 and 50 min, respectively) under microwave irradiation with initial power of 150 W. For investigating the formation process of bipods, a series of experiments were conducted at lower temperatures in the desired reaction time (see details in the Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI)†). The resultant precipitates were harvested by centrifugation, then washed with deionized water three times and with absolute ethyl alcohol once. Finally, the obtained precipitate was dried in air at ambient temperature. Here, each sample is marked as ZnOSX (X is the numerical value of reaction time). Moreover, to investigate the photocatalytic activity of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs, pure ZnO and ZnS were prepared under similar experimental conditions. The synthesis of pure ZnO (marked as pZnO) was performed in the reaction system analogous to that of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs (reacted at 130 °C for 15 min) without thiourea. Meanwhile, pure ZnS (marked as pZnS) was synthesized at 160 °C for 25 min using the same reaction mixture as that for ZnO/ZnS HCSSs. In addition, a physical mixture of pure ZnO and ZnS (marked as ZnOS), in which the molar ratio of ZnS to ZnO is 0.794, was also used to the comparison of photocatalytic activity. A ZnO/ZnS nanostructure (ZnOS NS) composite was also prepared by a normal hydrothermal method (for details see ESI†).
2.2 Characterization
The phase constituents of the products were determined by an X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance with Ni-filtered Cu-Kα radiation, λα = 0.15406 nm) at 40 kV and 40 mA in the 2θ range 25–70° with a scan rate of 0.02° per second. The optical properties of the samples were analyzed by UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV-vis DRS) using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Cary-500, Varian Co.), in which BaSO4 was used as the background. The morphologies of the obtained products were observed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, FEI Nova NANOSEM 230, operated at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV), as well as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) used also for energy disperse X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis (FEI Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN, operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was performed on a Thermo Scientific ESCA Lab250 spectrometer, which consists of a monochromatic Al Kα as the X-ray source, a hemispherical analyzer and sample stage with multi-axial adjustability to obtain the surface composition on the surface of the sample. All of the binding energies were calibrated by the C1s peak at 284.5 eV. The Zn2+ ions concentration in the solution after irradiation was measured by an Agilent 7500ce inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). The electron spin resonance (ESR) signal of the radicals spin-trapped by 5,5-dimethyl-l-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO) was determined on a Bruker EPR A300 spectrometer. For instance, the as-prepared sample (2.5 mg) was dispersed in 0.5 mL of purified methanol (deionized water) into which 20 μL of DMPO/methanol (deionized water) solution (1:10, v/v) was added. The mixture was oscillated to achieve a well-blended suspension. A lamp system with filter was used as the irradiation source (λ = 254 nm). The settings for the ESR spectrometer were as follows: center field = 3512 G, microwave frequency = 9.86 GHz and power = 6.34 mW.
2.3 Evaluation of photocatalytic properties
The photocatalytic degradations of p-CP (300 μmol L−1) aqueous solution in the liquid phase were conducted in a quartz tube with 4.6 cm inner diameter and 17 cm length. Four 4 W UV lamps with a wavelength centered at 254 nm (Philips, TUV 4 W/G4 T5) were used as the irradiation source. A photocatalyst (40 mg) was suspended in 80 mL of p-CP solution and stirred for 30 min to ensure the establishment of adsorption–desorption equilibrium. An aliquot (3 mL) was taken at a certain time interval during the experiment and centrifuged (TDL-5-A) to remove the powders. The filtrates were analyzed on a Varian UV-vis spectrophotometer (Cary 50, Varian Co.). The percentage of degradation is reported as C/C0. C is the absorption of pollutants at each irradiated time interval of the main peak of the absorption spectrum. C0 is the absorption of the initial concentration when adsorption–desorption equilibrium was achieved. In the photocatalytic stability experiments, the catalysts were recollected by centrifugation and then re-dispersed in the same p-CP aqueous solution for the next cycle. Other experimental parameters were same as the first test. The photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange (MO, 30 μmol L−1) aqueous solution was also carried out (for details see ESI†).
3 Results and discussion
In order to rapidly synthesize ZnOS HCSSs in one step, the nutrient solution containing Zn and S sources were irradiated by microwaves at an initial power of 150 W. Under hydrothermal conditions at 130 °C, pure ZnO was firstly produced in a short reaction time (1 min). Then, rapid conversion of ZnO into ZnO/ZnS can be achieved as the reaction time proceeds. Fig. 1(a) shows the XRD patterns of products obtained at 130 °C in the desired reaction time. From the bottom to top, the patterns correspond to the samples obtained in 1, 5, 10, 15, 25, 40 and 50 min, respectively. All of the diffraction peaks of ZnOS1 can be indexed to the hexagonal wurtzite ZnO. The pattern almost corresponds to the standard XRD data (JCPDS standard card no. 89-0511), except there is a certain degree of difference in the relative intensity of each diffraction peak. The enhanced (002) diffraction peak indicates that the firstly grown ZnO may preferentially grow along the [002] orientation in the early reaction stage. No other peaks not belonging to ZnO wurtzite are detected, showing that the products are pure phase. When the reaction time is more than 5 min, the diffraction peaks of ZnO are observably heightened, indicating the improvement of ZnO crystallinity (ZnOS5 and ZnOS10). Furthermore, the relative intensity of these peaks, especially that of (100) and (101) planes, changes obviously and is consistent with the standard data. During this reaction process, growth rates along orientations perpendicular to {100} and {101} must be dominant in the anisotropic growth of ZnO crystals. Meanwhile, another set of diffraction peaks are present, which match with face-center cubic (pcc) sphalerite ZnS (JCPDS standard card no. 79-0043). With an increase of reaction time, the peaks of ZnO are gradually weakened and replaced by that of ZnS (ZnOS15 and ZnOS25). It implies the conversion from ZnO into ZnO/ZnS composites and more and more ZnO is changed into ZnS. The diffraction peaks of ZnS are gradually stronger, indicating the increase of ZnS crystallinity and the heightening of the relative ratio of ZnS to ZnO. No other crystal phases can be detected in the patterns, suggesting that no impurity species were formed between ZnO and ZnS. The broadened diffraction peaks of ZnS are due to the very small size of the crystallites, around 14 nm as estimated by the Scherrer equation based on the full width at half-maximum of the diffraction peaks (111). When the reaction time is more than 40 min, all of the XRD characterization peaks of ZnO disappear. Only the diffraction peaks of ZnS are present in the samples of ZnOS40 and ZnOS50, implying that all of the ZnO are converted into ZnS.
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns (a) and the corresponding UV-vis DRS (b) of the as-prepared products. The Kubelka–Munk function, F(R) = (1 − R)2/2R, is used as the equivalent of absorbance. 

Fig. 1(b) displays the UV-vis DRS of as-obtained products. The different spectra along the orientation of the arrow correspond to the products obtained in 1, 5, 10, 15, 25, 40 and 50 min, respectively. As can be clearly seen, the optical absorption properties of the series of ZnOS HCSSs change remarkably. The wide features of most absorption edges should be attributed to different sizes of the particles in the products.24 The products obtained in a short reaction time (ZnOS1 and ZnOS5) have absorption in the visible region, which must be due to a small amount of amorphous S species on the surface that stems from thiourea. When the reaction time increases, a gradual blue shift to lower wavelength is observed, which is contributed to by the increased component of ZnS on the surface of the products because it has larger bandgap energy (3.7 eV) than ZnO (3.37 eV) and absorbs most of the incident light. Because both ZnOS40 and ZnOS50 are pure ZnS, the absorption properties of them are hardly changed. The narrow feature of these two absorption edges is related to the uniform size of ZnS nanoparticles. Simultaneously, the UV light (about 250–350 nm) absorption intensity of the products increases with the prolonging of the reaction time. It may well be caused by electronic interaction between ZnO and ZnS, while the content of ZnS increases.25 Moreover, the grown ZnS nanoparticles after the formation of ZnO crystals bring coarse surface to the crystal particles, which diminish the reflection of incident light so as to increase the volume of the optically active component.18
The FE-SEM and TEM images of representative ZnOS HCSSs are shown in Fig. 2. These two kinds of hollow structures were obtained at 130 °C for 15 min and 25 min, respectively. From the images, we can easily observe the apparent contrast between the inner cavity and outer shell, suggesting the existence of a hollow structure. These hollowly bifid structures are similar to peanut shells. Each peanut shell particle has a size about 600 nm in length and 200 nm in diameter. The two halves of the peanut shell are slightly different in size. The rough surface of peanut shells and some particles on the surfaces should be due to the aggregation of ZnS grains during the reaction process.
 Fig. 2  FE-SEM and TEM images of as-prepared ZnOS15 (a), (b) and ZnOS25 (c), (d). 
Interestingly, ZnOS15 has only a partial hollow structure in the middle of the particle, while ZnOS25 is hollowed in whole. It may imply that the hollowing process starts from the middle of the particle between the two halves of the peanut.
To confirm the above hypothesis, time-dependent experiments have been carefully carried out. The structures and compositions of products have been analyzed by FE-SEM and TEM with EDS line scans. The images of the as-prepared products obtained at 130 °C for designated periods of time are shown in Fig. 3. When the reaction time is 1 min, the bifid structures already form, as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (a′). All of the particles are solid and belong to hexagonal wurtzite ZnO according to the XRD results. The sheet-like compositions that could be easily pointed out in the images should be the residual Zn5(OH)8(NO3)2·2H2O precursors.26 Because the reaction time is extremely short, a small number of flakes of the precursor could not transform into ZnO and they are too few to detect by XRD. However, the trace quantities of N element signal could be obtained in XPS spectra (Fig. 4(a)). The weak XPS signal around the binding energy of 398.2 eV should belong to N1s. Meanwhile, in the binding energy spectra, the peaks at 161.7 eV, 1021.4 eV and 531.5 eV are obviously observed, which correspond to the signal of S2p, Zn2p3/2 and O1s, respectively. It can be seen that the low intensity of the photoelectron peak of S2p presents the relatively low atomic content of S element in this sample. TEM images of this sample (single bipods) are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), which can provide a deep insight into the crystal structure. Near the middle of the bipods, a joint that divides the whole particle into two parts can be pointed out. Fig. 5(b) shows the typical HRTEM image taken at the edge of the joint (white marked region of Fig. 5(a)). The average distance between the adjacent lattice planes parallel to the joint is 0.26 nm, corresponding to the (002) plane lattice distance of hexagonal-structured ZnO. It demonstrates that the as-generated ZnO bipods grow along [002] orientation. The rough surfaces with several particles on them are due to the formation of poorly crystalline or amorphous ZnS particles, which will serve as the seeds for the subsequent growth of ZnS crystals. The existence of traces of sulfur element in this sample has also been verified by EDS element analysis as shown in Fig. 5(c). The C and Cu peaks were derived from the substrate.
 Fig. 3  FE-SEM and TEM images of as-prepared ZnOS1 (a), (a′); ZnOS5 (b), (b′); ZnOS15 (c), (c′); ZnOS25 (d), (d′) and ZnOS40 (e), (e′). A schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of ZnOS HCSSs (f). 
 Fig. 4  XPS spectra of ZnOS1: N1s (a), S2p (b), Zn2p (c) and O1s (d). 
 Fig. 5  A TEM image (a) of single ZnO bipods and HRTEM image (b) of the margin of the joint (marked by the white rectangular frame in (a)). The corresponding EDS of ZnOS1 (c). 
A number of possible mechanisms can be used to expound the formation of metal sulfides, most commonly prepared from alkaline solutions using thiourea as S source. In our reaction system, DDA involved in reaction can be protonated, and then result in the alkalinity of nutrient solution.27 In this alkaline nutrient solution, thiourea is accessible to hydrolyze (equation (1)) and release H2S (S2−) (equation (2)) via microwave irradiation.15,28 (NH2)2CS + H2O → (NH2)2C(OH) + SH(1) (NH2)2C(OH)SH + H2O→ (NH2)2C(OH)2 + H2S(2)
Then, H2S (S2−) readily reacts with Zn2+ slowly dissolved from the surface of as-grown ZnO bipods to produce initial ZnS nuclei (equation (3)). H2S + ZnO → ZnS + H2O(3)
When the time is prolonged to 5 min, the bipods are still solid, but the ZnS nanoparticles on their surfaces pile up and become much more and bigger (Fig. 3(b) and (b′)). As is clearly visible in the micrograph in Fig. 6(a), another set of lattice planes (mean lattice distance of 0.30 nm) differ from that of the hexagonal-structured ZnO form on the surface, which belong to (111) plane of sphalerite ZnS, revealing the coexistence of ZnO and ZnS in the sample obtained at 15 min. It is in line with the XRD results. Moreover, the hollow structures have formed in the middle of each bipod (Fig. 3(c)), which can be confirmed by the strong contrast difference in the bipods with a light inner center and a relatively dark edge (Fig. 3(c′)). At the same time, the surface ZnS nanoparticles are thick and robust enough to form the ZnO core/ZnS shell structure. The existence of each element and their relative content in the composite are also determined by XPS, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). It is notable that two pairs of characteristic peaks in the Zn2p spectrum of ZnOS15 belong to the signals of single ZnO and ZnS, respectively, which confirms the coexistence of ZnO and ZnS components in the product. From the data of XPS, the calculated atomic ratio of S and O is 0.794:1, so the molar ratio of ZnS and ZnO in ZnOS15 is also about 0.794:1.
 Fig. 6  HRTEM (a) and STEM (b) images of ZnOS15. The profiles of EDS line scans analysis (c) along the longitudinal orientation of ZnOS HCSSs, as indicated by the line in (b). 
The EDS was applied to analyze the crystal structure and composition of the as-grown ZnO/ZnS HCSSs. Fig. 6(c) presents a nanoprobe EDS line scan analysis results along the longitudinal orientation of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs (marked by a red line in Fig. 6(b)). The spatial distributions of the atomic composition effectively confirmed the existence of hollow core/shell structure. That is, at the tips of the bipods and the joint of the two halves, S elements are obviously more than O elements. But it is an inverse situation for the element distribution at the solid section of the particle. Comparing the spatial distributions of the elements with each other, we can also evaluate that the thickness of the sulfur layer on the surface of the bipods is about 30 nm. So, there must be a thin ZnS shell on the surface of the bipods. However, the counts of all of the elements are down to a very low level in the middle at where is the hollow region. It definitely demonstrates the successful construction of the ZnS/ZnO HCSSs by a one step self-templated method.
When the reaction time is increased to 25 min, the hollow structure of each ZnO/ZnS particle is complete (Fig. 3(d) and (d′)). The TEM image of this sample clearly shows that only a thin shell remains for every particle, which looks much like the peanut shell. The coexistence of ZnO and ZnS confirmed by the XRD result and the hollowing evolution deduced from the products obtained at a shorter reaction time demonstrate that these peanut shells are core/shell structures. As clearly exhibited in Fig. 3(c′) and (d′), the size of the bipods is hardly changed during the hollowing process and the thickness of the shell is about 30 nm in accordance with EDS line scan analysis results. With time, the samples obtained at 40 min are aggregated nanoparticles shown in Fig. 3(e) and (e′). According to the XRD result, this sample is pure ZnS. That is to say, the ZnO/ZnS HCSSs collapse and transform to ZnS nanoparticles when the reaction time is long enough. Many circles rounded by nanoparticles (marked by white circular curves in Fig. 3(e)) should form by the cracking of HCSSs.
On the basis of the above discussions, a possible formation mechanism of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs is proposed, as shown in Fig. 3(f). At the initial reaction stage, the peanut-like ZnO bipods are firstly prepared. All of the peanuts are solid and will act as templates, as well as precursors for the formation of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs in the following reaction. At the reaction temperature of 130 °C, thiourea quickly decomposes and produces S2+ (H2S) that will react with Zn2+ dissolved from the surface of ZnO bipods to produce amorphous ZnS nanoparticles around ZnO bipods (step 1). Firstly, a nonuniform ZnS shell gradually forms on the surface of ZnO bipods. Soon afterwards, more and more ZnS nanoparticles emerge and pile up to form a uniform and dense shell composed of ZnS nanocrystals. The primal ZnO/ZnS core/shell structures form by this time (step 2). These two steps correspond to Fig. 3(a) and (b). As the reaction time increases, the hollowing process begins to take place. It is well-known that both the Kirkendall effect and the inside-out Ostwald ripening have been successfully applied to expound the formation mechanism of a variety of hollow crystals in nanoscale. With respect to the inside-out Ostwald ripening, it is a spontaneous process that refers to the growth of large precipitates at the expense of smaller precipitates triggered by energetic factors.9 Most of the hollow structures, even the core/shell hollow structures, grown in accordance with this mechanism, possess an interior with amorphous or crystalline small particles at the initial hollowing stage. However, the interior of the ZnO/ZnS core/shell structures is a hexagonal ZnO single crystal, which has been clearly confirmed by the HRTEM image shown in Fig. 5(b). It seems that the inside-out Ostwald ripening is not suitable for the growth mechanism of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs. For the Kirkendall process, it was originally conceived regarding the mechanism of void formation near interfaces, which is due to comparative diffusive migrations among different atomic species under thermally activated conditions.16 Nevertheless, the hollowing process of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs does not simply take place near the interfaces, as distinctly shown in Fig. 3. So, which formation mechanism can be well applied to expound the fabrication of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs?
As we know, ZnO crystals have both polar and nonpolar crystal surfaces. They have two oppositely charged surfaces perpendicular to the [002] orientation. Moreover, the positively polar surface is rich in Zn2+ and the negatively polar surface is rich in O2−.29 The TEM images in Fig. 5 exhibit that ZnO bipods grow along [002] orientation. That is, the axial orientation is the [002] orientation of the as-grown ZnO bipods. Therefore, the surfaces around both ends of our ZnO crystals are rich in O2−, just as other ZnO bipods.29,30 Thus, we consider that as the growth of ZnO bipods, both of the negatively charged ends in each bipod absorb numerous protonated DDA molecules. These adsorbed DDA molecules will protect the surfaces at the ends of the single bipods and to a great extent prevent them from directly contacting with the nutrient solution, as shown in step 1 of Fig. 3(f). In this case, the materials in these regions are very difficult to react with the substances in the nutrient solution, not to mention releasing the positively charged Zn2+ to participate in the reaction. On the other hand, after the formation of the ZnS shell at the initial stage, the inner ZnO bipods and the outer sulfur ion are separated by the shell. As a result, the concentration gradient of Zn2+ and S2− from the solution outside of the ZnS shell to the surface of the ZnO bipods inside the shell is formed (step 3 of Fig. 3(f)). Driven by the force of concentration gradient, the concentrated Zn2+ inside and near the ZnS shell will diffuse outward through the shell and the concentrated S2− in the nutrient solution will diffuse inward simultaneously. Because of the existence of DDA covering layer, this interdiffusion process occurs only at the side surface of ZnO bipods near the joint. It is in accordance with the Kirkendall process and is followed by the formation of a gap between the ZnO bipods and the ZnS shell. This process occurs during the morphological evolution from Fig. 3(b) and (c). Because the outward transport rate of Zn2+ is much faster than the inward transport rate of S2− species through the formed ZnS shell,16 the gap will become larger and larger due to the consumption of inside Zn2+ as the reaction proceeds. When the gap grows big enough, hollow structures form in the ZnO bipods, as shown in Fig. 3(c) and (c′). Simultaneously, the ZnS shell becomes porous and the interior void should be filled with nutrient solution (step 4 of Fig. 3(f)). As proposed by Lou et al., in this condition and situations where the hollow structures are of sub-micro- to micrometer dimensions and the synthesis is performed in solution, it is clearly inappropriate to discuss the formation mechanism of the shell-growth process based on vacancy flux and in turn the Kirkendall process.9 Instead, normal solution transport (Ostwald ripening) mechanism should account for the hollowing process in the subsequent reaction. According to the inside-out Ostwald ripening process, the materials inside the solid spheres have a strong tendency to dissolve, providing the driving force for the spontaneous hollowing process. As described in step 5 of the growth mechanism, the hollow structures totally shape in the whole bipods, which resemble peanut shells clearly shown in Fig. 3(d). After a long time of reaction, ZnO/ZnS HCSSs collapse and transform into heaps of aggregated ZnS nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 3(e) and step 6 of Fig. 3(f). This should be attributed to the agglomeration of nanoparticles under high temperature and long time.
On the other side, a series of experiments have also been carried out to study the morphological evolution of bifid structures. Fig. S2 (see ESI†) shows the FE-SEM images of the samples obtained at different reaction temperatures in crescent reaction time. From Fig. S2(a1), the main morphology of the products is a flake inset with a few particles when the reaction is carried out at 80 °C for 1 min. When the time is increased to 3 min, the flakes almost disappear. The particles grow up to a hexagonal truncated pyramid (Fig. S2(a2)). After the reaction of 5 min, a spot of bifid structures combined by two hexagonal truncated pyramids form, in which one half of the bipods is visibly smaller than the other, as shown in Fig. S2(a3), implying the ordinal growth of two parts of the bipods. Slightly elevating the temperature, the bifid structures easily form in a shorter time (Fig. S2(b1) and (b2)). Furthermore, the bipods begin to grow thick and are akin to ZnO peanuts the precursors of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs (Fig. S2(b3), (c) and (d)). Thus, it can be seen that the morphological evolution of bifid structures, in other words the formation of ZnO precursors begins from one half of the bipods to the twin crystals, and then grows into structures similar to the peanuts.
A basic concept in chemistry, “structure dictates function”, has been widely recognized by the distinctive morphology-dependent photocatalytic activity.31,32 Therefore, we infer that the distinctively hollow core/shell structures should bring unusually enhanced photocatalytic activity to ZnO/ZnS composite materials. To demonstrate the photocatalytic activity of the as-prepared ZnO/ZnS HCSSs, the photocatalytic degradation of p-CP was chosen as a test reaction. For comparison, pZnO and pZnS have been synthesized under reaction conditions similar to that of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs. Besides, ZnOS integrated by grinding these two pure phases was also used as a reference. The molar ratio of ZnS to ZnO in this integrated sample is 0.794, which is consistent with the ratio in ZnOS15 determined by XPS. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that these novel ZnOS HCSSs have been used as the photocatalysts for the degradation of p-CP. The results reveal that p-CP in aqueous solution could be effectively decomposed over ZnO/ZnS HCSSs under UV light irradiation. The UV-vis spectra of photocatalytic degradation of p-CP over ZnOS15 is shown in Fig. 7(a). As is clearly shown, the intensity of the main absorption peaks around 226 nm fade regularly. The variations of absorption peaks at 279 nm changing along the orientation of arrow are influenced by the photoinduction phenomenon that can be attributed to the relative number of radicals formed from the surface hydroxyl species.33,34 Temporal concentration changes of the pollutants during photocatalytic reaction were detected by examining the variations of the maximal values of these characteristic absorption peaks. This high energy band, located around 200–240 nm and assigned to the π→π* transition of the aromatic group, has undergone an important decrease in intensity. The photocatalytic degradation profiles of representative samples are clearly shown in Fig. 7(b). It is evident that a adsorption–desorption equilibrium has been established between the catalysts and pollutant after the dark reaction of 30 min. When UV illumination is introduced, the colours of the reaction suspension change observably from milky white to pale yellow and to transparent colour at last, implicating the decomposition of the chromophoric structure of p-CP. During the inchoate 30 min under UV light irradiation, the most degradation of p-CP is over pZnO catalyst followed by ZnOS and ZnOS1. When the irradiation time increases, the degradation rates of p-CP over these photocatalysts are remarkably retarded. Instead, much faster degradations take place over the ones that are rich with ZnS on the surfaces, such as pZnS, ZnOS15 and ZnOS25. After UV irradiation of 120 min, ZnO/ZnS HCSSs photocatalysts show good activities, among which the activity of ZnOS15 is the best. The degradation rate of p-CP over it is about 90%, and about 56%, 76%, 72%, 64%, 71% and 58% for ZnOS1, ZnOS25, ZnOS40, pZnO, pZnS and ZnOS, respectively. The poor activity of ZnOS indicates that the activity of the catalysts could not be effectively improved by simply mixing ZnO and ZnS. This can probably be ascribed to the insufficient contact between the two materials, which restricts the interchange of substances (such as the charge transfer) between them. That is, the two components in ZnO/ZnS HCSSs contact sufficiently and intimately with each other at the interfacial area, even forming some specific structures, such as heterostructures, leading to a more effective transfer of electrons between the two ingredients and a long lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. As a result, the photocatalytic activities of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs are markedly enhanced. This interaction between the two ingredients has been proved by the results of UV-vis DRS and XPS before. On the contrary, for the samples such as pZnO, pZnS and ZnOS1, the inexistence of heterostructures should be a crucial reason to their poor activities. The photocatalytic activity of ZnOS15 was also compared with ZnO/ZnS nanostructure composite for the removal of MO in aqueous solution. The XRD pattern and the morphology of ZnOS NS are shown in Fig. S3 (see ESI†). ZnOS NS shows better activity than ZnOS15 (see ESI, Fig. S4†), which may be due to the small size of ZnOS NS particles. On the basis of the above analysis, the different photocatalytic activities over these catalysts could be explained in two reasons: First, the two ingredients of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs contact and interact with each other, resulting in the improvement of their photocatalytic activities. Second, ZnO catalysts are gradually inactivated with increasing reaction time.
 Fig. 7  UV-vis spectra (a) of photocatalytic degradation of p-CP over ZnOS15. Photocatalytic activities (b) of the representative ZnOS HCSSs, pZnO, pZnS and ZnOS, detected by examining the variations of characteristic absorption peak at 226 nm in UV-vis spectra. 
As we know, one of the major drawbacks of ZnO photocatalysts is their photocorrosion under UV irradiation. According to a report, the photocorrosion of ZnO caused by photogenerated holes results in the fast formation of oxygen molecules and the fast expulsion of Zn2+ from the surface. The reaction steps of the photocorrosion effect can be described as follows:35 O2−surface + h+ → O−surface(4) O−surface + 3O2− + 3h+ → 2(O − O2−)(5) 2(O − O2−) + 2h+ → O2(6) 2Zn2+ → 2Zn2+(aq)(7)
The overall reaction can be abbreviated to the formula as below: ZnO + 2h+ → Zn2+ + 1/2O2(8)
When ZnO is exposed to UV light, the electrons in the valence band are excited and move to the conduction band, leading to the formation of holes that will be transported to the solid–solution interface. Because the bond of an oxygen atom on the surface of ZnO exists as the unsaturated state, which depends on the principal defect of ZnO semiconductor being the zinc interstitial, the transferred holes are prone to react with surface oxygen atom, resulting in the escape of oxygen and Zn2+ from the surface.36 To study if there is photocorrosion effect for ZnO/ZnS HCSSs and evaluate the stability of the photocatalysts, the recycled experiments for the photodegradation of p-CP were performed, the results are shown in Fig. 8. When pZnO was used for the first time, 74% of p-CP could be degraded within the reaction of 180 min. However, after three recycles, a significant decrease of the photocatalytic activity was found (Fig. 8(a)) and only 58% of p-CP was degraded. ZnO crystals suffer from the photoinduced dissolution and some photogenerated holes are consumed, which should be the reasons for the decrease of photocatalytic activity in the recycling experiments. By comparison, the activity of ZnOS15 was quite stable even after three recycles of the photocatalytic degradation of p-CP and almost all of the p-CP was degraded within 180 min, as shown in Fig. 8(b). It demonstrates that the photocorrosion effect of ZnO was effectively restrained by intimately combining ZnO with ZnS and the photostability of the catalyst was improved. It is well-known that a higher etching/reaction rate is possible at the defect sites.37 This not only confirms again that the photocorrosion of ZnO begins with surface oxygen defect sites, but also suggests that the growth of ZnS on the surface of formed ZnO crystals should start from these sites. Therefore, the grown ZnS crystals fill the surface oxygen defects of ZnO and make the surface oxygen atom more stable. The transferred holes on the surface would not react with the surface oxygen atoms, but attack the adsorbed reactants and result in the inhibition of the photocorrosion effect. In addition, based on the analysis for UV-vis DRS results, most of the incident light is absorbed by ZnS crystals on the surface, which indirectly reduces the occurrence of ZnO photocorrosion. On the other hand, one main reason for ZnO photocorrosion is the harmful transfer of photogenerated holes to the crystal surface. For the suppression of the photocorrosion effect, it must change the intrinsical charge transfer process in ZnO excited by UV light. The semiconductor composite with two different ingredients is not unusual. The ability of the two ingredients to interact with each other and participate in the charge transfer process has been demonstrated.38 Similarly, it is evident from the present results that the interaction between ZnO and ZnS components is responsible for the efficient charge transfer in the photocatalytic system and improves the stability of the photocatalyst.
 Fig. 8  Degradation of p-CP over pZnO (a) and ZnOS15 (b) under 254 nm light irradiation in three successive cycles. 
The structural stability and reproducibility of the photocatalyst in the application are also important. Thus, the crystallographic phases and the morphologies of the photocatalyst before and after photocatalytic reaction were measured by XRD and FE-SEM. The results are shown in Fig. S5 and S6 (see ESI†). XRD results demonstrate that the crystallographic phases and components of ZnOS15 hardly changed after the photocatalytic reaction. Only a few photocatalyst particles are fractured in the middle of the twin crystals (marked by white circles in Fig. S6†), which may be caused by the vigorous stirring during the photocatalytic reaction. Therefore, the crystallographic phase and structure of the photocatalyst are stable and reproducible in the photocatalytic application. In addition, the Zn2+ ions concentration in the solution were also detected to investigate the stability of the photocatalyst under irradiation. As shown in Table S1 (see ESI†), the Zn2+ ions concentration in all of the solution increased at the initial irradiation stage. It is also clear that the Zn2+ ions concentration in the p-CP solution of ZnOS15 photocatalyst hardly changed during the subsequent stages. But in the p-CP solution of ZnO photocatalyst, the Zn2+ ions concentration increased remarkably with the increasing of irradiation time. Moreover, the Zn2+ ions concentration in the aqueous solution of ZnOS15 photocatalyst also increased obviously as the irradiation time increased. These results demonstrated that under irradiation, ZnOS15 showed photocorrosion without photocatalytic reaction, but it was stable in the photocatalytic system of p-CP degradation. It could be due to the fact that the photogenerated holes in the photocatalytic system of ZnOS15 participate in the photocatalytic reaction rather than react with surface oxygen atoms.
In order to further reveal the reasons for the good photocatalytic activity and stability, and propose the photocatalytic reaction mechanism, the charge transfer process in our photocatalytic reaction system should first be determined. The efficient charge transfer would inhibit the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes and produce diverse active species, such as hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), superoxide radicals (O˙−2), hole (h+) and hydrated electrons (e−aq), responsible for photodegradation of organic pollutant, resulting in the improvement of the photocatalytic activity and stability. Therefore, ESR with DMPO technique was employed to probe the main reactive active species (such as O˙−2 and ˙OH) and the result is shown in Fig. 9. Under 254 nm light irradiation, six stable and strong peaks for DMPO-O˙−2 can be achieved in methanolic dispersions of ZnOS15 with the increased irradiation time (as shown in Fig. 9(a)). It indicates the existence of O˙−2 species that are generated through trapping electrons by adsorbed O2. Furthermore, the important roles of O˙−2 species in the charge transfer and the degradation reaction are also demonstrated. In Fig. 9(b), the ESR signal belonging to DMPO-˙OH is detected in aqueous dispersions of ZnOS15. All of the four main characteristic peaks (labeled by the arrows) are very weak, suggesting the almost inexistent ˙OH species. The weak signal of ˙OH species implies that the hydroxyl radicals are the extra essential active species in ZnO/ZnS HCSSs photocatalysis system.
 Fig. 9  DMPO spin-trapping ESR spectra in ZnOS15 methanolic dispersions for DMPO-O˙−2 (a) and aqueous dispersions for DMPO-˙OH (b) under 254 nm light irradiation. 
Thus far, we have discussed in detail the morphological evolution and the reasons for the optimized photocatalytic activity and stability for ZnO/ZnS HCSSs. The distinctively hollow core/shell morphology and the porous ZnS shell are beneficial to exchange the inner and outer reactants of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs, which is helpful to run the photocatalytic reaction favourably. In addition, the sufficient contact and interaction between the two ingredients should be primarily responsible for the excellent photocatalytic activity and stability. To describe the photocatalytic reaction more directly, the proposed degradation mechanism of p-CP over ZnO/ZnS HCSSs and the energy band structure of ZnO and ZnS can be schematically illustrated in Scheme 1. Because of the interaction and the formation of heterostructure between ZnO and ZnS, there is a build-in electric field in the composite. Besides, the conduction band of ZnS lies at a more negative potential (vs NHE) than that of ZnO, while the valence band of ZnO is more positive than that of ZnS.15 Hence, after the photogenerated electrons in the valence bands of ZnO core and ZnS shell are excited under UV light irradiation, they deviate from photogenerated holes to the conduction bands and then pass from the conduction band of ZnS shell to that of ZnO core. Meanwhile, the transfer of photogenerated holes occurs from the valence band of ZnO core to that of ZnS shell, which effectively prevents the holes attacking the surface oxygen of ZnO and inhibits the photocorrosion effect. Through this process, the yield and lifetime of charge carriers in the ZnO/ZnS system increase, leading to the more excellent photocatalytic activity of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs than that of pure ZnO and ZnS. Due to the porous ZnS shell, the dissolved O2 adsorbs everywhere on the surface of ZnO/ZnS HCSSs, even on the surface of ZnO core. They are apt to capture the transferred electrons on the conduction band of ZnS and ZnO to give O˙−2 species. Then, the generated O•−2 species, the transferred holes on the surface and tiny ˙OH species, even some e−aq or ˙H species probably formed during the photocatalytic process, reacted with the adsorbed p-CP molecules and degraded them into the intermediates with small molecules, even carbon dioxide and water.
 Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for degradation of p-CP over ZnOS HCSSs under UV light irradiation. 
4 Conclusions
A facile microwave hydrothermal method has been applied to synthesize hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures in one step. The morphological evolution first undergoes a process from precursor flakes to ZnO truncated hexagonal pyramids, and then towards ZnO hexagonal twin crystals. After that, the bipods immediately grow up to be solid peanuts, followed by inner dissolving to form hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures. Due to the distinctive structures and the formation of heterostructures by intimate contact between ZnO and ZnS, hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures show enhanced photocatalytic activity as compared to single ZnO, ZnS and the integrated ZnO/ZnS composite under UV light irradiation. Furthermore, hollow ZnO core/ZnS shell structures overcome the photocorrosion effect of a single ZnO catalyst and show good photocatalytic stability. O˙−2species play a key role in the photocatalytic system of p-CP degradation. Since the growth mechanism and the essence of photocatalysis have been discussed in detail, this work provides the basis for the construction of hollow core/shell structures, the development of ZnO-base photocatalysts without photocorrosion effect and an extended study of the photocatalytic mechanism.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the NNSF of China (21173047, 21073036 and 21033003), National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, 2007CB613306). We thank Prof. Fengfu Fu and Dr Yunqiang Zhao at Fuzhou University for ICP-MS analytical support.
References
L. Xu, Y.-L. Hu, C. Pelligra, C.-H. Chen, L. Jin, H. Huang, S. Sithambaram, M. Aindow, R. Joesten and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2875 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12527 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y.-S. Ding, C.-H. Chen, L. Zhao, C. Rimkus, R. Joesten and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 308 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Yu, J. Q. Wan, Y. Shan, K. Z. Chen and X. D. Han, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4892 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhu and L. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4652 RSC .
T. J. Zhou, M. H. Lu, Z. H. Zhang, H. Gong, W. S. Chin and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 403 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Dinsmore, M. F. Hsu, M. G. Nikolaides, M. Marquez, A. R. Bausch and D. A. Weitz, Science, 2002, 298, 1006 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Cong and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1814 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Goebl, R. W. Black, J. Puthussery, J. Giblin, T. H. Kosel and M. Kuno, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14822 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, L. Zhang, H. Xue, C. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010 Search PubMed .
J.-S. Hu, L.-L. Ren, Y.-G. Guo, H.-P. Liang, A.-M. Cao, L.-J. Wan and C.-L. Bai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhu, D. H. Fan and W. Z. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18629 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, H. Qian, Y. Liu, G. Du, F. Zhang, L. Wang and X. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3438 RSC .
X. M. Shuai and W. Z. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6415 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, M. L. Zhang, I. Shafiq, W. J. Zhang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2393 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Yu, J.-G. Song, Y.-S. Fu, Y. Xie, X. Song, J. Sun and X.-W. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2380 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Lu, J. H. Song, M. P. Lu, C. Y. Lee, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 357 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Q. Wang, Y. Yao, C. Qian, X. Zhang and X. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16779 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bilecka and M. Niederberger, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1358 RSC .
D. Wu, Y. Jiang, Y. Yuan, J. Wu and K. Jiang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 2875 Search PubMed .
D. Lin, H. Wu, R. Zhang and W. Pan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 3664 Search PubMed .
P. Chen, L. Gu and X. Cao, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 3950 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-X. Yang, W. Zhong, C. Au, J.-Y. Wang and Y.-W. Du, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 1831 RSC .
H.-P. Wang, H. Jiang and X.-M. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6900 RSC .
M. Kokotov and G. Hodes, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5483 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bitenc, G. Drazic and Z. C. Orel, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 830 CAS .
E. S. Jang, J. H. Won, Y. W. Kim, Z. Cheng and J. H. Choy, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 546 RSC .
J. Liu, Z. Guo, W. Wang, Q. Huang, K. Zhu and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1470 RSC .
Y. Bi, S. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, J. Cao and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6490 CrossRef CAS .
E. Martín del Campo, J. S. Valente, T. Pavón, R. Romero, Á. Mantilla and R. Natividad, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 11544 Search PubMed .
R. Neumann and M. Dahan, Nature, 1997, 388, 353 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rudd and C. B. Breslin, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1571 Search PubMed .
H. Fu, T. Xu, S. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8064 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Ding, P. Gao, X. Xin and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5238 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, D. Li, S. Meng, W. Chen, X. Fu and Y. Shao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 2987 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available: XPS spectra of Zn2p, O1s and S2p for the representative samples. FE-SEM images of the samples obtained at lower reaction temperatures. XRD patterns and FE-SEM images of ZnOS NS, ZnOS15 before and after the photocatalytic reaction. Photocatalytic activity profiles for the degradation of MO. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ce25591j/This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns (a) and the corresponding UV-vis DRS (b) of the as-prepared products. The Kubelka–Munk function, F(R) = (1 − R)2/2R, is used as the equivalent of absorbance.	 

 	Fig. 2  FE-SEM and TEM images of as-prepared ZnOS15 (a), (b) and ZnOS25 (c), (d).	 

 	Fig. 3  FE-SEM and TEM images of as-prepared ZnOS1 (a), (a′); ZnOS5 (b), (b′); ZnOS15 (c), (c′); ZnOS25 (d), (d′) and ZnOS40 (e), (e′). A schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of ZnOS HCSSs (f).	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS spectra of ZnOS1: N1s (a), S2p (b), Zn2p (c) and O1s (d).	 

 	Fig. 5  A TEM image (a) of single ZnO bipods and HRTEM image (b) of the margin of the joint (marked by the white rectangular frame in (a)). The corresponding EDS of ZnOS1 (c).	 
(NH2)2CS + H2O → (NH2)2C(OH) + SH	(1)
(NH2)2C(OH)SH + H2O→ (NH2)2C(OH)2 + H2S	(2)
H2S + ZnO → ZnS + H2O	(3)

 	Fig. 6  HRTEM (a) and STEM (b) images of ZnOS15. The profiles of EDS line scans analysis (c) along the longitudinal orientation of ZnOS HCSSs, as indicated by the line in (b).	 

 	Fig. 7  UV-vis spectra (a) of photocatalytic degradation of p-CP over ZnOS15. Photocatalytic activities (b) of the representative ZnOS HCSSs, pZnO, pZnS and ZnOS, detected by examining the variations of characteristic absorption peak at 226 nm in UV-vis spectra.	 
O2−surface + h+ → O−surface	(4)
O−surface + 3O2− + 3h+ → 2(O − O2−)	(5)
2(O − O2−) + 2h+ → O2	(6)
2Zn2+ → 2Zn2+(aq)	(7)
ZnO + 2h+ → Zn2+ + 1/2O2	(8)

 	Fig. 8  Degradation of p-CP over pZnO (a) and ZnOS15 (b) under 254 nm light irradiation in three successive cycles.	 

 	Fig. 9  DMPO spin-trapping ESR spectra in ZnOS15 methanolic dispersions for DMPO-O˙−2 (a) and aqueous dispersions for DMPO-˙OH (b) under 254 nm light irradiation.	 

 	Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for degradation of p-CP over ZnOS HCSSs under UV light irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available: XPS spectra of Zn2p, O1s and S2p for the representative samples. FE-SEM images of the samples obtained at lower reaction temperatures. XRD patterns and FE-SEM images of ZnOS NS, ZnOS15 before and after the photocatalytic reaction. Photocatalytic activity profiles for the degradation of MO. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ce25591j/

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
