Photoredox catalysis over graphene aerogel-supported composites  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA00728D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA00728D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4590-4604Photoredox catalysis over graphene aerogel-supported composites

        
          
            Kang-Qiang 
            Lu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Xin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zi-Rong 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yi-Jun 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350116, P. R. China
bCollege of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, New Campus, Fuzhou, 350116, P. R. China. E-mail: zrtang@fzu.edu.cn; yjxu@fzu.edu.cn;  Fax: +8659122865836;   Tel: +8659122865836
Received 
      23rd January 2018
    , Accepted 8th February 2018First published on 8th February 2018AbstractThree-dimensional (3D) graphene aerogels, by virtue of their unique physicochemical properties, which result from the intrinsic properties of graphene and 3D porous structure characteristics, have attracted ever-increasing research interest in the field of photocatalysis for the sake of efficient utilization of solar energy. Herein, we intend to afford a concise review on the recent progress regarding the synthetic method of graphene aerogels and the promising applications of graphene aerogel-based photocatalysts in pollutant elimination, water splitting, CO2 reduction, organic synthesis and atmospheric ammonia synthesis. In particular, the superiorities of 3D graphene aerogel-based photocatalysts for various solar-driven photoredox applications have been demonstrated. Furthermore, in addition to discussing opportunities offered by graphene aerogel-supported photocatalysts, we will also describe the existing challenges and the future direction of graphene aerogel-based photocatalysts in this burgeoning research area. It is hoped that this review could spur multidisciplinary research interest for advancing the rational utilization of 3D graphene aerogels to synthesize more efficient photocatalysts for practical applications.Kang-Qiang LuKang-Qiang Lu is now pursuing his Ph.D. degree at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests focus on the synthesis of carbon-based materials, especially graphene-based composite nanomaterials for applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.Zi-Rong TangZi-Rong Tang is an associate professor now working at College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. Her current research interests primarily focus on the design and fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductor-based nanostructured composites and their applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis and thermocatalysis.Yi-Jun XuYi-Jun Xu is a full professor now working at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of semiconductor-based and metal-based composite materials in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.
1. Introduction
Graphene (GR), an allotrope of carbon, has triggered ripples of excitement in the scientific and technological communities since its discovery in 2004.1–5 As the first two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb crystal available to us, GR possesses many unique properties, including superior electrical conductivity and mobility, theoretically high specific surface area, excellent optical transmittance, and high chemical stability.6–12 These unique properties make GR an ideal platform to assemble semiconductor components and accept/transport photogenerated charge carriers, thereby improving the efficiency of photocatalytic processes.13–18 The past several years have witnessed explosive interest in constructing a myriad of composites based on the versatile platform of GR.19–25 However, despite the impressive progress, many key roadblocks that impede the practical application of GR-based photocatalysts in solar energy conversion still exist.26 On the one hand, conventional GR-based photocatalysts in powder form have a strong tendency to agglomerate or even restack to form a graphitic structure.2,5,27,28 As a result, the inherent properties of GR cannot be exploited thoroughly. On the other hand, not only do the separation and recovery of powdered photocatalysts require miscellaneous and sophisticated operations (such as centrifugation, sonication, and drying) but the quantitative amounts of photocatalysts lost during the recycling process may also enter human or animal cells producing toxic effects.29,30 Furthermore, in order to disperse the powdered photocatalyst into aqueous solution, powerful agitation is always an inevitable experimental procedure.29 However, this punchy mechanical stirring treatment often does not conform to the practical application. Therefore, a novel state escalation toward photocatalysts to avoid the employment of the forced convection treatment is of great significance.
Constructing macroscopic three-dimensional (3D) GR aerogels (3DGAs) assembled from 2D GR building blocks has been recognized as an effective strategy to circumvent the above problems.31–33 The macroscopic block morphology of 3DGA-based photocatalysts makes them easily and conveniently recyclable photocatalyst candidates, which can be treated just using tweezers.34 In addition, due to their light weight, 3DGA-based photocatalysts are able to suspend in the aqueous solution without the assistance of an external force, which ensures that they can absorb sunlight and come into contact with the reactant molecules effectively.29 Furthermore, beyond these benefits of practical operation, the introduction of the 3DGA substrate can also improve the performance of composite photocatalysts.27 With inhibited agglomeration of the GR sheets, 3DGAs can farthest retain the advantageous properties of the individual GR sheets. Furthermore, the highly interconnected hierarchical porous structure endows 3DGAs with other unique physicochemical properties.35,36 Firstly, the 3D network structure can provide multidimensional electron transport pathways, which can improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.37 Secondly, such a macroporous structure of 3DGA-based photocatalysts can improve the accessible surface area, thus enhancing the adsorption of reactants.38,39 Thirdly, the hierarchically porous structure and tunable surface of 3DGAs make them ideal scaffolds to substantially inhibit the aggregation or stacking of subunits, thus exposing more active sites for photocatalytic surface reactions.29,34
Although there have been some review articles on 3D GR with emphasis on its synthesis methods, properties, and applications in energy storage and conversion,27,31,32,36,40–45 dedicated reviews focusing on the diverse photoredox applications of 3DGA-based photocatalysts are relatively scarce. Therefore, it is essential to present a general review from the widely dispersed literature in this important research area to provide collective enriched information and spark enlightened ideas in this field toward practical photoredox applications. In this review, the recent advances in the rational design and fabrication of 3DGAs with a variety of morphologies, structures, and properties are concisely presented. In addition, we will particularly focus on the typical description of different solar-driven photoredox applications of 3DGA-based photocatalysts, including pollutant elimination, water splitting, CO2 reduction, organic synthesis and atmospheric ammonia synthesis. Finally, some unsettled issues and potential opportunities in this promising field have been proposed. We hope this review would provide valuable insights into the current status of 3DGA-based photocatalysts and stimulate new ideas and further research on this promising topic, which may bring 3DGA-based materials closer to real-world applications in artificial photoredox processes.
2. Preparation methods
Because we are focusing on the applications of 3D carbon-based architectures for photocatalysis, their mechanical strength, surface wettability, specific surface area, pore volume and bulk density, which mainly depend on their preparation and modification methods, deserve special attention. Here, we classified these methods into three major categories: self-assembly method, template method and sol–gel process.
2.1. Self-assembly method

2.1.1. Cross-linking self-assembly. 
In a stable graphene oxide (GO) dispersion, there is a force balance between the van der Waals attractions from the basal planes of GO sheets and the electrostatic repulsions from the functional groups of GO sheets, which makes GO sheets well dispersed in an aqueous solvent.7,31,32,46 Gelation of the GO dispersion occurs once the force balance is broken.47 During the gelation process, GO sheets partially overlap to form 3D GO hydrogels (Fig. 1), which can then be converted into 3DGAs by further reduction and freeze drying.48 However, in many cases, GO is hard to assemble into a 3D structure, because the properties of GO are sensitive to the experimental conditions and the self-assembly of GO only occurs under certain conditions.49,50 In addition, 3DGAs with no reinforcement are usually brittle and have poor mechanical properties, which hamper their photocatalytic application.45 Therefore, adding cross-linking agents is a simple and effective way to synthesize 3DGA structures with improved mechanical properties.
 Fig. 1  Proposed mechanism of the formation of 3D GO hydrogels via cross-linking self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Various cross-linking agents have been evaluated to improve the mechanical stability of GO superstructures through physical and chemical cross-linking, including polymers,51–53 small organic molecules,54,55 biomacromolecules (DNA or protein),56,57 and multivalent ions (La3+, Fe2+, Ni2+, Ca2+, and Co2+).58,59 Shi et al.60 reported the assembly of GO sheets by adding poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) as a cross-linker to induce the formation of a 3D GO hydrogel. During the synthesis process, the hydrogen bonding interaction between hydroxyl-rich PVA chains and oxygen-containing functional groups on GO sheets accounts for forming the cross-linking sites. As the number of cross-linking sites is sufficiently high, a stable GO hydrogel with a 3D network is generated. However, a fundamental tradeoff of the introduction of cross-linkers is that it tends to sacrifice the electrical conductivity of 3DGAs.61 Recently, some of the conducting polymers have been utilized to construct highly conductive 3DGAs. For example, Zhao et al.62 utilized the conductive polymer polypyrrole (PPy) as a cross-linker to fabricate highly compressible and electrically conductive 3DGAs. Hu et al.63 introduced the cross-linker ethylenediamine to functionalize GO, which also induced the sheets to form a highly conductive 3D network. Furthermore, it is noted that a cross-linker that reacts with GO can realize ultrafast assembly. For instance, Qiu et al.64 used an epoxy curing agent, poly(oxypropylene)diamine, to realize the assembly of GO within 60 s.


2.1.2. Reduction-induced assembly. 
As an amphiphilic macromolecule, GO consists of both aromatic regions and abundant oxygen-containing groups on the basal planes and edges.46,65 These oxygen-containing groups render GO sheets hydrophilic and highly dispersible in water, whereas the aromatic regions are hydrophobic.61,66,67 The reduction causes partial removal of oxygen-containing hydrophilic groups in some regions so that these regions become hydrophobic and cannot disperse in water, resulting in phase separation at the nanoscale, which generates large sheet deformation as the undispersed regions attach to each other.68 Furthermore, the hydrophilic regions of the reduced GO (RGO) still have a strong interaction with water through hydrogen bonding, which causes some water to adsorb on the RGO surface as a spacer that prevents the parallel aggregation of the sheets,69 resulting in the final formation of the 3D structure. Other solvents can also act as the spacer for the 3D structure formation as water does, such as propylene carbonate and ionic liquids.70,71 From the above discussion, phase separation of GO sheets from a liquid is believed to be responsible for the reduction-induced assembly process, and a continuous liquid phase behaving as the spacer or a continuous template helps form an interlinked pore system and the final 3D network structure.
Hydrothermal reduction is a simple and effective way to remove the functional groups from GO and realize phase separation.72,73 However, the reduction degree and process must be controlled to balance the hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity because excessive reduction always induces the precipitation of RGO.74 The hydrothermal reduction can be easily tuned by the temperature and time. Higher temperature results in a higher reduction degree, and most of the hydrothermal reduction induced self-assembly of 3D GR occurs above the temperature of 150 °C, indicating that the low reduction degree cannot initiate self-assembly.68 Shi and co-workers75 reported a study on the preparation of a self-assembled GR hydrogel via a convenient one-step hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for 12 h in the absence of reducing agents. During the hydrothermal process, the thermal reduction of GO sheets can remove the negatively charged oxygen-containing functional groups, which leads to the increase of the hydrophobicity and π–π stacking, thereby resulting in the formation of 3D GR hydrogels. Based on this pioneering work, as shown in Fig. 2a, Niu et al.76 presented a versatile strategy to incorporate various functional nanomaterials into porous 3DGAs by a one-step hydrothermal co-assembly method. In addition, the hydrothermal approach is proved to be an effective way for achieving the doping of heteroatoms into 3DGAs.77,78 For example, Chun et al.79 prepared nitrogen (N)-doped 3DGAs through a simple hydrothermal method employing hexamethylenetetramine as a stabilizer and a nitrogen source. Similar to hydrothermal reduction, chemical reduction has also been utilized to build the 3DGAs construction (Fig. 2b). For the chemical reduction, the surface chemistry can also be easily tuned by the properties and amount of reducing agents. Chen et al.80 studied the effect of various reducing agents including sodium hydrogen sulfite (NaHSO3), sodium sulfide (Na2S), vitamin C, hydrogen iodide (HI), and hydroquinone (HQ) on the reduction of GO. They found that the reduction time required to form the 3D structure varies using different reducing agents. In addition, the shape of the hydrogel can also be controlled by utilizing differently shaped reactors, revealing the isotropic shrinkage of self-assembled GO sheets (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of preparing porous GR hybrid architectures by a hydrothermal co-assembly process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) The proposed self-assembly mechanism for GR hydrogel formation during the chemical reduction of GO in an aqueous suspension. (c) The shape controlled synthesis of hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.2. Template method
The template method is one of the most effective strategies toward achieving desirable 3D GR architectures which can be easily fabricated into desirable structures and morphologies by simply selecting a suitable template.42,81 There are abundant types of materials that can be considered as templates for the fabrication of 3D GR frameworks.40 Based on the physical properties, templates can be generally classified into two types: hard template and soft template.

2.2.1. Hard template. 
So far, hard-template methods have been extensively employed for the preparation of 3D GR-based materials. Solid nanostructured particles (e.g., silica spheres), porous metal foams (e.g., nickel foam) and coagulated solvents (e.g., ice) are usually utilized as hard templates to synthesize 3DGAs with different pore sizes, morphologies and properties.40,82 Zhao et al.40 designed a hydrophobic interaction driven hard templating approach to synthesize nanoporous GR foams using methyl functionalized silica spheres as templates. In a neutral aqueous solution, self-assembly occurs between GO sheets and silica templates due to the hydrophobic nature of both the methyl group grafted silica templates and the basal planes of GO sheets. The composites obtained in the assembly step are then calcined under an inert atmosphere to reduce GO sheets into RGO. Subsequently, with further HF etching of silica spheres, nanopores can be produced with a size similar to the dimension of the templates (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the nanoporous 3D GR with silica spheres as templates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Synthesis of 3D GR monoliths using Ni foam as a sacrificial template. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2011 Nature. (c) Schematic showing the formation mechanism of the cork-like monolith by freeze casting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2012 Nature. 
The metal foam is also an excellent hard template candidate for the fabrication of 3D GR.83 Cheng et al.84 used nickel (Ni) foam as a sacrificial template for the growth of 3D GR monoliths by decomposing methane (CH4) at 1000 °C (Fig. 3b). After etching away the underlying Ni skeleton with inorganic acid, interconnected 3D GR monoliths can be obtained. In addition, the size and pore structure of 3D GR can be adjusted by changing the type of Ni foam and controlling the CH4 concentration. Furthermore, a freeze-drying method, known as an ice templating-altered flash-frozen process, has also been explored to produce 3DGAs.85–87 Li et al.88 reported a modified freeze-drying method to prepare 3DGAs with a “cork-mimicked” structure (Fig. 3c). Upon freezing, the partially reduced GO sheets are rejected from the forming ice and entrapped between neighbouring ice crystals to form a continuous network. As the growth rate of ice crystals is highly anisotropic, the partially reduced GO sheets are forced to align along the moving solidification front, while they are concentrated and then squeezed at the crystal boundaries, yielding 3DGA monoliths.


2.2.2. Soft template. 
The hard-template method usually needs to eliminate the templates adopting complex physical and chemical methods.42 Compared to the hard-template approach, the soft-template method has many advantages, such as its straightforward implementation and relatively mild experimental conditions.89–91 Wang et al.92 used 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene (TMB) micro-emulsions and n-hexadecane emulsion as the soft-template to synthesize 3D GR monoliths with adjustable pore diameters. The way to remove the template is relatively simple. As shown in Fig. 4, the obtained 3D GR monoliths can be separated from suspensions by simple vacuum filtration. Besides, when utilizing TMB as the template, the pores in the 3D GR monoliths exhibit a polyhedral morphology with sizes of several micrometres. In addition, ultra-large macropores of 100 μm can be obtained by employing n-hexadecane as the template.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the emulsion soft-template synthesis procedures for preparing porous 3D GR monoliths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.3. Sol–gel process
The sol–gel process is another commonly used method for constructing 3DGAs.31 It is important to highlight that this method usually provides covalent carbon cross-links between GR sheets instead of physical bonds.44 In general, organic sol chemistry involves the polymerization of organic precursors to form a highly cross-linked organic gel, which can then be dried and pyrolyzed to produce 3DGAs.93 Worsley et al.94 reported the synthesis of 3DGAs by the sol–gel polymerization of resorcinol and formaldehyde (RF) with sodium carbonate as a catalyst in an aqueous suspension of GO. Typically, the GO–RF gel is prepared by curing an aqueous suspension containing 4 wt% R/F and 1 wt% GO in a sealed glass vial at 85 °C. The wet GO–RF gel is washed with acetone to remove water from the pores of the 3D network and dried with supercritical CO2 to obtain the GO–RF aerogel. Finally, the GO–RF aerogel is pyrolyzed at 1050 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere, resulting in the formation of 3DGAs. The obtained 3DGAs exhibit high electrical conductivity and a large specific surface area and pore volume. In a subsequent study, the same group has found that different addition amounts of RF have a significant effect on the nature of the carbon cross-links and the bulk properties of 3DGAs.44 Notably, 3DGAs obtained with decreasing RF content (<4%) possess a higher degree of exfoliation and less C–H bonding than that with a higher RF content. In addition, as the RF content increases, the electrical conductivity of graphene aerogels improves obviously, which is likely because the RF will transform the highly conductive carbon in the synthetic process.
3. Applications of graphene-based aerogels in photocatalysis
Light absorption, charge separation and migration to participate in the surface reaction process are considered to be the key steps in the photoredox process.36,95 Due to the unique macrostructure and porous properties, 3DGAs have proved themselves as exciting monolith materials for constructing high-efficiency photocatalysts for practical applications in solar energy conversion.1 The roles of 3DGAs in photoredox catalysis have been found to be diverse (Fig. 5). Firstly, the good electrical conductivity and multidimensional electron transport pathways of 3DGAs enable them to act as ideal photoelectron mediators to promote the separation of photogenerated electron hole pairs from the composite photocatalyst.26 More importantly, due to the excellent adsorption capacity and unique monolith structure of graphene aerogels, they have been successfully applied to serve as supports to improve the recyclability and adsorption capacity of the composite photocatalyst.96,97 Moreover, the highly hierarchically porous structures and abundant surface functional groups make graphene aerogels possibly act as templates to inhibit the aggregation and overgrowth of semiconductors, thus exposing more active sites for the catalytic surface reaction.27 Recent studies have also found that graphene aerogels can be directly used as photocatalysts to generate hot/free electrons under light illumination.98
 Fig. 5  Multifarious roles of 3DGAs in photoredox catalysis. 
Thus far, the preparation methods of 3DGA-based composite photocatalysts can be summarized as two categories. As shown in Fig. 6, one is the integration of prefabricated 3DGAs with photoactive components (e.g., semiconductors, organic dyes) (strategy 1); the other is to mix the precursor of GR (e.g., GO) and soluble precursors of photoactive materials (e.g., metal salts) followed by further treatment, forming 3DGA-based composite photocatalysts (strategy 2). In this section, we will demonstrate the application of 3DGA-based photocatalysts in an artificial photoredox process, including elimination of pollutants (e.g., liquid phase organic pollutants, toxic ions and gas phase pollutants), water splitting (hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution), CO2 reduction, organic synthesis and atmospheric ammonia synthesis.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the fabrication strategies of 3DGA-based photocatalysts. 
3.1. Elimination of pollutants

3.1.1. Liquid phase elimination of organic pollutants and toxic ions. 
With a rapid population growth and heavy industrialization, serious water pollution concerns regarding various organic contaminants and toxic ions are faced by modern society.2 Photocatalytic pollution mitigation with inexhaustible solar energy has already been widely put into effect and is expected to be devoted to practical applications.99 Unfortunately, conventional photocatalysts in powder form have drawbacks in terms of the recycling process and low efficiency, which limit their realistic application.27 In order to implement photocatalysts into practical applications and simultaneously reduce the overall production cost, it is very critical to immobilize photocatalysts on appropriate supports to circumvent the traditionally time-consuming and costly separation and recovery processes.26,100 The macroscopic block appearance of 3DGAs makes them desirable recyclable photocatalyst carriers. Zhang et al.34 reported a simple one-step hydrothermal method toward in situ growth of ultradispersed mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystals on 3D GR frameworks (TiO2/GAs). The obtained TiO2/GAs exhibit hydrophobic properties and excellent recyclable activity. The solar-driven photocatalytic activity of TiO2/GAs is measured by monitoring the degradation of methyl orange (MO). As shown in Fig. 7a, after irradiation for 5 h, MO can be degraded up to 90% by TiO2/GAs. Additionally, the TiO2/GAs can be easily separated by using a pair of tweezers for recycling; after 5 cycles, the catalyst maintains high photoactivity (83%).
 Fig. 7  (a) Cycling photodegradation of MO under simulated solar light irradiation (with an AM 1.5 air mass filter). Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of the original MB solution and the adsorptive MB solutions in the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles, GH, and TGH. Inset is the photograph of the original MB solution and adsorptive MB solutions in the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles, GH, and TGH. (c) Dye adsorption isotherms of MB on TGH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. SEM images of (d) AgBr/GAs and (e) AgBr without GAs. (f) Photocatalytic oxidative curves of MO by using AgBr/GAs and AgBr under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and the absorptive curve of AgBr/GAs in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Table 1 shows the porous features and surface area of some typical graphene aerogel-supported photocatalysts. It can be found that the 3D network graphene aerogel morphology is a framework containing hierarchical pores on meso and macro scales. The porous structure contributes to a high specific surface area and provides accessibility to the active surfaces. At the same time, the aromatic regions of graphene aerogels can form a π–π stacking interaction with organic pollutants containing aromatic structures, thus contributing to improving the adsorption of reaction substrates. Liu et al.101 reported the development of a new type of multifunctional titanium dioxide (TiO2)–GR composite hydrogel (TGH) by a facile one-pot hydrothermal approach. The obtained TGH exhibits increased adsorption capacities and enhanced activities for the photodegradation of methyl blue (MB). As shown in Fig. 7b, in the presence of TGH, the absorbance of MB is almost 3 and 4 times lower than that in the presence of GR hydrogels (GHs) and TiO2 nanoparticles, respectively, revealing that TGH possesses higher dye adsorption capacity than GH and TiO2 nanoparticles. The maximum adsorption capacity of TGH is found to be almost 120 mg g−1 (Fig. 7c), which outperforms many other currently available adsorbents.102 Moreover, the highly hierarchically porous structures and abundant surface functional groups make heterogeneous nucleation and in situ growth of nanoparticles on the 3D GR frameworks possible, thus effectively inhibiting the aggregation and overgrowth of nanoparticles. For instance, Niu et al.29 have prepared a novel AgBr/GR aerogel (AgBr/GA) structure, in which the AgBr nanoparticles (NPs) are uniformly distributed throughout the surface of the hierarchically porous 3DGAs (Fig. 7d). In contrast, pristine AgBr particles are much larger in size and tend to agglomerate into irregular shaped blocks (Fig. 7e). Therefore, the existence of 3DGAs remarkably inhibits the agglomeration of AgBr during the synthesis process, which leads to the increased active adsorption sites and photocatalytic reaction centers of AgBr. Degradation of MO and the reduction of Cr(VI) have been used to evaluate the photocatalytic activity of AgBr/GAs. Taking the former reaction as an example here, as shown in Fig. 7f, after visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) for 8 min, MO can be completely degraded by the AgBr/GAs, while only 65% is removed by pristine AgBr during the same interval. In addition, it can be easily observed that the degradation rate of MO presents a regular tendency in the AgBr/GA system, while an irregular degradation rate is noticed in the AgBr system. This should be attributed to the mild agitation conditions, which cannot sufficiently disperse the AgBr NPs in aqueous solution. Conversely, due to the light weight and porosity of the GA support in AgBr/GA composites, the loaded AgBr NPs are able to entirely suspend in solution and adequately come into contact with MO molecules without any assistance of external force. In addition to the aforementioned studies, other 3DGA-based photocatalysts have also been applied for the photodegradation of organic pollutants and toxic ions successfully. The summary of photocatalytic activity and reaction conditions compared with those of photocatalysts is shown in Table 2.96,97,103–113
Table 1 Porous features and surface area of typical graphene aerogel-based photocatalysts prepared by different methods




Photocatalyst
Porous features
Surface area of graphene aerogel
Synthesis methods
Ref.




TiO2–RGO aerogel
Macropores
148 m2 g−1
Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly

101



AgBr–RGO aerogel
Macropores and mesopores
105 m2 g−1
Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly

29



TiO2–RGO aerogel
Macropores
323 m2 g−1
Chemical reduction-induced assembly

97



W18O49–RGO aerogel
Macropores, mesopores and micropores
228 m2 g−1
Freeze-drying method

109



Ag3PO4–RGO aerogel
Mesopores
102 m2 g−1
Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly

114



g-C3N4–RGO aerogel
Macropores
312 m2 g−1
Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly

115



TiO2–GR aerogel
Macropores
—

Hard template method


116



CdS–RGO aerogel
Macropores
150 m2 g−1
Cross-linking self-assembly

37



Eosin Y–RGO aerogel
Macropores
115 m2 g−1
Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly

117





Table 2 Photocatalytic degradation of pollutants over some 3D graphene-based photocatalysts




Photocatalyst (mg)
Pollutant (mg L−1)
Light source (W)

λ

Degradation rate (time min)
Ref.




BiOBr/RGO aerogel
RhB (20)
Xenon lamp (300)
≥420 nm
100% (240)

103



ZnO–3D RGO (1.5)
MB (15)
Xenon lamp (300)
Full-spectrum
100% (60)

104



TiO2–RGO hydrogel
Cr(VI) (10)
Mercury lamp (250)
<420 nm
100% (30)

98



g-C3N4/GO aerogel
MO (20)
Xenon lamp (300)
≥420 nm
90% (40)

106



Polyaniline/TiO2–RGO hydrogel (20)
Bisphenol A (40)
Mercury lamp (500)
<420 nm
80 (40)

107



BiOBr/RGO aerogel (100)
MO (10)
Xenon lamp (300)
≥365 nm
80 (60)

108



W18O49–RGO aerogel (25)
MO (50)
Xenon lamp (500)
≥420 nm
100 (25)

109



N-Doped graphene hydrogel (6)
Acridine orange (20)
Xenon lamp (11)
≥420 nm
70 (300)

110



Cu2O@3D RGO@nano-chitosan (20)
RhB (5)
Xenon lamp (500)
Full-spectrum
100 (150)

111



TiO2–RGO aerogel (5)
RhB (20)
Xenon lamp (300)
<420 nm
100 (180)

112



S-Doped TiO2–RGO aerogel (50)
MO (6)
Xenon lamp (300)
≥420 nm
98 (360)

113



Bi2WO6–RGO aerogel (25)
MB (40)
Xenon lamp (500)
≥420 nm
50 (720)

38







3.1.2. Gas phase degradation of pollutants. 
Presently, urban environments are facing serious problems concerning air pollution, mainly due to exhaust gases from traffic and burning fuels in industries, leading to a major environmental issue on a global scale, which has a great impact on human health, animal life, plants and climate.118 In recent years, photocatalysis technology has been regarded as one of the most perspective strategies to degrade these gas phase pollutants.3,119 3DGA-based photocatalysts exhibit excellent potential in degrading gas phase pollutants due to the advantages of both the highly interconnected porous network and low gas resistance.118,120 Recently, Zhou et al.121 have synthesized a C3N4/graphene oxide aerogel (C3N4/GOA) by an one-step cryodesiccation route, which has been used for the photocatalytic removal of NO under visible light irradiation. As shown in Fig. 8a, the obtained C3N4/GOA has a beige color and an ultra-light density of 3–5 mg cm−3, which can easily rest on a ginkgo leaf. In addition, the C3N4/GOA obtained by this method can be easily made into the desired shape and size, as long as there is a suitable freeze-drying container or mold (Fig. 8b), which breaks the restriction that traditional GOAs can only be molded in a cylinder hydrothermal autoclave29,34 and makes the shape of C3N4/GOA versatile to meet application requirements. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 8c, after visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) for 30 min, 47% NO can be degraded by the 90 wt% C3N4/GOA, while only 35% NO is removed by C3N4. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of C3N4/GOA as compared with bare C3N4 probably results from the porosity and large surface area of the GOA, which can increase the number of active sites and promote the diffusion of reactants or products in the system. In addition, as shown in Fig. 8d, the introduction of GO can narrow the band gap of C3N4, and the valence band maximum of C3N4/GOA is shifted from 1.57 to 1.97 eV compared to the pristine C3N4 powder, which indicates photogenerated holes over C3N4/GOA with enhanced oxidative power. Therefore, the introduction of GO can promote the oxidation of NO2 to NO3−, and thus improves the selectivity of C3N4/GOA for the NO3− formation.
 Fig. 8  (a) Ultra-light C3N4/GOA resting on a leaf. (b) The macroscopic C3N4–GOA photocatalyst fabricated into the letters “SWPU”. (c) Visible light photocatalytic activity of the integrated aerogel photocatalysts with different amounts of C3N4 for the removal of NO in air. (d) Band structure diagram of powder C3N4 and C3N4/GOA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2. Water splitting

3.2.1. Hydrogen evolution. 
Photocatalytic water splitting into H2 and O2 using solar energy and semiconductors has attracted a lot of attention and proven to be a promising way to solve both the solar energy storage and the low-cost and green production of H2 fuel.122 However, from the viewpoint of the Gibbs free energy change, the thermodynamically uphill photocatalytic water splitting is more difficult than the downhill photocatalytic degradation reactions such as the oxidation of organic compounds using oxygen molecules.11 Over the past few years, various semiconductor photocatalysts have been investigated for H2 generation via photocatalytic water splitting. 3DGAs, which can not only preserve the large accessible surface areas of the GR species but also possess effective multidimensional electron transport pathways to facilitate photocarrier transfer, have been used to construct high-efficiency composite photocatalysts for photocatalytic water splitting.123 For example, Ho et al.124 developed a ternary composite photocatalyst composed of a 3D macroscopic assembled GR hydrogel, photoactive TiO2 and Au nanostructures (NGH–Au) by employing vitamin C as a reducing agent and cross-linker. It has been found that the H2 production activity over the NGH–Au sample is more efficient than that of pure TiO2 nanorods and the 2D RGO sheet–TiO2 composite (2D RGO–TiO2) and NGH with different weight loadings of Au nanoparticles under both UV-vis light and vis light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation. The improved photocatalytic activity can be attributed to the sharp separation of electron–hole pairs in the unique 3D GR hydrogel interconnected network structure.
Furthermore, apart from the role as an electron reservoir to accept and shuttle electrons photogenerated from the semiconductor, Chen et al.98 have highlighted that a carbon-only 3D GR material can also be used as a robust photocatalyst for H2 production via water splitting under ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) light. It can be seen from Fig. 9a that pure 3D GR prepared by a hydrothermal method (denoted as 3DG-un) exhibits moderate activity for photocatalytic H2 evolution with methanol as a sacrificial agent. Based on this result, the possible mechanism of H2 production over 3DG-un has been proposed. As shown in Fig. 9b, the highly energetic hot/free electrons can be generated efficiently by 3DG-un and be ejected from GR into free space via an Auger-like mechanism under light illumination. The electrons can act as powerful reducing agents to drive the initial photo-reduction process of water splitting for H2 evolution. Furthermore, it is found that the appropriate calcination treatment in an argon atmosphere can significantly enhance the photocatalytic activity of 3DGAs, and the 3DGAs annealed at 650 °C (3DG-650) display the optimal performance (Fig. 9a). The H2 evolution rate of the 3DG-650 sample is 270 μmol h−1 gcat−1, which is about 5.4 times larger than that of 3DG-un (ca. 50 μmol h−1 gcat−1). However, the reason why the calcination treatment can improve the photoactivity of 3D GR toward H2 evolution has not been explained clearly. Besides, the proposed hot/free electron mechanism of 3DGAs still needs further studies.
 Fig. 9  (a) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water splitting over a series of 3D GR samples synthesized at various annealing temperatures and reference samples. (b) Mechanism of photocatalytic hydrogen production catalyzed by 3D GR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017 Springer. 


3.2.2. Oxygen evolution. 
It is known that the oxygen (O2)-evolution half reaction is more difficult than the photocatalytic H2 evolution because the O2-evolution reaction requires a four electron oxidation of two water molecules coupled to the removal of four protons to form a relatively weak oxygen–oxygen bond.122 Recently, 3DGA-based photocatalysts have been used in water splitting to generate O2. For instance, Tang et al.114 synthesized 3D Ag3PO4/graphene aerogels (Ag3PO4/GAs) via an in situ ion filtration–precipitation method for photocatalytic O2 generation from water splitting with AgNO3 as the electron scavenger. In the water splitting process, under visible light irradiation, the photo-generated holes in the valence band of Ag3PO4 can oxidize H2O to evolve O2, while the electrons can transfer to 3DGAs and reduce Ag+ into metallic Ag (Fig. 10a). As shown in Fig. 10b, the O2 evolution over 3D Ag3PO4/GAs is 675 μmol in 3 h (4860 μmol h−1 g−1), which is higher than that of pristine Ag3PO4 and Ag3PO4/2D RGO. The improved photocatalytic activity of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs can be ascribed to the following reasons: firstly, the porous 3DGAs can inhibit the agglomeration of Ag3PO4 nanoparticles (NPs) during the synthesis of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs (Fig. 10c), providing more active sites for the photocatalytic reaction, secondly, as shown in Fig. 10d, the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) results indicate that 3DGAs can provide highly electrically conductive channels for the anchored Ag3PO4 NPs, which efficiently boost the separation and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers and thus result in the higher photoactivity of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs than Ag3PO4. Finally, the 3D porous structure of the aerogel enables Ag+ electron scavengers to facilely access the entire internal surface of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs, which promotes effective separation of charge carriers and thus facilitates O2 generation.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs in oxygen evolution from water splitting in AgNO3 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. (b) Photocatalytic oxygen evolution under visible light irradiation from an AgNO3 solution over pristine Ag3PO4, Ag3PO4/2D RGO and 3D Ag3PO4/GAs. (c) SEM image of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs. (d) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of Ag3PO4 and 3D Ag3PO4/GAs electrodes under visible light irradiation at 0.5 V bias potential vs. Ag/AgCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 

3.3. CO2 reduction
The greenhouse effect is considered to be an important factor for climate change. CO2, a major anthropogenic greenhouse gas, has caused growing concern due to its continuous rise in atmospheric concentration, and therefore various strategies have been developed to reduce it. Since the first demonstration of photocatalytic CO2 reduction by Inoue and co-workers in 1979,125 significant advancements have been made in exploiting efficient and feasible semiconductors for the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into valuable solar fuels such as methane or methanol126,127 However, despite the great advances being made in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with semiconductors, the photocatalytic efficiency remains low. With regard to this, a further enhancement of the catalytic reduction of CO2 over 3DGA-based photocatalysts has been proposed. For instance, Yan et al.116 reported the synthesis of a 3D GR (3DG)–TiO2 nanocomposite by covalently attaching TiO2 nanoparticles onto pristine 3DG through a perfluorophenyl azide-mediated coupling reaction. The 3DG–TiO2 nanocomposite has demonstrated excellent photocatalytic activity toward CO2 reduction to CO, which is about 11 times higher than that of TiO2 nanoparticles. The enhanced photocatalytic activity can be attributed to the high specific surface area of the polyporous 3DG support and the excellent dispersion of TiO2 nanoparticles on 3DG.
Furthermore, Jiang et al.115 reported visible-light-driven photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO over g-C3N4/graphene oxide aerogels (CNGAs), which were prepared by the hydrothermal co-assembly of two-dimensional g-C3N4 and GO nanosheets. As displayed in Fig. 11a, the optimized CNGA sample reduces CO2 into CO with a high yield of 23 mmol g−1 (within 6 h), exhibiting about 2.3 times higher activity than that of pure g-C3N4. The improved photoactivity of the CNGA sample is ascribed to the fact as follows: firstly, the porous aerogel structure improves the visible-light absorption and the adsorption affinity toward CO2 molecules. Besides, the presence of GO effectively inhibits the recombination of electron–hole pairs generated in g-C3N4, as confirmed by the photoluminescence (PL) spectra analysis (Fig. 11b). Furthermore, the mechanism of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction over CNGAs has been proposed by the author. As visualized in Fig. 11c, under visible light irradiation, the electrons generated in g-C3N4 transfer to the conducting network of GO, and then they can react with CO2 molecules to produce CO.
 Fig. 11  (a) CO evolution on the pure g-C3N4 and CNGAs with different mass ratios of g-C3N4 under visible light illumination. (b) PL spectra of pure g-C3N4 and CNGA samples. (c) Schematic diagram illustrating the photoreduction processes over CNGAs under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Organic synthesis
Selective oxidation of alcohols to carbonyls is one of the most important reactions both in industrial and laboratory synthesis, because many of the carbonyl compounds such as aldehydes and ketone derivatives are widely utilized in the fragrance, confectionary, and pharmaceutical industries.128,129 The classical industrial oxidation process always needs harsh reaction conditions and strong oxidants, such as high temperature and pressure, mineral acids, chromates and permanganates.130,131 However, the technology of photocatalysis is driven by clean solar energy, and the photocatalytic reaction is performed under mild reaction conditions (i.e., room temperature, ambient atmosphere) with benign oxidants, such as O2 and H2O2, which is green and environment friendly and can be regarded as a promising alternative synthetic route for selective organic transformations.132,133 Our group has reported the assembly of CdS and the 3D networks of monomer functionalized GR (MRGO) via a facile solvothermal method.37 The CdS–MRGO nanocomposites have been used for the photocatalytic selective oxidation of various benzylic alcohols with different substituents and allylic alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). As shown in Fig. 12a, the CdS–MRGO composites exhibit much higher visible light photoactivity than CdS–RGO for selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of CdS–MRGO composites is predominantly attributed to the restacking-inhibited 3D architectural morphology of MRGO, by which the synergistic effects of boosted separation and transportation of photogenerated charge carriers and increased adsorption capacity can be achieved. As shown in Fig. 12b, electrons can transfer stereoscopically in CdS–MRGO through the 3D networks, whereas they would be confined to a plane in CdS–2D RGO.
 Fig. 12  (a) Photocatalytic performance of CdS, CdS–RGO, and CdS–MRGO composites for photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol under visible light (λ > 420 nm) for 2 h. (b) Schematic illustrating the photogenerated electron transport pathways in CdS–RGO and CdS–MRGO composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Visible-light-driven (λ > 420 nm) photocatalytic hydrogenation of 4-nitroaniline (4-NA) to 4-phenylenediamine (4-PDA) over graphene–EY aerogels, graphene–EY powder, and semiconductor P25–EY powder. (d) Schematic illustration of the regeneration of the graphene–EY aerogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
Catalytic reduction of nitroaromatic compounds to corresponding amino compounds is another important chemical transformation in synthetic organic chemistry.126,134 Recently, we have also fabricated GR–Eosin Y (EY) composite aerogels via a facile hydrothermal method.117 Such a porous 3D GR-dye aerogel has unique advantages of (i) alleviating the aggregation and forming an interconnected porous framework with high electrical conductivity in the composite; (ii) promoting the spatial separation and rapid transportation of photoelectrons through the conductive graphene framework on the catalyst surface; and (iii) enhancing the adsorption of reactants and facilitating the photogenerated carriers to interact with the surface adsorbed reactants. The synergistic effect of these merits of such macroscopic 3D GR-organic aerogels efficiently promotes the photosensitization efficiency of molecular dyes. As shown in Fig. 12c, the GR–EY aerogels have showed higher visible-light photocatalytic performance than the 2D GR–EY powder and P25–EY for the selective reduction of 4-nitroaniline (4-NA) to 4-phenylenediamine. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that such a bulk aerogel manifests excellent regenerability, which guarantees the long-term photoactivity of the 3D aerogel. As shown in Fig. 12d, a very simple rehydrothermal treatment of the used GR–EY photocatalyst with fresh EY has been adopted to regenerate the photoactivity of the 3D GR–EY aerogel.
3.5. Atmospheric ammonia synthesis
Ammonia synthesis is profoundly important for both human beings and the earth's ecosystem.135 This is partially reflected in the fact that the scale of both industrial and biological fixation for its production is at ∼200 × 106 tons each year, which is the foundation sustaining the life on the planet.136,137 However, the industrial catalytic ammonia synthesis process (Haber–Bosch process), as one of the most complicated and successful chemical engineering processes, is operated at both high temperature and pressure, mainly because of the extremely high bond energy (945 kJ mol−1) and inert molecular structure of the nitrogen molecule and the absence of a permanent dipole of the triple bond in the nitrogen molecule.138 Therefore, it has been a persistent challenge to achieve ammonia synthesis under milder conditions such as at ambient pressure and temperature together with an efficient and stable catalytic activity. In recent years, great advances have been made using various photocatalysts for atmospheric ammonia synthesis.135,137,139,140
Chen et al.141 have reported that Fe@3D graphene (Fe@3DG) can be directly utilized as an efficient photocatalyst for the activation of N2 and generate ammonia with H2 at ambient pressure. As shown in Fig. 13a, the best activity has been achieved for 7 wt% Fe loading (7Fe@3DG) with a space-time yield at 408 ± 68 μg gcat−1 h−1, which is the highest photocatalytic activity for ammonia synthesis with milder methods reported recently.142 In addition, the mechanism for the photocatalytic atmospheric ammonia synthesis based on Fe@3DG has also been proposed. As shown in Fig. 13b, under light illumination, GR can act as an efficient electron emitter following an Auger-like light induced electron emission (LIEE) mechanism and the generated hot/free electrons as powerful reducing agents can effectively drive the photocatalytic reaction. Furthermore, several possible paths of hot electrons to facilitate the activation of N2 molecules have been presented by the author. In one way, the hot electrons might just work as the electrons to increase the electron density of the Fe surface, and thus highly enhanced Fe catalytic activity can be achieved (Fig. 13b, paths 1a and b). The second possible path (Fig. 13b, path 2) of hot electrons may work as a direct electron transfer, where hot electrons might tunnel through the little Schottky barrier and be accepted by the antibonding orbitals of N2 adsorbed on the Fe catalyst. The third possible way (Fig. 13b, path 3) is that N2 not adsorbed on the Fe catalyst could be activated directly by accepting these ejected highly energetic electrons. But one of the issues of such a Fe@3DG photocatalyst is that the ammonia synthesis rate dropped significantly over time. Obviously, such a problem has to be overcome for any possible practical application. Recently, the same group has developed the second generation catalyst, an Fe2O3–Al2O3–3D graphene (Fe–Al@3DG) composite catalyst, which not only shows enhanced stability, but also demonstrates a significantly improved photocatalytic activity for the ammonia synthesis.142 As shown in Fig. 13c, the remarkable stability of such a catalyst is due to the prevention of iron particle aggregation during the reaction by the structural promoter Al2O3. Furthermore, with addition of Al2O3, the particle size of the iron catalyst decreases significantly at the same iron loading and thus the overall photocatalytic activity gets increased.
 Fig. 13  (a) Catalytic performance of Fe@3DG at atmospheric pressure. (b) Activation mechanism over Fe@3DG under light illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Diagram of ammonia synthesis on FeeAl@3DG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
4. Summary and future outlook
Considerable advances have been achieved in the design and fabrication of 3DGA-based photocatalysts in the past few decades. In this review, we have summarized the recent developments in the synthesis of 3DGAs, and elaborated on the applications of 3DGA-based photocatalysts in pollutant elimination, water splitting, CO2 reduction, organic synthesis and atmospheric ammonia synthesis. The 3DGA architectures not only possess the inherent properties of GR (good adsorption capacity and electrical conductivity), but also exhibit other unique characters (improved recyclability and hierarchically porous structures). These properties endow 3DGAs with multifarious roles in photoredox catalysis, including as supports to improve recyclability and adsorption capacity, templates to inhibit the aggregation of semiconductors, photoelectron mediators, and in direct utilization as photocatalysts.
To date, although considerable progress has been achieved, the ability of 3DGA has not been exploited fully and research on 3DGA-based photocatalysts is still at an early stage. There are still many challenges toward the preparation of highly efficient 3DGA-based photocatalysts. To be specific, firstly, most of the GR in 3DGAs is derived from the reduction of GO. However, the electrical conductivity and charge carrier mobility of RGO are remarkably decreased due to the considerable disruption of the 2D π-conjugation in the domain of RGO sheets, which results in the fact that the net improvement efficiency of 3DGA-based photoactivity is often restricted. Therefore, rational utilization of GR with superior electrical conductivity to advance the 3DGA-based photocatalyst is a promising direction that still needs ongoing intense efforts. For instance, chemical modification of GR by doping heteroatoms, such as nitrogen, boron and sulphur atoms, is an effective way to improve the electrical conductivity of GR.
Secondly, as for the 3DGA-based photocatalyst, 3DGAs mainly act as cocatalysts to accept and shuttle electrons photogenerated from the active constituent (e.g., semiconductors and organic dyes). However, high GR content is normally required to form a cross-linked 3DGAs framework, which results in the fact that the content of the photoactive components is often restricted. Moreover, the high content of GR is not favorable for the light absorption of active components because of the “shielding effect” of the black GR. Therefore, new methods that can construct 3DGA-based photocatalysts with reduced GR content are urgently needed.
Thirdly, the pores in 3DGA architectures are usually in the range of hundreds of nanometers to several micrometers (Table 1). However, the macropores decrease the mechanical properties of the resulting materials. Thus, increasing research attention should be paid to construct 3DGAs with pore sizes on the nanometer scale. Furthermore, as for the drying techniques, freeze drying and supercritical drying, which could leave the dry sample with minimal distortion of the gelled volume and structure, are widely applied. However, it is well known that these two drying techniques require sophisticated devices. Therefore, the ambient pressure drying technique is strongly desired for the large-scale and cost-effective production of 3DGAs.
Finally, there are still many issues waiting to be settled for further development. For instance, conclusive evidence and convincing explanation are still absent for the hot electron mechanism of 3DGAs and the reason why the calcination treatment can improve hot electron effect still needs further exploration. Besides, the mechanisms of forming 3D GR frameworks in solutions and at interfaces remain controversial. Therefore, deeper systematic studies on these mechanisms from both theoretical and experimental aspects are highly desired. Given the short history of 3DGA-based photocatalysis, the progress has been impressive. We believe that with constant efforts, substantial breakthroughs for the practical applications of 3DGA-based composite photocatalysts would be expected in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1463204 and 21173045), the Award Program for Minjiang Scholar Professorship, the Natural Science Foundation (NSF) of Fujian Province for Distinguished Young Investigator Rolling Grant (2017J07002), the Independent Research Project of State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment (No. 2014A05), the 1st Program of Fujian Province for Top Creative Young Talents, and the Program for Returned High-Level Overseas Chinese Scholars of Fujian province is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240–8254 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, J. Dan, S. J. Pennycook, X. Lu, H. Zhu, Q.-H. Xu, H. J. Fan and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 885–894 RSC .
G. Xie, K. Zhang, B. Guo, Q. Liu, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3820–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim, W. Yuan, K. R. Shull and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8180–8186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11350–11366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Small, 2016, 12, 6640–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, N. Chen, J. Zhang and L. Qu, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 832–850 RSC .
X. Bai, L. Wang and Y. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2769–2778 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, J. Gao, X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, J. Miao and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1559–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, K. Kretschmer and G. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13278–13292 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426–7435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9777–9789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Q. Lu, N. Zhang, C. Han, F. Li, Z. Chen and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 27091–27103 CAS .
S. Liu, B. Weng, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 861–866 RSC .
M.-Q. Yang, C. Han and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27234–27246 CAS .
M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21724–21734 CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Marszewski, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 261–278 RSC .
C. Han, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 351–372 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wan, Y. Lin, A. Prakash and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18687–18705 CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5299–5308 CAS .
Y. Fan, W. Ma, D. Han, S. Gan, X. Dong and L. Niu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3767–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
Y. Shen, Q. Fang and B. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 67–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rechberger and M. Niederberger, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 1115–1121 RSC .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, L. Ren, L. Gong, X. Qi, Y. Liu, L. Yang, X. Wei and J. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 741–748 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, Y. Zhu, G. Zhu, Z. Zhang, X. Chen and W. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5661–5679 CAS .
B. Weng and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27948–27958 CAS .
Y. Li, W. Cui, L. Liu, R. Zong, W. Yao, Y. Liang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 412–423 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mu, Y. Zhang, W. Cui, Y. Liang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 212, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, K. Qian, J. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Li, C. Yu and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4419–4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang and S. Gu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 221, 41–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7295–7325 RSC .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
M. A. Worsley, T. Y. Olson, J. R. I. Lee, T. M. Willey, M. H. Nielsen, S. K. Roberts, P. J. Pauzauskie, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 921–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shi, Y. Cha, Y. Song, J.-I. Lee, C. Zhu, X. Li, M.-K. Song, D. Du and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15414–15447 RSC .
J. Luo, L. J. Cote, V. C. Tung, A. T. L. Tan, P. E. Goins, J. Wu and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17667–17669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 CAS .
S.-Y. Qin, X.-J. Liu, R.-X. Zhuo and X.-Z. Zhang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 2044–2051 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. D. Whitby, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9733–9754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Li, H. Meng, S. Xie, B. Zhang, L. Li, H. Ma, J. Zhang and M. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2934–2941 CAS .
C.-H. Zhu, Y. Lu, J. Peng, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4017–4022 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, Y. Sun, J. Zhou, R. Xu and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 425–432 CAS .
S. Ye, J. Feng and P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3495–3502 CAS .
Q.-Y. Cheng, D. Zhou, Y. Gao, Q. Chen, Z. Zhang and B.-H. Han, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3005–3010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358–7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4962–4964 RSC .
C. Chen, J. Li, R. Li, G. Xiao and D. Yan, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2778–2783 RSC .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5545–5551 CAS .
V. C. Tung, J.-H. Huang, J. Kim, A. J. Smith, C.-W. Chu and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7810–7818 CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wan, L. Li, Z. Zhao, H. Hu, X. Hao, D. A. Winkler, L. Xi, T. C. Hughes and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4915–4921 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Boukhvalov and M. I. Katsnelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10697–10701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
V. C. Tung, J.-H. Huang, I. Tevis, F. Kim, J. Kim, C.-W. Chu, S. I. Stupp and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lv, C. Zhang, Z. Li and Q.-H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 658–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Srinivasan, W. H. Shin, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 43–48 CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11193–11198 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, X. Fu, S. Liu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23501–23511 CAS .
Z. Chen, S. Liu, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4309–4319 CAS .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, L. Liu, L. Zhang, Q. Shao, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3681–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, X.-L. Sui, J.-L. Li, J.-J. Zhang, L.-M. Zhang and Z.-B. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2016, 86, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 11533–11537 CrossRef .
I. K. Moon, S. Yoon, K.-Y. Chun and J. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6976–6984 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Estevez, A. Kelarakis, Q. Gong, E. H. Da'as and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6122–6125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kuang, L. Liu, Y. Gao, D. Zhou, Z. Chen, B. Han and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12171–12177 RSC .
L. Qiu, J. Z. Liu, S. L. Y. Chang, Y. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Chen, L. Huang, C. Li, J.-D. Hong and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4789–4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Menzel, S. Barg, M. Miranda, D. B. Anthony, S. M. Bawaked, M. Mokhtar, S. A. Al-Thabaiti, S. N. Basahel, E. Saiz and M. S. P. Shaffer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, B. Sun, D. Su, D. Zhao and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7973–7979 CAS .
X. Huang, B. Sun, D. Su, D. Zhao and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7973–7979 CAS .
F. Meng, X. Zhang, B. Xu, S. Yue, H. Guo and Y. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18537–18539 RSC .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Q. Lu, Q. Quan, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 927–935 CrossRef .
J. Yang, D. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Cui, L. Liu, R. Zong, W. Yao, Y. Liang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 412–423 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, B. Ma, Y. Yang, E. Huang, Z. Ge, T. Zhang, S. Zhang, L. Li, N. Guan, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1662–1672 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. Cai, M. Long, B. Zhou, Y. Wu, D. Wu and Y. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, C. Hao, G. Jin, H.-Y. Zhu and X.-Y. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1973–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, Y. Guo, S. Wang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2227–2233 CAS .
B. S. Girgis, A. M. Soliman and N. A. Fathy, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 142, 518–525 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, J. Cai and Z. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 1428–1433 CrossRef .
F. Chen, W. An, L. Liu, Y. Liang and W. Cui, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 65–80 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, C.-t. Jia, Y.-c. Xue, L. Li, A.-q. Wang, G. Xu, N. Liu and M.-h. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, W. An, Y. Li, Y. Liang and W. Cui, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 123–132 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Shi, L. Feng, C. Li and L. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 396, 1775–1782 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Yang, J. Sun, P. He, X. Xu and G. Ding, Carbon, 2014, 78, 38–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, S. Chowdhury and R. Balasubramanian, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 751–763 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Zhai, M. Wang, H. Ji, L. He, C. Ye, C. Wang, S. Fang and H. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 659, 101–111 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zhang, Y.-H. Wu, J.-Y. Mei, G.-P. Zheng, T.-T. Yan, X.-C. Zheng, P. Liu and X.-X. Guan, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 1012–1019 CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Ma, K. Yang, S. Feng, W. Tan, Y. Tao, H. Mao and Y. Kong, Synth. Met., 2017, 231, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui, S. Li, Y. Qiu, H. Hu, X. Li, C. Li, J. Gao and W. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 666–672 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong, D. Yang, J. Shi, Y. Nan, Y. Sun and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25693–25701 CAS .
J. Park, T. Jin, C. Liu, G. Li and M. Yan, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 351–356 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Catal., 2017, 346, 21–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Khin, A. S. Nair, V. J. Babu, R. Murugan and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8075–8109 CAS .
Z.-R. Tang, F. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7880–7886 CAS .
K. C. Kemp, H. Seema, M. Saleh, N. H. Le, K. Mahesh, V. Chandra and K. S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3149–3171 RSC .
W. Wan, S. Yu, F. Dong, Q. Zhang and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7823–7829 CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 CAS .
R. Zhang, W. Wan, D. Li, F. Dong and Y. Zhou, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 313–320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13169–13177 RSC .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 342, 154–167 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, N. Zhang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 453, 181–187 CrossRef CAS .
S. Higashimoto, N. Suetsugu, M. Azuma, H. Ohue and Y. Sakata, J. Catal., 2010, 274, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Enache, J. K. Edwards, P. Landon, B. Solsona-Espriu, A. F. Carley, A. A. Herzing, M. Watanabe, C. J. Kiely, D. W. Knight and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2006, 311, 362–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sheldon, I. W. C. E. Arends, G.-J. ten Brink and A. Dijksman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 774–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999–2011 RSC .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari and R. Amadelli, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3811–3836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sahiner, H. Ozay, O. Ozay and N. Aktas, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 101, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Galloway, A. R. Townsend, J. W. Erisman, M. Bekunda, Z. Cai, J. R. Freney, L. A. Martinelli, S. P. Seitzinger and M. A. Sutton, Science, 2008, 320, 889–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kandemir, M. E. Schuster, A. Senyshyn, M. Behrens and R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12723–12726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Jia and E. A. Quadrelli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 547–564 RSC .
D. Zhu, L. Zhang, R. E. Ruther and R. J. Hamers, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, Y. Yang, T. Zhang, Z. Ge, H. Chang, P. Xiao, Y. Xie, L. Hua, Q. Li, H. Li, B. Ma, N. Guan, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10507–10515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, T. Zhang, Z. Ge, Y. Lu, H. Chang, P. Xiao, R. Zhao, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2017, 124, 72–78 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Kang-Qiang Lu	Kang-Qiang Lu is now pursuing his Ph.D. degree at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests focus on the synthesis of carbon-based materials, especially graphene-based composite nanomaterials for applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Zi-Rong Tang	Zi-Rong Tang is an associate professor now working at College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. Her current research interests primarily focus on the design and fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductor-based nanostructured composites and their applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis and thermocatalysis.
Yi-Jun Xu	Yi-Jun Xu is a full professor now working at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of semiconductor-based and metal-based composite materials in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Proposed mechanism of the formation of 3D GO hydrogels via cross-linking self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of preparing porous GR hybrid architectures by a hydrothermal co-assembly process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) The proposed self-assembly mechanism for GR hydrogel formation during the chemical reduction of GO in an aqueous suspension. (c) The shape controlled synthesis of hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the nanoporous 3D GR with silica spheres as templates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Synthesis of 3D GR monoliths using Ni foam as a sacrificial template. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2011 Nature. (c) Schematic showing the formation mechanism of the cork-like monolith by freeze casting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2012 Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the emulsion soft-template synthesis procedures for preparing porous 3D GR monoliths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Multifarious roles of 3DGAs in photoredox catalysis.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the fabrication strategies of 3DGA-based photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Cycling photodegradation of MO under simulated solar light irradiation (with an AM 1.5 air mass filter). Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of the original MB solution and the adsorptive MB solutions in the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles, GH, and TGH. Inset is the photograph of the original MB solution and adsorptive MB solutions in the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles, GH, and TGH. (c) Dye adsorption isotherms of MB on TGH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. SEM images of (d) AgBr/GAs and (e) AgBr without GAs. (f) Photocatalytic oxidative curves of MO by using AgBr/GAs and AgBr under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and the absorptive curve of AgBr/GAs in the dark. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

TiO2–RGO aerogel	Macropores	148 m2 g−1	Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly	
101

AgBr–RGO aerogel	Macropores and mesopores	105 m2 g−1	Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly	
29

TiO2–RGO aerogel	Macropores	323 m2 g−1	Chemical reduction-induced assembly	
97

W18O49–RGO aerogel	Macropores, mesopores and micropores	228 m2 g−1	Freeze-drying method	
109

Ag3PO4–RGO aerogel	Mesopores	102 m2 g−1	Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly	
114

g-C3N4–RGO aerogel	Macropores	312 m2 g−1	Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly	
115

TiO2–GR aerogel	Macropores	—	
Hard template method
	
116

CdS–RGO aerogel	Macropores	150 m2 g−1	Cross-linking self-assembly	
37

Eosin Y–RGO aerogel	Macropores	115 m2 g−1	Hydrothermal reduction-induced assembly	
117


BiOBr/RGO aerogel	RhB (20)	Xenon lamp (300)	≥420 nm	100% (240)	
103

ZnO–3D RGO (1.5)	MB (15)	Xenon lamp (300)	Full-spectrum	100% (60)	
104

TiO2–RGO hydrogel	Cr(VI) (10)	Mercury lamp (250)	<420 nm	100% (30)	
98

g-C3N4/GO aerogel	MO (20)	Xenon lamp (300)	≥420 nm	90% (40)	
106

Polyaniline/TiO2–RGO hydrogel (20)	Bisphenol A (40)	Mercury lamp (500)	<420 nm	80 (40)	
107

BiOBr/RGO aerogel (100)	MO (10)	Xenon lamp (300)	≥365 nm	80 (60)	
108

W18O49–RGO aerogel (25)	MO (50)	Xenon lamp (500)	≥420 nm	100 (25)	
109

N-Doped graphene hydrogel (6)	Acridine orange (20)	Xenon lamp (11)	≥420 nm	70 (300)	
110

Cu2O@3D RGO@nano-chitosan (20)	RhB (5)	Xenon lamp (500)	Full-spectrum	100 (150)	
111

TiO2–RGO aerogel (5)	RhB (20)	Xenon lamp (300)	<420 nm	100 (180)	
112

S-Doped TiO2–RGO aerogel (50)	MO (6)	Xenon lamp (300)	≥420 nm	98 (360)	
113

Bi2WO6–RGO aerogel (25)	MB (40)	Xenon lamp (500)	≥420 nm	50 (720)	
38


 	Fig. 8  (a) Ultra-light C3N4/GOA resting on a leaf. (b) The macroscopic C3N4–GOA photocatalyst fabricated into the letters “SWPU”. (c) Visible light photocatalytic activity of the integrated aerogel photocatalysts with different amounts of C3N4 for the removal of NO in air. (d) Band structure diagram of powder C3N4 and C3N4/GOA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water splitting over a series of 3D GR samples synthesized at various annealing temperatures and reference samples. (b) Mechanism of photocatalytic hydrogen production catalyzed by 3D GR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs in oxygen evolution from water splitting in AgNO3 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. (b) Photocatalytic oxygen evolution under visible light irradiation from an AgNO3 solution over pristine Ag3PO4, Ag3PO4/2D RGO and 3D Ag3PO4/GAs. (c) SEM image of 3D Ag3PO4/GAs. (d) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of Ag3PO4 and 3D Ag3PO4/GAs electrodes under visible light irradiation at 0.5 V bias potential vs. Ag/AgCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CO evolution on the pure g-C3N4 and CNGAs with different mass ratios of g-C3N4 under visible light illumination. (b) PL spectra of pure g-C3N4 and CNGA samples. (c) Schematic diagram illustrating the photoreduction processes over CNGAs under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photocatalytic performance of CdS, CdS–RGO, and CdS–MRGO composites for photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol under visible light (λ > 420 nm) for 2 h. (b) Schematic illustrating the photogenerated electron transport pathways in CdS–RGO and CdS–MRGO composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Visible-light-driven (λ > 420 nm) photocatalytic hydrogenation of 4-nitroaniline (4-NA) to 4-phenylenediamine (4-PDA) over graphene–EY aerogels, graphene–EY powder, and semiconductor P25–EY powder. (d) Schematic illustration of the regeneration of the graphene–EY aerogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Catalytic performance of Fe@3DG at atmospheric pressure. (b) Activation mechanism over Fe@3DG under light illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Diagram of ammonia synthesis on FeeAl@3DG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
