Understanding of perovskite crystal growth and film formation in scalable deposition processes  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00711C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00711C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1653-1687Understanding of perovskite crystal growth and film formation in scalable deposition processes

        
          
            Chang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yi-Bing 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ziyi 
            Ge
          
          
        
      *a
aNingbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Ningbo 315201, China. E-mail: geziyi@nimte.ac.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430070, P. R. China
Received 
      11th December 2019
    First published on 5th March 2020AbstractHybrid organic–inorganic perovskite photovoltaics (PSCs) have attracted significant attention during the past decade. Despite the stellar rise of laboratory-scale PSC devices, which have reached a certified efficiency over 25% to date, there is still a large efficiency gap when transiting from small-area devices to large-area solar modules. Efficiency losses would inevitably arise from the great challenges of homogeneous coating of large-area high quality perovskite films. To address this problem, we provide an in-depth understanding of the perovskite nucleation and crystal growth kinetics, including the LaMer and Ostwald ripening models, which advises us that fast nucleation and slow crystallization are essential factors in forming high-quality perovskite films. Based on these cognitions, a variety of thin film engineering approaches will be introduced, including the anti-solvent, gas-assisted and solvent annealing treatments, Lewis acid–base adduct incorporation, etc., which are able to regulate the nucleation and crystallization steps. Upscaling the photovoltaic devices is the following step. We summarize the currently developed scalable deposition technologies, including spray coating, slot-die coating, doctor blading, inkjet printing and vapour-assisted deposition. These are more appealing approaches for scalable fabrication of perovskite films than the spin coating method, in terms of lower material/solution waste, more homogeneous thin film coating over a large area, and better morphological control of the film. The working principles of these techniques will be provided, which direct us that the physical properties of the precursor solutions and surface characteristics/temperature of the substrate are both dominating factors influencing the film morphology. Optimization of the perovskite crystallization and film formation process will be subsequently summarized from these aspects. Additionally, we also highlight the significance of perovskite stability, as it is the last puzzle to realize the practical applications of PSCs. Recent efforts towards improving the stability of PSC devices to environmental factors are discussed in this part. In general, this review, comprising the mechanistic analysis of perovskite film formation, thin film engineering, scalable deposition technologies and device stability, provides a comprehensive overview of the current challenges and opportunities in the field of PSCs, aiming to promote the future development of cost-effective up-scale fabrication of highly efficient and ultra-stable PSCs for practical applications.
Chang Liu
Chang Liu received her MS and PhD degrees from University of Akron in 2014 and 2017, respectively. During 2017–2019, she conducted her postdoctoral research working with Prof. Yi-Bing Cheng and Prof. Udo Bach in Monash University. She is currently an associate professor in Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests focus on organic/perovskite solar cells.
Yi-Bing Cheng
Yi-Bing Cheng is Professor of Wuhan University of Technology, China and Emeritus Professor of Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Australia. He is an elected Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering. He was an academic staff at Monash University between October 1991 and March 2018 and is currently an Associate Investigator of the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics. He was named as a Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics in 2018. He specialises in inorganic materials and processing and characterisation of thin film solar cells. His current research is on perovskite solar cells.
Ziyi Ge
Ziyi Ge received his PhD from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2004. He conducted his postdoctoral research on organic electronics in Tokyo Institute of Technology, Kanagawa University, Japan and the University of New South Wales, Australia during 2005–2009. Currently, he is the leader of Organic Electronic Material and Device Group at Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests focus on organic/perovskite solar cells and OLEDs.
1. Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials have been revolutionizing the next-generation photovoltaics in recent decades. Perovskites have the general chemical formula of AMX3, where A is a monovalent cation (methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+) or caesium (Cs+)), M is a divalent metallic cation (Pb2+, Sn2+) and X is a halide (I−, Br−, Cl−).1,2 Due to their exceptional optical and electronic characteristics, including a large absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, and long carrier diffusion length in thin films, and their cost-effective and facile solution manufacturing, perovskites have received enormous attention in the field of photovoltaics.3–6 Perovskite materials utilized as light sensitizers in solar cells were first reported by Miyasaka and co-workers in 2009, who presented a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8% of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) back then.7 Soon, with tremendous efforts devoted to the advancement in chemical compositional engineering, thin film morphological modulation, interface/device modification, etc.,8–12 the PCE of PSCs rapidly surged to a certified value of 25.2% within just a decade.13 The outstanding PCEs have reached a performance level that rivals that of the commercial multicrystalline silicon solar cells, and the maturely developed indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) solar cells, showing great potential for industrialization and practical application of PSCs.14,15
However, the most efficient PSCs are all made in small areas (∼0.1 cm2), which conflicts the requirements for PSC commercialization: they need to be scalable. In this regard, efforts have been made to scaling up the PSC devices in the past few years. Worldwide PV companies and institutes have set out to large-area manufacturing of PSC modules. In 2016, Solaronix (Switzerland) fabricated fully printed 500 cm2 solar cell modules with a PCE of 12%.16 In 2017, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL) raised the novel concept of 2D/3D hybrid PSCs, achieving a PCE over 11% from fully printed 100 cm2 solar panels, with over one year stability.17 Greatcell Solar (former Dyesol, Australia) reported 12% PCE from a 100 cm2 module in 2018.18 Microquanta Semiconductor (China) reported a PCE of 17.9% for a rigid mini-module with an active area of 17.3 cm2, which set the world record efficiency of the perovskite solar module.19
Despite the impressive progress in large-area fabrication techniques, the PCE of the solar cell module still lags behind that of the small area devices. Efficiency losses would inevitably arise from the challenges of uniformly coating high quality and large area active layers, as well as scaling up the charge selective layers and electrodes while maintaining a low series resistance and a high shunt resistance in the device. From this point of view, developing deposition technologies that allow fine and homogeneous crystal formation is critical. In this review, we will firstly analyse the crystal formation kinetics and uncover the factors that dominate the resultant film morphology. Based on these fundamentals, a variety of methods refining perovskite crystallization and film formation will be summed up correspondingly. In addition, we’ll include the currently developed scalable deposition technologies, along with the discussion on the existing challenges and opportunities to push forward the commercialization of PSCs.
2. Morphological control of perovskite films
Homogeneously forming high quality perovskite films in large scale is of critical importance to bridge the efficiency gap between small-area devices and large-area solar modules. Fundamental understanding of the nucleation and crystal growth of perovskites is primary in this regard, which enables us to exquisitely modulate perovskite film morphology.
2.1. Nucleation and crystal growth
Perovskite formation is the combination of nucleation and crystal growth processes. Nucleation of particles is triggered by supersaturation of the precursor solution. In the classical theory of nucleation, a nucleus is regarded as a sphere of a condensed phase, and its free energy is defined by thermodynamic terms. The free energy of a nucleus is defined as20–22 (1)where r is the radius of the nucleus, γ is the surface free energy per unit area, and ΔGV is the free energy per unit volume of a crystal, which is defined by the difference between free energy of the monomer in crystal and in solution. ΔGV is given by (2)where Vm is the molar volume of the monomer in crystal. Taking the surface free energy (4πr2γ, positive) and bulk free energy (, negative) into consideration, ΔG(r) is plotted. Fig. 1a shows the critical radius rc. When the nuclei are smaller than rc, they cannot grow further, but re-dissolve into solution as monomers to decrease the free energy. Thus the critical radius is the minimum size of nuclei that can resist dissolution and grow further. The nucleation rate can be described by the equation (3)where N is the number of nuclei, A is the pre-exponential factor, kB is the Boltzmann constant, NA is Avogadro's number, S is the level of supersaturation and T is the temperature. From eqn (3), the nucleation rate is strongly dependent on the level of supersaturation, temperature and surface free energy. Theoretically, the nucleation rate can be improved by a more supersaturated solution, higher temperature or lower surface free energy. In a later context, a variety of currently developed methods refining the perovskite film quality will be systematically analysed corresponding to these fundamentals.
 Fig. 1  (a) Diagram of classical nucleation theory. ΔG is the free energy change, and is a function of nuclear radius (r) for homogeneous nucleation. (b) Schematic illustration of the diffusion layer near the surface of a nanocrystal and monomer concentration as a function of distance (x). (c) LaMer diagram depicts the nucleation and growth dynamics. 
The growth of particles in solution involves two processes: (1) transport of the monomers from the bulk solution onto the crystal surface, (2) reaction of the monomers on the surface. In the first step, the monomer diffusion is expressed by Fick's first law23 (4)where J is the total flux of monomers, r is the particle radius, D is the diffusion coefficient, and [M] is the monomer concentration at a distance from the surface (x). The concentration gradient around the surface of a spherical particle is shown in Fig. 1b. With respect to the diffusion-controlled growth, due to the steady state of the solute diffusion, the total flux of monomers (J) at the particle surface can be further derived as J = 4πDr([M]b − [M]s).(5)
In terms of surface reaction, the total flux of the monomer equals the monomer consumption rate by the surface reaction of the particle, because of the mass balance. The monomer consumption rate by the growth of the particle can be written as22 J = 4πr2k([M]s − [M]r),(6)where k is the surface reaction rate, [M]s is the concentration of the solute at the particle/solution interface and [M]r is the solubility of the particle with a radius r. Due to the Gibbs–Thomson effect, larger particles have lower solubility, and grow faster than smaller ones. According to eqn (5) and (6), the overall particle growth is determined by either diffusion process or surface reaction. On account of the steady state of solute diffusion, the diffusion-controlled growth accelerates the formation of uniform size particles, while the surface reaction is so slow that the monomer concentration at the particle surface reaches a value similar to that of the bulk solution (shown in Fig. 1b).
The overall nucleation and crystal growth processes of perovskites are generally depicted by the LaMer graph, which describes the concentration of the perovskite precursor changing as a function of time at a constant and isothermal evaporation rate of solvent. As shown in Fig. 1c, the LaMer diagram consists of three stages. In the first stage, the monomers initially accumulate in the solution. With a further increase in the monomer concentration until reaching a critical value, a supersaturation environment is created, as described by the second stage. In the third stage upon the formation of nuclei, crystal growth subsequently happens, accompanied by further nucleation in the meantime. Nucleation is terminated when the concentration of monomers is lower than the critical supersaturation value. Eventually the crystal growth will be finalised when the concentration of monomers decreases below the solubility value ([M]sol).
Ostwald ripening is another model to explain the growth mechanism of nanoparticles, which depicts the dissolution of small molecules and their re-deposition onto the surface of larger ones.24–26 Competitive growth takes place among precipitates when particles with various sizes are dispersed in a matrix. Based on the thermodynamic principle, i.e. the Gibbs–Thompson theory, particles with a smaller radius tend to dissolve more easily due to their higher chemical potential. A concentration gradient will then be formed between particles with various sizes, which drives the solute atoms flowing through the matrices. During this process, the average radius of the particles increases. The Ostwald ripening mechanism has been employed to elucidate the perovskite grain growth through coalescence, which will be discussed in detail in a later context.
In the case of perovskite film fabrication, the conventional spin coating procedure typically generates a limited degree of supersaturation due to the slow evaporation of the perovskite host solvent (dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), dimethylacetamide (DMAc), etc.), which results in a low density of heterogeneous nuclei. On the other hand, the crystal growth rate is relatively fast as a function of the solution supersaturation, giving rise to rapid solute precipitation at regions with high surface energy. The imbalance between nucleation and growth rate accelerates the growth of large dendritic perovskite structures on the limited number of nuclei, which are detrimental to PSC performance. In order to form dense perovskite crystals with good coverage, reaching a high nucleation rate before the onset of crystal growth is of critical importance. The most effective approach to optimize the nucleation-growth process is through nucleation regulation, including solution chemistry engineering, interfacial engineering, processing treatments (anti-solvent, gas-assisted, solvent annealing), etc. The basic idea of these treatments is to simultaneously suppress crystal growth and facilitate nucleation. In the following part, these methods will be summarized in terms of fast nucleation and slow crystal growth.
2.2. Morphological optimization
According to the fundamental analysis of perovskite crystallization in the previous part, nucleation and crystal growth govern the morphology of the solution-processed perovskite film. Generally, a rapid nucleation followed by a slow crystal growth is essential in the formation of high quality perovskite films with more surface coverage and less defects. In recent years, a variety of methods have been developed to refine the perovskite film from the above aspects, which will be introduced in this section.

2.2.1. Fast nucleation. 
2.2.1.1. Anti-solvent. 
Anti-solvent treatment requires a non-polar solvent that is miscible with the host solvent but insoluble with perovskite precursors. The introduction of an anti-solvent during the spin coating process induces instant supersaturation of the precursor solution, which leads to fast nucleation of the perovskite according to the analysis of eqn (3) described above. It helps to trigger homogeneous nucleation at the surface of the formed layer (solid/anti-solvent/air interfaces) to encourage the formation of smooth perovskite films with full surface coverage. Cheng et al. initially implemented the anti-solvent method by dropping chlorobenzene (CB) onto perovskite solution during the spin coating procedure.27 It was explained that CB immediately removed excess DMF solvent and reduced the solubility of the perovskite in the precursor wet film, rapidly creating supersaturation of the solute. This promoted larger number of nuclei formation, resulting in a uniform perovskite film with good surface coverage and reproducibility. Based on this concept, other anti-solvent alternatives (toluene (Tol), chloroform (CF), etc.) were reported, in coordination with different perovskite compositions and host solvent combinations.28–31 In order to have a more judicious selection protocol of anti-solvents, a series of solvents with different dielectric constant and other physicochemical properties were systematically compared. Solvents including CB, Tol, trifluorotoluene (TFT), p-xylene (Xyl), diethyl ether (DE) and dichloromethane (DCM) were investigated.28 It was unveiled that anti-solvents with a higher boiling point, better miscibility with the host solvent and a high dielectric constant (>5, TFT, Tol and CB) tended to form superior perovskite film morphology in terms of more balanced nucleation, film smoothness and surface coverage. In addition, towards an environmental-friendly manufacturing, green anti-solvents such as n-hexane, DE, anisole, ethyl acetate (EA), methyl acetate (MA), etc.,32–35 have further been proposed to replace their toxic counterparts. For instance, applying the green solvent EA in both perovskite anti-solvent engineering and spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (HTL) deposition process afforded high quality perovskite films and HTL films, which gave a PCE up to 19.4% for lab-scaled small cells and 14.2% for 5 × 5 cm2 module cells.33
The anti-solvent strategy was later demonstrated to be a feasible technique for the fabrication of room-temperature, solution-processed perovskite films with large-area uniformity. By immediately immersing the as-cast perovskite film in a DE bath under room-temperature, a rapid perovskite crystallization was induced by the extraction of the precursor solvent, leading to a uniform and ultra-smooth perovskite film. The improved perovskite film morphology resulted in planar-structured PSCs with PCE up to 15.2%.35 Moreover, this technique enabled a good control over the perovskite film thickness from 20 to 700 nm, realizing the fabrication of semi-transparent PSCs (film thickness of ∼80 nm) with a promising PCE over 10%. The work demonstrated the anti-solvent treatment as a versatile method for the development of room-temperature processed roll-to-roll scalable deposition of perovskite thin films for future multi-functional PSCs.
2.2.1.2. Other representative methods of instantly inducing supersaturation. 
In addition to solvent annealing treatment, other analogical methods to instantly create supersaturation of the perovskite solute include gas-assisted deposition and vacuum flash-assisted solution process (VASP). Huang et al. introduced flowing Ar gas over a semi-wet film during spin coating to speed up solvent evaporation.36 The promptly formed supersaturation encouraged rapid formation of more nuclei, which transformed the perovskite crystal from a dendritic structure with poor surface coverage to densely packed grains. PSCs prepared by this gas-assisted deposition showed significantly improved photovoltaic efficiency outperforming those from the conventional spin coating process, and the reproducibility was also dramatically improved. The VASP37 was as well a method that enabled the sudden and well-controlled removal of solvent by placing a semi-wet perovskite film in a vacuum chamber, which thereby facilitated rapid supersaturation of the perovskite solute. The VASP yielded more homogeneous films with full surface coverage and without pinholes. The perovskite grains exhibited large sizes between 400 and 1000 nm, which greatly exceeded the grain size of films prepared by the conventional deposition method.
For perovskite film preparation, thermal annealing is generally required during the perovskite formation process to promote perovskite precursor reaction, perovskite crystallization and grain growth. The annealing treatment is usually carried out under a moderate temperature of ∼100 °C for 1 hour to avoid decomposition of the perovskite.3–7 In contrast to this general protocol, Kim et al. reported that a brief high temperature annealing was more favourable for perovskite film formation. Considering the fact that high temperature could induce an instant and fast removal of solvent to create a supersaturation environment of the perovskite precursor solute, it would accelerate the perovskite nucleation and assist a uniform perovskite film deposition. Note that the annealing process should be terminated before the decomposition of the perovskite. Therefore, annealing the as-cast perovskite film under a high temperature of 400 °C for only 4 seconds drastically increased the grain size from ∼300 nm to over 1 μm and minimized the grain boundaries, as shown in Fig. 2a.38
 Fig. 2  (a) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films fabricated by different thermal annealing temperatures for different time periods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) The contact angle of water on varied HTLs (left column); cross-sectional (middle column) and top-view (right column) SEM images of the perovskite grown on PVA-, PEDOT:PSS, c-OTPD-, PTAA- and PCDTBT- covered ITO substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
2.2.1.3. Interfacial engineering. 
Nucleation occurs either in a heterogeneous or in a homogeneous manner. Based on the classical theory, homogeneous nucleation relates to the overall excess free energy. On the other hand, as heterogeneous nucleation occurs on foreign nuclei or surfaces, it imposes a consideration of extra surface or interface contact energy due to the wetting on foreign surfaces. In the case of perovskite crystal formation, heterogeneous nucleation is likely to dominate the growth mechanism, as nucleation generally occurs on foreign surfaces or via nuclei. The relationship between the free energy required for heterogeneous nucleation and that for homogeneous nucleation is given by the equation39,40 (7)where θ is the contact angle between the crystalline deposit and the foreign solid surface, i.e. the wetting angle on the solid/liquid interface. The coefficient  is less than unity, meaning the energy barrier for heterogeneous nucleation is lower than that for homogeneous nucleation. Better wetting (lower θ) promotes heterogeneous nucleation. Thus, wetting of the perovskite precursor solution (using polar solvents such as DMF and DMSO as host solvents), which is expected to be improved with increasing hydrophilicity of the bottom interlayer, would accelerate the nucleation of the perovskite. It would subsequently benefit the formation of high quality films with good coverage and uniformity.
In the case of mesoporous structures, the contact angle will be lower than that of their planar structure counterpart, due to the curvature of the mesoporous metal oxide, which results in a lower energy barrier for nucleation. Therefore, the perovskite film in a mesoporous structure generally exhibits more compact and uniformly distributed perovskite crystals with less pinholes and smaller crystal sizes.
In terms of planar structure, a bunch of interfacial engineering methods have been adopted to modulate the surface energy of the HTL or electron transporting layer (ETL), so as to control the growth kinetics of the perovskite. Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) modification of the TiO2 mesoporous or compact layer is one of the most pervasively utilized routes to facilitate charge transport through TiO2/perovskite interfaces.41–44 However, the poor wettability of perovskite precursor solution on the PC61BM layer generally causes pinholes on the perovskite film. To address this issue, Gong et al. introduced a newly designed water-soluble C60 derivative to modify the PC61BM layer. It was shown that interfacial engineering greatly improved the wettability of perovskite precursor solution, which assisted the formation of a more compact perovskite layer with the elimination of pinholes.45 Based on a similar stratagem, Yip et al. successfully increased the surface energy of HTLs by the introduction of polar functional groups, which helped in improving the wetting of perovskite precursors onto the bottom layer, and thus led to better films with full coverage and high crystallinity.46 Interfacial engineering on the conventional HTL PEDOT:PSS layer was also explored. The wettability of the perovskite onto the PEDOT:PSS layer are shown to be improved by graphene oxide (GO) and glucose insertion, resulting in the formation of compact and closer grains with less intergrain spaces and cracks.47
However, it is argued that dense nucleation on a wetting surface would limit the grain growth, i.e. crystal growth terminates once the grains impinge each other, thus confining the perovskite grain size. To this end, a hydrophobic bottom interlayer has been proposed as an alternative to prevent too dense nuclei from heterogeneous nucleation, which is expected to generate larger grains.48 But it should be noted that with reducing nuclei sites on the non-wetting underlayer, the perovskite domains would not be able to grow to fully impinge with each other, which easily leads to poor surface coverage. Huang et al. alleviated this problem by hot casting the precursor solution onto the non-wetting underlayer, which simultaneously ensured large perovskite grains and full surface coverage.48 The effects of hydrophobicity of the underlayer on perovskite film morphology were also investigated.48 The results in Fig. 2b show that perovskite crystal size significantly increased from ∼200 nm to over 1.5 μm with the decrease of the wettability of the precursor solution on the bottom interlayer. The grain size/thickness aspect ratio of the large grain perovskite reached as high as 7.9, leading to a remarkably reduced charge trap density by 100-fold and thus improved PCE to 18.3%.48 Apart from hot casting, vacuum deposition is as well a promising method to overcome the poor surface coverage of the perovskite crystals on a non-wetting substrate.49 Better yet, vacuum deposition is more compatible with scalable fabrication of the perovskite film, which will be elaborated in a later context.


2.2.2. Slow crystallization. 
2.2.2.1. Lewis acid–base adduct. 
Forming a Lewis acid–base adduct is a simple but effective stratagem to retard the crystallization of a perovskite, in which, the base is an electron-pair donor and the acid is an electron-pair acceptor.50–54 Monodentate or bidentate ligands with oxygen, sulphur and nitrogen can act as electron pair donors, which form an adduct with PbX2.
DMSO has been extensively employed as an O-donor Lewis-base in recent years.50,52,54–56 Due to the stronger Lewis basicity of DMSO compared to that of DMF, an intermediate phase of PbI2–DMSO–MAI will be formed during the competition reaction, prior to the conversion of perovskite precursors to perovskite crystalline structures. The MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase in DMSO contained perovskite solution was evidenced by Park et al. by infrared spectroscopy measurements.50 Accompanied with the anti-solvent treatment by DE (described in the previous part), the intermediate adduct formation successfully assisted the fabrication of a highly uniform perovskite layer. As shown in Fig. 3a,50 perovskite films prepared without the anti-solvent step showed rod-shaped crystals that were not fully covered on the substrate. The inferior morphology was ascribed to the different solubility of PbI2 and MAI in DMF solvent. With anti-solvent treatment, highly densified perovskite films could be formed by selectively washing DMF solvent with nonpolar DE solvent. But precursor solutions without DMSO still showed the existence of pinholes, suggesting that the evaporation rate of DMF cannot be well-controlled by washing with DE. In clear contrast, the addition of DMSO (forming the intermediate adduct) was able to highly regulate the film morphology by retarding the crystal growth, which thus resulted in high-quality pinhole-free perovskite films. Based on the inspiring results, Han et al. substituted DMF with DMSO as host solvent of the PbI2 precursor in the 2-step deposition process. They found that DMSO significantly delayed PbI2 crystallization due to the stronger interaction between PbI2 and DMSO,57 which encouraged PbI2 to crystallize to a more thermodynamically favourable state, and therefore formed a higher ordering and larger crystallinity of PbI2 grains. After reaction with MAI by sequential deposition, uniform perovskite films with narrow distribution of particle sizes were obtained. This solvent engineering strategy using DMSO was further extended to the FAPbI3 system via the intramolecular exchange process (IEP) and the sequential deposition method.58 The intramolecular exchange between DMSO and FAI was described as PbI2–DMSO + FAI → PbI2–FAI + DMSO↑ (removal). And because of the similar molecular size of DMSO and FAI, the intramolecular exchange didn’t induce volume expansion, which benefited the preparation of a uniform film morphology. This indirect reaction led to FAPbI3 films with a well-developed structure, and dense and larger perovskite grains, in comparison with the perovskite film formed from the direct reaction between PbI2 and FAI. Even though DMSO has been demonstrated to successfully improve FAPbI3 perovskite film formation in the sequential deposition method, Park et al. unveiled that DMSO failed to form a stable adduct with FAI by infrared spectroscopy measurements,51 which implied that the approach cannot be extended to the one-step deposition of FAPbI3. To seek for a more efficacious Lewis-base for the FAPbI3 perovskite in the one-step method, Yang et al. tentatively incorporated NMP, which formed a stronger coordinative bond with FAI in perovskite precursors.54 It was verified that FAI–PbI2–NMP intermediates can stably exist in the host solvent, spurring the homogeneous formation of reproducible FAPbI3 films by one-step fabrication, as shown in Fig. 3b.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process and top-view SEM images of the perovskite films from different deposition procedures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of FAPbI3 perovskite films using the adduct approach where X indicates Lewis bases; photos and SEM images of FAPbI3 perovskite films formed using DMSO and NMP, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) for thiourea and its adduct, and the corresponding photo of the FAI–PbI2–thiourea film (top); top-view SEM images of FAPbI3 films formed via FAI–PbI2–(DMSO1−xthioureax) adducts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The reaction coordinate diagram of perovskite formation via conventional pathway and pyridine-promoted pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to NMP, S-donors with stronger basicity than that of O-donors show great potential to be an effective Lewis-base in FA-based perovskite systems as well. Thiourea represents a typical example of S-donors. The strong interactions of thiourea with both FAI and PbI2 were evidenced by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Fig. 3c), which allowed the existence of stable FAI–PbI2–thiourea intermediates in the host solvent.51 In Fig. 3c, the plane-view SEM images of FAPbI3 perovskite films prepared from FAI–PbI2–(DMSO1−xthioureax) show significantly increased perovskite grains with full surface coverage when x = 0.2. The results confirmed S-donors as a more applicable Lewis-base than DMSO in FA-based perovskite systems.
N-Donors constitute another Lewis-base group which have been extensively studied recently.59 Choy et al. reported a new scheme of pyridine (Py)-promoted formation of high-quality perovskite films at room temperature.60 The perovskite formation involves two steps: (1) pyridine-induced formation of nanosctructured PbI2–(Py)2 intermediates according to the equation PbI2(s) + 2Py(g) ↔ PbI2(Py)2(s), and (2) perovskite formation facilitated by ligand exchange reaction according to the equation PbI2(Py)2(s) + CH3NH3(aq) → CH3NH3PbI3(s) + 2Py(aq), and both reactions occur at 25 °C. The theoretical calculations of activation energies are also provided in Fig. 3d, which illustrates that the PbI2(Py)2 adduct substantially lowered the activation energy when compared to that of the conventional pathway. By this judicious design, a PCE over 17% on a rigid substrate and a PCE beyond 14% on a flexible substrate were achieved, which showed great potential of realizing room-temperature processed scalable PSCs.
Similar to Lewis-base small molecules, Lewis-base polymers containing S, N and O atoms with lone pair electrons function in a way to not only modulate the perovskite nucleation and crystallization, but also passivate the non-radiative recombination traps at the grain boundaries by forming a Pb2+–Lewis-base adduct. More importantly, hydrophobic polymers on the perovskite grains could serve as a moisture protection barrier, which improves the long-term moisture stability of PSCs.61 The polymer-templated nucleation and growth (PTNG) concept was initially reported by Grätzel et al., where poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was introduced as a Lewis-base during the anti-solvent step.62 By lowering the nucleation free energy barrier, PMMA induced heterogeneous nucleation that was orders of magnitude faster than the homogeneous nucleation.63 On top of that, PMMA also retarded the perovskite crystal growth by forming an intermediate adduct with PbI2, which allowed the randomly formed nuclei to adjust the orientation to minimize the total Gibbs free energy and grow in a thermodynamically preferred orientation.64 The PMMA–PbI2 adduct was evidenced by FTIR spectra. The synergistic effects of PMMA on both nucleation and crystallization significantly improved the perovskite film, as illustrated by the SEM images shown in Fig. 4.62 The pre-perovskite intermediates before annealing changed from a mixture of randomly distributed nanoparticles into homogeneous nanorods; after annealing, the perovskite film treated with PTNG exhibited enlarged grain sizes, with grain boundaries forming perpendicular to the substrate, which facilitated the charge transport along a direction vertical to the substrate. Eventually, they achieved PSCs with a certified PCE over 21% and good moisture-stability over months. However, it was argued that insulating polymers on the grain boundaries severely obstruct charge transport across the perovskite grains, which limited the efficiency of PSCs. In this regard, π-conjugated polymers have been further proposed.65–67 Aside from functioning the same way to improve the perovskite nucleation and crystallization as insulating polymers did, conjugated Lewis-base polymers were demonstrated to allow better charge transport in the perovskite film through π-interactions. As a result, they could notably enhance the photocurrent in polymer-incorporated PSCs.65–67 However, it is still a debate over whether an insulating or conjugated polymer is better. Some reports stated that only a chemically inert polymer could warrant effective charge transport.68 Further studies are demanded in the area to clarify the criteria of selecting the Lewis-base polymers.
 Fig. 4  Top-view (a) and cross-sectional (c) SEM images of perovskite films deposited by the PTNG method with different concentrations (mg mL−1) of PMMA. (a) As-cast films before annealing, (b) and (c) perovskite films after annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
2.2.2.2. Other solvent additives. 
The nucleation and crystallization rate of perovskites can also be manipulated by the incorporation of solvent additives into precursor solutions. One of the effective means is to form chelation with Pb2+. 1,8-Diiodooctane (DIO), a solvent additive that has been extensively utilized in organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) composites to tune the phase separation,69,70 has also been incorporated in perovskite precursor solutions by Jen et al.71 They attested that DIO as a bidentate halogenated additive was capable of temporarily forming a chelate with Pb2+, which stimulated homogeneous nucleation and a well-controlled crystallization rate. In terms of forming chelate interactions with Pb2+, hydroiodic (HI) and hydrobromic (HBr) have been also represented as promising candidates. Snaith et al. found that the incorporation of HI into FAPbI3 perovskite precursor solution led to the formation of an extremely uniform and continuous film.72 They subsequently digged into the perovskite growth kinetics with the incorporation of HBr and HI in the precursor solution.73 As the precursor in pure DMF solvent was a colloidal dispersion rather than a pure solution, the formed perovskite film exhibited a poor morphology with rod-shaped colloids comprised of a soft coordination complex in the form of a lead polyhalide framework.74 The addition of hydrohalic acids was able to initiate the dissolution of the lead polyhalide colloids, which acted as nucleation sites in the as-cast thin films. With the dissolution of large colloids, a prolonged crystal growth period was observed due to fewer nucleation sites, which resulted in larger polycrystalline grain domains. As we’ve discussed before, heterogeneous nucleation dominates the growth mechanism, as nucleation occurred on foreign surfaces or via nuclei. And according to eqn (7) described previously, tuning θ through controlling the concentration of lead polyhalide colloids in the perovskite precursor solutions allowed us to modulate the amount of preferential heterogeneous nucleation sites. In the case of very few nucleation sites, the perovskite growing domains would not be able to fully impinge upon each other, which caused pinholes in the film. Thus, to guarantee larger perovskite grain size and less pinholes in the meantime, the concentration of lead polyhalide colloids should be well controlled within an appropriate range. Fig. 5 illustrates the impact of colloids on the crystal nucleation and growth kinetics, revealing that nucleation and crystal growth were affected by both the amount and size of the nuclei in the precursor solution. By dissolving the large colloids with hydrohalic acids, fewer heterogeneous nucleation sites led to the formation of larger crystal domains, whereas too little nucleation sites (long solution aging time) generated films without fully impinged grains. These observations were consistent with the previous theoretical analysis.
 Fig. 5  (a) Microscopy images using a 50× magnification of postnucleation thin films heated at 220 °C in air; prepared using precursor solutions aged with/without acid for different time periods. (b) Top-view SEM images of fully annealed perovskite films prepared with/without hydrohalic acids, where the solutions were aged for various time periods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
2.2.2.3. Solvent annealing. 
Solvent annealing (SA) treatment involves the introduction of solvents, which are soluble (or partial soluble) with the perovskite precursors, around the perovskite film during the thermal annealing process. Huang et al. pioneered the study in this area by introducing DMF solvent to the perovskite film in a closed environment during thermal annealing treatment.75 It was claimed that DMF vapour created a wet environment so that the precursor ions and molecules could diffuse a longer distance than that in the all solid-state thermal annealing procedure, thus promoting the grain growth and yielding a larger grain size, as shown in Fig. 6a. Subsequent studies were carried out to unravel the underlying mechanisms of how SA treatment affected the crystallization.76 Yang et al. proved that an intermediate of MA2Pb3I8(DMSO)2 was formed at the grain boundaries upon SA by DMSO, which reduced the activation energy of the grain boundaries (ΔEa). ΔEa under different treatments were calculated. From Fig. 6b, it is observed that ΔEa when annealed under DMSO vapour is 0.13 eV lower than that when annealed under N2, which eased the further growth of perovskite grains. Fig. 6b schematically illustrates the working mechanism of perovskite grain growth under different atmospheres. In both cases, MAPbI3 could be quickly formed upon heating. Under conventional thermal annealing, the grain growth rapidly went into the stagnant stage due to the higher ΔEa. On the other hand, under DMSO solvent (with a lower ΔEa), further thermal annealing allowed perovskite grains to grow into a columnar structure with larger grain sizes.
 Fig. 6  (a) Top-view SEM images of perovskite films prepared from thermal annealing and solvent annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (b) Proposed energy diagram of atom diffusion at the grain boundaries between MAPbI3 domains under different atmospheres (left); and schematic illustration of morphology evolution of MAPbI3 grains under different atmospheres (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films fabricated from thermal annealing and solvent annealing; (d) dynamic coarsening process of the perovskite grains based on the Ostwald ripening model: (1) initial stage, (2) early stage, (3) middle stage and (4) final stage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Aside from forming a solvate complex to tune the growth kinetics, Wei et al. pointed out that the solvent embedded in the perovskite precursor films during the SA process also played an important role in the coarsening of perovskite grains.77 This matter has, however, been overlooked due to the fast extravasation of the solvent under high temperature. To retard the escape of the solvent, they magnified the concealed intrinsic solvent annealing effects by adopting a sandwiched structure FTO/NiOx/perovskite/PC61BM in their work. The MAI–PbI2–DMF intermediate formed during SA treatment was evidenced by XRD patterns. By SA treatment, the grain size of the perovskite crystals increased from ∼200 nm to over 1 μm, accompanied by the grains evolving from an equiaxed structure to columnar grains (in Fig. 6c). The Ostwald ripening model was proposed to explain the grain coarsening effects. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 6d, the grains with various sizes were dissolved by DMF solvent to different degrees, among which, the small ones would be dissolved more easily due to their comparatively higher chemical potential. Then a concentration gradient would be formed from small grains to large grains, which drove the mass transportation between grains. As a result, large grain coarsening occurred upon the adsorption of small grains, until the termination of mass transportation due to the evaporation of solvent in the intermediates.
It was later brought up by Gong et al. that solvents like DMF and DMSO (have good solubility for both PbI2 and MAI precursors) would easily damage/dissolve the perovskite film during the SA step if the vapour pressure cannot be precisely controlled.78 To circumvent this issue, alcohol vapours, which have selective solubility for MAI over PbI2, were employed for the SA treatment. They demonstrated that the perovskite precursor reaction rate and the crystal growth could be fine-modulated by a variety of alcohol vapours with different polarity indexes, including methanol, ethanol and isopropanol.78 As a result, high-quality, large-grain perovskite films were achieved with the elimination of defects and pinholes in the films.
Humidity control over the perovskite growth kinetics is also a hot topic as hybrid perovskites are extremely moisture sensitive. Yet more and more research studies have manifested the positive influence of moisture on the initial growth of perovskite crystals. Snaith et al. proposed the “self-healing” mechanism of the perovskite lattice under a controlled degree of humidity, based on the partial solvation of MA+.79 A reduction of trap density and enhanced photoluminescence of the perovskite films were observed, which were advantageous to PSC performances. Later, Yang et al. and Kelly et al. independently confirmed that controlling the humidity during the thermal annealing process of the perovskite film generated finer perovskite morphologies, superior fluorescence properties and better PSC performances.11,80,81 Moisture exposure even played a crucial role in the fabrication of perovskite films under room temperature. Qiao et al. showed that moisture in an ambient atmosphere retarded the crystallization rate of as-cast perovskite films, which allowed slow and complete inter-diffusion of precursor elements.82 The refined growth kinetics thus resulted in improved crystallinity and large, continuous and defect-free perovskite morphology after 5 hours storage in ambient air for full reaction. Subsequently, micro-Raman measurements further evidenced the interaction of water molecules with MA+ under an ambient atmosphere, which slowed the perovskite reaction towards a finer crystallization.83 Even though a certain content of moisture vapour assisted perovskite crystallization, a prolonged exposure of MAPI3 to high humidity led to the colourless hydrate MAPbI3·H2O or MA4PbI6·2H2O, which was a partially reversible process, and eventually led to the complete decomposition of the perovskite.84,85 However, we mainly focus on morphological engineering in this review, and the discussion of moisture stability will not be elaborated in this part.86

2.3. 2D perovskites: higher film uniformity and better long-term stability
Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites, derived by isolating the corner-sharing lead halide octahedral sheets with long-chain organic cations, have been demonstrated to be another class of perovskite materials. 2D perovskites have the generic structural formula of B2An−1MX3n+1, where B is the bulky aliphatic or aromatic alkylammonium cation and n denotes the number of inorganic [MX6]4− layers. Owing to the hydrophobicity of the bulky organic components, 2D perovskites show remarkably stronger moisture tolerance than their 3D counterparts, demonstrating them to be great candidates for PSC commercialisation. Publications on 2D perovskite materials to date mainly focus on the material stability, optical and excitonic properties, etc.,87–90 and the growth mechanism of 2D perovskites, which affects the crystal orientation of 2D perovskites and the photovoltaic performance of 2D PSCs, is however scarcely reported. Distinctly from 3D perovskites, which generally suffer from low surface coverage and non-uniform crystal size in the thin film state, 2D perovskites can be easily self-assembled to form well-defined films with perfect surface coverage and fine texture.88 The bulky organic components drive the formation of highly oriented crystals with only a few grain boundaries. The high uniformity of 2D perovskite films encourages the applications of 2D perovskites in scalable PSC fabrication. Furthermore, 2D perovskites can be formed immediately after spin coating, without the requirement for thermal annealing, which renders them compatible with flexible substrates. In this section, the growth mechanism of 2D perovskites and the currently developed methods for modulating the crystal orientation of 2D perovskites will be reviewed in detail.

2.3.1. Film morphology of 2D perovskites. 
2.3.1.1. Crystal growth mechanism. 
Layer-structured perovskite (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (PEA = phenethylammonium) as an absorber in solar cells was firstly reported by Karunadasa et al.89 Due to the hydrophobicity of the PEA+ cation, the 2D perovskite film remained almost with the same XRD crystal phase after exposing to a relative humidity of 52% for 42 days, exhibiting outstanding moisture stability. Kanatzidis et al. further digged into the crystallization process of 2D perovskites, and unveiled that orientation of the 2D perovskite strongly depended on the value of n.88 It was generally acknowledged that orientation of the 2D materials on flat substrates favoured growth if the layers were parallelly oriented to the substrate. Taking (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 for example, the single-layer perovskite (n = 1) followed this rule by revealing a dominating (00l) reflection in the XRD pattern shown in Fig. 7a. When n > 1, a competition arose between the BA+ and MA+ cations, which tried to confine the growth within the planar layer and to extend the out-of-plane growth, respectively. The 2D crystals started to grow in a more random orientation, with a preferential stacking orthogonal with respect to the substrate. This type of orientation was evidenced by the XRD patterns shown in Fig. 7a, which consisted of a mixture of (0k0) reflections with the (111) and (202) planes. Note that (0k0) reflections for n = 2–4 corresponded to (00l) reflection for n = 1 and ∞. When n = 3 and 4, perovskites continued to follow the trend by showing dominating (111) and (202) reflections and the absence of (0k0) reflection, manifesting the increased degree of vertical growth of the perovskites.88 This growth trend was also reported in other 2D perovskite materials, and it was specifically noticeable in 2D materials with n > 3.91,92 As bulky organic components were electrically insulating, charge transport would be severely hindered when hopping between the inorganic slabs. In this regard, orientation of the inorganic perovskite crystals should be a dominating factor in determining the efficiency of PSCs: only vertical stacking provided a direct pathway for efficient charge transport through the perovskite, while the randomly or parallelly oriented perovskite severely obstructed charge migration. Based on this cognition, great efforts have thus been devoted to uncovering and optimizing the growth kinetics of the 2D perovskite.
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD of thin films vs bulk materials of MAPbI3, BA2PbI4, BA2MAPb2I7, BA2MA2Pb3I10 and BA2MA3Pb4I13 perovskites, and illustration of their respective diffraction planes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) GIWAXS pattern of the BA2MA3Pb4I13 thin film formed on mesoporous TiO2 substrates, and the possible illustration for nucleation with mesoporous TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Fundamental understanding of the origin of vertical orientation of 2D perovskites is of critical importance to allow rational tuning of the 2D crystals. Generally, homogeneous nucleation within the bulk of the solution leads to the growth of randomly oriented perovskite crystals owing to the isotropic environment. Under certain circumstances, homogeneous nucleation is able to generate a preferential orientation when the crystal has anisotropic dimensions, or possesses a preferential orientation that favours van der Waals interactions between the crystals and substrate. Yet in such case, a horizontal orientation, instead of vertical orientation, would be formed to maximize the van der Waals interactions. Therefore, to induce vertical orientation, heterogeneous nucleation at an interface should govern the nucleation kinetics. Through grazing incident wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), Choi et al. presented that heterogeneous nucleation and growth of (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 occurred at the liquid–air interface to form a top-crust of highly oriented solid crystal film, which acted as a template for further crystal growth.93 The GIWAXS pattern and the schematic illustration of the possible crystallization processes from different nucleation sites are shown in Fig. 7b. The vertical orientation of crystals at liquid/air interfaces might be attributed to the preference for the aliphatic chain of BA+ to remain in solution. To control the crystal nucleation and growth of the 2D perovskite, supersaturation was a key factor. In the case of high supersaturation, the nucleation rate outraced the growth rate, resulting in the formation of a large amount of nuclei either in the bulk liquid phase or at the substrate–liquid interface. As we’ve discussed earlier, the liquid–substrate interface favoured the horizontal orientation due to the van der Waals interactions, and the bulk liquid phase typically generated random orientation due to the isotropic environment. Therefore, a continuous crystal growth without additional nucleation is necessary to achieve a strong vertical orientation. This uninterrupted growth requires a low supersaturation of the 2D precursor solution approaching the metastable zone, which is able to promote the crystal growth while suppressing the undesired nucleation.
2.3.1.2. Solvent removal rate. 
One of the most straightforward ways to regulate supersaturation was controlling the solvent removal rate. Choi et al. investigated the effects of the solvent removal rate on 2D crystal orientation, where the solvent removal rate was adjusted by N2 gas flow and anti-solvent treatment (Fig. 8a).94 The degree of vertical orientation was extracted from GIWAXS patterns shown in Fig. 8b. It was observed that increasing the solvent removal rate significantly decreased the vertical orientation degree from 99% to 10%, which agreed well with the proposed crystallization mechanism. The hot-casting technique reported by Mohite et al. could be explained by the same growth mechanism. By casting hot perovskite precursor solution onto a preheated FTO/PEDOT:PSS substrate at 150 °C, a highly compact film with a strongly preferential out-of-plane alignment was obtained.87 It was highly likely that the precursor solution at the liquid–air interface reached supersaturation first due to the rapid evaporation of DMF solvent, which induced the formation of the strongly oriented top crust as shown in Fig. 7b.95 The highly oriented 2D crystal significantly improved the PCE of PSCs to 12.5%. The unencapsulated device showed superior long-term photostability under constant AM 1.5G light illumination and humidity stability under 65% relative humidity.
 Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the crystallization mechanism of the 2D perovskite with a slow and fast solvent removal rate; (b) GIWAXS patterns of the 2D perovskite with increasing solvent removal rates (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of 2D perovskite crystal growth in pure DMF solvent and mixed DMF/DMSO (v/v 5:5) solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. The corresponding GIWAXS patterns: pure DMF solvent (d), mixed DMF/DMSO solvents (e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 97, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic crystal structures of (n-BA)2MA4PbI13 and (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. GIWAXS patterns of (g) room-temperature (RT) and (h) hot-casting (HC) processed (n-BA)2MA4PbI13, and (i) RT and (j) HC processed (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
2.3.1.3. Solvent–precursor intermediate. 
The solvent–precursor intermediate played a key role in the crystal growth kinetics of 3D perovskites as we’ve discussed in the earlier part. Recently, it also intrigued great research interest in the field of 2D perovskites. Sargent et al. investigated the 2D perovskite crystallization via in situ GIWAXS measurements,96 and unveiled the following basic steps for the layered-structure formation process. After spin coating the precursor solution, the as-cast film consisted of largely unoriented intermediate solvent–precursor complexes among dissolved large cations. The large solvent complexes provided a framework that might assist the formation of perovskite quantum wells. During thermal annealing of the film, solvent molecules began to evaporate and weaken the complex, which allowed newly released PbI2 crystals, MAI and partially formed complexes to nucleate and grow into 2D perovskite grains. Despite the fact that the intermediate crystalline solvent complexes were majorly unoriented, they would align with the rest of the perovskite crystallites as they further grow, until the full replacement of the solvent complex by the perovskite eventually. According to the 2D perovskite formation kinetics described above, the coordination strength of solvents with the perovskite precursor would impose strong effects on both the initial state of intermediate formation and the solvent evaporation during thermal annealing, which influenced the 2D perovskite orientation and crystal grain size of the final film. To this end, Kanatzidis et al.97 and Zhu et al.98 independently implemented intermediate-controlled crystal growth of 2D perovskites by using mixed DMF and DMSO solvents. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 8c,98 in the precursor solution with only DMF solvent, the fast formation of perovskite crystals resulted in massive small grains with poor quality and no alignment. On the other hand, with the formation of a stable complex between DMSO and Pb2+, it would require a longer process to release Pb2+ and form the final perovskite structure. In addition, based on the previous analysis of film formation kinetics by Sargent,96 the intermediate complex favoured the vertical growth of the perovskite, resulting in a conformal alignment. In addition, the low nucleation density encouraged the creation of large grains at the crystallization stage. As a result, they achieved a controllable degree of crystallinity and orientation of the crystals by tuning the DMF:DMSO ratio. As shown in Fig. 8e,97 the optimized solvent ratio yielded highly oriented films with inorganic slabs dominantly perpendicular to the substrate. Similar solvent engineering methods for obtaining the vertically oriented and large-grain 2D perovskite were also reported by other research groups,99–101 demonstrating the viability and versatility of the technique.
Recently, Huang et al. systematically scrutinized the effect of different solvents (DMAc, DMF and DMSO) on the crystallization and crystal growth orientation of the 2D perovskites.102 They discovered that DMAc with the lowest boiling point and the weakest coordination to Pb2+ showed the most capability to form dense films with preferred vertical orientation, as compared to DMF and DMSO. The results seemed quite contradictory to the previous work, where the introduction of DMSO–perovskite intermediates benefited the film formation kinetics. The underlying growth mechanism still remained unclear, yet it was plausible that the solvent–perovskite intermediates and a low boiling point solvent (such as DMAc) dominate different film formation phases, i.e. nucleation and crystal growth. Based on the previous discussion, the intermediates slow the crystal growth process to allow a preferable ordering and orientation of the perovskites. On the other hand, DMAc may induce a rapid supersaturation at the liquid/air interface, which led to the generation of a highly oriented top crust. In the latter case, the nucleation might be the governing step in the film formation process.
2.3.1.4. Different organic spacers. 
In addition to solvent evaporation, crystal growth also competes to influence the level of supersaturation by consuming the solvent. Thus, the choice of organic spacers, which affect the perovskite crystal growth kinetics, would also be a means to control the solvent supersaturation and thus tune the crystal growth orientation. By replacing the linear nBAI with its isomer short branched isoBAI, Liang et al. discovered from GIWAXS measurements (shown in Fig. 8g–j) that the out-of-plane crystal orientation of the (isoBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 film was notably enhanced in comparison to that of (nBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13.103 The perpendicular stacking of the 2D perovskite crystal could significantly increase the charge transport and extraction. To learn the underlying mechanism of perovskite crystallization with different organic spacers, Choi et al. studied isoBAI and nBAI based 2D perovskite films processed from different host solvents, including gamma-butyrolactone (gBL), DMAc and 2-methoxyethanol (2ME). It was demonstrated that isoBAI consistently had a stronger vertical orientation forming ability as compared to nBAI, regardless of the host solvent of the 2D perovskite precursors. Two possible explanations were proposed for the phenomenon. Firstly, the faster crystal growth rate of isoBAI than that of nBAI allowed a rapid crystal growth that consumed precursor concentration to maintain a low level of supersaturation. Alternatively, it might be the higher diffusion coefficient of isoBAI that induced the diffusion–reaction process of the crystal growth, which as well alleviated supersaturation. On account of the higher degree of vertical orientation from isoBAI based 2D perovskites, the isoBAI based PSCs outperformed their nBAI counterparts, showing a PCE over 11% with largely increased JSC. The 2D PSCs showed outstanding long-term stability under an ambient environment, preserving 92% of their initial efficiency after 1000 hours aging. The stratagem of introducing binary organic spacer cation PEA+ and BA+ in 2D perovskite precursor solution was later reported by Chen and colleagues.104 The addition of PEA+ as a second spacer cation caused aggregation in the solution, which stimulated nucleation and decreased nucleation sites. It thus resulted in a high quality 2D perovskite film with preferential orientation growth and enlarged grain size over 1 μm. The PSCs presented a maximum PCE over 14%, which is among the highest reported value of BA2MA4Pb5I16 based 2D PSCs. The unsealed device also showed excellent moisture stability by maintaining 90% of its initial efficiency after 1000 hours' exposure to air (relative humidity of ∼25%). Chemically modifying the organic spacer has been proved to be an effective route to regulate the crystal orientation as well. Zhu et al. reported fluorine substitution on the para position in PEA to form 4-fluorophenethylammonium (F-PEA).105 This design induced shorter average phenyl ring centroid–centroid distances in the organic layer with a better aligned stacking of perovskite sheets, which led to stronger orbital interactions and improved out-of-plane charge transport in the film. As a result, a PCE of over 13% was obtained for (F-PEA)2MA4Pb5I16-based PSCs, and the device also showed much better thermal stability as compared to that of PEA2MA4Pb5I16 based PSCs. More importantly, the improved intrinsic charge transport characteristics of the 2D material enabled a simplified deposition process without the requirement for complicated treatments like hot-casting or additive incorporation to regulate the crystal orientation, which would be more compatible with the scalable deposition of 2D PSCs.105
The selection of organic spacers could also affect the charge transport properties of the 2D perovskite in a way to form different perovskite phases. The Ruddlesden–Popper (RP)88–93 and the Dion–Jacobson (DJ)92,106,107 phases are two common 2D phases, which are comprised of a monoammonium cation and a diammonium cation as the organic spacer, respectively. More recently, a new structural type of alternating cations in the interlayer space (ACI)108–110 has emerged, where different cations order along the interlayer space, and the organic cation should have a similar size compared to the A-site cations (MA+, FA+ or Cs+). So far, guanidinium (GA+) is the only reported cation that forms the ACI structure.108 However, there hasn’t been a systematic study on the 2D crystallization features of these perovskite phases, e.g. whether the DJ or ACI 2D structure would prefer more vertical crystal orientation than the RP ones. On the other hand, it has been discussed that these phases have distinctly different interlayer distances that strongly affect the charge transport characteristics. Among them, the RP phases generally have the largest interlayer distance (∼7 Å) as they are formed by bilayer organic cations, showing no electronic coupling of the perovskite slabs. In contrast, the DJ phases (∼4 Å) and ACI phases (∼3 Å) exhibit much smaller interlayer distances, which enhance the perovskite–perovskite interactions and thus facilitate the charge transport across the organic spacers.111 Therefore, forming different structural phases would also be a route to modulate the charge transport characteristics of the 2D perovskite, and further studies on the crystallization features of different 2D perovskite types (particularly DJ and ACI types) would be beneficial.
2.3.1.5. Additives. 
Other processing methods for regulating the crystal growth involve the incorporation of additives that tune the crystallization of perovskites. Pseudohalide thiocyanate ions (SCN−), which have a similar ionic radius to I− and the capability of forming strong interactions with Pb2+ due to the lone pair electrons from S and N atoms, have been widely used in 3D perovskites to modulate the crystallization kinetics.112–114 Recently, the similar treatment was applied to 2D perovskites based on BA+ or PEA+ as organic spacers.115,116 It was noticed that the addition of NH4SCN in 2D perovskite precursors successfully transformed the 2D perovskite crystals from random orientation to highly vertical orientation. The ability of NH4SCN to regulate the crystal orientation might be ascribed to the formation of Lewis base–acid intermediates, which elongated the crystallization of the perovskite to allow a preferential orientation and the production of larger grains. The vertical stacking of 2D crystals dramatically improved the charge transport between electrodes, thus balancing the electron/hole mobility. Due to the refined crystal orientation, the PCE of the 2D (n = 5) PSCs was significantly raised from 0.5% to 11.0%. The chloride ion (Cl−) was demonstrated as another effective additive in 2D perovskites. Chen et al. found that MACl addition in 2D perovskite precursor solution altered the crystallinity features and crystal orientation of the 2D perovskite: it transited the perovskite film from nanorod-like morphology to a dense-web, accompanied by the formation of vertically stacked inorganic slabs.117 The morphological optimization drastically improved the PCE of 2D PSCs from 1.7% to 15.4%. Similar observations were recently reported by Liang et al., who introduced NH4Cl as an additive in the 2D perovskite precursor solution to tune the film formation process.118 Through Cl− elongating the crystal growth, which induced larger crystals and passivated trap states, a maximum PCE up to 13.4% was achieved in 2D PSCs with n = 4. Combining the previously reported hot-casting method87 and DMSO solvent engineering,97,98 Liu et al. further included cesium (Cs+) doping in 2D perovskites as an effective route to control the crystal orientation, grain size and film quality.119 Through in situ GIWAXS measurements of the as-cast perovskite film, they evidenced that Cs-doping prolonged the phase transition from a disordered precursor to a perovskite, which potentially assisted the 2D perovskite grains to grow larger. It was also observed from GIWAXS patterns that Cs-doping retained a perfect crystal orientation, highly textured crystalline 2D characteristics and phase-purity. Eventually, the Cs-doped 2D PSCs delivered an outstanding PCE of 13.7%, and an excellent stability of retaining 90% of their initial PCE after 1400 hours aging under 30% relative humidity.


2.3.2. 3D/2D hybrid system. 
In spite of the great progress towards highly efficient and long-term stable 2D PSCs, their photovoltaic efficiencies are still much lower than that of the 3D perovskite counterparts. The PCE of 2D PSCs is fundamentally limited by the large exciton binding energy and the narrow absorption range of layer-structured perovskites.120,121 To bridge the gap of the optoelectronic characteristics between 2D and 3D perovskites, efforts have been focused on tuning the number of lead halide octahedral slabs between each organic plane.122,123 Increasing the number of inorganic slabs in 2D perovskites results in improved photovoltaic efficiency, but at the expense of ambient stability. Thus, to have a balance between efficiency and stability, a mixed 2D/3D hybrid system as the light-absorber has been developed. Snaith et al. pioneered the study in this area by incorporating BA+ into 3D perovskites.124 “Plate-like” 2D phase crystallites were found to be perpendicularly oriented to the plane of the film within the 3D perovskite grains, as shown by the SEM images in Fig. 9a. The 2D-XRD patterns also illustrated that the crystallinity was remarkably enhanced. Based on the results, a 2D/3D heterostructure with a type-I energy level alignment was postulated in the mixed perovskite system, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 9b. The charges reaching the 2D/3D interface from within the 3D grain would be reflected back to the 3D perovskite, without suffering from trapping or recombination at the grain boundaries. In addition, due to the interfacial grain boundary passivation by the layer structure, non-radiative recombination was inhibited in the heterostructured film, which led to a stabilized efficiency of 19.5% without hysteresis. The PSCs also showed improved photo-stability under continuous illumination, with the devices retaining 80% of “post burn-in” efficiency after 1000 hours exposure in air, and 4000 hours when encapsulated. The observation of 2D perovskites situated at the 3D perovskite grain boundaries has been further evinced by other groups.125–128
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of post-annealed BAx(FA0.83Cs0.17)1−xPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 perovskite films with different BA concentrations. The insets show 2D-XRD images of the films. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed self-assembled 2D–3D perovskite film structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. GIWAXS patterns of the (c) 3D perovskite and (d) 3D/2D perovskite. (e) Schematic interpretation of the surface reorganization of the 3D perovskite upon 2D perovskite formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the facile modulation of the film morphology of 2D/3D perovskites, as well as the exceptional long-term stability of the hybrid devices, Nazeeruddin further pushed forward the scalable fabrication of the hybrid system by using aminovaleric acid iodide (AVAI) as a 2D precursor.129 Distinct from the previous reports that 2D perovskites were formed on the 3D perovskite grain boundaries, 2D phases in this case were found to be mostly presented at the interface with the oxide. This was explained by the favourable anchoring of the carboxylic acid group of the AVAI ligand to the TiO2 scaffold. The 2D perovskite thus templated the growth of the biphasic 3D perovskite, forming an oriented wider bandgap phase within the TiO2 scaffold and a standard tetragonal phase on the top. This beneficial heterostructure yielded a remarkable long-term stability of over 10000 hours with zero loss in efficiency over a large-area, fully printable and highly efficient (PCE 11.2%) 100 cm2 solar module (active area of around 50 cm2). The work also suggested the huge application potential of the 3D/2D mixed system in large-scale printable PSCs.
Despite the 3D/2D perovskite system demonstrating an efficacious strategy to improve the stability of PSCs, the PCEs of the 3D/2D PSCs would be inevitably limited due to the fact that the bulky 2D cation could increase the number of perovskite grain boundaries (reduce grain sizes) and hinder the charge transport. In this regard, Zhu et al. reported the utilization of two complementary additives PEAI and Pb(SCN)2 in the (FA0.65MA0.2Cs0.15)Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3 perovskite precursor.130 The coupling of PEA+ and SCN− provides a synergistic effect that overcomes the growth challenges arisen from each individual additive: improving the perovskite film quality with enlarged grain sizes; reducing the excess PbI2 formation associated with the use of Pb(SCN)2; lowering the defect density and energetic disorder from the synergistic effect of PEA+ and SCN−; and improving charge mobility and lifetime. As a result, the wide-bandgap perovskite (16.8 eV) based PSCs achieved a PCE of ∼20%, which showed great significance in constructing tandem solar cells.130 They further applied a similar tactic to improve the film formation process of a Sn–Pb mixed low bandgap (1.25 eV) perovskite.131 It was found that adding GuaSCN as an additive in the (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4 film markedly improved the structural and optoelectronic properties of the perovskite, through the Gua-based 2D structure passivating the grain boundaries, suppressing the formation of excessive Sn vacancies and preventing the oxidation of Sn2+. Notably, over 20% PCE was obtained for the single-junction solar cells, which further encouraged the fabrication of all perovskite tandem solar cells with a high PCE of 23.1%.
Aside from the 3D/2D mixed perovskite system, the graded 3D/2D heterojunction structure was also demonstrated as an efficient system for highly efficient and stable PSCs. The graded structure was formed by depositing bulky organic cation contained precursor solution on the top of a 3D perovskite, followed by thermal annealing treatment to convert the top layer to a 2D perovskite. The 2D layer on the surface, serving as both defect passivator and moisture barrier, simultaneously improved the efficiency and stability of PSCs. Docampo et al. reported a good control over the phase purity of the 2D perovskite by applying mixed MAI and PEAI solution, as a 2D precursor solution, on the top of a 3D perovskite.132 GIWAXS experiments shown in Fig. 9c and d revealed the preferential orientation of the layered structure parallel to the substrate. It was explained that the PEAI:MAI solution led to reorganization of the 3D top layer, accompanied by a fast deintercalation of MAI and intercalation of PEAI into the perovskite structure, as schematically shown in Fig. 9e. The long-chain organic cations could act as a template for the extremely anisotropic growth of the 2D perovskite, resulting in films with a strong preferential crystal orientation. In this regard, the inorganic octahedral layer sandwiched between the organic layers would be confined parallel to the substrate. Benefited from this graded heterojunction structure, the hybrid PSCs preserved superior efficiency that was comparable to their 3D counterparts, and as well demonstrated dramatically improved moisture tolerance. In-depth studies were further carried out by Nazeeruddin to investigate the role of the 2D perovskite layer in the interfacial charge transfer kinetics.133 The ultraviolet photoelectron spectra (UPS) measurements of the hybrid perovskite film showed a proper valence band of the top 2D layer that favored the hole transfer within the graded structure. In the meantime, the much higher conduction energy level of the 2D perovskite prevented photo-excited electron diffusion to the HTL, significantly suppressing the electron–hole bimolecular recombination at the interface. As a result, they obtained significantly increased VOC from 1.09 V to 1.15 V, a high JSC of 22.73 mA cm−2, a FF of 79.4%, and a remarkable PCE of 20.75% from the 3D/2D graded PSCs. The hybrid system also delivered outstanding stability: the devices retained 85% of the initial PCE stressed under one sun illumination for 800 hours at 50 °C in an ambient environment. Due to the multiple advantages of the graded 3D/2D heterojunction structure, the hybrid system has been widely employed by worldwide research groups towards achieving highly efficient and ultra-stable PSCs.134–137 You et al. recently set a record of PSCs with a certified efficiency of 23.3% by applying PEAI as the surface defect passivator.138 The non-radiative recombination was substantially suppressed, which led to a VOC as high as 1.18 V at the absorption threshold of 1.53 eV. These impressive results inspired further application of the hybrid structure in large-scale production and commercialization of PSCs.

3. Scalable deposition methods for perovskite films
3.1. Fundamentals and challenges of scalable deposition
At present, most perovskite devices explored at the lab-scale are prepared through the spin coating process. Whilst the technology is capable of making high performance small perovskite devices, it is extremely challenging to control the perovskite film over a large area. In addition, the utilization rate of the precursor materials by spin coating is very low, and a large amount of materials/solutions would be wasted in the fabrication process, making it incompatible with commercial production. To address these issues, efforts have been made towards scalable deposition technologies for large-area perovskite films and solar modules, which are expected to yield photovoltaic efficiencies comparable to those from the spin coating technology.
For the scalable deposition of high quality perovskite films, the fundamentals of crystallization and the parameters affecting the film formation process should firstly be comprehended. According to the equation (8)as previously depicted, the nucleation rate is strongly dependent on the level of supersaturation, temperature and surface free energy. Thus, in order to deposit a uniform and pinhole-free perovskite film, the properties of the precursor solutions (such as the boiling point of the solvent, the precursor solution concentration and composition, fluid flow rate), temperature and surface characteristics of the substrate can be modulated to optimize the nucleation rate.
Generally, the scalable deposition techniques consist of liquid-film based and droplet based methods. The liquid film based methods are represented by blade-coating and slot-die coating, where the precursor solution is transferred to the substrate in the form of a semi-wet liquid film. On the other hand, for the non-contact droplet based methods including spray coating, drop casting and inkjet printing, the precursor solution reaches the substrate in the form of separate drops. In both deposition types, the physical properties of the precursor solutions, including the viscosity, density, surface tension, contact angle, etc., would strongly affect the film formation process. Particularly in the case of droplet-based deposition (spray coating and inkjet printing), the film formation process is dominated by droplet impact dynamics, such as the droplet velocity, size and physical properties through Weber (We), Reynolds (Re) and Ohnesorge (Oh) dimensionless parameters, as well as the substrate surface characteristics like surface energy, temperature, texture and wettability.139 Among these characteristics, We, Re and Oh are applied to define the viscosity, surface tension and density of the solutions, and the surface wettability is determined by the contact angle of the droplet on a substrate.139,140 For homogeneous deposition of high-quality thin films, a highly wetting substrate with appropriate We and Re numbers should be guaranteed. The surface tension of the precursor solution was associated with complex parameters including the bulk solution concentration, and thickness and composition of the interface layer. Eslamian et al. unravelled that the magnitude of the surface tension of perovskite solutions is comparable to that of their constituting solvents, which offered a clearer criterion on solvent selection.140 The most straightforward way to modulate the surface tension of the droplet is to tune the solution concentration. The same group found that the surface tension decreases with the concentration. Typically, higher concentration (i.e. higher surface tension) induces faster crystallization. For instance, crystal nucleation is greater in the vicinity of the gas–liquid–solid triple line due to the coffee ring effects. Thus, in order to suppress inhomogeneous crystal nucleation, increasing the spreading of the precursor droplets and inducing a rapid solution drying rate could be effective routes. The spreading and wetting of the liquid film are further affected by the viscosity of the solution, which increases nonlinearly as the solvent evaporates and the liquid film partially dries. The viscosity was found to linearly increase to a critical concentration and then sharply increase with a further increase in the concentration, which can be explained as that the solution starts to show non-Newtonian behaviour at high concentration.140 It has been reported that a low viscous solution generally resulted in a more homogeneous and high quality perovskite film regardless of the deposition method. Based on the Stokes–Einstein equation, a less viscous solution endows better diffusion of the perovskite molecules and nuclei, which impinged with one another to form large-grain perovskites. The contact angle of the droplet on the substrate is another important physical property in the spray deposition process. A low contact angle, i.e. better solution spreading, could benefit the formation of a more uniform and pinhole free film. Three different substrates m-TiO2, PEDOT:PSS and c-TiO2 that are typically used in PSCs have been compared.139 The perovskite droplets on m-TiO2 show a very small contact angle near 0°, on the PEDOT:PSS substrate show a contact angle of ∼10° and on c-TiO2 demonstrate a relatively large contact angle of ∼30°, which suggests the potential of m-TiO2 in the scalable deposition of high performance PSCs. These influencing factors also apply for the liquid-film based methods. For the hydrodynamic process like blade coating, the liquid film is formed under tension, by moving a blade above the substrate, where the film thickness is determined not only by the blade–substrate gap and blade moving speed, but also by the liquid surface tension, viscosity and density. In slot-die coating, despite the fact the liquid is released freely, the surface tension and viscosity affect the liquid dropping speed and thus the film thickness. Based on the above fundamentals, the crystal growth kinetics of perovskite films can be optimized through modulating the surface tension, viscosity, and contact angle of the precursor solutions, as well as the temperature and surface characteristics of the substrate.
In the following part, these currently developed scalable deposition technologies, including spray coating, slot-die coating, doctor blading, inkjet printing and vapour-assisted deposition, will be reviewed, along with the film morphological modulation routes. The photovoltaic performance of PSCs prepared by these scalable deposition technologies is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the photovoltaic performance of scalable-deposited PSCs






Deposition films
Device configuration
PCE (%)
Device area (cm2)
Date
Ref.




Spray coating
Perovskite
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ca/Al
11.1
0.025
2014

141



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
16.0
0.1
2016

142



13.1
1.0


PEDOT:PSS and perovskite
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/LiF/Al
9.9
0.025
2016

142



Perovskite
ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
11.7
3.8
2016

144



Perovskite
PET/ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiroOMeTAD/Au (flexible)
8.1
0.065
2015

148



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/PTAA/Au
15.5
40.0
2016

149



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/meso-TiO2/FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
14.2
0.15
2016

142



Doctor blading
Perovskite (in air)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Bis-C60/Ag
12.2
0.0314
2015

151



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
13.3
0.1
2015

146



10.4
10.1


4.3
100


PEDOT:PSS, perovskite, PCBM and Bis-C60 (in air)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Bis-C60/Ag
10.4
0.1
2015

164



Perovskite
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MA0.6FA0.4PbI3/PCBM/Ca/Al
11.5
0.04
2015

160



Perovskite
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al
15.1
0.0725
2015

157



Perovskite
ITO/PTAA/MA0.6FA0.38Cs0.02PbI2.975Br0.025/C60/BCP/Cu
19.3
—
2017

161



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
18.7
0.09
2018

159



17.1
1.0


Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
18.6
0.12
2017

162



17.3
1.2


13.3
11.09


Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45/PTAA/Ag
20.0
0.98
2017

163



Perovskite
ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu
15.3
33.0
2018

164



14.6
57.2


Perovskite
ITO/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu
20.0
0.08
2018

165



Slot-die coating
Perovskite
ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/P3HT/Ag
11.9
0.1
2015

170



Perovskite
ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/P3HT/Ag
4.6
47.3
2015

171



Perovskite
FTO/ZnO/MAPbI3/carbon
17.61
10.6
2017

169



Perovskite
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/C60/PCBM/BCP/Al
8.3
10.0
2018

172



Perovskite
ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
18.0
0.06
2018

173



Perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD
ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
10.0
168.75
2018

174



Perovskite
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13/PCBM/PEIE/Ag
14.9
0.078
2019

176



Inkjet printing
Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/carbon
11.6
0.15
2014

183



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/meso-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
12.3
0.04
2014

184



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
11.3
0.09
2016

188



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/meso-TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
18.6
0.04
2018

185



17.7
2.02


Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
17.0
0.04
2018

189



CVD
Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
12.0
9.0
2016

206



15.4
5.8


Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/Cs0.07FA0.93PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
12
14.6
2017

200



Perovskite
FTO/SnO2/CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
41.25
12.24
2018

209



Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/FAPb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
12
14.7
2019

201



Perovskite
FTO/SnO2/C60/Cs0.1FA0.9PbI3/spiro-eOTAD/Au
91.8
9.3%
2019

208



0.09
13.3%


Thermal evaporation
Perovskite
ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.076
15.4%
2013

183



Perovskite
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/C60/Bphen/Ca/Ag
0.05
15.4%
2014

185



VASP
Perovskite
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au
0.12
12.1%
2013

189





3.2. Scalable deposition methods

3.2.1. Spray coating. 
Ultrasonic spray coating technology, with the advantages of fast throughput and high material utilization, has already been actively studied in the field of PSCs.141–146 The spray coating process involves four steps: the generation of ink-droplets; transportation of the droplets to the substrate; formation of a wet film through coalescence of the droplets; and evaporation of the solvents to form dry films.147 As schematically illustrated in Fig. 10a,148 the first two steps are conducted through the ultrasonic atomizer, which nebulizes the perovskite precursor solution, followed by the injection of low-pressure gas stream to direct the precursor droplets onto the substrate.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the ultrasonic spray-coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Optical microscopy images of spray-deposited thin films of perovskite precursors onto substrates held at a range of elevated temperatures (28–87 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating for perovskite precursor deposition. (d) SEM images of perovskite films concurrently sprayed from inks of PbCl2/MAI, PbCl2 + Pb(Ac)2/MAI and Pb(Ac)2/MAI, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic illustration of (e) the proposed mechanism of the spray coating process, (f) crystalline grain growth and (g) the morphology of the formed crystalline grains in the perovskite film with respect to the balance between Fin and Fout. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The first attempt to produce perovskite films via spray coating was made by Lidzey et al.141 In this work, they specifically pointed out that the boiling point of the casting solvent was critical in affecting the film quality. If the boiling point was too low, the spray solution would dry before reaching the substrate, which led to films with a mass of pinholes and “pooling-like” structures. On the other hand, a too high boiling point solvent, which prolonged the drying time, would generate large-area thickness non-uniformity, or dewetting of the solution. To prevent either situation, perovskite precursors in a high boiling point solvent (DMF or DMSO) were sprayed onto a substrate that was held at an elevated temperature to accelerate the film drying process. It could be interpreted that the high boiling point solvent was used to ensure a low concentration (i.e. a low viscosity) of the solution droplet before reaching the substrate, which assisted the complete interdiffusion of the solutes, and a heating substrate prevents dewetting of the solution. From the optical micrographs of the as-deposited perovskite film under different substrate temperatures, as shown in Fig. 10b, perovskite films with high continuity and surface coverage were observed. An extended thermal annealing process was then conducted to crystallize the MAI:PbCl2 precursor film into the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite. HTL PEDOD:PSS and ETL PC61BM were fabricated via the spin coating process to construct a planar heterojunction PSC device. The optimized device delivered a PCE over 11% in laboratory-scale with an active area of 0.025 cm2. In their later reports, PEDOT:PSS and PCBM layers were both spray-cast in air to produce all-spray-cast PSC devices, which showed a champion PCE of 9.9%.143 Xiao et al. applied a similar optimization process in conventional structured PSCs with TiO2 as the ETL,148 and achieved a champion PCE of 13% from a small-area device with an active area of 0.065 cm2. The same group further extended the technology to a polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/indium tin oxide (ITO) flexible substrate with low-temperature processed TiO2 as the ETL.148 A PCE of 8.1% was obtained for the flexible device, demonstrating the great potential of the spray-coating technology to be compatible with roll-to-roll manufacturing. Perovskite precursor compositions also strongly affect the perovskite film quality, and the combination of multiple precursor ions has also been shown to enhance the film formation process. Tait et al. demonstrated the versatility of concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating for the optimization of both single and multiple halide perovskite layers; the spray coating setup is schematically illustrated in Fig. 10c. Concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating of two solutions at differential rates (varied rates of components but a constant net flow rate) enabled equivalent drying dynamics for each layer, as the solution volume, thickness and drying time were set to be constant. Thus this technique endowed a rapid and precise optimization of thickness, precursor ratios, flow rate and nozzle speed optimization. By this means, the concurrently pumped mixture of PbCl2/PbAc2 in combination with MAI resulted in a perovskite film with full coverage and negligible pinhole density (Fig. 10d), which pushed the PCE of spray-coated PSCs up to 15.7% for small devices and 11.7% for 3.8 cm2 aperture area modules.146 Sequential spray deposition of PbI2 and MAI precursor solutions was developed by Meng et al.142 In their work, DMSO was selected as the host solvent for PbI2 to form PbI2(DMSO)x Lewis base–acid intermediates, which assisted the formation of a smooth and uniform PbI2 film. After the full conversion of PbI2 and MAI precursors into the MAPbI3 perovskite, a high quality centimetre-scale perovskite film was formed, which yielded a promising PCE over 16% for small devices with an active area of 0.1 cm2, and a PCE over 13% for large devices with an active area of 1 cm2. The perovskite crystal growth kinetics can also be regulated by a mixture of solvents with different boiling points. Im et al. reported a manipulation over perovskite growth by utilizing mixed solvents DMF and γ-butyrolactone (GBL) with tuneable volume ratios.149 They found that MAPbI3−xClx crystal grain sizes can be controlled via a re-dissolution and crystal grain growth mechanism, by tuning the ratio of DMF:GBL. Specifically, during spray-coating, the deposition of the perovskite precursor solution onto a hot substrate created an inward flux (Fin) of the perovskite solution and an outward flux (Fout) of the solvents, and the ratio of Fin to Fout can be controlled by the experimental conditions. When the precursor solution landed on the heated substrate, the solvents rapidly evaporated, accompanied by perovskite precipitation/nucleation/crystallization. Therefore, the solvent concentration profile and crystallization rate profile from the top to the bottom of the perovskite film exhibited a reverse correlation under continuous spraying conditions, as illustrated in Fig. 10e. In the early stage of spray coating, small perovskite crystals would be formed due to the quick evaporation of solvents and the subsequent rapid crystallization. By continuously supplying perovskite solution (Fin), the pre-formed film is soaked by the freshly deposited perovskite layer, which induced a re-dissolution/grain merging/re-crystallization process, as shown in Fig. 10f. When Fin ≫ Fout (as in the case of DMF:GBL = 10:0 in the work), the sprayed perovskite solution quickly crystallized before it melted the underlying perovskite film, thus forming small crystal grains. On the other hand, in the case of Fin > Fout (DMF:GBL = 9:1 or 8:2 in the work), the underlying polycrystalline perovskite film can be moistened and re-dissolved by the later-deposited solution, merging the small crystalline grains into large ones by re-crystallization. Through this dissolution and recrystallization process, perovskite films with large crystal sizes up to 1.5 μm could be formed, which resulted in a small PSC device with an impressive PCE of 18.3% and a solar module (10 cm × 10 cm, active area of 40 cm2) with a promising efficiency of 15.5%.147 The spray coating method could also be extended to other perovskite materials, such as Cs-, FA-based or mixed cation systems.150,151 Liu et al. prepared the FA1−xCsxPbI3 mixed cation perovskite by the spray coating method, which showed significantly higher stability compared to that of the single cation (MA or FA) based perovskite. The FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 based PSCs demonstrated a PCE of 14.2% along with exceptional long-term stability by retaining a constant PCE of 12.5% after 100 hours aging under 50% relative humidity.151 This work demonstrated the great potential of the spray coating process towards highly stable and scalable PSCs.


3.2.2. Doctor-blade coating. 
Blade coating is a facile and versatile scalable technology that has been prevalently utilized in the fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) previously.152,153 Compared to spin coating, this technology is more economic-friendly as no solution would be wasted during the film processing. In addition, in the blade coating process, thin films are formed by swiping the precursor solution onto a substrate, and this process significantly retards the perovskite crystallization due to elongated film drying, which is beneficial for forming homogeneous and highly crystalline perovskite films. Due to these attractive advantages, this technology has intrigued great research interest in the area of perovskite devices in recent years.154–158 The coating process for perovskite films is shown in Fig. 11a:157 a precursor solution is dropped onto a substrate, followed by linearly swiping the solution with a glass blade at a constant speed. The thickness of the perovskite film can be controlled by the perovskite precursor solution concentration, blading speed and spacing between the blade and the substrate.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of doctor-blading of perovskite films. Top-view SEM images of perovskite films formed at a temperature of (b) and (d) 100 °C, and (c) and (e) 125 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. In situ GIWAXS measurements of MAPbI3 for different fabrication conditions (f) DMSO:GBL-blade-25 °C, (g) DMSO:GBL-blade-150 °C, and the corresponding schematic models of the perovskite structural evolution for the two cases. Real-time optical microscopy of (h) DMSO:GBL-blade-25 °C and (i) DMSO:GBL-blade-150 °C perovskite films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (j) Schematic illustration of the MASP process, (k) SEM image of the perovskite fabricated by MASP. (l) Optical micrograph of the microstructural evolution of perovskite grains as a function of time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Huang et al. initially carried out the application of doctor-blading in perovskite devices in 2015 for the first time.157 Similar to the spray deposition process, they unveiled that the substrate temperature during the deposition was critical in the production of continuous, smooth and pinhole-free perovskite films. If the substrate is held at a temperature much lower than the boiling point of the host solvent (for example DMF with a boiling point of 153 °C), a long drying time would cause rough and discontinuous films due to dewetting of the precursor solution, as shown by the SEM image in Fig. 11b–e. The inferior perovskite films resulted in a poor PCE of PSCs below 7%. In contrast, a quick drying of the perovskite film occurring under high substrate temperature (125 °C) led to a uniform, smooth and pinhole-free perovskite film. The domain size reached 80–250 μm in the 1.5–2 μm thick film, which was tremendously larger than that prepared from the spin coating method. Owing to the refined film morphology, a photovoltaic efficiency over 15% was achieved from laboratory-scale devices with a cell area of 0.0725 cm2.157 The necessity of high substrate temperature during the blade coating process was further evidenced by Liu et al. via in situ characterization.159 Based on in situ GIWAXS measurements (Fig. 11f and g) of MAPbI3 prepared under different substrate temperatures (25 °C and 150 °C), they revealed that a high substrate temperature (inducing a fast solvent removal) promoted a direct phase transition from a sol–gel precursor to perovskite crystals, without the formation of solvate intermediate phases. As illustrated by real-time optical microscopy in Fig. 11h and i, this direct phase transition assisted the transformation from needle-like perovskite nuclei with poor surface coverage into spherulitic nuclei, which grew into large perovskite grains (20–100 μm) within a short time (<0.9 s). The uniform perovskite film with large grain size and good surface coverage yielded PSCs with a photovoltaic efficiency of 18.7% (device area of 0.09 cm2) and 17.1% (device area of 1 cm2).159 To further push forward the industrial production of PSCs, enabling the fabrication of high quality perovskite films in air is the key step, as most of the previous research studies have been conducted under a stringently controlled environment like a N2-filled glovebox. To this end, Jen et al. carried out the blade-coating deposition of the perovskite film in air without controlling the atmosphere, and obtained PSCs with a photovoltaic efficiency of 9.52%.154 They subsequently digged into the effects of humidity on perovskite crystallization and the corresponding photovoltaic performances. The blade coating process was controlled under a relative humidity of 60–70%, 40–50% and 15–25%, respectively. By the investigation of perovskite structure and film morphology, they showed that the surface coverage and homogeneity of the perovskite film, as well as perovskite crystallinity, were remarkably improved with humidity decreasing from 60–70% to 15–25%. PSCs with an optimized PCE of 10.4% were obtained under relatively low humidity.156 These results suggested that for the ambient blade coating of high performance PSCs, other perovskite compositions should be explored.
Based on the discussions above, the photovoltaic efficiency of blade-coated PSCs still largely lags behind that of the state-of-the-art spin-coated devices at the current stage. The inferior efficiency lies in the lack of a fine control over the blade-coated perovskite film morphology. A variety of methods have thus been performed to ameliorate the perovskite film morphology, aiming to bridge the efficiency gap between the two processing methods.160,161 The chemical composition of the perovskite precursors played essential roles in affecting the doctor-bladed perovskite film formation kinetics. In Huang's recent report, a small fraction of Cs+ (less than 5 mol%) and Br− (2.5 mol%) were introduced into the (MAPbI3)0.6(FAPbI3)0.4 mixed precursor solution, which lowered the film formation temperature of the mixed perovskite. It enabled the deposition of MA0.6FA0.38Cs0.02PbI2.975Br0.025 films with improved phase purity at a lower temperature of 120 °C. They further included MACl into precursor solutions to increase the film coverage and grain sizes via a secondary grain growth, generating a smooth and pinhole-free perovskite layer with a micrometer grain size. As a result, the blade-coated PSCs showed a substantially improved PCE over 19% at a low coating temperature of 120 °C.161 Anti-solvent treatment has also been implemented in doctor-bladed perovskite films.162 It should be noted that the time for applying the anti-solvent is very stringent for the film formation process: too early time would cause pinholes, whereas too late time easily leads to a rough surface. Therefore, it would be very challenging to apply this treatment in scalable fabricating techniques due to the extremely narrow anti-solvent processing window. During the film formation process, the rate of solvent evaporation ultimately determined how long the wet-film stage existed, and the drying process of the solvents strongly correlated with the vapor pressure of the solvents. Based on these considerations, Zhu et al. considerably extended the processing time window from seconds (from single DMF solvent) to ∼8 min by using a mixture of DMF:NMP solvents. Due to the much lower vapor pressure of NMP solvent, the mixture could greatly extend the wet-film stage. In addition, the MACl additive was further incorporated into the perovskite precursor solution to increase the perovskite growth rate, which significantly shortened the thermal annealing time to ∼1 min. The tremendously expanded anti-solvent processing window along with the shortened thermal annealing time would be highly desirable for scalable fabrication. Due to the formation of high-quality perovskite films with large-scale uniformity, impressive PCEs of 18.55% and 17.33% were achieved for 0.12 cm2 and 1.2 cm2 devices, respectively. By further transferring this technology onto solar modules, a stabilized PCE of 13.3% from a 12.3 cm2 module (88% geometric fill factor) was achieved.162 Aside from anti-solvent treatment, Lin et al. reported a versatile meniscus-assisted solution printing (MASP) strategy to trigger an instant supersaturation of the precursor solutions during blade coating.163 As shown in Fig. 11j, a meniscus was formed due to capillary action by constraining the perovskite ink between a lower substrate and an upper plate. The fast solvent evaporation at the air/perovskite ink/lower substrate contact line triggered the outward convective flow to replenish the evaporation of the solvent, and transported the perovskite solutes towards the contact line in the meantime. A supersaturated phase would thus be generated, which engendered the rapid nucleation and growth of the perovskite crystals. The lower substrate was programmed to be moving for the printing of a continuous perovskite film. The real-time tracking of perovskite growth by optical microscopy was also studied. Fig. 11l depicts that the perovskite grain underwent 2D growth to a large crystal island as time progressed, until the grains connected with other adjacent grains eventually, accompanied by the coalescence of neighbouring grains. By this method, micrometre-scaled perovskite grains were acquired (Fig. 11k), which resulted in a high photovoltaic PCE over 20% from the laboratory-scale devices with an active area of 0.096 cm2.163 Another attempt to control the ink fluid dynamics was made by incorporating surfactants into the precursor ink to alter the fluid drying dynamics.164 It was pointed out that, generally in blade coating of the perovskite film, microscale fluid flowed towards the perovskite islands during drying of the wet-film. This would lead to the formation of partially filled or empty gaps between the islands, thus resulting in a non-uniform perovskite with large pinholes. The fluid flowing dynamics can be suppressed by adding surfactant molecules (L-α-phosphatidylcholine) to reduce the surface tension of the ink, therefore forming a smooth perovskite film with dramatically higher uniformity. In addition, the surfactants also improved the adhesion of perovskite ink to the hydrophobic substrates, leading to a full surface coverage of the perovskite film. As a result, the PSCs exhibited an outstanding PCE over 20% for small-area devices, and over 14% for large solar modules with an active area of 57.2 cm2.164 Huang et al. further applied this manufacturing technology to construct HTL-free PSCs.165 By introducing the strong electron-withdrawing molecule 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) to dope the MAPbI3 perovskite film, a modified ITO/MAPbI3 interface with favourable band bending could be obtained for promoting the hole extraction from the perovskite to ITO. This simple but effective approach enabled the fabrication of HTL-free PSCs based on a simplified device geometry, delivering an extraordinary PCE over 20%.


3.2.3. Slot-die coating. 
Slot-die coating, regarded as the most promising method towards mass production, has been extensively used in the fabrication of organic solar cells.166–168 The technology is similar to the blade coating approach; both use a moving meniscus liquid edge of the precursor ink to drive the spread of the liquid film across the substrate. The only difference is that the ink leaks out from a reservoir through a thin slit to the substrate, and thus the wet film thickness is determined directly by the supplied ink quantity, which is schematically illustrated in Fig. 12a.174 Similar to blade coating, the solvent removal rate during the slot-die coating deposition also plays a dominant role in the nucleation and crystal growth of the perovskite. Therefore, well controlling the solvent removal rate is of paramount importance to the slot-die coating of high quality perovskite films.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the slot die coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Slot-die coating with a gas-quenching process for the fabrication of the pinhole-free PbI2 layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM images of the perovskite films prepared with PbAc2:PbCl2 ratios of 10:0 and 8:2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) XRD and (e) GIWAXS pattern of a drop-cast 2D perovskite film annealed at 50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
In 2015, Vak et al. reported the fabrication of fully slot-die coated PSCs, except for the evaporated metal electrode.170 They developed a 3D printer based slot-die coater that had controllable xyz positions with acceleration and speed control. The perovskite film was prepared by the two-step method: the PbI2 layer was firstly formed by slot-die coating, followed by dipping of the PbI2 layer into MAI/IPA solution for full conversion into the perovskite. For the fabrication of the PbI2 layer, “gas quenching” was adopted to promote the nucleation of PbI2, so as to form a dense and uniform PbI2 layer (Fig. 12b). After converting into the perovskite, a good quality film morphology was obtained, which gave rise to a laboratory-scale device (inverted architecture, device area 0.1 cm2) with a photovoltaic efficiency of 11.9%. The same group further applied the same 3D printer-based slot-die coating technology to scale up the photovoltaic devices, and achieved a solar module (active area of 47.3 cm2) with a PCE of 4.6%.171 To simplify the slot-die coating process, one-step deposition of the perovskite film was then adopted. Kim et al. utilized PbAc2 and PbCl2 as mixed lead precursors in the precursor solution to modulate the film formation process. The nonhalide source PbAc2 could induce a fast crystallization due to the facile removal of the thermally unstable organic byproduct MAAc, which resulted in a relatively smooth and pinholeless perovskite film. These properties of PbAc2 were beneficial in scalable printing techniques which do not have self-quenching processes like spin coating. However, the fast crystallization of PbAc2 caused perovskite films with small crystal sizes (Fig. 12c) that would limit the solar cell performances. The combination of PbCl2 with PbAc2 was thus expected to alleviate the problem by retarding the crystallization by Cl− incorporation. Coupled with the “gas-assisted” approach to promote a rapid nucleation, a pinhole-free and large-grain perovskite film was obtained (Fig. 12c), leading to a 10 cm2 module with a PCE of 8.3%.172 Similarly, by applying the anti-solvent treatment in slot-die coating, Zhu et al. successfully produced perovskite films with good photophysical and structural characteristics that were comparable to those deposited from the spin coating method. The high quality films afforded an outstanding PCE over 18%, which has rivalled that of PSCs produced from the spin coating process.173 A scalable sheet-to-sheet slot-die coating process for perovskite devices was realized by Galagan et al., where large area modules of 12.5 × 13.5 cm2 were produced by slot-die coating on 6 in. × 6 in. substrates, in combination with a newly developed laser ablation process for conventional P1–P2–P3 monolithic cell interconnections. Over 10% PCE was achieved for the solar module, demonstrating a significant milestone in the evolution of scalable PSCs.174 Go flexible is another attractive topic for expanding the applications of PSCs to portable electronics, shaped display devices, wearable electronic textiles, etc. By employing a printed Ag electrode and a ITO/PET substrate, Krebs et al. developed flexible PSCs by slot-die roll coating under ambient conditions; a laboratory-scale device (0.2–0.5 cm2) with a PCE of 4.9% was achieved.175 An analogous technology was further adopted by Gao et al. to fabricate a 2D perovskite layer lately.176 The substrate was heated to 50 °C to induce nucleation at the liquid/air interface for the vertical growth of the 2D perovskite. Compared to the 2D perovskite prepared under room temperature, which showed randomly oriented crystals in the XRD pattern in Fig. 12d, the film prepared at 50 °C exhibited two major peaks at 14.04° and 28.28°, suggesting a high degree of texture in the film. GIWAXS patterns in Fig. 12f show a highly oriented vertical stacking of the 2D perovskite crystals to the substrate, which benefited the charge transport in the sandwiched PSC device with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/2D perovskite/PCBM/PEIE/Ag. With these favourable crystallization and crystal orientation, the small devices with an active area of 0.1 cm2 achieved a PCE of 12.5%. Further moving forward this process to roll-to-roll manufacturing yielded PSCs with a PCE over 8.0%. It is notable that compared with 3D perovskites, 2D perovskites generally show better capability to be self-assembled, which allows for a much more simplified fabricating procedure without “quenching” treatments. Therefore, in the future advancements of PSCs' up-scaling, 2D perovskites would be more appealing candidates than the 3D analogues.


3.2.4. Inkjet printing. 
The inkjet printing is a non-contact, material-conserving approach for the large-scale fabrication of functional layers in photovoltaics. During the operation of inkjet printing, a pressure pulse, which is generated by the piezoelectric transducer, drives the ejection of the precursor ink to the printing nozzle, as shown in Fig. 13a.177 The properties of the precursor ink play a critical role in guaranteeing the generation of stable droplets at the nozzle. For example, a minimum velocity, which correlates with the competition between fluid inertia and surface tension, is found to be necessary to trigger the droplet ejection at the nozzle to overcome the fluid/air resistance.177 In addition, the quality of film formation on a substrate strongly depends on the drop spreading, coalescence, solidification and uniformity of the film during drying. These are fundamentally determined by the interplay of the ink droplet and the substrate, such as the contact angle of the drop on the substrate, surface roughness, etc. Up to now, significant efforts have been made towards the organic opt-electronics by this technology, with great progress being achieved.178–180 For instance, the inkjet printing approach has successfully reached large-scale industrialization such as next-generation OLED production lines by Kateeva181 and LG.182 The delightful accomplishment greatly inspires the application of this manufacturing technology in perovskite devices.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the inkjet printing method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b–f) The printed points and films, and PbI2 surface morphology with different DMF/DMSO mixed solvents at different volume ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Yang et al. reported the first inkjet printed PSCs in 2014.183 To develop metal-electrode-free PSCs, they employed carbon as the top electrode, which was inactive to iodide in the perovskite. In addition, carbon was also a more compatible electrode than metals with respect to mass and low-cost production. They used carbon/MAI instead of pure MAI as a mixed ink to inkjet print on top of the PbI2 layer to form a perovskite upon thermal annealing. It was found that the precursor ink comprised of carbon generated better-defined crystallinity of the perovskite film, and an improved quality of the perovskite/carbon electrode interface. Due to the synergistic effects of carbon incorporation, the PSCs with a small active area of 0.15 cm2 showed the highest efficiency of 11.6%.183 Subsequently, the one-step inkjet printing of the PbI2 and MAI precursor ink onto a mesoscopic TiO2 structure was developed by Song et al.184 Analogous to the other printing technologies as previously described, the temperature of the substrate again strongly affects the film formation process. Proper heating of the substrate at 50 °C rapidly evaporated the solvents for a homogeneous thickness while avoiding pinholes arising from the too fast solvent evaporation. It could also circumvent the dewetting of the precursor solutions due to the too long drying time. As a consequence, a uniform, high-coverage and large-grained perovskite film was formed, resulting in PSCs with an optimized PCE of 12.3%.184 The same group further delved into the wetting behaviour of the ink droplet on a mesoporous substrate, the liquid viscosity and volatility by studying precursor solutions with different DMF:DMSO ratios to explore the underlying mechanism for grain growth.185 The high viscosity (1.996 mPa s) of DMSO could facilitate the ink solution membrane to keep within a certain area/thickness while it was undesirable for the homogeneous and complete diffusion of the solute. On the other hand, the low viscosity (0.796 mPa s) DMF benefited the spreading of precursor inks into an invisible thin solution film but it was challenging to control the diffusion behaviour of the droplets. Moreover, taking the boiling point into consideration, DMF with a relatively low boiling point (152.8 °C) induced a fast solvent evaporation and thus a homogeneous spreading of the solute, while high boiling point DMSO (189 °C) ensured a sufficient diffusion of the solute in the longitudinal direction but at the expense of dewetting of the precursor inks. Based on these considerations, the combination of DMF and DMSO was expected to afford a balance between the above effects. As shown in Fig. 13b–f, the printed film from high ratio DMF exhibited solute agglomeration while the printed film from high ratio DMSO showed rod-shapes. The mixture of DMF and DMSO with a volume ratio of 1:1 provided the optimal balance among the evaporation rate of the ink solvent, the crystallization rate of solute PbI2 and membrane thickness, which resulted in a uniformly coated PbI2 crystalline film. By optimization of these physical properties of the ink droplets, compact and microscale (>2 μm) perovskite crystalline grains were achieved, which yielded a high PCE of 18.6% for a small device (0.04 cm2) and 17.7% for a large area device (2.02 cm2). Later on, Gräztel et al. developed all printable air-processed PCSs.186 Mesostructured devices based on the architecture of FTO Glass/TiO2/ZrO2/MAPbI3/Carbon were fabricated, where TiO2, ZrO2 and carbon electrode were screen printed, and MAPbI3 was inkjet printed. 5-AVAI was added into the perovskite precursor as a template agent to improve the crystallinity and elongate the carrier lifetime of the perovskite thin film. In the meantime, the 5-AVAI incorporation prevented the clogging of the inkjet nozzles by retarding the perovskite crystal growth. Due to the optimization of perovskite film formation, highly reproducible and stable PSCs with a PCE of 8.7% were achieved. Under 1046 hours continuous 1 sun illumination at 35 °C without encapsulation, the device retained over 95% of its initial efficiency.186 With encapsulation, the devices demonstrated an exceptional durability under a harsh environment – showing no performance degradation for a period of 1002 hours under continuous and intense (1.5 sun UV light) illumination.187
As we’ve elaborated in the previous sections, anti-solvent is an effective treatment in spin coating perovskite thin films for triggering a fast nucleation and a uniform and pinhole-free film formation. This approach is however not suitable for inkjet printing owing to the slower drying mechanism. To mimic the anti-solvent effects in inkjet printing, Quintilla conducted vacuum annealing on the as-deposited precursor ink to stimulate an instant nucleation. The precursor ink consisted of PbI2 and MAI in a mixture of DMSO and GBL solvents, where GBL served as a high boiling point solvent and DMSO formed a solvate intermediate with PbI2 to positively affect the crystallization. It was found that the vacuum annealing treatment assisted the formation of a smooth perovskite film with complete surface coverage. Accompanied with multipass printing, which induced a dissolution and recrystallization of the wet film as previously discussed (Fig. 10e–g), the ultimate perovskite layer showed good quality with noticeably increased grain sizes. This inkjet-printed PSC demonstrated a PCE of 11.3%, which was comparable to that from the spin-coated devices (12.8%).188 Following a similar vacuum-assisted thermal annealing post-treatment, Xing et al. further enhanced the PCE of PSCs to 17.0% for small devices (0.04 cm2) and 13.3% for large devices (4.0 cm2). These PCEs presented the highest efficiencies for inkjet printed PSCs up to now.189 Recently, the technology has also been extended to the preparation of mixed triple cation Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 systems. PSCs based on the triple cation perovskite showed a maximum efficiency of 15.3% in the backward scan direction and 12.9% in continuous power output measurements, which are much higher than those from the mono cation based PSCs.190 The printed triple cation based PSCs also greatly outperformed PSCs based on MAPbI3 in terms of moisture and thermal stability. Triple cation based PSCs without encapsulation withstood 80 °C temperature for around 120 min with only 10% PCE drop, while MAPbI3 based devices were nearly totally degraded.
Despite the considerable progress in the fabrication of planar structured PSCs, the additional quenching steps (gas- or vacuum-assisted treatment) required in the film formation process are generally not applicable in large-scale industrial production. Mesoporous structures would thus be a more appealing alternative to the future development of inkjet printing of PSCs, as specifically speaking, the drop-by-drop deposition allows a precise control over the pore filling of the ink droplet. Optimization of the ink properties, such as capillary force, viscosity and wettability, as well as the pore geometry of the mesoporous metal oxide, which will affect the droplet formation and film formation on the substrate, is a possible endeavour for the future advancement of large-area uniform and pinhole-free perovskite films from inkjet printing technology.


3.2.5. Vacuum/vapor-assisted deposition. 
Vacuum deposition is an efficient and productive technique for the fabrication of large-scale and highly uniform optoelectronic thin films. The feasibility of vacuum-deposited perovskite thin films has also been demonstrated in recent years. Compared with solution-based fabrication as reviewed in the previous sections, vacuum deposition demonstrates exclusive advantages from the following aspects. Firstly, vacuum deposition enables the synthesis of a wider range of perovskite materials without the requirement for good solubility of precursor materials in solvents. Also, it allows a better control of the nominal stoichiometry of the precursors. For example, PbCl2 has poor solubility in common perovskite solvents such as DMF, DMSO, etc., and precisely controlling the stoichiometric composition would thus be a challenge in solution-processed perovskite films. Secondly, as many appropriate charge-selective layers have common solvents with perovskite precursors, it forbids their application in solution-processed PSCs. Vacuum deposition, on the other hand, grants the application of a large variety of HTMs or ETMs in PSCs. Thirdly, upon intensive outgassing of the precursor materials under a vacuum environment, the deposition approach is able to form higher purity perovskite films than those produced from the solution-process. Lastly, the wettability of the precursor on the substrate is no longer an issue, which not only improves the uniformity and surface coverage of the perovskite film, but also permits wider choices of electrode substrates or the charge-selective layer underneath.191
Snaith et al. performed vacuum-deposition of PSCs through dual-source deposition.192 A uniform and compact MAPbI3−xClx thin film was obtained by the co-evaporation of PbCl2 and MAI precursors, which gave rise to efficient planar-structured photovoltaic devices with a PCE of 15.4%. Using a similar approach, Bolink et al. deposited a pure MAPbI3 perovskite via the co-evaporation of PbI2 and MAI, which generated an extremely smooth and uniform film with a small root-mean-square roughness (Rrms) of 5 nm192 and an average grain size of 150 nm.193 The high quality film delivered PSCs with a highly reproducible PCE of ∼14.8%. But it was later argued that, during the co-evaporation, accurately monitoring and controlling the MAI deposition rate using quartz microbalance sensors would be a great challenge. It was because the small molecular weight of MAI would cause random diffusion of molecules inside the vacuum chamber.194 To address this issue, a sequential deposition of PbCl2 and MAI precursors was thus developed by Lin et al.194 The PbCl2 layer was firstly thermally deposited onto the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate, forming an ultrasmooth (Rrms of 7.8 nm) film with a uniform crystalline size (100–200 nm) and a full surface coverage. After depositing MAI subsequently, the resultant perovskite film maintained a smooth surface (Rrms of ∼22 nm) and high uniformity, generating PSCs with a PCE of 15.4%. The same group further discovered that the gas-like organic halide reagents could be easily monitored by measuring the partial pressure of the reagents nearby the substrate surface, which enabled a better manipulation over the organic halide quantity during thermal evaporation.195 As schematically shown in Fig. 14a, the partial pressure of organic halide gas was controlled by a tuneable vacuum gate valve between chamber B and the pumping system. It was observed that different pressure (10−5, 10−4, 10−3 Torr) resulted in distinctly disparate film morphologies. From Fig. 14b–d, the perovskite film fabricated under medium pressure (10−4 Torr) showed the largest crystal grain with a micrometer size, which was larger than the thickness of the film. It thus implied an efficient photocarrier extraction by the electrodes in the photovoltaic device. It was further revealed by XRD results that a low organic halide pressure (10−5 Torr) was insufficient to fully convert PbI2 into the perovskite. Under the optimized vapor pressure, the all-vacuum deposited PSCs based on the structure of ITO/Ca/C60/perovskite/4,4′-cyclohexylidenebis[N,N-bis(4-methylphenyl)benzenamine] (TAPC)/TAPC:MoO3/MoO3/Ag showed a promising PCE of 17.6%. Through vacuum doping the organic charge transport layer of TaTm-TCNNQ as the HTL and C60:PhIm as the ETL, Bolink further pushed the PCE of all-vacuum deposited PSCs over 20%, demonstrating a big breakthrough for the application of the technology in upscale industrial production.196 Note that N4,N4,N4′′,N4′′-tetra([1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-diamine (TaTm) is a HTL and (2,2′-(perfluoronaphthalene-2,6-diylidene)dimalononitrile) (TCNNQ) is a p-type dopant; N1,N4-bis(tri-p-tolylphosphoranylidene)-benzene-1,4-diamine (PhIm) is an n-type dopant.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the device fabrication chamber and the perovskite reaction chamber. Top-view SEM images of the perovskite films fabricated from 240 nm PbI2 at a partial pressure of (b) 10−5, (c) 10−4 and (d) 10−5 Torr. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e) Hybrid CVD based perovskite synthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199, Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is another vapor-phase deposition technique that enables throughput production for industrial applications.197,198 CVD is generally performed in a furnace tube, where the precursor powder is thermally sublimated into a gas phase followed by being transported onto the substrates within an inert gas stream. Perovskite film growth by a CVD approach was reported by Qi et al. in 2014, using the set-up schematically illustrated in Fig. 14e.199 Typically, perovskites prepared by CVD used an inert carrier gas such as nitrogen or argon to create an oxygen and moisture free environment. The multi-zone CVD shown in Fig. 14e had independent and precise control over the pressure, gas flow rate, MAI temperature and substrate temperature, which improved the reproducibility and performance of the perovskite films.199 PSCs prepared by the multi-zone CVD set-up showed an efficiency of 11.8%, and the devices were found to be stable under dry N2 gas.199 A similar deposition approach has also been extended to fabricate FAPbI3 films, and the solar module with an active area of 12 cm2 showed a steady-state PCE of 8.8%.205 They further combined the solution process, CVD and cation exchange to deposit the CsxFA1−xPbI3 mixed perovskite with higher stability. By this method, the Cs+ ratio can be precisely controlled, which contributed to an optimized module efficiency of 14.6% with a small PCE loss/area of 0.17% per cm2 (the module is based on Cs0.07FA0.93PbI3 and the module area is 12 cm2). The result demonstrated the significance of this method toward PSC upscaling.200 Very recently, the same group reported the combination of two scalable deposition techniques: raster ultrasonic spray coating and CVD. The novel spray technology combined with CVD technology not only overcame the coating size limitation of the existing stationary spray and single-pass spray, but also resulted in negligible lead waste during the PbI2 deposition, which made the technology environmentally friendly and transferable to industry. The FAPb(I0.85Br0.15)3 perovskite films prepared by the technology showed high film quality and uniformity, which gave rise to a high performance solar module (active area of 12.0 cm2) with a PCE of 14.7%.201
The perovskite film growth driven by ambient pressure thermal diffusion was attempted by Yang et al.202 The vapor-assisted solution process (VASP) reported in the work involved the solution-deposition of PbI2 onto substrates, loading the substrates into a heated closed container (150 °C) with MAI, and precursors’ full conversion into the perovskite after two-hour heating. The resultant perovskite film derived from this approach exhibited full surface coverage, precursors’ full conversion and uniform grain structures with grain size up to micrometers, which gave a PCE up to 12.1%.202 Similar deposition methods were also independently reported by other research groups, utilizing different chamber configurations, environmental pressures and reaction temperatures.203–207 Towards the upscaling of PSCs, the mixed cation Cs0.1FA0.9PbI2.9Br0.1 perovskite was prepared by combining the thermal co-evaporation of PbI2 and CsBr2, and chemical vapor deposition of FAI. A fully scalable perovskite solar module with 91.8 cm2 designated area on a 100 cm2 substrate was realized, which showed photovoltaic efficiency approaching 10%. Compared with pure MAPI3 based PSCs, the mixed cation perovskite exhibited much higher stability, and the encapsulated solar module exhibited an operational T80 lifetime of 500 hours under 1 sun illumination.208
Even though the vapor-deposition techniques assist the fabrication of full-coverage and uniform perovskite films over large areas, the complicated vacuum chamber configurations and the long reaction time (generally 1–2 hours) required for the deposition potentially hinder the low-cost manufacturing of scalable PSCs.
Aside from the perovskite active layer, challenges would also arise from homogeneously fabricating charge selective layers. For example, the thickness of compact ETLs (TiO2, SnO2) is normally tens of nm, and non-uniformity of the film deposition would result in direct contact between the perovskite layer and the electrode, which readily causes current leakage and low shunt resistance in the device. Thus, scalable deposition of uniform and dense ETLs and HTLs is just as important as making high quality perovskite active layers. Attempts have been made in this direction, such as atomic layer deposition, chemical bath deposition and electrodeposition of the TiO2 ETL,210–212 and sputtering, slot-die coating, and chemical bath deposition of the SnO2 ETL.213–215 However, research on the large-area fabrication of HTLs is quite limited,216 possibly because of the relatively harsh requirements to maintain the perovskite film intact (considering the conventional structure) during the deposition. More efforts are highly demanded in this area towards the realization of fully scalable deposition of the whole device.
Going from a single cell to solar modules would raise other intricate issues. The PSC module is developed by dividing large-area PSCs into small-area subcells by a series of interconnects, which could overcome the large parasitic resistive losses of the transparent conductive substrate in a long distance range. While the characteristics of the interconnections strongly affect the performance of solar modules, and it is of critical importance to reduce the resistance at the interconnect area. Effective approaches to this end have been demonstrated by adjusting the laser-scribing conditions or modifying the material properties in the contact region, and the details can be found in the review article of Kim et al.217

4. Stability
Albeit PSCs have reached a photovoltaic performance level that competes with that of the commercially available Si-solar cells and thin film solar cells, the device stability still lags far behind that of Si solar cells (more than 25 years of operational lifetime). It would fundamentally hurdle the practical application and commercialization of PSCs. Investigations have been conducted to improve the intrinsic stability of the photo-active layer, as has been discussed in the previous sections. For example, compositional engineering including the development of mixed cation perovskites218–223 and low-dimensional (2D) perovskites224–228 has been reported with significantly improved stability. Also, water-resistant small molecules or polymers have been incorporated into the perovskite film to prevent moisture diffusion into the perovskite grains.229–233 In addition to that, selection of the charge transporting layer/electrode,234–243 engineering of the device configuration243–246 and lamination of the devices247–250 are all of critical importance in pushing the stability of PSCs towards commercialization.
TiO2 has been traditionally used as the photoanode in DSSCs,251–253 and it has then evolved into the ETL of PSCs254–257 along with the development of perovskite photovoltaics. However TiO2 has some fatal drawbacks that make it incompatible with the commercialization of PSCs. Firstly, the TiO2 compact layers need to be sintered under high temperatures (400–500 °C) to increase crystallinity and carrier mobility, which is energy- and cost-ineffective and unsuitable for scalable fabrication. More importantly, UV illumination generates significant recombination of photogenerated holes in TiO2 and electrons at surface oxygen vacancies,258,259 acting as severe deep traps in TiO2, causing detrimental UV-instability of the whole PSC devices.260–262 SnO2, which is less catalytically active and more resilient under UV illumination, is therefore developed as an excellent replacement for TiO2.263–265 In addition, SnO2 possesses superior electrical properties than that of TiO2, giving rise to significantly improved charge transporting kinetics at the ETL/perovskite interfaces. As a result, the SnO2-based PSCs showed much better photovoltaic performance and higher photostability than that of TiO2-based PSCs, with almost no efficiency degradation after hours of continuous illumination in an ambient atmosphere.266–268 More importantly, SnO2 can be processed under low-temperature (<200 °C), which appeals to the low-cost fabrication of perovskite solar modules. SnO2 interfacial modification with fullerene or fullerene derivatives has further been brought up as an effective approach to increase the electrical conductivity and passivate the trap states of SnO2, which thus reduces both non-radiative and free carrier recombination at the ETL/perovskite interface.269–271 This generalized interfacial engineering tactic improves not only the photovoltaic performance but also the stability of PSCs.
Regarding the HTM in PSCs, spiro-OMeTAD is the most efficient and prevalently utilized candidate. However, due to the poor conductivity of pristine spiroOMeTAD (9.1 × 10−7 S cm−1), both LiTFSI (lithium bis-trifluoromethanesulfonyl imide) and TBP (tert-butylpyridine) have to be incorporated as co-additives to attain a decent conductivity.272–274 Despite high efficiencies being achieved by this HTM system, it was pointed out that the two additives would raise intrinsic stability issues in PSCs. LiTFSI was hygroscopic, which accelerated the moisture-induced decomposition of the perovskite.275,276 Meanwhile pyridine derivatives corroded the perovskite due to the formation of new complexes with PbI2, resulting in chemical decomposition of the perovskite and deterioration of the perovskite/HTM interface.277 To address the above issues, Cheng et al. developed tetrabutylammonium (TBA) salts (TBATFSI) as a substitution of both LiTFSI and TBP additives in spiro-OMeTAD based PSCs. The PSCs showed a slightly higher PCE of 18.4% than that of pristine PSCs (18.1%).278 Importantly, the devices demonstrated significantly improved moisture and thermal stability by retaining more than 60% of the initial PCE after 1 month aging in the dark with 50% relative humidity and after 8 hours heating at 85 °C with 50% relative humidity, respectively.278 By replacing TBP with a new pyridine additive containing a long alkyl chain at the o-position, Han et al. effectively improved the perovskite stability with no corrosion observed.277 Seo et al. designed and synthesized a fluorene-terminated spiro-derivative (denoted as DM) with a fine-tuned HOMO level in an effort to enhance VOC and thus the PSC performance. Moreover, the novel molecule with a high glass transition temperature (Tg of ∼160 °C) ensured thermally stable PSCs. The PSCs showed an outstanding PCE of 23.2% and 21.7% for small- (0.094 cm2) and large-area (1 cm2) cells, respectively, and impressive thermal stability by maintaining 95% of the initial performance for more than 500 hours heating at 60 °C.12 On top of spiro-OMeTAD, other alternative HTMs have been developed as well. For example, Snaith et al. produced concentrator photovoltaics with a PCE of 23.6% under 14 sun illumination by using PTAA as the HTM, and the device exhibited exceptional photo-stability by retaining 90% of the initial PCE after 10 sun illumination for 150 hours.279 But typically, similar to spiro-OMeTAD, PTAA is subject to low hole mobility and conductivity in its pristine form due to its amorphous nature. Therefore, dopants or additives are required to be incorporated towards the fabrication of highly efficient PSCs,280–293 which is however not desirable for stable devices. In the quest for stable PSCs, exploring efficient dopant-free HTMs would be highly demanded. The inorganic material copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) was proposed as the HTM without the requirement of dopants, which yielded PSCs with a stabilized efficiency exceeding 20%.284 However poor operational stability was caused by the potential-induced degradation of the CuSCN/Au contact. Further incorporating a conductive reduced graphene oxide spacer layer between CuSCN and Au remarkably addressed the stability issues, with the device retaining 95% of the initial PCE after aging at the maximum power point for 1000 hours.284 To push forward the large-area fabrication of PSCs, scalable deposition of CuSCN was realized by both doctor-blading and spray coating methods, which resulted in PSCs with a PCE of 12.4% and 17.1% respectively.285,286 Metal phthalocyanines, such as copper phthalocyanines (CuPcs) and zinc phthalocyanines (ZnPcs), have also been adopted as HTMs.287-272 In particular, Sun et al. reported the molecular engineering of the CuPc via a small structural change from butyl groups to butoxy groups in the substituents of the Pc rings, which strongly affected the molecular ordering and improved the hole mobility of the HTM. PSCs based on the dopant-free CuPc-derivative as the HTM achieved an increased PCE of 17.6% and markedly improved ambient stability as compared to the doped spiro-OMeTAD based PSCs.292 p-Type conjugated polymers, such as PTB7 and P3HT,293–298 have been proposed as another type of HTMs in PSCs, which however generally need to be used with p-type dopants to ensure high conductivity and charge mobility. Very recently, efforts have been made toward the development of high performance PSCs using dopant-free p-type polymers.235,299–302 For instance, Seo designed the growth of a wide bandgap halide perovskite on the top of the narrow bandgap perovskite film in an attempt to suppress electron transport to the anode in PSCs. In conjunction with a dopant-free P3HT as the HTM, a certified efficiency of 22.7% and impressive stability have been achieved from small devices. They further extended the platform to large-area modules (24.97 cm2), which used a scalable bar-coating method for the deposition of P3HT, and a promising PCE of 16.0% was obtained.235
From the stability point of view, inorganic HTMs generally have the potential of realizing PSCs with higher stability than their organic analogues. Thus efforts towards exploring more suitable inorganic materials for PSC applications, and the scalable deposition and nanostructure optimization of inorganic HTMs are worthy to realize the large-scale fabrication of highly efficient and long-term stable PSCs.
Electrodes of PSCs also strongly affect the long-term stability of the devices. Ag and Au are the most widely utilized top electrodes in PSCs. But they both could cause severe irreversible degradation of the device by diffusing into the perovskite and reacting with halide to form silver or gold halides.303 In this regard, Yang et al. reported the utilization of Cr2O3/Cr as contact instead of Ag or Al in PSCs, which was proved to be chemically inert to iodide.304 They also found that inserting a thin layer of Cr between the HTM and Au electrode was able to prevent Au diffusion into the perovskite, thus dramatically enhancing the stability of PSCs.305 Cu, with better corrosion resistance to halogens and considered as a better electrode, was firstly applied in PSCs by Huang et al.306 Without a noticeable Cu diffusion into the perovskite, or a chemical reaction between Cu and perovskite, a simple HTL-free device with Cu/perovskite contact could be stable under high temperature annealing for over 100 hours. For a normal device with HTL, the PSCs showed PCEs over 20%, which are comparable to those using Au or Ag as the electrode. More importantly, PSCs based on the Cu electrode exhibited much superior stability by sustaining 98% of the initial value after 800 hours storage in an ambient environment with 55% humidity.306,307 In contrast to metals, carbon material was demonstrated as a more attractive electrode type for low-cost and stable PSCs.307–310 Han et al. firstly utilized the carbon electrode in the fabrication of HTM-free PSCs.313 The carbon was processed via screen-printing, which was compatible with large-scale production. Also, the thick porous carbon electrode protected the perovskite film from moisture interdiffusion, which endowed the PSCs with exceptional long-term stability. The fully printable device showed a certified PCE of 12.8% and was stable for over 1000 hours in ambient air under full sun illumination.310 By further employing the more thermally stable mixed cation FA0.8Cs0.2PbI2.64Br0.36 perovskite as the active layer, PSCs based on the carbon electrode showed an efficiency of 14.9% and an impressive stability of retaining 77% of the initial PCE after storage under double “85” aging conditions (85% RH, 85 °C temperature) for 192 hours without encapsulation.311 The inspiring results suggested the carbon electrode as an excellent candidate for realizing stable and efficient PSCs overcoming the double “85” issue towards commercialization and practical applications.
In addition to improving the stability of PSCs via the engineering of perovskite materials, charge selective layers and top electrodes, encapsulation provides the device with direct and extra protection against moisture, oxygen and heat induced degradation. A simple encapsulation approach for laboratory research includes covering the device by a thin glass coverslip and subsequently sealing the edges with a UV curable epoxy resin.312–314 However, most epoxies are rigid which would easily crack under temperature cycling. A mature encapsulation technology, which has been widely used in silicon solar cells, is glass–glass encapsulation. It consists of an edge seal to delay the moisture ingress, and an encapsulant to fill the excess volume in the package, which thus ensures that the edge seal remains compressed throughout prolonged field exposure. This approach has been applied in PSCs, with butyl rubber applied as an edge seal and ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) utilized as an encapsulant. The packed device withstood a 1000 hours damp heat test under double “85” conditions.315,316 Exploiting more reliable and cost-effective encapsulation materials, identifying their heat, humidity and temperature resilience, and minimizing their negative effects on PSC functional layers should be future research directions for realizing long-term stable PSCs for practical application.
In large area module devices, more factors should be considered other than the general degradation causes for small cells, such as moisture, light illumination, thermal stress, etc. In the PSC modules, the perovskite film is scribed and partially exposed to the metal electrode or air at the interconnect area. Therefore, at the module level, there would exist particular challenges such as the material incompatibility at interconnections,217 halogen-induced degradation of module interconnections, and local hot spots or inverted-bias junction damage caused by shaded cells.317 Han et al. recently reported a strategy of blocking the iodide diffusion channels by introducing low-dimensional (0D, 1D, 2D) diffusion barriers, which consist of chemically and thermally stable metal oxide nanoparticles, inert silicon-based organic polymers, and 2D nano-structured inorganic materials, respectively.318 By this design, the iodide leakage rate was reduced 103–107 times, which prevented the degradation of the Ag interconnect. As a result, a highly stable PSC module with an efficiency of 15.6% at an aperture area of 36 cm2 was achieved, which retained 95% of the initial PCE after 1000 h heating at 85 °C and 91% of the initial PCE after 1000 h light-soaking at maximum power point tracking.318 Therefore, to actually realize highly stable PSC modules, more in-depth investigations are necessary to unveil the complex degradation causes at the module level.
5. Conclusions and outlook
The emergence of organometallic perovskites as photoactive materials has revolutionized the next-generation photovoltaics owing to their extraordinary optical and electronic properties. The extensive ongoing research on laboratory-scale devices has pushed the PSCs to a performance level that rivals the commercialized Si-solar cells and CIGS solar cells. Nevertheless, to realize the industrial mass production of PSCs, it is imperative to transit the PSCs from laboratory-scale to large solar modules, where the large-area fabrication of uniform and high quality perovskite films is critical. In this review, we discussed the fundamentals of the nucleation and crystal growth of perovskites. The underlying crystallization physics enlightened us that simultaneously suppressing the crystal growth while accelerating the nucleation is essential to homogeneously form large grain-sized perovskite thin films. From this point of view, we highlighted a variety of film morphological engineering methods, including anti-solvent, gas-assisted treatments, Lewis base–acid intermediate formation, thermal/solvent annealing treatment, etc. in both 3D and 2D perovskites. Subsequently, we systematically reviewed the mass production techniques, including spray coating, doctor-blading, slot-die coating, inkjet printing and vacuum/vapor-assisted deposition, from the aspects of technical control and large-scale morphological modulation. Despite the great progress in the large-area fabrication of PSCs, there is still a considerable efficiency gap between the small devices and perovskite solar modules. More work needs to be done in the future towards the understanding of the solution- to solid-phase nucleation and crystal growth mechanisms in mass production approaches, aiming to achieve ultra-uniform fabrication of perovskite thin films in large scale.
Stability is another important topic in realizing the practical applications of PSCs. The MA-based perovskite system, which has the most elucidated crystallization mechanism to date, yet shows poor moisture and thermal stability due to the hydrophilicity and volatility of MA+, making it unsuitable for industrial production and practical use. The Cs–FA mixed system, on the other hand, showing stronger resilience to moisture, heat and temperature, could be more appealing to future investigations. Nevertheless, the crystallite formation kinetics of the Cs–FA mixed system still remains unclear, which impedes the optimization of mixed cation perovskite film morphology. Delving into the film formation kinetics of the mixed cation perovskite should be one of the significant research endeavours to realize highly efficient and long-term stable PSCs. Previous studies revealed that 2D perovskites possess highly oriented crystals, perfect surface coverage, and notably higher ambient stability due to the moisture-resistant bulky organic cations, as compared to those of the 3D perovskites. These advantages make the 2D perovskites perfect candidates for the homogeneous, large-area production of long-term stable PSCs. More research is demanded in this area to establish judicious selection criteria for suitable mass-production techniques for 2D perovskite films and molecular design principles for 2D materials. In terms of photovoltaic performance of the 2D PSCs, the insulting long-chain organic cations severely hinder charge transport across the perovskite inorganic slabs, limiting the photocurrent of the 2D PSCs. Even though enormous efforts have been devoted to achieving the vertical orientation of the perovskite crystals, aiming to ameliorate the organic long-chain steric effects, the efficiencies of 2D PSCs are still hard to compete with that of 3D counterparts. Substituting the insulating organic cations with electronic-active organic components would be an intriguing direction. The electronic-active organic cations not only contribute to additional absorption of the 2D perovskite, but also improve the carrier transport across the perovskite sheets through π–π interactions. Through this novel design, we would expect to develop highly efficient and ultra-stable 2D PSCs for commercialization.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (21925506), the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFE0106000), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51773212), the Ningbo S&T Innovation 2025 Major Special Programme (2018B10055), the Ningbo Municipal Science and Technology Innovative Research Team (2015B11002 and 2016B10005), and the CAS Key Project of Frontier Science Research (QYZDB-SSW-SYS030).
Notes and references
D. Mitzi, Prog. Inorg. Chem., 1999, 48, 1–121 CAS .
K. Chondroudis and D. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3028–3030 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, T. Salim, N. Mathews, M. Duchamp, C. Boothroyd, G. Xing, T. C. Sum and Y. M. Lam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 399–407 RSC .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, R. van de Krol, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and J.-E. Moser, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, T. Kenjiro, S. Yasuo and M. Tsutomu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte and B. Rech, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, F. Huang, D. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502027 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Best Research-Cell Efficiencies Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20190802.pdf.
J. M. Ball, S. D. Stranks, M. T. Hörantner, S. Hüttner, W. Zhang, E. J. Crossland, I. Ramirez, M. Riede, M. B. Johnston and R. H. Friend, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 602–609 RSC .
M. A. Green, Y. Hishikawa, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger and A. W. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 26, 3–12 Search PubMed .

          https://www.solaronix.com/news/solaronix-achieves-major-breakthrough-toward-perovskite-solar-cell-industrialization/
        .
G. Grancini, C. R. Oldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://gsl.irmau.com/site/PDF/2630_0/March2018QuarterlyReportandAppendix4C
        .

          https://www.perovskite-info.com/microquanta-reaches-179-perovskite-solar-mini-module
        .
R. Strey, P. E. Wagner and Y. Viisanen, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7748–7758 CrossRef CAS .

          J. W. Mullin, Crystallization, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,  2001 Search PubMed .
K. S. Gu and H. Taeghwan, Small, 2011, 7, 2685–2702 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Kamaruddin and W. J. Koros, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 135, 147–159 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sugimoto, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 1987, 28, 65–108 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ostwald, Z. Phys. Chem., Stoechiom. Verwandtschaftsl., 1900, 34, 495–503 Search PubMed .
A. Baldan, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 2171–2202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 37, 9898–9903 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Paek, P. Schouwink, E. N. Athanasopoulou, K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, Y. Zhang, F. Stellacci, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3490–3498 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, S. Yang, L. Lei, Q. Cao, J. Shao, S. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3667–3676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gedamu, I. M. Asuo, D. Benetti, M. Basti, I. Ka, S. G. Cloutier, F. Rosei and R. Nechache, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 12885 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, P. Zhang, D. Liu, T. Zhang, L. Ji, X. Gu, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 616–625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, X. Dong and P. Wang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1041–1048 RSC .
T. Bu, L. Wu, X. Liu, X. Yang, P. Zhou, X. Yu, T. Qin, J. Shi, S. Wang, S. Li and Z. Ku, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700576 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, Z. Wang, B. Zhou, X. Jia, Q. Ma, N. Yuan, X. Zheng, J. Ding and W. H. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700213 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178–8184 RSC .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou and A. Gray-Weale, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J. D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, G. H. Kim, K. S. Oh, Y. Jo, H. Yoon, K. H. Kim, H. Lee, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6057–6064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, V. L. Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Cao, Nanostructures and nanomaterials: synthesis, properties and applications, World Scientific,  2004 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, K. Wang, C. Yi, X. Shi, P. Du, A. W. Smith, A. Karim and X. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6600–6606 RSC .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C. Z. Li, R. H. Friend, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abrusci, S. D. Stranks, P. Docampo, H. L. Yip, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3124–3128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, Q. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, Z. Liu, Y. T. Hsieh, L. Meng, Y. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15540–15547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. Du, T. Meng, X. Yu, S. Z. Cheng and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1153–1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xue, G. Chen, M. Liu, J. Xiao, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, X. Jiang, B. Zhang, F. Huang, W. Yang and H. L. Yip, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502021 CrossRef .
A. Giuri, S. Masi, S. Colella, A. Kovtun, S. Dell'Elce, E. Treossi, A. Liscio, C. Esposito Corcione, A. Rizzo and A. Listorti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6985–6994 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ávila, C. Momblona, P. P. Boix, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Joule, 2017, 1, 431–442 CrossRef .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Son, J. W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I. H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N. G. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, L. Shen, J. Dai, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Wei and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2017, 2, 1604545 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, Z. Dai, C. Lee, H. M. Lee, T. H. Han, N. De Marco, O. Lin, C. S. Choi, B. Dunn, J. Koh and D. Di Carlo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6317–6324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, S. H. Bae, Y. T. Hsieh, N. De Marco, M. Wang, P. Sun and Y. Yang, Chem, 2017, 3, 290–302 CAS .
N. D. Pham, V. T. Tiong, P. Chen, L. Wang, G. J. Wilson, J. Bell and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5195–5203 RSC .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 RSC .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Cheng, D. Li, F. Lin, J. Mao, C. Liang, A. K. Y. Jen, M. Grätzel and W. C. Choy, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604695 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J. D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cacciuto, S. Auer and D. Frenkel, Nature, 2014, 428, 404–406 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Auer and D. Frenkel, Nature, 2001, 413, 711–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Qin, G. Yang, Z. W. Ren, S. H. Cheung, S. K. So, L. Chen, J. Hao, J. Hou and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706126 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, X. Zhang, J. Lei, H. Bin, Z. G. Zhang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701757 CrossRef .
C. C. Zhang, M. Li, Z. K. Wang, Y. R. Jiang, H. R. Liu, Y. G. Yang, X. Y. Gao and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2572–2579 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Yan, W. Zhou, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, N. Zhou, S. J. Lou, J. Smith, D. B. Tice, J. W. Hennek, R. P. Ortiz, J. T. L. Navarrete, S. Li, J. Strzalka and L. X. Chen, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 825–833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, W. Rehman, F. Pulvirenti, J. B. Patel, N. K. Noel, M. B. Johnston, S. R. Marder, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607039 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4460–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, Y. Bai, X. Meng, T. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Hu, Y. Qu and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604944 CrossRef .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Cui, L. Ci, K. Ding and J. Wei, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 868–875 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, K. Wang, C. Yi, X. Shi, A. W. Smith, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 101–110 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. J. van Franeker, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Pathak, R. J. Sutton, G. Grancini, D. S. Ginger and R. A. Janssen, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9380–9393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Gangishetty, R. W. Scott and T. L. Kelly, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6300–6307 RSC .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T. B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
A. Dubey, N. Kantack, N. Adhikari, K. M. Reza, S. Venkatesan, M. Kumar, D. Khatiwada, S. Darling and Q. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10231–10240 RSC .
G. Grancini, V. D'Innocenzo, E. R. Dohner, N. Martino, A. S. Kandada, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis, H. I. Karunadasa, E. T. Hoke and A. Petrozza, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7305–7310 RSC .
A. M. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. Van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson and P. Docampo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
A. Halder, D. Choudhury, S. Ghosh, A. S. Subbiah and S. K. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3180–3184 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hailegnaw, S. Kirmayer, E. Edri, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak and L. Pedesseau, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding and N. S. Ginsberg, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, L. N. Quan and R. Quintero-Bermudez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693–6699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, W. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Z. Chen, M. Shiu, J. H. Ma, M. R. Alpert, D. Zhang, B. J. Foley, D. M. Smilgies, S. H. Lee and J. J. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1336 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Z. Chen, M. Shiu, X. Deng, M. Mahmoud, D. Zhang, B. J. Foley, S. H. Lee, G. Giri and J. J. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1336–1343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Fang, J. Zhao, Y. Shao, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, H. Ade, Q. Wang, J. E. Shield, N. Zhou and A. M. Moran, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1008 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. Gold-Parker, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, Z. Yang, S. O. Kelley, A. Amassian, M. F. Toney and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 900–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. M. Soe, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, H. Tsai, J. C. Blancon, F. Liu, J. Even, T. J. Marks, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1700979 CrossRef .
L. Gao, F. Zhang, C. Xiao, X. Chen, B. W. Larson, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 19, 3680–3695 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, R. Munir, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. Li, T. Niu, D. M. Smilgies, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707166 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yu, Y. Yan, Y. Chen, P. Chábera, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2015–2021 RSC .
W. Ke, L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Hoffman, I. Spanopoulos, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803384 CrossRef .
J. Qiu, Y. Zheng, Y. Xia, L. Chao, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, W. Zhang, X. Su, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700162 CrossRef .
X. Lian, J. Chen, M. Qin, Y. Zhang, T. Shuoxun, X. Lu, G. Wu and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9409–9413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. Lu, J. S. Park, B. Larson, J. Hu, L. Gao, C. Xiao, O. Reid, X. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. Ndione, J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, P. Fu, S. Yu, Q. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. Guo and C. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 794–806 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Cohen, Y. Li, Q. Meng and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2588–2597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. M. Soe, C. C. Stoumpos, M. Kepenekian, B. Traoré, H. Tsai, W. Nie, B. Wang, C. Katan, R. Seshadri, A. Mohite, J. Even, T. Marks and M. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16297–16309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, P. Wang, M. C. Tang, D. Barrit, W. Ke, J. Liu, T. Luo, Y. Liu, T. Niu, D.-M. Smilgies, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, S. Jin, M. Kanatzidis, A. Amassian, S. Liu and K. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2684–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Luo, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, T. Niu, J. Wen, J. Lu, S. Jin, S. Liu and K. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. L. Piacentino, C. Zheng and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7617–7620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Li, W. Huang, D. Gao and Z. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11997–11999 RSC .
S. Yang, W. Liu, L. Zuo, X. Zhang, T. Ye, J. Chen, C. Z. Li, G. Wu and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9430–9436 RSC .
X. Zhang, G. Wu, S. Yang, W. Fu, Z. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Liu, J. Yan, W. Yang and H. Chen, Small, 2017, 13, 1700611 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, G. Wu, W. Fu, M. Qin, W. Yang, J. Yan, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702498 CrossRef .
H. Lai, B. Kan, T. Liu, N. Zheng, Z. Xie, T. Zhou, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11639–11646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yu, Y. Yan, Y. Chen, P. Chábera, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2015–2021 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Ren, B. Liu, R. Munir, X. Zhu, D. Yang, J. Li, Y. Liu, D. M. Smilgies, R. Li and Z. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2095–2102 RSC .
J. C. Blancon, A. V. Stier, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traore, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, F. Katsutani, G. T. Noe and J. Kono, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2254 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 3733–3741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, V. Shanmugam, J. Schlipf, L. Oesinghaus, P. Müller-Buschbaum, N. Ramakrishnan, V. Swamy, N. Mathews, P. P. Boix and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3653–3661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
L. Iagher and L. Etgar, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lee, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Chen, Y. Cho, X. Deng, J. Seidel, S. Lim, S. Huang and A. W. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 647–654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, T. Qiu, F. Bai, W. Ruan and S. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703620 CrossRef .
M. Jung, T. J. Shin, J. Seo, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2188–2197 RSC .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, C. P. Muzzillo, J. Tong, A. F. Palmstrom, B. W. Larson, C. Choi, S. Harvey, S. Glynn, J. Whitaker, F. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Lu, M. van Hest, J. Berry, L. Mansfield, Y. Huang, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1734–1745 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tong, Z. Song, D. H. Kim, X. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. Ndione, M. Reese, S. Dunfiled, O. Reid, J. Liu, F. Zhang, S. Harvey, Z. Li, S. Christensen, G. Teeter, D. Zhao, M. Al-Jassim, M. van Hest, M. Beard, S. Shaheen, J. Berry, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Science, 2019, 364, 475–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. Schlipf, M. Wussler, M. L. Petrus, W. Jaegermann, T. Bein, P. Müller-Buschbaum and P. Docampo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5999–6007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, E. Oveisi, J. Ryu, O. Almora, M. Tschumi, P. A. Schouwink, G. Seo, S. Heo and J. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 952–959 RSC .
J. Zhang, D. Bai, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703246 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, H. Lin, Y. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701038 CrossRef .
F. Wang, W. Geng, Y. Zhou, H. H. Fang, C. J. Tong, M. A. Loi, L. M. Liu and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9986–9992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, V. Shanmugam, X. Guo, S. S. Lim, O. Filonik, E. M. Herzig, P. Müller-Buschbaum, V. Swamy, S. T. Chien, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2122–2128 RSC .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ahmadian-Yazdi, A. Rahimzadeh, Z. Chouqi, Y. Miao and M. Eslamian, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 025109 CrossRef .
M. Habibi, A. Rahimzadeh, I. Bennouna and M. Eslamian, Coatings, 2017, 7, 42 CrossRef .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 RSC .
H. Huang, J. Shi, L. Zhu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 352–358 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Mohamad, J. Griffin, C. Bracher, A. T. Barrows and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600994 CrossRef .
Z. Liang, S. Zhang, X. Xu, N. Wang, J. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Bi, G. Xu, N. Yuan and J. Ding, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60562–60569 RSC .
F. Zabihi, M. R. Ahmadian-Yazdi and M. Eslamian, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 71 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Tait, S. Manghooli, W. Qiu, L. Rakocevic, L. Kootstra, M. Jaysankar, C. M. de la Huerta, U. W. Paetzold, R. Gehlhaar, D. Cheyns and P. Heremans, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3792–3797 RSC .
J. E. Bishop, T. J. Routledge and D. G. Lidzey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, B. Yang, G. Gu, P. C. Joshi, I. N. Ivanov, C. M. Rouleau, T. Aytug, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 680–686 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, M. H. Lee, M. H. Jang and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17636–17642 RSC .
C. F. J. Lau, X. Deng, Q. Ma, J. Zheng, J. S. Yun, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 573–577 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, W. Wu, H. Li, B. Zheng, Y. Xue, J. Xu, D. Zhang, C. Gao and X. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 14792–14798 RSC .
G. S. Kim, H. K. Seo, V. P. Godble, Y. S. Kim, O. B. Yang and H. S. Shin, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 961–966 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kim, J. H. Yum and Y. E. Sung, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2005, 171, 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401229 CrossRef .
S. Razza, F. Di Giacomo, F. Matteocci, L. Cina, A. L. Palma, S. Casaluci, P. Cameron, A. D'epifanio, S. Licoccia, A. Reale and T. M. Brown, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 286–291 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, J. H. Kim, P. W. Liang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500328 CrossRef .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 8, 1544–1550 RSC .
Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 578–583 RSC .
J. Li, R. Munir, Y. Fan, T. Niu, Y. Liu, Y. Zhong, Z. Yang, Y. Tian, B. Liu, J. Sun and D. M. Smilgies, Joule, 2018, 2, 1313–1330 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Shirai, X. Yang, Y. Yue, W. Chen, Y. Wu, A. Islam and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4918–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, Y. Deng, X. Zheng, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Dong, H. Wei and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700302 CrossRef .
M. Yang, Z. Li, M. O. Reese, O. G. Reid, D. H. Kim, S. Siol, T. R. Klein, Y. Yan, J. J. Berry, M. F. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17038 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, B. Li, X. Cui, B. Jiang, Y. He, Y. Chen, D. O’Neil, P. Szymanski, M. A. Ei-Sayed, J. Huang and Z. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, X. Zheng, Y. Bai, Q. Wang, J. Zhao and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 560–566 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, S. Tang, Y. Deng, H. Lu, Y. Liu, T. Li, Z. Yang and A. Gruverman, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1625 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 465–475 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vak, K. Hwang, A. Faulks, Y. S. Jung, N. Clark, D. Y. Kim, G. J. Wilson and S. E. Watkins, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401539 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jørgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994–9001 RSC .
L. Cai, L. Liang, J. Wu, B. Ding, L. Gao and B. Fan, J. Semicond., 2017, 38, 014006 CrossRef .
K. Hwang, Y. S. Jung, Y. J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D. Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vak, K. Hwang, A. Faulks, Y. S. Jung, N. Clark, D. Y. Kim, G. J. Wilson and S. E. Watkins, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401539 CrossRef .
D. Lee, Y. S. Jung, Y. J. Heo, S. Lee, K. Hwang, Y. J. Jeon, J. E. Kim, J. Park, G. Y. Jung and D. Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16133–16139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Whitaker, D. H. Kim, B. W. Larson, F. Zhang, J. J. Berry, M. F. van Hest and K. Zhu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2442–2449 RSC .
F. Di Giacomo, S. Shanmugam, H. Fledderus, B. J. Bruijnaers, W. J. Verhees, M. S. Dorenkamper, S. C. Veenstra, W. Qiu, R. Gehlhaar, T. Merckx and T. Aernouts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 181, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Schmidt, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. E. Carlé, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500569 CrossRef .
C. Zuo, A. D. Scully, D. Vak, W. Tan, X. Jiao, C. R. McNeill, D. Angmo, L. Ding and M. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803258 CrossRef .
X. Peng, J. Yuan, S. Shen, M. Gao, A. S. Chesman, H. Yin, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang and D. Angmo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703704 CrossRef .
G. Azzellino, A. Grimoldi, M. Binda, M. Caironi, D. Natali and M. Sampietro, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6829–6833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhan, J. An, Y. Wei and H. Du, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 965–993 RSC .
F. Villani, P. Vacca, G. Nenna, O. Valentino, G. Burrasca, T. Fasolino, C. Minarini and D. della Sala, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13398–13402 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.oled-info.com/boe-use-kateevas-inkjet-printed-establish-pilot-oled-tv-production-line-hefei
        .

          https://www.flatpanelshd.com/news.php?subaction=showfull&id=1554270848
        .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Li, K. J. Jiang, M. J. Su, X. P. Cui, J. H. Huang, Q. Q. Zhang, X. Q. Zhou, L. M. Yang and Y. L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9092–9097 RSC .
P. Li, C. Liang, B. Bao, Y. Li, X. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, G. Shao and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Hashmi, D. Martineau, X. Li, M. Ozkan, A. Tiihonen, M. I. Dar, T. Sarikka, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Paltakari, P. D. Lund and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600183 CrossRef .
S. G. Hashmi, A. Tiihonen, D. Martineau, M. Ozkan, P. Vivo, K. Kaunisto, V. Ulla, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4797–4802 RSC .
F. Mathies, T. Abzieher, A. Hochstuhl, K. Glaser, A. Colsmann, U. W. Paetzold, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and A. Quintilla, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19207–19213 RSC .
C. Liang, P. Li, H. Gu, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Song, G. Shao, N. Mathews and G. Xing, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700217 CrossRef .
F. Mathies, H. Eggers, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1834–1839 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Ono, M. R. Leyden, S. Wang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6693–6713 RSC .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chen, H. W. Kang, S. Y. Hsiao, P. F. Yang, K. M. Chiang and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6647–6652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Hsiao, H. L. Lin, W. H. Lee, W. L. Tsai, K. M. Chiang, W. Y. Liao, C. Z. Ren-Wu, C. Y. Chen and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7013–7019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, E. Bandiello, E. M. Hutter, M. Sessolo, K. Lederer, J. Blochwitz-Nimoth and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3456–3463 RSC .
L. Qiu, S. He, L. K. Ono, S. Liu and Y. Qi, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2147–2167 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Park, J. Huang and Y. Qi, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2378–2380 RSC .
M. R. Leyden, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, Y. Kato, S. Wang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18742–18745 RSC .
Y. Jiang, M. R. Leyden, L. Qiu, S. Wang, L. K. Ono, Z. Wu, E. Juarez-Perz and Y. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1703835 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, M. Remeika, Z. Hu, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. Qiu, Z. Liu, T. Kim, L. Ono, D. Son, Z. Hawash, M. R. Leyden, Z. Wu, L. Meng, J. Hu and Y. Qi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803047 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 136, 622–625 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, L. Gu, Y. Gao, C. Reckmeier, J. He, A. L. Rogach, Y. Yao and Z. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14083 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Luo, Z. Liu, W. Xia, C. Yuan, J. Cheng and Y. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2708–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Leyden, M. V. Lee, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16097–16103 RSC .
M. R. Leyden, Y. Jiang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13125–13132 RSC .
P. Luo, Z. Liu, W. Xia, C. Yuan, J. Cheng and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12443–12451 RSC .
L. Qiu, S. He, Y. Jiang, D. Y. Son, L. K. Ono, Z. Liu, T. Kim, T. Bouloumis, S. Kazaoui and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6920–6929 RSC .
L. Luo, Y. Zhang, N. Chai, X. Deng, J. Zhong, F. Huang, Y. Peng, Z. Ku and Y. B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21143–21148 RSC .
F. Di Giacomo, V. Zardetto, A. D'Epifanio, S. Pescetelli, F. Matteocci, S. Razza, A. D. Carlo, S. Licoccia, W. Kessel, M. Creatore and T. M. Brown, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401808 CrossRef .
C. Liang, Z. Wu, P. Li, J. Fan, Y. Zhang and G. Shao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 337–344 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Su, T. Y. Hsieh, C. Y. Hong and T. C. Wei, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, Z. Liu, L. K. Ono, Y. Jiang, D. Y. Son, Z. Hawash, S. He and Y. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuang, V. Zardetto, R. van Gils, S. Karwal, D. Koushik, M. A. Verheijen, L. Black, C. Weijtens, S. Veenstra, R. Andriessen, W. Kessels and M. Creatore, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(36), 30367–30378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, C. C. Chueh, Z. Zhu, W. C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
T. Qin, W. Huang, J. E. Kim, D. Vak, C. Forsyth, C. R. McNeill and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, J. B. Whitaker, Z. Li, M. F. van Hest and K. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1437–1451 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
M. Deepa, M. Salado, L. Calio, S. Kazim, S. M. Shivaprasad and S. Ahmad, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4069–4077 RSC .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J. S. Park, S. H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 284–292 CrossRef .
W. Rehman, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 361–369 RSC .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. Shi, T. Li, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1190–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
N. H. Tiep, Z. Ku and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501420 CrossRef .
Y. Wei, H. Chu, Y. Tian, B. Chen, K. Wu, J. Wang, X. Yang, B. Cai, Y. Zhang and J. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900612 CrossRef .
W. Fu, H. Liu, X. Shi, L. Zuo, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900221 CrossRef .
T. H. Han, J. W. Lee, C. Choi, S. Tan, C. Lee, Y. Zhao, Z. Dai, N. De Marco, S. J. Lee, S. H. Bae and Y. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guan, N. Jiao and Y. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14223–14228 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wang, G. Pang, C. W. Koh, A. B. Djurišić, Y. Wu, B. Tu, F. Z. Liu, R. Chen, H. Y. Woo and X. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808855 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Zhang, Y. C. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Q. Wang and J. Fang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3806 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, M. I. Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abuhelaiqa, S. Paek, Y. Lee, K. T. Cho, S. Heo, E. Oveisi, A. J. Huckaba, H. Kanda, H. Kim, Y. Zhang and R. Humphry-Baker, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1910–1917 RSC .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T. Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. I. Dar, S. P. Senanayak, A. Sadhanala, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, L. M. Pazos-Outón, J. M. Richter, A. J. Pearson, H. Sirringhaus, M. Grätzel and R. H. Friend, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, Y. Wu, H. Zhang, E. Li, W. Zhang, X. Xu, W. Wu, H. Tian and W. H. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3784–3789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, L. Meng, T. B. Song, T. F. Guo, Y. M. Yang, W. H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen and Y. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, P. W. Liang, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C. C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 695–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, X. Yang, M. Cheng, W. Wang and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, T. Li, Y. Shao, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3650–3656 RSC .
Y. Rong, L. Liu, A. Mei, X. Li and H. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 5, 1501066 CrossRef .
C. H. Chiang and C. G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196–200 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Liu, P. Du, J. Zheng and X. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1245–1255 RSC .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. Du, C. Yi, T. Meng and X. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402024 CrossRef .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y. B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 RSC .
F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, E. Lamanna, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, C. Ducati and A. Di Carlo, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 162–172 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, B. Sun, T. Shi, Z. Tang and G. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10700–10709 RSC .
F. Sauvage, F. Di Fonzo, A. Li Bassi, C. S. Casari, V. Russo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, C. E. Bottani, P. Comte and M. Graetzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2562–2567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Duan, N. Fu, Q. Liu, Y. Fang, X. Zhou, J. Zhang and Y. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8888–8893 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang and W. W. F. Leung, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4559–4562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Zhu, A. J. Frank, C. A. Grimes and T. E. Mallouk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2727–2730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zuo, K. Bozhilov, R. J. Dillon, L. Wang, P. Smith, X. Zhao, C. Bardeen and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6223–6226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Roose, K. C. Gödel, S. Pathak, A. Sadhanala, J. P. C. Baena, B. D. Wilts, H. J. Snaith, U. Wiesner, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501868 CrossRef .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, G. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. Lei, B. Li, J. Wan and G. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, L. Steier, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and J. P. Correa-Baena, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3128–3134 RSC .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, P. Qin, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, Y. Yan and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24163–24168 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16177 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, Y. Wu and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. T. de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, S. Chen, J. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Tu, Q. Meng and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3463–3471 RSC .
M. Zhong, Y. Liang, J. Zhang, Z. Wei, Q. Li and D. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6659–6664 RSC .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. Xiao, C. Wang, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, M. Yang, Z. Li, C. S. Jiang, M. Al-Jassim and K. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14276–14283 RSC .
W. H. Nguyen, C. D. Bailie, E. L. Unger and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10996–11001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ganesan, K. Fu, P. Gao, I. Raabe, K. Schenk, R. Scopelliti, J. Luo, L. H. Wong, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1986–1991 RSC .
M. Li, Z. K. Wang, Y. G. Yang, Y. Hu, S. L. Feng, J. M. Wang, X. Y. Gao and L. S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601156 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Qin, X. Yang, T. Yasuda, A. Islam, K. Zhang, W. Peng, W. Chen and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2963–2967 RSC .
S. Wang, Z. Huang, X. Wang, Y. Li, M. Günther, S. Valenzuela, P. Parikh, A. Cabreros, W. Xiong and Y. S. Meng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16720–16730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yue, N. Salim, Y. Wu, X. Yang, A. Islam, W. Chen, J. Liu, E. Bi, F. Xie, M. Cai and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10738–10743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Zhang, L. Jiang, U. Bach and Y. B. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1677–1682 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, B. Wenger, M. G. Christoforo, Y. H. Lin, M. T. Klug, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 855–861 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ryu, J. Seo, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3271–3275 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Yang, M. R. Sohn, S. Do Sung, Y. J. Kim, Y. J. Yoo, J. Kim and W. I. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 414–421 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Cho, O. Trukhina, C. Roldán-Carmona, M. Ince, P. Gratia, G. Grancini, P. Gao, T. Marszalek, W. Pisula, P. Y. Reddy, T. Torres and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601733 CrossRef .
J. M. Wang, Z. K. Wang, M. Li, C. C. Zhang, L. L. Jiang, K. H. Hu, Q. Q. Ye and L. S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701688 CrossRef .
G. Yang, Y. L. Wang, J. J. Xu, H. W. Lei, C. Chen, H. Q. Shan, X. Y. Liu, Z. X. Xu and G. J. Fang, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Caliò, J. Follana-Berná, S. Kazim, M. Madsen, H.-G. Rubahn, Á. Sastre-Santos and S. Ahmad, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 2071–2077 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Wang, E. Rezaee, Q. Chen, Y. Feng, X. Sun, L. Dong, Q. Hu, C. Li and Z.-X. Xu, Sol. RRL, 2018, 3, 1800050 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, D. Wang, Z. Yu, W. Ma, H. B. Li, X. Yang, F. Liu, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803287 CrossRef .
F. Qi, X. Deng, X. Wu, L. Huo, Y. Xiao, X. Lu, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902600 CrossRef .
X. Yin, J. Zhou, Z. Song, Z. Dong, Q. Bao, N. Shrestha, S. S. Bista, R. J. Ellingson, Y. Yan and W. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904300 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, Z. Yao, Y. Guo, Y. Li, J. Bergstrand, C. J. Brett, B. Cai, A. Hajian, Y. Guo, X. Yang, J. M. Gardner, J. Widengren, S. V. Roth, L. Kloo and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19700–19707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Pham, S. M. Jain, M. Li, S. Manzhos, K. Feron, S. Pitchaimuthu, Z. Liu, N. Motta, H. Wang, J. Durrant and P. Sonar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5315–5323 RSC .
Y. Guo, H. Lei, L. Xiong, B. Li and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2157–2165 RSC .
J. Xiao, J. Shi, H. Liu, Y. Xu, S. Lv, Y. Luo, D. Li, Q. Meng and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401943 CrossRef .
F. Di Giacomo, S. Razza, F. Matteocci, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia, T. M. Brown and A. Di Carlo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 152–156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, C. Liu, K. Inoue, K. Harano, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13827–13830 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Liu, F. Tan and Y. Gu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1224–1230 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, H. Cai, J. Ni, J. Li, H. Yu, X. Sun, Y. Wu, H. Wen and J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 66981–66987 RSC .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 RSC .
A. Guerrero, J. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belmonte, H. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 10, 218–224 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, T. Li, Y. Shao, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3650–3656 RSC .
Y. Deng, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600372 CrossRef .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Zuo, M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Shen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, T. Liu and H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, Z. Hawash, L. Qiu, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804284 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Uddin, M. B. Upama, H. Yi and L. Duan, Coatings, 2019, 9, 65 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, F. Liu, M. K. Wong, H. W. Tam, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, C. Surya, W. K. Chan and A. M. C. Ng, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2597–2603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheacharoen, C. C. Boyd, G. F. Burkhard, T. Leijtens, J. A. Raiford, K. A. Bush, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2398–2406 RSC .
R. Cheacharoen, N. Rolston, D. Harwood, K. A. Bush, R. H. Dauskardt and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 144–150 RSC .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, J. Y. Zhengshan, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens and I. M. Peters, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, K. Bush, R. Cheacharoen, R. Beal, A. Bowring and M. D. McGehee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11483–11500 RSC .
Z. Li, T. R. Klein, D. H. Kim, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. F. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18017 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bi, W. Tang, H. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Barbaud, T. Wu, W. Kong, P. Tu, H. Zhu, X. Zeng, J. He, S. Kan, X. Yang, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Joule, 2019, 3, 2748–2760 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Chang Liu
	Chang Liu received her MS and PhD degrees from University of Akron in 2014 and 2017, respectively. During 2017–2019, she conducted her postdoctoral research working with Prof. Yi-Bing Cheng and Prof. Udo Bach in Monash University. She is currently an associate professor in Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests focus on organic/perovskite solar cells.

Yi-Bing Cheng
	Yi-Bing Cheng is Professor of Wuhan University of Technology, China and Emeritus Professor of Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Australia. He is an elected Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering. He was an academic staff at Monash University between October 1991 and March 2018 and is currently an Associate Investigator of the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics. He was named as a Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics in 2018. He specialises in inorganic materials and processing and characterisation of thin film solar cells. His current research is on perovskite solar cells.

Ziyi Ge
	Ziyi Ge received his PhD from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2004. He conducted his postdoctoral research on organic electronics in Tokyo Institute of Technology, Kanagawa University, Japan and the University of New South Wales, Australia during 2005–2009. Currently, he is the leader of Organic Electronic Material and Device Group at Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests focus on organic/perovskite solar cells and OLEDs.
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Diagram of classical nucleation theory. ΔG is the free energy change, and is a function of nuclear radius (r) for homogeneous nucleation. (b) Schematic illustration of the diffusion layer near the surface of a nanocrystal and monomer concentration as a function of distance (x). (c) LaMer diagram depicts the nucleation and growth dynamics.	 
	(4)
J = 4πDr([M]b − [M]s).	(5)
J = 4πr2k([M]s − [M]r),	(6)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films fabricated by different thermal annealing temperatures for different time periods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) The contact angle of water on varied HTLs (left column); cross-sectional (middle column) and top-view (right column) SEM images of the perovskite grown on PVA-, PEDOT:PSS, c-OTPD-, PTAA- and PCDTBT- covered ITO substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process and top-view SEM images of the perovskite films from different deposition procedures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of FAPbI3 perovskite films using the adduct approach where X indicates Lewis bases; photos and SEM images of FAPbI3 perovskite films formed using DMSO and NMP, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) for thiourea and its adduct, and the corresponding photo of the FAI–PbI2–thiourea film (top); top-view SEM images of FAPbI3 films formed via FAI–PbI2–(DMSO1−xthioureax) adducts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The reaction coordinate diagram of perovskite formation via conventional pathway and pyridine-promoted pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top-view (a) and cross-sectional (c) SEM images of perovskite films deposited by the PTNG method with different concentrations (mg mL−1) of PMMA. (a) As-cast films before annealing, (b) and (c) perovskite films after annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Microscopy images using a 50× magnification of postnucleation thin films heated at 220 °C in air; prepared using precursor solutions aged with/without acid for different time periods. (b) Top-view SEM images of fully annealed perovskite films prepared with/without hydrohalic acids, where the solutions were aged for various time periods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Top-view SEM images of perovskite films prepared from thermal annealing and solvent annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (b) Proposed energy diagram of atom diffusion at the grain boundaries between MAPbI3 domains under different atmospheres (left); and schematic illustration of morphology evolution of MAPbI3 grains under different atmospheres (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of perovskite films fabricated from thermal annealing and solvent annealing; (d) dynamic coarsening process of the perovskite grains based on the Ostwald ripening model: (1) initial stage, (2) early stage, (3) middle stage and (4) final stage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD of thin films vs bulk materials of MAPbI3, BA2PbI4, BA2MAPb2I7, BA2MA2Pb3I10 and BA2MA3Pb4I13 perovskites, and illustration of their respective diffraction planes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) GIWAXS pattern of the BA2MA3Pb4I13 thin film formed on mesoporous TiO2 substrates, and the possible illustration for nucleation with mesoporous TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of the crystallization mechanism of the 2D perovskite with a slow and fast solvent removal rate; (b) GIWAXS patterns of the 2D perovskite with increasing solvent removal rates (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of 2D perovskite crystal growth in pure DMF solvent and mixed DMF/DMSO (v/v 5:5) solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. The corresponding GIWAXS patterns: pure DMF solvent (d), mixed DMF/DMSO solvents (e). Reproduced with permission from ref. 97, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic crystal structures of (n-BA)2MA4PbI13 and (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. GIWAXS patterns of (g) room-temperature (RT) and (h) hot-casting (HC) processed (n-BA)2MA4PbI13, and (i) RT and (j) HC processed (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of post-annealed BAx(FA0.83Cs0.17)1−xPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 perovskite films with different BA concentrations. The insets show 2D-XRD images of the films. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed self-assembled 2D–3D perovskite film structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. GIWAXS patterns of the (c) 3D perovskite and (d) 3D/2D perovskite. (e) Schematic interpretation of the surface reorganization of the 3D perovskite upon 2D perovskite formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 
	(8)

Spray coating	Perovskite	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ca/Al	11.1	0.025	2014	
141

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	16.0	0.1	2016	
142

13.1	1.0
PEDOT:PSS and perovskite	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/LiF/Al	9.9	0.025	2016	
142

Perovskite	ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xBrx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	11.7	3.8	2016	
144

Perovskite	PET/ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiroOMeTAD/Au (flexible)	8.1	0.065	2015	
148

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/PTAA/Au	15.5	40.0	2016	
149

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/meso-TiO2/FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	14.2	0.15	2016	
142

Doctor blading	Perovskite (in air)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Bis-C60/Ag	12.2	0.0314	2015	
151

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	13.3	0.1	2015	
146

10.4	10.1
4.3	100
PEDOT:PSS, perovskite, PCBM and Bis-C60 (in air)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Bis-C60/Ag	10.4	0.1	2015	
164

Perovskite	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MA0.6FA0.4PbI3/PCBM/Ca/Al	11.5	0.04	2015	
160

Perovskite	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al	15.1	0.0725	2015	
157

Perovskite	ITO/PTAA/MA0.6FA0.38Cs0.02PbI2.975Br0.025/C60/BCP/Cu	19.3	—	2017	
161

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	18.7	0.09	2018	
159

17.1	1.0
Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	18.6	0.12	2017	
162

17.3	1.2
13.3	11.09
Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45/PTAA/Ag	20.0	0.98	2017	
163

Perovskite	ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu	15.3	33.0	2018	
164

14.6	57.2
Perovskite	ITO/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Cu	20.0	0.08	2018	
165

Slot-die coating	Perovskite	ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/P3HT/Ag	11.9	0.1	2015	
170

Perovskite	ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/P3HT/Ag	4.6	47.3	2015	
171

Perovskite	FTO/ZnO/MAPbI3/carbon	17.61	10.6	2017	
169

Perovskite	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/C60/PCBM/BCP/Al	8.3	10.0	2018	
172

Perovskite	ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	18.0	0.06	2018	
173

Perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD	ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	10.0	168.75	2018	
174

Perovskite	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13/PCBM/PEIE/Ag	14.9	0.078	2019	
176

Inkjet printing	Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/carbon	11.6	0.15	2014	
183

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/meso-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	12.3	0.04	2014	
184

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	11.3	0.09	2016	
188

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/meso-TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	18.6	0.04	2018	
185

17.7	2.02
Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	17.0	0.04	2018	
189

CVD	Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	12.0	9.0	2016	
206

15.4	5.8
Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/Cs0.07FA0.93PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	12	14.6	2017	
200

Perovskite	FTO/SnO2/CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	41.25	12.24	2018	
209

Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/FAPb(I0.85Br0.15)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	12	14.7	2019	
201

Perovskite	FTO/SnO2/C60/Cs0.1FA0.9PbI3/spiro-eOTAD/Au	91.8	9.3%	2019	
208

0.09	13.3%
Thermal evaporation	Perovskite	ITO/TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	0.076	15.4%	2013	
183

Perovskite	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/C60/Bphen/Ca/Ag	0.05	15.4%	2014	
185

VASP	Perovskite	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/sprio-OMeTAD/Au	0.12	12.1%	2013	
189


 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the ultrasonic spray-coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Optical microscopy images of spray-deposited thin films of perovskite precursors onto substrates held at a range of elevated temperatures (28–87 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of concurrently pumped ultrasonic spray coating for perovskite precursor deposition. (d) SEM images of perovskite films concurrently sprayed from inks of PbCl2/MAI, PbCl2 + Pb(Ac)2/MAI and Pb(Ac)2/MAI, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic illustration of (e) the proposed mechanism of the spray coating process, (f) crystalline grain growth and (g) the morphology of the formed crystalline grains in the perovskite film with respect to the balance between Fin and Fout. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of doctor-blading of perovskite films. Top-view SEM images of perovskite films formed at a temperature of (b) and (d) 100 °C, and (c) and (e) 125 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. In situ GIWAXS measurements of MAPbI3 for different fabrication conditions (f) DMSO:GBL-blade-25 °C, (g) DMSO:GBL-blade-150 °C, and the corresponding schematic models of the perovskite structural evolution for the two cases. Real-time optical microscopy of (h) DMSO:GBL-blade-25 °C and (i) DMSO:GBL-blade-150 °C perovskite films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (j) Schematic illustration of the MASP process, (k) SEM image of the perovskite fabricated by MASP. (l) Optical micrograph of the microstructural evolution of perovskite grains as a function of time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the slot die coating process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Slot-die coating with a gas-quenching process for the fabrication of the pinhole-free PbI2 layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM images of the perovskite films prepared with PbAc2:PbCl2 ratios of 10:0 and 8:2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) XRD and (e) GIWAXS pattern of a drop-cast 2D perovskite film annealed at 50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the inkjet printing method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b–f) The printed points and films, and PbI2 surface morphology with different DMF/DMSO mixed solvents at different volume ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the device fabrication chamber and the perovskite reaction chamber. Top-view SEM images of the perovskite films fabricated from 240 nm PbI2 at a partial pressure of (b) 10−5, (c) 10−4 and (d) 10−5 Torr. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e) Hybrid CVD based perovskite synthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199, Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
