Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B817437G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B817437G
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23, 1636-1692Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materialsBrian Charltona, Andy S. Fisher*b, Phill S. Goodallc, Michael W. Hindsd, Steve Lancastera and Sian ShoreeaHull Research & Technology Centre, BP, Saltend, East Yorkshire, UK HU12 8DSbSchool of Earth, Ocean and Environmental Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AAcBNFL Sellafield, Seascale, Cumbria, UK CA20 1PGdRoyal Canadian Mint, 320 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0G8eShell Research and Technology Centre, Thornton, P.O. Box 1, Chester, UK CH1 3SHReceived 3rd October 2008, Accepted 3rd October 2008First published on 3rd November 2008Contents1 Metals1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys2 Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids2.4 Nuclear3 Advanced materials3.1 Polymeric materials and composites3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materials3.3 Glasses3.4 Ceramics and refractories3.5 CatalystsReferencesAbstractThis is the latest review covering atomic spectrometric measurements of industrial materials, metals, chemicals and advanced materials. It follows on from last year's review1 and should be read in conjunction with other reviews in the series.2–6 This year has seen the departure of Malcolm Salisbury, one of the writing team for two years. He has, however, been replaced by Sian Shore who is an able successor. Our thanks go to Malcolm for all of his hard work over the period.This year's review has a slightly changed format, with the larger sections being split into smaller sub-sections so that the reader may be directed more easily to the parts of the review most relevant to them. In addition, to aid quick reference, the use of Tables has also continued.The technique of laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS) is still gathering pace, and its use is expanding into new territory. Similarly, the use of femtosecond laser ablation is also receiving more interest. These laser-based techniques are invaluable tools for the analysis of materials that are very inert, refractory or otherwise difficult to bring into solution or indeed if they are valuable either in terms of monetary value or archaeologically and must therefore have as little damage inflicted on them as possible. The use of chemometric analysis of analytical data is also gaining in popularity, especially for archaeological materials such as pottery/ceramics and glasses. This is largely because the use of chemometrics may facilitate provenance studies, elucidate trade routes etc. In addition, it is also being used increasingly for forensic applications.There is a continuing trend for the subject areas to overlap slightly, and hence it is worth noting that some papers may be discussed in more than one section of the review and that other papers may only be discussed once, but possibly not in the most expected place.The writing team are keen to elicit feedback from readers of this review and invite you to complete the Atomic Spectroscopy Updates questionnaire on http://www.asureviews.org/.There have been a number of reviews of techniques that are very relevant to this the analysis of materials described in this review. For instance, Pasquini and co-workers have described the use, applications, fundamentals as well as some possible future trends of LIBS analyses.7 The use of such a technique enables “stand-off” analysis and has therefore found numerous applications in areas that may otherwise provide an unpleasant or dangerous working environment. The authors also highlight the use of chemometric analysis of the data produced, to maximize the information that is obtained. Another review of direct relevance has been produced by Fernandez et al.,8 who discussed the use of femtosecond laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (fs-LA-ICP-MS). The authors discuss the advantages of the technique, including the marked decrease in elemental fractionation obtained during the transient signal when compared with LA signals produced by longer duration laser pulses as well as the improved figures of merit and the improved spatial resolution. The review summarized the differences between ablation mechanisms caused by short (> 1 ps) and ultra-short (< 1 ps) laser pulses and also presented a review of applications that covered aspects of depth-profiling as well as elemental analysis of assorted material types including biological, geological and other industrial-related materials.1 MetalsFor all types of metals and alloys, the most interesting contributions continue to centre on solid sample analysis methods. Laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS), in particular, continues to be of interest (16% of abstracts). The overall distribution of abstracts reviewed for the metals section by instrumental method were: atomic absorption 3%, atomic emission 30%, mass spectrometry 17%, atomic fluorescence 1%, SIMS 4%, XRF 18%, and the use of multiple instrumental methods 27%. Abstracts that are fundamental in nature were not cited and instead, readers are referred to instrumental reviews.2,31.1 Ferrous metals and alloysA low cost LIBS system was described by Gonzaga and Pasquini9 for the determination of Mn in steel. A partial least squares calibration model was used and accuracies of 0.3–7.3% relative to ICP-OES determinations were reported. The authors concluded that the performance of low cost systems can be very good for specific applications and that the use of chemometrics and integration of analysis pulses can partially compensate for low resolution and lower sensitivity compared with more expensive spectrometers. An online LIBS system was introduced at a continuous casting operation for high nickel steel by Aimoto et al.10 It was possible to detect alumina inclusions, casting mould contamination (from Al, Ca, Mg, Si, Na) and slag contamination on the surface (from Al, Ca, Mg). The analysis time, including sample preparation, was reported to be within 30 minutes. Elemental mapping of C, S and Si on segregated slabs was also shown. LIBS was used for the analysis of steel-making slags as reported by Palagas et al.11 Samples were crushed and milled to less than 0.2 mm and presented to the spectrometer as a solidified sample. Accuracy as measured by regression coefficients for iron oxides in two types of furnaces was reported to be very good (0.93 and 0.95). The regression coefficients for MgO and SiO2 were 0.94 and 0.86. Other components had much poorer regression coefficients because of the greater amount of scatter observed.Coedo and co-workers12 used fused glass beads with fixed iron content and varying concentration of Al and Ti as calibration standards for the determination of these elements in steel reference materials by laser ablation ICP-MS (LA-ICP-MS). Iron (m/z 57) was used as an internal standard and the concentrations found were in agreement with certified values. It was reported that it was possible to distinguish between soluble and total analyte concentrations. Iron isotope ratios were measured by multi-collector ICP-MS with H2 as a collision cell gas to remove polyatomic interferences in work published by Zhou, and colleagues.13 Ten synthetic standards were prepared by blending 99.94% Fe-56 and 99.90% Fe-54. The precision of the ten correction factors was 0.044% which indicated good linearity of the method for different abundance ratios.Electrolysis dissolution cells connected to ICP-OES were used by Aimoto and co-workers to determine elements in steels14 (in Japanese). P was rapidly determined in steel samples by generating PH3 in a heated electrolytic dissolution cell connected to the nebulizer of an ICP-OES instrument. It was noted that heating the cell to 80°C increased PH3 gas generation markedly and the analytical results were in agreement with a spectrophotometric method. In another report by the same group,15 Si was determined in steel by flow injection through an electrolysis cell to the ICP-OES instrument. A solution of 6 M HCl was introduced at a flow of 5 mL min−1 and the electrolysis cell operated at a constant 1.5 A at 25°C to avoid precipitation of the hydrolysed Si on its way through to the nebulizer. Results were in agreement with those obtained using a gravimetric method.As noted at the beginning of this section, there are a large number of published papers in which multiple techniques are used to study metal-based systems. The performance of instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) was compared with other spectrometric methods for the analysis of stainless steel by Cincu et al.16 The results from proficiency test samples from 5 different laboratories were compared. The corrosion-electrochemical behaviour of 13% chromium martensitic stainless steel in HCl solutions of different concentration was examined by Chermat-Aourasse and Kesri.17 Sample surfaces, after treatment, were examined by SEM coupled with EDAX. Flame AAS and colorimetric methods were used to analyze the corrosion products. In general, corrosion was observed from exposure to all the HCl solutions. The authors claimed that this is because of the composition and the microstructural properties of the alloys. Charleton and co-workers18 demonstrated that a low power electro-corrosion device could be used for rapid metal sample preparation. Steel, brass, and aluminium samples were prepared and analyzed by GFAAS, FAAS, and ICP-MS. Trace elements (<1%) could be observed but not quantified whereas major and minor components could be quantified.The surface composition of Fe–Ni thin films was determined by different methods and compared by Kim et al.19 X-ray photoemission spectrometry (XPS) and Auger electron spectrometry used sensitivity factors calculated from the pure metals to assess concentration values that were within 2% of the certified concentrations (obtained using ICP-MS). Analysis using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) with a C-60 ion source obtained values within 4%.Mizukami et al.20 studied the collapse of inclusions on the surface of steel samples that occur during the measurement process of spark OES pulse height distribution analysis (PDA). The techniques of SEM-EDS, EPMA and spark OES were used for the analysis. Inclusions initially generate an asymmetric distribution. It was found that inclusions were destroyed by the spark process and dispersed as fine particles into the metal matrix. The emission intensities from the fine particles generated by this process are superimposed on the normal symmetric emissions from soluble elements in the matrix. The authors proposed that finely dispersed particles generated from inclusions contribute to the symmetric normal distribution of a PDA histogram.Koshelev et al.21 studied the chromium oxide growth on a Fe–Cr–Ni alloy with grazing emission XRF (GEXRF) spectrometry. Oxide thickness, Cr depletion zone in the substrate, and concentration of Fe and Ni in the oxide layer were monitored by GEXRF. SEM and Raman spectrometry were also used to independently study this system. Many properties of Zr–Mg cobalt ferrite were studied by a variety of methods, as described by Iqbal and Siddiquah.22 The composition was measured by energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF) spectrometry and the crystal cell structure was determined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). The minimum temperature for synthesis was elucidated by thermogravimetric analysis.1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloysThe detection of biological contamination on copper and painted surfaces by LIBS was reported by Merdes et al.23 Chemometric data analysis consisting of many tests gave a classification tool that was able to identify bacterial spores with a false positive rate of 1% and a false negative rate of 3%. Mohamed24 developed a portable echelle-based LIBS system that was used to determine Be, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn and Si in aluminium standard alloys. Linear calibration curves were obtained with regression coefficients of 98–99%. Limit of detection values were in the ppm range and good precision was claimed (3–8% RSD) but it was not stated at what element concentrations. LIBS was heralded as a new analytical technique for in-situ studies of artwork in a paper by Detalle et al.25 (in French). The advantages of no sample preparation, qualitative identification of elements, and in-situ application were cited. Examples presented were alloy identification, depth-profiling and pigment analysis in painted objects. The application of LIBS to forensic investigations was discussed in a paper by Martin et al.26 Proof of concept examples, such as elemental composition determination in prosthetic implants and analysis of human remains, were presented. Ramli et al.27 quantitatively determined hydrogen in zircaloy-4 by LIBS in an ultrapure helium gas environment. A linear calibration curve was obtained from zircaloy-4 samples and a limit of detection was estimated to be 50 ppm. The authors claimed this demonstrated the potential of the technique for in-situ quantitation of hydrogen impurities in zircaloy-4 tubes used in nuclear power plants.Sieber, et al.28 described an XRF method for the determination of silicon metal and included impurities. A fused glass sample was made by reaction of the sample with LiOH to form Li2SiO3 and followed by fluxing with lithium borate. Matrix matched calibration standards were made for calibration. Concentrations of nine impurity elements obtained using XRF were very similar to those obtained using ICP-OES and gamma-ray activation analysis. Results were validated by comparison to silicon metal reference materials. Cesareo et al.29 used a 50 eurocent coin to develop a protocol to evaluate the performance of mobile XRF spectrometers for the analysis of archaeological and historic materials. The coin material is 89% Cu, 5% Al, 5% Zn and 1% Sn and is widely available. A number of different mobile spectrometers with different configurations were examined. Limits of detection were observed to vary by a factor of 6 for Zn and 100 for Sn. X-ray tube voltage was observed to be the most important parameter that affected spectrometer performance. The limitations of applying portable XRF to the analysis of multilayer objects and bronze artefacts were discussed in a paper by Gianoncelli and Kourousias.30 The authors discussed the strengths, weaknesses and underlying assumptions of using portable XRF spectrometers to analyze archaeological materials.The determination of O in magnesium by glow discharge- mass spectrometry (GD-MS) was discussed in a report from Kikuta and colleagues31 using only relative sensitivity factors. It was found that a pre-discharge time of 5000s was required to remove surface adsorbed oxygen for both pin and disk shaped samples. The O concentration in pure magnesium and re-dissolved magnesium was quantified by GD-MS and charged particle activation analysis. Based on the comparison, the GD-MS was recommended as a possible technique to measure O with high sensitivity.The origins of 240 Roman lead objects found in archaeological sites in Germany were investigated by Durali-Mueller et al.32 using multi-collector ICP-MS isotope analysis. Lead isotope ratios of ore bodies in Germany were correlated with the isotope ratios of the lead objects. One ore body in Germany (Eifel, Hunsrueck) was the source of 85% of the objects tested. Historic silverpoint drawings were studied by Reiche and co-workers33 by spatially resolved synchrotron induced XRF which has sufficient sensitivity for both major and minor components. It was concluded that three of the five drawings were found to have been drawn by the same silverpoint because of the similarity in element composition observed.A micro-analytical study of welding aerosols using a combination of EDXRF, micro-Raman spectroscopy and electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) was conducted by Worobiec et al.34 The study showed inter-dependency between the particles' composition and the particles' size and structure. This is consistent with previously assumed formation mechanisms. Souza and co-workers studied solid state reactions in the platinum-mercury system by thermogravimetry, differential scanning calorimetry, EDXRF, SEM, ICP-OES, XRD and cold vapour AAS.35 The results indicated that electro-deposited Hg reacts with Pt to form a variety of intermetallic compounds even after the partial removal of bulk mercury from the surface by thermal desorption. The chlorination of aluminium-copper alloys at temperatures of 200–500°C was investigated by thermogravimetry, XRD, SEM, and EDXRF. De Micco, and co-workers36 observed that reactivity of the alloys differed from the pure elements and that there were interactions between the different chlorides formed in the process.There were two papers that dealt with the analysis of patinas by a variety of techniques. Mathis and Aucouturier37 used non-destructive techniques such as particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE), Rutherford back-scattering spectrometry (RBS), XRD and Raman spectroscopy to examine patinas on copper based alloys. In another paper, ICP-MS and ICP-OES were used to provide quantitative information on patinas formed on Chinese bronzes. The authors, Hou et al.38 also used XRD, FT-IR and Raman spectroscopy to understand the structure and compounds forming the patinas.Porticello bronzes were studied using LIBS and portable XRF methods in a paper by Ferretti et al.39 These techniques provided in-situ analysis of several bronze pieces at an offshore find. The quantitative analyzes by both techniques permitted the pieces to be classified by their composition. The two techniques were viewed as complimentary in determining the composition of the bronze pieces. Several notable papers that deal with novel metals and/or analytical approaches are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Applications of the analysis of ferrous and non-ferrous metals and alloys

ElementMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationCommentsReferenceFerrous metals and alloysNSteelSIMS; SThe surface modification of impacting nitrogen ions onto SKD-61 steel was studied by SIMS40VariousCast iron stainless steelXPS; S XRD; S XRF; SEM; SHigh temperature corrosion of these materials in a gas exhaust environment was studied. Auger electron spectrometry was also used.41,42VariousMetal hydride alloysXPS; SOther techniques: secondary neutron mass spectrometry, thermal desorption mass spectrometry were used to study hydrogen storage behaviour.43VariousZinc - iron alloys electro-platedAA; F; L XRD; SZn1-xFex alloys were electro-plated on stainless steel from a sulfate bath. FAAS, XRD, and polarization measurements were made to study these plated alloys44Various (4)High alloy steelAES; HG ICP; LAs, Bi, Se, Sn, and Te were determined with limits of quantitation of 1–10 mg kg−1. Accuracy was evaluated by spike recovery experiments.45Various (10)Iron waste slagAES; laser; SLIBS conditions were optimized and results were compared with those obtained using ICP-OES46Non-ferrous metals and alloysAgsilver coated quartzToF SIMS; -; SArtificially corroded silver coated quartz crystal microbalance disks were depth-profiled by ToF-SIMS. The presence of O and S were detected in the weathered layers.47Ag, CuBrass and steelLIBS; -; SLIBS was used to depth-profile silver plated brass, copper plated steel, and silver plated nylon substrate48BTitaniumSIMS; -; SThe diffusion of B into pure titanium and gamma Ti–Al (54 at.% Al) was monitored by SIMS using the stable B-11 isotope.49GeGadolinium silicon germanide alloyOES; ICP; LTwo decomposition methods were compared. A mixture of HNO3 + HF decomposed the sample and the effect of amount of HF on dissolution process was studied. Three different alloys were studied.50LiAluminium alloysLIBS; -; SWavelength selection and optimizing conditions for the determination of Li in aluminium alloys was described. LOD's at different wavelength were 230 ppm (610 nm) and 870 ppm (671 nm).51NbTantalumOES; GD; STrace Nb in tantalum by GD-OES was in agreement with values obtained using solution- ICP-OES. RSD values of 3% within runs and 4% between runs were reported (without concentration values). LOD was estimated to be 2 ppm.52NiNickel-titanium alloysMS; MIP; LThe degradation of diamond like coatings on nickel-titanium dental alloys in physiological saline solution was determined by microwave induced plasma mass spectrometry. The alloy was kept in the solution for 6 months at 37°C.53PbTin based solderFI-AFS; HG F; LA macrocyclic immobilized silica gel was used within a flow injection manifold mini-column to separate Pb from matrix elements. An RSD of 1.8% for 0.5 mg L−1 Pb and a LOD of 3 ng L−1 Pb were reported.54PbTin based solderLIPS; SLinear calibration curves were obtained from lead-free solder certified reference materials (range 174–1940 ppm). LOD was reported to be “several tens of ppm”.55SeManganeseOES; HG ICP; LThe development of a laboratory reference material for the determination of Se in electrolytic manganese and aluminium alloys was described56Ti and MoTitanium-molybdenum alloysXRF; SEM; STi-Mo alloys from 4–20% Mo were studied by SEM with EDX for composition mapping. XRD was used to verify the crystal structure of the alloys.57VariousAncient coinsMS; LA ICP; SThe presence of Hg on silvered coins by LA-ICP-MS was evidence that amalgam silvering was a process used in the production of Roman coins. Results were confirmed by EPMA.58Various (24)CobaltMS; ICP; LSamples were dissolved in closed microwave vessels with HNO3 and HCl. LOD were in the range 0.016–1.50 μg g−1.59Various (22)CopperMS; ICP; LThe performance and reliability of ICP-MS and ETAAS for the determination of 22 elements in copper were compared.60AA; ETA; LVarious (52)Niobium and niobium compoundsMS; ICP; L25 elements were determined by an online anion exchange matrix separation method. 27 elements were analyzed directly injecting a sample solution plus 0.2% of internal standards into the ICP-MS instrument by a flow injection manifold. Sample included niobium metaland niobium oxides.61VariousPalladium-silver-ruthenium/alumina alloyOES; ICP; LThe composition of the alloy was determined by ICP-OES.62Various (7)Silver coinsMS; LA ICP; SAnalytical protocols were developed to characterize ancient silver coins. Results for samples and standards were compared with those obtained using fast neutron activation analysis.63Various (9)TelluriumOES; GD; SElements (Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mg, Ni, Pb, Se and Si) were determined in high purity tellurium. LOD for most elements were less than 10 ng g−1.64VariousTitanium dental alloysOES; ICP; LSix different titanium based alloys were immersed in peroxide and fluoride containing solutions. The extent of dissolution was measured by ICP-OES. A Ti-20Cr alloy was minimally affected by the treatments.652 Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum productsStudy of the elemental composition of coal as well as geochemistry of coal rich areas continues to feature strongly in 2008, although much of this work did not use novel experimental techniques. Emissions, particulates, and residues (fly ash) related to coal combustion were present in a large number of papers. Laser ablation combined with ICP-MS has been generating increased interest. There has also been interest in further developing methods for determining low level S in fuel. Far lower detection limits than current legislation requires have been achieved, using technology that has been optimized for this requirement. Several papers proposed methods for the determination of Cu, Fe and V in petroleum products. Established analysis techniques were used, but with novel sample preparation procedures. Relatively few papers have been published about wear metal analysis of lubricating oils during this review period. This is in contrast to 2007 when there was increased interest in this area. There have also been very few papers published about alternative fuels in 2008.This review will report novel aspects of the analytical techniques, sample pre-treatment or collection processes.2.1.1 Petroleum products—gasoline, diesels, gasohol, exhaust particulates. Korn and co-workers have reviewed the atomic spectrometric determination of metals and metalloids in automotive fuels including gasoline, diesel, ethanol and biodiesel (87 refs).66 The main atomic spectrometric techniques, including FAAS, ETAAS, ICP-OES, ICP-MS and vapour generation techniques, were reviewed as were sample preparation procedures.Vanadium is one of the most frequently determined analytes in petroleum products because it is one of the most abundant metals in this sample type, It causes side effects in the refining process and corrosion in oil-fired power stations. The determination of V in petrol and petroleum products has been reviewed (with 112 references) by Amorim and colleagues.67 The techniques included were FAAS, ETAAS, ICP-OES and ICP-MS. Also reviewed were sample pre-treatments, preparation procedures and the most recent speciation studies.An application of V determination (along with Cu and Fe) in petroleum has been presented by Brandao and colleagues,68 who used a solid sampling accessory to introduce the sample directly. Although no sample pre-treatment or dilution was used, the use of a Pd-Triton X-100 matrix modifier was necessary. Both the temperature programme employed and the mass of Pd were optimized. The LOD obtained were impressive, with absolute values of 10, 200 and 800 pg being obtained for Cu, Fe and V. The method was validated by the use of CRMs and by the use of alternative techniques. Sample introduction to GFAAS instrumentation by emulsification was described by Santelli and co-workers.69 Sample (either petroleum condensate, diesel or gasoline) was mixed with nitric acid, Triton X-100 and water in the ratio 2: 1: 1: 6. The temperature programme was optimized using Doehlert experimental design software. The slopes of the calibration curves produced by aqueous standards, organic solvents and standard additions to the emulsions of the different types of sample were compared. The LOD for V was reported to be 14 μg L−1 while the precision based on 10 replicate injections was 6.4% for a concentration of 20 μg L−1, improving to 2.9% for 80 μg L−1. Method validation was by the less reliable technique of spike/recovery experiments, but recoveries of between 90 and 105% were the norm. Another paper to report the use of emulsions is one by dos Santos et al.,70 who determined Cr and Cu in gasoline using GFAAS. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide was used as a surfactant at a mass range of between 25 and 300 mg for a sample size of 2 mL. The optimal amount was found to be 150 mg. These components were dispersed in 0.1% nitric acid. Sonication for 10 minutes produced an emulsion that was stable for several hours. After optimization of the temperature programme, LOD of 1.5 and 5 μg L−1 were obtained for Cr and Cu respectively. Precision was better than 10% and spiking experiments led to recoveries of between 90 and 98%.The production of three CRMs for the S content in petrol has been reported by Linsinger et al.71 Two of the materials were made from commercial petrol whereas the third was a blend of commercial petrols. Between ampoule heterogeneity was better than 2.5% and the potential degradation during storage (shelf-life) was determined. The materials were analyzed by three different laboratories each using different variants of isotope dilution mass spectrometry, with the results being pooled. Certified values were 48.8, 20.2 and 9.1 mg kg−1 for the three materials.A speciation method for S in petroleum liquids by GC ICP-MS was developed by Tao et al.72 (in Japanese). Effects of the ICP-MS operating conditions on the background intensities at m/z 32 and 34 were studied, and measures to reduce background intensity, such as alternative cone materials and an alternative GC-ICP-MS interface, were described. This may be a useful starting point for anyone wishing to establish a similar equipment set-up. However, some of the optimization detailed here may be unnecessary on modern ICP-MS systems. A lower sensitivity was noted for S species with a high boiling point and it is suggested that this may be because of discrimination at the GC injection port or decomposition in the column. This, however, required further investigation. The method was successfully applied to naphtha, gasoline, kerosene and light oil; superior sensitivity was observed when compared with conventional methods. Heilmann and Heumann have produced two papers that discussed isotope dilution as a means of S speciation in petroleum products.73,74 In the first example, a species specific isotope dilution GC-ICP-MS method for the determination of thiophene derivatives was described. The accuracy of the method was confirmed by the successful analysis of the SRM NIST 2296. The LOD was excellent, at 7 pg absolute, which corresponded to 7 ng S g−1. The isotope dilution method helped overcome a problem caused by co-eluting hydrocarbons affecting the S signal when external calibration was used. In the second of the papers,74 the authors described a species un-specific method for the quantification of S species in petroleum products. A special dosing unit was designed and a 34S labeled dimethyldisulfide spike synthesized. Again, the method overcame problems caused by the co-eluting hydrocarbons, analysis of SRM 2296 yielded results in good agreement with the certified value once the S in individual species had been summed and LOD was 9 ng g−1. The use of ESI-MS enabled structural elucidation of the S species to be made. It was felt that the method was robust enough to be used on a routine basis.Cellulose modified with p-aminobenzoic groups was used for the preconcentration of Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn from ethanol fuels by de Castro et al.75 Retention and recovery of the elements was studied, although no detail was provided about the success of the experiments. The effects of fuel characteristics on elemental composition of emissions from heavy duty diesel buses was studied by Lim and co-workers.76 The role of S content in the emission of inorganic elements is likely to be of interest in industry. Another paper that reported a pre-concentration procedure was published by Teixeira and colleagues.77 These authors retained the analytes Cu and Fe from gasoline on cellulose paper and then used EDXRF for their determination. Sample was spotted onto the paper disk so that a uniform thin film was produced. This was then dried at 60°C for 20 minutes prior to the analysis. Calibration was linear between 20 and 800 μg L−1 for both analytes. Precision (n = 15) was 8.1 and 7.8% RSD for Cu and Fe respectively when a concentration of 100 μg L−1 was being determined. The LOD were reported to be 15 and 10 μg L−1 for Cu and Fe.2.1.2 Fuels—coal, fly ash, particulates/emissions. Boulyga et al.78 developed a method for determination of Br, Cd, Cl, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, Pb, S, U and Zn in powdered coal samples. The equipment used was specialized, and at this time may be more suited to a research environment than to an industrial laboratory. Inductively coupled plasma isotope dilution mass spectrometry, combined with a high ablation rate LA system was used (LA-ICP-ID-MS). This was found to give significantly better sensitivity, detection limits, and accuracy, compared with a conventional laser ablation coupled with a quadrupole ICP-MS instrument. SRMs were analyzed and good recoveries were obtained. A deviation of less than 5% from certified values was observed for most elements, with the exceptions of Hg and Cd. Detection limits of 9.5 pg g−1 for Hg, 0.3 pg g−1 for U, 450 ng g−1 for Cl and 18ng g−1 for S were reported. Laser ablation ICP-MS was also used to determine trace elements in coal by Spears and colleagues.79 The elements Ba, Cu, Ge, Ni, Sr, V and Zn are known to have an organic association within coal samples, Al and Fe were also determined as a control on clay and pyrite abundances. The element profiles were combined with the petrography and statistical analysis was carried out. Relationships between Al, Ge and V were explored, and all were thought to be present in the organic matter and not as minerals. It was suggested that these elements became concentrated during diagenesis, with the possibility that some of the Al could be residual. The Cu/Ni ratio in the pyrite was relatively constant, suggesting a possible seawater source. No limits of detection or analysis of a SRM analysis was reported.Geng and co-workers described the use of an oxygen flask combustion method for the determination of Hg and S in coal.80 After the combustion, the Hg was absorbed into a solution of potassium permanganate and then determined by CV-AFS. Six CRM coals were analyzed and the Hg results were in good agreement with certified values for all of them. In addition, nine other Japanese standard coals were analyzed using the method described in the paper and the results were compared with those obtained using microwave assisted acid dissolution. For the determination of S, the samples underwent oxygen flask combustion and then the S was absorbed into a hydrogen peroxide solution. Analysis in this instance was by ICP-OES.2.1.3 Oils—crude oil, lubricants. The determination of trace elements in crude oil and its heavy fractions has been reviewed by Duyek and co-workers.81 The review contained 123 references and included the analysis of saturates, aromatics, resins and asphaltenes using AAS, ICP-OES and ICP-MS. The analytical challenges were mentioned and sample preparation procedures based on dry-ashing, microwave assisted digestion and combustion decomposition discussed. The authors noted that the introduction of non-aqueous solvents and micro-emulsions to ICP instrumentation are becoming more popular introduction techniques since they are rapid and can yield accurate results. Also discussed was the increasing trend for speciation analysis with applications of both HPLC and GC coupled with ICP-MS being described. A second review with 69 references, this time of lubricating oils, has been prepared by the same research group.82 The authors discussed the importance of such analyses as well as the problems related to sample pre-treatment and calibration.Recycling of used automotive lubricating oils using ionizing radiation was investigated by Scapin et al.83 Ionizing radiation is used for industrial effluents treatment due to its high efficiency in the degradation of organic compounds and removal of metals by the action of OH*, *H and e(aq) radicals. In this work, ionizing radiation was used to remove metals and degrade organic compounds in used automotive lubricating oils. 100 and 200 kGy irradiation doses were given to the samples. The samples were analyzed both prior to and post-irradiation using XRF for the trace elements and IR spectroscopy for the organic components. A suite of over 20 analytes were chosen for the XRF analysis. No details of the success of this method of recycling were reported within the abstract.Hussain and Gondal84 used LIBS to detect toxic metals in oil spill contaminated soil from the coast of the Persian Gulf. The elements determined included Al, Ba, Ca, Cr, Fe, K, Mg, Na, Sr, Ti, V and Zr. Results obtained by LIBS were compared with results obtained from ICP-OES analysis, although no indication of this comparison was provided within the abstract. Concentrations of Ba and Cr were found to be higher than permissible safe limits.Bai and co-workers85 determined various elements in oil shale at retorting by ICP-AES (for Ba, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, P, Pb, Sr, Ti, V, Y) and by AFS (for As and Hg). By comparing the content of trace elements in oil shale and shale char, distribution characteristics of trace elements at retorting were studied. In comparison with earth crust averages, oil shale samples are richer in several elements, and some of these elements are increased in shale char at retorting. It was found that for most elements their release from shale oil can be promoted by a higher heating rate and nitrogen atmosphere.Bauer and Broekaert have described the use of a specialized crossflow nebulizer that was capable of aspirating two different solutions simultaneously.86 They used this to introduce aqueous calibrants alongside oil samples dissolved in kerosene. The result was that the two solutions mix in the spray chamber of the ICP-OES instrument and are transported simultaneously to the plasma without the need of a surfactant.Silva and co-workers described the determination of volatile and non-volatile compounds of both Ni and V in crude oils by solid sampling GFAAS.87 Use of 20 μg Pd as a matrix modifier prevented the loss of volatile species (i.e. enabled total Ni and V to be determined). Analysis without the Pd modifier enabled only the thermally stable species to be determined. The volatile species were determined by difference. Iridium was found not to work as a modifier for this analysis and the Pd introduction had to be optimized to ensure adequate performance. The authors concluded that 40 μL of 0.5 g L−1 Pd in 0.05% Triton X-100 was best. Calibration using aqueous standards was found to be possible and the LOD based on a 10 mg sample were 0.02 and 0.06 μg g−1 for Ni and V respectively.2.1.4 Alternative fuels. Kakui et al.88 noted that S species present in biomass ethanol included dimethyl sulfide (DMS). The paper is written in Japanese, but it is worth noting that the compound DMS has a much higher introduction efficiency into an ICP-AES plasma than the sulfate form of S. It was concluded that this may cause an overestimate of S during analyses by this technique. This is a recognized issue within industry, and may be overcome by use of appropriate standards or an alternative analysis technique.Elemental analysis of biofuel gasification was investigated by Poole et al.89 Behaviour of trace elements during gasification can be problematic. There are concerns about toxic components and process problems caused by alkali metal corrosion and fouling. Experiments were conducted to monitor trace element concentration in gasification gas continuously from an experimental reactor, using ICP-AES. The concentration of some elements in the gas phase was found to be extremely high and therefore of significant concern. However, some problems were encountered during the experimental work. There was a problem with tar formation in the gasification process, which led to the analysis procedure being challenging. The authors concluded that further development in the sampling and pre-treatment procedure was required in order to improve accuracy and reliability.Two research groups have described extremely simple methods of determining trace analytes in biodiesel. Woods and Fryer simply diluted the material in kerosene and analyzed using an ICP-MS instrument equipped with an octopole reaction system.90 The octopole reaction system enabled several important analytes, including S, to be determined at levels far below those possible using ICP-OES. A similar approach with simple sample dilution was reported by dos Santos and colleagues,91 who diluted the sample in ethanol, added Y as an internal standard and then analyzed using axial ICP-OES directly. Operating conditions such as plasma power, auxiliary and nebulizer flow rates and the oxygen flow rate used to decrease the background signal were optimized using factorial analysis. Dilution of 2.5 g of sample in a final volume of 25 mL yielded LOD of 0.03, 0.3, 0.005, 0.1 and 0.5 μg g−1 for Ca, K, Mg, Na and P respectively. Calibration using standards prepared in ethanol was possible, so simple aqueous-based stock standards could be used to prepare the working standards. Recoveries were reported to be in the rather wide range of 82–114%.Two papers have discussed the analysis of natural gases. A paper by Larsson et al. discussed the transport and collection characteristics of gaseous Hg using amalgamation followed by an ID-ICP-MS analysis.92 Several different collection tube designs and tubing materials were tested and an assortment of different sample types was also examined. The different sample types included air, natural gas, sales gas and methane. The LOD for gaseous Hg was 50 pg m−3 for a 60 L sample volume. Recoveries of Hg from spiked samples were greater than 90% when flow rates of up to 10 L min−1 were used and for volumes up to 100 L. In addition, the collection efficiency of the spike Hg was independent of the type of sample gas. Use of stainless steel tubing in the presence of hydrogen sulfide led to problems with transport efficiency of the Hg vapour. This was attributed to the steel acting as either a sink, where it retained the Hg, or as a source of extra Hg. This problem was not observed in the absence of the hydrogen sulfide. In addition, the use of a PVC tube did not lead to problems, even in the presence of hydrogen sulfide. The authors questioned the applicability of the ISO standard method of collection of Hg vapour from gases as this uses stainless steel tubing and other components. The other paper describing analysis of natural gas was an interesting speciation application by Krupp and colleagues.93 These authors used cryo-trapping GC-ICP-MS to determine tri-alkylated arsenic compounds in natural gas, pressurized condensate and stable condensate from the same gas well. In all samples analyzed, the main species was found to be trimethylarsine. The highest concentrations found were 33.2 μg L−1 in the stable condensate phase, 17.8 ng L −1 in the gas phase and 121 μg L−1 in the condensed gas phase. In addition, this condensed phase was also found to contain trace amounts of several unidentified higher alkylated compounds.2.2 Organic chemicals and solventsDuring this review period there were several interesting developments in LIBS instrumentation. These include the use of actual and inferred molecular information to allow the classification of organic compounds, particularly in the area of explosives detection and remote sensing. Coupled with this is the removal of atmospheric interferences from carbon and nitrogen species. In order for a technique to become widely applied in chemical analysis, there needs to be a fundamental understanding of the processes occurring and, to this end, several papers dealt with the processes occurring within the plasma. LIBS is also extensively used in the analysis of historical artefacts and works of art and is often used with a second, complementary technique which allows much more interesting and valuable information to be obtained. Synchrotron radiation sources are becoming more widely available and some interesting applications are reported. Some recent developments in beam lines and their commercial availability are enabling the high resolution 2-dimensional mapping and elemental characterization of complex samples, often on a micro-scale. Also of note during this review period is that atomic absorption techniques appear to be enjoying a renaissance. This is likely to be due to the simplicity and relative low cost of atomic absorption techniques as compared with ICP which does have significant running costs. Several interesting and novel applications are reviewed. As expected, speciation continues to be a very strong theme. Of note during this review period is the increasing use of both molecular and atomic techniques to complement one another and to maximize the information available from an analysis. An example of the use of complementary techniques is the use of ICP-MS and ESI-MS to yield atomic, molecular and structural information. The interactions of pharmaceutical molecules with proteins and the metabolic response to drugs - metabonomics -is of great interest and several papers outlining interesting analytical developments in this field are reviewed. Not all papers were reviewed in detail, but several which were thought important for completeness are included in Table 2 to which the reader may refer.
Table 2 Application of the analysis of organic chemicals and solvents

ElementMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationCommentsReferenceMgPaper from early 20th century booksMS; ICP; LApH is an important feature governing the stability of paper. De-acidification solutions, often containing magnesium are employed and LA-ICP-MS was used for the investigation of magnesium distribution over the surface of paper128Mn, ZnBeerAAS; F; LFractionation of distinct Mn and Zn species, e.g., hydrophobic polyphenol bound metals and cationic metal species prior to quantitation.129MnHypertensive drugsAAS; ETV; LComparative study of univariate and multivariate optimisation procedures for manganese determination130PbVinegarAAS; ETV; LBismuth was evaluated as an internal standard to minimise the matrix effects during the determination of Pb in vinegar by GFAAS.131PbHistorical European paintingsXRF; S also SEM-EDX, XRDYellow pigments based on oxides of lead. The recipes for their production are uncertain. This paper outlines the synthesis of some traditional lead-based yellows and comparative analysis with those found in historical paintings.132PbMicro-analytical study of the interactions between oil and lead compounds in paintingsSynchrotron based FTIR and XRF micro analysisMolecular and atomic images were obtained. Investigated the appearance of protrusions formed on aging.133SbEnvironmental and pharmaceutical samplesAAS; HGA flame heated metallic hydride atomizer is evaluated and optimised for a range of matrices134VariousWineOES; ICP; L and AAS; ETV; LMetals content was used as a marker for determination of origin of wines. Supervised learning pattern recognition procedures were applied to the data. Linear discriminant analysis and Probabilistic Neural Networks were used in the data analysis.135,136VariousWineA range of techniquesA review article (52 refs) covering the analysis of metals in wine in the past decade137Various (12)SherryOES; ICP; LTwelve elements quantified. Non-normal distributions were reported and the inter-relations of metal couples were investigated using Spearman non-parametric sample correlation. Similar results reported in two papers.138,139VariousTobaccoXRF; SThe bio-accumulation of heavy metals in tobacco because of intensive farming may be a health concern. This paper shows the use of WDXRF in quantifying a range of metals in tobacco leaves.140VariousEcstasy tabletsVariousA review is presented (79 refs) outlining both atomic and molecular analysis for the profiling of illicit ecstasy tablets141VariousDecorative paintings from the sarcophagus cartonnage of an Egyptian mummyX-ray micro-fluorescenceSynchrotron radiation employed.142,143VariousMultilayer paint chips, inks and fibres.Raman spectroscopy and μ-XRFMolecular and atomic profiling of forensic samples. The aim of the work was to assess the practicality of the combination of the two techniques within one instrument (PRAXIS apparatus)1442.2.1 Analysis of explosives. LIBS continues to be widely published as a technique for rapid multi-elemental analysis of a range of materials and objects. Baudelet et al.94 have demonstrated time resolved LIBS for the analysis of organic materials. A major challenge for organic or biological material analysis by LIBS arises because the substances to be analyzed are composed of mainly the same elementals, namely carbon, oxygen and nitrogen. An efficient strategy for detection and discrimination between organic materials is based on determination of ratios between intensities of line emissions from these organic elements, e.g. O/C, N/C or O/N, which are related to the chemical composition of the organic compounds (see references within this paper). For biological materials, it has been demonstrated that a certain number of diatomic molecular fragments, such as C2 or CN, can provide information for their speciation. This strategy does, however, suffer from interferences, particularly those arising from atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen. Because of this, it is important to study the interaction between plasma plume and ambient gas in order to have a realistic estimation of emission from plasma-excited air which depends on the plasma properties such as temperature and density. These properties, in turn, depend on laser parameters (pulse duration, wavelength) and on the physico-chemical properties of the sample. It is therefore important to either minimize emissions of atomic or molecular species (O, N, or CN) due to the interaction between plasma and background gas or make these emissions controllable, in such a way that their contributions can be removed from the total line intensities of oxygen and nitrogen atoms or CN molecules detected in a LIBS spectrum of an organic material. This paper presents time-resolved UV-LIBS for organic material analysis. A sample of nylon was used as a typical organic material and samples of copper and a tablet of aspirin were used as samples with different physico-chemical properties for comparison. The investigations focused on emission from atomic oxygen and nitrogen which can originate from either native organic elements or atmospheric air. A kinetic study of line intensities allowed the contributions of native organic elements to be distinguished from those from the ambient air. For molecular species, kinetic behaviour of the emission from CN bonds was presented and data showed that emission from native CN bonds could be distinguished from that due to recombination with ambient air in a time-resolved study of the molecular line emission intensity. The authors also demonstrated that for UV-LIBS, the laser fluence is a suitable control parameter which allowed specifying the regime with either predominant native CN bonds or with predominant recombination CN bonds. UV-LIBS with low laser fluence allowed detection of native CN bonds thus providing a spectral marker for certain organic materials and an indication of biological materials.On a similar theme, Babushok et al.95 described a fundamental study of the processes occurring within the plasma plume and the development of a kinetic model of these processes occurring within the LIBS plume of cyclotrimethylenetrinitamine (RDX). RDX is an explosive nitroamine widely used in military and industrial applications and is considered one of the most powerful military explosives. The developed model included the processes of formation and quenching of excited H, N and O atoms, and comprised initial decomposition reactions of RDX (or explosive products at the surface of the target material), high-temperature reactions of products of explosive decomposition in the buffer gas under the LIBS conditions and reactions of excited states species responsible for the LIBS signature, including the generation and quenching of excited states (O, H, N) and the subset of reactions of excited species with the decomposition products of RDX and with buffer gas species. A sub model was included for formation of the C2 molecule. The observation of LIBS C2 signals was used to discriminate organic samples from inorganic targets during detection of energetic materials. Together with peak ratios, the data on C2 emission were used for the detection of a number of explosive materials. The sources of data for inclusion into the model are indicated in the paper and the authors were careful to point out that the rate constants were extrapolated from those given at much lower temperatures. The model was therefore examined for errors resulting from the use of this extrapolated data. The work demonstrated that the overall reaction process in the plasma plume could be considered a two-stage process. The first stage corresponds to a fast approach to a quasi-stationary state. The second stage corresponds to a change in the quasi-stationary concentrations of species as a result of the change in temperature. As a result of the two-stage process, the initial composition at the surface of the target, or the initial mechanism of RDX decomposition, was not considered important in determining the LIBS signature in the LIBS measurement time window. The results of modeling with different mechanisms of decomposition are approximately the same during the second stage. The memory of the initial compound was lost within 1μs. This allows the suggested model to be employed for modelling of the LIBS plume of other C/N/H/O-containing energetic materials in the LIBS measurement window (1–30μs).Bohling et al.96 described an all fibre-coupled LIBS device for the field measurement of explosives and surface contamination with explosive residues. Objects such as land mines which are hidden by soil or other improvised explosive devices which can be hidden in a variety of containers prove difficult to detect. This paper showed the development of a miniaturized and all-fibre-coupled LIBS sensor device with the capability of real time remote control and has the option to perform measurements through small drill holes or within the ground. The sensor head consists of a metal tip into which the optical fibres, a focussing lens and a mechanical shutter system for keeping the optics clean while digging in soil for land mine detection are integrated. A fibre bundle collects the LIBS signal and guides it back to the detection units where the LIBS signal is recorded spectrally and temporally resolved and analyzed. The data analysis and classification of the LIBS data is done by combining chemometric data processing tools and neural networks. This approach, for the first time, gives the possibility to add new objects to the database continuously during the analysis procedure itself. In this paper the capability of such an all-fibre-coupled LIBS sensor device is illustrated. Results from field measurements performed at a test facility of the German Armed Forces are discussed. An alternative approach to discrimination of the LIBS signal of explosives from that of the atmospheric background is the use of double pulse experimental approach. De Lucia et al.97 compared the close-contact (< 1m) LIBS spectra of explosives using single pulse LIBS in argon with double pulse LIBS in the atmosphere. They demonstrated improved discrimination of an explosive and an organic interferent using double pulse LIBS which reduced the air entrained in the analytical plasma. A range of double pulse LIBS experiments have been reported (see the above reference and references therein). In this case the paper is concerned with performing LIBS remote or standoff experiments, and all of the laboratory double pulse LIBS experiments were performed with two collinear pulses. The main advantage of double pulse LIBS is the observed increase in signal and combinations of several factors are thought to be the source of the emission increase. These factors include greater mass ablation, larger plasma volume (so more atoms are excited) and less laser shielding of the second pulse resulting from the decrease in gas density after the first pulse. The authors exploited the decrease in gas density during the double pulse event to minimize atmospheric oxygen and nitrogen in the LIBS spectra, thereby improving the ability to discriminate explosive materials based on relative amounts of oxygen and nitrogen in the interrogated sample. The same authors 98 reported the use of the double pulse technique during the standoff LIBS analysis of a range of hazardous materials. In a third paper,99 they demonstrated the discrimination of explosives residues from a range of interferences and the separation of explosives into various classes using partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA). They were able to discriminate among explosive and non-explosive sample spectra acquired at a distance of 20 m and correctly classified samples not contained in the original model. The use of summed intensities and ratios from species observed in the explosives spectra enabled the identification of explosive residues even when mixed with road dust.2.2.2 Analysis of historical artifacts. There are several papers during this review period which described the use of non-destructive or quasi-non-destructive techniques in which only a small area, often less than 100 μm is destroyed, for the analysis of historical artifacts. Dawson100 reviewed (with 109 references) a range of analytical techniques which have been specifically employed in the analysis of inorganic colours and organic binders and their degradation products. Arcon et al.101 investigated the feasibility of iron K-edge XANES as a way of determining the iron(II)/iron(III) ratio in historic inks. Iron gall ink is historically very important having being used from the Middle Ages until the 20th Century. One unfortunate side effect of these inks however is their propensity to cause degradation of paper. Unfortunately 60–70% of Leonardo da Vinci's oeuvre is showing signs of deterioration and a similar situation exists with many other historical documents including Bach's scores which are virtually falling apart. The authors referred to literature suggesting that the two main reasons for this degradation are acid hydrolysis and oxidation, caused by ferrous ions. Other techniques which have been used for the total iron and Fe(II)/Fe(III) ratios in gall iron inks, specifically XRF and PIXE do not yield information on the oxidation state of the iron. In XANES, the valence state of metal cations can be deduced and this, together with the use of XANES as a technique for the analysis of relative amounts of Fe(II) in historic gall inks, is described in the paper. Faubel and co-workers102 discussed the increased efforts to preserve our cultural heritage in the form of historical books and manuscripts which are being endangered by the corrosive effects of the inks and colouring materials employed. They discussed several non-destructive analytical procedures, specifically the application of a novel combination of synchrotron radiation induced micro-XRF and FTIR microscopy to investigate the state of historical documents and the effectiveness of conservation procedures. This paper described measurements on several documents and artefacts including iron gall ink on a document dating from 1769. One paper has reported the use of LA for both cleaning and analysis of the resulting LIBS spectra of the surface layers of historical paper documents.103 The authors proposed that ablative cleaning be coupled with the use of the LIBS spectroscopic information generated to identify the composition of the contaminant layers non-destructively and of the surface pigment layers almost non-destructively. Resulting detrimental post-processing effects were discussed and these included a decrease in resistance to tearing and stretching (tensile strength) of the documents. The ablative cleaning was reported to result in the complete removal of the contaminants over small areas. The effects of wavelength of the laser was investigated and UV radiation was found to result in significant damage to the paper fibres resulting in a decreased resistance to tearing whereas exposure to visible and IR radiation resulted in much less damage. Kim and colleagues104 described the use of a portable LIBS spectrometer for fingerprinting paints and surface coatings. The rapid and quasi-non-destructive spectral fingerprinting of these artefacts was successfully performed on surfaces of significant compositional complexity. The complimentary use of techniques plays an important role in the analysis of historical artefacts and Bruder et al.105 reported the use of LIBS and Raman microscopy for the identification of pigments in paintings. This paper outlined the use of Raman microscopy of the surface and of the ablation crater and the results showed that the pigments were still recognisable by Raman spectroscopy after the LIBS measurement had been made. The conclusion was that the combination of the two techniques gave valuable information on the sample.Resano and co-workers106 demonstrated the use of a range of techniques including SEM-EDX, Raman spectroscopy and LA-ICP-MS for the characterization of post-Palaeolithic paintings. Prior to LA-ICPMS analysis, all the pigments and substrate samples were subjected to SEM-EDX and Raman inspection, since these are non-destructive techniques. The results from this investigation were discussed in detail. LA-ICP-MS was employed and spatially resolved (both laterally and in depth) quantitative multi-element information for 42 analytes present in a wide concentration range (from microgram per gram to 10% level) was achieved. In addition to the intrinsic value of these results, this information, after suitable data processing, was demonstrated to be very useful for fingerprinting purposes. Cotte et al.107 employed synchrotron-based X-ray microscopy techniques during the analysis of German 16th century paintings. This work was facilitated by recent developments at the ID21 beam line (European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, ESRF). A submicron X-ray fluorescence probe revealed the main presence of Ca, Pb, S and Sb. The fluorescence-line interferences (in particular K-lines of S with M-lines of Pb, and K-lines of Ca with L-lines of Sb) were resolved with the fitting program, PyMCA. 2D-mapping was made possible by the high resolution and highlighted the presence of micrometer grains of S and Sb in a lead matrix. XANES measurements were performed at both the S K-edge and the Sb L-edge to gain information at the molecular level. Beam stability was a key point in this study to selectively probe micrometer pigment grains dispersed in the lead matrix. The authors confirmed that the grains were made of stibnite (antimony sulfide), a very atypical pigment. Chemical mapping of sulfides was perfectly correlated with Sb mapping and provided a clear visualization of the stibnite pigments, in addition to their identification. Besides its artistic relevancy, this work aimed at illustrating developments of synchrotron X-ray microprobe methods for the chemical characterization and observation of complex and micrometer-scale materials. It is likely that synchrotron sources will become much more widely used for analysis in a range of areas particularly heterogeneous samples requiring high spatial resolution due to the high signal to noise ratios achieved with the high flux densities available. This article illustrates the recent developments of these micro-analytical methods, namely the combination of micro-X-ray fluorescence at low energies and micro-X-ray absorption spectroscopy (μ-XANES) for elemental and chemical imaging at the sub-micrometer scale. Creagh et al.108 also employed a synchrotron source for their XRD studies of Australian Aboriginal artifacts where they determined the mineral phase compositions of very small amounts (< 50 μg) of material, together with the use of PIXE to establish the atomic compositions down to low ppm levels.Morigi et al.109 reported the use of X-ray cone-beam computed tomography (CT) for the non-destructive investigation of historical paintings. The authors presented results from the analysis of two small paintings on wood, belonging to the National Gallery of Bologna. The details of the experimentation were presented and some spectacular radiographic images presented, together with virtual cross sectional images. It was concluded that this technology could provide important information to restoration and conservation planners.2.2.3 AAS determinations. Atomic absorption techniques appear to be undergoing a renaissance. This is possibly because of its ease of use and low running costs compared with ICP-OES. There are several papers during this review period which described new developments in atomic absorption procedures. Farinas et al.110 described Cd determination in alcoholic beverages using ETAAS as a cheaper alternative to ICP-MS. However, some well documented difficulties occur in the ETAAS cadmium determination such as the interference effects of anions and cations, non-specific absorption and the loss of the volatile analyte. The authors reported the development and optimisation of analytical methods for Cd determination in Orujo spirits by ETAAS using tungsten, iridium and tungsten-iridium permanent modifiers to minimise the matrix effects and losses due to volatility. The analytical characteristics of the methods developed were compared with those obtained when classical chemical modifiers such as Pd–Mg(NO3)2 and (NH4)H2PO4 were used. Experimental design was also used to optimize the ETAAS methods. The application of the chemometric procedure resulted in rapid and efficient optimization of the different factors influencing the analytical signal. Plackett-Burman designs were applied in the first step as a screening method to evaluate the most significant factors with just a few experiments. In the second step, the optimum conditions for the significant parameters were obtained employing a two-level factorial central composite design. The authors found that of all the methods developed, those based on permanent modifiers presented better analytical characteristics than those based on classical modifiers. Gil et al.111 reported a “greener” method for the determination of sodium ethylmercurithiosalicylate (thiomersal) in ophthalmic solutions. Thiomersal is an organomercurial (approximately 49% mercury by weight) that is commonly used as both an antiseptic and an antimicrobial preservative in pharmaceutical formulations. This organomercurial has been added to some vaccines, cosmetics, eye-drops and contact lens solutions as a preservative to prevent bacterial contamination. Nevertheless, increased concern has arisen due to its instability, which can give rise to the formation of toxic ethylmercury. Analytical methods for the determination of thiomersal include enzymatic amperometry, ETAAS, high-performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection and colorimetry. Cold vapour-atomic absorption spectrometry (CVAAS) is a widely employed technique for the determination of Hg at the ultra-trace level, but a prior step for conversion of organomercurials into Hg(II) is required. Most of the methods employed for oxidation of organomercurials, including thiomersal, generally require the use of strong acids, oxidants and high temperatures for decomposition in both batch and on-line procedures, which results in the production of harmful wastes of significant environmental impact. The generation of toxic wastes is becoming recognised as being as important as any other analytical feature. The authors described a sono-induced cold vapour generation technique (SI-CVG) which has eliminated the need for conventional reducing reagents such as NaBH4 or SnCl2 for determination of Hg by AAS. The SI-CVG technique is accomplished with formic acid as the sole chemical reagent. This reagent partly decomposes upon ultrasound irradiation to yield both reducing gases and radicals within the analytical run, which promotes cold vapour generation and is non-toxic and biodegradable. A drawback inherent with SI-CVG is the presence of oxidizing substances which preclude the reduction of Hg(II) to Hg(0) by ultrasound. Intensive wet digestion procedures have been commonly employed for degradation of thiomersal, but they may cause difficulties when applied in combination with the SI-CVG technique owing to the excess of oxidising acids remaining after treatment. Advanced oxidation procedures such as UV/H2O2 or ultrasound/O3 or UV/O3 rely on the generation of powerful OH radicals, which can rapidly react with organic compounds. Additionally, such procedures do not add any excess oxidising agents to the sample solution and, consequently, should ideally fit the sample preparation for SI-CVG. In this work, the combination of the SI-CVG technique and the UV/H2O2 procedure was applied to the determination of thiomersal in eye-drop solutions as a greener alternative to conventional CVG following wet digestion. The authors described the optimisation of the digestion procedure in detail and the determination of thiomersal in a range of ophthalmic solutions was demonstrated. Excellent recoveries were reported.Antimony and its compounds are considered to be priority interest pollutants by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, with a maximum allowable contaminant level of 6μg L−1 Sb for drinking water. The European Union defines a maximum admissible concentration of Sb in drinking water that is 5μg L−1. Antimony exists mainly in the Sb(III) and Sb(V) oxidation states. The trivalent form is ten times more toxic than the pentavalent form, while the organic species are less toxic, which is a similar behaviour to arsenic. Clearly the speciation of antimony is of importance and Zih-Perenyi et al.112 reported a solid phase chelation extraction procedure for the speciation of inorganic Sb in pharmaceutical and water samples using GFAAS detection. The chelating procedure utilised iminodiacetic acid-ethyl cellulose as an extractant to separate Sb(III) and Sb(V) prior to the GFAAS determination. Results were compared with total Sb figures obtained using ICP-MS. Highly diluted solutions of phosphate-containing pharmaceuticals as well as samples of phosphoric acid with relatively high Sb concentrations were analyzed directly by the ICP-MS method. Solid phase extraction was done within a flow injection analysis manifold with the relevant fractions being collected off-line prior to GFAAS analysis. Optimisation of the extraction procedures was described in detail. The authors showed that the Sb(III) plus Sb(V) results obtained by the speciation procedure agreed very well with the total Sb found by ICP-MS. Recovery studies performed on both pharmaceutical materials and water samples showed quantitative recovery. The paper also referenced two useful reviews of the occurrence of antimony in natural waters and the studies of the impact of human activities' on the biogeochemistry and geochemical cycling of antimony.2.2.4 Speciation analyses. Speciation continues to be a very prominent area in the field of elemental analysis and this is reflected in the high quality work being reported during this review period. One theme which is very strongly evident is the use of both molecular and atomic spectrometric techniques to facilitate the comprehensive identification and structure elucidation of molecules. Forsgard et al.113 described the use of column switched LC-ICP-MS and LC-ESI-MS/MS for the screening and identification of Al containing biomolecules in soils, which may pose toxicological risks. The aim of this study was to investigate the applicability of ICP-ToF-MS with reversed-phase LC separation to the screening and fingerprinting of aluminium-chelated siderophores in field-soil solutions. The ability to detect Al with ICP-MS has traditionally been problematic due to the solvents used as organic modifiers in reversed phase LC, which caused plasma instabilities and a high background signal due to isobaric interferences with aluminium as well as a reduction in signal due to space charge effects. In order to detect low concentrations of Al in natural samples the LC-ICP-MS method was optimized to minimize the formation of these interfering species and to maximize the analytical signal. To achieve this, the authors investigated several mobile phases and plasma conditions and very significant improvements in signal to noise ratios were reported. The developed LC setup was also coupled to ESI-MS and ESI-MS/MS and these molecular techniques were utilized to identify and characterize aluminium-chelated siderophores in a natural field soil solution sample. Compound independent calibration for the determination of organic compounds after chromatographic separation is a recurrent topic in modern analytical chemistry. Gonzalez-Gago et al.114 reported the determination of trihalomethanes in drinking water by GC-ICP-MS. The initial objective of their work was to check for compound independent sensitivity for different halogenated compounds using GC-ICP-MS as the first step to developing a post-column isotope dilution analysis procedure using 37Cl and 79Br enriched isotopes. Problems with the supply of the enriched isotopes required that they check the possibility of using a natural abundance internal standard for quantitation. This paper demonstrated that, when compound independent sensitivity was assured, the use of an internal standard eliminated the need for any external calibration of the response of the instrument. This allows determination of the analytes in a way which is similar to the use of isotope dilution analysis without species specific calibration standards. Importantly, it was noted that compound independent calibration is only an approximate quantification strategy and cannot compete with species-specific isotope dilution analysis in terms of the control of the recovery of the analytical procedure. The halogenated compounds selected for this work were the trihalomethanes. These compounds are the main disinfection by-products formed during water chlorination. Increasingly strict regulations are requiring new methodologies for the quantification of trihalomethanes. This paper described in detail the calibration protocols employed and showed that the elemental response for Br and Cl was linear and independent of the molecular structure for CHCl3, CHBrCl2, CHBr2Cl and CHBr3 and the selected internal standard (CBrCl3) when using GC-ICP-MS. The optimum operational conditions for the GC separation and the ICP-MS detection were presented. The compound independent calibration methodology was applied and validated for the determination of trihalomethane compounds in drinking water, and showed adequate analytical characteristics in application of the European Legislation.As the requirement for speciation grows to encompass a wider range of species, it is becoming increasingly important to obtain appropriate CRMs. Narukawa et al.115 described the preparation of an arsenobetaine solution reference material for use in the speciation of arsenic compounds. This material was developed and certified by the National Metrology Institute of Japan. The authors described the synthesis and certification of this material by four independent analytical techniques (ICP-MS, ICP-OES, GFAAS and LC-ICP-MS). Trace environmental analysis has been highly topical for many years but more recently the necessity for speciation at trace levels in environmental samples is being realised. Campillo et al.116 proposed two procedures for the simultaneous determination of selenite and two organoseleniums, dimethyl selenide (DMSe) and dimethyldiselenide (DMDSe). This paper discussed the importance of selenium speciation and cited five review papers which the reader may find useful. Both procedures involved preconcentration by solid phase micro-extraction (SPME) in the head space, in order to achieve the low detection limits required. Analysis was achieved using GC-AED. Water samples from a range of sources, including seawater were analyzed, both derivatization and extraction procedures were optimised and recoveries were checked using spiked samples. Detection limits in the low ng L−1 range were achieved and 96% to 98% recoveries were reported. This paper illustrated the need for speciation at trace levels in environmental samples and it is likely that the importance of trace level speciation will grow in the near future as many of the species finding their way into the environment are still largely unknown.One aspect of speciation which is becoming increasingly important is the study of the metabolic response to drugs, this field is often known as metabonomics. Vanhaecke and co-workers117 reported the development of an ICP-MS procedure for the metabolism studies of a new Br-containing anti-tuberculosis compound, R207910. During drug discovery, and before a prospective drug can be launched onto the market, it is a requirement that the fate of the drug should be known after it enters the human body. Part of this study involved the metabolite profiling of the candidate compound including the determination of the amount of compound-related material in the excreta, and identification and quantification of the metabolites to understand the metabolic fate of the compound. The latter has traditionally been done by HPLC with UV detection, mass spectrometric detection or radiochemical detection. With UV detection, there is the likelihood that some metabolites will remain undetected, while the picture may be further obscured by a lack of specificity. Additionally, the sensitivity of the UV and mass spectrometry methods is strongly dependent on the molecular structure of the compounds, so the availability of synthetic standards is required for quantification. As this is often not feasible in the initial phase of drug discovery, radio-labelling is frequently employed but this can be expensive and time-consuming and there are obvious issues associated with human studies involving radio-labelled molecules. This is especially so in the case of R207910 due to its long blood plasma half life and high tissue penetration. To minimise these disadvantages, the authors have reported the use of HPLC-ICP-MS, as a compound independent technique for the analysis of drug compounds containing an element detectable by ICP-MS, e.g. Br, Cl, Pt or S. This paper described the development of this methodology for the detection of bromine-containing metabolites of this drug in faeces of animals which had been dosed with R207910 and the results were compared with those achieved by the use of carbon 14 radio-labelled material. The paper fully described the experiments, including the use of a cooled spray chamber, narrow injector tube, a PFA-LC nebulizer and oxygen addition to the plasma to minimise carbon build up. The authors discussed the possibility of the results being different from those obtained using radio-labelled experiments and attributed any differences to the possibility that some of the metabolites may lose their radio-label during metabolism, and similarly, in the case of ICP-MS detection, some of the metabolites may have lost their ICP-MS detectable atom, in this case, Br. The ICP-MS detection was therefore seen as being complementary to radiochemical techniques. The paper also discussed the use of gradient elution and the resulting change in the ICP-MS response, which resulted in poor stability and poor quantitation. The use of species-non-specific isotope dilution to minimise this response drift was suggested and this is the subject of a second paper from the same group.118 Here they employed organic mass spectrometry in combination with inorganic techniques, and this is increasingly used as a means of gaining speciation and/or structural information in addition to the quantitative information. In this paper, the authors used a combination of HPLC-ICP-MS and HPLC-ESI-MS for the metabolite profiling of R207910. HPLC-ESI-MS was used for the structural identification of the active molecule and its metabolites. The 79Br/81Br isotope ratio was used to search for bromine containing metabolites in the complex chromatographic background using HPLC-ESI-MS and these bromine-specific mass chromatograms were referred to as ‘bromatograms’. A combination of accurate mass measurements and structural information were obtained from collision-induced fragmentation by means of MS2 using a quadrupole-Time of Flight and a LTQ-Orbitrap instrument. The experimental conditions were described in detail. Quantitation of the Br containing molecules (metabolites and parent compound) was achieved by HPLC-ICP-MS using species unspecific isotope dilution (described in detail in the paper). The use of this procedure based on the measurement of the ratio of the two bromine isotopes resulted in a very stable response which was not affected by the solvent gradient and the results were in good agreement with those obtained from carbon-14 radiochemical detection. The HPLC-ESI-MS ‘bromatograms’ were similar to those obtained by HPCL-ICP-MS. In addition, the combination of the molecular and elemental analyses enabled structure elucidation and good quantitation of the metabolites in the biological matrices of interest. Brominated organic compounds are also of interest in atmospheric chemistry and specifically, the 81Br:79Br ratio has potential for the study of the source, transport and fate of these compounds. Sylva et al.119 described the use of GC-multi-collector ICP-MS to determine this ratio in brominated organic compounds. They reported that 0.3 parts per thousand precision was achieved when 0.3 nmol of Br was injected.Radio-immunotherapy is a promising approach for cancer treatment. It is based on the selective targeting of radioactivity to tumour tissue expressing a specific antigen via radio-labelled monoclonal antibodies. The advantage over more conventional chemotherapeutic techniques is that the radiotoxic effects on normal organs is limited. Yttrium-90 is the most widely used radionuclide employed in the radio-immunotherapy of solid tumours because of its favourable radiological properties. Ciavardelli and colleagues120 proposed a novel approach to evaluate the pharmacokinetic profiles of yttrium-90 based radio-immunotherapy using a stable isotope surrogate. They employed 89Y as a stable tracer of 90Y to evaluate the urinary clearance of the radio-labelled antibody and they described an ICP-MS procedure as a highly sensitive and accurate method of detection to quantify the amount of Y in the urine of the test animal. Labelled antibody fragments were characterized by electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry. ICP-MS detection limits for Y at the single figure ppt level in urine were achieved and accurate Y concentrations were determined without the need for any sample preparation. The authors suggested that this procedure fulfils the accuracy and precision requirements necessary for long term pharmacokinetic studies in animal models.The detection and quantification of metalloproteins is becoming increasingly important for clinical diagnosis, since alterations in their formation or expression can be an indicator of disease. Hyphenated techniques such as HPLC-ICP-MS are commonly used for trace elemental speciation. A common problem with the analysis of biomolecules such as metalloproteins is that the complexed metals can be labile under certain conditions, allowing the metal to be released and the protein to elute or migrate as its apo form. Dissociation and transformation or irreversible binding of proteins to the column material during the analytical procedure must be carefully considered. Furthermore, quality control in metalloprotein analysis is problematic because of the lack of suitable standards and reference materials for biological species. Deitrich et al.121 described the preparation and characterization of an isotopically enriched superoxide dismutase standard to be used for species specific isotope dilution analysis. When the stoichiometry of metals in a metalloprotein is known and an identical isotopically enriched species is available, it is possible to perform species-specific isotope dilution mass spectrometry (SS-IDMS). In this case, the protein concentration can be determined via its elemental concentration. This is also possible using the species-unspecific approach if the stoichiometry of the metal-protein complex is known. However, the species-specific spiking approach is superior because losses of the analyte after spiking can be corrected for. SS-IDMS of metalloproteins, especially where non-covalent protein-metal interactions are involved, requires carefully chosen and maintained conditions in order that no loss of the metal centre or redistribution between free metal isotopes and the isotopes of the spike and sample protein occur. An important benefit of SS-IDMS is that species transformation during sample preparation and chromatography can be controlled and even quantified. SS-IDMS is, therefore, a useful tool for evaluating analyte stability and behaviour during the analytical procedure. This paper contained many useful references on this subject together with a review which the reader may find useful and described in detail the production and characterization of the enriched superoxide dismutase, together with an investigation of its stability. The authors claimed that this is the first report detailing the production of an isotopically enriched metalloenzyme, containing two different isotopically enriched metal cofactors, which can be used as a standard in species-specific IDMS. The study showed that it is possible to chemically produce an isotopically enriched superoxide dismutase with various isotopic abundances of the enriched 65Cu and 68Zn. The stability of the metalloprotein standard under speciation conditions was tested, and no exchange of the 65Cu and 68Zn was observed after addition of excess Cu, Zn or a chelating agent. This application shows the potential of using isotopically enriched superoxide dismutase for the accurate quantification of that enzyme in real samples. General limitations of this approach were that the native enzyme activity was not completely restored in the isotopically enriched enzyme. In addition, denaturation of the protein may have taken place during the de-metalation procedure especially at low pH. The authors also stated that, despite all the advantages of SS-IDMS, a huge effort is necessary to produce and characterize an isotopically enriched protein spike. Therefore, this approach may only be sensible in practice for the assay of essential proteins or biomarkers. The development of matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS), electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS), and tandem mass spectrometry (MSn) in the late 1980s has enabled the determination of the molecular weights of intact proteins, the analysis of their amino acid sequences, and the characterization of structural modifications of peptides and proteins. Hartinger and co-workers122 described the characterization of the protein binding interactions of anti-cancer metallodrugs specifically the platinum family of drugs and compared MALDI and ESI ionisation techniques. Platinum complexes are known to bind to a high degree to plasma proteins but the role of the binding of tumour-inhibiting metal-based drugs to proteins is not well understood and there are inconsistencies for different metal complexes. Additionally, for platinum complexes a significant contribution to side effects is thought to be due to the binding of proteins. In contrast, the good tolerability and tumour specificity of ruthenium drug candidates is thought to be strongly dependent on binding to transferrin, and also to albumin, therefore exploiting the enhanced mobility and retention effect could contribute to the mode of action of the metal complexes. There are also questions regarding the preferred binding sites of metal complexes on proteins. Recently, model proteins such as ubiquitin (Ub), myoglobin, and cytochrome-c (Cyt-C) have been utilized in mass spectrometric studies on the binding of anticancer metal coordination compounds to proteins with both clinically established and developmental drugs (see the paper by the authors and references therein). The authors reported a comparative study on the applicability of nESI (nano-electrospray ionization) and MALDI techniques for the analysis of the binding of the tumour-inhibiting anti-cancer agents oxaliplatin and the cis-platin drug, CDDP and the trans-isomer, TDDP of the latter towards the model protein ubiquitin. The advantages and disadvantages of the compared methods for studying the metal complex-protein interaction were discussed. The authors claimed that this is the first report on the use of MALDI-MS to characterize a protein-metal drug interaction. For the first time MALDI-MS was found to be suitable to characterize Ub-platinum complex adducts. However, with high molecular weight proteins, the resolution of the MALDI-ToF-MS was thought unlikely to be sufficient to unambiguously characterize metal-protein adducts. MALDI also resulted in increased fragmentation products with respect to cleavage of the ligands from the Pt complex and this was thought to make interpretation errors more problematic. For example, a Ub–Pt species was observed only in the MALDI spectra and therefore presumably corresponds to a species generated in the instrument rather than existing in solution. The ion trap instrument had advantages when higher sensitivity was required—bis adducts of oxaliplatin were detected, which were not observed in the MALDI or in the nESI-QToF mass spectra. This paper demonstrated that MALDI-MS is a useful method for the analysis of metal binding to low molecular weight proteins even though it delivers lower resolution mass spectra than ESI. The MALDI data appear to be ideally suited to providing spectra from which kinetic constants can be estimated and may be useful in developing non-classical metal drugs that target proteins rather than DNA. Phytochelatins are metal binding ligands found in hyper-accumulating plants. Since hyper-accumulating plants have the potential to be used in phyto-remediation efforts to detoxify contaminated sites, there is great commercial interest in developing a “green” cost-effective clean-up method for metal contaminated sites. Furthermore, low toxicity ligands such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, and other similar compounds have been used to enhance the bioavailability of heavy metals for plant uptake; a process called chelate assisted phyto-remediation.123 The successful use of plants to extract metals from contaminated soils requires a better understanding of the mechanisms of metal uptake, translocation and accumulation within the plant. Consequently, this requires the development of accurate methods for the determination of polycarboxylic metal complexes in such environmental matrices. As with the work on the brominated drug described above, the authors also described the use of molecular analysis and atomic analysis as complimentary techniques to gain both structural and sensitive quantitative information. Their novel approach employed FI coupled with electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry (FI-ESI-MS) to obtain speciation information without prior separation and IC-ICP-MS for the sensitive quantitation of the species of interest. The analytical performances of these procedures were evaluated by analyzing soil samples from a lead contaminated site undergoing chelate assisted phyto-remediation. Reversible protein phosphorylation is considered to be one of the most abundant fundamental steps in cellular processes in which post-translational protein modifications are involved.124 Many corresponding cellular mechanisms including cell signalling, metabolism and apoptosis (programmed cell death) are dependent on this biochemical reaction. Consequently, there is much interest in accessing quantitative information about the phosphoproteome and the phosphorylation degree of single proteins in certain cell compartments. Traditional strategies for detection and quantification of phosphorylation sites are in-vivo and in-vitro incorporation of radioactive phosphorus. As these methods require significant amounts of radioactive compounds, mass spectrometric methods are becoming the methodology of choice. Based on MALDI or ESI ionisation, mass spectrometry can provide accurate information on the molecular mass of intact proteins with an estimation of the phosphorylation degree from the molecular weight distribution pattern, whereas the analysis of phosphorylation
sites and stoichiometry may require further MS or MS/MS techniques. This paper referenced some reviews and early papers in this field which the reader may find useful. In order to supplement the existing ICP-MS methods, the authors reported the concept of a recently developed on-line coupling of gel electrophoresis and ICP-sector field-MS for the determination of phosphorylated proteins. As this is a new development, this new application to proteins was realised on the basis of a one-dimensional gel electrophoretic separation prior to ICP-MS detection. By simultaneous monitoring of 31P+ and 32S+ as naturally occurring elemental tags, the authors determined the phosphorylation degree of alpha- and beta-casein. The authors described their experimental conditions in detail and initial work was done to elucidate the electrophoretic migration behaviour and the ICP-MS detection of caseins with the proposed coupling system. The paper showed that the use of P/S ratio measurements enabled the determination of the amount of protein-bound phosphate with acceptable precision. Since this method required knowledge about the number of S-containing amino acids in the entire protein, the proposed concept was limited to well-characterized proteins. Proteins with unknown structure would need to be identified by accompanying molecular MS methods like ESI-MS or MALDI-MS. The limited separation power of one-dimensional GE was the main restriction in the analysis of complex samples, so that co-elutions of interfering compounds have to be excluded.Organophosphorus nerve agents are categorized as some of the most toxic species ever created. These compounds hydrolyze in the environment into specific alkyl phosphonic acids which provide an indirect means for monitoring release of the parent nerve agents. Richardson and Caruso125 described the application of a GC-ICP-MS method, previously reported for the determination of organophosphorus nerve agent degradation products, but now for the presence of mixtures of organophosphorus pesticides. Sample preparation and instrumental parameters were described in some detail. Initial experiments consisted of the analysis of individual pesticide standards of dichlorvos, ethion and parathion ethyl in the presence of a mixture of seven organophosphorus nerve agent degradation products. The degradation products of sarin, cyclosarin and soman as well as their common final hydrolysis product (MPA) were rapidly detected in mixtures of the three pesticides. Pesticide mixture concentrations ranging from 5 to 10 times greater than those of the degradation products were shown to have no effect on the identification of the nerve agent degradation product of interest. This application demonstrated that the chromatographic resolution of the GC separation method was sufficient to resolve possible interfering species from the nerve agent degradation products of interest. The same group also described the derivatization of organophosphorus nerve agent degradation products for analysis by GC with ICP-MS and ToF-MS detection.126 Organophosphorus nerve agent degradation products are non-volatile, highly polar species with no useful chromophore. Due to the highly specific hydrolysis pathway of the parent chemical warfare agent, which was described in the paper, the analysis of the less toxic degradation products provides an alternative technique for the detection of such materials. In this work, the application of GC-ICP-MS to the determination of common degradation products of the chemical warfare agents Soman, Sarin, Tabun, RVX and VX is described. Optimization of temperature and time for the formation of tert-butyldimethylsilyl (TBDM) derivatives of seven degradation products was described and confirmation of the formation of TBDMS derivatives for six of the chemical warfare agents degradation products of interest was determined by GC-ToF-MS. Analytical figures of merit for each species studied were presented, with detection limits in the low pg range being reported. The method developed was applied to river water and soil matrices to determine the sensitivity of ICP-MS for these organophosphorus nerve agent degradation product derivatives. The authors are reportedly investigating the use of alternative derivatization techniques, including TMS, p-bromophenol and pentafluorbenzyl esters, as well as the use of solid-phase micro-extraction (SPME) preconcentration to analyze these degradation products although this work was not reported in this paper. Zhai et al.127 described a novel procedure for the determination and speciation of methyltins in process wastewaters. Organotin compounds have been distributed extensively in the environment because of their extensive applications as biocides, antifouling agents and polymer stabilizers. These compounds have the potential to cause harm to aquatic organisms and their use as antifouling agents has been banned in many countries. Speciation of organotins is based on the on-line coupling of chromatographic procedures with various detectors. Among the GC-based systems, the most extensively used detectors were AAS, mass spectrometry, ICP-MS and the quartz surface-induced luminescence flame photometric detector (QSIL-FPD). The authors referenced two other papers describing this latter technique, which is shown to possess very high selectivity and low detection limits for organotin compounds. In this paper, QSIL-FPD was employed as a HPLC detector for the speciation of methyltin compounds. The paper described the optimization of mobile phase conditions as well as describing how the methyltin compounds separated by the HPLC and derivatized using post-column addition of the derivatization reagent to generate volatile hydride products by a hydride generation (HG) reaction with potassium borohydride. The derivatization products were separated from the liquid matrix with a newly developed microporous membrane gas-liquid separator (MGLS) as the HPLC-FPD interface and introduced into the QSIL-FPD for detection. This instrumentation was described in detail in the paper, as were the optimization of all the parameters. The detection limit for trimethyltin was claimed to be sub ppb (ng mL−1), which was higher than those obtained by ICP-MS but the high levels of organic solvents from the HPLC separation were claimed to be problematic for ICP-MS procedures. Recovery studies showed quantitative recovery of the organotins. The authors suggested that, with a preconcentration step such as solid phase extraction, this procedure could be a low cost alternative to ICP-MS for the speciation and sensitive detection of organotin compounds. Additionally, they suggested that this procedure could be extended to other hydride forming metals such as lead, selenium, mercury and arsenic.2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acidsThis has been a vibrant area of research in this review period. There have been a number of areas in which substantial research has been reported. Included in these are the forensic analysis of materials and the analysis of cements.2.3.1 Reviews and production of CRMs. A publication by Salle and co-workers has described the latest applications of “stand-off” LIBS analysis of distant objects.145 The review contained 30 references and covered the analysis of materials to which there is not easy physical access but optical access is not problematic. The review only covered those applications where incident radiation and returning plasma light were transmitted through the atmosphere rather than along an optical fiber. The analysis of both solid and liquid samples over distances of tens of meters using nano-second laser pulses was discussed. The authors also discussed the various parameters that have an effect on the distance over which an analysis may be made. Such parameters include the laser characteristics (pulse energy and power, beam divergence, spatial profile) and the optical system used to focus the radiation. The optical systems used to collect the plasma light were also described. These systems usually use a lens or a mirror to increase the solid angle over which the plasma light can be collected. The light collection system may be at an angle to the laser path beam or may be collinear. A number of applications were described that covered the metallurgical, nuclear and cultural heritage industries as well as environmental and even inter-planetary systems. The authors also discussed the use of femto-second laser pulses which, because of the very high power densities associated with them, could extend the useful range of LIBS to several kilometers.Reynolds et al. described the preparation of three reference materials for Si isotopes.146 One (IRMM-018) was a SiO2 standard, one (given the name “Big Batch”) was a fractionated SiO2 material prepared at the University of California, Santa Barbara and the other was a diatomite that had originally been deposited as a marine biogenic opal. All the materials were compared with the international Si standard NBS28 (RM 8546) and were found to be in reasonable agreement. An assortment of techniques were used for the analysis. These included both acid and alkaline dissolution/fusion, Si separation using cation exchange, selective co-precipitation and high and low resolution mass spectrometric techniques. The average delta Si-30 values were + 1.26 parts per thousand, −1.65 parts per thousand and −10.48 parts per thousand for Diatomite, IRMM-018 and Big Batch respectively. There was almost no statistical difference between mean values obtained by each participating laboratory except for IRMM-018. The problems associated with this standard were attributed to inhomogeneity or contamination. The other two materials produced data sets (involving many analytical techniques) that had very similar precision and differences were limited to 0.2 parts per thousand in mean delta Si-30 values and differences of 0.13 parts per thousand in mean delta Si-29 values.2.3.2 Forensic applications. There has been a sudden increase in interest in applications involving forensic analysis of materials. Many of these applications involve the analysis of gunshot residue. Although many of these studies proved to be successful there were, however, a couple that were either inconclusive or failed to prove what the authors had hoped. Among the more successful papers is one by Sarkis and co-workers.147 These authors used a solution of EDTA on a swab to collect residue from the hands of volunteers who had fired either 9mm or 0.4 inch caliber pistols and using either Taurus or Clean Range ammunition. Once collected, the samples were analyzed for Ba, Pb and Sb using SF-HR-ICP-MS, which enabled concentrations lower than 1 μg L−1 to be determined. A clear discrimination between shooters and non-shooters was observed from the analytical data. In addition, the authors also discussed the importance of the sampling procedure including collection of samples from a different body part as well as the gun hand of the suspect. A paper by Wunnapuk and co-workers tested the skin around gunshot entry wounds and compared it with other skin areas.148 Using ICP-OES as a means of detection, it was found that discrimination between different ammunition types could be made. A fully jacketed bullet caused an increase in Fe and Zn on the skin whereas an unjacketed bullet (a lead bullet) led to a large deposit of Pb. A correlation between the Pb content and the analytes Ba and Sb was also noted for both ammunition types. Another paper used ICP-MS and SEM-EDX to obtain elemental data from gunshot residues and then applied a chemometric approach (regularized discriminant analysis) to the data so that the residues may be classified according to different groups, i.e. “gunshot residue characteristic”, “consistent with gunshot residue” and “environmental particles”.149 In addition, an attempt was made to identify the brand of ammunition used. According to the authors, it is getting increasingly difficult to differentiate between types of ammunition as well as between the classification of particle type. These authors used a specially designed shooting device to keep the external conditions unchanged. This device enabled them to use defined distances between the shooter and the target. The determination of firing range is a subject that has also been tackled by Gagliano-Candela and co-workers, who used ETAAS to determine Pb in samples of filter paper that had been shot using a Colt 38 Special from distances of 5, 10, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60, 80 and 100 cm.150 Each sample was cut into three rings with external diameters of 1.4, 5 and 10.2 cm. A plot of the logarithm of the Pb concentration in each ring against the firing distance enabled a linear correlation to be established. A SEM-EDX study of gunshot residue from a shooter's hands and from the inside of the cartridge case was performed by Brozek-Mucha.151 Three types of 9 mm Luger ammunition were tested, i.e. different types of detonator; viz. lead azide or lead styphnate, mercury fulminate or an organic based one, e.g. diazodinitrophenol. In addition, other types of ammunition, e.g. copper and tin plated projectiles were also tested. The author noted that although there were similarities, there were also some differences in the chemical composition and morphology observed from gunshot residue collected from the hands and from the cartridges. This was apportioned to the projectile itself depositing some residue. The author warned that the distribution and chemical composition of the residue depends strongly on the direction of the reaction path starting in the primer, moving along the cartridge case and finishing when the projectile leaves the gun muzzle. It was concluded that for a reliable comparison of the airborne residue, considerable experience based on laboratory experiments performed under controlled conditions was necessary. Two papers by Molina and co-workers have also described the analysis of gunshot residue taken from suicide victims. In the first of these applications, SEM-EDX was used for the analysis152; whereas in the second, ICP-OES was used.153 In the first of these applications 116 cases were studied and the hands of the victims were tested for gunshot residue as well as being analyzed for calibre of weapon and proximity of wound. It was found that SEM-EDX identified an undisputed gunshot residue particle in only 50% of cases and that the spatial distribution of residue on the hands could lead to identifying the manner in which the weapon was being held in only 18% of cases. The authors concluded that the low sensitivity of the instrumentation along with the low percentage of identification of discernible patterns of residue meant that SEM-EDX was of limited use for such studies. In the second of the applications, the authors performed a very similar study, but using ICP-OES as a means of sample analysis. Data from 102 cases were reported. This study also demonstrated that proof of the victim firing a handgun immediately prior to death could only be obtained in 50% of cases; i.e. the results were exactly the same as for SEM-EDX. Again, the authors concluded that the test could not be relied upon for differentiating between self-inflicted and non-self-inflicted wounds.Three other interesting forensic style applications have been noted. These included the use of ICP-MS and ToF-SIMS followed by principal component analysis of the data to distinguish between pencils from a number of manufacturers.154 This study, by Denman and colleagues, succeeded in its goals to differentiate between pencils from different manufacturers, but it also noted that pencils from different batches by the same manufacturer could also be significantly different. The technique of ToF-SIMS has been used by Szynkowska et al. for the detection and analysis of fingerprints.155 Six types of surface (stainless steel, copper, brass, aluminium foil, glass and paper) onto which fingerprints had been placed were analyzed. “Natural” fingerprints and prints that had been contaminated with nickel nitrate hexahydrate, gunshot residues and arsenic trioxide were examined. The authors suggested that it was possible to relate the ToF-SIMS fingerprints to other evidence found at the crime scene. In the last of the forensic applications, Obhodas and co-workers described how a small container suspected of housing red mercury (a material of unproven existence, but thought to be capable of acting as a detonator for nuclear bombs) had been confiscated by police and then analyzed by neutron activation analysis and EDXRF.156 The neutron activation analysis found traces of Cr, Fe, Hg and Ni. Data obtained from EDXRF analysis showed that the Cr, Fe and Ni signals originated from the container. Another hypothetical component of red mercury, Sb, was not detected.2.3.3 Analysis of cements, concretes and mortars. There have been several publications in this area during this review period. Potgieter-Vermaak 157 analyzed ordinary Portland cements as well as mortars (1:3 blends of cement and different sands) for a range of minor and trace analytes. Then, using star plots and principal components analysis, the authors successfully provided a unique fingerprint that could be used to characterize and identify the materials for forensic purposes. A chemometric analysis of analytical data obtained by X-ray spectrometry of Portland cements was an approach also made by Goraieb and colleagues.158 These authors used a commercial software package to discriminate between cement types according to their trace element profile. The elements Al, Ca, Mg and Si were quantified using multivariate calibration of the entire spectrum, whereas the analytes Fe, K and S were better quantified by correlating their K alpha peaks with concentrations in a univariate procedure. In another paper, Potgieter and Maljanovic determined the concentration of Cl in cements using ICP-OES.159 Material was slurried both in the presence and the absence of 5% v/v nitric acid, with homogenization ensured by ultra-sonication for 10 mins. Results obtained from these analyses were compared with those obtained using the Volhard indirect titration method and from potentiometric analysis using an ion selective electrode (ISE). Analysis of CRMs indicated that the ICP-OES and ISE produced comparable results. The application of LIBS in the near IR region of the spectrum to the determination of Cl and S in cements, mortars and concretes has been described by Weritz and colleagues.160 Since the main elements found in such samples, e.g. Ca, give a very strong signal over much of the spectrum, small windows, e.g. in the near IR, must be used for other analytes so that their signals are not affected by the concomitants. The problem with determining analytes in this part of the spectrum is that most CCD detectors have a rapidly decreasing quantum efficiency. The authors tested a number of detectors in terms of quantum efficiency and dynamic range and compared them for LOD and signal to noise ratio (SNR). Materials with well characterized amounts of trace elements were used during the study.2.3.4 Other applications. There have been a number of more simple applications described in the literature. Many of these are discussed in Table 3 with only the most interesting being discussed more fully in the text.
Table 3 Applications of the analysis of inorganic chemicals and acids

AnalyteSampleTechnique; atomization; presentationCommentsReferenceCl, Fe and ZnZinc electro-plating solutionsXRF; -; LAnalysis performed in atmospheric helium mode. Procedure provided results with acceptable accuracy and precision.166Cl and FeHydrochloric pickling solutionsXRF; -; LSimilar procedure to the one described above.167CN−Industrial effluent and electrolytic bathsAAS; F; FIFour silver reagents (sulfite, dichromate, oxalate and carbonate) compared for the indirect determination of cyanide. Reagents packed (25%) into columns and then Ag (as the cyanide) determined by FAAS. Method was simple, fast and precise (RSD = 1.12%).168CN−Industrial waste watersAAS; F; FIMicro-column of N,N'bis(salicylidene) ethylenediamine immobilized on sodium dodecylsulfate coated alumina saturated with silver ions. Introduction of 250 μL of sample (pH 9–11) led to elution of silver cyanide. Linear range for CN was 0.1–10 mg L−1, LOD was 0.06 mg L−1 and RSD was approx. 4.1% for a CN concentration of 1 mg L−1.169CrPharmaceutical grade barium sulfateAAS; ETA; SSample (0.3–1 mg) was weighed directly into graphite tube. Pyrolysis and atomization temperatures of 1500 and 2400°C used. LOD was 2.4 pg, reproducibility (n = 20 over three day period) was 12% and repeatability was better than 9%. Results compared with those obtained using nitric acid extraction followed by ETAAS and ICP-OES and were found to be 20% higher using the proposed method. This was attributed to incomplete extraction. Calibration with aqueous standards was possible.170SnHydrochloric acidAAS; ETA; SlSn-APDC complex collected on an anion exchange resin. After filtration, resin dispersed in 1 M nitric acid containing 100 μg Pd and 60 μg Ni. Resin suspension analyzed directly.171Various (9)High purity tellurium (6N)OES; GD; SSix analytes (Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb and Si) below LOD, other analytes (Ca, Mg and Se) detectable. LOD for most analytes below 10 ng g−1 and precision was approx. 10% RSD. Results compared with those obtained using ICP-MS.64Various (10)High purity antimony (5N)MS; ICP; GAqua regia vapour used to convert antimony to antimony trichloride. This volatilized material at 250°C within 90 mins. Recoveries of analytes were > 90% except for Pb (47%). LODs in the ng g−1 range. Results compared with those obtained using SF-ICP-MS and by volatilization using bromide.172Many of more useful applications have concentrated on direct analysis of the solid samples. Therefore, the use of LIBS has continued its growth. Nicolas and co-workers discussed the use of LIBS for the analysis of non-flat surfaces.161 The first step was to make a detailed contour map of the surface of the sample and then, using this information, a constant distance between sample surface and both the focusing and collection optics could be maintained. In this way it was possible to use a home-made computer programme to develop a three dimensional map of the chemical composition of the surface. Two papers have discussed the analysis of powders. In one, Gondal et al. determined the role of binding materials such as potassium bromide, poly(vinyl alcohol), starch, silver and aluminium.162 The overall aim was to determine the matrix effects caused by the different binders in an attempt to improve the overall performance of LIBS analysis. Using four Mg lines (518.3, 517.2, 383.8 and 279.5 nm) pellets containing known concentrations of Mg in the binders were analyzed. The influence of laser intensity on ablated mass and on signal intensity was determined. It was found that the binding material played a significant role in the formation of the LIBS signal, with relative signal strength being very different for different binders (i.e. 735, 538, 387, 227 and 130 for potassium bromide, starch, poly(vinyl alcohol), silver and aluminium respectively). The authors concluded that potassium bromide is the best binder for use with powdered samples. In the other application that analyzed powders, Lie and colleagues used a 355 nm Nd:YAG laser to form a laser induced low pressure plasma.163 The powdered samples analyzed included a mixture of copper (II) sulfate pentahydrate, zinc sulfide and chromium (III) sulfate n-hydrate powders; baby powders, cosmetic powders, gold films, zinc supplement tablets and also mud and soils. Samples were pulverized to a particle size of approximately 30 μm so that they could be trapped in micro-holes in the quartz sub-target and then analyzed directly. For all samples, it was possible to obtain good quality spectra with a low background signal, free from contamination from the sub-target. Sensitivity was in the ppm range and linear calibrations were achieved that had a zero intercept. Oh and co-workers reported an interesting application in which slurries were analyzed using LIBS by application of two circulation systems.164 The circulation systems employed were originally devised to overcome two of the main problems associated with the analysis of slurry samples, i.e. sedimentation and the change in distance between lens and sample particle. The slurry consisted of 85.4% water, 2.5% ferric oxide and 1.7% alumina. Performances of the two circulation systems were compared. It was concluded that the experimental configuration plays a critical role for on-line slurry analysis.One final application of note should be discussed in this section. Pohl et al. described the determination of As and Sb in several sample types including coal fly ash and a galvanic bath solution containing 2.5% nickel sulfate, using a technique that involved continuous flow chemical hydride generation and a miniaturized microwave microstrip argon plasma operated inside a capillary channel in a sapphire wire.165 Careful optimization of the experimental parameters was undertaken in which the concentrations of hydrochloric, nitric and sulfuric acids used for acidification of the sample were studied, as well as the effects of argon flow rate, reagent flow rates and the liquid volume in the separator. Potential interferences arising from concomitants such as Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn were evaluated and, unfortunately, were found to be significant in many cases. For As, the presence of Fe(III) led to a signal enhancement of 50%, whereas for Sb the presence of Fe(III), Cu(II) or Cr(III) led to a signal depression of up to 75%. The presence of Cd and Mn also produced suppression of the Sb signal but to a lesser extent (approx. 25%). These interferences were found to occur even at very low concentration (2–20 pg mL−1). The microplasma was found to be sufficiently robust to withstand the presence of 4.2 mL min−1 hydrogen (which corresponds to a composition of 28%). Detection limits were 18 ng mL−1 and 31 ng mL−1 for As and Sb respectively and calibrations were found to be linear over two orders of magnitude. The As and Sb concentrations found in the galvanic bath solution were 45 and 6.4 μg mL−1 respectively.2.3.5 Nanotechnology. This has also been a flourishing area of research, with several interesting applications being published. Nanoparticles have an enormous variety of uses and although it is inappropriate to discuss much of the work here, it should be noted that the wider literature contains an enormous number of applications. Those discussed in this review are the ones that have been published in the atomic spectrometry literature (i.e. have yielded an increase in knowledge in the analytical field) or have discussed the use of the atomic spectrometric technique in more detail other than merely mentioning that it was used.Water soluble luminescent lanthanum fluoride nanoparticles doped with different lanthanide ions (Ce3+, Eu3+, Ho3+ and Tb3+) were analyzed by Engelhard and colleagues using low flow ICP-OES.173 Colloidal solutions of the citrate-stabilized nanoparticles (mean size 24 nm) were nebulized directly into the plasma and were found to produce extremely similar results to samples that had undergone a digestion procedure. The low flow ICP-OES usage decreased the overall consumption of argon compared with conventional operation by approximately 95% but was still capable of producing LOD at the μg L−1 level (Eu = 0.08, Ho = 0.18, La = 0.36, Tb = 0.56 and Ce = 3.14 μg L−1 respectively). Precision was typically between 1 and 2.2% RSD when pneumatic nebulization was used as a means of sample introduction and the overall performance was compared with that of a conventional torch. Recoveries were reported to lie in the range 97–104% for most elements. Brown and Rehse described the preparation and the analysis of iron (III) oxide nanoparticles in an alginate matrix that could potentially have applications for targeted drug delivery, as a magnetic resonance imaging contrast agent and for hyperthermic treatment of malignant tumours.174 These authors compared the use of LIBS for the determination of Fe with conventional technology such as ICP in an attempt to determine whether or not it could offer an increase in accuracy as well as a time saving. The authors prepared materials of alpha-iron (III) oxide nanoparticles (of 5–25 nm particle size) and silver micro-powder (2–3.5 μm diameter) with 13 precisely known concentrations and then pressed them into pellets for the LIBS analysis. The ratio of the intensity of the Fe line at 371.994 nm to that at the Ag line 328.069 nm was used to create a calibration curve. Using this calibration curve an “unknown” gamma-iron(III) oxide - alginate - silver pellet was analyzed. The mass fraction of Fe found was 51 ± 3 wt %, which apparently was in very good agreement with the expected value and also with previous determinations.Several papers have discussed the preparation and then characterization of nanoparticles. Included in this number is one by Yan et al. who prepared single-walled carbon nanotubes by the conventional arc discharge method and then purified them with a two step treatment involving heating to 350°C to remove amorphous carbon and then treating them with strong acid to remove the metallic catalysts.175 Near edge X-ray absorption and fine structure spectroscopy was used to determine any defects in the carbon nanotubes so that the experimental conditions for the purification process could be optimized. The purity of the nanotubes was then verified by techniques such as SEM, TEM, thermogravimetric analysis and Raman spectroscopy. The measurement of particle size of nanoparticles is clearly very important and two groups have tackled this issue. Maffi and co-workers have attempted to extend the techniques used in soot diagnostics to the field of flame synthesis of nanoparticles.176 If successful, this would enable the production system to be optimized more readily. The authors used laser induced incandescence during the production of titanium dioxide nanoparticles in a flame reactor. The effects of laser fluence on the spectral structure of the laser excited radiation emitted from the particles were determined. It was noted that in many cases such radiation cannot be assumed to be an incandescence signal. Measurements of the signal time decay were reported and interpreted and the dependence of time decay on the particle size was demonstrated. The onset of formation of nanoparticles in an ethylene/air flame was studied using a large assortment of analytical techniques by Paganini and co-workers.177 Laser induced incandescence, optical imaging, visible imaging and spectroscopic analysis of optical emission were all used and the results were used in conjunction with those obtained using a particle size analyzer. By changing the combustion conditions, a transition in signal detected by the different techniques was observed and this transition corresponded with the differing sensitivity of each instrumental technique to the formation of the nanoparticles. The authors stated that the different sensitivities of the diagnostics and the different information that they provided confirmed the need for a multi-diagnostic setup for the characterization of nanoparticles during the combustion process.An intriguing piece of research by Sattayasamitsathit et al. described the one-step template guided electro-deposition preparation of Co–Ni–Cu ternary alloy nanowires that had distinct XRF barcode patterns.178 This one-step templated synthesis coupled with a non-destructive XRF analysis greatly simplified the practical application of bar-coded nano-materials. The nanowires can have a broad composition range and hence there is also the potential for an extremely large range of analytical signatures. The fluorescent bar-codes correlated well with the composition of the metal mixture plating solution which indicated a reproducible plating process. The factors affecting the coding capacity and identification accuracy were examined. In addition, potential tracking and authenticity applications involving embedding the nanowires in plastics and inks were also discussed.There have been several papers published that have described the preparation and characterization of nanoparticles and/or nanowires. Many of these papers described either a new preparation technique or a new type of nanoparticle. Yan and Xue described the preparation of ultrafine amorphous Fe–B alloy nanoparticles using anodic aluminium oxide templates.179 The particles were characterized in terms of morphology, chemical composition, structure and magnetic properties using SEM, ICP-OES, XRD, Mossbauer spectroscopy and vibrating sample magnetometry respectively. The B content was 24% and the shape of the particle could be either a sphere or a rod, depending on the duration of preparation. The spherical nanoparticles had a narrow range of diameters, with the average being 35 nm. The particles were also shown to have superparamagnetic properties. The preparation and characterization of amorphous silica nanowires obtained from natural chrysotile was discussed by Liu and co-workers.180 The natural mineral was chemically dispersed and acid leached and this formed the silica nanowires which were then characterized using XRF, thermogravimetric and differential thermogravimetric analysis, XRD, FTIR and SEM. It was found that the nanowires had the chemical composition SiO1.8·0.6H2O and, although the silica was amorphous, the structure was regular to some extent. The structural unit was found to be the {SiO4} tetrahedron and six-membered silicon-oxygen ring with the tetrahedral positioned alternately up and down in the six-member ring. The wires were apparently well dispersed, had cylindrical morphology and possessed a smooth surface. The commonly used flame retardant 4ZnO.B2O3.H2O was produced in nano-rod form by Shi et al. who used the hydrothermal route in the presence of the surfactant PEG-300 for synthesis.181 Characterization was by XRD, ICP-OES, thermogravimetry, differential thermal analysis, SEM, TEM and high resolution TEM. The nanorods were approximately 70 nm in thickness, 150–800 nm in width and had lengths of up to a few microns. The synthesis, characterization and anti-fouling properties of copper nanoparticles was explored by Anyaogu and colleagues who incorporated them into composites with a polymer.182 The particulates were stabilized by surface attachment of the acrylic functionality that could be co-polymerized with other acrylic monomers. Experimental data indicated that the materials produced exhibited a similar anti-microbial activity to conventional copper-based biocides, although the leaching rate of Cu, determined by AAS, and was found to be substantially lower. The potential for use as a marine anti-fouling coating is therefore very high since it produces far less environmental copper contamination.There have been several other papers that have discussed the preparation of certain nanoparticles or nanowires that have then used various techniques to characterize the products. Included in this number is the formation of silver nanoparticles deposited on alpha-Bi2Mo3O12 nanorods,183 the synthesis and purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes using the high pressure carbon monoxide process184 and the formation of Ce0.8Sm0.2O1.9 by a urea-based low-temperature hydrothermal process.185 In the first of these papers, the silver nanoparticles (of mean diameter 10 nm) were deposited on the alpha-Bi2Mo3O12 nanorods using an ultrasonic method. In brief, pre-formed alpha-Bi2Mo3O12 spherical particles were exposed to ultrasonic radiation and this transformed them into rod-like structures. Then by adding silver(I) oxide in pyridine and sonicating for longer, the silver particles (and pyridine) were deposited on the rods. The pyridine was then removed by calcination at 450°C. Using ToF-SIMS, it was found that the preferential binding site for the silver nanoparticles was the bismuth. Other techniques including TEM, SEM, thermogravimetric analysis, XRD, XPS and energy dispersive X-ray analysis were then used to characterize the product further. In the second of these papers,184 the preparation of single-walled carbon nanotubes was found to be governed by the temperature, pressure, carbon monoxide flow rate and the nozzle injection velocity and geometry. It was found that particles with a diameter as low as 1 nm could be formed. Highly pure nanotubes were produced at 1250 K at pressures between five and 10 bar and in a turbulent flow regime. Any iron arising from the presence of catalysts was removed by chemical treatment in hydrochloric acid/ethanol. The products were characterized using SEM, high-resolution TEM, AAS, and optical absorption spectroscopy. In the last of this series of papers,185 Cheng and co-workers described the elucidation of preparation mechanisms of the Ce0.8Sm0.2O1.9 using XRD and ICP-OES.In the final paper to be reviewed in this section, the microbial manufacture of chalcogenide-based nanoparticles via the reduction of selenite using the bacterium Veillonella atypica was discussed.186 The authors, Pearce and colleagues, found that the bacterium could reduce assorted selenium oxyanions to form nanospheres of elemental Se which could then be further reduced by the bacterium to form reactive selenides. These were then precipitated using a suitable metal cation to form a chalcogenide precipitate, e.g. zinc selenide that had semi-conducting properties. The mechanisms of formation were studied using a novel synchrotron-based in-situ, time-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy system, ion chromatography and ICP-OES. The products were also characterized using XRD, XRF and electron microscopy.2.4 NuclearThere has been a sudden large increase in papers reporting analysis of nuclear materials or the determination of radionuclides; the reason for which is not immediately clear. This year, the “Nuclear” section has been split this year into several sub-sections entitled “reviews, certified reference materials and inter-laboratory comparisons”, “Analysis of nuclear materials”, “nuclear forensics”, “AMS” and “environmental applications”. Many of the latter classes of application will be summarized mainly in a table, whereas the other, more important applications will be discussed in more detail in the text.2.4.1 Reviews, certified reference materials and inter-laboratory comparisons. There have been several reviews prepared in this review period. Among them is a paper by Hou and Roos187 who delivered a paper entitled “Critical comparison of radiometric and mass spectrometric methods for the determination of radionuclides in environmental, biological and nuclear waste samples”. This review contained 296 references and covered topics such as alpha-, beta- and gamma-spectrometries as well as the mass spectrometric techniques such as ICP-MS, SIMS, TIMS, RIMS and GD-MS. The review concentrated on the determination of several analytes including H-3, C-14, Cl-36, Ca-41, Ni-59, Ni-63, Sr-89, Sr-90, Tc-99, I-129, Cs-135, Cs-137, Pb-210, Ra-226, Ra-228, Np-237, Am-241, and isotopes of Th, U and Pu. Also discussed were the automated FI approaches to the determinations of these analytes. A more specific review on the determination of Pu isotope concentrations and isotope ratio by ICP-MS that contained 139 references has been published by Kim et al.188 Various approaches to improve the LOD to sub-attogram mL−1 (10−18g mL−1) levels in environmental and in nuclear fuel samples were summarized and reviewed critically. The adjustment of the Pu to the correct oxidation state is one of the most important aspects of pre-concentration using resins, as is the quantitative elution. Both of these steps were discussed. Polyatomic interferences arising from uranium hydrides was also described as were the other factors that may affect the trueness and precision of the data. Portier and co-workers reviewed the use of SIMS for the analysis of nuclear fuels and cladding.189 The review, which contained 51 references, briefly described the principles of SIMS as well as the different operating modes and then went on to discuss many of the more recent applications of the analysis of nuclear fuels and cladding materials. The applications included the determination of Xe as well as Te, I and Cs in uranium dioxide fuel, the radial distribution of Pu in mixed oxide fuel, the radial distribution of Gd in (U,Gd)O2 fuel and the determination of B and Li in the external oxide layer of Zircaloy cladding. The authors also described many of the modifications to the SIMS instrumentation required for such analyses to be undertaken. One overview was prepared by Gunther-Leopold and colleagues, who also discussed the characterization of nuclear fuels by ICP-mass spectrometric techniques.190 The paper described selected applications of multicollector ICP-MS in combination with chromatographic separation techniques and LA for the isotopic analysis of irradiated nuclear fuels. The advantages and limitations of the selected analytical technique for the characterization of such a heterogeneous sample matrix were discussed. Another overview was prepared by Lamontagne and co-workers, who discussed the practical aspects of microbeam analysis (EPMA) of irradiated materials.191 The authors described the capabilities of the technique and highlighted where differences between standard EPMA and EPMA of highly irradiated samples occurred.There have been three papers reporting the preparation of standards and/or CRMs. In one, Surugaya and co-workers described the preparation, certification and validation of a stable solid spike of U and Pu coated with a cellulose derivative that could be used during the determination of these analytes in spent nuclear fuel using isotope dilution.192 The material was coated in a thin film of cellulose acetate butyrate as a protective organic stabilizer to resist shocks encountered during transportation and to eliminate flaking-off during long-term storage. This could easily be removed by boiling with nitric acid. The solid spike was certified as a reference material with certified quantities of 235U and 239Pu amounts and U and Pu amount ratios, and was validated by analyzing spent fuel dissolver solutions of the Tokai reprocessing plant in Japan. Aggarwal and colleagues described the preparation and characterization of working standards for 238Pu.193 This was achieved by mixing solutions of enriched isotopes of 238Pu and 239Pu, available indigenously. The working standards were characterized using the recently developed interfering element correction methodology in TIMS and the data were compared with those obtained by conventionally used alpha spectrometry; with the results agreeing to within 0.5–1%. The authors concluded that the commercial availability of these CRMs would allow the traceability of 238Pu measurements in Pu using different radio-analytical techniques, provide a common platform to the measurements made on 238Pu by various nuclear material accounting laboratories around the world, and would also permit the use of newly developed TIMS methodology, by various laboratories, with confidence. The 239Pu, 240Pu and 239Pu + 240Pu concentrations found in the certified material IAEA 315 (marine sediment) were determined using ID-TIMS and alpha spectrometry by Shinonaga et al.194 The authors also determined 238Pu using alpha spectrometry. A spike of 242Pu CRM was used for the quantification.There have been two inter-laboratory comparisons produced in this review period. In one, Fink and Smith studied 10Be and 26Al standards used by different laboratories during AMS measurements.195 The purpose of the study was to assess their relative values and accuracy of their quoted nominal values. It was found that a new set of standards prepared at University of California, Berkeley exhibited excellent systematic reproducibility and internal consistency. Other standards were less robust though, with deviations being evident even when the results were re-calibrated to a common half life. In particular, the NIST SRM 4325 was identified as having a 14% greater 10Be/Be than that quoted on the certificate. A second paper evaluated the status of U isotopic ratio measurements in urine.196 The results originated from the RETMEP 18 programme which comprised 71 participants, including several nuclear safeguards laboratories and some academic laboratories. Samples were first certified by IRMM using a gas source mass spectrometer (for the major isotopes of 235U/238U) and TIMS (for the minor isotopes 234U/238U and 236U/238U). In general, the results from the 71 participants were very encouraging, although the authors did report that some laboratories encountered difficulties determining the minor isotope ratios and the calculation of the measurement uncertainties. The report included a graphical evaluation of the results and discussion of the results, a discussion of the calibration techniques applied and the overall conclusions.2.4.2 Analysis of nuclear materials. There have been several applications that have described the determination of analytes in uranium oxide materials, nuclear fuels or plutonium. By measuring the 230Th/234U ratio in uranium-based nuclear materials by ICP-MS, Varga and Suranyi were able to determine the production date of the uranium oxide material.197 The method was sample destructive since the material had first to be brought into solution and then, the analytes retained on Teva resin. After elution, the analytes were measured by ID-ICP-MS using a sector field instrument. The results obtained were compared with those obtained using LA-ICP-MS. The advantages and disadvantages of both of the techniques were discussed. Burger and co-workers discussed the determination of impurities in uranium matrices using ToF-SIMS.198 Analysis of a series of CRMs (New Brunswick Laboratory CRM 124 (1–7)) yielded results for 18 elements that had an overall precision and accuracy of 5% and 14% respectively. Two research groups have studied the thermal diffusion of species through uranium dioxide materials. In one, Snidy and colleagues measured the diffusion of I caused by thermal annealing or radiation damage using high performance SIMS.199 By measuring over the temperature range 1200–1650°C for periods ranging from 1 h to 24 h, the authors managed to produce a refined Arrhenius relationship. An increase, by two orders of magnitude, in both the solubility and diffusion rate of I compared with stoichiometric fuel was found when the annealing was performed at 1400°C under slightly oxidizing conditions. In the other application, Pipon et al. studied the thermal diffusion of Cl through uranium dioxide using both SIMS and XAS.200 A sintered uranium dioxide pellet was implanted with 37Cl at an ion fluence of 1013 cm−2 and this was then annealed in the temperature range 1175–1475K. The implanted Cl was used to simulate the behaviour of 36Cl, produced from 35Cl during the thermal neutron capture process. It was found that Cl diffusion became significant at 1275 K.Two papers have discussed the determination of Xe in irradiated nuclear fuels. The determination of Xe is important, since it comprises up to 90% of the gaseous materials found in nuclear fuel which, in turn, contains up to 20% gaseous fission materials. Desgranges and co-workers reported a new method by which Xe could be determined in gas-filled bubbles in fuels using SIMS.201 The use of EPMA for such a task is impossible since it is not capable of detection of such bubbles. The authors proposed a method by which SIMS, SEM and EPMA (of areas that have no bubbles) can be used, each of which provides complementary information. Horvath et al. proposed a totally different method for the determination of Xe in these gas-filled bubbles.202 These authors used LA-ICP-MS to analyze these inclusions and, as well as discussing simple sample handling procedures, they proposed two different calibration strategies. The first strategy was to inject a known quantity of a reference gas into the LA-ICP-MS carrier gas stream. The other strategy involved the ablation of a “matrix matched” standard of non-irradiated uranium dioxide sample that had been implanted with a known amount of 129Xe. Both of these two quantification methods enabled the successful determination of Xe, but the direct injection of gas into the carrier stream proved to be the more simple to apply. This method was very simple and yielded linear calibration curves, had good reproducibility and the matrix interferences were described as being within the uncertainty of the measurements. It was necessary though to filter the ablated gas stream to dispose of fine particulate matter that may otherwise create interferences. Results were in good agreement with those obtained using computer simulations.Several research groups have published papers reporting the analysis of plutonium-based materials. Worley and Colletti described a method that eliminated the potential for radioactive liquid leak into the spectrometer, decreased specimen preparation time and minimized waste during the determination of Fe and Ga in plutonium solutions.203 Samples of only μL volumes were cast onto Kapton and then a surfactant added to disperse the solution uniformly across the Kapton surface. After drying, the samples were sealed in a cell for analysis using WDXRF. Precision was very good with RSDs of 0.5% and 2% being achieved for Ga and Fe respectively. This was described as being more than sufficient for routine analysis. Aggarwal and colleagues have discussed the relative merits of both alpha spectrometry and TIMS for the determination of 238Pu in plutonium bearing fuels.204 They recognized that both techniques had their problems, with alpha spectrometry having random errors associated with the counting statistics and systematic errors arising from in-growth of 241Am and the tail contribution correction methodology whereas TIMS suffers the problem of isobaric interference from 238U. The authors then described a method for TIMS by which the spiking of the smple with a known quantity of 235U and then the formation of oxides enabled the determination of 238Pu by an inter-element mathematical correction. Another, very similar, paper by the same research group discussed the process further.205 A third paper discussed the relative merits of using ID measurements to account for radioactive decay on the measurement of Pu isotopes.206 The authors demonstrated that, depending on the isotopic composition of the tracer and the time elapsed after tracer calibration, a correction factor of between 0.1 and 4% was necessary over a period of five years. The authors pointed out that such a correction would be necessary when high accuracy is necessary, e.g. for nuclear material accounting.Trace element determination at the mg kg−1 level in thorium oxide using TXRF was reported by Misra and co-workers.207 These authors determined 14 analytes in the material after first dissolving it in a mixture of nitric and hydrofluoric acids and then using solvent extraction with the reagents tri-n-butyl phosphate or tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide as extractants to separate the bulk matrix. Analysis of a certified material yielded results that were in agreement to within 20% of the certified values and a precision that was also relatively poor, at 20% RSD (n = 4). An interesting application by Pitois et al. described the determination of fission products in nuclear samples using the technique of capillary electrophoresis (CE)-ICP-MS.208 Both quadrupole and sector field-based instrumentation was used during the study, which yielded LODs of 6 ng mL−1 and 4 pg mL−1 respectively for Cs and 8 ng mL−1 and 7 pg mL−1 for lanthanides respectively. The authors also claimed that their method was fast (six minutes for Cs and 13 minutes for lanthanides respectively) and required only a few microliters of sample since nanoliter injection volumes were used. This had the added bonus of reducing the amount of irradiated material that personnel were exposed to as well as reducing the amount of nuclear waste.2.4.3 Nuclear forensics. There have been a large number of forensic applications in the nuclear industry over this review period. Taylor and co-workers have reported the results of a preliminary study into using 135Cs/137Cs as an indicator of source of radioactive contamination in environmental samples.209 The soil from around Chernobyl was found to be 135Cs deficient, with the 135Cs/137Cs being 0.45; symptomatic of an area with a high thermal neutron flux. This compared with a ratio of 1 obtained from a sludge sample from a nuclear waste treatment pond. Sediment collected from downstream of a nuclear reactor yielded highly variable 135Cs/137Cs. The results, when compared with Pu isotope ratios, yield the same trends and give an indication of the fuel and reactor conditions. The authors concluded that the Cs ratio method may be used to corroborate other methods of characterizing radioactive contamination. According to Varga, the origin and release date of environmental plutonium may be assessed according to its and americium's isotopic composition.210 The applicability and sensitivity of different Pu ratios (e.g.240Pu/239Pu and 241Pu/239Pu) measured using sector field ICP-MS and 239Pu/238Pu measured using alpha spectrometry for determining the origin of source was assessed in several types of environmental sample. The use of mixing models enabled the contribution of different sources, e.g. global fallout or Chernobyl, to be calculated. Measurement of 241Am/241Pu enabled a release date to be approximated to sufficient an extent to be able to distinguish recent Pu release from previous emissions. Zheng and co-workers have also used Pu isotope ratios as a means to provide useful time markers for rapid dating of vertical cores from recent sediments from Chenghai Lake in China.211 They used the Pu ratios in much the same way as Varga and managed to identify vertical sections that correlated with the Chinese nuclear tests in the 1970s, the deposition of re-suspended Pu particles after the Chernobyl accident etc. Rapid finger-printing of 239Pu and 240Pu in environmental samples with a high content of U using an on-line chromatography-ICP-MS system has been reported by Epov and co-workers.212 The Pu was extracted from sediments from Northern Asia using microwave assisted leaching. Then, just prior to the chromatography, the Pu was reduced using ascorbic acid to its PuIV state and then the analyte was retained on TEVA resin. This resin is capable of preconcentrating the analyte whilst enabling it to be separated from the bulk matrix components, including uranium. On elution from the column, the analyte was introduced to the plasma via a commercial desolvation device and a specialized nebulizer to ensure minimum clogging and formation of the polyatomic interferent uranium hydride. Detection limits were very impressive, with LOD being 3 and 0.3 pg kg−1 for 239Pu and other Pu isotopes respectively.Whitehead and co-workers have determined 10Be, an analyte more commonly used by AMS for dating studies.213 These authors explained that 10Be is actually formed during nuclear explosions at an atom yield close to that of 137Cs. Although there is a significant production route via the decay of 13C from carbon dioxide in the air, as well as the organic explosives, other bomb components etc., the authors managed to identify the 10Be originating during the explosion. Historical samples from both Hiroshima and from Semipalatinsk (Kazakhstan) showed levels of 10Be to be two to three times that found by background cosmogenic levels.Several papers have described experiments performed in support of the IAEA safeguards protocols. Among these are papers by Lee et al.214 and by Godoy and colleagues.215 In the former paper, the development of fission track TIMS for particle analysis was reported. Previous studies had shown that the process of particle identification was difficult because of the discrepancy between the position of the particles and fission tracks observed in conventional fission track experiments. The proposed method largely overcame this problem. The paper by Godoy and co-workers described the use of quadrupole ICP-MS for the determination of Pu in environmental samples.215 In many ways, this was similar to the paper by Epov and colleagues described above. The analyte was extracted from the solid “swipe” sample, retained on TEVA resin so that matrix separation and preconcentration could be afforded and then, once elution had occurred, the analyte was introduced to the instrument via an ultrasonic nebulizer (USN) and a membrane desolvator. The protocol was applied to the New Brunswick CRMs as well as to the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Round Robin samples that were based on a European programme's samples. Isotopic ratios for the Pu were determined and the LOD in a sediment sample was estimated as being 5 mBq 239Pu kg−1.Whitney and Biegalski216 reported the results of an extensive study of isotope ratios that may be used to reveal historical characteristics of a nuclear reactor cycle and hence, may be used to provide information on the origin of unknown nuclear waste. This may be achieved even after the U and Pu have been removed from the fuel using chemical processing. The authors simulated several different reactor types, including pressurized water reactor, boiling water reactor, Canada deuterium uranium reactor and liquid metal fast breeder reactors. It was found that use of long-lived or stable fission products that are present many years after their creation yielded the most successful data. Consequently, 151Sm/146Sm, 149Sm/146Sm and 244Cm/246Cm were used since they were found to be good indicators of fuel cycle length and were also well suited for AMS.2.4.4 Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) applications. For many years, AMS has been used for dating purposes. More recently, there have been several papers that have used the technique for nuclear applications. The largest block of papers in this area has concentrated on determining 129I or 129I/127I isotope ratios. There has been a plethora of examples of this published in this review period. Examples include papers by Atarashi-Andoh and co-workers217 who determined I ratios in surface waters in the English Lake District, Englund et al. who determined 129I in solid samples such as soils and organic materials,218 Persson and colleagues who determined the variability in 129I precipitation over Europe,219 Dong et al. who determined 129I in cesium iodide powder220 and a paper by Japanese workers at the Micro Analysis Laboratory, Tandem accelerator at the University of Tokyo who determined I in soils.221 Another interesting report was prepared by Christl and colleagues who, for the first time, determined the concentrations of 231Pa using AMS.222 The work was undertaken using the compact ETH/PSI - AMS TANDY facility operating at about 300kV. The linearity of the AMS was documented with two standard dilution experiments. In addition the first measurements of natural samples from very different climates archives were presented. The LOD were reported as being in the lower femtogram range, which was sufficiently low to measure Pa in samples that had concentrations of between 1 and 4 pg g−1. Precision for measurements at that concentration range was 2% with, the authors said, clear potential for improvement.A report by Galindi-Uribarri and co-workers summarized the work being performed at the Holifield Radioactive Ion Beam Facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which concentrates on the determination of 14C and 36Cl using a 25 MV tandem accelerator.223 The authors described how, since they have instrumentation with the highest operating voltage in the World and also has a folded geometry which involves a 180 degree magnet in the terminal, they successfully managed to determine 36Cl/total Cl in seawater down to ratios at the 10−16 level. A similar progress report has been published by the workers at the University of Tokyo, who summarized their work determining 26Al and 36Cl.224 Although their instrumentation is not as powerful as that at Oak Ridge, it is still capable of producing impressive data, with a LOD of 5 × 10−15 being achieved for 26Al/27Al and of 2 × 10−14 for 36Cl/35Cl.Other examples of AMS published in this review period are papers by Bessho and colleagues,225 who estimated the thermal fluence in the concrete of proton accelerator facilities from 36Cl production and a paper by Whitney and Biegalski216 who analyzed nuclear fuel cycles from isotopic ratios of waste products. The latter paper was discussed in greater detail in section 2.4.3.2.4.5 Environmental applications. There has been a large number of applications published in this area. Many of these (as well as others applicable to previous sections) are summarized in Table 4. It is fair to say though that there has been a wide range of applications performed which have included the determination of Pu in seawater samples,226,227 characterization of soils or nuclear particles from Thule or Palomares (the sites of accidents where B52 bombers that had been carrying nuclear weapons crashed in the 1960s) 228,229 and the determination of ultra-trace level 226Ra in seawater.230 It is also interesting to note that speciation analysis is also beginning to make an appearance in this field of analytical chemistry. Some papers are now attempting to determine the effects of different oxidation state and chemical form of Pu during mobility studies.231 Other workers are reporting the development of techniques designed to actually achieve the speciation data. One example of this is a paper by Buerger et al. who used CE-ICP-MS to separate PuIII, PuIV, PuV and PuVI yielding a LOD of approximately 20 ppb for any one analyte.232 The authors also determined the effects of humic and fulvic acids on the Pu oxidation state. It was found that PuVI could be reduced relatively rapidly (10–1000 hours) using these materials, but that the rate of reduction was dependent on the pH of the solution. The authors also gave the first results obtained from a coupling of CE with Resonance Ionization Mass Spectrometry (RIMS). This coupling was made in an attempt to improve the sensitivity of the detection.
Table 4 Application of nuclear analysis

AnalyteMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationCommentsReference241AmSediments and seaweedsSF-ICP-MSSample separated by co-precipitation on CaF2 followed by purification on TRU resin. LOD = 0.86 fg (0.11 mBq). Chemical yield = 72–94%. Good agreement reported vs. CRM and against alpha-spectrometry.233Cs and MoSediment core samplesMS; ICP; LThe extent and radiological characteristics of leaked material from Hanford tank in sediments was assessed. Samples leached with water and dilute acid. Isotope ratios for Cs and Mo determined.234H-isotopesGraphiteXPS; -; SMapping/profiling of wall tiles from JT-60U235NpUranyl oxide hydrate mineralsMS; ICP; LA 236Np and PuHydrous ferric oxide colloidsSIMS; -; S XANES XPSSpeciation of Np and Pu in contaminated aquifer of the “Mayak” site. At low concentration, Pu sorbed onto hydrous ferric oxide colloids. At higher concentration, it forms PuO2 × nH2O colloids.237PuCoastal surface watersMS; ICP; L Alpha spectrometryIsotope dilution performed using sector field instrument. 240Pu/239Pu determined with mean value of 0.227. This is substantially higher than mean global fallout value of 0.18.238Pu + variousLanthanide borosilicate glassesMS; ICP; LPCT for Pu loaded glasses (PuO2 = 9.5%). Leachates filtered through 0.45 μm filters and after ultra-centrifugation to determine colloidal Pu.239PuMarine sedimentsMS; ICP; LDigestion and chemical separation to pre-concentrate Pu and remove 238U and 241Am prior to measurement of 239Pu, 240Pu, 241Pu and 242Pu. Sector field instrument used.240PuSquid liverMS; ICP; LDigestion and standard radiochemical separation of Pu. Concentration = 1.5–28 mBq kg−1 (239Pu) and 1.1–24 mBq kg−1 (240Pu). Input from global and near-in (Bikini Atoll) fallout estimated from isotope ratio. Sector field instrument used.241PuSeawaterMS; ICP; LChemical separation via two stage anion exchange. Chemical yield 242Pu tracer = 65%. Activities of alpha-isotopes showed good agreement with certified values. Isotopic ratios for 240Pu/239Pu showed improved precision (RSD = 0.35%) compared to the indicative values of the CRM (RSD = 13.6%). Sector field instrument used.226PuSoil and sedimentsMS; ICP; FIMicrowave extraction, Separation and pre-concentration on TEVA micro-column. LOD = 3 pg kg−1 for Pu-239 and 0.3 pg kg−1 for higher Pu-isotopes equivalent to Pu239 + 240 LOD = 10 mBq kg−1. Flow injection system into a quadrupole instrument.212PuEnvironmental samplesAMS; -; L Alpha spectrometryTEVA (R) resin used to retain analyte prior to determination. Good agreement between AMS and alpha spectrometry observed.242PuEnvironmental samplesMS; ICP; LUltrasonic nebulisation of material into quadrupole instrument. Pu isotopes determined. Techniques for dissolution, pre-concentration and chemical separation evaluated. Results compare with those from alpha spectrometry. LOD of 0.5–1 fg L−1 obtained for fresh waters and 0.03–0.2 ng kg−1 for sediments.243PuForest soilsMS; ICP; LSoils from Nagasaki area collected and decomposed using microwave digestion procedure. Pu isotope ratios determined on high resolution instrument.244PuUrineMS; ICP; LAutomated, on-line pre-concentration, separation and detection system established using TEVA resin. Elution of Pu from resin was with 0.01 M ammonium oxalate. Pu isotope ratios determined in urine in less than 15 minutes with LOD ∼ 0.2 mBq L−1. Recovery ∼ 70%.245PuUrineMS; ICP, L TIMS; Alpha spectrometryPu isotopes determined. Three ICP-MS methods compared with one TIMS method and two alpha spectrometry methods.246U, Th TXRFSample size = 10 μl, matrix <200 μg cm−3, analyte = 1–50 μg cm−3, % RSD <3%, bias < 4%. Internal standard = Co, Ga or Y247UWaterQ-ICP-MSU separated and pre-concentrated on TRU resin. Alkaline stripping solution used (TMAH). Pre-concentration factor = 20 achieved.248U (DU)FishDRC-Q-ICP-MS; SF-ICP-MSIsotope ratio measured to estimate DU. Ammonia used in reaction cell. Bias at 1, 1,5 and 2x LOQ = −8.2, + 9.5 and +9.6% respectively. Similarly, within laboratory reproducibilities of 15.5, 8.0 and 11.0% reported249Various (3)Environmental samples Development of an on-line sequential injection system for the separation of 210Pb, 210Po and Pu. Results for Pu within 5% of certified value for IAEA soil 6.250VariousSediment coreMS; ICP; L Gamma spectrometry137Cs, 237Np, 239Pu, 240Pu, 234U, 238U, 228Th, 230Th and 232Th determined using sector field ICP-MS and gamma spectrometry.251VariousPUREX materialsXRFPlutonium, Uranium Refining by Extraction process materials analyzed. An actinide separation process from the bulk raffinate matrix with quantitative efficiency was developed.252VariousPUREX materialsXRFFour separation methods of actinides from each other developed.25386Y MS; ICP; L86Y produced from 86Sr strontium carbonate by irradiation using low energy protons. Overall efficiency was > 90%.25493ZrIrradiated cladding materialMS; ICP; LIsotope dilution and a multi-collector instrument used. Zr removed from zircaloy cladding material prior to analysis. Uncertainty of ICP-MS determination was 0.1%, with overall uncertainty being estimated as 0.6%.2553 Advanced materials3.1 Polymeric materials and composites3.1.1 Reviews and CRMs. This has been quite a busy area of research in the last review period, with considerable progress made in the analysis of this type of materials. As always, solid sampling has been the sample introduction method of choice since it overcomes the necessity of tricky, lengthy or potentially dangerous dissolution steps. As such, X-ray techniques have continued to be commonly used. Historically though, there has been a problem with finding suitable standards or certified reference materials for the use with X-ray spectrometry for these materials. This has been addressed in a paper by Mans and co-workers256 who reported the development of suitable plastic standards for X-ray fluorescence analysis. The standards were based on acrylonitrile-butadiene - styrene terpolymer and contained the elements Br, Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb (the analytes covered under the EU “Restriction on use of certain Hazardous Substances” RoHS directive). The materials were produced as both granules and as solid bodies and were not formed from dilution of a master batch, but instead were produced as nine independent calibration samples. The authors stated that this was necessary so that inter-elemental corrections and empirical constant mass absorption coefficients could be determined. The materials were characterized by ICP-OES for all analytes except Br, which was determined using neutron activation analysis. There was a good correlation between the X-ray data and the data from the alternative techniques. Another paper (written in Japanese) by Nakano et al. also reported the development of CRMs for plastic materials.257 The materials, developed by the Japan Society for Analytical Chemistry, were labelled JSAC 0631 and JSAC 0632. The materials were prepared as disks by filling aluminium cylindrical moulds with the raw material (a polyester resin with a hardener and some organometallic compounds). Once formed, the disks were ground and polished and the homogeneity evaluated by sending sub-samples to 24 laboratories. Any outlying data were identified as such by z-scores and were eliminated from the pool of data.3.1.2 Advances in analytical methodology. Two papers have described the use of LIBS for analysis of plastic materials. In the first,258 Gaspard and colleagues used the technique to characterize cinematographic films. Using a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser operating at 266nm and by ablating the same spot repetitively, the authors demonstrated the feasibility of analyzing the various layers of the film, i.e. the thin layer of protective cross-linked gelatine on top of the layer of photographic emulsion which was supported by the polymeric support (plasticized cellulose triacetate). Analytical lines of Ag from the light sensitive salts within the photographic emulsion as well as lines from Cr Fe, P and Pb were all identified. The Fe and Pb were identified as coming from film developers whereas the Cr originated from hardening agents and the P from the plasticizer. The general aim of the work was to identify the optimal conditions for conservation. However, the study also enabled the classification of different gelatine preparations and of the photographic emulsions. In the second of the two LIBS papers, Gondal and Siddiqu identified different types of plastic (low density polyethylene (LDPE), high density polyethylene (HDPE), polypropylenes (PP), polystyrene (PS), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC)) as an aid for waste management and re-cycling.259 Again a Nd:YAG laser was used, but this time at a wavelength of 1024 nm and with an energy of 40mJ. The assorted polymers were distinguished by the relative C and H responses with C/H ratios of 1.68, 1.51, 1.42, 1.16, 1.01 and 0.91 being achieved for HDPE, LDPE, PS, PP, PET and PVC respectively. The authors concluded that LIBS offers the advantages of real time analysis without sample pre-treatment, speed and remote operation.The viability of near IR femto-second LA-ICP-MS analysis of polymer coatings over galvanised steel substrates was demonstrated by Mateo et al.260 A low repetition rate was used to ensure that information coming from successive shots was not mixed. The ablation process took place under a helium atmosphere. Results for the three sample types analyzed compared well with those obtained using a GD-OES technique, although the LA-ICP-MS method did achieve a better depth resolution.Lopez-Molinero and co-workers developed a novel method of analyte introduction whereby the analyte (Sb) was volatilized from the sample (PET) as a bromide, directly into a FAAS instrument.261 The procedure was optimized using an assortment of techniques including an experimental design process, visual interpretation of 3 dimensional response surfaces and artificial neural networks. Data were compared with those obtained using a standard ICP-OES method and were found to be in good agreement. Using the Sb 217.6 nm line, FAAS was found to give a LOD of 300 ng Sb(V), a linear range of 1.0 to 17.2 μg and a precision of typically 4.5% RSD.Several papers have discussed the relative merits of both sample dissolution and solid sampling. De Schrijver and colleagues compared dissolution and solid sampling techniques for the determination of Ag in polymeric samples by ETAAS, mass spectrometry and X-ray spectrometry.262 Two dissolution methods were compared. One was a conventional acid dissolution in a Kjeldahl flask whereas the other was a combination of dry ashing and microwave assisted digestion. The authors concluded that, in general, accurate results were obtained although they did note occasions when Ag was either lost or was decreased when digestion was incomplete. Solid sampling using LA-ICP-MS was found to suffer from problems associated with calibration. Use of a polypropylene sample as a standard was found to produce reliable results for polypropylene samples as well as some other plastic types, as long as the 13C ion was used as an internal standard. However, even with use of the internal standard, overestimates were obtained for samples of polyoxymethylene. Calibration problems were also observed during WD-XRF analyses. Accuracy could be improved by use of a matrix correction procedure but, unfortunately, this required accurate knowledge of the matrix prior to analysis. Solid sampling ETAAS proved to be a relatively rapid and reliable technique and could be calibrated using aqueous standards. Use of the 3 field mode Zeeman background correction system was necessary to overcome the background signals and to extend the linear range of calibration. A similar paper by the same research group compared the analysis of polyamide using both solid sampling ETAAS and ETV-ICP-MS with dissolution in formic acid.263 Dissolution using formic acid followed by direct aspiration using a pneumatic nebulization system into the ICP-MS instrument or direct introduction to the ETAAS instrument led to satisfactory precision (6–10% RSD) and to an adequate LOD (0.1–0.6 μg g−1) although matrix matching the standards with formic acid was necessary. In contrast, introduction of the solid materials led to an increase in sample throughput, decreased contamination/analyte loss, improved LOD, precision of approximately 10% RSD and, most importantly, accurate results.Microwave irradiation has been used by several research groups to bring their sample type into solution. In one simple application (written in Chinese), Wang and co-workers carefully optimized the acid conditions as well as the digestion procedure for the determination of As, Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb in acrylonitrile - butadiene - styrene copolymer.264 Analysis was by ICP-MS. The authors reported no necessity of matrix matching, impressive LOD (0.7–6.5 ng g−1), recoveries in the range 89.8 to 110.8% and precision between 2.8 and 11.3% RSD. An application by Moraes and colleagues described a novel method of sample decomposition in which nitrile-butadiene rubber or ethylenepropylene - diene monomer were combusted in a microwave oven in the presence of oxygen and using 50 μL of 6 M ammonium nitrate as an aid for ignition.265 The analytes Al, Fe, Mn, Sr and Zn were then determined using ICP-OES. Data for Mn and Zn were compared with those obtained using a reference method (ASTM D 4004–06), which is based on dry ashing and FAAS detection of the analytes. Other data were compared with those obtained using a conventional wet digestion in a closed system. The proposed procedure was found to give optimal results (recoveries of 97–101%) when a reflux using 4 M nitric acid for five minutes was used after the combustion. This additional step was required only for Fe. The standard dry ashing method was found to give good results for Zn, but other analytes had a very much reduced recovery (14, 37, 72 and 37% for Al, Fe, Mn and Sr respectively). The proposed procedure yielded a more rapid sample preparation time whilst also avoiding the use of concentrated acids.Mateo and co-workers described a near-IR femto-second LA-ICP-MS technique for depth analysis of polymer coated steel samples.260 A good depth resolution was achieved by modifying the femto-second Gaussian beam to a flat-top beam using a liquid crystal display. A very low repetition rate was used so that there was no mixing of data between successive shots. The depth profiles obtained using the technique were compared with those obtained using GD-OES and were found to be in good agreement. The advantage of the technique was that the depth resolution was much better than for GD-OES, with a resolution of 240 nm being obtained for hot-dipped galvanized steel (compared with 2.2 μm for GD-OES) and of 2.3 μm for a polymer-polymer coated steel (compared with 4.5 μm).One final “advance in Analytical Methodology” has been reported. A team of Polish workers reported the use of a combined Raman and micro-XRF technique, termed PRAXIS, that could be applied to the forensic analysis of multi-layer paint chips, inks, plastics and fibres.144 Although the abstract demonstrated a paucity of results, it did state that with a few modifications, i.e. the use of an extra laser and by decreasing the spot size for the XRF analysis, the instrument showed real promise for the analysis of such samples.3.1.3 Synthesis and characterization. As always, there have been a number of applications describing preparation of new polymers or composites or different preparation methods that have then used atomic spectroscopy to characterize the products. Included in this number is a paper by Wang and colleagues who prepared charged polystyrene latexes by emulsion polymerization induced by gamma rays.266 The ionic polymerizable surfactants sodium 4-(8-(methacryloyloxy)octyl)benzenesulfonate (MOBS) and methacryloyloxyoctyltrimethylammonium bromide (MOTB) were synthesized and then used as emulsifiers to synthesize the latexes. The products were characterized using TEM and XRF. This synthesis route was considered advantageous compared with initiator-induced emulsion polymerization. Gamma irradiation from 60Co has been used by Ferreira and co-workers to prepare polyethylene grafted hydroxyethyl methacrylate copolymeric thin films.267 The materials, which could have uses in bioapplications, were analyzed using PIXE, AFM and SEM. Although many analytes were found (e.g. Ca, Cl, Fe, K, P, S, Si and Zn), their concentrations were sufficiently low so as not to pose any toxicological risk. The AFM and SEM demonstrated the roughness and porosity of the surface of the polymer which is essential for the bio-interaction or cell adhesion. Maiti and Bhowmick reported the preparation of new fluoroelastomer nano-composites from synthetic montmorillonite.268 The montmorillonite-like materials were synthesized in-house because the authors' aim was to understand the structure-property relationships. The clays and the nano-composites were characterized using techniques such as XRD, XRF, IR and TEM. The materials were also characterized in terms of their mechanical, dynamic mechanical, swelling and thermal properties. It was found that the synthetic materials showed improved properties when compared with those made using the natural materials.3.1.4 Other applications. A simple application in which the amount of Sb leached from polyethylene terephthalate oven proof trays used for ready-to-eat meals was reported by Haldimann and colleagues.269 The Sb, which is present as a result of the use of a polycondensation catalyst, could potentially leach into the food and become a health hazard. The authors tested a number of meals and found that background levels ranged from not detectable up to 3.4 μg kg−1. On cooking in either microwave or conventional ovens, the amount of antimony in the foodstuffs increased significantly, with the range found in food being 0–17 μg kg−1 and the range in ready meals being 8–38 μg kg−1. It was found that approximately half of the food prepared at 180°C exceeded the specific migration limit set for food contact material by the European Commission. Despite this, the amount of Sb leached into the food was still regarded as being not of toxicological concern because it was below the tolerable daily intake limit.3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materialsAs usual, this has been a very popular area of research; although many of the papers published have focused very much on the properties of the materials produced rather than on the analysis of them. Such papers are numerous and will not be discussed in any detail in this review. Instead, mention will be made only of papers that discuss the analysis in some detail. Table 5 discusses some of the interesting, but lesser significant applications.
Table 5 Applications of the analysis of electronic materials

AnalyteSampleTechnique; atomization; presentationCommentsReferenceDiffusion and depth-profiling applicationsCThin films of titanium and tantalum carbidesSIMS; -; S XPS; -; SCarbide films produced by treating titanium and tantalum films in methane at 1 Pa pressure and creating an electrical discharge at −20kV. Process times of between 0.5 and 2 hours used at a pulse repetition rate of 1 kHz. SIMS and XPS gave depth-profiles of implanted C and the chemical shift observed demonstrated the formation of metal- C bonds. The depth-profile indicated the formation of a thin C film on top and a shallow implantation profile.322MnGallium manganese arsenide/gallium arsenide (001) thin filmsSIMS; -; SMn-doped films of gallium arsenide grown by molecular beam epitaxy at substrate temperatures of between 580 and 250°C. Dynamic SIMS and Auger electron spectroscopy used for characterization. When films grown at 250°C, the Mn profile is uniform, but at higher temperature the Mn profile can be erratic. When the Mn level is below the solubility limit, unexpected peaks were observed in the concentration depth profile.323VariousUltra-thin oxide-nitride-oxide stacked filmsSIMS; ToF; SToF-SIMS and Auger electron spectroscopy used to measure depth profiles. Tunnel oxide of 2.3 nm depth grown on silicon substrate in a nitrogen diluted oxygen ambient, then 5.7 nm layer of nitride deposited using low-pressure chemical vapour deposition. Blocking oxide then formed by oxidizing oxide-nitride structure in wet oxygen. Some chemical mixing found to occur, i.e. tunnel oxide reacts with silicon surface forming SiO1.1N0.67 and also O diffuses into nitride layer forming the same compound.324VariousZirconium oxynitride films obtained by radio-frequency magnetron reactive sputteringSIMS; -; S XPS; -; S XRD; -; SThe relationship between structural and compositional properties and the sputtering parameters was investigated. At lowest N flux in the atmosphere, ZrN cubic phase was produced with very small quantities of amorphous zirconium oxynitride. At highest N flux, only crystalline ZrON phases were found. Between the extremes, a mixture of ZrN and ZrON was found.325VariousPoly-crystalline silicon filmsSIMS; -; SFilms produced by flash lamp annealing of amorphous silicon films prepared by catalytic chemical vapour deposition method. The crystallinity could be changed by altering the lamp irradiance. SIMS depth-profiling of dopants indicated negligible diffusion. Material regarded as potentially a highly efficient solar cell.326Other characterization studiesErErbium doped spin-on glassToF-SIMS; -; SErbium - doped silica thin films show room temperature photo-luminescence at ∼ 1.53 μm. After annealing of the film at 1000°C, photo-luminescence was enhanced by a factor of 30 compared with those annealed at low temperature. ToF-SIMS results indicated that at higher annealing temperature, Er–O–Si complex was favoured and the OH group eliminated.327VariousNickel oxide and lithium nickel oxide thin filmsEDXRF; -; SThin films deposited through pyrolysis of nickel acetylacetonate and lithium acetylacetonate in the temperature range 350–420°C. Starting materials and products analyzed using EDXRF and XRD with the products also being analyzed using Rutherford back scattering spectrometry, UV-Vis spectroscopy and van der Pauw conductivity. The amount of metals in product did not reflect the ratio of metals in the precursors. Instead, it was dependent on deposition temperature.328VariousThin ferrite filmsSIMS; -; SNickel ferrite, nickel zinc ferrite, zinc ferrite and barium ferrite films grown on silicon substrate. Films then characterized using XRD, SEM, EDAX, SIMS and AFM.329VariousPtMn magnetic material filmSIMS; -; SDepth-profile of major elements in films determined using SIMS. Film structure and lattice spacing determined using XRR and GIXRD. Gas cluster ion beam at an acceleration voltage of 20 kV and at an angle of 80° used to smooth the surface of the films. Average roughness of 1.2 nm obtained.330VariousBeta iron silicide (FeSi2) thin filmsSIMS; -; S MS; GD; S MS; ICP; -High purity iron (5N) and silicon (5N+), molten in a quartz ampoule forming the compound. GD-MS determined that material was one order of magnitude more pure than that prepared using traditional arc melted method. Material showed n-type conduction whereas arc-melted material showed p-type. ICP-MS and SIMS analysis showed that impurities in the p-type conducting materials were mainly Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, W and Zn.331VariousNitrogen doped zinc oxide filmsSIMS; -; S XPS; -; SFilms produced by RF magnetron sputtering in 75% nitrogen/argon + nitrogen atmosphere. Influence of substrate temperature (room temperature to 300°C) determined using XRD, SIMS, XPS and Hall measurements. XPS and SIMS demonstrated that nitrogen incorporation decreased as temperature increased. Hall measurements indicated n-type conductivity.332VariousPulsed laser deposited zinc oxide filmsSIMS; -; SNumerous methods of preparation described including ablation of sintered ZnO pellets and pure metallic zinc targets. Properties of films closely related to pulsed laser deposition conditions. SIMS, AFM and SEM used to characterize materials produced using different methods.333VariousIron-nickel alloy thin filmsIsotope ratio-MS; ICP; L XPS; -; S SIMS; -; SA comparison of methods for surface analysis of iron-nickel alloy thin films. Films grown on silicon (100) wafers by ion-beam sputter deposition. Films then characterized by isotope ratio -ICP-MS. Alternative methods (XPS, SIMS and Auger electron spectroscopy) then also used for analysis. XPS and Auger agreed to within 2% of isotope ratio ICP-MS results and SIMS (using a 60C source) agreed to within 4%. Relative sensitivity factors had to be used for all techniques to obtain the results.193.2.1 Certified reference materials, comparisons and reviews. The development of certified reference materials in which single dopant species were introduced to silicon wafers by ion implantation was described by Simons et al.270 The materials, which were designed for the calibration of SIMS instrumentation, had their dopant doses certified (in units of atoms/cm2) by nuclear analytical methods including neutron depth-profiling for B, instrumental neutron activation analysis for As and radiochemical neutron activation analysis for P. Three reference materials were produced containing certified doses of B, As and P respectively. The authors discussed how the use of such materials to calibrate SIMS instrumentation enabled better agreement to be obtained during inter-laboratory comparisons of the analysis of samples with unknown dopant levels and implanted doses.Mass spectrometry on the nano-scale with ion sputtering techniques has been discussed by Veryovkin and co-workers.271 The authors discussed the analytical approaches required as well as the instrumental capabilities. The new generation of analytical instruments developed in the authors' laboratories were optimized for laser post-ionization secondary neutral mass spectrometry and compared with the capabilities of SIMS. Price and colleagues compared the use of dynamic SIMS and ToF-SIMS for the determination of impurities in mercury cadmium telluride.272 The capabilities of each of the techniques were compared as well as the LOD achievable. Nine analytes (Al, As, Cu, Fe, In, K, Li, Na and Ni) were determined in six materials from six different liquid phase epitaxy mercury cadmium telluride double layer hetero junction wafers.Wobrauschek has published a review containing 88 references on TXRF analysis.273 The technique is a variant of energy dispersive X-ray analytical techniques that is capable of analyte detection at the ultra-trace level. Using an X-ray tube for excitation, LOD at the pg g−1 or ng g−1 can be obtained, whereas if synchrotron radiation is used for excitation, detection at the fg level can be achieved. The technique is especially useful for when only very limited sample is available, since only a few mg of sample are required for the analysis. The review overviewed the theoretical principles, advantages, instrumentation, quantification and applications. The capabilities in terms of chemical analysis, surface analysis, depth-profiling and thin film characterization were also described. The review also commented on the extension of the technique using synchrotron radiation, the determination of low z elements and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The technique of TXRF was also discussed by Steen and co-workers.274 These workers described how dopant atoms segregate to energetically more favourable sites at the interface between silicon and silicon dioxide during the fabrication process and that, since device dimensions are becoming increasingly small, the measurement is becoming increasingly more difficult. The authors described a method by which TXRF was used with successive etching to determine the impurity profile at the Si/SiO2 interface with a resolution of approximately 1 nm. A third paper to give an overview of TXRF has been prepared by Beckhoff and colleagues.275 These authors also discussed the determination of the light analytes during the non-destructive analysis of semiconductor materials as well as giving the other relative merits of the technique. The instrumentation present at the authors' institute is capable of TXRF analysis as well as grazing incidence XRF (GIXRF) for the analysis of buried layers and conventional EDXRF for the analysis of surface layers. The most prominent features of the instrumentation were described as being a high vacuum load-lock combined with an equipment front-end module and a UHV irradiation chamber with an electrostatic chuck mounted on an eight-axis manipulator. Here, the entire surface of a 200 or 300 mm diameter wafer can be scanned by monochromatized radiation. The possibilities of reference-free quantitation of TXRF in a tabletop instrument were also discussed.The capabilities of ToF-SIMS as a powerful high throughput screening tool have been discussed by Smentkowski and Ostrowski.276 This surface analytical technique is capable of the simultaneous determination of virtually all the elements (including H, which can be problematic for other techniques), and can raster its primary ionization beam across a 70 mm diameter wafer in under 90 minutes. The data sets obtained can contain massive amounts of data since an entire high resolution mass spectrum is saved at each pixel as an ion image. Use of multivariate statistical analysis by the ToF-SIMS community can assist in data interpretation. The authors demonstrated the use of these multivariate statistical techniques and discussed how they managed to provide detail that was not available using univariate methods.Zhang and colleagues prepared a review of the studies of ferroelectric domain inversion and inverse mechanism in ferroelectrics and dielectric lithium niobate and lithium tantalate crystals.277 Amongst the techniques discussed were SIMS, differential scanning calorimetry and TEM, as well as simulation of proton profile and pyroelectric experiments.3.2.2 Environmental impact analyses and re-cycling of metals. The production of printed circuit boards (PCB) involves a substantial amount of toxic metals. Once the circuit boards are redundant, they must be re-cycled to re-claim as much of the toxic materials as possible. Alternatively, some of the chemicals used are of very high purity and hence high cost. These materials are also re-claimed since it helps lower the overall cost of production. There have been several papers in this subject area published during this review period. The recovery of high purity copper cathodes from printed circuit boards using either ammoniacal sulfate or chloride solutions has been discussed by Oishi et al.278 Leaching of the waste PCBs was achieved using copper (II) ammine as oxidizing agent which selectively dissolved the Cu giving a concentration of 40–50 g L−1 in the final solution. Other materials dissolved included Zn (at 1 g L−1) and Mn and Pb (both at ∼ 0.1 g L−1). The solution was then purified by solvent extraction using alkyl substituted 8-hydroxyquinoline, which managed to remove > 95% of the impurities, but with a few exceptions. Leaching of the PCBs with a sulfate solution led to higher selectivity for the Cu than did leaching with chloride-based reagents. Copper was recovered from the solutions by electro-deposition. The power required for the electro-deposition was also dependent on the leaching system used, with 1300 kWh required for the deposition of 1 tonne of Cu from the sulfate system and 500 kWh required for the chloride-based system. Analysis of the recovered material using GD-MS indicated that impurities totaled 24 ppm for the sulfate system and 1 ppm for the chloride system, with Pb being the main contaminant in both. Chiang and co-workers described a pyrolysis method for the re-cycling of metals and brominated compounds from PCBs.279 Circuit boards were crushed into particle size of mesh 5–40 (0.71–4.4 mm) and then pyrolysed at temperatures of between 200 and 500 °C for a period of 30 minutes. The thermal decomposition kinetics were measured using a thermogravimetric analyzer. The pyrolytic residues were analyzed using EDXRF, ICP-OES and ICP-MS. The composition of the liquid products was also measured using ICP-OES and ICP-MS. The effects of particle size and pyrolysis temperature were determined in the study where it was found that the particle size was irrelevant but that the temperature was the key factor for the pyrolysis. Other papers in this area have been published by Hall and Williams280,281 who also investigated the use of pyrolysis for separating organic, metallic and glass fibre fractions of the PCBs. The boards were pyrolysed at 800°C in an oxygen free atmosphere and the organic fraction released (volatile oils and gases) was analyzed by assorted gas chromatographic techniques. The residues remaining were analyzed by ICP-MS. Apparently, the copper, glass fibre etc. could easily be separated. The organic oils/gases could be used either as fuels or as a chemical feedstock and the recovered metals (mainly copper, calcium, iron, nickel, aluminium and zinc, but also lower amounts of bismuth, gallium, gold and silver), could be purified and re-cycled using traditional methods.3.2.3 Analysis of wafers and other materials. The analysis of silicon wafers coated by spin-on-glass using LA-sector field - ICP-MS has been reported by Ryu and co-workers.282 The wafers were prepared using a sequence of spiking of known amounts of metal contaminants in spin-on-glass, spin-coating and baking. The spin-on-glass layer was split into 74 different sectors, each of which was then analyzed. The average contamination of each sector was in the range 1010–1012 atoms cm−2. The craters produced by each laser shot (266 nm, 9 mJ per pulse) were investigated using SEM and were found to be larger than the thickness of the glass layer and were also found to increase in diameter with the power and decrease with de-focused beam diameter. The LOD was approximately 109 atoms cm−2, but was element dependent. A paper by Ricciari and co-workers discussed the possibility of using in-line ToF-SIMS instead of surface photo-voltage techniques to control ion implanter equipment.283 Although the photo-voltage techniques are in very common use, they only give an indirect measure of metallic contamination. The authors described a comparison of data obtained from the two techniques, where a good correlation was reported. The authors did note that ToF-SIMS gave detailed information about the other contaminants present on the surface of the wafers. A resonance multi-photon - ionization sputtered neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS) instrument for sub-micron area analysis was developed by Schichi et al.284 The laser system for producing resonance ionization consisted of two yttrium aluminium garnet (YAG) lasers and three dye lasers. Combination of these laser beams enabled a maximum of four colours to be focused above a sample. The primary ion beam source consisted of a liquid-metal ion source and was developed specifically for this instrument. The system provided an ion beam current density of more than 8 A cm−2 at a beam diameter of 30 nm. The depth profile of Fe in a sub-micrometer area on a silicon wafer was obtained at a useful yield of about 5% and the lateral profile of P in a rectangle area of 1400 × 500 mm was obtained at a useful yield of about 0.2%. Vapour phase decomposition (VPD) followed by ICP-MS or GFAAS detection has been discussed as a means of analysis of silicon oxide and nitride films for metallic contaminants.285 The authors, Yeh et al., in discussing the technique noted that the silicon matrix can cause interferences. If the thickness of the oxide film on the wafer was less than 0.1 nm, then determination using ICP-MS was unaffected by the silicon matrix. If the thickness is greater than this, then measures must be taken to eliminate the silicon matrix. The authors described an improved heating pre-treatment approach that successfully achieved this. For the GFAAS analysis, the presence of the silicon can create interferences during the determination of Al and Na. Addition of nitric acid to the graphite tube after sample injection was also found to decrease the silicon interference. Detection limits were element specific, but were typically in the range 0.04–0.55 × 1010 and 0.05–1.73 × 109 atoms cm−2 for VPD-GFAAS and VPD-ICP-MS respectively.Several other applications of atomic spectrometry to the analysis of materials used in the electronics industry have been reported. Included in this number is the analysis of the cathode material LiNi0.9Co0.1O2 prepared by co-precipitation of lithium hydroxide and Ni0.9Co0.1(OH)2 and subsequent two-stage heat treatment in flowing oxygen.286 The techniques of ICP-OES, XRD, SEM and cyclic voltammetry were used for the characterization. Although all the materials had a layered structure and exhibited good electrical properties, the sintering temperature was found to be critical in obtaining optimal performance. A temperature of 750°C yielded a material that showed the largest initial discharge capacity and the best cycling performance. Liu determined Ce, Co, La, Mn, Nd, Ni and Pr in a rare earth hydrogen storage alloy (AB(5) type) using an ICP-OES method.287 The author chose the analytical lines of interest by inspecting the spectrum obtained and identifying overlap interferences. As long as the matrix concentration was less than 0.2 mg mL−1, there were insignificant problems from matrix depression. Spike recovery experiments yielded mixed results, with recoveries lying in the range 82–129%. Precision was respectable with typical values in the range 2.2 to 11.1% RSD. The author noted that the ICP-OES method had the advantage of being rapid, offer high sensitivity, accurate and had multi-element capability. Two papers reported the analysis of silicon metal. In the first, Sieber and co-workers validated an alkali reaction, borate fusion method of sample preparation followed by XRF measurement.28 The authors used lithium hydroxide as a pre-treatment, which converts the silicon metal into lithium silicate and then fused this with lithium borate flux without any damage to platinum ware. Once the specimens were fused and cast as beads, calibration standards were prepared that matched as closely as possible the matrix of the sample. Method validation was achieved by the analysis of older CRM materials of silicon metal (NIST 57 and NIST 57a) and also by analysis of the candidate reference material NIST 57b. The XRF results for the latter material were compared with those obtained using ICP-OES and prompt gamma-ray activation analysis (PGAA). Bias tests indicated that the XRF results are accurate for Al, Ca, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, S and Zr; however, it was noted that the concentrations of Ca, Cr, Cu and S in the candidate material were close to the LOD of the alkali reaction/borate fusion method. The other paper to discuss the analysis of silicon was prepared by Schiffem and colleagues, who used collinear double-pulse femtosecond LIBS.288 Double pulse LIBS was found to give signal enhancements compared with single pulse. The double pulse LIBS was studied over a range of pulse energies, inter-pulse delays and sample positions. Correlation between crater volume and signal intensity was measured over a limited range of the sample focal plane position; where double pulse LIBS was again found to be superior to single pulse for certain focal plane positions. Phosphine is used for compound epitaxial growth during the manufacture of some semiconductors. The presence of impurities, including water vapor, in the gas can lead to a detrimental effect on the optical and electrical properties. The determination of trace water vapor in high-purity phosphine using cavity ringdown spectroscopy has been reported by Funke and colleagues289; who used a commercial instrument that measures water vapor at a wavelength of 1392.53 nm. The background signals arising from the phosphine at different pressures were evaluated and incorporated into the data analysis software. Test concentrations generated using a diffusion vial-based H2O source and dilution manifold were used to verify instrument accuracy, sensitivity, linearity and response time. The readings at a pressure of 13.2 kPa correlated well with the concentration introduced and the calibration was linear over the range 0–52.7 nmol mol−1. The analyzer was sensitive to H2O concentration changes of 1.3 nmol mol−1. The authors did note, however, that some spectral lines arising from the phosphine could not be overcome, which resulted in an additional systematic uncertainty of 9.0 nmol mol−1.A new chemical method labeled as a modification of the sublimation sandwich method has been used to prepare thick gallium manganese nitride (Ga1-xMnxN) layers.290 During the preparation, gallium nitride powder and powdered manganese were reacted with ammonia. Crystals with the best quality were obtained using a growth rate of 25 μm h−1. The structure of the material was analyzed using SIMS, which indicated that layers containing up to 4% Mn were present. Other techniques, such as XRD, rocking curves and EXAFS confirmed good structural properties without phase separation. Zhu and co-workers have published a paper claiming to provide an improved understanding of an electron beam charge compensation method for magnetic sector SIMS analysis of insulators.291 The new method utilized an adjacent electron beam approach. A combination of computational simulation and quantitative characterization of the charge compensation phenomenon was used to elucidate the under-lying mechanisms of this charge compensation technique. Overall advantages of the technique included higher mass resolution, better profile stability and higher sensitivity.3.2.4 Semiconductors. Wang and colleagues reported a new SIMS method for the determination of Cd in mercury cadmium telluride.292 Measurement of HgCs+ and CdCs+ cluster ions enabled the determination of x in the formula Hg1-xCdxTe. Results demonstrated that x/(1−x) is linearly proportional to HgCs+/CdCs+ over the range of x = 0.2 to 0.9. The technique enabled the authors to obtain an accurate Cd profile for a multi-layer sample with different x values for each layer using a single standard with known value of x. There have been relatively few papers published with respect to solar cells during this review period. This is in contrast to previous years, where the number had been increasingly annually. Despite this, one paper that has been published was by Rowlands et al. who investigated the incorporation of As into a series of cadmium telluride/cadmium sulfide devices using metal organic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD) and with different partial pressures of tris(dimethylamino) arsine.293 The authors used SIMS to characterize the growth layers and found that As ranged from 1 × 1016 to 1 × 1019 atoms cm−3, and a square law dependence of As concentration on the tris(dimethylamino) arsine vapour concentration was observed. A reaction mechanism was proposed and discussed in terms of reaction kinetics.Frei and co-workers reported the use of nano-second LA-ICP-MS for the determination of the stoichiometry of various Ag(In)SbTe phase change materials.294 Performing raster ablation sampling reportedly led to improved precision and accuracy compared with single hole drilling ablation. Similarly, raster ablation reduced the fractionation effects and temporal mass load effects in the ICP. Calibration was achieved using a single material composed of all four analytes and a quantification approach based on 100% normalization was undertaken. This method was reported previously (reference given in the paper) and was possible because all of the elements exhibit a similar behaviour during the ablation sampling. The authors studied the stoichiometry-dependent particle size distribution of the laser induced aerosol and found that it was actually the limiting factor for the accuracy. Despite this drawback, the overall technique was capable of accurate stoichiometric determination provided that the calibration material was as closely matched to the sample as possible and that the laser ablation conditions remain constant. Another ICP-MS-based determination has been published by Wang and colleagues,295 who determined the behaviour of impurities in cadmium zinc telluride. Three cadmium zinc telluride ingots were grown by the vertical Bridgman method and the impurities determined by ICP-MS. The distribution and segregation of the impurities were found to vary with the concentration and be dependent on the growth conditions. The effects of these impurities on the optical and electrical properties were determined using photoluminescence and voltage current measurements.Most of the other applications in this field were undertaken using either SIMS or ToF-SIMS. Ultra-shallow depth-profiling using SIMS and Rutherford back-scattering spectroscopy (RBS) has been used by Kataoka and Itani to obtain reliable depth-profiles of gate dielectrics and dopant profiles as well as to provide important information for the modeling and process control of advanced complimentary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) design.296 An ultra-thin silicon nitride/silicon dioxide (Si3N4/SiO2) stacked layer and ultra-shallow As implantation distributions (3 keV, 1 × 1015 cm−2) were used as a sample material for the study. Low energy oxygen and cesium ions were used for the bombardment at an impact angle of 78° and the spectra obtained from these measurements were compared with those obtained using high resolution RBS. The results using these measurement conditions indicated that accurate results were obtained, but the authors did note that the RBS spectra clearly showed that there was some re-distribution in the near-surface region. The SIMS profiles obtained using conventional conditions and with cesium as the primary ions at an oblique incidence were distorted at depths of less than 5 nm. The distortion apparently arose because of a transient signal originating from a native oxide. This was very much reduced when oxygen was used as the primary ions. The interaction between hafnium tantalum nitride (HfxTayN) metal gate with silicon dioxide and hafnium oxynitride (HfOxNy) gate dielectrics was analyzed using ToF-SIMS by Yang and colleagues.297 The diffusion depths of the Hf and Ta were less significant in the silicon dioxide gate dielectric than they were in the hafnium oxynitride. The silicon dioxide showed better electrical properties (leakage current, hysteresis, interface trap density and stress-induced flat-band voltage shift) compared with the other gate dielectric. The electrical characteristics of the silicon dioxide gate dielectric remain almost unchanged after an increase in annealing temperature, indicating that it is both thermally and electrically more stable than the hafnium oxynitride dielectric. Avice et al. prepared films of aluminium oxide on n-type (nitrogen doped) 4H-SiC (001) epitaxial samples using atomic layer chemical vapour deposition.298 The samples were deposited at 300°C and were then annealed in an argon atmosphere at 1000°C. The structures of the materials were analyzed by a series of techniques including SIMS, XPS and TEM. The SIMS and XPS results indicated that the average composition in the wider interface was not changed significantly by the annealing process. The TEM and XPS results indicated that the samples had a double interface, with an intermediate sub-oxide (SiOx, where x < 2) forming the other interface. After annealing, this intermediate interface breaks up and forms silicon dioxide islands resulting in a rough interface region and a high concentration of Si in the aluminium oxide film. The use of ToF-SIMS to assess the manner in which the surface chemistry of mercury cadmium telluride (Hg1-xCdxTe) is influenced by the process chemistry, patterned photoresist format and etch geometry (including aspect ratio, trench depth, trench width and unit cell spacing) has been reported by Garwood and co-workers.299 It was observed that both the cross-contaminant abundance and the relative ranking of the process cleaning efficacies are influenced significantly by these parameters. The paper reported the novel use of ToF-SIMS to qualitatively assess cleaning efficacy, geometry-dependent surface species distributions, the polar/hydrophilic and non-polar/hydrophobic nature of the processed surface and the dependence of the surface chemistry on the cleaning process.3.2.5 Superconductors. Filippi and co-workers reported the use of micro-XRF and micro-XANES for the analysis of phase-separated samples belonging to the superconducting materials Mg1-xSexB2, where x > 0.27.300 It was found that the sample separated into Se-rich and Se-deficient regions and that these phase separated samples exhibited a critical temperature higher than pristine MgB2. Using a beam spot size of less than 1 pm, micro-XRF found Se-poor textures of 100 μm size embedded in a Se-matrix. The use of micro-XANES enabled the study of the chemical state of the Se in the Se-poor region and found that it did not enter the MgB2 lattice. The effect of the partial substitution of Ca with Sm in Bi-2223 superconducting samples (Bi1.6Pb0.4Sr2Ca2-xSmxCu3Oy), prepared using the conventional solid state reaction method, have been investigated by Yilmazlar and colleagues who used XRD, EDXRF, magneto-resistivity, critical temperature, transport critical current density and ac susceptibility measurements.3013.2.6 Thin films. As always, the section concerning the analysis of thin films is split between those applications that have prepared a material and have then undertaken characterization studies and those that have performed depth-profiling/diffusion studies. In the latter case, many of the studies simply use SIMS (or ToF-SIMS) and do not actually go into any great experimental detail. Many of these will be discussed more briefly in tabular form. Other applications that give more detail or that use an alternative technique, will be discussed at greater length in the text.One interesting instrument development reported is that of a hand-held XRF spectrometer, capable of measuring film thickness in the range 1–1500 nm in one minute, with an accuracy of 3%.302 The authors, Carapelle et al., stated that software had been developed that enabled the spectrometer to be used by non-specialists. Calibration was apparently an automated procedure and was based on measurements of reference samples. Another interesting development was reported by Xu and co-workers who described a new method of film analysis using a polycapillary X-ray lens.303 This polycapillary X-ray lens was used to produce a micron sized primary X-ray beam that could be used with grazing emission XRF (GE-XRF), which is a development of TXRF. The authors said that the setup may be used to obtain information on film thickness, composition, and density.3.2.6.1 Depth-profiling and diffusion studies. Since this is a rapidly expanding area of research, there are still relatively few certified materials available. It is encouraging to note that this review period has seen the reporting of two such materials. Galindo and co-workers reported the production of a CRM for use with thin films used as protective coatings (oxides, nitrides, oxynitrides etc.) that had known quantities of O and N.304 The material was first prepared by depositing the nitride and this was then characterized using absolute quantitative measurements with Rutherford back-scattering spectrometry. Once the material had been characterized, it was used during the GD-OES analysis of other materials of similar type. The authors stated that the GD-OES analysis method worked well and that was due largely to the calibration using the material they had prepared. A new method for the calibration of the vertical scale of a stylus profilometer using delta-layer films was reported by Kim and co-workers.305 A Si/Ge multiple layer film with Si separated by delta-Ge layers was developed. The total thickness of the film and the delta-layer spacing were certified by high resolution TEM. Six craters with different depth were formed on the film by ion sputtering using SIMS depth-profiling. The depths of the craters were determined from the certified depth of the delta-layer and direct measurements using a stylus profilometer calibrated by a step-height standard. The vertical scale of the stylus profilometer could be calibrated by the slope and the offset of the measured crater depth fitted as a function of the certified nominal thickness.Three-dimensional micro-XRF spectroscopy has been used by Mantouvalou and colleagues for the analysis of film thickness and composition of stratified materials.306 The technique enabled 3-D resolved, non-destructive investigation of the elemental distribution in samples at micrometer resolution. These workers also overcame the problem of shortage of suitable CRMs by preparing a stratified material of their own that could be used with 3-D micro-XRF as well as other depth-sensitive X-ray techniques.Colombi and co-workers have used glancing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) for depth-profiling thin polycrystalline layers and compared that with results obtained from a simulation model.307 The method, described as being non-destructive, used different incidence angles to obtain information about different phases lying at different depths. The dependence of intensities of the diffracted X-rays on the incidence angle was analyzed and compared with simulations performed by means of a simple optico-geometrical model that took into account the Fresnel coefficients, X-ray absorption and the effective scattered volume. Results from the GIXRD and the simulation were in good agreement with those obtained for the thickness of the material measured by X-ray reflectivity (XRR). X-ray measurements with micro- and nano-resolution for depth-profiling purposes have been discussed by Gupta et al.308 The capabilities of the KMC-2 beamline at BESSY for spatially resolved X-ray measurements were reviewed. Experimental methods such as XRF and extended X-ray absorption fine spectroscopy with X-ray standing wave technique were applied to the depth-profiling analysis of Si/W/Si layers yielding sub-nanometer resolution. The materials under investigation were placed between two gold films that acted as a waveguide and hence increased sensitivity and accuracy. A non-destructive method of analysis of silver selenide films with varying composition has been reported by Dargel et al.309 The materials were deposited on magnesium oxide substrates by pulsed laser deposition and were then analyzed using micro-XRF. A calibration procedure was designed to determine the absolute thickness of the films and lateral homogeneity was investigated by elemental mapping. A wet chemical procedure was performed to dissolve layers prior to ICP-OES and ICP-MS analysis to determine the stoichiometry of the silver selenide. The results indicated that a correlation between the composition of the layers and their thickness existed, with silver enriched layers being generally thinner than those that were silver deplete. Magnetic/non-magnetic layers that are used in read-out units of magnetic recording media, i.e. hard drives, have been analyzed by Katona and co-workers.310 These authors electro-deposited CoNiCu/Cu and Co/Cu layers onto a silicon (111) surface and then the depth-profile was analyzed using secondary neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS). Although the SNMS indicated that incorporation of O into the layers was insignificant, the resolution of the analysis was proportional to the initial roughness of the silicon substrate. When both Ni and Co were present in the magnetic layer, the composition of the samples was influenced by the anomalous co-deposition properties of the iron-group elements and the mass transport of the corresponding ions in the electrolyte. The authors concluded that there was possible inhomogeneity of the magnetic layers in the electro-deposited sample. Bacaksiz and colleagues deposited zinc sulfide thin films on glass substrates by a spray pyrolysis method and then measured Ag diffusion through the layers using XRF.311 The films were deposited in a nitrogen atmosphere at temperatures of between 80 and 400°C and the methodology enabled the authors to calculate the diffusion coefficient. The Ag diffusion coefficient could be determined using the equation: D = 8 × 10−9 exp(−0.10eV/kT). It was found that the un-doped zinc sulfide film exhibited n-type behaviour whereas the Ag - doped materials exhibited p-type behaviour. In addition, the band gap in the doped material was increased when compared with the un-doped material annealed under the same conditions. The results were attributed to the migration of Ag through both the grain boundaries and intra-grain accompanied by interaction with native point defects.Lloyd gave a good account of the relative merits of the use of multivariate statistical analysis for improving data obtained from ToF-SIMS.312 In the paper, she discussed how SEM can visualize buried defects but that the chemical characterization of these defects can be complex or difficult. The technique of ToF-SIMS is, however, capable of depth-profiling because it has the ability to spatially resolve depth profiles while collecting an entire mass spectrum at every “voxel” (a portmanteau of the words pixel and volume). The technique can therefore produce a vast amount of data which, depending on the sample size, can become unmanageable. Use of multivariate statistics can reduce this amount of data to a small set of chemically meaningful factors. Data scaling is important in such applications and a comparison of scaling procedures was made. Analytical examples from relatively homogeneous layers as well as materials with buried particulate were shown.Some of the problems associated with depth-profiling using SIMS were discussed by Cwil et al.313 These authors used SIMS with an argon beam to determine the depth-profile of ultra-thin Ti/Si multi-layer systems deposited on crystalline silicon wafers by laser ablation of titanium and silicon targets. After high temperature treatment which leads to uniform metastable phases of the composite films, the re-distribution of the elements was measured. The data using positive atomic ion detection obtained prior to heat treatment showed some anomalous Ti distribution behaviour. This was attributed to numerous ion mass interferences and matrix effects caused mainly by the presence of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen contaminants in the film. Negative SIMS analysis in conjunction with detection of the molecules TiO2− and Si2− was found to be less affected by contaminants in the matrix.3.2.6.2 Preparation and characterization. Cobalt (II) tetrasulfonated phthalocyanine and copper (II) tetrasulfonated phthalocyanine films prepared by cyclic voltammetric deposition on gold electrodes were investigated by Peeters and co-workers using SR-XRF.314 The films' properties were studied as a function of the phthalocyanine concentration in solution during the modification process. The quantification procedure using SR-XRF was described in detail and the results obtained from the process could be compared with those obtained using electrochemical methods enabling the mechanism of thin film growth during the modification procedure to be elucidated. Staryga and colleagues applied ToF-SIMS to the determination of the chemical composition of the surface and of the bulk structure of diamond-like carbon films.315 The films were deposited using radio frequency plasma chemical deposition using methane gas in a high frequency plasma. The results indicated that the film contained primarily C and H, but also contained Cr, Fe and Ni as well as other elements introduced as contaminants during the preparation. The concentration of H was found to be much higher in the surface layer than in the bulk material which the authors stated was in accordance with the widely accepted models of deposition processes. Using negative carbon cluster ions for the analysis, the authors determined that significant differences in surface and bulk energy of fragmentation of the clusters was found and that this indicated that the fragmentation pattern was independent of the self-bias voltage used during film deposition. Diamond-like carbon films have also been investigated by Bursikova et al. who prepared nitrogen-doped materials on silicon wafers placed on steel samples using the plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition technique with a RF capacitive discharge (13.56 MHz), at low pressure (20 Pa) and with starting materials of methane, nitrogen and hexamethyldisiloxane.316 The materials were prepared using different deposition times and were then analyzed using LA-ToF-MS using different commercial instrumentation. Analysis of the spectra obtained indicated the presence of Cn+ (where n = 4–30), Sin+ (n = 2, 3), SinH+ (n = 2, 3), SiOK+, Si3H4+, Si2N+, Si2NH2+ and Si3C+. According to the authors, the latter three species could possibly be indicative of nitrogen - silica and carbon - silica bonds. The stoichiometries of all of the species were confirmed by isotopic pattern simulation. In the negative ion detection mode, Cn− (where n = 2–12) clusters were observed. The authors concluded that LA-ToF-MS could be a useful supplementary characterization procedure for materials such as these.The effects produced on films by annealing processes have been studied in two papers. Lisowski and co-workers studied the structural and chemical transformation of thin titanium - palladium and titanium deuteride - palladium bilayer films induced by vacuum annealing.317 The films were prepared under ultra-high vacuum conditions and were annealed in-situ using the same annealing procedure for all materials prepared. The authors used a number of techniques to characterize the transformations including SEM, TEM, XRD and XPS. It was found that both film types undergo extensive transformations during the annealing process, with extensive inter-mixing of the Ti and Pd layers and the formation of a new PdTi2 bimetallic phase. Depth-profiling of the materials using XPS indicated a different distribution of Pd and Ti in the annealed titanium deuteride - palladium film compared with the annealed titanium - palladium one. A mechanism for the transformation was deduced, which involved the thermal decomposition of the titanium deuteride which, in turn, led to a modification of the inter-mixing process. In the other paper of this type, Mertens and co-workers determined the effects of a rapid thermal annealing process on thin boron - niobium and boron - niobium nitride bilayers and niobium - boron - niobium trilayers.318 The films (of approximately 500 nm total thickness) were deposited on silicon (100) wafers with the Nb and B layers being deposited by magnetron sputtering and the Nb2N layers being prepared by nitridation of Nb films. The samples were annealed at temperatures in the range 600 and 1200°C in a rapid thermal processing system under argon or ammonia gas flow so that the inter-diffusion and reactivity of the niobium, boron and nitrogen could be studied. Using the techniques of XRD, SEM, AFM and SIMS, the surface morphology and roughness as well as the chemical composition were studied. Annealing of the B–Nb bilayers and Nb–B–Nb trilayers under argon at 1200°C led to the formation of Nb3B2 at the Nb–B interface. At lower temperatures, the high oxygen content in the boron layer hindered the formation of borides because of the formation of glass-like oxides. In ammonia several niobium nitrides were formed, but no borides. This was again attributed to the formation of glass-like oxides. The overall conclusion was that since no borides were formed, the Nb2N was an effective barrier to B diffusion.A structural and chemical investigation of cadmium selenide films prepared by electro-crystallization inside a nano-porous silica network deposited by a sol-gel preparation method on an indium tin oxide substrate has been reported by Jakobsen and colleagues.319 Subsequent removal of the silica template should, according to the authors, have led to a nano-porous network of cadmium selenide in intimate contact with the conducting substrate. The films produced were analyzed using SEM, AFM, grazing incidence small/wide angle X-ray scattering and ToF-SIMS. The latter technique also enabled a depth-profile/3-dimensional chemical imaging of the sample. The materials were tested as electron conductors in hybrid organic/inorganic solar cells. Unfortunately, the removal of the silica network led to collapse of the cadmium selenide structure and the formation of a high pin-hole density. Consequently, this led to poor photo-voltaic properties. The intercalation of lithium ions in vanadium pentoxide leads to a change in optical properties, a process that is of value on thin film electrochemical devices. A study by Alamarguy and co-workers deposited the vanadium pentoxide on indium tin oxide glass coupons using a sol-gel process and then challenged it using increasing amounts of charge - discharge cycles ranging from 72 to 589 full cycles.320 The samples were then washed. The resulting materials were then characterized using XPS (which measured the thickness and composition of the solid - electrolyte interface) and ToF-SIMS (which gave a depth-profile, i.e. examined the rate of de-intercalation). The ToF-SIMS results enabled the authors to make a correction for the amount of inactive material within the electrochemically active region of the film. It was noted that the overall Li concentration was similar for all the samples analyzed and that there was a notable build-up at the interface between the vanadium pentoxide and the indium tin oxide glass substrate. This interface region had a thickness of 27 nm and was electrochemically inactive. A paper by Barquinha et al. discussed the use of alternatives to indium tin oxide as the material in thin film transistors (TFT).321 These authors used gallium indium zinc oxide semiconductor and then analyzed the electrode materials indium zinc oxide, titanium, aluminum, molybdenum, and titanium/gold. Each of these electrode materials were used in two different types of device, namely a material annealed after gallium indium zinc oxide channel deposition but before source/drain deposition and another which was annealed at the end of device production. It was noted that the materials annealed at the end of the process yielded better electrical properties, e.g. using the titanium/gold electrodes the mobility rises from 19 to 25 cm2/V and turn on voltage drops from four to two V. The authors used ToF-SIMS to confirm that diffusion in the source/drain electrodes and semiconductor interface existed.3.3 GlassesAs usual, most research methods of glass analysis have concentrated on solid sampling approaches, with both LA-ICP-MS and, increasingly, LIBS approaches becoming popular. An alternative, but still commonly used, approach is the varying types of XRF. In the applications fields, the analysis of glass is still proving very popular with archaeologists/historians, who use the analytical techniques, often in conjunction with chemometric methods, to elucidate provenance, possible trade routes, manufacturing processes, etc. The analysis of historical glasses clearly requires as little damage as possible being inflicted on the samples, hence solid sampling approaches such as XRF, LA-ICP-MS and LIBS have proved very popular in this area. The most interesting of the applications will be discussed in the text. There are, however, several applications that although interesting, do not lead to a significant increase in knowledge of atomic spectrometry. These are therefore discussed more briefly in a Table 6.
Table 6 Applications of the analysis of glass

AnalyteSampleTechnique; atomization; presentationCommentsReferenceApplications of archaeological and historical glassesVarious (32)Egyptian and Mesopotamian late bronze age glassesMS; ICP; LAAnalysis of 54 Egyptian and Mesopotamian glasses using LA-ICP-MS demonstrated clear differences in elemental signature between the two types. The authors claimed that this was because of different raw materials/different manufacturing process.351Various85 clear glass samples from the Roman ship Iulia FelixXRF; -; S EPMA; -; SAnalytical data treated with multivariate statistical tools e.g. cluster analysis. Glass samples shown to be soda-lime-silica in composition. Pattern of trace elements (especially Ba, Sr and Zr) indicates beach sand with differing amounts of alkali-feldspars was used as raw material.352Various500 glass window fragments from historical sites in BelgiumEPMA; -; SHistorical sites covered 12th–18th centuries. A sudden compositional change in late 14th century indicated that a new recipe was used and that new raw materials were introduced.353VariousGlass beads from ThebesXRF; -; SXRF produced supporting elemental data for a study that reported solid-state luminescence (thermo-luminescence and optically stimulated luminescence). Luminescence techniques enabled chronological estimation to be made.354,355Various25 ancient glass artifacts from RhodesXRF; -; SArtifacts dating from 640–600 BC analyzed using XRF and Raman spectroscopy. Composition indicates archaic recipe dating from between 15th and 7th century BC. Raman spectroscopy indicates low processing temperatures (ranging from < 600 to < 1000°C)356VariousGlass from Roman ship Iulia Felixμ-XRF; -; S SIMS; -; S XPS; -; SVarious techniques employed to elucidate degradation mechanisms that irreversibly alter the aesthetic appearance, e.g. formation of patinas, loss of brightness and transparency, formation of pits, crystals and peeling layers. XRD also used with μ-XRF to allow identification of crystallization species.357VariousGlass from Roman ship Iulia Felix, from Italian church windows and modern glassPIXE; -; S XPS; -; SWeathering process in terms of the formation of corrosion growth rings in three sample types compared. Results indicated that the three glass types could all have been prepared using the same technique.358VariousRoman glass objects from the Bocholtz burial siteXRF; -; SSEM and XRF used to study weathering process. Colourless glass objects badly weathered (crumbled to < 1 mm fragments) whereas transparent blue-green glass objects were pristine. Fragmentation found to be due to leaching of sodium oxide from glass structure and its replacement with water. The process appeared worse when the glass had a low concentration of calcium oxide. The coloured glass had a high calcium oxide content and was therefore weathered less.359VariousAncient Roman glassesPIGE; -; S PIXE; -; SAl, Na and Si profiled as a function of PIGE beam energy.360VariousV-XVI century glasses from San Martino di Ovaro (Italy)PIXE; -; S42 glass fragments analyzed in fully non-destructive way. Results validated by parallel PIGE analysis.361Other applicationsFeIron (III) oxide glass and Iron (II) oxide glass-ceramic system containing lead sodium and siliconXRF; -; S XAFS; -; SDetermination of Fe local co-ordination. Mossbauer spectroscopy also used, indicating that the Fe is present predominantly as Fe3+.362FeIron (III) oxide-lead oxide-silica-sodium oxide composite glassesEXAFS; -; S NEXAFS; -; SSimilar study to the one above.363Pb isotopesSilicate glassesMS; ICP; LAMulti-collector instrument used to collect Pb isotopic data. Improved spatial resolution and quantification limits reported. Standard - sample - standard bracketing method of calibration employed using USGS BCR2-G as calibrant. Accuracy and precision evaluated by analysis of other reference materials.364Si and YBioactive glass spheres used for radionuclide treatment of cancerMS; ICP; LBiodegradable glass microspheres containing Y were prepared by conventional melting and flame spheroidization. Their behavior in simulated body fluid and Tris buffer solution was monitored using ICP-MS as well as SEM-EDX, UV-Vis and FTIR. Incorporation of Y into the glass increased its structural stability and hence altered its behavior in the fluids.365VariousPhoto-thermo-refractive glassesSIMS; -; SSIMS used for determination of composition of these glasses. Main photosensitive components did not have uniform profiles of concentration.3663.3.1 CRMs. In common with other materials, analysis using solid sampling approaches still requires calibration with materials as closely matched to the samples of interest as possible. A paper by Klemme et al. has reported the synthesis and preliminary characterization of new silicate, phosphate and titanate reference glasses.334 Several analytical techniques were applied to the analysis of the samples to determine the bulk chemical composition, as well as the homogeneity. The techniques applied included ICP-MS, multicollector (MC) ICP-MS, LA-ICP-MS and SIMS. The results from the different techniques showed good agreement for 27 analytes (including alkali metals, alkaline earth metals and REEs) enabling provisional recommended values to be assigned. The materials were found to be homogeneous at the micrometer level.3.3.2 LA-ICP-MS determinations. A method for the preparation of solid calibration standards based on a sol gel process for use specifically with LA-ICP-MS has been described by Fitzpatrick and co-workers.335 An analyte (Se) and an internal standard (S) were added to the material during preparation and were found not to impair the formation of the glass-like disc (the xerogel). The heterogeneity of S and Se in the xerogels was less than that in the NIST materials SRM 610 and 612. It was noted, however, that small differences in the slopes of calibration between the xerogels and sulfide standards existed. This was attributed to matrix effects. The authors attempted to form xerogel standards for a range of transition elements as well as the Se, but this proved unsuccessful since visible heterogeneities (inclusions) resulted. Despite this drawback, the authors claimed that the xerogels were potential standards for a variety of analytes in glasses, minerals and other materials.Several papers have reported the use as well as the analytical capabilities, advantages and optimization of femtosecond LA-ICP-MS. Included in this number is a paper by Hiratat and Kon,336 who used a titanium–sapphire laser that operated in the near IR region of the spectrum. The signal intensity from 57Fe obtained from iron sulfide was almost four times higher than that obtained using an ArF excimer laser for ablations under similar energy fluence (5 J cm−2). In addition, the femtosecond laser produced craters that were similar in dimension and depth irrespective of whether the material was a glass or a zircon material. This was not the case for the excimer laser where the crater formed in a zircon was half the depth of the one formed in a glass material. Thermal induced and particle-size related elemental fractionation was also compared for the two laser systems. The conventional excimer laser produced greater ratios of 206Pb/238U and 238U/232Th, indicating a higher level of elemental fractionation; a source of analytical error. Precisions of replicate determinations of Fe and of 57Fe/54Fe and 56Fe/54Fe in a natural iron pyrite material were also much improved for the femtosecond laser system when compared with the excimer laser. Femtosecond lasers for use during LA-ICP-MS analyses has also been studied by Gonzalez and co-workers337,338 who compared similar parameters to the paper by Hiratat and Kon. The influence of repetition rate (1–1000Hz) and scan speed (1–200 μm s−1) using a low energy (30 μJ) and a small spot size (10 μm) femtosecond UV laser was evaluated for the analysis of silica glass samples.337 A precision of 6% RSD was obtained whilst accuracy was less impressive, with 14% error observed. In the second of the papers,338 a UV laser (266 nm) was used to generate particles from a glass and a metal alloy. Femtosecond (150 fs) and nanosecond (4 ns) laser pulses were compared using an identical fluence of 50 J cm−2. SEM imaging demonstrated that the particles produced by the nanosecond laser were larger and that there were more of them. These authors found that there was no correlation between particle size and median major element concentration for the alloy sample, which is in contrast to the results obtained previously and to those obtained by Hiratat and Kon. However, Gonzalez and colleagues also noticed clear differences in particle size, crater depth, heat affected zone and ICP-MS response between the glass and alloy samples, with the glass particles being larger but the craters being less deep and damage to the sample being less pronounced than for the alloy sample. Additionally, the femtosecond laser system produced a more intense ICP-MS response than did the nanosecond laser system, although the increase in intensity was less pronounced for the glass sample than for the alloy sample.3.3.3 LIBS determinations. As discussed briefly before, analysis using LIBS is becoming increasingly popular for many sample types including glass. There have been several relevant applications published during this review period. Burakov and co-workers have published two papers in this research area over the period. The first described a method by which alloys and glasses could be analyzed yielding accurate and precise data without recourse to calibration curves, CRMs or internal standards.339 Since the ablated mass of sample is minimal, the technique is generally regarded as being non-destructive and hence has use in the archaeological field. In this paper, Burakov and Raikov analyzed brass, bronze and gold alloys, glasses and archaeological samples. In a second paper, Burakov et al. characterized the laser induced plasma from a glass sample using both single and a collinear double pulse excitation regimes.340 The detection system enabled spatial, temporal and spectral measurements to be obtained. The experiments indicated that the two systems produced very different results with the signal being enhanced in the double pulse system. This enhancement was, however, found to be spatially dependent and to differ for different elements. An optical micro-lens array for laser plasma generation and spectrochemical analysis has been developed by Sturm.341 A Q-switched Nd:YAG laser operating at 1064 nm was focused by the micro-lens array to form a plasma on silicate glass targets. The output energy of the laser was 200 mJ, the pulse duration was 8 ns and the repetition rate was 10 Hz. The overall result was that 47 ablation spots could be obtained within an area of 9 mm diameter. The micro-lens array enabled a reduction in the variation of spectral line emission (Ca and Si lines) compared with the use of a single lens to focus the light. The author associated this reduction in variation with the averaging effect of the micro-lens array. Carmona and colleagues reported the determination of Pb in assorted glass samples including sonorous glass (10% PbO), crystal glass (at least 24% PbO) and superior crystal glass (at least 30% PbO).342 The glass samples were artificially weathered using neutral, alkaline and acidic solutions. The bulk composition of the samples was determined using XRF and the surfaces of the samples were analyzed using LIBS and by SEM-EDX. For the LIBS analysis, a linear correlation between intensity of Pb emission lines and the PbO content was established. It was found that acid attack on the glasses led to a decrease of PbO, CaO and Na2O at the surface with respect to the bulk sample whereas alkaline attack produced only minor changes in composition. The authors concluded that LIBS could be used to assess both the degree and the type of corrosion that a glass sample had undergone.One somewhat less successful application of LIBS was reported by Bridge et al.343 These authors used LIBS in conjunction with refractive index (RI) data and compared the analysis with LA-ICP-MS and RI for the forensic discrimination of several glass types including float glass from front and side automobile windows, car headlamp glass, side mirror glass and brown beverage container glass. The largest overall discrimination was obtained using LA-ICP-MS and RI, where 98.8% of 666 samples were identified. Unfortunately, the combination of LIBS and RI data gave a successful discrimination in only 87.2% of 1122 samples. The problem was associated with side mirror glass, where LIBS had a large variance in emission intensity leading to poor discrimination. The same problem was not observed for the LA-ICP-MS analyses.3.3.4 Forensic analyses. In addition to the paper by Bridge et al.,343 there have been four other forensic applications of the analysis of glass. Coumbaros and co-workers commented that RI data alone is insufficient to discriminate between different float glasses since, in Australia, the values of RI lie between 1.5189 and 1.5194.344 Hence, it is necessary to complement RI data with instrumental chemical analysis. In their paper, they described the use of ToF-SIMS for the analysis of the three-dimensional homogeneity of a sheet of float glass. A variation in the concentrations of Ca, Mg, Na and Si immediately under the non-float surface was observed and this was found to correlate with a decrease in RI value. Nakanishi and colleagues described the use of synchrotron radiation high energy XRF for the analysis of glass fragments.345 The use of such a facility decreased LOD to picogram levels for some analytes and to tens of picograms for others. Analysis of NIST 612 enabled the k-line peaks of 31 elements to be obtained, with precision being better than 9.7% RSD for all except Ca. The technique was applied to the determination of Ce, Hf, La, Pb, Rb, Sr and Zr in fragments of sheet glass. Detection limits were sufficiently low to enable the use of these analytes to characterize the glass samples. The authors concluded that the technique was an effective approach to the non-destructive discrimination of small fragments of glass and was therefore applicable to forensic science.The other two relevant papers have been written in Japanese, but are interesting applications. In one, Ito and co-workers346 used LA-ICP-MS to determine Ba, Ce, Co, La, Rb, Sr and Zr impurities in glass. Using a Nd:YAG laser operating at 213 nm, the authors analyzed 16 sheets of glass produced by three different manufacturers. The results from the LA-ICP-MS procedure were in good agreement with those obtained using conventional solution nebulization ICP-MS following an acid digestion. The sample preparation time for the LA-ICP-MS was, however, very much reduced in comparison. In the other application, the forensic discrimination between heated and non-heated sheet glass by the analysis of trace impurities using SR-XRF was reported by Kasamatsu et al.347 Five sheets of glass from three manufacturers were split into two groups; one of which was heated to 760°C for two minutes and the other remained at room temperature. Both groups of glasses were then analyzed using RI and SR-XRF. All of the heated glasses had a lower RI than those of the non-heated ones. The concentrations of Ba, Ce, La, Rb, Sr and Zr were found to be considerably different among the different non-heated glasses, but that there was no significant difference between the ratios of Sr k-alpha/Rb k-alpha, Zr k-beta/Rb k-alpha, Ba k-alpha/Ce k-alpha and La k-alpha/Ce k-alpha between heated and non-heated glasses.3.3.5 Nuclear glasses. The results of two studies of nuclear glasses have been published. In one Peuget and co-workers determined the effect of alpha radiation on the leaching behavior of nuclear glasses.348 Various samples of glass R7T7 were doped with Np-237, Pu-238, Pu-239, Am-241 or Cm-244, with the content of each actinide adjusted to cover a range of alpha activity varying from 105 to 1011 Bq g−1 and alpha decay doses of up to 4 × 1018 g−1. Inactive glass samples were also prepared so as to act as a control. The glasses were then soxhlet extracted using water and the extracts analyzed using ICP-OES. It was found that the neither the alpha activity nor the decay dose had a significant impact on the leaching behavior of the glass. In a similar paper by the same group, solid state diffusion in the nuclear glass R7T7 was studied.349 The material, which has been selected as a nuclear containment material in France, has a very low long term alteration rate that remains constant (or slightly reduces) over time. The alteration rate never reaches zero and even though the rate is 5 nm per year at 323K, over a geological time scale, this could prove problematic. The authors proposed two mechanisms to explain this diffusion: diffusion through an amorphous altered layer and the precipitation of neo-formed layers. The effects of pH, temperature, ionic strength and surface to volume ratio of the surrounding solution were all determined, using ICP-OES to analyze the liquid phase and ToF-SIMS to depth profile the glass itself. Surface to volume ratio and ionic strength were found not to be significant factors in the diffusion, whereas pH leads to a significant decrease in diffusion at 323K when it is raised from 8 to 10.3.3.6 Archaeological studies. Although particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) is a technique not normally covered in ASU reviews, it is perhaps worth mentioning an article by Calligaro entitled “PIXE in the study of archaeological and historical glasses”.350 The author presented two case studies in which the elucidation of ancient glass recipes, determination of provenance of raw materials and the weathering processes were all studied. The paper highlighted the place PIXE has amongst the other analytical techniques and illustrated the use of various forms (p-PIXE and He-PIXE) as well as proton induced gamma ray emission (PIGE) and Rutherford back-scattering spectrometry (RBS) for the study of ancient glasses.The other papers relevant to this part of the review are very much application-based and, in common with similar applications for the analysis of ceramics, are very interesting but frequently do not add to the knowledge of atomic spectrometry. These applications are therefore best placed in a Table for easy reference and will not be discussed in great detail. Also in common with the analysis of other historical or precious samples, the techniques used tend to cause minimal damage.3.4 Ceramics and refractoriesAs usual, the analysis of ceramics and refractories has split interest between the analysis of archaeological finds and the analysis of new materials, many of which are used in the biomedical field. There have, however, been several reports of new methods of analysis for established ceramic materials. For the archaeological samples, it has been the norm to cause as little damage as possible and hence methods of direct solids analysis that leave the material intact have, as usual, been popular. Techniques such as LA, XRF or even LIBS are the most common. Over the last few years, there has also been an increasing trend to use chemometric analysis of the analytical data to try and glean as much information as possible; e.g. to establish the provenance of samples, detection of forgeries etc. This trend has continued in this review period.3.4.1 Methods of analysis. Many ceramics are very refractory and can therefore be difficult to bring into solution for analysis. As a result, there has been a trend over many years to analyze the samples directly, i.e. the solid form. This trend has continued during this review period. One of the more commonly used methods of direct solids analysis has proved to be LIBS, with several applications to the analysis of ceramics being reported. In one application, Ctvrtnickova et al.367 compared the use of single and double pulse LIBS for the analysis of pressed pellets of powdered samples of silicate raw materials for the brick and tile industry. The parameters compared included the precision, sensitivity and LOD; with operating conditions such as laser pulse energy and inter-pulse separation being optimised. Two Nd:YAG lasers operating at 1064 and 532 nm in an orthogonal configuration with a re-heating arrangement were employed. Under optimised conditions the LOD obtained for Mg and Si using the double pulse technique were 10 times better than for single pulse. Killinger and co-workers found that the emission obtained from an alumina target irradiated by a Nd:YAG laser operating at 1064 nm was enhanced by the use of a 10.64 μm carbon dioxide laser.368 The level of enhancement was dependent on the individual analytical line, but was in the region of between 25 and 300 times. The output energy of the Nd:YAG laser was 50 mJ/pulse and the beam was focussed to a spot size of 1 mm diameter. The carbon dioxide laser had an output of 40 mJ/mm. The authors found that the enhancement effect of the carbon dioxide laser was critical on the two laser pulses being within 1 ms of each other. Of note in this paper was the observation that different ionization states and different elemental species produced a different level of signal enhancement. Both tungsten carbide hard metal pre-cursors and cemented tungsten carbide powders were analyzed using LIBS by Novotny and colleagues.369 The samples were pressed using a hydraulic press to form a pellet using powdered silver as a binder. The cemented tungsten carbide was embedded in resin for easier manipulation. A wide variety of operating conditions were tested, e.g. different lasers, (Nd:YAG operating at 1064 nm and 266 nm, argon fluoride at 193 nm and krypton fluoride at 248 nm); different surrounding gases (air, helium and argon) and different detectors. The authors finally employed the argon fluoride and krypton fluoride lasers in air to determine Co, Nb, Ta and Ti in the samples. Although reasonable calibration curves (r2 > 0.96) were obtained for Nb, Ta and Ti, the Co proved problematic with a regression of only 0.7994 being obtained for the cemented samples and calibration being unobtainable for the pre-cursor samples. Another interesting LIBS application was conducted by Das et al. who used the technique for a depth-profiling study of a thermal barrier coated superalloy.370 The thermal barrier coating consisted of a 7% yttria stabilised zirconia ceramic and an inner platinum-modified bond coat on a nickel-based superalloy single crystal substrate. In the presence of the ceramic it was possible to determine the ceramic/bond coat interface from the spectral profile of Al. In the absence of the ceramic, the spectral profile of W could be used to identify the interface of the bond coat and the substrate and also between the two layers of the bond coat.There have been several other applications that have described the different methods of sample analysis. In this group is a method reported by Peschel et al. who used the radionuclides 51Cr, 59Fe, 60Co and 65Zn to study the influence of thermochemical reagents on the volatilisation and transport efficiency from slurries of alumina during analysis using ETV-ICP-MS.371 The alumina powder (NIST 699) was introduced to the ETV device and then, after volatilisation at 2200°C, only 2% of the analytes were found to be retained, even without the additional use of thermochemical reagents. Placement of filters on the end of the transport tube indicated that recovery of the analytes was approximately 10% but that this increased to over 20% in the presence of palladium chloride, a mixture of palladium nitrate and magnesium nitrate, palladium chloride, iridium chloride, tin chloride, silver chloride, sodium fluoride, ammonium chloride or ammonium fluoride. However, this increase in analyte transport efficiency was found to be dependent on the concentration of the reagents; with normal concentrations used for volatilisation yielding the increase in transport efficiency but elevated concentrations actually causing a decrease. This was especially true for silver chloride, iridium chloride and the palladium chloride. Barth and co-workers described two methods for the determination of Al, Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn, Si, Ti and Zr in four boron nitride materials.372 The first of these methods involved the direct solids introduction to GFAAS. For this, the platform was covered with graphite powder prior to weighing the sample aliquot onto it. For the Si determination, it was also necessary to use a palladium/magnesium nitrate modifier. The other method described was ETV-ICP-OES. Again, this was a direct solid sampling approach, but utilised Freon R12 as a volatilisation aid. Detection limits were impressive and lied within the range 5 (for Cu) to 130 (for Si) ng g−1 for the GFAAS measurements and between 8 (for Cu) and 200 (for Si) ng g−1 for ETV-ICP-OES. The results obtained using both methods were compared and were also compared with those obtained using a standard digestion followed by ICP-OES determination. Direct solid sampling GFAAS detection has also been explored by Docekal and Vojtkova,373 who reported the determination of As, Cd, Hg, Pb, Sb and Zn in powdered titanium dioxide of pharmaceutical, food and cosmetics grade. It was found that at temperatures in excess of 2000°C the titania matrix was transformed into a titania-titanium carbide liquid phase which simply ran out of the sampling boat. The authors adjusted the temperature programmes accordingly so that the volatile analytes could be determined without interference and to prolong the useful lifetime of the graphite tube. Calibration was achieved using aqueous standard additions to the powders. The authors also discovered that linear range could be extended by two orders of magnitude if Zeeman background correction was used. Very low LOD of 2.1, 0.27, 24, 3.9, 6.3 and 0.9 ng g−1 were reported for As, Cd, Hg, Pb, Sb and Zn respectively. The results obtained using the proposed procedure were compared with those obtained using independent methods. Kiera et al. have re-discovered spark ablation as a means of sample introduction to a simultaneous ICP-OES system.374 Silicon carbide powders (0.2 g) were mixed with copper (0.6 g) and then pelletized using a pressure of 10 t cm−2 for a period of eight mins. The pellets were then spark ablated and a hard spark at a repetition rate of 8 Hz was found to be optimum. Using this technique, five analytes were determined simultaneously with LOD at the low μg g−1 range. Calibration was achieved using the addition of aqueous standards, with Y being used as an internal standard. Under these conditions, precision of between 4 and 24% RSD was achievable for concentrations of 350 down to 3 μg g−1.Heinrich and Matschat have investigated the use of assorted Freons (CCl2F2, CHClF2 and CHF3) introduced as 1% pre-mixes to the inner gas for the simultaneous multi-elemental determination of Cr, Mo, Ti and V in boron carbide and silicon nitride powders.375 The authors tested the use of these gases in the pyrolysis, atomization and clean-out stages of a GFAAS temperature programme and found that introduction during and just prior to the atomization step led to decreased memory effects and decreased peak tailing. The advantageous effects of the gases only occurred when used in conjunction with 2% hydrogen introduced to the outer argon flow during all of the GFAAS heating stages. Application of 1% CHClF2 (at a flow rate of 50 mL min−1) in the presence of 2% hydrogen in the purge gas yielded characteristic masses of 8.8, 17, 160, and 74 pg for Cr, Mo, Ti and V respectively. The proposed procedure was applied to an inter-laboratory comparison sample which the authors had digested prior to analysis.Karimov and co-workers developed an instrumental setup that was capable of multi-layer characterization of a Mo/(B)4C sample.376 The setup used energy dispersive X-ray reflectivity with a silicon drift detector and enabled high count rates (up to 5 × 105 counts per second) to be achieved. The quality of the experimental data enabled sample structure exploration to be achieved once a numerical procedure for experimental data fitting was used. The procedure was reported to be of low cost and rapid and, according to the authors, could have several industrial applications.3.4.2 Sample decomposition methods. This has been a relatively quiet area of research during this review period with only two applications being reported and a further application reporting the results of various leaching experiments. In the first application, Sahayam and co-workers used microwave irradiation in the presence of the minimum volume of sulfuric acid and then hydrofluoric and nitric acids to digest silicon nitride samples.377 Using 80 psi with ramp and hold times of 30 and 60 mins respectively (performed twice), it was found that 99.9% of the silicon matrix was removed as the tetrafluoride. The remaining analytes were then taken up and analyzed using reaction cell ICP-MS. For 12 analytes, the recoveries were in the range 80–100%. Blanks were reported to be low and method LODs were in the lower to sub ng g−1 range. In the second application, Packer and colleagues analyzed ceramics used in radiological dispersal devices.378 The ceramics strontium titanate and cerium dioxide were digested using nitric acid: hydrogen peroxide: hydrofluoric acid (16: 2: 1) and nitric acid: hydrogen peroxide (1: 4) respectively in a closed vessel microwave digestion apparatus. The analytical methods used included both ICP-OES and ICP-MS along with the reference method INAA that was used directly on the solid sample material. Results using ICP-OES/-MS were in good agreement with those by INAA demonstrating the efficiency of the digestion procedures.Curkovic and colleagues determined the leaching effects of different concentrations of hydrochloric and sulfuric acids at different temperatures on cold isostatically pressed, high purity alumina ceramics.379 Different concentrations of acids were tested at 25°C. Similarly, 0.65 M hydrochloric acid and 0.37 M sulfuric acid solutions were tested at 40, 50 and 70°C for 48 hours. The leachates were then analyzed using AAS where the analytes Al, Ca, Fe, Mg, Na and Si were determined. It was noted that leaching from the samples at room temperature decreased as the concentration of the acid solutions increased from 0.37 to 6.5 M.3.4.3 Analysis of archaeological materials. As discussed previously, the majority of these applications involved the use of solid sampling analysis, with XRF being the most prevalent by far. The trend for using chemometric analysis such as principle components analysis of the analytical data is still growing. The majority of the applications in this section, although interesting, do not usually give a significant advance in information from the atomic spectrometric viewpoint. They are therefore summarised in Table 7 rather than being discussed at length in the text. One paper of particular note was reported by Fernandez-Ruiz and Garcia-Heras.380 These authors compared TXRF with INAA using two different solid sampling approaches. For the solid sedimentation procedure, the TXRF technique enabled the analysis of the elemental composition with respect to the size fraction, but not the overall “average” concentrations. For the solid homogenization procedure, TXRF yielded precise (0.8–27% RSD depending on the analyte and concentration) and accurate (91–110% recovery) data. Overall, 15 elements were determined. For the solid sedimentation procedure, problems arising through the different particle sizes of the sample were found to be negligible for most analytes, but for three elements (As, Sr and Zn), problems were noted. These were attributed to interference effects of the mineral grain sizes. The solid homogenization procedure was found to be more useful for the study of archaeological materials.
Table 7 Analysis of archaeological materials

AnalyteMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationSample treatment/commentsReferenceApplications that have used chemometric techniquesVarious (15)Marajoara pubic coversEDXRF; -; SXRF system used consisted of a Si(Li) detector with a resolution of 180 eV at 5.9keV. PCA used on data to evaluate provenance of samples.381VariousMarajoara pubic covers and pigments from a sarcophagusEDXRF; -; SA similar study to reference.381 Again PCA used to study the provenance.382Various63 pieces of Yaozhou Celadon from two kilnsXRF; -; S20 pieces of porcelain from one kiln and 43 from a second were analyzed. Elements were determined by XRF (major components) and INAA (minor components). PCA and stepwise discriminant analysis used to establish provenance.383Various (14)67 shards of pottery from Dougga, TunisiaAES; F; L AES; ICP; LBoth supervised and un-supervised methods of chemometric analysis used on analytical data from three sources of pottery, i.e. African red slip ware, Dougga ware and African cooking ware. African cooking ware distinguishable from other two, but hard to distinguish between other two types.384VariousPotteryAES; ICP; LICP-AES as well as thermogravimetric and thermomechanical techniques used to analyze pottery from three Italian and one Libyan site. PCA used on analytical data. Results showed a good correlation between age and PC1.385VariousNeolithic pottery from Aegean and Asia MinorXRF; -; S188 samples analyzed using portable XRF. Data studied using PCA, hierarchical cluster analysis and model-based multivariate mixture of normals with an unknown number of components. The three chemometric methods were compared.386Other applicationsPbAncient glazed ceramicsMS; ICP; LIsotope ratio measurements made on 4% acetic acid leaches of glazes in an attempt to distinguish between ceramics from different ages, different areas and different workshops. Precision varied but was typically 0.2% for 206Pb/204Pb improving to 0.05% for 207Pb/206Pb. These precision values were found not to be a limiting factor. 20 sec read times per isotope enabled analysis times of less than six minutes.387Various (8)Decorated Neolithic pottery from Northern GreeceXRF; -; SSherds were separated into four decorative groupings (crusted, classic Dimini, cream on red and black on red). Different groups easily distinguishable from trace element data.388VariousAbbasid blue and white ware from Iraq and Chinese Sancai wareXRF; -; SSEM-EDS and SEM-WDS as well as semi-quantitative XRF used to analyze eight sherds of pottery from Iraq and seven vessels of Chinese Sancai ware.389VariousBronze age pottery of three distinct sortsXRF; -; SPottery from North Mesopotamia analyzed using assorted techniques including XRF, XRD, SEM-EDS and polarising microscopy. Standard and cooking pottery were found to be of typical middle Eastern construction, however, metallic ware pottery was found to be of much finer quality and had a very different mineralogy.390VariousPottery from CreteXRF; -; SXRF, XRD and NAA used to characterize pottery from late Minoan kiln at Haghia Triada in Crete was compared with pottery from a neighbouring contemporary kiln at Kommos. Ceramic fibres, raw materials, paste recipes and firing conditions examined. A surprising differentiation between the wares from the two kilns was observed.391VariousMedieval period pottery from ItalyXRF; -; SPottery of two sorts (vetrina sparsa and invetriata grezza) analyzed by XRF, XRD, SEM-EDS and other techniques. Two different types of pottery showed different firing characteristics from each other but production technology of both types over five centuries appeared to remain constant.392VariousChinese ancient porcelainXRF; -; SThe development of a micro-XRF system based on polycapillary X-ray optics for the non-destructive analysis of archaeological objects was described. The polycapillary optics could focus the primary X-ray beam down to tens of microns for non-destructive, local analysis. Analytical characteristics of the system were discussed.3933.4.4 Biomedical ceramics. Assorted forms of (hydroxyl) apatite materials have been used over the years and research in this area has continued unabated. Zhang and co-workers have reported a novel technique to synthesise hydroxyapatite whiskers with high crystallinity, uniform morphology and with a high aspect ratio.394 Using the reflux - hydrothermal combined method of preparation the authors determined the effects of the additives urea, citric acid and disodium EDTA as additives on the characteristics of the hydroxyapatite whiskers. Analytical techniques such as XRD, FTIR, SEM and ICP-OES were used for the characterization. It was found that the combined reflux - hydrothermal preparation method created larger aspect ratios, more uniform morphology, more pure phase compositions, had a shorter reaction time and used more mild conditions than either the reflux or the hydrothermal methods on their own. Urea was found to have the greatest effect on the material's characteristics. Structural characterization of Zn-substituted hydroxyapatite prepared by the hydrothermal method was reported by Li et al.395 These authors used XRF, XRD, FTIR and TEM for the characterization of the crystalline phase, microstructure, chemical composition, morphology and thermal stability. Results indicated that Zn-hydroxyapatite had a greater Zn substitution content when it was prepared using sodium hydroxide rather than ammonia solution. In addition, substitution of Zn for Ca caused a lower crystallinity and changed the lattice parameters since the ionic radius is smaller for Zn (0.074 nm) than for Ca (0.099 nm). Thermal stability also differed depending on the preparation conditions, with Zn-hydroxyapatite prepared using ammonia solution starting to decompose at 800°C when the Zn fraction increased to 15 mol %, whereas that prepared in sodium hydroxide solution started to decompose at only 5 mol% Zn. The electrochemical and structural characteristics of yttria stabilised zirconia/hydroxyapatite composite coatings on surgical-grade stainless steel were investigated by Balamurugan and colleagues.396 The materials, which were a product of sol-gel dip coating and calcinations, varied in molar ratio of hydroxyapatite and yttria stabilised zirconia, but all had an average particle size of 30 nm. Techniques such as FTIR, XRD and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDXA) were used during the structural characterization. The extent of corrosion of the materials in simulated body fluids was determined using IC-OES. Pekounov and Petrov have attempted to elucidate the amorphous to crystalline transition that occurs in the bio-mineralisation process.397 A stable calcium apatite precursor was synthesised in simulated body fluid and this was then transformed into a low crystalline apatite. Techniques such as XRD, FTIR, vacuum FTIR, ICP-OES, SEM and nitrogen adsorption experiments were used to characterize both the starting materials and the product. The authors observed that the product contained numerous bone-like features, including a lack of OH, nanometer size, low crystallinity, etc. and therefore concluded that the amorphous precursor appeared to be the essential step for the transition to occur.3.5 CatalystsFor the purposes of this review catalysts and catalyst function have been broadly categorised as follows: novel materials, hydrogen evolution reactions, hydrogenation reactions, oxidation and desulfurisation, NOx reductions and Perovskite catalysts, Fischer Tropsch reactions, ionic liquids as acid catalysts in organic synthesis and photocatalysts. Ionic liquids are a new addition to this review and there are several papers which outlined their applications and analysis. The reviewer predicts that their unique properties, coupled with sound environmental credentials, mean that they will become increasingly important in the field of catalysis. In addition, there is a short section outlining papers which address the recurring theme of catalyst deactivation by coke formation. Many of the papers in this review period deal primarily with the synthesis of catalysts and the investigation of their catalytic activity, with characterization by spectroscopic and physico-chemical techniques being described in brief. This review therefore concentrates on the broader field of catalyst preparation and characterization, but the first section considers papers which do have a significant analytical content, particularly XAFS and XANES techniques for the elucidation of atomic structures, valence state and coordination numbers of the catalytic materials and SIMS techniques for surface analysis of materials.3.5.1 Methods of analysis. In addition to the methods mentioned above, one paper on cavity ringdown spectroscopy is also reviewed. Synchrotron sources are also becoming more readily available and the utilization of these sources is described in detail in some of the papers reviewed. Also presented is a review paper by Myasoedova et al.398 which discussed the available sorbants for the preconcentration of noble metals.Transition metals and REE support materials play an important role in catalyst support development as well as being of interest for their luminescent, photoconductive, photorefractive, superconducting, laser action and magnetic properties. Nano-structured materials with different support characteristics are of interest in a wide range of catalytic applications including low-temperature catalytic combustion, partial oxidation of hydrocarbons, hydrogenation of carbon oxides, unsaturated hydrocarbons and reduction of NO, etc. For nanoparticles, support materials play an important role by providing a high reactive surface area, thermal stability, higher dispersion of nano-metallic particles, longer catalyst life and a structure sensitive base. For development of good nanocatalytic materials, the structures and environment of nanoparticles are critical and it is very important that the nanoparticles are properly stabilised in the support matrix. Bhargava et al.399 and references therein have reported that gold particles active in particular forms, environments, size ranges and distributions will catalyse certain types of reactions including oxidation, hydrogenation and hydrochlorination reactions with most being noticeably structure sensitive over supported gold catalysts. Supported nano-gold catalysts are typically used in the low-temperature, catalytic combustion and partial oxidation of hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, hydrogenation of carbon oxides and unsaturated hydrocarbons and reduction of nitric oxide. Nano-gold catalysts provide fast reaction rates, high selectivity, and low reaction temperature. This paper described a predominantly XAFS investigation of the structural properties of gold nanoparticles supported on different rare earth oxide (europium, dysprosium, samarium oxide, neodymium, gadolinium oxide, lanthanum) support materials. High purity europium, dysprosium, samarium oxide, neodymium, gadolinium oxide and lanthanum oxide materials containing various loading of gold nanoparticles were prepared by a range of methods. High-resolution X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) was utilised for investigating the atomic and molecular structures of supported nanoparticles on rare earth materials in order to elucidate variations in the local environment and structure around the gold atom. A range of data is presented, including atomic distances and Debye–Waller factor of gold nanoparticles supported on different rare earth oxide materials and these data, together with TEM and XANES data are discussed in detail. Platinum catalysts are excellent methanol oxidation catalysts and are used in direct methanol fuel cells. They are, however, susceptible to poisoning by CO whereas the PtRu alloys have been shown to exhibit a high tolerance to CO poisoning. Nitani et al.400 have employed XAFS to examine the atomic substructure, and other techniques to study PtRu nanoparticles supported on carbon for direct methanol fuel cells. The results from the analysis indicated a platinum rich core and a ruthenium rich shell. The coordination numbers were determined by XAFS and clear correlation was found between catalytic activity and Pt-Ru atomic pair frequency occurring on the catalyst surface. Sacaliuc and co-workers401 have reported the use of EXAFS and XANES in studies of highly dispersed gold nanoparticles in a Ti-SBA-15 mesoporous support. Detailed description of the results from these techniques and their use in establishing information on the characteristics of the gold and titanium particles was presented. Differences in catalytic activity have been attributed to the dispersion of titanium in the support and to the gold nanoparticle size.Synchrotron radiation (SR) X-ray fluorescence (XRF) microscopy is increasingly being used for environmental particle analysis as well as for characterization of nano-materials. X-ray beam sizes of the order of 50–500 nm are currently used at state-of-the-art synchrotron facilities for performing this type of trace-level analysis. Kawai and colleagues402 described the analysis of individual micrometer size particles of TiO2 photocatalyst by SR-XRF and SEM. Electron beam excited and synchrotron radiation induced X-ray emission spectra of the same yellow sand single particles are reported and compared. The Ti-K edge absorption fine structure of single microparticles of TiO2 (rutile, anatase and a photocatalyst aerosol) were recorded by using monochromatic synchrotron radiation of tunable energy. The authors have shown that discrimination between rutile and anatase is possible. Based on the single particle speciation, the toxicity of photocatalyst aerosol powder was discussed. Three-way type automotive catalytic converters (ACCs), which deal with the three most important pollutants in vehicle exhaust (CO, NOx, and unburned or partially burned hydrocarbons), are usually based on a honeycomb monolith made of cordierite (2MgO·2Al2O3·5SiO2). This material is wash coated with a mixture of alumina, CeO2, ZrO2, precious metals (Pt, Pd, Rh) and Ba- or La-oxides. The precious metals are the most important components of the ACCs, since the catalytic activity occurs at the precious metal centre. It is generally agreed that Rh promotes the NOx dissociation, while Pt and Pd promote the oxidation reaction. It is important to be able to quantify precious metals in catalysts which are recycled but there are few papers detailing the quantitation of these metals in ACCs. A fast and direct determination procedure for precious metals in spent automotive catalyst has now been reported.403 Van Meel et al. described the use of high-energy polarized-beam XRF to determine platinum group metals (PGM) in ACCs. A sample preparation method working directly on material which had been ground was optimized. The primary goal was to obtain a fast method with as simple a sample preparation procedure as possible, without losing analytical performance compared with ICP-OES. EDXRF has the benefit of (in most cases) easy sample preparation and multi-element capabilities. When using a high-energy polarizing-beam EDXRF (HE-P-EDXRF) equipped with secondary targets, additional benefits include low background and better excitation of heavy elements. In this work, a method was developed to analyze the ACC in the form of pressed powder pellets using HE-P-EDXRF equipment. For the sake of simplicity of sample preparation, no internal standard was added and Compton correction for matrix effects was used. The accuracy was established by comparing the results of the analysis of many samples with a highly validated ICP-OES technique. A 2-sided t-test at the 95% confidence level confirmed the data were equivalent to the results from the validated ICP technique and 3σ detection limits were in the single figure ppm range. TiO2 catalysts are important photocatalysts but are only around 3% efficient. Their efficiency can be increased by doping with V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, C, N or S atoms. The photocatalytic role of vanadium doped in mesoporous TiO2 has not been clarified and Izumi et al.404 described valence state-sensitive XAFS as a means to monitor the V sites in mesoporous TiO2 for ethanol dehydration under equilibrium in-situ conditions and visible light-illumination. The feasibility of discriminating VIV sites from a 1:1 physical mixture of standard VIV and VV inorganic compounds was demonstrated. The chemical shift between VIV and VV sites was 1.0 eV. The redox states for ethanol dehydration over mesoporous TiO2 excited in visible light were suggested to be VIII and VIV. The chemical shift between valence states VIII and VIV was greater (3.2 eV). On the basis of V Kß5,2 emission and V Kß5,2-selecting XAFS spectra tuned to the V Kß5,2 peak, the authors determined that the fresh mesoporous V-TiO2 catalyst has a valence state of VIV. The vanadium sites were partially reduced by the dissociative adsorption of ethanol under visible light, but they stayed within the emission-energy ranges for standard VIV compounds. These partially reduced vanadium sites were reoxidized in oxygen under visible light. Finally, direct XAFS observation of photo-reduced VIII sites was attempted by tuning the spectrometer to 5456.3 eV for partially reduced mesoporous V-TiO2.. Valence state VIII was selected for 60% of the spectrum in the mixture of VIII (minor) and VIV (dominant) valence states. The minimisation of interferences prior to the determination of noble metals in geological samples by conventional elemental analysis techniques including ICP-MS and ETAAS is important to achieve the required levels of accuracy and sufficiently low detection limits. Myasoedova et al.398 presented a review of available sorbents used for the preconcentration of noble metals in geological matrices, together with a description of the major instrumental features used for their determination after preconcentration. One of the most commonly used catalyst supports, particularly in the oil and petrochemical industries, is amorphous alumina, owing to its physical, thermal and chemical properties. These catalysts are largely applied for isomerization of olefins, paraffin, alkyl aromatics, alkylation of aromatics with alcohols, olefins oligomerization and catalytic cracking. However, catalyst deactivation is a problem in many industrial catalytic processes. Deactivation can occur by a number of different chemical and physical mechanisms, which are commonly divided into four classes: i) poisoning, ii) coking or fouling, iii) sintering and iv) phase transformation. Other mechanisms of deactivation include masking and loss of the active elements via volatilization, erosion and attrition. The presence of trace elements, such as Cd, Pb and Cu among others, in catalysts can affect their performance and the quality of products. Although limited information about the effect of trace contaminants on catalysts is available, some studies have indicated that even small amounts of these contaminants deposited onto the catalyst surface may cause strong chemisorption on the active sites resulting in significant loss of catalytic activity. Trace elements in digests of alumina based materials have been determined by various techniques including GFAAS, ICP-OES and ICP-MS. However, the sample preparation step can introduce serious limitations in the analytical performance of these techniques mainly because of contamination, the time required and difficulties in sample digestion. Rodrigues and colleagues405 reported that direct solid sampling GFAAS can offer several advantages, especially when it is applied for the analysis of high purity materials. Potential advantages include the low risk of contamination, small sample mass requirement, no or only very little reagent consumption and low LOD (generally < 1 μg g−1). This technique has already been successfully applied for trace element determination in materials that are particularly difficult to digest, such as zirconium, niobium, and aluminum oxide powders (see references therein). The authors reported on the effects of the various experimental parameters including pyrolysis conditions and sample mass and suggest that several elements in alumina based materials could be quantified using aqueous standards. Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) has been applied to the investigation of the deactivation processes of hydrochlorination catalysts by Grams et al.406 A model catalyst of palladium on alumina was used in these studies and ToF-SIMS was able to monitor various parameters associated with catalyst deactivation simultaneously. This technique was employed primarily as it yields surface information which is complementary to other techniques, particularly XPS, XRD, temperature programmed reduction (TPR), TEM and SEM. The aim of this work was to demonstrate the suitability of ToF-SIMS to investigate the catalyst surface and establish the reasons for its deactivation during hydrodechlorination. Pd on alumina is widely used as a catalyst for removal of chlorine from halogenated substances which may be damaging to the environment. Unfortunately, it is susceptible to deactivation. In this work the reasons for this deactivation were investigated and found to be several fold, including a significant deposition of chlorine on the surface. The chlorine was shown by ToF-SIMS to be present as Pd-Cl bonds on the active surface and was demonstrated to be in the form of PdCl− and PdCl2−. A quantitative comparison of fresh and used catalyst showed that there was a significant increase in these species in the used catalyst. This was also accompanied by a significant reduction in the surface accessible Pd and a decrease in surface area of the catalyst. ToF-SIMS surface images are shown in this paper and allow a visual observation as well as a quantitative analysis of the deterioration of the catalyst. Zinc oxide
nanowires are expected to make a significant impact in optoelectronics because of the wide band gap and high exciton energy of this material. The catalyst and growth mechanism have been found to play an important role in the orientation, dimensions and defect density of the nanowires. The effect that the catalyst and its residue will have on the electrical properties of the zinc oxide nanowire is unknown but it is likely to have a significant impact. Morris and co-workers407 have employed SIMS depth profiling analysis for the spatial determination of gold residue in these nanowires, together with EDXRF and SEM. 500eV caesium near surface mass spectra were obtained and typical depth profiles from the nanowire materials were shown. These results showed the distribution of Au through the nanowire and the authors were able to propose an alternate growth mechanism (vapour-solid mechanism) to the anticipated vapour-liquid-solid growth mechanism. Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) are promising power sources for many applications requiring high power and long operating times. Several prototype systems have been developed although there are issues with long term durability of the membrane electrode assembly. Pt-Ru alloys are thought to be the most practical anode materials for these applications due to favourable catalytic activity, though their activity is strongly dependent on the composition, structure, morphology and particle size. Gyeong-Su Park et al.408 described the use of high resolution TEM, XPS and ToF-SIMS for the study of the durability of Pt-Ru anode catalysts under DMFC operating conditions. Beautiful images, particularly ToF-SIMS mapping images of Ru in the cathode materials, are presented in this paper. EDS results on the cathodes did not reveal the presence of ruthenium but the SIMS images did show clear evidence of Ru crossover through the decomposition of the Pt-Ru catalysts. This was clearly illustrated by the Ru accumulation at the cathode surface and this was related linearly with the performance drop. Platinum crossover from the anode was also demonstrated, and associated morphological changes of the Pt-Ru particles. This was also correlated to performance drop. Johansson et al.409 have demonstrated the use of cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS) to probe reaction intermediates desorbing from the surface during a heterogeneous catalytic reaction. In understanding catalysis and combustion, intermediates play a critical role in the overall description of reaction paths, elementary reaction rates and soot formation. Many such processes, including soot formation, involve radicals and small molecules. The radicals are often very reactive and short-lived and, therefore, exist in low concentrations, which makes them difficult to detect and quantify. The development of laser spectroscopic techniques has opened new opportunities to probe such molecules. The OH radical is, in general, an important intermediate in combustion, and is also crucial in catalytic water formation from hydrogen and oxygen. The OH molecules are formed on the catalytic surface and rapidly react to form water. Hydrogen fuel cells use hydrogen as fuel and oxygen as the oxidant that, on the cathode, react to form water. If the surface temperature is sufficiently high (>900 K) during catalytic water formation, a small fraction of OH molecules can desorb into the gas phase and be probed using laser spectroscopy. Laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) is a sensitive technique for diagnostics, imaging, and measuring relative concentrations. This method can also be used to determine rotational temperature distributions of species in combustion systems by probing several resonances. Determination of quantitative concentrations is important for successful comparisons with simulations. Absolute number densities give valuable information when determining rate constants and are preferred for a detailed understanding of the complex chemistry on the catalytic surface. To complement the extensive LIF studies and to encourage further modelling of the H2/O2 system, the abundance of OH outside of a polycrystalline platinum catalyst was quantified using CRDS. This method is a highly sensitive absorption method well suited for measuring reaction intermediates in trace amounts. The only pre-requisites for CRDS to work are that the species of interest absorb light at an accessible wavelength and that there is no interference from other species at this wavelength. This technique, in contrast to LIF, can also be applied even if the excited state of the probed molecule does not fluoresce. Because of its long absorption path length, CRDS is also much more sensitive than conventional absorption methods such as FTIR. This paper described the principles of the technique in some detail and is a good introduction to the theory of CRDS. The authors presented results quantifying hydroxyl radicals from a platinum catalyst using CRDS and compared them with results from a LIF experiment under the same conditions. Differences were observed and possible reasons for the differences were presented. An organotin which was grafted on to cross linked polystyrene has been synthesized and characterized by 1 and 2 dimensional proton, 13C and 119Sn high resolution MAS NMR.410 Its catalytic activity was assessed and detailed analysis of 119Sn HRMAS NMR under various chemical conditions mimicking the reaction mixtures allowed an insight into the catalysis mechanism.3.5.2 Novel materials. This section of the review covers papers which discuss more novel catalytic materials, for example in self-cleaning high value steel products.411 Here TiO2 thin films were deposited using two different precursor systems, and their photocatalytic activities studied in the context of the feasibility of their photo-catalysed self-cleaning properties. SiO2 layers deposited using flame-assisted chemical vapour deposition were investigated as possible barrier layers to prevent diffusion of substrate components into the TiO2 films. The films were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), sputtered neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS), Raman spectroscopy and SEM. Photo-activity was characterized by the UV-induced destruction of stearic acid layers. These techniques were employed to characterize the deposited layers and to understand their mode of activity and were discussed in detail by the authors. Ultrafine amorphous alloy particles (UAAP) constitute an overlapping area of amorphous alloys and nanophase materials and hence attract a great deal of attention due to their interesting intrinsic properties, e.g., short-range order, long-range disorder and high dispersion, as well as their potential applications in powder metallurgy, magnetic materials, catalysts and ferrofluids, higher activity, better selectivity and stronger poison resistance in many hydrogenation reactions.412 Ultrafine amorphous alloy particles have properties that are of interest in catalysis including: (i) the presence of a large number of surface coordinatively unsaturated sites, (ii) the lack of crystal defects, and (iii) the isotropic, single phase nature of the materials. Examples of UAAP include M–B (where M = Fe, Co or Ni), Ni–P, Co–P, Fe–P–B (where M = Cr, Co or Ni), Ni–P–B, Fe–Co–B, Fe–Ni–B, Ni–Co–B as well as ultrafine crystalline particles of Co, Co2B or Co(BO2)2, and Fe, Fe2B, Mg, Al, Ni, Pd and Cu. The objective of this work was to achieve an understanding on the effects of preparative methods on the surface properties of Fe–P amorphous alloy catalysts. Dehydrogenation of ethanol was chosen as a test reaction to probe the catalytic behaviour. Emphasis was placed on using different iron precursors and solvents which, in combination with characterization techniques, would reveal its influence on the morphology and catalytic activity of Fe–P alloys. The characterization techniques which were employed included XRD and the sample was scanned over the range 2θ = 20–60 at a rate of 0.05/min to identify the amorphous nature. Samples for XRD were prepared as thin layers on a sample holder. Elemental analysis using ICP-OES was carried out on the Fe–P samples to study the effect of preparation method on the compositions of the samples. N2 sorption isotherms were measured at −197°C using a Micromeritics ASAP 2010 instrument. The measurement of the surface areas of the samples was achieved using BET for relative pressures in the range P/P0 = 0.05–0.2. The morphology and particle size of the samples were determined by TEM. XPS spectra were also obtained to calculate the binding energies of the Fe–P catalysts. A full discussion of all these techniques was presented in the paper.3.5.3 Hydrogen evolution reaction. One of the most important processes for generation of hydrogen from water from renewable sources, now and in the foreseeable future, is electrolysis. The conventional process is alkaline electrolysis, which has been in commercial use for more then 80 years. Since hydrogen generated by electrolysis uses electrical power it is a challenge to make this process economically more acceptable. Nickel and nickel-based electrodes are mainly employed in industrial water electrolysis because of their good electrocatalytic ability for hydrogen evolution, corrosion resistance to the strongly alkaline environment and low price. Nevertheless, significant deactivation of commercial cathodes in long-term exploitation has been observed. Since overall energy efficiency of electrolysis is depended on hydrogen evolution kinetics, optimization of cathode polarization performances has become one of the most important subjects in electrochemistry. Kaninski et al.413 investigated two types of intermetallic compounds, TiPt and MoPt2 as cathode materials. They also investigated the addition of various ionic activators into the electrolyte. A qualitative comparison of electrocatalytic efficiency was carried out. Results showed the Tafel slope, the exchange current density, the overpotential needed for a fixed hydrogen production rate and the apparent energy of activation. Kinetic parameters revealed advanced catalytic ability of the MoPt2 over the TiPt cathode towards hydrogen evolution reaction. Also, a significant improvement was achieved by using an ionic activator. The presence of Mo and Co species attached to the cathode surface was confirmed by XRF analysis. Thus, enhanced catalytic activity was assigned to the formation of a Mo–Co-based electrodeposit from the ionic activator. Results suggested significant catalytic performance of the MoPt2 cathode especially if used with an ionic activator in alkaline water electrolysis.Hydrogen is also an important raw material for the chemical industry; it is mainly consumed for ammonia production, followed by refining and methanol production. Additionally, hydrogen is a clean and sustainable energy source, which can be used as fuel for transportation and power generation with fuel cells. Currently, hydrogen is mainly produced by the catalytic steam reforming of natural gas, oil-derived naphtha, partial oxidation of heavy oils and coal gasification. However, the production of hydrogen from fossil fuels will increase the emission of carbon dioxide. Because of this, the use of biomass as a feedstock for hydrogen production or as an energy source is attracting considerable attention. Wang et al.414 have investigated the use of novel metal doped catalysts of {Ca24Al28O64}4+·4O−/M (C12A7-O−/M, M = Mg, K, Ce). The features of the steam reforming of the bio-oil were measured in a fixed-bed continuous flow reactor, including the effects of temperature, the metal-doped content the S/C ratio (the ratio of mol steam to mol carbon feed) on the hydrogen yield, carbon conversion (moles carbon in production gases to moles of carbon feed) and the distributions of the products. The catalyst giving the highest hydrogen yield and carbon conversion was reported. Catalyst deactivation was predominantly caused by cooling and ways of regeneration were discussed. The catalyst characteristics and the intermediate species formed in the steam reforming processes were investigated by a range of techniques, which are fully discussed in the paper. These included XRD, XPS, ICP-OES and FT-IR measurements. Of note, XPS was employed to investigate the atomic states, their compositions on the catalyst surfaces and carbon depositing during the steam reforming of the bio-oil. XPS measurements were made using Mg Ka primary radiation (15 keV, 10 mA). The normalized XPS intensities, which are proportional to the effective concentrations of the corresponding elements on the surface layer, were determined as the integrated peak areas divided by their corresponding sensitivity factors. FTIR was employed to investigate the intermediate species on the C12A7-O−/18% Mg surface formed during the process of the steam reforming. An optimum catalyst was described and suggestions for further improvements were made.3.5.4 Hydrogenation. The selective hydrogenation of the carbonyl group in α,β-unsaturated aldehydes is an important target for research in catalysis and the industrial production of fine chemicals. Its desired products, allyl alcohols, are of significant importance for the fragrance, food and pharmaceutical industry. Reduction of an α,β-unsaturated aldehyde, e.g. crotonaldehyde, leads to three main products. Hydrogenation of the C=C bond leads to formation of the saturated aldehyde (butyraldehyde), while reducing the carbonyl group yields the desired unsaturated alcohol (crotyl alcohol). As a result of full hydrogenation of the molecule, the saturated alcohol (butanol) is formed. This reaction is most often carried out with group VIII metal catalysts, especially platinum. However, hydrogenation of the C=O bond is not favoured thermodynamically and catalysts require modifications in order to improve the selectivity towards formation of the unsaturated alcohol. Ruppert and Paryjczak241 have investigated Pt/ZrO2/TiO2 catalysts with different zirconia loadings for the gas phase hydrogenation of crotonaldehyde. These catalysts were subjected to low- and high-temperature calcination (200 and 400 °C) and a range of reduction temperatures (200–600°C). Pt/TiO2 was used as a reference system. The catalysts were characterized by TPR, XPS, SEM, HR TEM, ToF-SIMS and H2, O2 and CO chemisorption after different stages of thermal pre-treatments. The relationships between catalytic activity, selectivity towards crotyl alcohol and physicochemical properties of the catalysts were examined and the authors attempted to understand the relationship between the aforementioned physicochemical properties of the catalysts and their behaviour in crotonaldehyde hydrogenation. The comparison of catalysts calcined at different temperatures was of special interest, as this subject has not been thoroughly pursued in the literature to date. This paper discussed the analytical techniques in some detail. The platinum-titania catalysts, modified with the addition of zirconia into the support, were found to retain the good selectivity towards the C=O bond hydrogenation, associated with the formation of Pt–TiOx interfacial active sites. Loss of catalytic activity was avoided due to the second oxide, which controlled the titania migration. The most favourable properties in crotonaldehyde hydrogenation were achieved for the catalyst containing 30% ZrO2 in the support, calcined at 200 °C and reduced at 500 °C. While the effects of high-temperature reduction on the properties of catalysts on reducible supports have been widely described, much less was known about the influence of calcination temperature. In this case, higher selectivity was obtained on the Pt/ZrO2/TiO2 catalyst calcined at lower temperature. This was explained by the formation of an oxidised platinum phase with smaller particle sizes, which allows for more TiOx migration onto the metal surface during high-temperature reduction, which follows calcination. Therefore, by careful choice of the support composition and pretreatment temperatures, the surface coating of platinum with titania was kept at the optimum level to provide high selectivity towards crotyl alcohol without the loss of catalytic activity.3.5.5 Hydrogen sulfide oxidation. Recently the catalytic effects of composite materials have been investigated because of the possibility of multi-functional applications. Mixing materials or creating their nanoscale assemblies very often leads to a synergetic effect in such processes as catalysis, gas storage or drug delivery mechanisms. The processes involved in formation of nano-composites are often time consuming and material demanding which ultimately increase their cost. An interesting route to developing composite materials is based on utilization of wastes, such a polystyrene, clays exposed to heavy metal adsorption or waste clays applied for removal of organic compounds in food production processes (from vegetable oil). In addition, fly ash or ash produced during the burning of fossil fuel, mainly coal, has found interesting applications in composite materials. Seredych and Bandosz415 have focused on development of sewage sludge-based adsorbents for desulfurization from gas phase effluents. It was shown that materials, which are the mixtures of inorganic oxides such as calcium, magnesium, iron, copper and carbon phase are excellent adsorbents for H2S removal from moist air. This happens because of a high dispersion of calcium species, which provide the basic pH necessary for dissociation of hydrogen sulfide followed by oxidation of HS− ions by active oxygen. Iron, on the other hand, activates oxygen and takes part in the electron transfer process (Fe3+/Fe2+). The presence of a carbonaceous phase, even non-microporous, contributes to the dispersion of a sludge-based catalytic phase and provides space for storage of the oxidation product, elemental sulfur. The authors reported that mixing sewage sludge with spent mineral oil resulted in 20% higher capacity for H2S removal than that obtained on the material derived from unmodified sludge. The differences in the performances were attributed to the subtle changes in an organic phase, since the general composition of the inorganic phase seemed not to be affected. The objective of this work was to demonstrate a unique nanostructure and chemistry of sewage sludge derived adsorbents and its effect on the catalytic performance. As examples the materials carbonized between 650°C and 950°C were chosen as media on the surfaces of which reactive adsorption of hydrogen sulfide occurs. The development of a catalytic surface was presented not only as a function of pyrolysis temperature but also of pyrolysis time. Both these factors were found to be crucial for thermal activation of sewage sludge derived materials. The analytical techniques employed in studying these materials (thermal analysis, XRD, XRF, SEM-EDX and TEM) were described in the paper. The authors concluded that complex waste products such as sludges may be used as precursors for composite catalytic materials with sophisticated nano-features. After thermal treatment their surface was found to be a mixture of carbon nanostructures, with an active inorganic phase, highly dispersed within the surface layer of amorphous carbon.3.5.6 NOX reductions and Perovskite catalysts. The selective catalytic reduction of nitrogen oxides by hydrocarbons offers an attractive alternative to NH3-selective catalytic reduction technology. The system of Ag/Al2O3-hydrocarbons for the reduction of NOx has been widely reported for its high selectivity. However, the activity of Ag/Al2O3 at low temperatures needs to be improved for practical usage. Xie et al.416 have shown that the addition of 0.01 wt% Pd into the 5 wt% Ag catalyst (denoted as Ag-Pd/Al2O3) increases its catalytic activity for the reduction of NOx at low temperatures; however, this work has also shown the weak sulfur tolerance of the Ag-Pd/Al2O3 catalyst in the presence of SO2. The tolerance of metal oxide-based catalysts to SO2 depends on the type and oxidation state of the deposited metal, the nature of the support and the kind of reductants. The suppression effect of SO2 on the activity of Ag/alumina mounted on a cordierite substrate was attributed to the formation of sulfate on the catalyst. The authors discussed previous work on the promotion of the selective catalytic reduction of NOx process by SO2 over Ag/Al2O3 using C3H6/C3H8 as the reductant. This work has shown that the dispersion of metal particles on the support was an important factor in the oxidation of SO2, and that the activity of NO reduction to nitrogen and ammonia over the Pt and Pd catalysts was completely suppressed by the presence of very low levels of SO2. They discussed work showing that under oxidizing conditions the sulfur storage capability of the support in the form of sulfate directly affected the catalyst resistance to poisoning. However, the sulfate species characterization was insufficient and conclusive information of the effect of SO2 on the catalysts was not available due to the difference of reported results. To obtain more information on the sulfur resistance of these catalysts, the present study was conducted to reveal the SO2 deactivating mechanism of Ag-Pd/Al2O3 during C3H6 reduction of NOx. The authors examined the time dependence of the activity of the reduction of NOx on SO2 when SO2 was added into the feed gas. Temperature programmed desorption (TPD) was used to identify the surface sulfate species. In-situ diffuse reflectance infra-red fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) was used to detect the effect of SO2 on the formation of key intermediates such as -NCO, enolic species, and NO3− under different reaction conditions. Two kinds of sulfate species were found on the SO2 poisoned Ag-Pd/Al2O3 catalyst, and the formation of nitrate was blocked by these surface sulfate species. The addition of Pd into Ag/Al2O3 promoted the formation of sulfate on the Ag sites in the presence of SO2, which was considered to be the possible reason for the weak sulfur resistance of Ag-Pd/Al2O3. Experiments showed that the initial NOx conversion in the absence of SO2 over Ag-Pd/Al2O3 and Ag/Al2O3 was 96% and 91%, respectively. When SO2 was introduced into the feed gas stream, the NOx conversion over both catalysts decreased in the first 2 h. The NOx conversion was stable at 12% over Ag-Pd/Al2O3 catalyst in the presence of SO2, which was much lower than the stable NOx conversion of 63% over Ag/Al2O3. These results revealed that Ag-Pd/Al2O3 is less resistant to sulfur than Ag/Al2O3. It was suggested that the addition of noble metals may not be an appropriate method for improving the SO2 resistance of Ag/Al2O3.Removal of CO, CHx, NO, SOx, and other compounds from exhaust combustion sources is a major challenge for environmental protection. Hueso et al.417 have explored the possibility of the combination of catalysts and plasmas to induce specific reactions under much milder thermal conditions than are usually required. In this paper, the authors used a mixed plasma plus catalyst system in an attempt to achieve the oxidation of CO into CO2. Their results demonstrated the synergetic effects of CO plasma plus catalyst oxidation at low temperatures. Two types of catalysts were used; a commercial high-specific surface area SiO2 catalyst and a Perovskite-type catalyst prepared in-house, and these were detailed in the paper. The latter choice was dictated by the fact that Perovskite catalysts are well-known catalysts for CO and CH4 oxidation reactions. The SiO2 catalyst was used for comparative purposes to evaluate the hypothesis proposed in several papers that the porosity of the catalyst controls the efficiency of the plasma plus catalyst systems. The main focus of this investigation with complex gas mixtures containing NO, CH4 and O2 was to understand the chemical and plasma processes involved in the removal of NO and the conversion of CO (a primary product of the plasma reaction) into CO2 when the plasma is used in conjunction with a Perovskite catalyst. The active species in the plasma were characterized by optical emission spectroscopy and various mechanisms were proposed. The catalyst - plasma interactions were investigated by in-situ by XPS. An elegant experimental design which allowed the catalyst materials to be exposed to different plasma gases during XPS characterization was also described.3.5.7 Fischer–Tropsch. The Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) has been previously studied using catalysts of iron supported on different substrates, including SiO2, Al2O3, MgO and zeolites. Bengoa and co-workers418 and references therein stated that it is well known that in these systems it is very difficult to reach a complete metal reduction when the iron loading is lower than 10% (w/w). In these cases, intermediate iron species are present on the fresh reduced catalyst in addition to Fe0 and the role played by these intermediate species in the synthesis is still unknown. To perform studies on this system it was necessary to have a support that allowed complete iron reduction in order to be used as a reference; the authors used a carbon support because of its low metal-support interaction. Some reactions involved in FTS are dependent on the metal crystal size, so it was necessary to prepare catalysts with similar Fe0 crystal diameters in order to avoid the influence of this parameter and this was described in detail. In order to determine the effect of the intermediate iron reduced species on the activity and selectivity on the FTS, two Fe/C catalysts with different degrees of iron reduction were prepared, catalytically tested and the results correlated with their structural properties. The authors described in detail the production of these catalysts and the analyses employed for their characterization. Mössbauer spectroscopy at 298 K and low temperatures, X-ray diffraction (XRD), CO chemisorption, atomic absorption spectroscopy and N2 adsorption (BET) were used to characterize the solids. It was concluded that two catalysts with different iron species and degrees of reduction were obtained, starting from two precursors with the same iron species but with different crystal sizes. It was also demonstrated that the presence of an intermediate reduction species in the reduced fresh catalyst, Fe3O4 leads to the formation of a non-stoichiometric carbide, which is less stable, more active and more selective towards olefins than χ-Fe5C2 carbide. The authors concluded that it was not desirable to reduce the iron to its metallic state completely, since this species leads only to χ-Fe5C2 carbide during the FTS.An important goal of Fischer-Tropsch (FT) research is the design of selective supported catalysts to yield a specific hydrocarbon range. The nature of the support strongly influences the metal catalytic properties for the CO hydrogenation and inert oxides such as SiO2 and Al2O3 have been used. However, Cagnoli et al.419 and references therein reported interesting results when reducible oxides like TiO2 and Nb2O5 are used. In these systems the product selectivity was observed to change, depending on the reduction temperature. In this way, metal catalysts supported on niobia showed a higher selectivity towards long chain saturated hydrocarbons compared with the alumina supported ones. In a Co/Nb2O5 system, these results were explained by the formation of new catalytic sites involving the metal and the partially reduced support during high temperature reduction through the strong metal support interaction effect (SMSI). However, for CO hydrogenation it was reported that the SMSI effect was destroyed during the reaction itself, because of the presence of water. This effect was stable in Nb2O5 systems and the activity was not completely reversed but the selectivity was drastically changed after high temperature reduction. Therefore, in these systems the SMSI effect remains during the FT reaction. Iron is another metal commonly used in the FT reaction and is cheaper than Co. When it is supported, however, it does not yield long chain hydrocarbons. In this paper the authors studied the feasibility of using the SMSI effect to improve the selectivity towards longer chain hydrocarbons (>C5). They reported the influence of the structural and catalytic properties of a Fe/Nb2O5 system reduced at different temperatures on the FT synthesis of hydrocarbons. In this work Mössbauer spectroscopy was used in a controlled hydrogen atmosphere at both room temperature and at low temperatures. Other techniques used to characterize the solids included X-ray diffraction (XRD), CO chemisorption, atomic absorption spectroscopy, N2 adsorption (BET method), volumetric oxidation and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Both the analytical and catalytic experimental designs are explained in detail. These studies have shown that that this is a very complex system. The beneficial effect of the SMSI on selectivity was observed for c698-Fe/Nb2O5 since the C12–C14 production was increased over the values predicted by the Anderson-Schultz-Flory (ASF) model. This effect was more pronounced in c773-Fe/Nb2O5 since not only the ASF model deviation was higher but also the “breakpoint” of this distribution was shifted towards higher molecular weight hydrocarbons.3.5.8 Ionic liquids. Acid catalyzed acylation reactions are widely used in synthesizing important industrial and pharmaceutical molecules. Many such reactions are performed using acid anhydrides or acyl chlorides in the presence of stoichiometric amounts of amine. Protic and Lewis acids are well documented catalysts for such acylation reactions. However, using acetic anhydride as acetylating agent and soluble bases or acids as reagents or catalysts causes significant difficulties in the recovery of the catalyst and by-products, leading to <50% atom economy in the consumption of acetic anhydride. Consequently, new methods to overcome these problems are of current interest. One such method involves the use of insoluble solid acids. However, in this case the reaction rate is small, and the acetylating agent is still acetic anhydride. Another solution involves metal triflates; however, in this case, although acetic acid is used as acylating agent and the atom economy is high, the catalyst is soluble and difficult to recover from the products. Because of these disadvantages, simplification of the acylation reaction through the design of new strong heterogeneous acid catalysts that can replace the conventional hazardous liquid- or traditional waste-generating Lewis-acid catalysts is very important. In this context, room temperature ionic liquids are attracting special interest as acid catalysts in organic syntheses. However, the use of biphasic systems requires relatively large amounts of ionic liquid, which may create some economic and toxicologic issues. Therefore, it is desirable to minimize the amount of ionic liquid used. Coman and co-workers420 reported the immobilization of ionic liquids on stable, high-surface area materials. Their work combined the properties of ionic liquids and metal triflates and proposed new catalysts in which complex metal triflate-ionic liquid systems are immobilized onto MS41 mesoporous supports using a grafting method. They provided green, stable, recyclable heterogeneous catalysts for the acylation of amines (with acetic acid) and sulfonamides (with acetic anhydride) under green conditions and with very high atom economy. The synthesis of these green catalysts is described and their characterization by a range of techniques is fully discussed. Characterization techniques include proton NMR, powder XRD, surface area and mesoporous volume, TEM and DRIFTS. Binding energies of the main elements, together with nitrogen:silicon ratios were investigated by XPS, quantitation of the inorganic elements was by ICP-OES, and the organic species were quantified by TGA. The resulting materials proved to be efficient catalysts for the acylation of amines under green conditions and with a very high atom economy by directly using acetic, propionic, and butyric acids as acylating agents instead of acid anhydride. The reactions were carried out under mild reaction conditions. These materials are also suitable catalysts for the synthesis of N-acylsulfonamides from sterically and electronically diverse aromatic substrates, but in that case, acylation was possible only with acetic anhydride.3.5.9 Photocatalysis. The photocatalytic purification of water by light activated semiconductor particles has proven to be a useful process which leads to the mineralization of pollutants. The direct band-gap excitation of semiconductors generates electron-hole pairs which participate in reduction and oxidation processes. High surface area anatase has been reported to be a suitable photocatalyst by itself or if it is structurally modified e.g. by doping, co-deposition of metals, surface chelating, mixing of two semiconductors or coated with an insulating oxide layer. The disadvantage of TiO2 is that it mainly absorbs UV light, which covers only 4–6% of the solar spectrum. Fe2O3 with a band-gap of 2.3 eV is a good candidate to absorb visible light and therefore Bandara et al.421 have used this as a photocatalyst supported on Raschig glass rings by electrostatic attachment. This was used for the photodegradation of pollutants in water with 4-chlorophenol and orange II being used as model compounds. Analysis of the aqueous solutions was carried out by UV-vis spectroscopy using a photodiode array spectrometer and total organic carbon (TOC) was measured to assess the extent of degradation of organics. The catalysts were analyzed using XPS, TEM, gas absorption studies, atomic absorption spectroscopy and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS). Quantitative XPS was employed to determine the extent of adsorption of various species on the catalyst surface and the stability of the active Fe species was elucidated. A series of phosphate-modified titanium dioxide samples (P-TiO2) with varying P/Ti atomic ratio was prepared by a sol-gel method.422 The influence of the surface-bound phosphate on the structural behaviour of the titania samples was studied by XPS, XRD and nitrogen sorption measurements. The ratio of the numbers of P and Ti atoms was compared using XPS and ICP-OES. In each of the samples the P/Ti ratio was greater than expected from the chemical composition or found by ICP-OES. Taking into account the surface sensitivity of the XPS it was concluded that the surface region was richer in P than the bulk phase. A practically constant P/Ti ratio was determined at different X-ray incident angles for the P-TiO2/0.05 sample, which means that the P-abundant layer is thicker than the escape depth of the P 2p electrons from the sample. The analysis of this material is discussed in detail by the authors. Palladium based catalysts provide efficient and selective reduction of several drinking water contaminants, including nitrate, but their long term usage requires an effective regeneration protocol. Chaplin and colleagues423 have reported the regeneration of sulfur fouled bimetallic palladium based catalysts. A range of regeneration procedures were tried following catalyst deactivation with sulfide. These included the use of dissolved oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, sodium hypochlorite and hot air. Hypochlorite and hot air were found to effectively restore nitrate reduction rates. ICP-MS showed that hypochlorite caused dissolution of Cu from the Pd–Cu catalyst but a Pd–In catalyst was stable. XPS showed that PdS and InS complexes formed during fouling and that regeneration with hypochlorite converts some S2− to S6+ with a corresponding increase in nitrate reduction rates. Izumi et al.424 employed XANES for the study of photo-oxidation over mesoporous V-TiO2 catalyst. This allowed a specific redox reaction mechanism to be proposed between V(IV) and V(III) states. Bulk Au has long been regarded as a highly inert metal with little or no chemical and catalytic activity. However, Tian and co-workers425 and references therein have found that Au can exhibit surprisingly high catalytic reactivity when it is highly dispersed on selective metal oxides (Au/oxides) and the authors claimed that Au/oxide catalysts have become one of the hottest systems in catalysis, being widely applied to many important processes, such as CO oxidation, selective oxidation of propene, nitrogen oxide reduction, and photo-catalytic oxidations used for environmental cleanup. It has been confirmed by various studies that the catalytic property of Au/oxide catalysts depends significantly on the size of Au particles, the interaction between Au and the supporting oxide, as well as the nanostructure of the active sites. The authors discussed in detail the preparation of Au/TiO2 catalysts, their use in photo-oxidation, using methyl orange as a model compound, and their characterization by a range of techniques. UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra were explained in terms of Plasmon resonance of metallic gold particles and the intensity was related to the size of the gold particles. XPS was carried out to elucidate the oxidation of the gold nanoparticles. Other techniques employed included XRD, AAS and TEM. The photocatalytic properties of these catalysts were explained by the size, loading and distribution of gold particles, as elucidated by the above techniques. Xu et al.426 have reported the preparation and characterization of various transition metal loaded BiVO4 catalysts and studied the photocatalytic decomposition of methylene blue. They employed ICP-OES, XRD, XPS, UV-Vis DRS and photoluminescence to characterize these systems and the influence of a range of different transition metal loadings was discussed.3.5.10 Coke formation. Formation of coke is a common problem with many catalysts, and can result in catalyst deactivation. Rodrigues and Monteiro427 addressed the analysis and characterization of coke species in their studies of the effect of CO2 addition on the non-oxidative dehydro-aromatization of methane over a molybdenum MCM-22 catalyst. The major objective of this work was to study the effect of CO2 addition to the above catalytic system under varying conditions of temperature and pressure. The authors also studied the formation of coke and characterized the various coke species using TGA, and thermo programmed oxidation. In addition to carbidic carbon, they observed two other types of coke. One was associated with the molybdenum and the other with the Brønsted acid sites located on both the catalyst surface and inside the zeolite pores. The species which were associated with the acid sites and known to be responsible for polyaromatics formation and catalyst deactivation were reduced significantly by the use of CO2 and this increased the catalyst stability.4 Glossary of termsAASAtomic absorption spectrometryAMSAccelerator mass spectrometryANOVAAnalysis of varianceANSIAmerican National Standards InstituteAPDCAmmonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamateBCRBureau of Community ReferenceCFPCirculating fluidized bedCMOSComplementary metal oxide semiconductorCRMCertified reference materialDCPDirect current plasmaDMFCDirect methanol fuel cellsDPTDiphenyl tinDRIFTSDiffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopyDRSDiffuse reflectance spectroscopyDTADifferential thermal analysisDTPADiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acidEDXEnergy dispersive X-ray analysisEDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescenceEPMAElectron probe microanalysisERDAElastic recoil detection analysisESPElectrostatic precipitatorESRElectron spin resonanceETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryETVElectrothermal vaporisationFFFast flowFIFlow injectionFIBFocused ion beamFTAFission track analysisFT-IRFourier transform-infra redFTSFischer–Tropsch synthesisGCGas chromatographyGDGlow dischargeGFAASGraphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopyGI-XRFGrazing incident XRFHPLCHigh performance liquid chromatographyIBMKIsobutylmethyl ketoneICPInductively coupled plasmaIDIsotope dilutionINAAInstrumental neutron activation analysisLALaser ablationLDALinear discriminant analysisLEDLight emitting diodeLEISLow energy ion scatteringLIBSLaser induced breakdown spectroscopyLIPSLaser induced plasma spectroscopyLODLimit of detectionLOQLimit of quantitationMC-ICP-MSMultiple collector ICP-MSMIMMetal insulator metalMOCVDMetal organic chemical vapour depositionMPTMonophenyl tinMSMass spectrometryNd:YAGNeodymium: yttrium aluminium garnetNEXAFSNear edge X-ray absorption fine structureNISTNational Institute of Standards and TechnologyNMRNuclear magnetic resonanceNRRANuclear resonant reaction analysisOESOptical emission spectrometryOSLOptical stimulated luminescencePB/HC-OESParticle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectrometryPCAPrinciple component analysisPETPolyethyleneterephthalatePGMPlatinum group metalsPIGEProton induced gamma ray emissionPIXEParticle induced X-ray emissionPVDPhysical vapour depositionRBSRutherford backscattering spectrometryREEsRare earth elementsRFRadio frequencyRIRefractive indexRIMSResonance ionization mass spectrometryRMMRelative molecular massRSDRelative standard deviationSEMScanning electron microscopySFSector fieldSIMCASoft independent modelling of class analogySIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometrySNMSSecondary neutral mass spectrometrySPMScanning probe microscopySPMESolid phase micro-extractionSRMStandard reference materialSRXRFSynchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescenceTEMTransmission electron microscopyTGAThermogravimetric analysisTIMSThermal ionization mass spectrometryTMAHTetramethyl ammonium hydroxideTMPPTris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamineTOCTotal organic carbonToFTime of flightTPRTemperature programmed reductionTPTTriphenyl tinTSLThermally stimulated luminescenceTRXPSTotal reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopyTXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometryUSNUltrasonic nebuliserUVUltra violetVPD-DCVapour phase decomposition-droplet collectionVUVVacuum ultra violetWDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescenceXANESX-ray absorption near edge spectrometryXASX-ray absorption spectrometryXPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopyXRDX-ray diffractionXRFX-ray fluorescenceXRRX-ray reflectometry5 ReferencesB. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and M. Salisbury, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(12), 1517–1560 RSC .E. H. Evans, J. A. Day, C. Palmer, W. J. Price, C. M. M. Smithe and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(6), 663–696 RSC .J. R. Bacon, K. L. Linge, R. R. Parrish and L. Van Vaeck, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(8), 973–1006 RSC .M. West, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(10), 1304–1332 RSC .O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(2), 249–286 RSC .A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(4), 595–646 RSC .C. Pasquini, J. Cortez, L. M. C. Silva and F. B. Gonzaga, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2007, 18(3), 463–512 CAS .B. Fernandez, F. Claverie, C. Pecheyran and O. F. X. Donard, Trac-Trends Anal. Chem., 2007, 26(10), 951–966 CrossRef CAS .F. B. Gonzaga and C. Pasquini, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(1), 56–63 .M. Aimoto, H. Kondo, H. Yamamura and T. Toh, Tetsu To Hagane-J. Iron Steel Inst. Jpn., 2007, 93(7), 483–488 Search PubMed .C. Palagas, P. Stavropoulos, S. Couris, G. N. Angelopoulos, I. Kolm and D. C. Papamantellos, Steel Res. Int., 2007, 78(9), 693–703 Search PubMed .A. G. Coedo, T. Dorado, I. Padilla and J. C. Farinas, Talanta, 2007, 71(5), 2108–2120 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhou, M. Zhao, J. Wang and H. Lu, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2008, 22(5), 717–720 CrossRef CAS .A. Aimoto, H. Kondo and A. Ono, Tetsu To Hagane-J. Iron Steel Inst. Jpn., 2007, 93(2), 100–104 Search PubMed .M. Aimoto, H. Kondo and A. Ono, Anal. Sci., 2007, 23(12), 1367–1371 CrossRef CAS .E. Cincu, I. Manea, V. Manu, D. Barbos, O. Sima, I. Gustavsson, P. Vermaercke, N. Vajda, Z. Molnar and H. Polkowska-Motrenko, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 274(1), 199–205 CrossRef CAS .N. Chermat-Aourasse and R. Kesri, Protect. Met., 2007, 43(4), 344–352 Search PubMed .K. Charleton, T. Buffie and D. M. Goltz, Talanta, 2007, 74(1), 7–13 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Kim, D. W. Moon, C. J. Park, D. Simons, G. Gillen, H. Jin and H. J. Kang, Surf. Interface Anal., 2007, 39(8), 665–673 CrossRef CAS .K. Mizukami, M. Sugiyama, W. Ohashi, K. Mizuno and M. Tsuji, Tetsu To Hagane-J. Iron Steel Inst. Jpn., 2007, 93(9), 583–590 Search PubMed .I. K. Koshelev, A. P. Paulikas, M. Beno, G. Jennings, J. Linton, M. Grimsditch, S. Uran and B. W. Veal, Oxid. Met., 2007, 68(1–2), 37–51 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Iqbal and M. R. Siddiquah, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2008, 320(6), 845–850 CrossRef .D. W. Merdes, J. M. Suhan, J. M. Keay, D. M. Hadka and W. R. Bradley, Spectroscopy, 2007, 22(4), 28 Search PubMed  –+.W. T. Y. Mohamed, Opt. Laser Technol., 2008, 40(1), 30–38 CrossRef CAS .V. Detalle, Q. Glorieux, R. Bruder, D. L'Hermite and A. Semerok, Actual Chim., 2007, 312(13), 98–104 Search PubMed .M. Z. Martin, N. Labbe, N. Andre, R. Harris, M. Ebinger, S. D. Wullschleger and A. A. Vass, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1426–1432 CrossRef .M. Ramli, K. I. Fukumoto, H. Niki, S. N. Abdulmadjid, N. Idris, T. Maruyama, K. Kagawa, M. O. Tjia, M. Pardede, K. H. Kurniawan, R. Hedwig, Z. S. Lie, T. J. Lie and D. P. Kurniawan, Appl. Optics, 2007, 46(34), 8298–8304 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Sieber, E. A. Mackey, A. F. Marlow, R. Paul and R. Martin, Powder Diffr., 2007, 22(2), 146–151 CrossRef CAS .R. Cesareo, M. Ferretti, G. E. Gigante, G. Guida, P. Moioli, S. Ridolfi and C. R. Garcia, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 167–172 CrossRef CAS .A. Gianoncelli and G. Kourousias, Appl. Phys. A-Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 89(4), 857–863 CrossRef CAS .E. Kikuta, H. Asano and T. Kikuchi, Tetsu To Hagane-J. Iron Steel Inst. Jpn., 2007, 93(2), 128–131 Search PubMed .S. Durali-Mueller, G. P. Brey, D. Wigg-Wolf and Y. Lahaye, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2007, 34(10), 1555–1567 Search PubMed .I. Reiche, A. Berger, A. Duval, H. Guicharnaud, S. Merchel, M. Radtke, D. Schafer and R. Simon, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 173–177 CrossRef CAS .A. Worobiec, E. A. Stefaniak, S. Kiro, M. Oprya, A. Bekshaev, Z. Spolnik, S. S. Potgieter-Vermaak, A. Ennan and R. Van Grieken, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(5), 328–335 CrossRef CAS .G. R. Souza, I. A. Pastre, A. V. Benedetti, C. A. Ribeiro and F. L. Fertonani, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2007, 88(1), 127–132 CrossRef CAS .G. De Micco, D. M. Pasquevich and A. E. Bohe, Thermochim. Acta, 2007, 457(1–2), 83–91 CrossRef CAS .F. Mathis and M. Aucouturier, Actual Chim., 2007, 312(13), 78–85 Search PubMed .S. H. Hou, Y. P. Li, M. X. Xie, T. R. M. De Beer, W. R. G. Baeyens, S. H. Hu and J. Ouyang, Surf. Interface Anal., 2007, 39(9), 775–782 CrossRef CAS .M. Ferretti, G. Cristoforetti, S. Legnaloll, V. Palleschi, A. Salvetti, E. Togrioni, E. Console and P. Palaia, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1512–1518 CrossRef .F. L. Wen, Y. L. Lo and Y. C. Yu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2007, 25(4), 1137–1142 CrossRef CAS .F. Tholence and M. Norell, Oxid. Met., 2008, 69(1–2), 13–36 CrossRef CAS .F. Tholence and M. Norell, Oxid. Met., 2008, 69(1–2), 37–62 CrossRef CAS .M. Schulke, H. Paulus, M. Lammers, G. Kiss, F. Reti and K. H. Muller, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(6), 1495–1505 CrossRef .I. H. Karahan, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42(24), 10160–10163 CrossRef CAS .H. Wiltsche, I. B. Brenner, G. Knapp and K. Prattes, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(9), 1083–1088 RSC .M. A. Gondal, T. Hussain, Z. H. Yamani and A. H. Bakry, J. Environ. Sci. Health Part A-Toxic/Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng., 2007, 42(6), 767–775 Search PubMed .J. Schnoller, R. Wiesinger, C. Kleber, U. Hilfrich, M. Schreiner and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(6), 1543–1549 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Rusak, R. B. Congdon, K. D. Weaver and B. L. Taroli, Am. Lab., 2007, 39(18), 13 CAS .S. V. Divinski, F. Hisker, T. Wilger, A. Friesel and C. Herzig, Intermetallics, 2008, 16(2), 148–155 CrossRef CAS .P. Y. Liu, N. Li, R. Z. Shao, B. Liu and X. Wu, J. Rare Earths, 2007, 25(3), 377–380 CrossRef .V. N. Lednev, A. V. Yakovlev, T. A. Labutin, A. M. Popov and N. B. Zorov, J. Anal. Chem., 2007, 62(12), 1151–1155 CrossRef CAS .G. Anil, M. R. P. Reddy, S. R. Kumar, N. R. Munirathnam and T. L. Prakash, Atom. Spectrosc., 2008, 29(1), 16–20 CAS .S. Kobayashi, Y. Ohgoe, K. Ozeki, K. Hirakuri and H. Aoki, J. Mater. Sci.-Mater. Med., 2007, 18(12), 2263–2268 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Shang and X. P. Yan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(10), 1284–1289 RSC .B. Chen, H. Kano and M. Kuzuya, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(2), 289–291 CrossRef CAS .N. Etxebarria, G. Arana, R. Antolin, G. Borge, T. Posada and J. C. Raposo, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2007, 12(11), 575–580 CrossRef CAS .N. T. C. Oliveira, G. Aleixo, R. Caram and A. C. Guastaldi, Mater. Sci. Eng. A-Struct. Mater. Prop. Microstruct. Process., 2007, 452, 727–731 CrossRef .C. Vlachou-Mogire, B. Stern and J. G. McDonnell, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 265(2), 558–568 Search PubMed .H. L. Xie, K. L. Huang, X. D. Nie and Y. G. Tang, Rare Metals, 2007, 26(3), 286–291 CrossRef CAS .B. Lange, S. Recknagel, M. Czerwensky, R. Matschat, M. Michaelis, B. Peplinski and U. Panne, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 160(1–2), 97–107 CrossRef CAS .S. Kozono and H. Haraguchi, Talanta, 2007, 72(5), 1791–1799 CrossRef CAS .L. S. Wang, R. Yoshiie and S. Uemiya, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 306(1–2), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .G. Sarah, B. Gratuze and J. N. Barrandon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(9), 1163–1167 RSC .G. Anil, M. R. P. Reddy, D. S. Prasad, N. R. Munirathnam and T. L. Prakash, Ann. Chim., 2007, 97(10), 1039–1046 CrossRef CAS .T. Noguchi, S. Takemoto, M. Hattori, M. Yoshinari, E. Kawada and Y. Oda, Dent. Mater. J., 2008, 27(1), 117–123 CrossRef CAS .M. D. A. Korn, D. S. S. dos Santos, B. Welz, M. G. R. Vale, A. P. Teixeira, D. D. Lima and S. L. C. Ferreira, Talanta, 2007, 73(1), 1–11 CrossRef CAS .F. A. C. Amorim, B. Welz, A. C. S. Costa, F. G. Lepric, M. G. R. Vale and S. L. C. Ferreira, Talanta, 2007, 72(2), 349–359 CrossRef CAS .G. P. Brandao, R. C. de Campos, E. V. R. de Castro and H. C. de Jesus, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 962–969 CrossRef .R. E. Santelli, M. A. Bezerra, A. S. Freire, E. P. Oliveira and M. D. B. de Carvalho, Fuel, 2008, 87(8–9), 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .D. S. S. dos Santos, A. P. Teixeira, J. T. P. Barbosa, S. L. C. Ferreira, M. D. A. Korn and L. S. G. Teixeira, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 1072–1077 CrossRef .T. Linsinger, W. Andrzejuk, A. Bau, J. Charoud-Got, P. De Vos, H. Emteborg, R. Hearn, A. Lamberty, A. Oostra, W. Pritzkow, C. Quetel, G. Roebben, I. Tresl, J. Vogl and S. Wood, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21(4), 2240–2244 CrossRef CAS .H. Tao, T. Nakazato, M. Akasaka and S. Satoh, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(5), 333–347 CrossRef CAS .J. Heilmann and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(2), 643–653 CrossRef CAS .J. Heilmann and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(6), 1952–1961 CrossRef CAS .G. R. de Castro, J. D. de Oliveira, I. L. Alcantara, P. S. Roldan, C. C. F. Padilha, A. G. S. Prado and P. M. Padilha, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2007, 42(6), 1325–1340 CrossRef CAS .M. C. H. Lim, G. A. Ayoko, L. Morawska, Z. D. Ristovski and E. R. Jayaratne, Fuel, 2007, 86(12–13), 1831–1839 CrossRef CAS .L. S. G. Teixeira, R. B. S. Rocha, E. V. Sobrinho, P. R. B. Guimaraes, L. A. M. Pontes and J. S. R. Teixeira, Talanta, 2007, 72(3), 1073–1076 CrossRef CAS .S. F. Boulyga, J. Heilmann, T. Prohaska and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389(3), 697–706 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Spears, A. G. Borrego, A. Cox and R. M. Martinez-Tarazona, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2007, 72(3–4), 165–176 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Geng, T. Nakajima, H. Takanashi and A. Ohki, Fuel, 2008, 87(4–5), 559–564 CrossRef CAS .C. Duyck, N. Miekeley, C. L. P. da Silveira, R. Q. Aucelio, R. C. Campos, P. Grinberg and G. P. Brandao, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 939–951 CrossRef .R. Q. Aucelio, R. M. Souza, R. C. de Campos, N. Miekeley and C. L. P. da Silveira, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 952–961 CrossRef .M. A. Scapin, C. Duarte, M. H. O. Sampa and I. M. Sato, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2007, 76(11–12), 1899–1902 CrossRef CAS .T. Hussain and M. A. Gondal, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2008, 136(1–3), 391–399 CAS .J. Bai, Q. Wang, S. Y. Li, C. Y. Li and X. H. Guan, Oil Shale, 2008, 25(1), 17–26 CrossRef CAS .M. Bauer and J. A. C. Broekaert, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(4), 479–486 RSC .M. M. Silva, I. C. F. Damin, M. G. R. Vale and B. Welz, Talanta, 2007, 71(5), 1877–1885 CrossRef CAS .S. Kakui, N. Shimotsuma, T. Kyotani, K. Sawamura, K. Yamaguchi, S. Ikeda and T. Nakane, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(7), 587–591 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Poole, V. Sharifi, J. Swithenbank, P. Kilgallon, N. Simms, J. Oakey and D. Ardelt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(5), 532–539 RSC .G. D. Woods and F. I. Fryer, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389(3), 753–761 CrossRef CAS .E. J. dos Santos, A. B. Herrmann, E. S. Chaves, W. W. D. Vechiatto, A. C. Schoemberger, V. L. A. Frescura and A. J. Curtius, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(10), 1300–1303 RSC .T. Larsson, W. Frech, E. Bjorn and B. Dybdahl, Analyst, 2007, 132(6), 579–586 RSC .E. M. Krupp, C. Johnson, C. Rechsteiner, M. Moir, D. Leong and J. Feldmann, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 970–977 CrossRef .M. Baudelet, M. Boueri, J. Yu, S. S. Mao, V. Piseltelli, X. L. Mao and R. E. Russo, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1329–1334 CrossRef .V. I. Babushok, F. C. DeLucia, P. J. Dagdigian, J. L. Gottfried, C. A. Munson, M. J. Nusea and A. W. Miziolek, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1321–1328 CrossRef .C. Bohling, K. Hohmann, D. Scheel, C. Bauer, W. SchipperS, J. Burgmeier, U. Willer, G. Holl and W. Schade, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1519–1527 CrossRef .F. C. De Lucia, J. L. Gottfried, C. A. Munson and A. W. Miziolek, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1399–1404 CrossRef .J. L. Gottfried, F. C. De Lucia, C. A. Munson and A. W. Miziolek, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1405–1411 CrossRef .J. L. Gottfried, F. C. De Lucia, C. A. Munson and A. W. Miziolek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(2), 205–216 RSC .T. L. Dawson, Color. Technol., 2007, 123(5), 281–292 CAS .I. Arcon, J. Kolar, A. Kodre, D. Hanzel and M. Strlic, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 199–205 CrossRef CAS .W. Faubel, S. Staub, R. Simon, S. Heissler, A. Pataki and G. Banik, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(6–7), 669–676 CrossRef .A. Kaminska, A. Sawczak, K. Komar and G. Sliwinski, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253(19), 7860–7864 CrossRef CAS .T. Kim, B. T. Nguyen, V. Minassian and C. T. Lin, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2007, 4(3), 241–253 Search PubMed .R. Bruder, V. Detalle and C. Coupry, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2007, 38(7), 909–915 CrossRef CAS .M. Resano, E. Garcia-Ruiz, R. Alloza, M. P. Marzo, P. Vandenabeele and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(23), 8947–8955 CrossRef CAS .M. Cotte, E. Welcomme, V. A. Sole, M. Salome, M. Menu, P. Walter and J. Susini, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(18), 6988–6994 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Creagh, M. E. Kubik and M. Sterns, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A-Accel. Spectrom. Dect. Assoc. Equip., 2007, 580(1), 721–724 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Morigi, F. Casali, M. Bettuzzi, D. Bianconi, R. Brancaccio, S. Cornacchia, A. Pasini, A. Rossi, A. Aldrovandi and D. Cauzzi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A-Accel. Spectrom. Dect. Assoc. Equip., 2007, 580(1), 735–738 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Farinas, J. B. Garcia, S. G. Martin, R. P. Crecente and C. H. Latorre, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 591(2), 231–238 CrossRef CAS .S. Gil, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(5), 569–572 RSC .K. Zih-Perenyi, P. Jankovics, E. Sugar and A. Lasztity, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(3), 445–449 CrossRef .N. Forsgard, P. Sjoberg, D. Bylund, M. Andersson and J. Pettersson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(11), 1397–1402 RSC .A. Gonzaez-Gago, J. M. Marchante-Gayo and J. I. G. Alonso, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(9), 1138–1144 RSC .T. Narukawa, K. Chiba, T. Kuroiwa, T. Yarita and A. Takatsu, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389(2), 661–666 CrossRef CAS .N. Campillo, R. Penalver, M. Hernandez-Cordoba, C. Perez-Sirvent and M. J. Martinez-Sanchez, J. Chromatogr. A, 2007, 1165(1–2), 191–199 CrossRef CAS .L. I. L. Balcaen, B. De Samber, K. De Wolf, F. Cuyckens and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389(3), 777–786 CrossRef CAS .F. Cuyckens, L. I. L. Balcaen, K. De Wolf, B. De Samber, C. Van Looveren, R. Hurkmans and F. Vanhaecke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(7), 1717–1729 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Sylva, L. Ball, R. K. Nelson and C. M. Reddy, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2007, 21(20), 3301–3305 CrossRef CAS .D. Ciavardelli, G. D'Anniballe, G. Nano, F. Martin, G. Federici, P. Sacchetta, C. Di Ilio and A. Urbani, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2007, 21(14), 2343–2350 CrossRef CAS .C. L. Deitrich, A. Raab, B. Pioselli, J. E. Thomas-Oates and J. Feldmann, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(21), 8381–8390 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Hartinger, W. H. Ang, A. Casini, L. Messori, B. K. Keppler and P. J. Dyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(8), 960–967 RSC .Z. L. Chen, G. Owens, K. R. Kim and R. Naidu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 599(2), 163–169 CrossRef CAS .A. Helfrich and J. Bettmer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(10), 1296–1299 RSC .D. D. Richardson and J. A. Caruso, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389(3), 679–682 CrossRef CAS .D. D. Richardson and J. A. Caruso, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 388(4), 809–823 CrossRef CAS .G. S. Zhai, J. F. Liu, G. B. Jiang, B. He and Q. F. Zhou, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(11), 1420–1426 RSC .B. Wagner, E. Bulska and W. Sobucki, J. Cult. Herit., 2008, 9(1), 60–65 CrossRef .P. Pohl and B. Prusisz, Talanta, 2007, 71(4), 1616–1623 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Silveira, P. C. P. Lara, M. B. Dias, C. C. Nascentes, C. Dernicheli and J. B. B. da Silva, Can. J. Chem.-Rev. Can. Chim., 2007, 85(9), 619–625 Search PubMed .S. R. de Oliveira and J. A. G. Neto, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 1046–1050 CrossRef .D. Hradil, T. Grygar, J. Hradilova, P. Bezdicka, V. Grunwaldova, I. Fogas and C. Miliani, J. Cult. Herit., 2007, 8(4), 377–386 CrossRef .M. Cotte, E. Checroun, J. Susini and P. Walter, Appl. Phys. A-Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 89(4), 841–848 CrossRef CAS .E. C. Figueiredo, J. Dedina and M. A. Z. Arruda, Talanta, 2007, 73(4), 621–628 CrossRef CAS .I. M. Moreno, D. Gonzalez-Weller, V. Gutierrez, M. Marino, A. M. Camean, A. G. Gonzalez and A. Hardisson, Talanta, 2007, 72(1), 263–268 CrossRef CAS .M. Alvarez, I. M. Moreno, A. Jos, A. M. Camean and A. G. Gonzalez, Microchem J., 2007, 87(1), 72–76 CrossRef CAS .P. Pohl, Trac-Trends Anal. Chem., 2007, 26(9), 941–949 CrossRef CAS .M. Alvarez, I. M. Moreno, A. M. Jos, A. M. Camean and A. G. Gonzalez, J. Food Compos. Anal., 2007, 20(5), 391–395 CrossRef CAS .M. Alvarez, I. M. Moreno, S. Pichardo, A. M. Camean and A. G. Gonzalez, Sci. Aliments, 2007, 27(1), 83–92 CrossRef CAS .N. Camas, B. Karabulut and A. Karabulut, Asian J. Chem., 2007, 19(5), 3971–3978 CAS .R. J. H. Waddell-Smith, J. Forensic Sci., 2007, 52(6), 1297–1304 CAS .C. Calza, M. J. Anjos, S. de Souza, A. Brancaglion and R. T. Lopes, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 263(1), 249–252 Search PubMed .C. Calza, M. J. Anjos, S. De Souza, A. Brancaglion and R. T. Lopes, Appl. Phys. A-Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 90(1), 75–79 CAS .J. Zieba-Palus, R. Borusiewicz and M. Kunicki, Forensic Sci.Int., 2008, 175(1), 1–10 CrossRef CAS .B. Salle, P. Mauchien and S. Maurice, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(8), 739–768 CrossRef .B. C. Reynolds, J. Aggarwal, L. Andre, D. Baxter, C. Beucher, M. A. Brzezinski, E. Engstrom, R. B. Georg, M. Land, M. J. Leng, S. Opfergelt, I. Rodushkin, H. J. Sloane, S. van den Boorn, P. Z. Vroon and D. Cardinal, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(5), 561–568 RSC .J. E. S. Sarkis, O. N. Neto, S. Viebig and S. F. Durrant, Forensic Sci.Int., 2007, 172(1), 63–66 CrossRef CAS .K. Wunnapuk, P. Durongkadech, T. Minami, W. Ruangyuttikarn, S. Tohno, K. Vichairat, C. Azuma, P. Sribanditmongkol and Y. Tohno, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2007, 120(1–3), 74–81 CrossRef CAS .S. Steffen, M. Otto, L. Niewoehner, M. Barth, Z. Brozek-Mucha, J. Blegstraaten and R. Horvath, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 1028–1036 CrossRef .R. Gagliano-Candela, A. P. Colucci and S. Napoli, J. Forensic Sci., 2008, 53(2), 321–324 CrossRef CAS .Z. Brozek-Mucha, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(6), 398–407 CrossRef .D. K. Molina, M. Martinez, J. Garcia and V. J. M. DiMaio, Am. J. Forensic Med. Pathol., 2007, 28(3), 187–190 CrossRef .D. K. Molina, M. Martinez, J. Garcia and V. J. M. DiMaio, Am. J. Forensic Med. Pathol., 2007, 28(3), 191–194 CrossRef .J. A. Denman, I. M. Kempson, W. A. Skinner and K. P. Kirkbride, Forensic Sci.Int., 2008, 175(2–3), 123–129 CrossRef CAS .M. I. Szynkowska, K. Czerski, J. Grams, T. Paryjczak and A. Parczewski, Imaging Sci. J., 2007, 55(3), 180–187 Search PubMed .J. Obhodas, D. S. S. Blagus and V. Valkovic, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 261(1–2), 922–924 Search PubMed .S. S. Potgieter-Vermaak, J. H. Potgieter, K. Worobiec, R. van Grieken, L. Majanovic and S. Moeketsi, Cem. Concr. Res., 2007, 37(6), 834–843 CrossRef CAS .K. Goraieb, A. S. Lopes, C. A. Sato, M. G. Segatelli, V. P. E. Silva, J. C. Verzoto and M. Bueno, J. Chemometr., 2006, 20(11–12), 455–463 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Potgieter and L. Maljanovic, Cem. Concr. Res., 2007, 37(8), 1172–1175 CrossRef CAS .F. Weritz, D. Schaurich and G. Wisch, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1504–1511 CrossRef .G. Nicolas, M. P. Mateo and V. Pinon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(10), 1244–1249 RSC .M. A. Gondal, T. Hussain, Z. H. Yarnani and M. A. Baig, Talanta, 2007, 72(2), 642–649 CrossRef CAS .Z. S. Lie, M. Pardede, R. Hedwig, M. M. Suliyanti, K. H. Kurniawan, Y. I. MunadiLee, K. Kagawa, I. Hattori and M. O. Tjia, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(7), 1781–1787 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Oh, T. Miller, F. Y. Yueh and J. P. Singh, Appl. Optics, 2007, 46(19), 4020–4025 CrossRef .P. Pohl, I. J. Zapata, N. H. Bings, E. Voges and J. A. C. Broekaert, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(5), 444–453 CrossRef .S. M. Jung, Y. M. Cho and H. G. Na, ISIJ Int., 2007, 47(6), 853–859 Search PubMed .S. M. Jung, Y. M. Cho, H. G. Na and D. J. Min, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(3), 185–190 CrossRef CAS .M. Noroozifar, M. Khorasani-Motlagh and R. Zare-Dorabei, Talanta, 2007, 72(5), 1773–1778 CrossRef CAS .S. Dadfarnia, A. M. H. Shabani, F. Tamadon and M. Rezaei, Microchim. Acta, 2007, 158(1–2), 159–163 CrossRef CAS .R. C. B. Olzan, L. F. Rodrigues, J. C. P. de Mattos, V. L. Dressler and T. M. D. Flores, Talanta, 2007, 74(1), 119–124 CrossRef CAS .M. Taruki, T. Waku, I. Nukatsuka and K. Ohzeki, Anal. Sci., 2007, 23(12), 1435–1438 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Sahayam, S. J. Jiang and C. C. Wan, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 598(2), 214–218 CrossRef CAS .C. Engelhard, T. Vielhaber, A. Scheffer, M. Brocksieper, W. Buscher and U. Karst, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(3), 407–411 RSC .E. Brown and S. J. Rehse, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1475–1483 CrossRef .D. W. Yan, J. Zhong, C. R. Wang and Z. Y. Wu, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(6–7), 711–716 CrossRef .S. Maffi, F. Cignoli, C. Bellomunno, S. Iullis and G. Zizak, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(2), 202–209 CrossRef .E. Paganini, G. Mariotti, S. Gasperetti, C. Vallebona, L. Predolin, E. Mure, V. Palleschi, A. Salvetti and E. Tognoni, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(2), 191–201 .S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Burdick, R. Bash, P. Kanatharana, P. Thavarungkul and J. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(19), 7571–7575 CrossRef CAS .Z. J. Yan and D. S. Xue, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43(2), 771–774 CrossRef CAS .K. Liu, Q. M. Feng, Y. X. Yang, G. F. Zhang, L. M. Ou and Y. P. Lu, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2007, 353(16–17), 1534–1539 CrossRef CAS .X. X. Shi, M. Li, H. Yang, S. P. Chen, L. J. Yuan, K. L. Zhang and J. T. Sun, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42(9), 1649–1656 CrossRef CAS .K. C. Anyaogu, A. V. Fedorov and D. C. Neckers, Langmuir, 2008, 24(8), 4340–4346 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Ghule, K. Ghule, S. H. Tzing and Y. C. Ling, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 21, 3342–3349 CrossRef .D. Selbmann, B. Bendjemil, A. Leonhardt, T. Pichler, C. Taschner and M. Ritschel, Appl. Phys. A-Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 90(4), 637–643 CrossRef CAS .M. Y. Cheng, D. H. Hwang, H. S. Sheu and B. J. Hwang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175(1), 137–144 CrossRef CAS .C. I. Pearce, V. S. Coker, J. M. Charnock, R. A. D. Pattrick, J. F. W. Mosselmans, N. Law, T. J. Beveridge and J. R. Lloyd, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19(15) Search PubMed .X. L. Hou and P. Roos, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 608(2), 105–139 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Kim, C. K. Kim, P. Martin and U. Sansone, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(7), 827–841 RSC .S. Portier, S. Bremier and C. T. Walker, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2007, 263(2–3), 113–126 Search PubMed .I. Gunther-Leopold, N. Kivel, J. K. Waldis and B. Wernli, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(2), 503–510 CrossRef .J. Lamontagne, T. Blay and I. Roure, Microsc. microanal., 2007, 13(3), 150–155 CrossRef CAS .N. Surugaya, T. Hiyama, A. Verbruggen and R. Willlum, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(2), 247–252 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Aggarwal, P. M. Shah, D. Alamelu and N. N. Mirashi, Radiochim. Acta, 2007, 95(4), 233–237 CrossRef CAS .T. Shinonaga, H. Aigner, D. Klose, P. Spinder, H. Froschl and D. Donohue, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2008, 32(1), 93–101 Search PubMed .D. Fink and A. Smith, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 600–609 Search PubMed .S. Richter, A. Alonso, J. Truyens, H. Kuhn, A. Verbruggen and R. Wellum, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2007, 264(2–3), 184–190 Search PubMed .Z. Varga and G. Suranyi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 599(1), 16–23 CrossRef CAS .S. Burger, L. R. Riciputi and D. A. Bostick, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 274(3), 491–505 CrossRef .M. Saidy, W. H. Hocking, J. F. Mouris, P. Garcia, G. Carlot and B. Pasquet, J. Nucl. Mater., 2008, 372(2–3), 405–415 CrossRef CAS .Y. Pipon, N. Toulhoat, N. Moncoffre, L. Raimbault, A. M. Scheidegger, F. Farges and G. Carlot, J. Nucl. Mater., 2007, 362(2–3), 416–425 CrossRef CAS .L. Desgranges, C. Valot, B. Pasquet, J. Lamontagne, T. Blay and I. Roure, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(1), 147–154 Search PubMed .M. Horvath, M. Guillong, A. Izmer, N. Kivel, R. Restani, I. Gunther-Leopold, J. O. Coutureau, C. Hellwig and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(10), 1266–1274 RSC .C. G. Worley and L. P. Colletti, Powder Diffr., 2007, 22(2), 152–155 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Aggarwal, D. Alamelu, P. S. Khodade and P. M. Shah, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 273(3), 775–778 CrossRef CAS .D. Alamelu and S. K. Aggarwal, J. Alloy. Compd., 2007, 444, 640–642 CrossRef .D. Alamelu and S. K. Aggarwal, J. Alloy. Compd., 2007, 444, 643–646 CrossRef .N. L. Misra, S. Dhara, V. C. Adya, S. V. Godbole, K. D. S. Mudher and S. K. Aggarwal, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(1), 81–85 CrossRef .A. Pitois, L. A. de las Heras and M. Betti, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2008, 270(3), 118–126 Search PubMed .V. F. Taylor, R. D. Evans and R. J. Cornett, J. Environ. Radioact., 2008, 99(1), 109–118 CrossRef CAS .Z. Varga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389(3), 725–732 CrossRef CAS .J. Zheng, H. Q. Liao, F. C. Wu, M. Yamada, P. Q. Fu, C. Q. Liu and G. J. Wan, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 275(1), 37–42 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Epov, R. D. Evans, J. Zheng, O. F. X. Donard and M. Yamada, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(9), 1131–1137 RSC .N. E. Whitehead, S. Endo, K. Tanaka, T. Takatsuji, M. Hoshi, S. Fukutani, R. G. Ditchburn and A. Zondervan, J. Environ. Radioact., 2008, 99(2), 260–270 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Lee, K. Iguchi, J. Inagawa, D. Suzuki, F. Esaka, M. Magara, S. Sakurai, K. Watanabe and S. Usuda, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 272(2), 299–302 CrossRef CAS .M. Godoy, J. M. Godoy and L. A. Roldao, J. Environ. Radioact., 2007, 97(2–3), 124–136 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Whitney and S. Biegalski, Nucl. Sci. Eng., 2007, 157(2), 200–209 Search PubMed .M. Atarashi-Andoh, C. Schnabel, G. Cook, A. B. MacKenzie, A. Dougans, R. M. Ellam, S. Freeman, C. Maden, V. Olive, H. A. Synal and S. Xu, Appl. Geochem., 2007, 22(3), 628–636 CrossRef CAS .E. Englund, A. Aldahan, G. Possnert and V. Alfimov, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 365–369 Search PubMed .S. Persson, A. Aldahan, G. Possnert, V. Alfimov and X. Hou, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 508–512 Search PubMed .K. J. Dong, M. He, S. Jiang, H. T. Wong, J. Z. Qiu, Y. J. Guan, S. H. Li, S. Y. Wu, M. Lin, Q. B. You, Y. W. Bao, Y. M. Hu, D. Zhou, X. Y. Yin and J. Yuan, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 271–276 Search PubMed .H. Matsuzaki, Y. Muramatsu, K. Kato, M. Yasumoto and C. Nakano, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 721–726 Search PubMed .M. Christl, L. Wacker, J. Lippold, H. A. Synal and M. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 262(2), 379–384 Search PubMed .A. Galindo-Uribarri, J. R. Beene, M. Danchev, J. Doupe, B. Fuentes, J. G. del Campo, P. A. Hausladen, R. C. Juras, J. F. Liang, A. E. Litherland, Y. Liu, M. J. Meigs, G. D. Mills, P. E. Mueller, E. Padilla-Rodal, J. Pavan, J. W. Sinclair and D. W. Stracener, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 123–130 Search PubMed .K. Sasa, Y. Nagashima, T. Takahashi, R. Seki, Y. Tosaki, K. Sueki, K. Bessho, H. Matsumura, T. Miura and M. He, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 41–46 Search PubMed .K. Bessho, H. Matsumura, T. Miura, Q. Wang, K. Masumoto, H. Hagura, Y. Nagashima, R. Seki, T. Takahashi, K. Sasa, K. Sueki, T. Matsuhiro and Y. Tosaki, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 259(1), 702–707 Search PubMed .J. Zheng and M. Yamada, Anal. Sci., 2007, 23(5), 611–615 CrossRef CAS .M. Yamada, J. Zheng and Z. L. Wang, J. Environ. Radioact., 2007, 98(3), 274–284 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ranebo, M. Eriksson, G. Tamborini, N. Niagolova, O. Bildstein and M. Betti, Microsc. microanal., 2007, 13(3), 179–190 CrossRef CAS .O. C. Lind, B. Salbu, K. Janssens, K. Proost, M. Garcia-Leon and R. Garcia-Tenorio, Sci. Total Environ., 2007, 376(1–3), 294–305 CrossRef CAS .Z. Varga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(2), 511–519 CrossRef CAS .D. I. Kaplan, B. A. Powell, M. C. Duff, D. I. Demirkanli, M. Denham, R. A. Fjeld and F. J. Molz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(21), 7417–7423 CrossRef CAS .S. Buerger, N. L. Banik, R. A. Buda, J. V. Kratz, B. Kuczewski and N. Trautmann, Radiochim. Acta, 2007, 95(8), 433–438 CrossRef CAS .Z. Varga, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 587(2), 165–169 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Evans, P. E. Dresel and O. T. Farmer, Vadose Zone J., 2007, 6(4), 1042–1049 Search PubMed .Y. Oya, T. Tanabe, M. Oyaidzu, T. Shibahara, K. Sugiyama, A. Yoshikawa, Y. Onishi, Y. Hirohata, Y. Ishimoto, J. Yagyu, T. Arai, K. Masaki, K. Okuno, N. Miya and S. Tanaka, J. Nucl. Mater., 2007, 367, 1266–1270 CrossRef .A. L. Klingensmith, K. M. Deely, W. S. Kinman, V. Kelly and P. C. Burns, Am. Miner., 2007, 92(4), 662–669 CrossRef CAS .S. N. Kalmykov, V. V. Kriventsov, Y. A. Teterin and A. P. Novikov, C.R. Chim., 2007, 10(10–11), 1060–1066 CrossRef CAS .M. Yamada and H. Zheng, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2008, 66(1), 103–107 CrossRef CAS .C. L. Crawford, J. C. Marra and N. E. Bibler, J. Alloy. Compd., 2007, 444, 569–579 CrossRef .O. F. X. Donard, F. Bruneau, M. Moldovan, H. Garraud, V. N. Epov and D. Boust, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 587(2), 170–179 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Ruppert and T. Paryjczak, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 320, 80–90 CrossRef CAS .E. Chamizo, M. C. Jimenez-Ramos, L. Wacker, I. Vioque, A. Calleja, M. Garcia-Leon and R. Garcia-Tenorio, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 606(2), 239–245 CrossRef CAS .C. Greis, S. Karlsson, A. Duker, H. Pettersson and B. Allard, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 275(1), 55–70 CrossRef CAS .S. Yoshida, Y. Muramatsu, S. Yamazaki and T. Ban-Nai, J. Environ. Radioact., 2007, 96(1–3), 85–93 CrossRef CAS .D. Lariviere, T. A. Cumming, S. Kiser, C. Li and R. J. Cornett, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(3), 352–360 RSC .C. S. Li, D. Lariviere, S. Kiser, G. Moodie, R. Falcomer, N. Elliot, L. Burchart, L. Paterson, V. Epov, D. Evans, S. Pappas, J. Smith and J. Cornett, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(4), 521–526 RSC .S. Dhara, N. L. Misra, K. D. S. Mudher and S. K. Aggarwal, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(1), 82–85 CrossRef .P. K. Tamrakar and K. S. Pitre, Rev. Anal. Chem., 2007, 26(1), 1–11 Search PubMed .S. D'Ilio, NO. ViolanteSenofonte and F. Petrucci, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 597(2), 195–202 CrossRef CAS .C. K. Kim, C. S. Kim, U. Sansone and P. Martin, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2008, 66(2), 223–230 CrossRef CAS .Y. Y. Yoon, C. S. Kim, D. Y. Yang, W. H. Nahm, S. Y. Cho and K. Y. Lee, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 276(1), 187–191 CrossRef CAS .M. Crozet and A. Guigue, Radiochim. Acta, 2007, 95(11), 625–628 CrossRef CAS .M. Crozet and M. Guigue, Radiochim. Acta, 2007, 95(11), 629–635 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Avila-Rodriguez, J. A. Nye and R. J. Nickles, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2008, 66(1), 9–13 CrossRef CAS .F. Chartier, H. Isnard, J. P. Degros, A. L. Faure and C. Frechou, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2008, 270(3), 127–133 Search PubMed .C. Mans, S. Hanning, C. Simons, A. Wegner, A. Janssen and M. Kreyenschmidt, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(2), 116–122 CrossRef .K. Nakano, T. Nakamura, I. Nakai, A. Kawase, M. Imai, M. Hasegawa, Y. I. Ishibashi, I. Inamoto, K. Sudou, M. Kozaki, A. Turuta, A. Bando, A. Ono, K. Kakita, K. Takimoto and M. Sakata, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(5), 363–370 CrossRef CAS .S. Gaspard, M. Oujja, E. Rebollar, C. Abrusci, F. Catalina and M. Castillejo, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1612–1617 CrossRef .M. A. Gondal and M. N. Siddiqu, J. Environ. Sci. Health Part A-Toxic/Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng., 2007, 42(13), 1989–1997 Search PubMed .M. P. Mateo, C. C. Garcia and R. Hergenroder, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(13), 4908–4914 CrossRef CAS .A. Lopez-Molinero, P. Calatayud, D. Sipiera, R. Falcon, D. Linan and J. R. Castillo, Microchim. Acta, 2007, 158(3–4), 247–253 CrossRef CAS .I. De Schrijver, M. Aramendia, L. Vincze, M. Resano, A. Dumoulin and F. Vanhaecke, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(11), 1185–1194 CrossRef .I. De Schrijver, M. Aramendia, M. Resano, A. Dumoulin and F. Vanhaecke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(4), 500–507 RSC .Y. F. Wang, Y. Z. Shi, H. Zhang, Y. H. Chen, J. Lau, S. Wilbur and P. Li,, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2008, 28(1), 191–194 CAS .D. P. Moraes, M. F. Mesko, P. A. Mello, J. N. G. Paniz, V. L. Dressler, G. Knapp and E. M. M. Flores, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 1065–1071 CrossRef .X. B. Wang, Z. C. Zhang, J. Chen and S. J. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61(13), 2662–2666 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Ferreira, A. N. Falcao and M. H. Gil, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 265(1), 193–197 Search PubMed .M. Maiti and A. K. Bhowmick, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68(1), 1–9 CrossRef CAS .M. Haldimann, A. Blanc and V. Dudler, Food Addit. Contam., 2007, 24(8), 860–868 CrossRef CAS .D. S. Simons, R. G. Downing, G. P. Lamaze, R. M. Lindstrom, R. R. Greenberg, R. L. Paul, S. B. Schiller and W. F. Guthrie, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2007, 25(4), 1365–1375 CrossRef CAS .I. V. Veryovkin, W. F. Calaway, C. E. Tripa and M. J. Pellin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 261(1–2), 508–511 Search PubMed .S. Price, L. Wang, A. Wang, A. Ginwalla and I. Mowat, J. Electron. Mater., 2007, 36(8), 1106–1109 CrossRef CAS .P. Wobrauschek, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(5), 289–300 CrossRef CAS .C. Steen, A. Nutsch, P. Pichler and H. Ryssel, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(5), 481–484 CrossRef .B. Beckhoff, R. Fliegauf, M. Kolbe, M. Muller, J. Weser and G. Ulm, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(20), 7873–7882 CrossRef CAS .V. S. Smentkowski and S. G. Ostrowski, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78(7) Search PubMed .Z. Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Zhu, H. F. Wang, L. C. Wang, S. N. Zhu and N. B. Ming, Physica B, 2007, 398(1), 151–158 CrossRef CAS .T. Oishi, K. Koyama, S. Alam, A. Tanaka and J. C. Lee, Hydrometallurgy, 2007, 89(1–2), 82–88 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Chiang, K. H. Lin, M. H. Lai, T. C. Chen and S. Y. Ma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 149(1), 151–159 CrossRef CAS .W. F. Hall and P. T. Williams, Circuit World, 2007, 33(4), 43–50 CrossRef CAS .W. J. Hall and P. T. Williams, Resour. Conserv. Recycl., 2007, 51(3), 691–709 CrossRef .W. K. Ryu, J. S. Kim, J. S. Lee, H. B. Lim and P. K. Jun, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(6), 623–629 RSC .R. Ricciari, M. Bertini, E. P. Ferlito, G. Pizzo, G. Anastasi, D. Mello and G. Franco, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 257, 257–260 Search PubMed .H. Shichi, S. Osabe, M. Sugaya, K. Kanehori, H. Kakibayashi and Y. Mitsui, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2007, 25(4), 751–757 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Yeh, C. Hsien, C. S. Huang and T. C. Lin, Surf. Interface Anal., 2008, 40(1), 60–66 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, Z. Peng, W. Guo, C. Yuan, Y. Liu and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42(22), 9221–9226 CrossRef CAS .P. Y. Liu, J. Ceram. Process. Res., 2007, 8(3), 161–163 Search PubMed .J. T. Schiffem, D. W. Doerr and D. R. Alexander, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1412–1418 CrossRef .H. H. Funke, M. W. Raynor, K. A. Bertness and Y. Chen, Appl. Spectrosc., 2007, 61(4), 419–423 CrossRef CAS .M. Kaminski, S. Podsiadlo, P. Dominik, K. Wozniak, L. Dobrzycki, R. Jakiela, A. Barcz, M. Psoda, J. Mizera, R. Bacewicz, M. Zajac and A. Twardowski, Chem. Mat., 2007, 19(13), 3139–3143 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhu, C. Gu, F. A. Stevie and D. P. Griffis, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2007, 25(4), 769–774 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang, A. Wang and S. Price, J. Electron. Mater., 2007, 36(8), 910–912 CrossRef .R. L. Rowlands, S. J. C. Irvine, V. Barrioz, E. W. Jones and D. A. Lamb, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2008, 23(1) Search PubMed .C. Frei, J. Schenzel, F. Waibel and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(2), 217–222 RSC .T. Wang, W. Q. Jie, J. J. Zhang, G. Yang, D. M. Zeng, Y. D. Xu, S. Y. Ma, H. Hua and K.J. He, Cryst. Growth,  2007, 304(2), 313–316.Y. Kataoka and T. Itani, Surf. Interface Anal., 2007, 39(10), 826–831 CrossRef CAS .C. T. Yang, K. S. Chang-Liao, H. C. Chang, B. S. Sahu, T. C. Wang, T. K. Wang and W. F. Wu, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84(12), 2916–2920 CrossRef CAS .M. Avice, S. Diplas, A. Thogersen, J. S. Christensen, U. Grossner, B. G. Svensson, O. Nilsen, H. Fjellvag and J. F. Watts, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(5) Search PubMed .G. Garwood, R. Olshove, E. Pettijohn, J. Bangs, M. Liguori, E. Olson and F. Lua, J. Electron. Mater., 2007, 36(8), 937–948 CrossRef CAS .M. Filippi, S. Agrestini, L. Simonelli, N. L. Saini, A. Bianconi, S. De Negri, M. Giovannini and A. Saccone, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(6–7), 717–719 CrossRef .M. Yilmazlar, H. Aydin, A. Varilci and C. Terzioglu, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42(21), 9030–9036 CrossRef CAS .A. Carapelle, K. Fleury-Frenette, J. P. Collette, H. P. Garnir and P. Harlet, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78(12) Search PubMed .J. Yang, X. L. Ding and C. L. Liang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253(20), 8352–8355 CrossRef CAS .R. E. Galindo, E. Fornies, R. Gago and J. M. Albella, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(12), 1512–1516 RSC .K. J. Kim, C. S. Jung and T. E. Hong, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2007, 18(9), 2750–2754 CrossRef CAS .I. Mantouvalou, W. Malzer, I. Schaumann, L. Luhl, R. Dargel, C. Vogt and B. Kanngiesser, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(3), 819–826 CrossRef CAS .P. Colombi, P. Zanola, E. Bontempi and L. E. Depero, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(6–7), 554–557 CrossRef .A. Gupta, N. Darowski, I. Zizak, C. Meneghini, G. Schumacher and A. Erko, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(6–7), 622–625 CrossRef .R. Dargel, M. Azeroual, B. Mogwitz, J. Janek and C. Vogt, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42(17), 7375–7380 CrossRef CAS .G. L. Katona, Z. Berenyi, L. Peter and K. Vad, Vacuum, 2007, 82(2), 270–273 CrossRef CAS .E. Bacaksiz, O. Gorur, A. Tomakin, E. Yanmaz and A. Altunbas, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61(30), 5239–5242 CrossRef CAS .K. G. Lloyd, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2007, 25(4), 878–885 CrossRef CAS .M. Cwil, P. Konarski and J. Ciosek, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2007, 263(1), 54–58 Search PubMed .K. Peeters, K. De Wael, A. Adriaens, G. Falkenberg and L. Vincze, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(5), 493–501 RSC .E. Staryga, G. W. Bak, J. Rogowski, M. Knapik, A. Rylski and K. Fabisiak, Diam. Relat. Mat., 2007, 16(4–7), 1312–1315 CrossRef CAS .V. Bursikova, P. Rehulka, J. Chmelik, M. Alberti, Z. Spalt, J. Janca and J. Havel, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68(5–6), 701–706 CrossRef CAS .W. Lisowski, E. G. Keim, Z. Kaszkur, A. H. J. van den Berg and M. A. Smithers, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389(5), 1489–1498 CrossRef CAS .R. Mertens, W. Bock, B. Lommel and B. O. Kolbesen, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390(6), 1517–1525 CrossRef CAS .H. P. Jakobsen, J. W. Andreasen, K. Nomnan and F. C. Krebs, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516(8), 2203–2212 CrossRef CAS .D. Alamarguy, J. E. Castle, N. Ibris and A. M. Salvi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2007, 25(6), 1577–1586 CrossRef CAS .P. Barquinha, A. M. Vila, G. Goncalves, R. Martins, J. R. Morante, E. Fortunato and L. Pereira, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2008, 55(4), 954–960 CrossRef CAS .K. Baba, R. Hatada, S. Flege, G. Kraft and W. Ensinger, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 257, 746–749 Search PubMed .J. F. Xu, P. M. Thibado, C. Awo-Affouda, F. Ramos and V. P. LaBella, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2007, 25(4), 1476–1480 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Lee, B. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. M. An and K. Y. Seo, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515(17), 6915–6920 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Signore, A. Rizzo, L. Mirenghi, M. A. Tagliente and A. Cappello, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515(17), 6798–6804 CrossRef CAS .K. Ohdaira, Y. Abe, M. Fukuda, S. Nishizaki, N. Usami, K. Nakajima, T. Karasawa, T. Torikai and H. Matsumura, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516(5), 600–603 CrossRef CAS .Y. Y. Hui, P. H. Shih, K. J. Sun and C. F. Lin, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515(17), 6754–6757 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Eleruja, G. O. Egharevba, O. A. Abulude, O. O. Akinwunmi, C. Jeynes and E. O. B. Ajayi, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42(8), 2758–2765 CrossRef CAS .O. F. Caltun and L. S. Hsu, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2007, 9(4), 1155–1157 Search PubMed .S. Kakuta, S. Sasaki, T. Hirano, K. Ueda, T. Seki, S. Ninomiya, M. Hada and J. Matsuo, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 257, 677–682 Search PubMed .K. Gotoh, H. Suzuki, H. Udono, I. Kikuma, F. Esaka, M. Uchikoshi and M. Isshiki, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515(22), 8263–8267 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, V. Sallet, F. Jomard, A. M. B. do Rego, E. Elamurugu, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515(24), 8785–8788 CrossRef CAS .A. Vincze, J. Bruncko, M. Michalka and D. Figura, Cent. Eur. J. Phys., 2007, 5(3), 385–397 CrossRef CAS .S. Klemme, S. Prowatke, C. Munker, C. W. Magee, Y. Lahaye, T. Zack, S. A. Kasemann, E. J. A. Cabato and B. Kaeser, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2008, 32(1), 39–54 Search PubMed .A. J. Fitzpatrick, T. K. Kyser, D. Chipley and D. Beauchemin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(2), 244–248 RSC .T. Hiratat and Y. Kon, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(3), 345–353 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Gonzalez, A. Fernandez, D. Oropeza, X. Mao and R. E. Russo, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(2), 277–286 CrossRef .J. J. Gonzalez, C. Liu, S. B. Wen, X. Mao and R. E. Russo, Talanta, 2007, 73(3), 577–582 CrossRef CAS .V. S. Burakov and S. N. Raikov, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(3), 217–223 CrossRef .V. Burakov, N. Tarasenko, M. Nedelko and S. Isakov, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(1), 19–26 CrossRef .V. Sturm, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(12), 1495–1500 RSC .N. Carmona, M. Oujja, S. Gaspard, M. Garcia-Heras, M. A. Villegas and M. Castillejo, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(2), 94–100 CrossRef .C. M. Bridge, J. Powell, K. L. Steele and M. E. Sigman, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1419–1425 CrossRef .J. Coumbaros, J. Denman, K. P. Kirkbride, G. S. Walker and W. Skinner, J. Forensic Sci., 2008, 53(2), 312–320 CrossRef CAS .T. Nakanishi, Y. Nishiwaki, N. Miyamoto, O. Shimoda, S. Watanabe, S. Muratsu, M. Takatsu, Y. Terada, Y. Suzuki, M. Kasamatsu and S. Suzuki, Forensic Sci.Int., 2008, 175(2–3), 227–234 CrossRef CAS .M. Ito, A. Hokura, M. Oishi, Y. Nishiwaki and I. Nakai, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(12), 1115–1125 CrossRef CAS .M. Kasamatsu, H. Kikkawa, Y. Higashikawa, Y. Suzuki, S. Suzuki, T. Nakanishi, M. Takatsu, O. Shimoda, S. Watanabe, Y. Nishiwaki and N. Miyamoto, Bunseki Kagaku, 2007, 56(12), 1159–1164 CrossRef CAS .S. Peuget, V. Broudic, C. Jegou, P. Frugier, D. Roudil, X. Deschanels, H. Rabiller and P. Y. Noel, J. Nucl. Mater., 2007, 362(2–3), 474–479 CrossRef CAS .T. Chave, P. Frugier, A. Ayral and S. Gin, J. Nucl. Mater., 2007, 362(2–3), 466–473 CrossRef CAS .T. Calligaro, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(2), 169–177 CrossRef CAS .A. Shortland, N. Rogers and K. Eremin, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2007, 34(5), 781–789 Search PubMed .A. Silvestri, G. Molin and G. Salviulo, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2008, 35(2), 331–341 Search PubMed .O. Schalm, K. Janssens, H. Wouters and D. Caluwe, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(6–7), 663–668 CrossRef .N. Zacharias, K. Beltsios, A. Oikonomou, A. G. Karydas, Y. Bassiakos, C. T. Michael and C. Zarkadas, Opt. Mater., 2008, 30(7), 1127–1133 CrossRef CAS .N. Zacharias, K. Beltsios, A. Oikonomou, A. G. Karydas, V. Aravantinos and Y. Bassiakos, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 761–767 CrossRef CAS .A. Oikonomou, P. Triantafyllidis, K. Beltsios, N. Zacharias and M. Karakassides, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 768–772 CrossRef CAS .D. Benedetti, E. Bontempi, R. Bertoncello, B. Dal Bianco, E. Pantos and L. E. Depero, Nuovo Cimento Soc. Ital. Fis. C-Geophys. Space Phys., 2007, 30(1), 27–33 Search PubMed .B. Dal Bianco and R. Bertoncello, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 773–779 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Huisman, S. Pols, I. Joosten, B. J. H. van Os and A. Smit, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2008, 35(2), 398–411 Search PubMed .A. Climent-Font, A. Munoz-Martin, M. D. Ynsa and A. Zucchiatti, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(4), 640–648 Search PubMed .A. Zucchiatti, L. Canonica, P. Prati, A. Cagnana, S. Roascio and A. C. Font, J. Cult. Herit., 2007, 8(3), 307–314 CrossRef .F. Pinakidou, M. Katsikini, E. C. Paloura, O. Kaloglrou and A. Erko, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2007, 353(28), 2717–2733 CrossRef CAS .F. Pinakidou, M. Katsikini, P. Kavouras, F. Komninou, T. Karakostas and E. C. Paloura, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354(2–9), 105–111 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Souders and P. J. Sylvester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(4), 535–543 RSC .D. Cacaina, H. Ylanen, S. Simon and M. Hupa, J. Mater. Sci.-Mater. Med., 2008, 19(3), 1225–1233 CrossRef CAS .M. Klimov, L. Glebova and L. Glebov, Phys. Chem. Glasses-Eur. J. Glass Sci. Technol. Part B, 2007, 48(5), 313–316 Search PubMed .T. Ctvrtnickova, L. M. Cabalin, J. Laserna and V. Kanicky, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(1), 42–50 CrossRef .D. K. Killinger, S. D. Allen, R. D. Waterbury, C. Stefano and E. L. Dottery, Opt. Express, 2007, 15(20), 12905–12915 CrossRef CAS .K. Novotny, A. Stankova, H. Hakkanen, J. Korppi-Tommola, V. Otruba and V. Kanicky, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(12), 1567–1574 CrossRef .D. K. Das, J. P. McDonald, S. M. Yallsove and T. M. Pollock, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(1), 27–36 CrossRef .B. U. Peschel, W. Herdering and J. A. C. Broekaert, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(2), 109–115 CrossRef .P. Barth, J. Hassler, I. Kudrik and V. Krivan, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 924–932 CrossRef .B. Docekal and B. Vojtkova, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(3), 304–308 CrossRef .A. F. Kiera, S. Schmidt-Lehr, M. Song, N. H. Bings and J. A. C. Broekaert, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2008, 63(2), 287–292 CrossRef .H. J. Heinrich and R. Matschat, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(8), 807–816 CrossRef .P. Karimov, S. Harada, H. Takenaka and J. Kawai, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(5), 476–480 CrossRef .A. C. Sahayam, S. J. Jiang and C. C. Wan, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 605(2), 130–133 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Packer, D. Lariviere, C. S. Li, M. Chen, A. Fawcett, K. Nielsen, K. Mattson, A. Chatt, C. Scriver and L. S. Erhardt, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 588(2), 166–172 CrossRef CAS .L. Curkovic, M. F. Jelaca and S. Kurajica, Corrosion Sci., 2008, 50(3), 872–878 CrossRef CAS .R. Fenandez-Ruiz and M. Garcia-Heras, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(10), 1123–1129 CrossRef .C. Calza, M. J. Anjos, M. Bueno, T. A. Lima and R. T. Lopes, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 263(1), 245–248 Search PubMed .C. Calza, M. J. Anjos, M. Bueno, S. M. de Souza, A. Brancaglion, T. A. Lima and R. T. Lopes, X-Ray Spectrom., 2007, 36(5), 348–354 CrossRef CAS .Y. Q. Wang, S. L. Feng, X. Q. Feng, Y. Lei, L. Cheng, Q. Xu, Z. X. Zhuo and D. X. Xue, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 272(3), 541–543 CrossRef CAS .P. Fermo, E. Delnevo, M. Lasagni, S. Polla and M. de Vos, Microchem J., 2008, 88(2), 150–159 CrossRef CAS .F. Bellanti, A. Tomassetti, G. Visco and L. Campanella, Microchem J., 2008, 88(2), 113–120 CrossRef CAS .I. Papageorgiou and I. Liritzis, Archaeometry, 2007, 49, 795–813 CrossRef CAS .P. Marzo, F. Laborda and J. Perez-Arantegui, Atom. Spectrosc., 2007, 28(6), 195–201 CAS .D. Papadopoulou, A. Sakalis, N. Merousis and N. C. Tsirfiganis, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A-Accel. Spectrom. Dect. Assoc. Equip., 2007, 580(1), 743–746 CrossRef CAS .N. Wood, M. S. Tite, C. Doherty and B. Gilmore, Archaeometry, 2007, 49, 665–684 CrossRef CAS .T. Broekmans, A. Adriaens and E. Pantos, Appl. Phys. A-Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 90(1), 35–42 CAS .C. M. Belfiore, P. M. Day, A. Hein, V. Kilikoglou, V. La Rosa, P. Mazzoleni and A. Pezzino, Archaeometry, 2007, 49, 621–653 CrossRef CAS .C. Fortina, I. M. Turbanti and F. Grassi, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 30–47 CAS .L. Cheng, X. L. Ding, Z. G. Liu, Q. L. Pan and X. L. Chu, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(8), 817–823 CrossRef .J. Zhang, X. Gao, B. C. Song, Z. F. Wang and W. W. Lu, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62(8–9), 1162–1164 CrossRef CAS .M. O. Li, X. F. Xiao, R. F. Liu, C. Y. Chen and L. Z. Huang, J. Mater. Sci.-Mater. Med., 2008, 19(2), 797–803 CrossRef CAS .A. Balamurugan, G. Balossier, S. Kannan, J. Michel, J. Faure and S. Rajeswari, Ceram. Int., 2007, 33(4), 605–614 CrossRef CAS .Y. Pekounov and O. E. Petrov, J. Mater. Sci.-Mater. Med., 2008, 19(2), 753–759 CrossRef CAS .G. V. Myasoedova, O. B. Mokhodoeva and I. V. Kubrakova, Anal. Sci., 2007, 23(9), 1031–1039 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Bhargava, D. B. Akolekar and G. Foran, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2007, 267(1–2), 57–64 CrossRef CAS .H. Nitani, T. Nakagawa, H. Daimon, Y. Kurobe, T. Ono, Y. Honda, A. Koizumi, S. Seino and T. A. Yamamoto, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 326(2), 194–201 CrossRef CAS .E. Sacaliuc, A. M. Beale, B. M. Weckhuysen and T. A. Nijhuis, J. Catal., 2007, 248(2), 235–248 CrossRef CAS .J. Kawai, H. Ishii, Y. Matsui, Y. Terada, T. Tanabe and I. Uchiyama, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(6–7), 677–681 CrossRef .K. Van Meel, A. Smekens, M. Behets, P. Kazandjian and R. Van Grieken, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(16), 6383–6389 CrossRef CAS .Y. Izumi, K. Konishi, D. M. Obaid, T. Miyajima and H. Yoshitake, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79(18), 6933–6940 CrossRef CAS .L. F. Rodrigues, J. C. P. de Mattos, V. L. Dressler, D. Pozebon and E. M. D. Flores, Spectroc. Acta Pt. B-Atom. Spectr., 2007, 62(9), 933–938 CrossRef .J. Grams, J. Goralski and B. Szczepaniak, Russ. J. Phys. Chem., 2007, 81(9), 1515–1520 CrossRef CAS .R. J. H. Morris, M. G. Dowsett, S. H. Dalal, D. L. Baptista, K. B. K. Teo and W. I. Milne, Surf. Interface Anal., 2007, 39(11), 898–901 CrossRef CAS .G. S. Park, C. Pak, Y. S. Chung, J. R. Kim, W. S. Jeon, Y. H. Lee, K. Kim, H. Chang and D. Seung, J. Power Sources, 2008, 176(2), 484–489 CrossRef CAS .A. Johansson, S. Hemdal, M. Andersson and A. Rosen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111(29), 6798–6805 CrossRef CAS .V. Pinoie, K. Poelmans, H. E. Miltner, I. Verbruggen, M. Biesemans, G. Van Assche, B. Van Mele, J. C. Martins and R. Willem, Organometallics, 2007, 26(27), 6718–6725 CrossRef CAS .P. Evans, T. English, D. Hammond, M. E. Pemble and D. W. Sheel, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 321(2), 140–146 CrossRef CAS .B. Rajesh, N. Sasirekha and Y. W. Chen, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2007, 275(1–2), 174–182 CrossRef CAS .M. P. M. Kaninski, V. M. Nikolic, T. N. Potkonjak, B. R. Simonovic and N. I. Potkonjak, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 321(1), 93–99 CrossRef .Z. X. Wang, Y. Pan, T. Dong, X. F. Zhu, T. Kan, L. X. Yuan, Y. Torimoto, M. Sadakata and Q. X. Li, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 320, 24–34 CrossRef CAS .M. Seredych and T. J. Bandosz, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 128(1), 59–67 CrossRef CAS .S. X. Xie, J. Wang and H. He, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2007, 266(1–2), 166–172 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Hueso, J. Cotrino, A. Caballero, J. P. Espinos and A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, J. Catal., 2007, 247(2), 288–297 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Bengoa, A. M. Alvarez, M. V. Cagnoli, N. G. Gallegos and S. G. Marchetti, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 325(1), 68–75 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Cagnoli, A. M. Alvarez, N. G. Gallegos, J. F. Bengoa, C. D. D. de Souza, M. Schmal and S. G. Marchetti, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 326(1), 113–119 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Coman, M. Florea, V. I. Parvulescu, V. David, A. Medvedovici, D. De Vos, P. A. Jacobs, G. Poncelet and P. Grange, J. Catal., 2007, 249(2), 359–369 CrossRef CAS .J. Bandara, U. Klehm and J. Kiwi, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2007, 76(1–2), 73–81 CrossRef CAS .L. Korosi, A. Oszko, G. Galbacs, A. Richardt, V. Zollmer and I. Dekany, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2007, 77(1–2), 175–183 CrossRef CAS .B. P. Chaplin, J. R. Shapley and C. J. Werth, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41(15), 5491–5497 CrossRef CAS .Y. Izumi, K. Konishi, T. Miyajima and H. Yoshitake, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62(6–7), 861–864 CrossRef CAS .B. Z. Tian, J. L. Zhang, T. Z. Tong and F. Chen, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2008, 79(4), 394–401 CrossRef CAS .H. Xu, H. M. Li, C. D. Wu, J. Y. Chu, Y. S. Yan and H. M. Shu, Mater. Sci. Eng. B-Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2008, 147(1), 52–56 CAS .A. C. C. Rodrigues and J. L. F. Monteiro, Catal. Lett., 2007, 117(3–4), 166–170 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:

Ferrous metals and alloys
N	Steel	SIMS; S	The surface modification of impacting nitrogen ions onto SKD-61 steel was studied by SIMS	40
Various	Cast iron stainless steel	XPS; S XRD; S XRF; SEM; S	High temperature corrosion of these materials in a gas exhaust environment was studied. Auger electron spectrometry was also used.	41,42
Various	Metal hydride alloys	XPS; S	Other techniques: secondary neutron mass spectrometry, thermal desorption mass spectrometry were used to study hydrogen storage behaviour.	43
Various	Zinc - iron alloys electro-plated	AA; F; L XRD; S	Zn1-xFex alloys were electro-plated on stainless steel from a sulfate bath. FAAS, XRD, and polarization measurements were made to study these plated alloys	44
Various (4)	High alloy steel	AES; HG ICP; L	As, Bi, Se, Sn, and Te were determined with limits of quantitation of 1–10 mg kg−1. Accuracy was evaluated by spike recovery experiments.	45
Various (10)	Iron waste slag	AES; laser; S	LIBS conditions were optimized and results were compared with those obtained using ICP-OES	46
Non-ferrous metals and alloys
Ag	silver coated quartz	ToF SIMS; -; S	Artificially corroded silver coated quartz crystal microbalance disks were depth-profiled by ToF-SIMS. The presence of O and S were detected in the weathered layers.	47
Ag, Cu	Brass and steel	LIBS; -; S	LIBS was used to depth-profile silver plated brass, copper plated steel, and silver plated nylon substrate	48
B	Titanium	SIMS; -; S	The diffusion of B into pure titanium and gamma Ti–Al (54 at.% Al) was monitored by SIMS using the stable B-11 isotope.	49
Ge	Gadolinium silicon germanide alloy	OES; ICP; L	Two decomposition methods were compared. A mixture of HNO3 + HF decomposed the sample and the effect of amount of HF on dissolution process was studied. Three different alloys were studied.	50
Li	Aluminium alloys	LIBS; -; S	Wavelength selection and optimizing conditions for the determination of Li in aluminium alloys was described. LOD's at different wavelength were 230 ppm (610 nm) and 870 ppm (671 nm).	51
Nb	Tantalum	OES; GD; S	Trace Nb in tantalum by GD-OES was in agreement with values obtained using solution- ICP-OES. RSD values of 3% within runs and 4% between runs were reported (without concentration values). LOD was estimated to be 2 ppm.	52
Ni	Nickel-titanium alloys	MS; MIP; L	The degradation of diamond like coatings on nickel-titanium dental alloys in physiological saline solution was determined by microwave induced plasma mass spectrometry. The alloy was kept in the solution for 6 months at 37°C.	53
Pb	Tin based solder	FI-AFS; HG F; L	A macrocyclic immobilized silica gel was used within a flow injection manifold mini-column to separate Pb from matrix elements. An RSD of 1.8% for 0.5 mg L−1 Pb and a LOD of 3 ng L−1 Pb were reported.	54
Pb	Tin based solder	LIPS; S	Linear calibration curves were obtained from lead-free solder certified reference materials (range 174–1940 ppm). LOD was reported to be “several tens of ppm”.	55
Se	Manganese	OES; HG ICP; L	The development of a laboratory reference material for the determination of Se in electrolytic manganese and aluminium alloys was described	56
Ti and Mo	Titanium-molybdenum alloys	XRF; SEM; S	Ti-Mo alloys from 4–20% Mo were studied by SEM with EDX for composition mapping. XRD was used to verify the crystal structure of the alloys.	57
Various	Ancient coins	MS; LA ICP; S	The presence of Hg on silvered coins by LA-ICP-MS was evidence that amalgam silvering was a process used in the production of Roman coins. Results were confirmed by EPMA.	58
Various (24)	Cobalt	MS; ICP; L	Samples were dissolved in closed microwave vessels with HNO3 and HCl. LOD were in the range 0.016–1.50 μg g−1.	59
Various (22)	Copper	MS; ICP; L	The performance and reliability of ICP-MS and ETAAS for the determination of 22 elements in copper were compared.	60
AA; ETA; L
Various (52)	Niobium and niobium compounds	MS; ICP; L	25 elements were determined by an online anion exchange matrix separation method. 27 elements were analyzed directly injecting a sample solution plus 0.2% of internal standards into the ICP-MS instrument by a flow injection manifold. Sample included niobium metaland niobium oxides.	61
Various	Palladium-silver-ruthenium/alumina alloy	OES; ICP; L	The composition of the alloy was determined by ICP-OES.	62
Various (7)	Silver coins	MS; LA ICP; S	Analytical protocols were developed to characterize ancient silver coins. Results for samples and standards were compared with those obtained using fast neutron activation analysis.	63
Various (9)	Tellurium	OES; GD; S	Elements (Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mg, Ni, Pb, Se and Si) were determined in high purity tellurium. LOD for most elements were less than 10 ng g−1.	64
Various	Titanium dental alloys	OES; ICP; L	Six different titanium based alloys were immersed in peroxide and fluoride containing solutions. The extent of dissolution was measured by ICP-OES. A Ti-20Cr alloy was minimally affected by the treatments.	65

Mg	Paper from early 20th century books	MS; ICP; LA	pH is an important feature governing the stability of paper. De-acidification solutions, often containing magnesium are employed and LA-ICP-MS was used for the investigation of magnesium distribution over the surface of paper	128
Mn, Zn	Beer	AAS; F; L	Fractionation of distinct Mn and Zn species, e.g., hydrophobic polyphenol bound metals and cationic metal species prior to quantitation.	129
Mn	Hypertensive drugs	AAS; ETV; L	Comparative study of univariate and multivariate optimisation procedures for manganese determination	130
Pb	Vinegar	AAS; ETV; L	Bismuth was evaluated as an internal standard to minimise the matrix effects during the determination of Pb in vinegar by GFAAS.	131
Pb	Historical European paintings	XRF; S also SEM-EDX, XRD	Yellow pigments based on oxides of lead. The recipes for their production are uncertain. This paper outlines the synthesis of some traditional lead-based yellows and comparative analysis with those found in historical paintings.	132
Pb	Micro-analytical study of the interactions between oil and lead compounds in paintings	Synchrotron based FTIR and XRF micro analysis	Molecular and atomic images were obtained. Investigated the appearance of protrusions formed on aging.	133
Sb	Environmental and pharmaceutical samples	AAS; HG	A flame heated metallic hydride atomizer is evaluated and optimised for a range of matrices	134
Various	Wine	OES; ICP; L and AAS; ETV; L	Metals content was used as a marker for determination of origin of wines. Supervised learning pattern recognition procedures were applied to the data. Linear discriminant analysis and Probabilistic Neural Networks were used in the data analysis.	135,136
Various	Wine	A range of techniques	A review article (52 refs) covering the analysis of metals in wine in the past decade	137
Various (12)	Sherry	OES; ICP; L	Twelve elements quantified. Non-normal distributions were reported and the inter-relations of metal couples were investigated using Spearman non-parametric sample correlation. Similar results reported in two papers.	138,139
Various	Tobacco	XRF; S	The bio-accumulation of heavy metals in tobacco because of intensive farming may be a health concern. This paper shows the use of WDXRF in quantifying a range of metals in tobacco leaves.	140
Various	Ecstasy tablets	Various	A review is presented (79 refs) outlining both atomic and molecular analysis for the profiling of illicit ecstasy tablets	141
Various	Decorative paintings from the sarcophagus cartonnage of an Egyptian mummy	X-ray micro-fluorescence	Synchrotron radiation employed.	142,143
Various	Multilayer paint chips, inks and fibres.	Raman spectroscopy and μ-XRF	Molecular and atomic profiling of forensic samples. The aim of the work was to assess the practicality of the combination of the two techniques within one instrument (PRAXIS apparatus)	144

Cl, Fe and Zn	Zinc electro-plating solutions	XRF; -; L	Analysis performed in atmospheric helium mode. Procedure provided results with acceptable accuracy and precision.	166
Cl and Fe	Hydrochloric pickling solutions	XRF; -; L	Similar procedure to the one described above.	167
CN−	Industrial effluent and electrolytic baths	AAS; F; FI	Four silver reagents (sulfite, dichromate, oxalate and carbonate) compared for the indirect determination of cyanide. Reagents packed (25%) into columns and then Ag (as the cyanide) determined by FAAS. Method was simple, fast and precise (RSD = 1.12%).	168
CN−	Industrial waste waters	AAS; F; FI	Micro-column of N,N'bis(salicylidene) ethylenediamine immobilized on sodium dodecylsulfate coated alumina saturated with silver ions. Introduction of 250 μL of sample (pH 9–11) led to elution of silver cyanide. Linear range for CN was 0.1–10 mg L−1, LOD was 0.06 mg L−1 and RSD was approx. 4.1% for a CN concentration of 1 mg L−1.	169
Cr	Pharmaceutical grade barium sulfate	AAS; ETA; S	Sample (0.3–1 mg) was weighed directly into graphite tube. Pyrolysis and atomization temperatures of 1500 and 2400°C used. LOD was 2.4 pg, reproducibility (n = 20 over three day period) was 12% and repeatability was better than 9%. Results compared with those obtained using nitric acid extraction followed by ETAAS and ICP-OES and were found to be 20% higher using the proposed method. This was attributed to incomplete extraction. Calibration with aqueous standards was possible.	170
Sn	Hydrochloric acid	AAS; ETA; Sl	Sn-APDC complex collected on an anion exchange resin. After filtration, resin dispersed in 1 M nitric acid containing 100 μg Pd and 60 μg Ni. Resin suspension analyzed directly.	171
Various (9)	High purity tellurium (6N)	OES; GD; S	Six analytes (Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb and Si) below LOD, other analytes (Ca, Mg and Se) detectable. LOD for most analytes below 10 ng g−1 and precision was approx. 10% RSD. Results compared with those obtained using ICP-MS.	64
Various (10)	High purity antimony (5N)	MS; ICP; G	Aqua regia vapour used to convert antimony to antimony trichloride. This volatilized material at 250°C within 90 mins. Recoveries of analytes were > 90% except for Pb (47%). LODs in the ng g−1 range. Results compared with those obtained using SF-ICP-MS and by volatilization using bromide.	172

241Am	Sediments and seaweeds	SF-ICP-MS	Sample separated by co-precipitation on CaF2 followed by purification on TRU resin. LOD = 0.86 fg (0.11 mBq). Chemical yield = 72–94%. Good agreement reported vs. CRM and against alpha-spectrometry.	233
Cs and Mo	Sediment core samples	MS; ICP; L	The extent and radiological characteristics of leaked material from Hanford tank in sediments was assessed. Samples leached with water and dilute acid. Isotope ratios for Cs and Mo determined.	234
H-isotopes	Graphite	XPS; -; S	Mapping/profiling of wall tiles from JT-60U	235
Np	Uranyl oxide hydrate minerals	MS; ICP; LA	 	236
Np and Pu	Hydrous ferric oxide colloids	SIMS; -; S XANES XPS	Speciation of Np and Pu in contaminated aquifer of the “Mayak” site. At low concentration, Pu sorbed onto hydrous ferric oxide colloids. At higher concentration, it forms PuO2 × nH2O colloids.	237
Pu	Coastal surface waters	MS; ICP; L Alpha spectrometry	Isotope dilution performed using sector field instrument. 240Pu/239Pu determined with mean value of 0.227. This is substantially higher than mean global fallout value of 0.18.	238
Pu + various	Lanthanide borosilicate glasses	MS; ICP; L	PCT for Pu loaded glasses (PuO2 = 9.5%). Leachates filtered through 0.45 μm filters and after ultra-centrifugation to determine colloidal Pu.	239
Pu	Marine sediments	MS; ICP; L	Digestion and chemical separation to pre-concentrate Pu and remove 238U and 241Am prior to measurement of 239Pu, 240Pu, 241Pu and 242Pu. Sector field instrument used.	240
Pu	Squid liver	MS; ICP; L	Digestion and standard radiochemical separation of Pu. Concentration = 1.5–28 mBq kg−1 (239Pu) and 1.1–24 mBq kg−1 (240Pu). Input from global and near-in (Bikini Atoll) fallout estimated from isotope ratio. Sector field instrument used.	241
Pu	Seawater	MS; ICP; L	Chemical separation via two stage anion exchange. Chemical yield 242Pu tracer = 65%. Activities of alpha-isotopes showed good agreement with certified values. Isotopic ratios for 240Pu/239Pu showed improved precision (RSD = 0.35%) compared to the indicative values of the CRM (RSD = 13.6%). Sector field instrument used.	226
Pu	Soil and sediments	MS; ICP; FI	Microwave extraction, Separation and pre-concentration on TEVA micro-column. LOD = 3 pg kg−1 for Pu-239 and 0.3 pg kg−1 for higher Pu-isotopes equivalent to Pu239 + 240 LOD = 10 mBq kg−1. Flow injection system into a quadrupole instrument.	212
Pu	Environmental samples	AMS; -; L Alpha spectrometry	TEVA (R) resin used to retain analyte prior to determination. Good agreement between AMS and alpha spectrometry observed.	242
Pu	Environmental samples	MS; ICP; L	Ultrasonic nebulisation of material into quadrupole instrument. Pu isotopes determined. Techniques for dissolution, pre-concentration and chemical separation evaluated. Results compare with those from alpha spectrometry. LOD of 0.5–1 fg L−1 obtained for fresh waters and 0.03–0.2 ng kg−1 for sediments.	243
Pu	Forest soils	MS; ICP; L	Soils from Nagasaki area collected and decomposed using microwave digestion procedure. Pu isotope ratios determined on high resolution instrument.	244
Pu	Urine	MS; ICP; L	Automated, on-line pre-concentration, separation and detection system established using TEVA resin. Elution of Pu from resin was with 0.01 M ammonium oxalate. Pu isotope ratios determined in urine in less than 15 minutes with LOD ∼ 0.2 mBq L−1. Recovery ∼ 70%.	245
Pu	Urine	MS; ICP, L TIMS; Alpha spectrometry	Pu isotopes determined. Three ICP-MS methods compared with one TIMS method and two alpha spectrometry methods.	246
U, Th	 	TXRF	Sample size = 10 μl, matrix <200 μg cm−3, analyte = 1–50 μg cm−3, % RSD <3%, bias < 4%. Internal standard = Co, Ga or Y	247
U	Water	Q-ICP-MS	U separated and pre-concentrated on TRU resin. Alkaline stripping solution used (TMAH). Pre-concentration factor = 20 achieved.	248
U (DU)	Fish	DRC-Q-ICP-MS; SF-ICP-MS	Isotope ratio measured to estimate DU. Ammonia used in reaction cell. Bias at 1, 1,5 and 2x LOQ = −8.2, + 9.5 and +9.6% respectively. Similarly, within laboratory reproducibilities of 15.5, 8.0 and 11.0% reported	249
Various (3)	Environmental samples	 	Development of an on-line sequential injection system for the separation of 210Pb, 210Po and Pu. Results for Pu within 5% of certified value for IAEA soil 6.	250
Various	Sediment core	MS; ICP; L Gamma spectrometry	137Cs, 237Np, 239Pu, 240Pu, 234U, 238U, 228Th, 230Th and 232Th determined using sector field ICP-MS and gamma spectrometry.	251
Various	PUREX materials	XRF	Plutonium, Uranium Refining by Extraction process materials analyzed. An actinide separation process from the bulk raffinate matrix with quantitative efficiency was developed.	252
Various	PUREX materials	XRF	Four separation methods of actinides from each other developed.	253
86Y	 	MS; ICP; L	86Y produced from 86Sr strontium carbonate by irradiation using low energy protons. Overall efficiency was > 90%.	254
93Zr	Irradiated cladding material	MS; ICP; L	Isotope dilution and a multi-collector instrument used. Zr removed from zircaloy cladding material prior to analysis. Uncertainty of ICP-MS determination was 0.1%, with overall uncertainty being estimated as 0.6%.	255

Diffusion and depth-profiling applications
C	Thin films of titanium and tantalum carbides	SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S	Carbide films produced by treating titanium and tantalum films in methane at 1 Pa pressure and creating an electrical discharge at −20kV. Process times of between 0.5 and 2 hours used at a pulse repetition rate of 1 kHz. SIMS and XPS gave depth-profiles of implanted C and the chemical shift observed demonstrated the formation of metal- C bonds. The depth-profile indicated the formation of a thin C film on top and a shallow implantation profile.	322
Mn	Gallium manganese arsenide/gallium arsenide (001) thin films	SIMS; -; S	Mn-doped films of gallium arsenide grown by molecular beam epitaxy at substrate temperatures of between 580 and 250°C. Dynamic SIMS and Auger electron spectroscopy used for characterization. When films grown at 250°C, the Mn profile is uniform, but at higher temperature the Mn profile can be erratic. When the Mn level is below the solubility limit, unexpected peaks were observed in the concentration depth profile.	323
Various	Ultra-thin oxide-nitride-oxide stacked films	SIMS; ToF; S	ToF-SIMS and Auger electron spectroscopy used to measure depth profiles. Tunnel oxide of 2.3 nm depth grown on silicon substrate in a nitrogen diluted oxygen ambient, then 5.7 nm layer of nitride deposited using low-pressure chemical vapour deposition. Blocking oxide then formed by oxidizing oxide-nitride structure in wet oxygen. Some chemical mixing found to occur, i.e. tunnel oxide reacts with silicon surface forming SiO1.1N0.67 and also O diffuses into nitride layer forming the same compound.	324
Various	Zirconium oxynitride films obtained by radio-frequency magnetron reactive sputtering	SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S XRD; -; S	The relationship between structural and compositional properties and the sputtering parameters was investigated. At lowest N flux in the atmosphere, ZrN cubic phase was produced with very small quantities of amorphous zirconium oxynitride. At highest N flux, only crystalline ZrON phases were found. Between the extremes, a mixture of ZrN and ZrON was found.	325
Various	Poly-crystalline silicon films	SIMS; -; S	Films produced by flash lamp annealing of amorphous silicon films prepared by catalytic chemical vapour deposition method. The crystallinity could be changed by altering the lamp irradiance. SIMS depth-profiling of dopants indicated negligible diffusion. Material regarded as potentially a highly efficient solar cell.	326
Other characterization studies
Er	Erbium doped spin-on glass	ToF-SIMS; -; S	Erbium - doped silica thin films show room temperature photo-luminescence at ∼ 1.53 μm. After annealing of the film at 1000°C, photo-luminescence was enhanced by a factor of 30 compared with those annealed at low temperature. ToF-SIMS results indicated that at higher annealing temperature, Er–O–Si complex was favoured and the OH group eliminated.	327
Various	Nickel oxide and lithium nickel oxide thin films	EDXRF; -; S	Thin films deposited through pyrolysis of nickel acetylacetonate and lithium acetylacetonate in the temperature range 350–420°C. Starting materials and products analyzed using EDXRF and XRD with the products also being analyzed using Rutherford back scattering spectrometry, UV-Vis spectroscopy and van der Pauw conductivity. The amount of metals in product did not reflect the ratio of metals in the precursors. Instead, it was dependent on deposition temperature.	328
Various	Thin ferrite films	SIMS; -; S	Nickel ferrite, nickel zinc ferrite, zinc ferrite and barium ferrite films grown on silicon substrate. Films then characterized using XRD, SEM, EDAX, SIMS and AFM.	329
Various	PtMn magnetic material film	SIMS; -; S	Depth-profile of major elements in films determined using SIMS. Film structure and lattice spacing determined using XRR and GIXRD. Gas cluster ion beam at an acceleration voltage of 20 kV and at an angle of 80° used to smooth the surface of the films. Average roughness of 1.2 nm obtained.	330
Various	Beta iron silicide (FeSi2) thin films	SIMS; -; S MS; GD; S MS; ICP; -	High purity iron (5N) and silicon (5N+), molten in a quartz ampoule forming the compound. GD-MS determined that material was one order of magnitude more pure than that prepared using traditional arc melted method. Material showed n-type conduction whereas arc-melted material showed p-type. ICP-MS and SIMS analysis showed that impurities in the p-type conducting materials were mainly Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, W and Zn.	331
Various	Nitrogen doped zinc oxide films	SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S	Films produced by RF magnetron sputtering in 75% nitrogen/argon + nitrogen atmosphere. Influence of substrate temperature (room temperature to 300°C) determined using XRD, SIMS, XPS and Hall measurements. XPS and SIMS demonstrated that nitrogen incorporation decreased as temperature increased. Hall measurements indicated n-type conductivity.	332
Various	Pulsed laser deposited zinc oxide films	SIMS; -; S	Numerous methods of preparation described including ablation of sintered ZnO pellets and pure metallic zinc targets. Properties of films closely related to pulsed laser deposition conditions. SIMS, AFM and SEM used to characterize materials produced using different methods.	333
Various	Iron-nickel alloy thin films	Isotope ratio-MS; ICP; L XPS; -; S SIMS; -; S	A comparison of methods for surface analysis of iron-nickel alloy thin films. Films grown on silicon (100) wafers by ion-beam sputter deposition. Films then characterized by isotope ratio -ICP-MS. Alternative methods (XPS, SIMS and Auger electron spectroscopy) then also used for analysis. XPS and Auger agreed to within 2% of isotope ratio ICP-MS results and SIMS (using a 60C source) agreed to within 4%. Relative sensitivity factors had to be used for all techniques to obtain the results.	19

Applications of archaeological and historical glasses
Various (32)	Egyptian and Mesopotamian late bronze age glasses	MS; ICP; LA	Analysis of 54 Egyptian and Mesopotamian glasses using LA-ICP-MS demonstrated clear differences in elemental signature between the two types. The authors claimed that this was because of different raw materials/different manufacturing process.	351
Various	85 clear glass samples from the Roman ship Iulia Felix	XRF; -; S EPMA; -; S	Analytical data treated with multivariate statistical tools e.g. cluster analysis. Glass samples shown to be soda-lime-silica in composition. Pattern of trace elements (especially Ba, Sr and Zr) indicates beach sand with differing amounts of alkali-feldspars was used as raw material.	352
Various	500 glass window fragments from historical sites in Belgium	EPMA; -; S	Historical sites covered 12th–18th centuries. A sudden compositional change in late 14th century indicated that a new recipe was used and that new raw materials were introduced.	353
Various	Glass beads from Thebes	XRF; -; S	XRF produced supporting elemental data for a study that reported solid-state luminescence (thermo-luminescence and optically stimulated luminescence). Luminescence techniques enabled chronological estimation to be made.	354,355
Various	25 ancient glass artifacts from Rhodes	XRF; -; S	Artifacts dating from 640–600 BC analyzed using XRF and Raman spectroscopy. Composition indicates archaic recipe dating from between 15th and 7th century BC. Raman spectroscopy indicates low processing temperatures (ranging from < 600 to < 1000°C)	356
Various	Glass from Roman ship Iulia Felix	μ-XRF; -; S SIMS; -; S XPS; -; S	Various techniques employed to elucidate degradation mechanisms that irreversibly alter the aesthetic appearance, e.g. formation of patinas, loss of brightness and transparency, formation of pits, crystals and peeling layers. XRD also used with μ-XRF to allow identification of crystallization species.	357
Various	Glass from Roman ship Iulia Felix, from Italian church windows and modern glass	PIXE; -; S XPS; -; S	Weathering process in terms of the formation of corrosion growth rings in three sample types compared. Results indicated that the three glass types could all have been prepared using the same technique.	358
Various	Roman glass objects from the Bocholtz burial site	XRF; -; S	SEM and XRF used to study weathering process. Colourless glass objects badly weathered (crumbled to < 1 mm fragments) whereas transparent blue-green glass objects were pristine. Fragmentation found to be due to leaching of sodium oxide from glass structure and its replacement with water. The process appeared worse when the glass had a low concentration of calcium oxide. The coloured glass had a high calcium oxide content and was therefore weathered less.	359
Various	Ancient Roman glasses	PIGE; -; S PIXE; -; S	Al, Na and Si profiled as a function of PIGE beam energy.	360
Various	V-XVI century glasses from San Martino di Ovaro (Italy)	PIXE; -; S	42 glass fragments analyzed in fully non-destructive way. Results validated by parallel PIGE analysis.	361
Other applications
Fe	Iron (III) oxide glass and Iron (II) oxide glass-ceramic system containing lead sodium and silicon	XRF; -; S XAFS; -; S	Determination of Fe local co-ordination. Mossbauer spectroscopy also used, indicating that the Fe is present predominantly as Fe3+.	362
Fe	Iron (III) oxide-lead oxide-silica-sodium oxide composite glasses	EXAFS; -; S NEXAFS; -; S	Similar study to the one above.	363
Pb isotopes	Silicate glasses	MS; ICP; LA	Multi-collector instrument used to collect Pb isotopic data. Improved spatial resolution and quantification limits reported. Standard - sample - standard bracketing method of calibration employed using USGS BCR2-G as calibrant. Accuracy and precision evaluated by analysis of other reference materials.	364
Si and Y	Bioactive glass spheres used for radionuclide treatment of cancer	MS; ICP; L	Biodegradable glass microspheres containing Y were prepared by conventional melting and flame spheroidization. Their behavior in simulated body fluid and Tris buffer solution was monitored using ICP-MS as well as SEM-EDX, UV-Vis and FTIR. Incorporation of Y into the glass increased its structural stability and hence altered its behavior in the fluids.	365
Various	Photo-thermo-refractive glasses	SIMS; -; S	SIMS used for determination of composition of these glasses. Main photosensitive components did not have uniform profiles of concentration.	366

Applications that have used chemometric techniques
Various (15)	Marajoara pubic covers	EDXRF; -; S	XRF system used consisted of a Si(Li) detector with a resolution of 180 eV at 5.9keV. PCA used on data to evaluate provenance of samples.	381
Various	Marajoara pubic covers and pigments from a sarcophagus	EDXRF; -; S	A similar study to reference.381 Again PCA used to study the provenance.	382
Various	63 pieces of Yaozhou Celadon from two kilns	XRF; -; S	20 pieces of porcelain from one kiln and 43 from a second were analyzed. Elements were determined by XRF (major components) and INAA (minor components). PCA and stepwise discriminant analysis used to establish provenance.	383
Various (14)	67 shards of pottery from Dougga, Tunisia	AES; F; L AES; ICP; L	Both supervised and un-supervised methods of chemometric analysis used on analytical data from three sources of pottery, i.e. African red slip ware, Dougga ware and African cooking ware. African cooking ware distinguishable from other two, but hard to distinguish between other two types.	384
Various	Pottery	AES; ICP; L	ICP-AES as well as thermogravimetric and thermomechanical techniques used to analyze pottery from three Italian and one Libyan site. PCA used on analytical data. Results showed a good correlation between age and PC1.	385
Various	Neolithic pottery from Aegean and Asia Minor	XRF; -; S	188 samples analyzed using portable XRF. Data studied using PCA, hierarchical cluster analysis and model-based multivariate mixture of normals with an unknown number of components. The three chemometric methods were compared.	386
Other applications
Pb	Ancient glazed ceramics	MS; ICP; L	Isotope ratio measurements made on 4% acetic acid leaches of glazes in an attempt to distinguish between ceramics from different ages, different areas and different workshops. Precision varied but was typically 0.2% for 206Pb/204Pb improving to 0.05% for 207Pb/206Pb. These precision values were found not to be a limiting factor. 20 sec read times per isotope enabled analysis times of less than six minutes.	387
Various (8)	Decorated Neolithic pottery from Northern Greece	XRF; -; S	Sherds were separated into four decorative groupings (crusted, classic Dimini, cream on red and black on red). Different groups easily distinguishable from trace element data.	388
Various	Abbasid blue and white ware from Iraq and Chinese Sancai ware	XRF; -; S	SEM-EDS and SEM-WDS as well as semi-quantitative XRF used to analyze eight sherds of pottery from Iraq and seven vessels of Chinese Sancai ware.	389
Various	Bronze age pottery of three distinct sorts	XRF; -; S	Pottery from North Mesopotamia analyzed using assorted techniques including XRF, XRD, SEM-EDS and polarising microscopy. Standard and cooking pottery were found to be of typical middle Eastern construction, however, metallic ware pottery was found to be of much finer quality and had a very different mineralogy.	390
Various	Pottery from Crete	XRF; -; S	XRF, XRD and NAA used to characterize pottery from late Minoan kiln at Haghia Triada in Crete was compared with pottery from a neighbouring contemporary kiln at Kommos. Ceramic fibres, raw materials, paste recipes and firing conditions examined. A surprising differentiation between the wares from the two kilns was observed.	391
Various	Medieval period pottery from Italy	XRF; -; S	Pottery of two sorts (vetrina sparsa and invetriata grezza) analyzed by XRF, XRD, SEM-EDS and other techniques. Two different types of pottery showed different firing characteristics from each other but production technology of both types over five centuries appeared to remain constant.	392
Various	Chinese ancient porcelain	XRF; -; S	The development of a micro-XRF system based on polycapillary X-ray optics for the non-destructive analysis of archaeological objects was described. The polycapillary optics could focus the primary X-ray beam down to tens of microns for non-destructive, local analysis. Analytical characteristics of the system were discussed.	393
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVA	Analysis of variance
ANSI	American National Standards Institute
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
BCR	Bureau of Community Reference
CFP	Circulating fluidized bed
CMOS	Complementary metal oxide semiconductor
CRM	Certified reference material
DCP	Direct current plasma
DMFC	Direct methanol fuel cells
DPT	Diphenyl tin
DRIFTS	Diffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopy
DRS	Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
DTA	Differential thermal analysis
DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ERDA	Elastic recoil detection analysis
ESP	Electrostatic precipitator
ESR	Electron spin resonance
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporisation
FF	Fast flow
FI	Flow injection
FIB	Focused ion beam
FTA	Fission track analysis
FT-IR	Fourier transform-infra red
FTS	Fischer–Tropsch synthesis
GC	Gas chromatography
GD	Glow discharge
GFAAS	Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy
GI-XRF	Grazing incident XRF
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
IBMK	Isobutylmethyl ketone
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ID	Isotope dilution
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
LA	Laser ablation
LDA	Linear discriminant analysis
LED	Light emitting diode
LEIS	Low energy ion scattering
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIPS	Laser induced plasma spectroscopy
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantitation
MC-ICP-MS	Multiple collector ICP-MS
MIM	Metal insulator metal
MOCVD	Metal organic chemical vapour deposition
MPT	Monophenyl tin
MS	Mass spectrometry
Nd:YAG	Neodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NRRA	Nuclear resonant reaction analysis
OES	Optical emission spectrometry
OSL	Optical stimulated luminescence
PB/HC-OES	Particle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectrometry
PCA	Principle component analysis
PET	Polyethyleneterephthalate
PGM	Platinum group metals
PIGE	Proton induced gamma ray emission
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PVD	Physical vapour deposition
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REEs	Rare earth elements
RF	Radio frequency
RI	Refractive index
RIMS	Resonance ionization mass spectrometry
RMM	Relative molecular mass
RSD	Relative standard deviation
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIMCA	Soft independent modelling of class analogy
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SNMS	Secondary neutral mass spectrometry
SPM	Scanning probe microscopy
SPME	Solid phase micro-extraction
SRM	Standard reference material
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TIMS	Thermal ionization mass spectrometry
TMAH	Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
TMPP	Tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine
TOC	Total organic carbon
ToF	Time of flight
TPR	Temperature programmed reduction
TPT	Triphenyl tin
TSL	Thermally stimulated luminescence
TRXPS	Total reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
USN	Ultrasonic nebuliser
UV	Ultra violet
VPD-DC	Vapour phase decomposition-droplet collection
VUV	Vacuum ultra violet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge spectrometry
XAS	X-ray absorption spectrometry
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
XRR	X-ray reflectometry

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
