Two-dimensional black phosphorus: its fabrication, functionalization and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR07395C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR07395C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21575-21603Two-dimensional black phosphorus: its fabrication, functionalization and applications

        
          
            Zehua 
            Hu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Tianchao 
            Niu†
*c, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Guo†
d, 
      
        
          
            Jialin 
            Zhang†
d, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Lai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            He
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Wang
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      *bdg
aSchool of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, Nanjing 210044, China
bDepartment of Physics, National University of Singapore, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117542, Singapore. E-mail: phycw@nus.edu.sg
cHerbert Gleiter Institute of Nanoscience, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, No. 200 Xiaolingwei, Nanjing 210094, China. E-mail: tcniu@njust.edu.cn
dDepartment of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, 117543, Singapore
eSchool of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, 932 Lushan Road, Changsha 100083, China
fInstitute for Advanced Study and Department of Physics, Nanchang University, 999 Xue Fu Da Dao, Nanchang 330000, China
gNational University of Singapore (Suzhou) Research Institute, 377 Lin Quan Street, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou 215123, China
Received 
      11th September 2018
    , Accepted 22nd October 2018First published on 23rd October 2018AbstractPhosphorus, one of the most abundant elements in the Earth (∼0.1%), has attracted much attention in the last five years since the rediscovery of two-dimensional (2D) black phosphorus (BP) in 2014. The successful scaling down of BP endows this ‘old material’ with new vitality, resulting from the intriguing semiconducting properties in the atomic scale limit, i.e. layer-dependent bandgap that covers from the visible light to mid-infrared light spectrum as well as hole-dominated ambipolar transport characteristics. Intensive research effort has been devoted to the fabrication, characterization, functionalization and application of BP and other phosphorus allotropes. In this review article, we summarize the fundamental properties and fabrication techniques of BP, with particular emphasis on the recent progress in molecular beam epitaxy growth of 2D phosphorus. Subsequently, we highlight recent progress in BP (opto)electronic device applications achieved via customized manipulation methods, such as interface, defect and bandgap engineering as well as forming Lego-like stacked heterostructures.
1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed an explosion of interest in two-dimensional (2D) materials, a group of materials of only one-layer or few-atomic layer thickness. Due to the extreme scaling down in the out-of-plane direction as well as the weak van der Waals (vdW) interlayer interaction, 2D materials are ideal candidates for exploring the fundamental quantum physics and tackling the technological bottlenecks such as the scaling limit of bulk semiconductors.1–5 The most widely investigated 2D materials are graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). Graphene is a semimetal lacking an intrinsic bandgap, leading to the poor on/off ratio in electronic devices.6,7 TMDCs are a family of materials in the form of “MX2”, where M is a transition metal such as Mo or W and was recently expanded to Pt, Sn, etc., and X represents S, Se or Te.8 Most TMDCs, e.g. MoS2 and WS2, are semiconductors, but the relatively large bandgap (typically >1.5 eV), the low charge carrier mobility and the poor semiconductor–metal interface (Fermi level pinning) severely hinder their practical (opto)electronic applications.3,4,9,10
Black phosphorus (BP) was first synthesized over one century ago as a semiconducting phase allotrope of the phosphorus family.11 It was not until 2014 that Li et al. exfoliated BP down to the few-layer form by the Scotch tape method.12 The scaling down of BP gives rise to many intriguing semiconducting properties, including a moderate and thickness-mediated direct bandgap that covers from the visible to mid-infrared light spectrum, as well as hole-dominated ambipolar transport characteristics, making it a promising building block for next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices.13–19 The orthorhombic lattice structure of BP with reduced symmetry (D2h18) leads to the in-plane anisotropy, which enables the crystal orientation control over fundamental optical and electronic properties.20,21 Intensive research efforts have been devoted to revealing the fundamental physical and chemical properties of BP as well as the phosphorus allotropes via both theoretical and experimental methods.22–25 Meanwhile, it is of broad interest to design high-performance BP (opto)electronic devices and functional devices with versatile applications via customized manipulation methods, such as interface, defect and bandgap engineering as well as by forming stacked heterostructures.23,26–28
The aim of this review is to present a thorough perspective of this rapidly developing material. We begin with the findings on the fundamental atomic and electronic structures of BP. A detailed description of the fabrication of both bulk and few-layer BP, in particular the growth mechanism and recent achievements in the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) growth of 2D phosphorus, is given. As the poor stability of BP under ambient air conditions severely limits its further application, we discuss the oxidation mechanism of BP under various environmental conditions, together with providing a summary of reliable and effective surface passivation methods. The functionalization of BP via interface, bandgap and defect engineering, along with current applications in versatile functional devices like diodes, inverters, memory, photodetectors, solar cells and spin valves based on customized engineering methods, is presented in the subsequent sections. Finally, the remaining challenges and future opportunities of BP are outlined.
2. Properties of few-layer BP
2.1. Crystal and band structure of BP
BP is the first discovered single-element layered material with semiconducting properties beyond group IV family (graphene, silicene, etc.). Each P atom is connected to three adjacent atoms, forming a honeycomb structure with an interlayer distance of ∼5 Å (Fig. 1a).12,24,25,30,31 The semiconducting BP belongs to the D2h18 point group with reduced symmetry compared to graphene (D6h).1 Unlike graphene, where carbon atoms are located on the same atomic plane to form the hexagonal honeycomb structure, the individual layers of BP show two kinds of P–P bonds with different bond lengths. The P–P bond length is 2.224 Å in the same plane and 2.244 Å between the top and bottom plane P atoms within a single layer (top view in Fig. 1b).30
 Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure and (b) top view of BP. (c) Band structure of bulk BP mapped out by ARPES measurements. Blue solid and red dashed lines denote empty and filled bands, respectively. (d) The evolution of the bandgap calculated by different methods. (e) The electromagnetic wave spectrum, the bandgap ranges and the corresponding frequency ranges of various types of 2D materials. Reprinted with permission from: (a, b, d) ref. 29, Copyright 2014, American Physical Society; (c) ref. 12, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group; (e) ref. 30, Copyright 2015, United States National Academy of Sciences. 
The band structure of bulk BP can be verified by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements in combination with ab initio calculations.12 As plotted in Fig. 1c, the dashed and solid lines represent filled and empty bands, respectively. The bulk BP crystal features a direct bandgap of ∼0.3 eV at the Z point. The bandgap can dramatically increase with the shrinking of layer thickness, even reaching 2 eV in the monolayer form according to theoretical calculations. However, the numerical value of the calculated bandgap depends on the theoretical method used, showing a variation from 0.8 to 2 eV (Fig. 1d).29 Different from the indirect to direct bandgap transition in TMDCs from bulk to ML, BP features a direct bandgap for any number of layers.21,32 But the bandgap minimum point will shift to the Γ point in a few-layer form. Such a layer-independent direct bandgap has been verified by theoretical calculations, UV-Vis absorption, photoluminescence (PL), infrared spectra, etc.18,21,22,33–37 The tuneable bandgap of 2D BP shows great potential in a wide range of photoresponse devices from the visible to mid-infrared light region, which is complementary to gapless graphene and TMDC materials with a relatively large bandgap, as illustrated in Fig. 1e.24,30 Different from graphene and MoS2, BP has an orthorhombic lattice structure with D2h18 symmetry, leading to the in-plane anisotropic property:18,38 the effective mass of carriers along the zigzag direction (y) is about 10 times larger than that along the armchair (x) direction.30 Hence 2D BP exhibits strong orientation dependence in optical, electronic and phonon properties, which will be introduced in the following part.
2.2 Phonon properties
When scaling down from bulk down to ML, the band structure of BP, especially the bandgap, changes a lot. In the synergy of the quantum confinement effect and the interlayer interactions, the phonon and optical properties of few-layer BP are greatly influenced, which have been investigated by Raman, absorption and PL spectroscopy in combination with theoretical calculations.24,25,31
The D2h18 space group of bulk BP permits 12 lattice vibrational modes while 6 of them are Raman-active (Fig. 2a). According to the symmetry selection rule,39 three of them labelled Ag1 (∼365 cm−1), B2g (∼440 cm−1) and Ag2 (∼470 cm−1) can be detected when the laser is incident perpendicular to the sample plane. As plotted in Fig. 2b and c, Wang et al. used a linear polarized laser to measure the Raman spectra of BP.20 Since the Ag2 mode represents the atomic vibration along the armchair (x) direction (Fig. 2a), the measured Ag2 peak intensity exhibits a strong angle dependence on the polarized laser direction, with the strongest and weakest intensity at 0° (polarized along the x axis) and 90° (polarized along the y axis), respectively.20 Such a relationship between the peak intensity and angle can be well described by a cos2θ function, as shown by the solid line in the polar plot (Fig. 2c). The inhibition of Ag2 intensity at 90° results from the symmetry-forbidden optical transition via the y axis. Other than the crystal orientation, the Raman peak intensity also strongly depends on the polarization angle between the incident laser and the scattered light, which determines the periodicity of Raman mode intensity.39 These strong angle-dependent properties enable the quick and precise crystalline orientation identification of BP. Other properties like PL, absorption, and transport properties have similar angle dependence as Raman spectra.21,24,41
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the vibration modes. (b) Polarization-resolved Raman scattering spectra of ML BP with linearly polarized laser excitation. (c) Intensity of the Ag2 mode as a function of the excitation laser polarization angle in the x–y plane. (θ denotes the angle between the x axis and the polarization of the excitation laser.) (d) Raman spectra of 2D BP as a function of thickness n. Three modes are expected for the bulk: Ag1, B2g, and Ag2. In thin layers, a new vibrational mode labelled Ag(B2u) is also present. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 39, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons; (b, c) ref. 20, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (d) ref. 40, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The evolution of Raman spectra with the BP layers ranging from ML to bulk is shown in Fig. 2d. A clear shift of the vibration modes, especially the Ag2 mode, can be distinguished on different layers, which can be used to identify the layer number. However, because of the accelerated oxidation under light illumination42–44 (which will be discussed later) as well as the strong angle dependence, this method is not as effective as that in TMDCs.45 Meanwhile, with the thinning of the layer thickness, the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) broadens to the maximum at the trilayer, followed by shrinking on further thinning down to ML. This feature is ascribed to the Davydov splitting similar to TMDCs.46,47 Another interesting phenomenon is the splitting of the Ag2 peak in bilayer BP. As the number of atoms in a bilayer unit cell doubles that of ML, the larger number of atoms results in a larger degree of freedom. Correspondingly, a new Raman-allowed mode in the component of two out-of-phase ML infrared vibration modes can be distinctly revealed, as shown in Fig. 2d. Such an effect is a signature characteristic of bilayer 2D materials and has been previously observed in other 2D materials such as Bi2Te3,48 MoSe2,46 WSe249 and MoTe2.50 Therefore, this special feature can be utilized to identify bilayer BP.
2.3 Excitons and charged excitons
Besides phonons, exciton properties are of particular interest and can be investigated by the combination of various spectroscopy techniques like PL and absorption spectroscopy. Fig. 3a summarizes the evolution of PL peak energy with layer number, which exhibits a clear red shift with the increase of layer number, indicating the shrinking of the bandgap at thicker forms.51 Thus, controlling the thickness of BP can make it cover a wide spectrum from the visible to mid-infrared region (Fig. 1e). Several groups have investigated the exciton properties of BP in detail, especially the exciton binding energy (Eb). The inset of Fig. 3a is a schematic energy diagram showing that Eb can be quantitatively extracted from the equation: Eb = Eg − Eopt, where Eg and Eopt represent the quasiparticle (electronic) bandgap and optical bandgap, respectively. In a pioneering study, the Eg of BP (ML BP on SiO2) was identified by photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy (PLE), where the PL intensity undergoes a sharp enhancement at an excitation energy of ∼2.2 eV (Eg, Fig. 3b). Since the ground-state exciton energy is ∼1.3 eV, the calculated Eb is as high as 900 meV (ref. 20) (compared to ∼370 meV for ML WSe252). In another report, however, the absorption spectrum (differential reflection) was recorded to obtain the Eg of BP, and much lower values of Eg ∼ 1.73, 1.15, and 0.83 for mono-, bi- and tri-layer were obtained for hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) encapsulated BP on SiO2 (Fig. 3c–e).21 The PL energies are only slightly lower than the absorption energies in all numbers of layers, indicating a small Eb of ∼100 meV.21 Very recently, Zheng et al. systematically investigated the layer-dependence of Ebvia infrared absorption spectroscopy (BP on PDMS/SiO2). It was found that Eb decreases from 213 meV (2-layer) to 106 meV (6-layer). Intrinsic (free-standing) ML BP was extrapolated to have a large Eb of ∼800 meV.36 Two main factors lead to the deviation between these experimental results, including (1) the different methods to extract Eg and (2) the different dielectric environments. The first factor, i.e. accuracy of the specific method employed in each case, is hard to evaluate. For the second one, as the screening effect from the dielectric environment has a significant influence on the exciton properties, the h-BN protecting-layer would lead to underestimation of the intrinsic Eb.3,52–54 Therefore, to rule out the environmental impact (especially the dielectric), it is now an important research topic to obtain direct experimental evidence of the intrinsic Eb on free-standing BP samples.
 Fig. 3  (a) Eopt as a function of the layer number. The inset shows the schematic illustration of the electronic bandgap and exciton binding energy. (b) Top: A schematic plot showing the measured ground-state exciton energy (narrow red band) and the energy corresponding to the quasiparticle band edge (wide blue band). Bottom: Calculated optical absorption of ML BP with e–h interactions (excitonic absorption, red curve) and without e–h interactions (quasiparticle absorption, blue curve). (c–e) PL spectra of (c) ML, (d) bilayer and (e) trilayer BP at 77 K with an excitation energy of 2.33 eV in the x and y detection directions. (f) Measured PL spectra (solid dark gray lines) under various back-gate voltages. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 51, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (b) ref. 20, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (c–e) ref. 21, Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group; (f) ref. 34, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the quantum confinement effect and reduced dielectric screening in 2D systems, the excitons are in a tightly bound form. Further interaction with free charge carriers (h+/e−) can form charged excitons (2h+ + e−/h+ + 2e−), i.e. trions (labelled X+/X−).4 Extra binding energy is required to bind the free carrier; therefore the emission energy for a trion is always smaller than that for the exciton.55 The modulation of the trion/exciton has been widely investigated in TMDCs.55,56 Electrostatic modulation and chemical doping were proved to be effective at modulating the formation of trions, thereby having a deep impact on optoelectronics.3 In a typical field-effect transistor (FET) configuration with a BP channel, the exciton/trion modulation by an electrostatic field was measured by PL spectroscopy.34 As shown in Fig. 3f, the two predominant peaks at ∼1100 and 1300 nm are ascribed to the exciton (X0) and positive trion (X+) peaks, respectively. They are sensitive to the applied voltage and can be gradually tuned from X+ dominated to X0 dominated photoemission by switching the gate voltage from negative to positive.34 When applying a negative voltage, BP is p+ doped by injected holes. The excess free holes are easily bound to excitons and form X+; therefore trion emission dominates the emission process. In contrast, when applying positive voltages, the injected electron would exhaust the intrinsic holes in the p-doped sample, converting the PL emission process to exciton available. Notably, the binding energy of the trion can be calculated by the energy difference of X0 and X+ peaks, with a value of ∼100 and 160 meV obtained for ML and trilayer, respectively. Note that trion possesses a longer lifetime and a slower relaxation rate, which may strongly influence the optoelectronic performance such as photodetection.56 However, approaches to effectively modulate the trion/exciton properties via a non-volatile method, e.g. chemical doping, have rarely been reported and need further investigation.
3. Preparation of BP
The preparation of high-quality few-layer BP samples is essential for investigating their fundamental properties and practical applications. The typical synthesis methods of 2D material can be classified into bottom-up and top-down methods, respectively. Bottom-up methods include chemical synthesis of 2D samples from precursors directly by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or MBE, which have been widely applied in graphene,57 TMDCs58–60 and h-BN.61 However, there is still no high throughput bottom-up method to grow BP due to the absence of a suitable substrate with appropriate interactions and lattice constants. Therefore, to obtain high-quality few-layer BP flakes, most samples are prepared by top-down methods, i.e. exfoliation from bulk crystals by adhesive tape or liquid phase exfoliation via sonication. In the following part, we will first review growth methods of bulk BP crystals and several typical top-down strategies for preparing few layer BP flakes. Next, the growth of 2D phosphorus allotropes by MBE will be emphasized.
3.1 Bulk BP crystals
Bulk BP crystals were first synthesized in 1914 under 200 °C and 1.2 GPa with ∼30 min reaction time from white phosphorus (WP) by Bridgman.11 This new phosphorus allotrope features relatively high density (2.69 g cm−3), much higher than WP (1.83 g cm−3) and red phosphorus (RP, 2.05 g cm−3). Unlike amorphous WP, this new allotrope of phosphorus features a highly polycrystalline form.11 As a result, BP shows much better air stability and cannot catch fire in air. Keyes et al. then found that the phase transition process from WP to BP happens within a few minutes at 200 °C under 1.3 GPa, with a typical sample size smaller than 100 μm.62 Brown et al. achieved a needle or rod-like BP crystal by heating the WP/bismuth mixture at 400 °C for 20 h, with a typical sample size of ∼5 × 0.1 × 0.07 mm3.63 In 1981, Akimoto et al. for the first time achieved a large single crystal of BP from RP at 270 °C under a high pressure of ∼3.9 GPa.64 After that, mercury or bismuth was used for “low pressure” synthesis of BP.63,65,66 In 2007, a low pressure synthesis method for a BP crystal was developed by Nilges et al. via the reaction between RP and Sn by using an Au and SnI4 mixture as a mineralizer. Based on this method, Kopf et al. further developed a new method only with Sn/SnI4 as a mineralization agent67 and this method has also has been applied to synthesize a P–As alloy recently.68
3.2 Few-/single-layer BP

3.2.1 Top down isolation. 
Large-area high quality few-layer BP is necessary for the fabrication of functional devices. However, mechanical exfoliation by adhesive tape suffers from the low production rate of large-area few-layer samples. Herein, several other “top-down” methods assisted by external forces have been developed. The first strategy is to exfoliate the sample with the assistance of a liquid, i.e. liquid-phase exfoliation. Several groups have demonstrated that BP crystals can be exfoliated down to few- or even mono-layer by sonication in solvents such as N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP),69 dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).70 In the exfoliation process, a bulk BP crystal was first immersed in aprotic and polar solvents, followed by sonication to produce uniformly dispersed solutions. The solutions were then centrifuged to separate supernatants and residual bulk samples. A typical high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of the exfoliated sample is presented in Fig. 4b, with the crystal structure in perfect match with the BP lattice structure.70 This method can be further improved by using surfactant-assisted exfoliation and post-processing in deoxygenated water in order to get rid of the organic residues and, meanwhile, improve the exfoliation yield, as demonstrated by Kang et al.71
 Fig. 4  (a) Photograph of the atomically thin BP dispersions in DMSO and DMF solvents after sonication (left) and after centrifugation and supernatant collection (right). (b) HRTEM image of liquid-exfoliated ML BP nanoflake (scale bar is 1 nm). TEM simulation (upper right inset) and a filtered section of the acquired image (lower left inset) are added for comparison. The lattice parameters perfectly match the ML BP structure. (c) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical exfoliation set-up. (d) Illustration of the intercalation and expansion of bulk BP in an organic DMSO electrolyte consisting of TAA salts. (e) Schematic illustration of the CAFM patterning setup. (f) Contact-mode AFM images of the as-patterned sample. Reprinted with permission from: (a, b) ref. 70, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons; (c, d) ref. 72, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (e, f) ref. 73, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
Since liquid-exfoliation involves long-time agitation by sonication or shear-mixing, the exfoliated sample size is quite limited, usually smaller than 1 μm2. Electrochemical exfoliation is a promising alternative due to the high efficiency (only lasts for several minutes) without the agitation process. A typical set-up is shown in Fig. 4c; a BP crystal was clamped in a cathodic Pt clamp for nonoxidative exfoliation under the simultaneous monitoring by a microscope.72 The applied negative voltage drives the intercalation of the organic electrolyte consisting of tetraalkylammonium (TAA) in aprotic polar solvents, leading to the fast expansion of the interlayer distance of bulk BP and the exfoliated layers eventually dispersed uniformly in solvents.72 The sample prepared in this way is of high quality with a hole mobility of ∼60 cm2 V−1 s−1, a thickness of ∼5 layers, and a sample size of ∼10 μm2 and can be used in inkjet printing to fabricate large-area BP photodetectors.72
In addition to exfoliation, an alternative strategy is to etch the larger-area thick BP flake down to the 2D limit by Ar+ plasma etching.74 The etching rate is adjustable and thereby even ML BP can be achieved by this method. Another layer-by-layer thinning method is to use conductive atomic force microscopy (CAFM) via anodic oxidation, as shown in Fig. 4e.73 The thick BP was transferred onto doped Si in order to facilitate the direct current (DC) transfer between the substrate and the AFM tip. By controlling the bias voltage on the tip, the selective area of BP can be oxidized with the formation of a phosphorous oxide (POx) by-product, which could be removed by a water rinsing process.73 After patterning, the contact mode height image (Fig. 4f) demonstrates the retraction features in the as-patterned region, confirming the effective thinning in the selective area.73 Moreover, this method is also applicable to insulating substrates, e.g. silicon dioxide (SiO2) by the alternating current (AC) method. The BP FET with a channel region patterned by this method shows a 50 times enhancement of the on–off ratio without much sacrifice of the on-current.73 Therefore, this method is of great potential in directly thinning the fabricated devices on the selective area and can be widely applied to other 2D materials.


3.2.2 Bottom-up growth. 
Theoretical predication. 
In addition to BP (termed black P in this section in order to differentiate it from other phosphorus allotropes), there exists many other 2D allotropes of phosphorene with no bulk counterpart, but there is blue phosphorene that can only be epitaxially grown on Au(111). Meanwhile, although single layer or few-layer black P has been isolated via mechanical or liquid phase exfoliation; there is still no high throughput epitaxial method for the growth of large area black P with high quality (the mobility of CVD grown few-layer BP is as low as ∼0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1).75 Thus, it is highly desirable to understand the growth mechanism and explore the suitable substrates for the bottom-up growth. Zeng et al. performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations to study the interaction between black/blue P and different substrates, as summarized in Fig. 5a.76 Black P has minimal lattice mismatch when placed on the GaN(001) along the armchair direction, while the GaN(001) substrate also presents the minimal lattice mismatch for blue P. Further examining the binding energy of black and blue P to different substrates gives the largest value on Cu(111), Au(111) and GaN(001). The GaN(001) was selected because of the convenience of further device fabrication. Fig. 5b presents the structures of black and blue P on GaN(001) after 1 ps and 50 ps ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations at 400 K, respectively. Black P was severely distorted while blue P retained its original structure; therefore, GaN(001) would be suitable for blue P growth.76
 Fig. 5  (a) The lattice mismatch and binding energies of black and blue P on different substrates. (b) Calculated thermodynamic stabilities of black and blue P on GaN(001) after 1 ps and 50 ps AIMD simulations at 400 K, respectively. The crystal structure is distinguished by different colors. (c) Diffusion barrier of a single P adatom on (I) bare GaN(001); (II) a half-layer (HL) P covered GaN(001); (III) Ehrlich–Schwoebel barrier for a P adatom to climb down the step of HL P covered GaN(001) and bare GaN(001). (IV) Schematic model showing the diffusion barriers for a single P atom on different surfaces. (d) Surface structures of P at different coverages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2017, American Physical Society. 
As demonstrated in Fig. 5d, the surface structures of P atoms on GaN(001) depend on the coverage (θ). At low coverage, P atoms tend to be isolated from each other instead of forming dimers. Trimers start to evolve after the coverage reaches 2/9 ML; however, these trimers will not stitch into a large island but pack into ordered arrays when θ = 1/2 ML, as shown in Fig. 5d(III). Furthermore, if an extra P atom is added into the trimer pattern, it can diffuse from one trimer to another, and finally climb down from the edge of a trimer to the bare GaN surface, with a barrier of 0.71 eV (Fig. 5c). This growth behavior is different from that of graphene, silicene or other elemental 2D materials, on which nucleation into a small island or cluster is preferred. On further increasing the coverage, the P adatoms on the top of the trimer pattern also prefer to be isolated from each other to induce the structural distortions (Fig. 5c(II)). When the coverage reaches 5/6 ML, the P adatoms will break the former trimers and form an initial state that mimics the blue P structure, as shown in Fig. 5d. Therefore, a half-layer-by-half-layer growth mechanism was proposed for blue P on GaN(001) (Fig. 5c(IV)). The adatom deposited on the ML blue P can readily diffuse (barrier is 0.29 eV) and climb down (1.07 eV) to the top of the first half-layer.
As demonstrated above, the interaction between the substrate and phosphorus atoms plays key roles in determining the final phases. To explore the appropriate substrates for engineering the growth of different phosphorenes, Ding's group investigated four phosphorene allotropes on different metal substrates widely used in graphene and h-BN growth.77Fig. 6a and b summarize the formation and binding energies of four phosphorenes on seven metal substrates. It is clear that all the allotropes have the lowest formation energy and the smallest binding energy on the β-Sn(100) surface, while they have the highest values on the Ni(111) surface. Furthermore, charge transfer between blue phosphorene and the substrates is stronger than for black P due to its planar structure. Consequently, blue P on Au(111) and Ni(111) is more stable and favorable than black P. In the case of γ-P, it is predicted to be the most stable on Ru(0001) and Ni(111) due to its largest binding energy. Therefore, it is possible to fabricate certain phosphorene allotropes by selecting an appropriate substrate. As phosphorene is unstable and can barely be transferred to other substrates by dissolving the substrates in chemical solution, low interaction between phosphorene and the substrate would be preferred to enable dry transfer.78
 Fig. 6  Theoretically calculated (a) formation energies and (b) binding energies of black/α-, blue/β-, γ-, and δ-phosphorene on β-Sn(100), Ag(111), Au(111), Cu(111), Pt(111), Ru(0001) and Ni(111). (c) Optimized most stable configurations of PN clusters on the Au(111) surface. The formation energy of each cluster is indicated. N is the number of P atoms in each cluster. (d) Formation energy as a function of the number of P atoms within each cluster. The black, red, green, blue, purple, and orange lines represent structural motifs of the dispersed, zigzag chain, ring-based 1D chain, multiring 2D island, black P, and 3D structure, respectively. The blue and yellow balls represent phosphorus and gold atoms, respectively. Top and side views of CDD between the Au surface and ML (e) black P and (f) blue P. The blue and red parts represent the aggregation and depletion of electrons, respectively. The isosurface is 0.004 e Å−3. Reproduced with permission from: (a, b) ref. 77, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c–f) ref. 79, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Theoretically, Han et al. studied the nucleation mechanism and growth behavior of P clusters on the Au(111) substrate at the initial stage by ab initio calculations.79 Isolated P atoms randomly dispersed on Au(111) when N ≤ 3, and were linked into a linear zigzag chain for 4 ≤ N ≤ 10, as depicted in Fig. 6c. Increasing the number of atoms to 11 induces the transformation from a linear chain into a straight network comprising 4-, 5-, and 6-membered rings. It is noteworthy that the cluster preserves the straight configuration instead of circling into a 2D large island, strikingly different from the growth behavior of graphene at the initial stage.80,81 The phosphorus atom number dependent cluster morphology results from the competition effect between the P–P and P–Au bonds. The driving force for the P aggregation when N ≥ 4 is the Mulliken bond population difference of P–P and P–Au. It will bond into chains when P–P interaction is strong enough to overcome the coupling with the Au substrate (P–Au interaction). With the increase of P atom numbers, the formation energy of P clusters decreases monotonically, as shown in Fig. 6d (square and triangle). To evaluate the formation possibility of black P on Au(111), Han et al. also calculated four PN clusters (N = 10, 13, 19, 24) which are truncated from black P (hexagonal in Fig. 6d). The formation energy is obviously much higher than that of blue P, which is mainly due to the fewer P atoms bonded with Au substrate. Extending to ML black P and blue P on Au(111), the vertical distance between ML black P (blue P) and the Au(111) surface is 2.627 Å (2.419 Å). Fig. 6e and f present the charge density difference (CDD) between ML blue P/black P and the Au substrate. According to Bader analysis, each P atom in blue P accepts 0.039e, while that in black P accepts only 0.019e. It is obvious that only half-layer black P interacts with the Au(111) surface while almost all the atoms in blue P can attract electrons from gold; therefore, blue P is energetically more favorable than black P on Au(111).
Furthermore, to explore a suitable substrate to grow black P, Gao et al. performed ab initio energy optimizations and molecular dynamics simulations of P27 nanoflakes on Cu(111), h-BN and modified h-BN.82 They found that the stability of phosphorene strongly depends on the interaction strength between the nanoflake and the substrate. The strong interaction (0.75 eV per P atom) with Cu(111) breaks down the phosphorene nanoflake, while the weak interaction (0.063 eV per P atom) with h-BN fails to stabilize the structure of black P. In particular, the edge construction of the flake on h-BN has an energy barrier of only 17.5 meV, indicating a fast edge reconstruction that can barely retain the structure. Modulating the h-BN substrate to have a moderate interaction of 0.35 eV per P atom, the edge reconstruction barrier dramatically increases to 1.31 eV. Therefore, the edge wrapping of black P flake can be prohibited, while the inner part of P27 preserves the pristine structure of black P. Although theoretical calculations have provided guidelines for the selection of substrates with appropriate interaction strength, the experimental realization of the epitaxial growth of ML black P is still a big challenge.
Growth of blue phosphorene. 
In 2016, blue phosphorus has been successfully fabricated on Au(111) via MBE using a black P bulk crystal as the precursor.83 It is noteworthy that the final structure dramatically depends on the substrate temperature during growth and the annealing temperature. Deposition of phosphorus on Au(111) held at room temperature and then post annealed to 250 °C for 1 h can generate honeycomb structure with different domains (Fig. 7a). This is the drawback of the post annealing method that desorbs part of the deposited P atoms during the on-surface condensation. Therefore, continuous deposition on the heated substrate (230 °C) was used to produce high quality ML blue phosphorene with a uniform honeycomb structure, as representatively shown in Fig. 7b. The enlarged scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) image shows that the unit cell is composed of two equilateral triangles. This topology is similar to the silicene on Ag(111).84 First-principles calculations were performed based on the DFT as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) with the plane-wave basis set to elucidate the atomic structures of this honeycomb structure. Fig. 7d and e are the top and side views of the fully relaxed atomic geometries of the model for ML blue phosphorene on Au(111), respectively. The purple and yellow balls indicate the phosphorus atoms in the top layer and bottom layer, respectively. The orange rhombus highlights the unit cell, while the red triangle denotes the basic triangles in the STM topography. The structure presents a (4 × 4) superstructure of P that is commensurate with the (5 × 5) supercell of the substrate. The top P atom resides at the center of each triangle (the dashed white triangle in Fig. 7d), and bonds with the three P atoms in the bottom layer with an average lattice constant of ∼0.35 nm. This value is larger than that of the free-standing blue P (0.328 nm), which is due to the strong interaction between P and the Au(111) substrate. Further confirmed by the bulking variation as shown in Fig. 7e, the average height between the bottom P layer and Au(111) is 2.40 ± 0.12 Å, while the top P layer is 3.58 ± 0.13 Å away from the substrate, giving rise to an interlayer modulation of ∼1.18 Å, which is smaller than the interlayer distance of free-standing blue P (1.3 Å).
 Fig. 7  (a) Large scale STM image taken after annealing the as-deposited phosphorus on Au(111) showing the formation of honeycomb lattices. (b) Large scale STM image of ML blue phosphorene on Au(111). (c) Zoom-in scanning showing the honeycomb structure and the triangles. (d) Top and (e) side views of the theoretically optimized model for blue phosphorene on Au(111). (f) Simulated STM image of blue phosphorene on Au(111) based on the model in (d) (a and b: Vtip = 0.9 V, c: Vtip = 1.0 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
To elucidate the growth mechanism of blue phosphorene on Au(111), Zhang et al. annealed the room temperature deposited phosphorus at 150 °C rather than 250 °C.83 The large area STM image shows that the Au(111) surface was decorated by triangles of different sizes (different colored triangles in Fig. 8a). The zoom-in scan demonstrates that these triangles are phosphorus clusters instead of blue phosphorene (Fig. 8b). The bright dots along the edge of the triangle exhibit an average distance of ∼3.5 Å, close to the unit cell size of ML blue phosphorene. Therefore, the size of these clusters is able to quantify as sequentially demonstrated in Fig. 8b. These clusters can transform into blue phosphorene after annealing to 250 °C. Compared with the theoretically proposed straight ring structure from N = 11 to N = 24 with no triangle features at the initial stage of blue phosphorene growth (Fig. 6d), the main difference of the experimental growth would be that the phosphorus vapor generated from the black P source is P4 clusters rather than individual single P atoms in theoretical prediction.79 Recently, experimental growth of blue phosphorene using InP as the solid source demonstrated different growth behaviors. Their results are summarized in Fig. 8c–f. At low coverage, one-dimensional chains were packed along the high symmetric direction of Au(111) (Fig. 8c). On increasing the P coverage, bright spots are densely packed in a hexagonal pattern with an average distance of ∼5 Å. The corresponding model is depicted in Fig. 8f, where the individual P atoms preferred to reside at the hollow site of Au(111) with an interatomic distance of 4.94 Å, referring to a  reconstructed surface. It is noteworthy that there are also some much brighter dots surrounded by six small dots (dashed circles in Fig. 8d), implying interlayer bonding formation within the  phase. Further increasing the P coverage triggers the generation of blue phosphorene and, loosely packed domains composed of P dots. Blue P nucleates by consuming P atoms in the  domains, while the lattice will transform into loosely packed or one-dimensional chains.
 Fig. 8  (a) Large scale STM image of P clusters on Au(111). (b) Representative P clusters with different sizes and the corresponding models. (c) STM image taken on Au(111) after deposition of a small amount of phosphorus (size: 20 × 20 nm2; Vbias = 0.1 V), the phosphorus vapor was generated from thermal decomposition of InP at ∼470 °C while the substrate was held at 210–230 °C. (d) Following (c) with higher P coverage, showing a densely packed  structure (size: 20 × 20 nm2; Vbias = 0.1 V). (e) The coexistence of the blue phosphorene and loosely packed  structure (size: 20 × 20 nm2; Vbias = 0.1 V). (f) Schematic model showing the atomic structure of the  structure; the inset is the top view to illustrate the anchoring position of individual P atoms. Reprinted with permission from: (a, b) ref. 83, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c–f) ref. 85, Copyright 2017, American Physical Society. 

4. Oxidation and surface protection
4.1 Surface oxidation mechanism
Besides the lack of a high throughput fabrication method of large area BP thin films, one major challenge restricting its application is its poor stability against an ambient atmosphere, particularly its severe degradation under illumination.42,43 The lone pairs at the surface of phosphorus make it active to oxygen. It is essential to identify how the oxygen interacts with BP and whether the active oxygen species are energetically favorable or not. In the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) band structure of ML BP (Fig. 9a), the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) are located at −5.46 and −3.95 eV with respect to the vacuum level, respectively, which shows a direct bandgap of 1.51 eV.42 The redox potential of O2/O2− is located in the bandgap; therefore, the BP has the potential to dissociate O2. Fig. 9b summarizes several possible configurations of isolated oxygen on BP based on theoretical calculations.19 The dangling oxygen binding on top of the phosphorus atom with a bond length of 1.5 Å has the highest binding energy. The second stable configuration is the interstitial bridged oxygen, which penetrates into the lattice, forming a bridge between two P atoms. The formation of this configuration is highly exothermic (Eb = −1.6 eV).19 Besides these two stable configurations, oxygen has other metastable binding sites on phosphorus, including a diagonal bridge and a horizontal bridge, as shown in the table of Fig. 9b. These chemisorbed oxygen atoms introduce an acceptor state near the conduction band and perturb the valence band state. However, if only considering oxygen itself, the energy barrier of oxygen dissociation is ∼0.56 eV (Fig. 9c) and, thus, the dissociation requires external energy excitation such as light illumination. Ziletti et al. proposed an indirect way that oxygen molecule physisorbs at 3.2 Å parallel to the phosphorene surface, while the oxygen is in the triplet ground state. When the oxygen molecule gets closer to the surface, the doubly degenerated π*2p orbitals are lifted due to the hybridization with the lone pairs of phosphorene.19 As depicted in the inset of Fig. 9c, the crossing of the triplet to singlet state occurs when the oxygen molecule is 1.9 Å above the phosphorene surface. Then, the oxygen molecule bridges the neighboring phosphorus atoms to form a diagonal bridge. The dissociation of this bridge O2 to dangling oxygen needs only 0.15 eV. It can be concluded that the oxidation of phosphorene is restricted by both the high energy barrier to dissociate the oxygen molecule and also the triplet-to-singlet conversion. However, it is possible to induce surface oxidation of phosphorene under light illumination, as proposed in Fig. 9d.
 Fig. 9  (a) HSE band structure for ML black phosphorus; right: the VBM and CBM of BP with different layer numbers; the dashed line is the redox potential of O2/O2−. (b) HSE binding energy for the isolated oxygen atom on BP and the corresponding atomic structure; (c) Proposed mechanism of single layer phosphorene oxidation; the oxygen configuration is depicted below. The inset shows the singlet and triplet PESs as a function of the O2− phosphorene distance. (d) Proposed light-induced degradation processes of phosphorene. (e) Snapshots of ABMD (adaptively biased molecular dynamics) simulations of H2O on oxygen adsorbed bilayer BP. (f) Left: The stability of BP with P–P (top) and P–O–P bonding (bottom) in the presence of water. Right: Snapshots of ABMD simulations of H2O adsorbed on partial (top) and fully oxidized phosphorene ML (bottom). Figures reproduced with permission from: (a, d, e, f) ref. 42, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons; (b, c) ref. 19, Copyright 2015, American Physical Society. 
Following previous research, Zhou et al. proposed that the degradation of BP in O2 and H2O under light involves three steps.42 The first step is the generation of O2− under light (eqn (1)), and then the O2− dissociates after landing on phosphorus to form two P–O bonds. Finally, the hydrogen bond in the H2O molecule interacts with the dangling oxygen and pulls the P atoms out of the surface, resulting in the breakdown of the surface BP, as demonstrated in the snapshots of AIMD simulations (Fig. 9e).42,86 However, it is noteworthy that the fully oxidised layer can stabilize the BP surface (Fig. 9f). The top panel is partially oxidized without the formation of P–O–P bonds, where the H2O interacts with the oxygen to break the P–P bond. For comparison, in the case of the fully oxidized layer with the P–O–P bonds, although the surface is also terminated with dangling oxygen to attract the H2O molecules near the surface, the formation of the intralayer P–O–P bond is much stronger than the P–P bond, and hence no bonds can be broken. This oxidized layer can serve as a protective layer to inhibit further degradation.87 O2 + hv → O2− + h+(1) O2− + P + h+ → PxOy(2)
The aforementioned theoretical studies demonstrated the role of oxygen, water and light in the surface degradation of BP, focusing on the surface oxidation mechanism. However, owing to their practical application in electronic devices, such as FETs, it is vital to explore the cooperative effect of oxygen, water and light on the BP degradation mechanism under in operando conditions to stimulate ambient environments. The transport properties of BP under different environments (O2, N2, or O2 under illumination, air, dry air, humid O2, or humid N2) and the polarization effect of water on BP oxidation were explored based on the combination of the FET, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and DFT approaches (Fig. 10).44,88 Exposure of the as-fabricated BP FET to pure O2 largely attenuates the electron conductance by nearly three orders of magnitude while it keeps hole conductance intact at the same time (Fig. 10a). It is noteworthy that annealing under an inert atmosphere like Ar could nearly recover the on-current of the electron branch to the pristine state, implying the physisorptive nature of oxygen on the BP surface. This assumption can be well supported by in situ XPS spectra, where neither the shift of the P 2p peak nor the appearance of phosphorous oxide can be observed.44 The striking difference between electron and hole mobilities after oxygen exposure is mainly ascribed to the fact that the physisorbed O2 molecules can serve as electron trapping centers and then scatter negative charge carriers, thus resulting in severely reduced electron mobility, but the scattering of holes is minimal.44 In contrast, exposure to O2 under laser illumination (515 nm, ∼1.5 W cm−2) attenuates both hole and electron conductance, which cannot be recovered by annealing. The XPS P 2p core level clearly shows a new peak at ∼134.5 eV, corresponding to the phosphorous oxide (POx) species. The severe degradation of the device properties after oxygen exposure under light illumination is consistent with the previously proposed photoinduced oxidation of BP.42
 Fig. 10  BP exposure to (a–c) O2; (d, e) humid O2. (a) Linear plot of the transfer characteristic upon 1280 min exposure with respect to the pristine BP. (b) Logarithmic plot of the transfer curve after annealing compared to pristine and 1280 min exposed curves. (c) P 2p core level XPS spectra evolution of BP as a function of O2 exposure time under dark conditions. (d) Linear plot of the transfer characteristics with respect to exposure time. Inset: Logarithmic plot. (e) P 2p core level XPS spectra evolution of BP as a function of humid O2 exposure time under dark conditions. (f) Electron affinities, relative energies of the O2–H2O cluster and energy levels of π*2p orbitals of O2 as a function of the distance (d) between O2 and H2O. Electron affinities are in red, relative energies are in blue, and orbital energies are in black, units are in eV. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 44, Copyright 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd; (d–f) ref. 88, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Besides the light induced oxidation in oxygen, a new degradation channel in a dark environment via water-catalyzed oxidation was proposed.88 Firstly, to determine the role of water alone, BP was exposed to humid N2 in a dark environment. The as-fabricated device only shows a slight n-doping after water exposure, with both the electron mobility and concentration slightly increased. In situ XPS spectra under different exposure times and after annealing revealed that the BP is not oxidized in contact with water in a dark environment. However, upon exposure to humid O2, both the electron and hole conductance decreased significantly (Fig. 10d), showing a dramatic on-current decrease by over two orders of magnitude after 19.5 h exposure (inset of Fig. 10d).88 The hole mobility dropped from 163.7 to 1.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 after 23.5 h exposure, while the electron mobility sharply decreased from 5.7 to 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 only after 3 h exposure. Such degradation can be ascribed to the oxidation of BP in humid oxygen as further confirmed by the in situ XPS study (Fig. 10e).88 The peak at 134.5 eV is exactly the same as the light-induced oxidation case and can be ascribed to POx. In further theoretical studies, it is found that the strong polarization effect of H2O molecules leads to the downward shift of the energy levels of degenerated π*2p orbitals of O2 (3Σg−), i.e. the electron affinity of O2 is enhanced in the presence of H2O (Fig. 10f). Thereby, electrons in BP could spontaneously move to the O2–H2O composite and form P–O bonds. Water molecules then form hydrogen bonds with O atoms in P–O bonds and further destroy the BP lattice.42,88
4.2 Surface protection
As demonstrated above, oxygen itself can barely induce the oxidation of BP; either water or light illumination can stimulate the formation of active oxygen species and further induce the POx to degrade the device performance. Therefore, effective surface protection methods are necessary for long working lifetimes of BP based devices. Typical surface protection layers including noncovalent and covalent bonding will be reviewed in detail in this section.
The most widely used protection method is to passivate the as-fabricated device with Al2O3 due to its compact structure and easy access via atomic layer deposition (ALD). However, the BP device with a 30 nm Al2O3 capping layer (with sidewalls fully covered) cannot retain well the pristine device performance, resulting from the slow diffusion of adsorbates through the capping layer (Fig. 11a).89,93 In comparison, double-layer protection, which consists of 25 nm Al2O3 and a layer of spin-cast DuPont Teflon-AF fluoropolymers, could achieve good long-term stability (Fig. 11b). The improved stability can be attributed to the hydrophobic nature of the fluoropolymer to prevent the water penetration to the BP surface, thereby avoiding the water-catalyzed oxidation.89 h-BN is another promising capping layer due to its chemically inert, pinhole free and atomically flat surface, and has been widely used to reduce the charged impurity scattering in 2D materials.3,94,95 As shown in Fig. 11c and d, Avsar et al. used graphene and h-BN as the contact and the top dielectric, respectively.90 The atomically thin graphene contact allows the full sealing of the BP channel and gets rid of the surface adsorbates and the charge trap induced hysteresis, thus achieving robust device performance with over 2 month air exposure.90
 Fig. 11  The effect of capping layers on BP. (a) Thick-cap (25 nm ALD Al2O3) and (b) Double-cap (25 nm ALD Al2O3 and DuPont Teflon-AF fluoropolymer) FET device performance changes with ambient exposure time. (c) Optical image BP FET device with graphene contact and h-BN top dielectric. (d) I–V curve (device shown in c) at Vg = −40 V and Vsd = 100 mV. Inset: The transport curve of a no-encapsulated device. (e) Simulated Nucleation of 50 PTCDA molecules on BP at 450 K within 25 ns. (f) Snapshots of 6 ML PTCDA under exposure at 300 K after 30 ns. (g) Optimized structures of covalent bonding of PV molecule to BP along armchair (top) and zigzag (down) directions; the broken P–P bond is denoted by a dash line. (h) Band structure (spin up) of PV molecule along the armchair direction at the PBE + D2 level, together with decomposed density of states of three energy bands near the Fermi level at Γ (0, 0, 0) point. (i) Band alignments of BP and PPV-BP composites with different PPV derivatives at the HSE06 level, the red dash line marks the redox potential of O2/O2−. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a,b) ref. 89, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (c, d) ref. 90, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (e,f) ref. 91, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons; (g–i) ref. 92, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Self-assembled monolayers (SAM) are another promising choice due to their easy access by solvent immersion or physical vapor deposition (PVD), as well as their ability to self-assemble into stable and well-ordered MLs on numerous substrates.96–98 The effect of self-assembled perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) on BP was investigated by Zhao et al. from a theoretical perspective.91 PTCDA neither forms chemical bonds nor breaks the original electronic properties of BP as it physically adsorbs on BP via vdW epitaxy.91 The discrete nucleus islands form large area films with herringbone patterns due to the intermolecular hydrogen bonding (C–H⋯O, Fig. 11e). Molecular dynamics simulation of PTCDA's passivation ability revealed that ML PTCDA cannot isolate well the air atmosphere (simulated density is ∼500 times higher than the atmosphere), while 7 MLs or thicker are good enough to protect the underlying BP. Besides PTCDA, organic molecules like octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS),99 7,7,8,8-tetra-cyano-p-quinodimethane (TCNQ),100 and ligands like titanium sulfonate (TiL4)101 have also proved to be effective noncovalent surface protection layers.
Covalent passivation utilizes the chemical reactivity of BP to form stable chemical bonds with adsorbates. Ryder et al. found that covalent aryl diazonium (4-nitrobenzene-diazonium and 4-methoxybenzenediazonium) functionalization not only induces p-type doping, resulting in enhanced hole mobility and on/off ratio, but also suppresses the chemical degradation, with the morphology unchanged after three weeks ambient exposure.102 A thorough theoretical investigation of covalent functionalization was then performed by Li et al.92 The optimized structure of the phenylenevinylene (PV)–BP covalent bond is presented in Fig. 11g. With the formation of the P–C covalent bond between BP and PV on the top layer, a new dangling bond appears at the sublayer (or a singly occupied molecular orbital lies between the bandgap, Fig. 11h), which is unstable and can easily react with the cations (H+) or anions in solution (Fig. 11h).92 In the hydrogenation process, the midgap state disappears while the top valence band is flattened and the curvature decreases. As a result, the effective hole mass increases from 6.23m0 to 9.48m0, hence attenuating the hole mobility. However, as plotted in Fig. 11i, the CBM is still above the redox potential of (O2/O2−), implying the possibility of superoxide anion generation, i.e. not a promising surface protecting method (Fig. 11i). Moving forward, the stability of different poly-phenylenevinylene (PPV) derivative functionalized BP was simulated. The modulation strength of decoration groups is determined by their electrophilic ability. As shown in Fig. 11i, OCH3− and F− slightly decrease the CBM of PPV-BP by 0.04 and 0.19 eV, respectively, but O2/O2− still lies below the CBM. CN− and NO2− can significantly shift the CBM of PPV-VP downward to be lower than O2/O2−, indicating the formation of an effective protection layer.
5. Functionalization
Surface charge transfer doping by introducing functional adlayers on the surface of semiconductors is a convenient way to realize effective and non-destructive n- or p-type doping. It has been demonstrated that the transfer properties of BP can be effectively modulated via in situ surface functionalization with cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3, n-doping) and molybdenum trioxide (MoO3, p-doping).27 Other species such as Cu, Al, K, benzyl viologen, self-assembled layers and cross-linked poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) have been demonstrated to be effective dopants.103–108 Besides manipulating the charge carrier type and concentration, a tuneable bandgap is highly desirable in (opto)electronic applications. Various methods have been developed to manipulate the bandgap of BP and will be reviewed in the following section. Meanwhile, customized intercalation and defect engineering enable the effective functionalization of BP devices, thus opening up a fast-emerging research field.
5.1 Bandgap engineering
In 2015, Kim et al. reported the widely tuneable bandgap of few-layer BP with in situ potassium doping as discussed below.109 In pristine BP, the valence band (Γ2+) and the conduction band (Γ4−) of BP are located at the Brillouin zone center with a predicated Eg of 0.7 to 1.6 eV (ref. 110) (with a vertex in VB at −0.15 eV). After introducing K atoms, the BP is slightly n-doped (Fig. 12b), with a small downward shift of VB (Eg ∼ 0.6 eV, Fig. 12d). On further increasing the dopant density (0.36 ML), the bandgap gradually reduces to zero, indicating a transition from a moderate-gap semiconductor to a band-inverted semimetal (Fig. 12c). When VB and CB come into contact with each other, the band dispersion in kx is linear, whereas that in the ky direction is still parabolic (schematic drawing in Fig. 12c). Fig. 12e is a 3D representation of ARPES spectra as a function of dopant density. The diamonds and circles denote the positions of VBM and CBM, respectively. With the increase of dopant density, the Γ2+ and Γ4− get closer to each other and cross at a critical point of 0.36 ML, where band inversion occurs. The bandgap as a function of the dopant density is plotted in Fig. 12f; it is clearly shown that the bandgap of BP can be continuously tuned in the range of +0.6 to −0.2 eV via the potassium doping. They further performed DFT calculations based on four-layer BP with a single K atom on each 2-by-2 surface unit cell to elucidate the origin of this bandgap variation. At a distance (d) of ∼3.67 Å (2.76 Å at equilibrium), the calculated bandgap is ∼0 eV. In the meantime, the uniformly spatially distributed Ev and Ec states in pristine BP are strongly separated in opposite directions in the presence of a K atom, resulting from the strong local electric field generated by K anions. This phenomenon is termed the giant Stark effect, as previously reported in h-BN111,112 and TMDCs113,114 and further confirmed in BP from STM37 and double-gated115 FET perspectives.
 Fig. 12  Band structure of (a) pristine BP, (b) initial stage of surface doping, (c) transition to a zero-gap semimetal. The square in (a) is the surface Brillouin zone, the red dots are high symmetry points. (d) Corresponding experimental ARPES data of the band structure with different doping density of K. (e) 3D representation of the band evolution as a function of dopant density. Dots and diamonds represent the position of Ec and Ev, respectively. (f) Bandgap as a function of dopant density. The shaded area represented the inverted gap at the Γ point. (g) Transfer characteristics (Vg from −80 to 50 V) evolution of a BP FET measured at Vsd = 0.1 V in logarithmic scale with increasing K thickness. (h) Bandgap variation of few-layer BP as a function of K thickness. The inset shows the current minimum of the transfer curves as a function of K thickness. (i) The rectification characteristic of the BP diode at an optimized gate voltage of −30 V in both logarithmic and linear scale. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–f) ref. 109, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (g–i) ref. 105, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Incorporating BP in FET devices is helpful to evaluate the electronic properties during the in situ K doping and to provide valuable and unique information. Han et al. studied the transport properties of BP during the in situ K deposition.105 Due to the significant charge transfer from the K dopants to the underlying BP, a giant electron doping effect can be distinctly revealed as evidenced by the gradual current minimum shift during the sequential K deposition (Fig. 12g). Charge carrier mobility (μ) and electron concentration (n) can be calculated by  and n = −Ci(Vg − Vth)/e, where Ci = ε0εr/d (εr and d are the dielectric constant and the thickness of the dielectric, respectively), dIsd/dVg represents the slope of the linear region in the transfer plot, and L and W are the length and width of the conduction channel, respectively. It is noteworthy that the electron concentration sharply increased from 1.3 × 1011 to 1.0 × 1012 cm−2 after 0.2 nm K deposition, while the electron mobility shows one order improvement from 18 to 262 cm2 V−1 s−1 as well. The Vth in ambipolar transport semiconductors can be used to evaluate the bandgap according to the formula , where Vn-th and Vp-th are threshold voltage of the electron and hole branch, respectively; β = 1 + CT/COX is the band movement factor; CT and COX are the interface trap capacitance and oxide capacitance, respectively.120Fig. 12h shows that the bandgap of BP decreased from 0.45 to 0.35 eV after deposition of 0.4 nm K, which is consistent with the above ARPES results and can be attributed to the giant Stark effect. The work function significantly decreases from 4.16 eV (pristine BP) to 2.78 eV, while the P 2p core level peak shifts by 0.55 eV to a higher binding energy after deposition of 3.2 nm K, as revealed by in situ UPS and XPS spectra. The vacuum level shift (work function change) comprises the downward band bending in BP and the interface dipole (∼0.8 eV), resulting from the significant interfacial charge transfer induced accumulation of excess delocalized electrons in the BP layer. Benefiting from the significant n-doping of K on BP, a p–n diode based on a half-channel-doped homojunction on one single BP flake was fabricated. As plotted in Fig. 12i, the estimated rectification ratio is ∼104 and the ideality factor value is 1.007 for the typical device, suggesting near-ideal p–n diode behavior and a significant built-in electric field across the junction area.
Recently, a theoretical study placed K atoms at the opposite site of the BP layer, which is supposed to have a minimal effect on the bandgap due to the neutralization of double-sided electric fields.121 However, simulated results show that it can still change the bandgap when varying the distance between the dopant and the BP surface. Thus, they believed that it was surface charging of donated electrons from K dopants and its screening of the K ion potential rather than the giant Stark effect that leads to the variation of bandgap, but more experimental study of this standpoint is needed.121 Besides alkali doping and electrical field, it was also demonstrated by Zhang et al. recently that strain could modulate the bandgap of BP.122 Different from the monotonic redshift of the bandgap by the electrical field, tensile and compressive strain enables the blueshift and redshift of the bandgap, respectively, thus enabling a much wider modulation range.122
5.2 BP intercalation compounds (BPICs)
The interlayer spacing of BP is about 5.3 Å, which is roughly 2 Å larger than that in graphite, making it possible to be intercalated by alkali metal atoms.123 However, BP will be corroded when it comes into contact with the alkali metal vapor, and, thus, it is challenging to prepare stable intercalation compounds.124 To overcome this issue, Grigorieva's group employed a liquid ammonia intercalation method by immersing BP in a metal–liquid ammonia solution at a temperature of −78 °C in a dry-ice/isopropanol bath, which has been used to prepare intercalated MoS2 with superconductivity.125 As shown in Fig. 13a and b, several alkali and alkali-earth metal intercalated BP compounds have been successfully prepared which exhibit superconductivity with a Tc of 3.8 ± 0.1 K.116 Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used to determine the chemical composition of the intercalated compounds, which present average concentrations of 20, 17, 18 and 8 at% for K, Rb, Cs and Ca intercalated crystals, respectively (Fig. 13a).116 The elemental distribution is uniform based on the mapping data. Fig. 13b shows the temperature dependence of dc magnetic susceptibility for Li, K, Rb, Cs and Ca intercalated BP compounds under zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) conditions. It is obvious that all the curves show a sharp change at 3.8 K, a typical feature of the superconducting transition. The inset in Fig. 13b is a plot of dχ/dT as a function of T, exhibiting a Tc = 3.8 ± 0.1 K for all compounds. This property is strikingly different from the alkali intercalated graphite, where the Tc strongly depends on the chemical composition, ranging from 0.02 K for CsC6, 11.5 K for CaC6 and non-superconducting for Li intercalated graphite.126 Based on the controlled experiments, superconductivity is ascribed to electron-doped phosphorus, whereas the intercalated layers mainly play the role of charge reservoirs.116
 Fig. 13  (a) Typical energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy for pristine and intercalated BP. (b) Temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility χ for intercalated BP. ZFC (solid symbols) and FC (open symbols) measurements for an in-plane magnetic field of 10 Oe. The arrow indicates Tc as determined from dχ/dT. The inset shows how Tc was determined for individual samples. (c) Enlarged XRD details showing the new peaks and peak splitting after K intercalation. (d) (Left) HRTEM of a domain with AB stacking; (Right) atomic model of AB-stacked BP viewed at [02] direction. The inset is the corresponding simulated HRTEM image. (e) (Left) HRTEM of a domain with AC stacking; (right) atomic model of AC-stacked BP viewed at [02] direction. The inset is the corresponding simulated HRTEM image. (f) Theoretically calculated sodium intercalated BP. Yellow balls represent phosphorus atoms, and blue balls represent sodium atoms. (g) Schematic illustration of the LiH-intercalated BP including two steps, x refers to the atomic ratio of Li. (h) PL spectra of bulk BP without intercalation and LiH-BP, the inset is the optical image showing the detected sample. (i) VBM shift as a function of atomic ratio of LiH. (j) AFM images of the surface morphology of LiH-BP (top) and hydrogenated BP (bottom) after ambient exposure. The right panels are the corresponding line profile. (k) Superior device stability of LiH-BP. Charge carrier mobility and on/off ratio for LiH-BP as a function of air exposure time. The inset is the charge mobility for pristine BP as a function of air exposure time. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a, b) ref. 116, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; (c) ref. 117, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons; (d–f) ref. 118, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (g–k) ref. 119, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
To explore the formation process and reveal the structures of BPICs, Cheng et al. carried out solid-state synthesis of BPICs by mixing BP with alkali metal at a controlled temperature.118Fig. 13c is the enlarged X-ray diffraction (XRD) image showing the new peaks and peak splitting after the alkali metal intercalation.117 The new peaks around 7° can be assigned to the average interlayer (c) distance of 12.4 Å for Na-BPICs and 12.8 Å for K-BPICs. Peak splitting at 17° corresponds to the occurrence of new intercalated phases, (010)-reflections with expanded lattice parameters. Cheng et al. provided conclusive evidence showing the gliding of BP planes after the sodium intercalation, which gives rise to reordering of atomic stacks from AB to AC.118Fig. 13d is the HRTEM image of an orthogonal atomic pattern. The inset is the corresponding FFT pattern with highlighted (200) and (012) planes.118 The atomic arrangement matches well with the AB-stacked BP projected in the [0] (right panel of Fig. 13d). AB stacking is the normal phase of BP, and it can be transferred to AC stacking when the upper layer shifts along the [100]/[010] direction by a half unit cell. Fig. 13e is an enlarged HRTEM image showing a different atomic arrangement in the intercalated region, which has a well-defined 1 lattice plane with a d spacing of 0.235 nm (highlighted by yellow lines). The corresponding FFT distinctly shows the (1) spots.118Fig. 13e (right) is the atomic model of AC-stacked BP with the [0] projection, which is similar to the HRTEM image, indicating the transition from AB to AC in the initial intercalation stage. Fig. 13f is the side view of the relaxed structure after sodium intercalation. First, the sodium intercalation induces the phase transition of BP to another orthorhombic structure with space group Imm2. Second, the lattice parameter shrinks, while the spaces along b and c expand.118 In particular, BP expands about 20.70% along the c direction when the sodium concentration reaches 25%, driving the AB–AC transformation. Furthermore, the amount of amorphous components increases with increasing the intercalation amount of sodium, which is ascribed to the lattice constraint of BP. The modification of BP with alkali and alkali-earth atoms can modulate the electronic structure, but these compounds are very sensitive to ambient atmosphere exposure. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare intercalated BP with high mobility and stability.
Very recently, Loh's group demonstrated an approach to intercalate BP with alkali metal hydride.119Fig. 13g schematically shows the two-step intercalation processes. Lithium was first evaporated from a getter source under ultra-high vacuum (UHV), followed by annealing in hydrogen (2 × 10−5 Torr, 450 K) to stabilize the Li cation. The final product is a quasi-ML LiH intercalated BP.119 To confirm the quasi-ML feature of the final product, PL spectra were measured on the bulk BP and the intercalated region (Fig. 13h). No PL peak can be detected on the bulk surface, while the intercalated area shows a PL emission at 729 and 748 nm, which is close to the previously reported oxygen etched86 or mechanically exfoliated ML BP.130Fig. 13i plots VBM as a function of the atomic ratio of the deposited LiH. It is obvious that there are two stages, corresponding to two distinct phases. For the typical K doping (Fig. 12), the doping induced VBM shift changes monotonically with the atomic ratio of dopant. However, for LiH, when the atomic ratio of LiH is larger than 0.15, the VBM abruptly shifts to 1.23 eV, implying the formation of quasi-ML phase. To evaluate the stability of the LiH-intercalated BP, AFM was used to directly monitor the surface morphology. Small bumps can be seen after the exfoliation of BP under ambient conditions, which is ascribed to the formation of phosphoric acid.131 However, as shown in Fig. 13j (top panel), LiH-intercalated BP exhibits no change after the ambient atmosphere exposure for one month, as evidenced by the smooth line profile at a thickness of 5 nm.119 In a control experiment, hydrogenation of BP alone barely has any protection against degradation. Fig. 13j (bottom) shows the AFM image of the hydrogenated BP after 3 days exposure to air. Bright bubbles with high density and average height above 60 nm can be found on the whole surface. The nontrivial stability of LiH-intercalated BP has several origins, which is the same as the increased stability of the 1T′ phase in LiH-intercalated MoS2.132 First, LiH is less reactive than Li with air and water. Second, LiH can act as an effective electron donor to donate electrons to the electron trap sites or neutralize the hole oxidizers in BP. To evaluate the quality and stability of LiH-intercalated BP, a FET device was fabricated. As shown in Fig. 13k, the sample maintains a high mobility of up to ∼800 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on/off ratio of >103 even after 18 days’ exposure to air (20 °C, 56% humidity, natural indoor light illumination). In contrast, the FET device with pristine BP died after 2 days’ air exposure (inset in Fig. 13k). The LiH intercalation method, which has been proved to be an effective way to both tune the electronic properties and protect the materials from degradation, should also be applicable for other vdW layered materials.
Alkali metal atoms possess low electron negativity and small atom radius and, thus, are easy to intercalate, but how to intercalate large organic molecular remains a challenge. Very recently, Duan's group reported an electrochemical molecular intercalation approach, where a standard BP FET was immersed in a saturated molecular solution (cetyl-trimethylammonium bromide in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone) coupled with a platinum counter-electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. By controlling the electrochemical voltage, the intercalation ability could be easily controlled by the driving voltage (1.4–2 V for 4 to 10 layers and >3 V for ML BP).127Fig. 14a (top gate transfer characteristic) shows a largely increased on/off ratio (from <10 to >105) of BP FET after several intercalation processes, implying the ‘thinning’ of bulk BP. Further in situ PL investigation reveals a gradual evolution from the absence of PL to a prominent emission peak at 898 nm (1.38 eV), 710 nm (1.75 eV) and 548 nm (2.26 eV) during the intercalation process, corresponding to trilayer, bilayer and ML BP exciton emission, respectively (Fig. 14b). The relatively large emission energy can be attributed to the strain-induced bandgap expansion and broken orbital symmetry.133 The intercalation nature was then investigated by various methods such as AFM, XRD and cross-section TEM, which clearly demonstrate an interlayer distance expansion from 5.24 Å to 11.21 Å (Fig. 14c and d). This method is of great universality and can be applied for intercalating various molecules into different kinds of 2D materials such as semiconductors (MoS2), thermoelectric materials (SnSe), semimetals (NbSe2) and topological insulators (Bi2Se3).127
 Fig. 14  (a) Ionic gate transfer characteristics of the starting (black) and the final intercalated (green) BP at 0.01 V drain–source bias. (b) PL signals observed during different stages of intercalation. High resolution cross-sectional TEM images for (c) pristine, (d) intercalated ML BP. Scale bars: 1 nm. Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
5.3 Characterization of defects in BP
Both interface and defect engineering are promising strategies for the modulation of fundamental physical properties of low dimension materials.3,134 To achieve desired functionalities by defect engineering, it is of great significance to understand the effect of defects first. In the early work on BP, a variety of theoretical studies have been carried out to reveal different types of defects, and their effects on the electronic properties as well as the surface instability of BP, but experimental characterization studies of the defects in BP are few in number. Benefiting from its weak interlayer van der Waals interactions, BP can be cleaved along the [001] direction in UHV, which gives rise to an atomically clean and flat surface for in situ STM studies.
As seen from the STM image (Fig. 15a), the puckered structure of BP exhibits a zigzag pattern along the [010] direction, leading to periodic zigzag rows which correspond to the upper plane of BP.129 Scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) measurements on it illustrate a bandgap of 0.317 ± 0.036 eV (Fig. 15b). Fig. 15c summarizes the positions of VBM and CBM for 48 individual measurements, showing that the Fermi level resides within ±30 mV of the valence band edge. This means that BP is strongly p-doped, consistent with another STM study.128Fig. 15d is a large-area STM image of BP at the sample bias of −0.1 V (near the valence band edge). Several elongated, dumbbell-shaped protrusions which exhibit charge distribution along the [100] direction can be found, but show different brightnesses. The inset of Fig. 15d highlights the measured heights of these protrusions, giving a value ranging from 0.01 to 0.2 nm. These differences are ascribed to the defects beneath the surface with various depths.129Fig. 15e shows two examples of such defects with different depths. Examining the STM topographies reveals that both the size and brightness of the dumbbell are mirror-symmetric along the [010] direction. It is noted that these images were taken at −0.1 V (sample bias close to the valence band edge). Tuning the bias presents different information of the defects, as shown in Fig. 15f and g. At negative bias, the defects are surrounded by a bright halo, while positive bias gives rise to a dark halo surrounding.129 The dark halo at positive sample bias is due to the repulsive interaction between the negatively charged defect and electron tunnelling into empty states, while the bright halo at negative sample bias is ascribed to the attraction between the defect and hole tunnelling into occupied states.129 The tip bias induced morphology variation has also been observed in the Si impurities on the GaAs semiconductor surface, which is ascribed to the ionization of the donor.135 The charge state of the Si donor in GaAs was manipulated with a STM tip that was fully controlled by the position of the tip and the voltage applied. In the current case, to elucidate the electronic properties of the defect in BP, STS measurements were performed, as shown in Fig. 15h. The green curve is the STS taken on BP far away from the defects, shown as a reference. The dI/dV spectrum taken on the defect shows two weak peaks at −0.13 eV (P1) and −0.21 eV (P2) and a sharp peak at 0.31 eV (P3). This sharp peak implies a tip-induced deionization of shallow acceptor states. As schematically depicted in Fig. 15i (top panel), at negative sample bias, downward band bending shifts the acceptor state below EF, thus facilitating the formation of stable negatively charged acceptor states. In contrast, the tip-induced band bending at positive bias shifts acceptor states above EF, resulting in the deionization of the acceptor. Therefore, the P3 peak corresponds to the tip-induced deionization of acceptor states.129
 Fig. 15  (a) STM image of the flat BP surface free from defects after in situ cleaving (−0.1 V, 200 pA. scale bar = 1 nm). (b) STS of BP showing a bandgap of 0.317 ± 0.036 eV. (c) Statistic of the position of valence band maximum and conduction band minimum for 48 individual measurements on the defect. (d) 3-D representation of a STM image showing the different brightness of the defects; inset is the line profiles taken across three vacancies, 1L, 2L and 3L as marked in panel (d). (e) Enlarged STM images shows two vacancies at different sublattice. (f) and (g) STM image of the cleaved BP with defects taken at different sample biases. (h) Corresponding STS taken from panel (g) with different colored squares. A sharp feature and two weak resonances can be clearly visible in the STS spectrum acquired at the bright ellipse. (i) Schematic models showing the tip induced band bending that switches the charge state of the acceptor from (top) the negatively charged state at −0.45 V to (bottom) neutral state at 0.35 V. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–e) ref. 128, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (f–h) ref. 129, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
However, in a similar study by Kiraly et al., they did not observe any significant effect of tip-induced band bending. Fig. 16a is an example to show that the defect is a vacancy in the uppermost layer.128 The calculated charge density of these vacancies reproduces the experimental STM image. As the brightness of these defects is strongly correlated to the depth height (h), the electronic properties of each vacancy also depend on the depth. Fig. 16b representatively demonstrates the STS spectra taken at the red spots on the defect with different h values.128 Although the intensities of the peaks vary with the measurement position in different defects, two peaks splitting near the EF are clearly observed for defects with h > 0.06 nm. For h < 0.05 nm, there is only one single peak at ∼9 ± 2 mV. Furthermore, the STS result indicates the donor feature in these vacancies, which contributes to the inherent p-doping.128
 Fig. 16  (a) (Left) Ball and stick model of the single vacancy in BP located at sublattice site; and (Right) the calculated charge density of the single vacancy. (b) A sort of STS spectra taken on the defect with decreasing apparent heights, at the position as marked in panel (a). (c) Top panel: STM image shows the dumbbell shape for the excited state; bottom panel: calculated squared wave function of 1s states. (d) Top panel: STM image resolves an ellipse shape for the ground state; bottom panel: squared wave function of 2px states calculated using an anisotropic hydrogen-like model. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a, b) ref. 128, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (c, d) ref. 129, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The observed features are similar to the dopants in semiconductors, such as Mn acceptors in the InAs(110).136 In analogy to the mirror asymmetry of the bound hole wave function of this dopant, the dumbbell shape of the defect in BP suggests the formation of bound hole states. Therefore, P1 and P2 correspond to ground and excited states, respectively.129 The dumbbell transforms into an ellipse at a sample bias of +0.11 V, and then gradually reverts to the dumbbell shape above 0.31 V. At −0.2 V, P2 state (excited hole) dominates the tunnelling process, giving rise to the dumbbell shape. To further elucidate the nature of the electronic states, DFT calculations were performed to show the simulated STM images. It is noted that only taking the Coulomb interaction of the hole with the negatively charged acceptor center and the respective hydrogen-like states into account can reproduce the features. This shows that the 1s and 2px states orientate along the armchair direction ([100]), while the 2s and 2py states are reversed along the zigzag direction (bottom panels in Fig. 16c and d). Therefore, the ground state (P1) and the excited state (P2) correspond to the 1s and 2px states, respectively.129
Vacancies are the most common defects in BP.137–139 Their crystal and electronic structures have been characterized by STM and STS, interpreting the origin of intrinsic p-doping of BP. Similar to graphene, engineering BP with vacancies or foreign atoms can also modulate their electronic properties,68,140,141 or even induce magnetism,142–144 thus broadening their applications. In addition, an atomic scale study on the reaction of oxygen and water with the defects would be helpful to understand the degradation mechanism of BP. However, experimental characterization at the atomic scale is still rarely reported, mainly due to the challenges in high-quality sample preparation under UHV.
6. Applications
6.1 Electronic devices
2D BP was rediscovered in 2014 as an attractive channel material for FETs because of its semiconducting nature, such as high on/off ratio ∼105, hole dominated ambipolar transport characteristics and planar surface in favor of the integration with other low-dimension materials.12,14 The typical BP FET demonstrated by Li et al. is plotted in Fig. 17a–d.12 Few-layer BP (∼5 nm) was exfoliated from the bulk crystal and further configured as a FET device with Cr/Au contact. The fabricated device showed clear hole-dominated ambipolar conductance. The hole mobility of the sample is as high as 984 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is comparable to or even larger than TMDC based FETs.56,145 Meantime, the electron branch in this device is also clearly distinguishable in the positive Vg range.12 The bandgap of BP is strongly layer-dependent and approaches 0.3 eV in this 5 nm-thick sample, which makes it easy to tune the Fermi level from below VBM to above CBM with the electrostatic field. Contact performance of this device is then demonstrated by measuring the Ids–Vds curve (Fig. 17b), which shows good/poor linearity in the hole/electron branch, representing the ohmic and Schottky contact performance in p and n branches, respectively.12 Furthermore, to reveal the dominated scattering mechanism on BP's transport characteristics, temperature dependent measurements were performed (Fig. 17c). The extracted hole mobility (μh) shows a clear temperature dependence: μh decreases with reducing the temperature down to 100 K and saturates at lower temperature (Fig. 17d), consistent with charge impurities dominated scattering.12,146 Meanwhile, Hall mobility clearly increases with charge carrier concentration at low temperature (squares in Fig. 17d), which can be attributed to the enhanced screening effect with larger carrier concentration. Therefore, the mobility in this range is dominated by charge impurity scattering, resulting from the residual ions in the underlying SiO2 dielectric. Hall mobility at temperatures >100 K fits well with μ ∼ T−0.5, consistent with the electron–phonon dominated scattering process.146
 Fig. 17  Few-layer phosphorene FET and its device characteristics. (a) Transfer characteristic of a few-layer BP FET. (b) Hole branch I–V curve of the device in (a). Inset: Electron branch I–V curve. (c) Four-terminal conductance as a function of gate voltage measured in an 8 nm-thick sample at different temperatures. (d) Field-effect mobility (red open circles) and Hall mobility (filled squares, three different values of n) as a function of temperature on a logarithmic scale. (e) Device structure used to determine the angle-dependent transport behavior. (f) Angular dependence of the drain current and the transconductance Gm of a typical device. Reprinted with permission from: (a–d) ref. 12, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group; (e, f) ref. 14, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Owing to the strong in-plane anisotropy as discussed previously, exploring the electrical performance with different in-plane orientations is of wide interest. As shown in Fig. 17e, Liu et al. fabricated a device with multiple Cr/Au contacts with 45° included angle in the adjacent contacts.14 The drain current at Vg = 30 V, Vd = 0.5 V in the perpendicular direction is ∼85 mA mm−1 (at 45° and 225°) and ∼137 mA mm−1 (at 135° and 315°), respectively, demonstrating the strong anisotropy of ∼50% between the orthogonal directions. Utilizing such a strong anisotropy of BP, BP based orientation-induced diodes can be fabricated, showing a remarkable rectification ratio as high as 115 and an ‘ideal’ diode property with an ideality factor (n) of ∼1.05.147 Another possible application of the in-plane anisotropy property is in thermoelectric devices, which rely on the Seebeck effect to convert heat into electricity. In particular, the conversion efficiency is proportional to the ratio between electrical conductance and thermal conductance. To achieve a high Seebeck coefficient, it is desirable to obtain a high electrical conductance and a low thermal conductance simultaneously. In anisotropic BP, electrical and thermal conductance peak along the armchair and zigzag directions, respectively. Consequently, the conversion efficiency shows a ZT value (thermoelectric figure of merit) of ∼2.5 along the armchair direction, which is comparable to commercial materials.148
In 2D material electronic devices, semiconductor/metal contact plays a major role in determining the transistor polarity and contact resistance. The formation of ohmic contact is crucial to achieve devices with high performance. Therefore, a systematic investigation of the BP device performance with different metal contacts is highly desirable. The contact between ML BP and a variety of metals is theoretically investigated and plotted in Fig. 18a.149 ML BP forms chemical bonds with deposited metals; therefore it undergoes metallization. Two different methods, band calculation and transport simulation, were used to predict the contact performance. In consideration of the interaction between metal electrodes and semiconductor channels, the latter approach shows much higher accuracy and is more consistent with experimental results.149 It was found that Schottky barriers are formed at almost all ML BP/metal interfaces. The electron Schottky barrier heights (SBHs) between ML BP and Au, Cu, Cr, Al and Ag are around 0.30, 0.34, 0.37, 0.51, and 0.52 eV, respectively; meanwhile the hole SBHs between Ti, Ni, and Pd and ML BP are 0.30, 0.26, and 0.16 eV, respectively.149
 Fig. 18  (a) Comparison of the Schottky barrier heights (ΦeSB for electron and ΦhSB for hole) of ML phosphorene-Al, Ag, Ti, Cr, Cu, Au, Ni, and Pd contacts obtained by the ab initio electronic band calculations, quantum transport calculations, and experimental observations. (b) Transfer characteristic of BP FET with channel length from 2 μm to 100 nm. (c), (d) Band diagram showing how Schottky barrier at metal contacts varies the FET behavior in long and short channel transistors. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 149, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b–d) ref. 41, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
BP FETs with different metal contacts have been experimentally investigated by several reports.41,150–152 The contact resistance can be extracted with the transfer length method (TLM), as Rtotal = 2Rcontact + Rchannel and Rchannel strongly depends on the channel length. Based on this method, Rcontact between Ni/Pd and few-layer BP is extracted to be 1.75 ± 0.06 and 3.15 ± 0.15 Ω mm at the electrostatic doping limit, respectively.41 Notably, the contact resistance for both holes and electrons is much smaller in the short-channel configuration. As shown in the schematic of Fig. 18c and d, the effective SB height only depends on gate voltage in the long-channel configuration.41 If the channel length is reduced, not only gate voltage but also source drain bias would modulate the SB height, i.e. a large source drain bias would turn the thermionic emission into a tunnelling process at the metal/semiconductor barrier.
Apart from basic electronic devices like FETs, functional devices like diode and logic inverters have been demonstrated in many studies.103,106,153–155 Replacing traditional SiO2 with a better dielectric, e.g. h-BN, quantum oscillations,156 quantum Hall effects95 and spin valves157 have been achieved at ultra-low temperature. Using a ferroelectric material dielectric, poly(vinylidenefluoride-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)), a non-volatile memory device has been demonstrated by Lee et al.158
6.2 Optoelectronic devices
An important application of semiconductors is photodetectors. Owing to the tunable direct bandgap from 0.3 (bulk) to 2 eV (ML) as well as the high charge carrier mobility, BP is a promising candidate for photodetection over a wide range, from the visible to infrared regime. A schematic plot of the early studied BP photodetector is shown in Fig. 19a.159 For a photodetector, the figure of merit photoresponsivity (R) is defined as photocurrent triggered by a unit power of incident light on the effective area of the photodetector: R = ΔI/PAs, where ΔI is the excited photocurrent (ΔI = Ilaser,ON − Ilaser,OFF), P is the intensity of the light, and As is the effective area under light illumination. Upon illumination, BP FET shows a fast photoresponse speed of ∼1 ms, a large R of ∼4.8 mA W−1 in the visible light region and expanding to the near-infrared (NIR) region at 940 nm (Fig. 19b).159 The relationship between R and wavelength is plotted in Fig. 19c, which decreases linearly when the excitation wavelength is increased. A BP photodetector shows a wider operation range compared to a TMDC photodetector,162–166 with an estimated cutoff wavelength (λcutoff) of ∼997 nm (1.24 eV), owing to the much smaller bandgap of BP (Fig. 19c).159 Interestingly, there is an abnormal significant enhancement of R in the near ultraviolet (UV) range, reaching a record high value of ∼9 × 104 A W−1 at Vsd = 3 V (Fig. 19d).160 Different from the fast response (ms) in the visible to infrared range, the photoresponse at 330 nm is as slow as ∼100 s (Fig. 19e). Such a colossal but slow UV photoresponse is ascribed to the resonant-interband transition between a pair of specially nested valence and conduction bands (Fig. 19f), which is known as the band-nesting effect.167 Density of states (DOS) on the nested bands are extremely high, leading to this highly efficient absorption in the UV light region.160
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic figure of a few-layer BP photodetector. (b) Photocurrent as a function of time under modulated light excitation (∼20 Hz) with different wavelengths. The shaded areas indicate the time when the light beam is blanketed by the mechanical chopper. (c) Responsivity vs. excitation wavelength at constant power (red squares). The dashed red line is a linear fit to the data. (d) Photoresponsivity within the energy range 1–4 eV measured at VBG = 80 V and VSD = 0.1 V. (e) Slow response of photocurrent under wavelength 330 nm. (f) Calculated band structure of BP. The arrow indicates the band nesting edge (between 3 and 4 eV). (g) Illustration of the BP photodetector operating at 3.39 μm. The polarization of the incident laser and its incident direction are represented by yellow and green arrows, respectively. (h) Power dependence of the R. Solid lines: fitting results with Hornbeck–Haynes model. (i) Photocurrent amplitude versus modulation frequency under various incident powers. Inset: Variation of 3 dB frequency (f3dB) with incident power. Reprinted with permission from: (a–c) ref. 159, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (d–f) ref. 160, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (g–i) ref. 161, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The mid-infrared (MIR) photodetector performance has been systemically investigated by Guo et al.161 To enhance the photoresponse, multiple interdigitated electrodes were used to optimize the photocarrier collection efficiency (Fig. 19g).168 This device demonstrates an ultrawide operation range up to the mid-infrared region of ∼3.39 μm, as plotted in Fig. 19h. When the incident power increases, R of the device drops simultaneously, revealing a photogating effect dominated photoresponse. In particular, if photo-generated electrons (holes) are trapped by defects,169 impurities170 or hybrid structures like quantum dots,171 the lifetimes of the photo-generated holes (electrons) are generally prolonged. The trapped carriers can act as a local gate to effectively modulate the concentration of photo-generated free carriers. As a result, the photogain (G) of the device is enhanced according to G = τ/τT, where τ is the excess minority carrier lifetime and τT is the carrier transit time.161 Here, some intrinsic defects like vacancies, dislocations and grain boundaries act as the trap state, thus leading to the high G = 104 and R ∼ 82 A W−1 at 500 mV bias and 1.6 nW incident power (Fig. 19h).161 The frequency dependent photocurrent is shown in Fig. 19i. The 3 dB cutoff frequency (the point where the photocurrent becomes half of the one under continuous illumination) ranges from 2.2 to 1.1 kHz for incident power from 5.6 μW to 1.6 nW, demonstrating a fast-response and low-power-sensitive mid-infrared photodetection properties. The high frequency (>10 kHz) cutoff point is ∼60 mA W−1 for all the powers, originating from the photovoltaic effect.172

6.2.1. Diode. 
The p–n diode is the basic component in both electronics and optoelectronics. The BP p–n diode has been achieved via electrostatic controlled local gating,173 stacking with other n-type 2D materials like MoS2,153 selective area oxidation to form a BP-BP suboxide junction,155etc. The schematic illustration of a locally gated h-BN/BP junction is shown in Fig. 20a.173 H-BN and BP were transferred onto two 300 nm split prepatterned gate electrodes. The BP flake was then contacted by Ti/Au electrodes, using a standard nanofabrication method. As the pristine BP FET features ambipolar transport characteristics with hole and electron mobilities of ∼25 and 0.12 cm2 V−1 s−1, split gate electrodes were able to tune the transistor into hole and electron dominated transport in different parts of the channel, respectively. As a result, a widely tuneable p–n diode could be formed. As shown in Fig. 20b, four distinct regions are clearly distinguished, corresponding to PN, PP, NP and NN regions, respectively. Among them, PN and NP regions represent the formation of a built-in electric field, which can be used to separate photo-generated electron–hole pairs. In this device, the photocurrent at zero source–drain bias, i.e. short circuit current (Isc), is clearly observed at PN and NP regions (Fig. 20c), while PP and NN regions show negligible Isc. Meanwhile, there was a high open circuit voltage (Voc) in PN and NP configurations and zero Voc in PP and NN configurations.173
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic figure of the locally gated h-BN/BP PN junction. (b) False-colour map of the magnitude of the source–drain current at constant bias voltage (100 mV) as the voltages on the two local gates are changed independently. (c) False-colour map of the short-circuit current (Isc, Vds = 0 V) as the voltages on the two local gates are changed independently. (d) Band diagrams illustrating the photovoltaic mechanism in PN and NP configurations: an impinging photon (red arrow) generates an electron–hole pair that is swept away from the junction region by the built-in electric field. (e) Inset: Schematic figure of the BP-MoS2 heterojunction. I–V characteristics of the PN diode under various incident laser powers. (f) Calculated R as a function of incident power. (g) Id as a function of Vd under various laser powers. The Isc and Voc can be obtained from the intercepts of the curves on Id and Vd axes. (h) Power generated by the p–n diode as a function of Vd under different laser power. Reprinted with permission from: (a–d) ref. 78, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group; (e–h) ref. 153, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Another way to realize the p–n junction is to stack p-type BP with other n-type 2D materials such as MoS2 to form a vdW heterojunction (inset of Fig. 20e).153 The formed p–n junction shows a strong current-rectifying ratio of ∼105 at Vg = −30 V. Meanwhile, the formed reverse bias suppressed the dark current and therefore largely enhanced the photodetecting signal-to-noise ratio (Iillumination/Idark) to 3 × 103, which was almost 100 times higher than that of the MoS2 photodetector.166 The relationship between R and incident power in both forward and reverse bias is plotted in Fig. 20f. Both photoconductor (forward bias) and photodiode (reverse bias) R decreased with power and peaked at 3.5 A W−1 and 418 mA W−1 under 1 μW illumination, respectively. In addition to photodetection, the photovoltaic effect was clearly observed, with the power dependent Isc and Voc plotted in Fig. 20g. As the first demonstrated BP based p–n heterojunction, the fill factor FF = Pd/(IscVoc) and external quantum efficiency EQE = (Isc/Plaser)(hc/eλ) were calculated to be 0.5 and 0.3%, respectively, where h is Planck's constant, e is the electron charge, c is the velocity of light, and λ is the wavelength of the incident light. Based on a similar device configuration, Ye et al. demonstrated that such a p–n heterojunction can be used as a broadband photodetector with a remarkable R of ∼22.3 A W−1 measured at λ = 532 nm and 153.4 mA W−1 at λ = 1.55 μm with a microsecond response speed (15 μs).28

7. Summary and outlook
Recent progress in the preparation, characterization, and application in (opto)electronics of BP has been reviewed. Bulk BP features a small bandgap ∼0.3 eV and can be gradually increased to ∼2 eV by simply scaling down the thickness. Unlike TMDCs, which involve a direct-to-indirect bandgap crossover in the bilayer or thicker case, the bandgap of BP is always direct, thus holding promise in high-efficiency light emission optoelectronics, especially in the infrared regime. However, achievements in BP based light emission devices are surprisingly rare, possibly resulting from the poor air stability induced challenging device fabrication process. Furthermore, the theoretically predicted hole mobility can be as high as 10000 cm2 V−1 s−1, much superior to TMDCs and can be applied to next-generation electronic devices. Besides these, the unique crystal symmetry makes BP highly anisotropic, a new dimension that can both control the physical properties and design some conceptually new logic devices. In the sample preparation part, we traced back the bulk BP crystal synthesis to the last century. To fabricate few-layer BP, versatile top-down (exfoliation or etching) methods are summarized and compared. Meanwhile, the detailed progress of phosphorene allotrope prepared via MBE is given, with an explicit description of the substrate effect from both theoretical and experimental perspectives. The oxidation mechanism of BP under various environment and several noncovalent/covalent protection methods is summarized. The effect of water, which was usually overlooked, is now identified to ‘catalyze’ the oxidation of BP even in a dark environment. How to effectively prevent water penetration is vital for keeping the BP surface intact. In the device application part, customized engineering methods, including interface, bandgap and intercalation engineering, have been outlined. Particularly, we highlighted recent achievements in characterizing the type and effect of defects in a BP crystal, which is the basis for future defect engineering. Functional electronic and optoelectronic devices based on BP are summarized. In optoelectronics, the relative low infrared light absorption of BP severely limits the device performance. A recent study has found that Ag–P hybridization could induce an abnormal near-infrared absorption, thus improving the near-infrared photoresponsivity.174 To further improve the infrared optoelectronic performance, future studies should be directed to integrating surface plasmonic structures and micro-cavities or precisely controlling the defect states,175 thus achieving optoelectronic devices with both high and fast responsivity.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of China under 21872100, 21573156, and 21403282, the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province under BK20170005 and BK20181297 and the Singapore MOE under Grant No. R143-000-652-112 and R143-000-A43-114.
References
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Akinwande, N. Petrone and J. Hone, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Z. Wu, C. Han, J. He, Z. Ni and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3100–3128 RSC .
J. Lu, H. Liu, E. S. Tok and C. H. Sow, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2494–2515 RSC .
W. Chen, D. Qi, X. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2009, 84, 279–321 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. Katsnelson, I. Grigorieva, S. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schmidt, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7715–7736 RSC .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Schulman, A. J. Arnold and S. Das, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3037–3058 RSC .
P. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344–1363 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, W. Zhang, M. Demarteau, A. Hoffmann, M. Dubey and A. Roelofs, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5733–5739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Peng, K. Khaliji, N. Youngblood, R. Grassi, T. Low and M. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6315–6320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hong, B. Chamlagain, W. Z. Lin, H. J. Chuang, M. H. Pan, Z. X. Zhou and Y. Q. Xu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8978–8983 RSC .
T. Niu, Nano Today, 2017, 12, 7–9 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z. X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 046801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Kim, C. Jin, G. J. Ye, D. Y. Qiu, F. H. da Jornada, Z. Shi, L. Chen, Z. Zhang, F. Yang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, W. Ren, S. G. Louie, X. H. Chen, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 12, 21 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Low, A. S. Rodin, A. Carvalho, Y. Jiang, H. Wang, F. Xia and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 075434 CrossRef .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3900–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, J. Yang, A. Carvalho, H. Liu, Y. Lu and C. H. Sow, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1806–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .
A. Sharma, B. Wen, B. Liu, Y. W. Myint, H. Zhang and Y. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1704556 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Xiang, C. Han, J. Wu, S. Zhong, Y. Liu, J. Lin, X. A. Zhang, W. Ping Hu, B. Ozyilmaz, A. H. Neto, A. T. Wee and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, H. Li, Z. Chen and J. Xu, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 692–699 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carvalho, M. Wang, X. Zhu, A. S. Rodin, H. Su and A. H. Castro Neto, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16061 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, L. Vicarelli, E. Prada, J. O. Island, K. L. Narasimha-Acharya, S. I. Blanter, D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, J. V. Alvarez, H. W. Zandbergen, J. J. Palacios and H. S. J. van der Zant, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 025001 CrossRef .
R. Xu, S. Zhang, F. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, B. Xing, Z. Yu, L. Fu, Q. Qin and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2046–2053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, S. Huang, A. Chaves, C. Song, V. O. Ozcelik, T. Low and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, A. Chaves, S. Huang, F. Wang, Q. Xing, T. Low and H. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap9977 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Qiu, A. Carvalho, Y. Bao, H. Xu, S. J. Tan, W. Liu, A. H. Castro Neto, K. P. Loh and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1970–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, N. Mao, L. Xie, H. Xu and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 2396–2399 CrossRef .
A. L. Phaneuf-L'Heureux, A. Favron, J. F. Germain, P. Lavoie, P. Desjardins, R. Leonelli, R. Martel and S. Francoeur, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7761–7767 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Du, H. Liu, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10035–10042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Tong and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 11609–11613 CrossRef .
A. Favron, E. Gaufres, F. Fossard, A. L. Phaneuf-L'Heureux, N. Y. Tang, P. L. Levesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Hu, A. Carvalho, N. Guo, J. Zhang, F. Hu, D. Xiang, J. Wu, B. Lei, L. Wang, C. Zhang, A. H. Castro Neto and W. Chen, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 021007 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, L. Chu, M. Toh, C. Kloc, P.-H. Tan and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 791–797 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan and D. R. Zahn, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, H. Yan, L. E. Brus, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and S. Ryu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2695–2700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shahil, M. Hossain, V. Goyal and A. Balandin, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 054305 CrossRef .
X. Luo, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, M. Toh, C. Kloc, Q. Xiong and S. Y. Quek, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 195313 CrossRef .
M. Yamamoto, S. T. Wang, M. Ni, Y.-F. Lin, S.-L. Li, S. Aikawa, W.-B. Jian, K. Ueno, K. Wakabayashi and K. Tsukagoshi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3895–3903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, R. Xu, J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, F. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Yu and Y. Lu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e312 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, N. Kumar, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, K. F. Mak, H. Zhao and J. Shan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 026803 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, S.-F. Shi, H. Felipe, Y. Zhang, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain and Z.-X. Shen, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, X. Ling, L. Yu, S. Huang, A. L. Hsu, Y.-H. Lee, J. Kong, M. S. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5569–5576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tongay, J. Zhou, C. Ataca, J. Liu, J. S. Kang, T. S. Matthews, L. You, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2831–2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Lin, C. Han, F. Wang, R. Wang, D. Xiang, S. Qin, X.-A. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Zhang and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5323–5329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Obraztsov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 212–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, S. Wang, D.-M. Tang, W. Zhao, H. Xu, L. Chu, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and G. Eda, Appl. Mater. Today, 2015, 1, 60–66 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, J. K. Huang, C. H. Chen, Y. H. Chang, Y. J. Cheng and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y.-C. Lin, W. Zhao, J. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Shen, D.-M. Tang, J. Wang and Q. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Hamsen, X. Jia, K. K. Kim, A. Reina, M. Hofmann, A. L. Hsu, K. Zhang, H. Li and Z.-Y. Juang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4134–4139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Keyes, Phys. Rev., 1953, 92, 580 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brown and S. Rundqvist, Acta Crystallogr., 1965, 19, 684–685 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shirotani, R. Maniwa, H. Sato, A. Fukizawa, N. Sato, Y. Maruyama, T. Kajiwara, H. Inokuchi and S. Akimoto, Nippon Kagaku Kaishi, 1981, 1604–1609 CrossRef CAS .
H. Krebs, H. Weitz and K. Worms, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1955, 280, 119–133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maruyama, S. Suzuki, K. Kobayashi and S. Tanuma, Physica B+C, 1981, 105, 99–102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Köpf, N. Eckstein, D. Pfister, C. Grotz, I. Krüger, M. Greiwe, T. Hansen, H. Kohlmann and T. Nilges, J. Cryst. Growth, 2014, 405, 6–10 CrossRef .
B. Liu, M. Kopf, A. N. Abbas, X. Wang, Q. Guo, Y. Jia, F. Xia, R. Weihrich, F. Bachhuber, F. Pielnhofer, H. Wang, R. Dhall, S. B. Cronin, M. Ge, X. Fang, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4423–4429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. S. Cucinotta, N. C. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey, P. Lynch, Z. Gholamvand, S. Zhang, K. Wang, G. Moynihan, A. Pokle, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, W. J. Blau, J. Wang, G. Abellan, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, S. Sanvito, D. D. O'Regan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, T. Foroozan, C. Wang, M. Asadi, D. Tuschel, J. E. Indacochea, R. F. Klie and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. A. Wells, J. D. Wood, J. H. Lee, X. Liu, C. R. Ryder, J. Zhu, J. R. Guest, C. A. Husko and M. C. Hersam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11688–11693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C. Chen, S. Liu, J. Lu, W. P. Goh, H. Fang, Z. Qiu, B. Tian, Z. Chen and C. Yao, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2742–2749 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, K. S. Chen, S. A. Wells, I. Balla, J. Zhu, J. D. Wood and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1604121 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lu, H. Nan, J. Hong, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, Z. Liang, X. Ma, Z. Ni, C. Jin and Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 853–859 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, B. Deng, X. Wang, S. Chen, M. Vaisman, S.-I. Karato, G. Pan, M. Larry Lee, J. Cha, H. Wang and F. Xia, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 031002 CrossRef .
J. Zeng, P. Cui and Z. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 046101 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Dong and F. Ding, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2255 RSC .
C. Gu, S. Zhao, J. L. Zhang, S. Sun, K. Yuan, Z. Hu, C. Han, Z. Ma, L. Wang and F. Huo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4943–4949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Han, N. Gao and J. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17893–17899 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Q. Yuan, H. Hu, J. Zhao and F. Ding, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17695–17703 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, P. Wu, Z. Li and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17782–17787 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4763–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Zhang, S. Zhao, C. Han, Z. Wang, S. Zhong, S. Sun, R. Guo, X. Zhou, C. D. Gu, K. D. Yuan, Z. Li and W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4903–4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Feng, Z. Ding, S. Meng, Y. Yao, X. He, P. Cheng, L. Chen and K. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3507–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Xu, J.-Q. Zhang, H. Tian, H. Xu, W. Ho and M. Xie, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1, 061002 CrossRef .
J. Pei, X. Gai, J. Yang, X. Wang, Z. Yu, D.-Y. Choi, B. Luther-Davies and Y. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Edmonds, A. Tadich, A. Carvalho, A. Ziletti, K. O'Donnell, S. Koenig, D. Coker, B. Ozyilmaz, A. C. Neto and M. Fuhrer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14557–14562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Q. Li, B. Lei, Q. Zhou, D. Xiang, Z. Lyu, F. Hu, J. Wang, Y. Ren, R. Guo, E. Goki, L. Wang, C. Han, J. Wang and W. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9131–9135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, Y. Liu, W. Zhu, S. Kim, D. Wu, L. Tao, A. Dodabalapur, K. Lai and D. Akinwande, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Avsar, I. J. Vera-Marun, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Ozyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4138–4145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Q. Zhou, Q. Li, X. Yao and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1603990 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, Q. Zhou, X. Niu, Y. Zhao, Q. Chen and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4540–4546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K. S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, G.-H. Lee, Y. D. Kim, G. Arefe, P. Y. Huang, C.-H. Lee, D. A. Chenet, X. Zhang, L. Wang and F. Ye, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, F. Yang, G. J. Ye, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhu, W. Lou, X. Zhou, L. Li, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Chang, Y. Wang, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 206–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Chen, X. Gao, W. Chen and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3431–3436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Weiss, C. Wagner, R. Temirov and F. S. Tautz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11864–11865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Artel, Q. Guo, H. Cohen, R. Gasper, A. Ramasubramaniam, F. Xia and D. Naveh, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 6 CrossRef .
G. Abellán, V. Lloret, U. Mundloch, M. Marcia, C. Neiss, A. Görling, M. Varela, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 14777–14782 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, H. Wang, H. Huang, Q. Xiao, Y. Xu, Z. Guo, H. Xie, J. Shao, Z. Sun, W. Han, X. F. Yu, P. Li and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5003–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, L. Seixas, A. Carvalho, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, N. Yakovlev, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Ozyilmaz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Cai, G. Zhang, Y.-W. Zhang and K.-W. Ang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 17, 1604638 CrossRef .
C. Han, Z. Hu, L. C. Gomes, Y. Bao, A. Carvalho, S. J. R. Tan, B. Lei, D. Xiang, J. Wu, D. Qi, L. Wang, F. Huo, W. Huang, K. P. Loh and W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, S. Zhang, H. Zeng and Q. J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kang, M. H. Jeon, S. K. Jang, W.-Y. Choi, K. N. Kim, J. Kim, S. Lee, G. Y. Yeom and J.-H. Park, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1822–1830 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Bao, T. Pei, R. Ma, Y.-Y. Zhang, L. Sun, G. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Li and C. Gu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6870–6878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. S. Baik, S. H. Ryu, Y. Sohn, S. Park, B.-G. Park, J. Denlinger, Y. Yi, H. J. Choi and K. S. Kim, Science, 2015, 349, 723–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Yang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 23970–23976 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khoo and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 201401 CrossRef .
F. Zheng, Z. Liu, J. Wu, W. Duan and B.-L. Gu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 085423 CrossRef .
A. Ramasubramaniam, D. Naveh and E. Towe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205325 CrossRef .
Q. Yue, S. Chang, J. Kang, X. Zhang, Z. Shao, S. Qin and J. Li, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter., 2012, 24, 335501 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Deng, V. Tran, Y. Xie, H. Jiang, C. Li, Q. Guo, X. Wang, H. Tian, S. J. Koester, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, Q. Xia, L. Yang and F. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, J. Waters, A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Abellán, C. Neiss, V. Lloret, S. Wild, J. C. Chacón-Torres, K. Werbach, F. Fedi, H. Shiozawa, A. Görling and H. Peterlik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15267–15273 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cheng, Y. Zhu, Y. Han, Z. Liu, B. Yang, A. Nie, W. Huang, R. Shahbazian-Yassar and F. Mashayek, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1350–1356 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. R. Tan, I. Abdelwahab, L. Chu, S. M. Poh, Y. Liu, J. Lu, W. Chen and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704619 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chu, H. Ilatikhameneh, G. Klimeck, R. Rahman and Z. Chen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8000–8007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Kim, H. Jung, H.-J. Kim, J.-H. Choi, S.-H. Wei and J.-H. Cho, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 075416 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Li, J. Horng, N. Z. Wang, F. Yang, Y. Yu, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, K. Watanabe and T. Taniguchi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6097–6103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-Q. Sun, M.-J. Li, K. Sun, S.-H. Yu, R.-S. Wang and H.-M. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14772–14779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maruyama, S. Suzuki, T. Osaki, H. Yamaguchi, S. Sakai, K. Nagasato and I. Shirotani, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1986, 59, 1067–1071 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, I.-L. Tsai, J. Chapman, E. Khestanova, J. Waters and I. V. Grigorieva, Nano Lett., 2015, 16, 629–636 CrossRef PubMed .
T. E. Weller, M. Ellerby, S. S. Saxena, R. P. Smith and N. T. Skipper, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 39 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, Q. He, U. Halim, Y. Liu, E. Zhu, Z. Lin, H. Xiao, X. Duan, Z. Feng and R. Cheng, Nature, 2018, 555, 231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kiraly, N. Hauptmann, A. N. Rudenko, M. I. Katsnelson and A. A. Khajetoorians, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3607–3612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qiu, H. Fang, A. Carvalho, A. S. Rodin, Y. Liu, S. J. Tan, M. Telychko, P. Lv, J. Su and Y. Wang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6935–6940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Yang, R. Xu, F. Wang, W. Li, M. Ghufran, Y.-W. Zhang, Z. Yu, G. Zhang and Q. Qin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9590–9596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gusmao, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8052–8072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tan, I. Abdelwahab, Z. Ding, X. Zhao, T. Yang, G. Z. Loke, H. Lin, I. Verzhbitskiy, S. M. Poh and H. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2504–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guan, W. Song, L. Yang and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 045414 CrossRef .
Z. Wu and Z. Ni, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 1219–1237 CAS .
K. Teichmann, M. Wenderoth, S. Loth, R. Ulbrich, J. Garleff, A. Wijnheijmer and P. Koenraad, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 076103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Marczinowski, J. Wiebe, J.-M. Tang, M. Flatté, F. Meier, M. Morgenstern and R. Wiesendanger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 157202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Li, P. Guo, T.-F. Cao, H. Liu, W.-M. Lau and L.-M. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Kistanov, Y. Cai, K. Zhou, S. V. Dmitriev and Y.-W. Zhang, 2D Mater., 2016, 4, 015010 CrossRef .
Y. Guo and J. Robertson, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, B. Wan, Q. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Hu, W. Lv, Q. Chen, Z. Zeng, F. Wen, J. Xiang, S. Yuan, J. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Y. Tian and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9408–9415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Long, A. Gao, P. Wang, H. Xia, C. Ott, C. Pan, Y. Fu, E. Liu, X. Chen and W. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700589 CrossRef PubMed .
O. V. Yazyev and L. Helm, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 125408 CrossRef .
L. Seixas, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 155138 CrossRef .
I. Khan and J. Hong, New J. Phys., 2015, 17, 023056 CrossRef .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of semiconductor devices, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
W. Xin, X. K. Li, X. L. He, B. W. Su, X. Q. Jiang, K. X. Huang, X. F. Zhou, Z. B. Liu and J. G. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1704653 Search PubMed .
G. Qin, Q. B. Yan, Z. Qin, S. Y. Yue, H. J. Cui, Q. R. Zheng and G. Su, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, Y. Wang, M. Ye, R. Quhe, H. Zhong, Z. Song, X. Peng, D. Yu, J. Yang, J. Shi and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2100–2109 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Ling, S. Sakar, S. Mathew, J.-T. Zhu, K. Gopinadhan, T. Venkatesan and K.-W. Ang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Perello, S. H. Chae, S. Song and Y. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, Y. Dan, Y. Wang, M. Ye, H. Zhang, R. Quhe, X. Zhang, J. Li, W. Guo, L. Yang and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12694–12705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yan, S. Fathipour, Y. Han, B. Song, S. Xiao, M. Li, N. Ma, V. Protasenko, D. A. Muller, D. Jena and H. G. Xing, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5791–5798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, A. Carvalho, J. Wu, H. Liu, E. S. Tok, A. H. C. Neto, B. Özyilmaz and C. H. Sow, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4090–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, G. J. Ye, V. Tran, R. Fei, G. Chen, H. Wang, J. Wang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. Yang, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 608–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Avsar, J. Y. Tan, M. Kurpas, M. Gmitra, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Fabian and B. Özyilmaz, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, nphys4141 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Lee, H. Kwon, J. S. Kim, H.-H. Kim, Y. J. Lee, J. A. Lim, Y.-W. Song, Y. Yi, W.-K. Choi and D. K. Hwang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10394–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, G. K. W. Koon, D. Xiang, C. Han, C. T. Toh, E. S. Kulkarni, I. Verzhbitskiy, A. Carvalho, A. S. Rodin and S. P. Koenig, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8070–8077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, A. Pospischil, M. Bhuiyan, H. Jiang, H. Tian, D. Farmer, B. Deng, C. Li, S. J. Han, H. Wang, Q. Xia, T. P. Ma, T. Mueller and F. Xia, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4648–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 74–80 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Choi, M. Y. Cho, A. Konar, J. H. Lee, G. B. Cha, S. C. Hong, S. Kim, J. Kim, D. Jena, J. Joo and S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5832–5836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, A. Castro-Beltran, H. R. Gutiérrez, S. Feng, R. Lv, T. Hayashi, F. López-Urías and S. Ghosh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5511–5517 CrossRef .
P. Hu, Z. Wen, L. Wang, P. Tan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5988–5994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carvalho, R. Ribeiro and A. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 115205 CrossRef .
C. O. Chui, A. K. Okyay and K. C. Saraswat, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2003, 15, 1585–1587 Search PubMed .
L. Li, W. Wang, Y. Chai, H. Li, M. Tian and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701011 CrossRef .
M. M. Furchi, D. K. Polyushkin, A. Pospischil and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6165–6170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. De Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Youngblood, C. Chen, S. J. Koester and M. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Q. Li, B. Lei, J. Wu, Q. Zhou, C. Gu, X. Wen, J. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Li, Y. Zheng, J. Lu, J. He, L. Wang, Q. Xiong, J. Wang and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801931 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiang, C. Ling, T. Xu, W. Wang, X. Niu, A. Zafar, Z. Yan, X. Wang, Y. You and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804332 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure and (b) top view of BP. (c) Band structure of bulk BP mapped out by ARPES measurements. Blue solid and red dashed lines denote empty and filled bands, respectively. (d) The evolution of the bandgap calculated by different methods. (e) The electromagnetic wave spectrum, the bandgap ranges and the corresponding frequency ranges of various types of 2D materials. Reprinted with permission from: (a, b, d) ref. 29, Copyright 2014, American Physical Society; (c) ref. 12, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group; (e) ref. 30, Copyright 2015, United States National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the vibration modes. (b) Polarization-resolved Raman scattering spectra of ML BP with linearly polarized laser excitation. (c) Intensity of the Ag2 mode as a function of the excitation laser polarization angle in the x–y plane. (θ denotes the angle between the x axis and the polarization of the excitation laser.) (d) Raman spectra of 2D BP as a function of thickness n. Three modes are expected for the bulk: Ag1, B2g, and Ag2. In thin layers, a new vibrational mode labelled Ag(B2u) is also present. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 39, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons; (b, c) ref. 20, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (d) ref. 40, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Eopt as a function of the layer number. The inset shows the schematic illustration of the electronic bandgap and exciton binding energy. (b) Top: A schematic plot showing the measured ground-state exciton energy (narrow red band) and the energy corresponding to the quasiparticle band edge (wide blue band). Bottom: Calculated optical absorption of ML BP with e–h interactions (excitonic absorption, red curve) and without e–h interactions (quasiparticle absorption, blue curve). (c–e) PL spectra of (c) ML, (d) bilayer and (e) trilayer BP at 77 K with an excitation energy of 2.33 eV in the x and y detection directions. (f) Measured PL spectra (solid dark gray lines) under various back-gate voltages. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 51, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (b) ref. 20, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (c–e) ref. 21, Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group; (f) ref. 34, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photograph of the atomically thin BP dispersions in DMSO and DMF solvents after sonication (left) and after centrifugation and supernatant collection (right). (b) HRTEM image of liquid-exfoliated ML BP nanoflake (scale bar is 1 nm). TEM simulation (upper right inset) and a filtered section of the acquired image (lower left inset) are added for comparison. The lattice parameters perfectly match the ML BP structure. (c) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical exfoliation set-up. (d) Illustration of the intercalation and expansion of bulk BP in an organic DMSO electrolyte consisting of TAA salts. (e) Schematic illustration of the CAFM patterning setup. (f) Contact-mode AFM images of the as-patterned sample. Reprinted with permission from: (a, b) ref. 70, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons; (c, d) ref. 72, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (e, f) ref. 73, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The lattice mismatch and binding energies of black and blue P on different substrates. (b) Calculated thermodynamic stabilities of black and blue P on GaN(001) after 1 ps and 50 ps AIMD simulations at 400 K, respectively. The crystal structure is distinguished by different colors. (c) Diffusion barrier of a single P adatom on (I) bare GaN(001); (II) a half-layer (HL) P covered GaN(001); (III) Ehrlich–Schwoebel barrier for a P adatom to climb down the step of HL P covered GaN(001) and bare GaN(001). (IV) Schematic model showing the diffusion barriers for a single P atom on different surfaces. (d) Surface structures of P at different coverages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2017, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Theoretically calculated (a) formation energies and (b) binding energies of black/α-, blue/β-, γ-, and δ-phosphorene on β-Sn(100), Ag(111), Au(111), Cu(111), Pt(111), Ru(0001) and Ni(111). (c) Optimized most stable configurations of PN clusters on the Au(111) surface. The formation energy of each cluster is indicated. N is the number of P atoms in each cluster. (d) Formation energy as a function of the number of P atoms within each cluster. The black, red, green, blue, purple, and orange lines represent structural motifs of the dispersed, zigzag chain, ring-based 1D chain, multiring 2D island, black P, and 3D structure, respectively. The blue and yellow balls represent phosphorus and gold atoms, respectively. Top and side views of CDD between the Au surface and ML (e) black P and (f) blue P. The blue and red parts represent the aggregation and depletion of electrons, respectively. The isosurface is 0.004 e Å−3. Reproduced with permission from: (a, b) ref. 77, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c–f) ref. 79, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Large scale STM image taken after annealing the as-deposited phosphorus on Au(111) showing the formation of honeycomb lattices. (b) Large scale STM image of ML blue phosphorene on Au(111). (c) Zoom-in scanning showing the honeycomb structure and the triangles. (d) Top and (e) side views of the theoretically optimized model for blue phosphorene on Au(111). (f) Simulated STM image of blue phosphorene on Au(111) based on the model in (d) (a and b: Vtip = 0.9 V, c: Vtip = 1.0 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Large scale STM image of P clusters on Au(111). (b) Representative P clusters with different sizes and the corresponding models. (c) STM image taken on Au(111) after deposition of a small amount of phosphorus (size: 20 × 20 nm2; Vbias = 0.1 V), the phosphorus vapor was generated from thermal decomposition of InP at ∼470 °C while the substrate was held at 210–230 °C. (d) Following (c) with higher P coverage, showing a densely packed  structure (size: 20 × 20 nm2; Vbias = 0.1 V). (e) The coexistence of the blue phosphorene and loosely packed  structure (size: 20 × 20 nm2; Vbias = 0.1 V). (f) Schematic model showing the atomic structure of the  structure; the inset is the top view to illustrate the anchoring position of individual P atoms. Reprinted with permission from: (a, b) ref. 83, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c–f) ref. 85, Copyright 2017, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HSE band structure for ML black phosphorus; right: the VBM and CBM of BP with different layer numbers; the dashed line is the redox potential of O2/O2−. (b) HSE binding energy for the isolated oxygen atom on BP and the corresponding atomic structure; (c) Proposed mechanism of single layer phosphorene oxidation; the oxygen configuration is depicted below. The inset shows the singlet and triplet PESs as a function of the O2− phosphorene distance. (d) Proposed light-induced degradation processes of phosphorene. (e) Snapshots of ABMD (adaptively biased molecular dynamics) simulations of H2O on oxygen adsorbed bilayer BP. (f) Left: The stability of BP with P–P (top) and P–O–P bonding (bottom) in the presence of water. Right: Snapshots of ABMD simulations of H2O adsorbed on partial (top) and fully oxidized phosphorene ML (bottom). Figures reproduced with permission from: (a, d, e, f) ref. 42, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons; (b, c) ref. 19, Copyright 2015, American Physical Society.	 
O2 + hv → O2− + h+	(1)
O2− + P + h+ → PxOy	(2)

 	Fig. 10  BP exposure to (a–c) O2; (d, e) humid O2. (a) Linear plot of the transfer characteristic upon 1280 min exposure with respect to the pristine BP. (b) Logarithmic plot of the transfer curve after annealing compared to pristine and 1280 min exposed curves. (c) P 2p core level XPS spectra evolution of BP as a function of O2 exposure time under dark conditions. (d) Linear plot of the transfer characteristics with respect to exposure time. Inset: Logarithmic plot. (e) P 2p core level XPS spectra evolution of BP as a function of humid O2 exposure time under dark conditions. (f) Electron affinities, relative energies of the O2–H2O cluster and energy levels of π*2p orbitals of O2 as a function of the distance (d) between O2 and H2O. Electron affinities are in red, relative energies are in blue, and orbital energies are in black, units are in eV. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 44, Copyright 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd; (d–f) ref. 88, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  The effect of capping layers on BP. (a) Thick-cap (25 nm ALD Al2O3) and (b) Double-cap (25 nm ALD Al2O3 and DuPont Teflon-AF fluoropolymer) FET device performance changes with ambient exposure time. (c) Optical image BP FET device with graphene contact and h-BN top dielectric. (d) I–V curve (device shown in c) at Vg = −40 V and Vsd = 100 mV. Inset: The transport curve of a no-encapsulated device. (e) Simulated Nucleation of 50 PTCDA molecules on BP at 450 K within 25 ns. (f) Snapshots of 6 ML PTCDA under exposure at 300 K after 30 ns. (g) Optimized structures of covalent bonding of PV molecule to BP along armchair (top) and zigzag (down) directions; the broken P–P bond is denoted by a dash line. (h) Band structure (spin up) of PV molecule along the armchair direction at the PBE + D2 level, together with decomposed density of states of three energy bands near the Fermi level at Γ (0, 0, 0) point. (i) Band alignments of BP and PPV-BP composites with different PPV derivatives at the HSE06 level, the red dash line marks the redox potential of O2/O2−. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a,b) ref. 89, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group; (c, d) ref. 90, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (e,f) ref. 91, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons; (g–i) ref. 92, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Band structure of (a) pristine BP, (b) initial stage of surface doping, (c) transition to a zero-gap semimetal. The square in (a) is the surface Brillouin zone, the red dots are high symmetry points. (d) Corresponding experimental ARPES data of the band structure with different doping density of K. (e) 3D representation of the band evolution as a function of dopant density. Dots and diamonds represent the position of Ec and Ev, respectively. (f) Bandgap as a function of dopant density. The shaded area represented the inverted gap at the Γ point. (g) Transfer characteristics (Vg from −80 to 50 V) evolution of a BP FET measured at Vsd = 0.1 V in logarithmic scale with increasing K thickness. (h) Bandgap variation of few-layer BP as a function of K thickness. The inset shows the current minimum of the transfer curves as a function of K thickness. (i) The rectification characteristic of the BP diode at an optimized gate voltage of −30 V in both logarithmic and linear scale. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–f) ref. 109, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (g–i) ref. 105, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Typical energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy for pristine and intercalated BP. (b) Temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility χ for intercalated BP. ZFC (solid symbols) and FC (open symbols) measurements for an in-plane magnetic field of 10 Oe. The arrow indicates Tc as determined from dχ/dT. The inset shows how Tc was determined for individual samples. (c) Enlarged XRD details showing the new peaks and peak splitting after K intercalation. (d) (Left) HRTEM of a domain with AB stacking; (Right) atomic model of AB-stacked BP viewed at [02] direction. The inset is the corresponding simulated HRTEM image. (e) (Left) HRTEM of a domain with AC stacking; (right) atomic model of AC-stacked BP viewed at [02] direction. The inset is the corresponding simulated HRTEM image. (f) Theoretically calculated sodium intercalated BP. Yellow balls represent phosphorus atoms, and blue balls represent sodium atoms. (g) Schematic illustration of the LiH-intercalated BP including two steps, x refers to the atomic ratio of Li. (h) PL spectra of bulk BP without intercalation and LiH-BP, the inset is the optical image showing the detected sample. (i) VBM shift as a function of atomic ratio of LiH. (j) AFM images of the surface morphology of LiH-BP (top) and hydrogenated BP (bottom) after ambient exposure. The right panels are the corresponding line profile. (k) Superior device stability of LiH-BP. Charge carrier mobility and on/off ratio for LiH-BP as a function of air exposure time. The inset is the charge mobility for pristine BP as a function of air exposure time. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a, b) ref. 116, Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; (c) ref. 117, Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons; (d–f) ref. 118, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (g–k) ref. 119, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Ionic gate transfer characteristics of the starting (black) and the final intercalated (green) BP at 0.01 V drain–source bias. (b) PL signals observed during different stages of intercalation. High resolution cross-sectional TEM images for (c) pristine, (d) intercalated ML BP. Scale bars: 1 nm. Figures reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) STM image of the flat BP surface free from defects after in situ cleaving (−0.1 V, 200 pA. scale bar = 1 nm). (b) STS of BP showing a bandgap of 0.317 ± 0.036 eV. (c) Statistic of the position of valence band maximum and conduction band minimum for 48 individual measurements on the defect. (d) 3-D representation of a STM image showing the different brightness of the defects; inset is the line profiles taken across three vacancies, 1L, 2L and 3L as marked in panel (d). (e) Enlarged STM images shows two vacancies at different sublattice. (f) and (g) STM image of the cleaved BP with defects taken at different sample biases. (h) Corresponding STS taken from panel (g) with different colored squares. A sharp feature and two weak resonances can be clearly visible in the STS spectrum acquired at the bright ellipse. (i) Schematic models showing the tip induced band bending that switches the charge state of the acceptor from (top) the negatively charged state at −0.45 V to (bottom) neutral state at 0.35 V. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–e) ref. 128, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (f–h) ref. 129, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) (Left) Ball and stick model of the single vacancy in BP located at sublattice site; and (Right) the calculated charge density of the single vacancy. (b) A sort of STS spectra taken on the defect with decreasing apparent heights, at the position as marked in panel (a). (c) Top panel: STM image shows the dumbbell shape for the excited state; bottom panel: calculated squared wave function of 1s states. (d) Top panel: STM image resolves an ellipse shape for the ground state; bottom panel: squared wave function of 2px states calculated using an anisotropic hydrogen-like model. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a, b) ref. 128, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (c, d) ref. 129, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Few-layer phosphorene FET and its device characteristics. (a) Transfer characteristic of a few-layer BP FET. (b) Hole branch I–V curve of the device in (a). Inset: Electron branch I–V curve. (c) Four-terminal conductance as a function of gate voltage measured in an 8 nm-thick sample at different temperatures. (d) Field-effect mobility (red open circles) and Hall mobility (filled squares, three different values of n) as a function of temperature on a logarithmic scale. (e) Device structure used to determine the angle-dependent transport behavior. (f) Angular dependence of the drain current and the transconductance Gm of a typical device. Reprinted with permission from: (a–d) ref. 12, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group; (e, f) ref. 14, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Comparison of the Schottky barrier heights (ΦeSB for electron and ΦhSB for hole) of ML phosphorene-Al, Ag, Ti, Cr, Cu, Au, Ni, and Pd contacts obtained by the ab initio electronic band calculations, quantum transport calculations, and experimental observations. (b) Transfer characteristic of BP FET with channel length from 2 μm to 100 nm. (c), (d) Band diagram showing how Schottky barrier at metal contacts varies the FET behavior in long and short channel transistors. Reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 149, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b–d) ref. 41, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic figure of a few-layer BP photodetector. (b) Photocurrent as a function of time under modulated light excitation (∼20 Hz) with different wavelengths. The shaded areas indicate the time when the light beam is blanketed by the mechanical chopper. (c) Responsivity vs. excitation wavelength at constant power (red squares). The dashed red line is a linear fit to the data. (d) Photoresponsivity within the energy range 1–4 eV measured at VBG = 80 V and VSD = 0.1 V. (e) Slow response of photocurrent under wavelength 330 nm. (f) Calculated band structure of BP. The arrow indicates the band nesting edge (between 3 and 4 eV). (g) Illustration of the BP photodetector operating at 3.39 μm. The polarization of the incident laser and its incident direction are represented by yellow and green arrows, respectively. (h) Power dependence of the R. Solid lines: fitting results with Hornbeck–Haynes model. (i) Photocurrent amplitude versus modulation frequency under various incident powers. Inset: Variation of 3 dB frequency (f3dB) with incident power. Reprinted with permission from: (a–c) ref. 159, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (d–f) ref. 160, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (g–i) ref. 161, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic figure of the locally gated h-BN/BP PN junction. (b) False-colour map of the magnitude of the source–drain current at constant bias voltage (100 mV) as the voltages on the two local gates are changed independently. (c) False-colour map of the short-circuit current (Isc, Vds = 0 V) as the voltages on the two local gates are changed independently. (d) Band diagrams illustrating the photovoltaic mechanism in PN and NP configurations: an impinging photon (red arrow) generates an electron–hole pair that is swept away from the junction region by the built-in electric field. (e) Inset: Schematic figure of the BP-MoS2 heterojunction. I–V characteristics of the PN diode under various incident laser powers. (f) Calculated R as a function of incident power. (g) Id as a function of Vd under various laser powers. The Isc and Voc can be obtained from the intercepts of the curves on Id and Vd axes. (h) Power generated by the p–n diode as a function of Vd under different laser power. Reprinted with permission from: (a–d) ref. 78, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group; (e–h) ref. 153, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
