Cavity enhanced spectroscopy for measurement of nitrogen oxides in the Anthropocene: results from the Seoul tower during MAPS 2015  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7FD00001D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7FD00001D
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 200, 529-557Cavity enhanced spectroscopy for measurement of nitrogen oxides in the Anthropocene: results from the Seoul tower during MAPS 2015

        
          
            Steven S. 
            Brown
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Hyunjin 
            An
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Meehye 
            Lee
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jeong-Hoo 
            Park
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Sang-Deok 
            Lee
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Dorothy L. 
            Fibiger
          
        
      af, 
      
        
          
            Erin E. 
            McDuffie
          
        
      abf, 
      
        
          
            William P. 
            Dubé
          
        
      af, 
      
        
          
            Nicholas L. 
            Wagner
          
        
      af and 

        
          
            Kyung-Eun 
            Min
          
        
      *g
aChemical Sciences Division, NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory, Boulder, CO, USA. E-mail: steven.s.brown@noaa.gov
bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
cDepartment of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
dClimate and Air Quality Research Department, National Institute of Environmental Research, Incheon, South Korea
eDepartment of Forest Environment Protection, Division of Forest Science, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon-si, South Korea
fCooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
gSchool of Earth Science and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, South Korea. E-mail: kemin@gist.ac.kr
Received 
      3rd January 2017
    , Accepted 30th January 2017First published on 30th January 2017AbstractCavity enhanced spectroscopy, CES, is a high sensitivity direct absorption method that has seen increasing utility in the last decade, a period also marked by increasing requirements for understanding human impacts on atmospheric composition. This paper describes the current NOAA six channel cavity ring-down spectrometer (CRDS, the most common form of CES) for measurement of nitrogen oxides and O3. It further describes the results from measurements from a tower 300 m above the urban area of Seoul in late spring of 2015. The campaign demonstrates the performance of the CRDS instrument and provides new data on both photochemistry and nighttime chemistry in a major Asian megacity. The instrument provided accurate, high time resolution data for N2O5, NO, NO2, NOy and O3, but suffered from large wall loss in the sampling of NO3, illustrating the requirement for calibration of the NO3 inlet transmission. Both the photochemistry and nighttime chemistry of nitrogen oxides and O3 were rapid in this megacity. Sustained average rates of O3 buildup of 10 ppbv h−1 during recurring morning and early afternoon sea breezes led to a 50 ppbv average daily O3 rise. Nitrate radical production rates, P(NO3), averaged 3–4 ppbv h−1 in late afternoon and early evening, much greater than contemporary data from Los Angeles, a comparable U. S. megacity. These P(NO3) were much smaller than historical data from Los Angeles, however. Nighttime data at 300 m above ground showed considerable variability in high time resolution nitrogen oxide and O3, likely resulting from sampling within gradients in the nighttime boundary layer structure. Apparent nighttime biogenic VOC oxidation rates of several ppbv h−1 were also likely influenced by vertical gradients. Finally, daytime N2O5 mixing ratios of 3–35 pptv were associated with rapid daytime P(NO3) and agreed well with a photochemical steady state calculation.
1. Introduction
The Anthropocene is a proposed, new geologic epoch that represents the increasing impact of human activities on the Earth System. Crutzen proposed in 2002 that its onset be defined by the first evidence for increasing concentrations of CO2 trapped in polar ice just prior to 1800,1 although stratigraphic analysis of multiple markers of human activities may suggest a more recent shift occurring in the middle of the 20th century.2 Metrics for the Anthropocene include increasing human and domestic animal populations, changes in land and water use, impacts on the biosphere, and changes in atmospheric composition through the carbon, sulfur and nitrogen cycles.1
Key to understanding the scale of these impacts is the development of new measurement and modelling tools. Just as technological development accompanying increasing human population has driven changes in the Earth System, rapid technological developments in computation and chemical sensing have enabled increasingly detailed understanding of anthropogenic impacts on atmospheric composition. The increasing availability of such information may serve as feedback on the Anthropocene, providing the human population with the understanding required for the mitigation of its own impact.
The capability of chemical sensing to track and diagnose atmospheric composition changes has undergone recent, revolutionary changes. Aerosol composition and the factors that influence it are now understood in increasing detail owing to the advent of powerful mass spectrometric methods.3,4 Unprecedented detail and specificity in gas phase measurements is now possible with chemical ionization schemes and high-resolution detectors.5,6 High sensitivity optical detectors in lightweight, robust packages have enabled high frequency and high accuracy measurements of greenhouse gases and other trace species.7,8 Space based remote sensing instruments now provide assessment of emissions that influence air quality worldwide,9 and forthcoming geostationary measurements will accelerate this capability.
Cavity enhanced spectroscopy (CES) is among the technological advances that have propelled the atmospheric chemical measurement revolution. The method was first described nearly 30 years ago through its best known and most common realization of cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS).10 One of its first applications was in trace gas measurement in ambient air.11 It is now a general method applicable to the accurate and sensitive measurement of greenhouse gases,7 nitrogen oxides,12 a variety of ultraviolet and visible absorbing molecules13 and extinction due to atmospheric aerosol.14 Section 2 below describes the measurement principle in more detail and the specific instruments that are the subject of this paper.
Among the most important impacts on atmospheric composition during the industrial era is the emission of nitrogen oxides from combustion.15 As open shell compounds, nitrogen oxides are both highly reactive and exhibit characteristic visible absorption spectra that can be exploited for sensitive measurement by optical absorption. Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) has well known visible absorption bands16 with a maximum at the blue end of the visible spectrum (405 nm), while the nitrate radical (NO3) has strong absorption bands in the red, with a distinct maximum at 662 nm.17

Fig. 1 illustrates simplified nitrogen oxide atmospheric chemical cycles. During daytime, NOx (NO + NO2) acts as a catalyst that produces O3 during the course of photochemically driven oxidation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs).18 Termination occurs through the further oxidation of NO or NO2, as exemplified by the reaction of NO2 with OH to produce HNO3, although other photochemical pathways contribute to NOx oxidation and chain termination.19 At night, in the absence of NO2 photolysis, NO oxidizes rapidly in excess O3 to NO2, which in turn oxidizes more slowly to NO3. The nighttime nitrogen oxides, NO3 and N2O5, exist in thermal equilibrium mediated by NO2. The nitrate radical is a strong oxidant for unsaturated VOCs, especially biogenics, while N2O5 undergoes heterogeneous uptake on aerosol particles to form HNO3 and ClNO2.20
 Fig. 1  Daytime and nighttime chemical cycles of nitrogen oxides in the lower atmosphere. The insets show the characteristic visible absorption spectra of NO2 and NO3 overlaid on the daytime and nighttime diagrams, respectively. 
This manuscript illustrates the use of CES to address nitrogen oxide chemistry in the Anthropocene. Of specific interest is the broad, recent shift in emissions from developed nations in Europe and the USA toward developing nations, especially in Asia.9,21–27 While detailed atmospheric chemical measurements of regional air pollution are well established in developed countries, there is an increasing need for observations in the rapidly growing economies of Asia. A recent campaign in Seoul, South Korea, one of the largest megacities in the world, illustrates the utility of a CES instrument for characterizing the chemical cycles in Fig. 1, and provides comparisons to atmospheric composition in a U. S. megacity using the same instrument and based on the same analytical standards.
2. Cavity enhanced spectroscopy
The principle of cavity enhanced spectroscopy and its applications in atmospheric science have been reviewed previously.28 Briefly, CES relies on the path length enhancement associated with light that is trapped within an optical cavity (stable optical resonator) made up of two or more highly reflective (HR) mirrors, as Fig. 2 illustrates. The effective optical path length, Leff, is related to the mirror reflectivity, R, and base path length, Lbase, defined by the physical separation of the mirrors. Leff(λ) = Lbase/[1 − R(λ)](1)
 Fig. 2  Top: Generalized schematic showing the basic elements of a cavity enhanced spectroscopy (CES) instrument, including light source, detector and high reflectivity (HR) mirrors (top). Bottom: Different CES approaches using time domain (CRDS = Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy, CAPS = Cavity Attenuated Phase Shift Spectroscopy) and intensity domain (ICOS = Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy, CEAS = Cavity Enhanced Absorption Spectroscopy, CE-DOAS = Cavity Enhanced Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy). Intensity domain approaches can be monochromatic or broadband, with the latter illustrated in the schematic. 
Dielectric coated mirrors have a wavelength (λ) dependent reflectivity that can exceed R > 0.99999 in the visible and near infrared, resulting in up to a five order of magnitude (or more) increase in the effective optical path relative to physical size of the instrument defined by Lbase. This path enhancement enables instruments that can reach part per trillion level detection sensitivity for measurement of trace gases via direct absorption or extinction coefficients of 0.01 Mm−1 for measurement of aerosol optical properties. CES instruments achieve high sensitivity while retaining the advantage of direct absorption (extinction) spectroscopy, which is an absolute measurement.
2.1 CES methods
There are several techniques for conversion of the light transmitted through an optical cavity to an extinction or absorption signal, which are broadly separable into time domain and intensity domain methods. The most common time dependent measurement is cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS), which results from measurement of the time constant for single-exponential decay of light transmitted through the cavity after rapidly shutting off the light source (modulated continuous light source or a pulsed laser).29 Cavity attenuated phase shift spectroscopy (CAPS) applies an amplitude modulation of a given frequency to the input light source and measures the phase shift in the transmitted intensity,30 a method that simplifies data acquisition and signal processing compared to CRDS. Direct measurement of transmitted intensity is often referred to simply as cavity enhanced absorption spectroscopy (CEAS)31 or integrated cavity output spectroscopy (ICOS).32 Additional cavity enhanced methods, such as frequency comb spectroscopy,33 use more advanced light sources and have only recently been introduced for atmospheric sensing.
Light sources used in CES can be either monochromatic or broadband. The former are typically lasers or filtered light emitting diodes (LEDs), and are used either to probe an individual ro-vibrational line by rapidly tuning its wavelength over a narrow range,34 or by remaining at a fixed wavelength and modulating the extinction signal on and off through chemical scrubbing or filtering at the instrument inlet.35 Broadband CES that uses various light sources, most commonly LEDs or Xe arc lamps, has become increasingly common. Recent broadband CES instruments typically utilize transmitted intensity measurements,36,37 although broadband CRDS is also well known.38 Broadband CES utilizes spectral dispersion of the output intensity and the use of spectral fitting techniques developed for use in differential optical absorption spectroscopy (DOAS) for identification of molecular absorbers, and is therefore often referred to as cavity enhanced DOAS, or CE-DOAS.13,39 Broadband aerosol extinction measurements can be used to determine the wavelength dependence of complex refractive indices and other aerosol optical properties.40,41
These CES methods have numerous applications in defining the Anthropocene. Because this manuscript is necessarily limited in scope, it will describe contributions of one instrument described below to the specific issues listed at the end of the Introduction. This cavity ring-down spectrometer designed for measurement of nitrogen oxides and O3 has been developed at the Chemical Sciences Division of the NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory.
2.2 Six channel CRDS instrument for NO, NO2, NOy, O3, NO3 and N2O5
The six-channel NOAA CRDS instrument is designed to characterize both daytime and nighttime nitrogen oxide cycles. Fig. 3 shows a schematic. Individual aspects of this instrument and their measurement principles have been described previously,12,42–47 but there is no complete description of the six channel instrument in the literature.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the six-channel NOAA CRDS instrument for nitrogen oxides and ozone. The instrument consists of two diode lasers at 662 nm and 405 nm that detect NO3 and NO2, respectively. Inlet conversion of N2O5, NO, O3 or NOy to NO3 or NO2 as described in the text provides simultaneous, fast response techniques for these species. 
Briefly, a 100 mW 662 nm diode laser, temperature tuned to the maximum in the NO3 absorption spectrum, passes through a beamsplitter and optical isolator to illuminate two separate optical cavities with mirrors of nominal R = 0.999995% (5 parts per million, ppm, total loss) and 1 m radius of curvature (ROC) separated by 95 cm. The 0.6 nm spectral width (full width half maximum, FWHM) overlaps more than 2000 longitudinal cavity modes, enabling passive coupling of the laser light to the cavity without the need to match the laser frequency to a resonator mode. The diode laser intensity is square-wave modulated at 200 Hz, with a manufacturer specified shutoff time on the nanosecond time scale, much faster than the 300–500 microsecond time ring-down time constant. A photomultiplier tube and 2.5 Ms s−1 digitizer record ring down transients subsequent to laser shut off. Transients are co-added at 2 Hz (100 ring-down transients) and fit to a single exponential using standard fitting methods.48 Concentrations of NO3 within each cavity are from measurements of the time constant with (τ) and without (τ0) the absorber present using the standard ring-down equation. (2)here, c is the speed of light, σ is the NO3 absorption cross section,17,49 and RL is the ratio of the mirror separation to the length over which the sample is present in the cell. A small flow of zero air (25 standard cubic centimeters per minute, sccm) is added to volumes adjacent to each mirror to maintain cleanliness, with a resulting RL of approximately 1.2. The τ0 value at the operating pressure of 300 mbar is typically 450–500 μs, with a corresponding 1 second detection sensitivity of 1 pptv (2σ).45 The zero time constant, τ0, is determined by periodic addition of 1 part per million of NO to chemically titrate NO3. NO + NO3 → 2NO2(R1)k1 (298 K) = 2.6 × 10−11 cm3 molecule per s (ref. 50)
The 662 nm absorption cross section of the resulting NO2 is nearly 4 orders of magnitude smaller than that of NO3.16,17 A 130 °C Teflon oven induces rapid thermal decomposition of N2O5 to NO3, which is subsequently measured in a second ring down cell at 75 °C, a temperature sufficient to maintain the equilibrium between NO3 and N2O5 at >95% NO3 for ambient NO2 < 50 ppbv. This channel measures the sum of NO3 and N2O5, with N2O5 determined by subtraction between the two channels. Sample cell pressures are maintained near 300 mbar using a 1/8′′ Teflon tubing flow restriction at the inlet and sample flows of 15 and 9 volumetric liters per minute (lpm) on the NO3 and NO3 + N2O5 channels, respectively. Sample air passes through a Teflon membrane filter to exclude aerosol, and an automated device43 changes filters every 1–3 hours during field measurements to minimize loss of NO3 or N2O5 due to buildup of aerosol on the filters.51
A second 100 mW diode laser at 405 nm passes through an isolator and a set of beamsplitters to illuminate four separate optical cavities with mirrors of nominal R = 0.99995 (50 ppm total loss). A more rapid laser modulation frequency of 2 kHz compensates for the shorter time constant (30–40 μs) at 405 nm. Ring-down transients are co-added and fit at 2 Hz (1000 ring-down transients) to match the data frequency of the 662 nm system. The detection limit of four 405 nm channels varies between 20–60 pptv NO2 (2σ, 1 second).12,47 One of the four channels measures NO2 directly, while the other three convert NO, O3 and total reactive nitrogen, NOy, to NO2. Excess O3 (∼5 × 1014 molecules per cm3) added to a reactor of residence time 0.5 s (sample flow rate of 2 SLPM) upstream of a second 405 nm CRDS channel quantitatively converts NO to NO2 (>99%) to measure total NOx (=NO + NO2). NO + O3 → NO2 + O2(R2)k2 (298 K) = 1.8 × 10−14 cm3 per molecule per s (ref. 50)
Further oxidation of NO2 by O3 to NO3 and N2O5 occurs more slowly, resulting in a 1–2% correction to the measured NOx signal.12 NO2 + O3 → NO3 + O2(R3)k3 (298 K) = 3.2 × 10−17 cm3 per molecule per s (ref. 50)
The NO mixing ratio is determined by the difference between the NO2 and NOx channels. Addition of excess NO to a reactor upstream of a third measurement channel converts ambient O3 to NO2, also by reaction (R2), to measure total Ox (=O3 + NO2),46 with O3 again determined by the difference between Ox and NO2. No correction for further NO2 reaction is required for this channel. Finally, a quartz oven at 650 °C upstream of the fourth 405 nm channel converts most NOy species to NO2 through thermal dissociation.52,53 Addition of excess O3 to a reactor between the oven and the CRDS channel converts NO to NO2 for a quantitative measurement of total NOy.47 The NO2, NOx and Ox channels share a common inlet, and sample air in both inlets passes through a Teflon membrane filter to remove aerosol. In all four channels, periodic displacement of the sample air with zero air from a compressed gas cylinder provides a measurement of τ0. Previous analysis has shown that total gas phase optical extinction at 405 nm provides a specific measurement of NO2 with negligible interference from other absorbers.12
All six trace gas measurements are calibrated to a common analytical standard based on the absorption of O3 at 254 nm.54 The effective cross section for NO2 for each measurement channel is determined by generation and measurement of O3 using a commercial monitor, followed by quantitative conversion of O3 to NO2 in excess NO (R2) as described by Washenfelder et al.46 The conversion efficiency of N2O5 and the transmission efficiency of NO3 are then determined by their measurement on the 662 nm channels and their conversion to NO2via thermal dissociation (for N2O5) and reaction with excess NO (reaction (R1)) as described by Fuchs et al.12 and Wagner et al.45
The six-channel instrument is currently constructed on an optical bench system mounted to a custom built, aircraft certified rack system. The same table/rack system has been used over the course of approximately 12 years of development, from the first aircraft instrument demonstrated in 2004.43 During this period, the instrument has evolved from one based on pulsed laser systems with 2–3 measurement channels to the six channel, diode laser based instrument described here. It currently has a footprint of 21 × 42 inches (54 × 108 cm), a height of 35 inches (89 cm), a weight of 320 lbs (145 kg), with a power consumption of 500 W. These specifications include gas cylinders and pumping system. Although this platform has been versatile during the development of methodology for each of the six species, there is now considerable potential for miniaturization. Even at its current size, the complete six-channel instrument has been flown on an NSF C130 aircraft during the recent WINTER campaign (Wintertime INvestigation of Transport, Emission and Reactivity) on the U. S. East Coast. It has also participated in recent field studies investigating the influence of oil and gas emissions on regional O3 in the western USA,55–58 and in studies of nighttime chemistry and photochemistry at a mountain top observatory in Hong Kong, China.59,60 It has also participated in a 2015 tower-based campaign in Seoul, South Korea, described further in the following sections.
Wild et al.47 have recently described a smaller footprint CRDS instrument with four 405 nm channels for NO2, NOx, Ox and NOy, but without the 662 nm channels. This instrument is based on a custom optical cage system that uses aluminum mounting brackets and carbon fiber rods rather than an optical breadboard. The smaller instrument achieves sensitivity similar to that of the larger instrument, but with 50 cm optical cavities.12,47 The four-channel instrument has footprint of 21 × 26 inches (53 × 66 cm) and height of 53 inches (135 cm), with a weight of 240 lbs (109 kg) including gas cylinders and pumps. It has been deployed on a NOAA P-3 aircraft during the Shale Oil and Natural Gas Nexus study (SONGNEX) in 2015. The design of this instrument provides the concept for a miniaturized six-channel instrument currently under construction as a replacement for the existing, breadboard based instrument described above.
The six channel NOAA diode laser CRDS instrument is similar in many respects to the designs and performances of CRDS instruments developed elsewhere utilizing a combination of 405 nm detection for NO2 and 662 nm detection for NO3.51,61–68 These instruments show promise for the robust measurements of the nitrogen oxides in Fig. 1 and their atmospheric chemical cycles.
3. Nitrogen oxides and ozone in an Asian megacity: MAPS 2015
The six-channel CRDS instrument described in Section 2.2 measures nitrogen oxide and O3 from a tower in the Asian megacity of Seoul, South Korea in 2015. Accompanied only by a proton-transfer reaction mass spectrometry (PTR-MS) instrument for VOCs and meteorological data, the data from the six-channel CRDS illustrates how this measurement tool can be used to understand nitrogen oxides in one of the largest urban areas in the world. The discussion below illustrates the utility of the instrument, but also some of its current limitations, especially for the measurement of NO3 radicals, which are prone to losses during sampling with in situ instruments. Thus, the goal of this section with respect to measurement tools for the Anthropocene is twofold. First, to show the current capabilities and limitations of a new class of instrument for the characterization of nitrogen oxide and O3 chemistry, and second to provide new scientific analysis of atmospheric chemistry in a rapidly urbanizing region of the world.
3.1 Field site and measurement overview
The 2015 Megacity Air Pollution Study (MAPS2015) took place in May and June of that year, with measurement of reactive nitrogen and VOCs from the Seoul tower as part of a larger study that also included measurements at different sites around Seoul.69Fig. 4 shows the Seoul tower, its location within the broader region of South Korea, and the height of the sample point above the urban area. The tower is located within the Seoul metropolitan area, a region with some 25 million residents which is among the largest urban areas in the world. The tower is built near the summit of a hilltop, with a tower base elevation of 240 m above sea level (ASL). The scientific instruments were located one level above an observation deck near the middle of the tower, at a height of 360 m ASL. The urban area below the tower lies at 20–80 m ASL, with the lower bound defined by the Han River, the major waterway through Seoul. Thus, the sample point was approximately 300 m above the city, an elevation well within the daytime convective boundary layer, but likely either near the top of the nocturnal boundary layer (NBL) or within the residual layer during nighttime.70–72 Although the study did not include detailed measurements of boundary layer depths, the discussion below indicates that high frequency measurements of nitrogen oxides, especially at night, can illuminate the role of transport and boundary layer dynamics in nitrogen oxide chemistry.
 Fig. 4  Left: Map of South Korea showing the location of Seoul (Google Maps). Center: Photograph of the Seoul tower and the hilltop on which it is built. Instruments were housed one level above the main observation deck near the center of the tower at 360 m ASL. Right: Boom extending over the edge of the platform above the observation deck level on which the inlets for chemical instrumentation and meteorological instruments were mounted. 
The measurement suite included the six-channel CRDS instrument, a time of flight (ToF) PTR-MS instrument for the measurement of VOCs,73 and meteorological data. Instruments were housed in a room with window access to a balcony on which a boom was affixed for the meteorological sensors and instrument inlets. The NOy oven for the CRDS instrument was located on the boom so that all components of NOy, including sticky trace gases such as HNO3, were converted first to NO or NO2 before being transferred through the approximately 3 m inlet line to the instruments inside of the tower.
Meteorological data indicates that the late spring/early summer winter pattern was characteristic of a sea breeze circulation. Fig. 5 shows the wind direction and wind speed data as a function of the time of day during the measurement period. Daytime winds had a clear maximum from the southwest, with average wind speed reaching a daily maximum in the late afternoon at 5 ± 2.5 m s−1 (1σ). The coastline is approximately 37 km from the Seoul tower along the line of the prevailing wind direction so that the average transport times for marine air to reach the Seoul tower ranged from 5 hours in the morning (2 m s−1) to 2 hours in the afternoon (5 m s−1). Nighttime winds were less consistent in direction, with the greatest nighttime wind speeds associated with a westerly or southwesterly flow, but weaker winds distributed across all directions.
 Fig. 5  Top: Wind roses showing data for all times of day (left), daytime (center) and nighttime (right), where day is defined as a solar zenith angle of less than 90°. Radial axes are probability and wind speed bins are in 2 m s−1 increments. Bottom: Diel average wind speed and standard deviation. Shading at the back indicates the average duration of day and night during the 27 day measurement period. 
The six-channel CRDS instrument operated for a period of 27 days, providing NO, NO2, NOy, O3, NO3 and N2O5 for 22 of those days, and NO, NO2, NO3 and N2O5 for an additional 5 days. Fig. 6 gives an overview of the data averaged to 1 minute time resolution. The instrument operated largely unattended, and was serviced every two days to ensure a sufficient supply of filters in the automated filter changer on the NO3 and N2O5 channels. Air sampled at the Seoul tower had high levels of nitrogen oxide pollution. Median and average one-minute averaged NOy were 24.1 and 28.8 ppbv, respectively, while the 10th and 90th percentiles encompassed the range 6.5–56.1 ppbv. Median and average O3 were 54.5 and 53.9 ppbv, across the entire data set, near the 60 ppbv standard for 8 hour average O3 in South Korea. Ozone at 300 m above ground level (AGL) may be higher at night due to the lack of titration that is commonly observed in large urban areas at the surface, but daytime O3 should be representative of surface level mixing ratios.
 Fig. 6  Time series of O3, NO, NO2, NOy, NO3 and N2O5 (top 3 panels) at 1 minute time resolution during MAPS 2015 in parts per billion by volume (ppbv) mixing ratio. The dashed lines on the O3 data show the 60 and 100 ppbv standards for 8 hour and 1 hour averaged O3 in South Korea. Mixing ratios of NO3 in the third panel are calculated from N2O5 (see text) and multiplied by 5 for visibility on the same scale with N2O5. Bottom panels show temperature, relative humidity and solar elevation angle (SEA, bottom, no scale) to differentiate day (yellow shade) from night (grey shade). 
3.2 NO3 measurement and inlet loss
Although both the NO3 and N2O5 channels operated throughout the campaign, the NO3 measurements suffered from significant apparent wall loss. Measured NO3 was lower by a large but variable amount from that predicted to be in equilibrium with the measured N2O5. The left panels of Fig. 7 compare the measured and equilibrium ratios of NO3 and N2O5, where the predicted equilibrium is governed by NO2 and temperature. NO3 + NO2 ⇆ N2O5(R4) [N2O5]/[NO3] = Keq(T)[NO2](3)
 Fig. 7  Comparison of measured and predicted ratio of N2O5/NO3 from MAPS 2015 and CalNex 2010. Left: MAPS 2015 data showing a comparison of measured N2O5/NO3 ratio to the predicted equilibrium ratio, Keq(T)[NO2] at 1 minute time resolution for a single night in the top panel, and a scatter plot of N2O5/NO3vs. Keq(T)[NO2] for all data from MAPS 2015 in the bottom panel. Right: CalNex 2010 aircraft data comparing N2O5/NO3 to Keq(T)[NO2] at 1 second time resolution for a single night flight in the top panel, and N2O5/NO3vs. Keq(T)[NO2] for four night flights (May 30 and 31, and June 2 and 3) in the bottom panel, also at 1 second resolution. 
The measured N2O5/NO3 ratio was persistently too large over the wide range over which the equilibrium ratio varies. The top panel compares the right and left hand sides of eqn (3) for a single night during MAPS 2015, while the bottom panel plots the same two quantities against each other for nighttime data from the entire campaign. Previous measurements with an earlier version of the NOAA instrument have shown agreement with equilibrium,49,74 as have intercomparisons between different NO3 and N2O5 instruments in a large environmental simulation chamber.51,68 The right hand panel of Fig. 7 makes the same comparison for the NOAA diode laser based instrument during night flights of the NOAA P-3 aircraft during the CalNex campaign in 2010 over Los Angeles, a megacity in the U.S.75 During CalNex, the ratio of N2O5/NO3 followed its predicted equilibrium over more than 2 orders of magnitude over four separate night flights.
The reason for the difference in NO3 inlet transmission between the two campaigns is not clear, although the 3 m inlet line used during MAPS 2015 was considerably longer than the 45 cm P-3 aircraft inlet. The under-measurement seen in MAPS 2015 was similar to that reported for measurements at a mountain top site above Hong Kong in 2013 with the same instrument, where measured NO3 was only 40% of that predicted from its equilibrium with N2O5.59 In that study, comparison to an independently calibrated N2O5 measurement based on chemical ionization mass spectrometry (CIMS) showed agreement to within instrument uncertainties.60 Systematic deviation from the predicted ratio of N2O5 to NO3 in the Hong Kong study was therefore attributed to error in NO3 measurement, consistent with previous studies showing N2O5 inlet transmission to be more robust than that of NO3.76 However, other recent ground based measurements with similarly long inlet lines have shown agreement with equilibrium.58 The lack of agreement with equilibrium is a diagnostic for NO3 wall loss and illustrates the potential for significant under-measurement of this compound with CRDS instruments.
The NO3 in Fig. 6 is calculated from measured N2O5 after subtraction of NO3 from the ambient channel, on the assumption that the NO3 in both channels was the same. The contrast in the equilibrium behavior of NO3 and N2O5 between MAPS 2015 and CalNex 2010 illustrates the potential pitfalls of sampling NO3. Although the reason for the under measurement is not clear, the difference demonstrates that routine calibrations for NO3 inlet transmission12 should be included in measurement campaigns for which accurate NO3 is required.
3.3 Nitrogen oxide and ozone photochemistry
Reactive nitrogen showed a distinct diel cycle, with a clear morning maximum and a lesser afternoon maximum, with somewhat lower overnight levels, as shown in Fig. 8. The morning maximum in NOx and NOy, occurring near 9 AM local time, was coincident with the onset of more rapid wind speeds that characterized the sea breeze and likely the morning rush hour. Similarly, the smaller late day maximum may have followed the afternoon rush hour. Both maxima also corresponded with an increase in the NOx to NOy ratio (0.88 during the morning peak, 0.92 just prior to sunset), indicative of more recent NOx emission and less chemical oxidation at these times of day. The midday minimum in NOy corresponded with a decreased NOx to NOy ratio of 0.70, consistent with either a decreased NOx emission rate or an increased rate of photochemical oxidation during the middle of the day. Nighttime NOx and NOy were less variable, with their ratio decreasing steadily throughout the night. Decreasing NOx/NOy is consistent with nighttime NOx oxidation via reactions (R2) and (R3) and reduced rate of surface NOx emission reaching the sample altitude. However, the observed decrease in NOx/NOy between sunset and midnight was 0.065 h−1, about half of the first order oxidation rate of NO2 through reaction (R3) for the average O3. Thus, the 360 m altitude of the tower sample was likely not isolated from surface level NOx emissions. Evidence from the variability in high time resolution data suggests that the sample altitude was influenced by mixing between surface level and residual layer air at night (see below).
 Fig. 8  Top: Diel average mixing ratios of NOx, NOy (left axis) and their ratio, NOx/NOy (right axis). Bottom: Diel average O3 mixing ratio. Shaded region shows the 2σ variation. 
Ozone increased rapidly during the daytime. Diel average O3 increased linearly between 8:30–13:30 local time at a rate of 10 ppbv h−1 to produce an average rise of 50 ppbv. It is difficult to separate the influence of transport and local photochemistry on the observed ozone rise since there is no information on boundary layer depths for this study. However, the data are consistent with rapid local photochemistry in this megacity environment during the early part of the day, with potential moderation in late day as dilution increases with the increased late day wind speeds from the sea breeze. Factors driving local photochemistry, especially production of radicals through different mechanisms,77,78 would be of significant interest in future studies. Nighttime O3 was nearly constant in the diel average. Some nights showed considerable variability in O3, however, as described further in Section 3.5 below. Nights with high O3 tended to have lower NOx, lower relative humidity and higher temperatures, indicating that higher nighttime O3 was likely present in the residual layer, while the nocturnal boundary layer had lower O3 as a result of nighttime titration by NOx. The constant nighttime average in Fig. 8 may result from a balance between sampling of residual layer, high O3 air and low O3 air from the NBL.
3.4 Nighttime chemistry
Air at the Seoul tower exhibited rapid nighttime chemistry in addition to rapid photochemistry. Fig. 9 shows the diel average of the nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3) and the lifetime of N2O5, τ(N2O5). These standard metrics for nighttime chemistry are defined as follows.20 P(NO3) = k3[O3][NO2](4) τ(N2O5) = [N2O5]/P(NO3)(5)
 Fig. 9  Diel averages of nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3) (top) and N2O5 lifetime, τ(N2O5) (bottom). See the text for definitions. The shaded region in the top plot shows the 1σ range for P(NO3), where 1σ is used in the place of 2σ here due to the large variation. The log scale on the lower plot illustrates daytime and nighttime N2O5 lifetimes. 
Nitrate radical production rates were consistently large, with diel average values of 3 ppbv h−1 at sunset, decreasing to 0.8 ppb h−1 before sunrise. This average sunset P(NO3) was near the maximum value observed in aircraft studies of nighttime chemistry in the USA (e.g., Brown et al.79). Daytime nitrate radical production was even larger, with a broad daily maximum average near 4 ppbv h−1, and with P(NO3) exceeding 5 ppbv h−1 on many afternoons and 10 ppbv h−1 on two afternoons. These nitrate radical production rates are comparable to those from photochemical sources in polluted environments,78,80 indicating that P(NO3) of 3 ppbv h−1 at sunset over Seoul represents a significant potential nighttime oxidizing capacity. Large P(NO3) were observed at a mountain top site in Hong Kong, located in the Pearl River Delta of China, in 2013.59 That site was at 950 m, near the top of the local daytime boundary layer and often under wind flow that brought marine air directly to the site without traversing the major nearby urban areas. Nevertheless, a similar pattern of P(NO3) was apparent at that site, with a late afternoon maximum that corresponded to the time of maximum O3. Values of P(NO3) frequently exceeded 1 ppbv h−1, although the nighttime average value was smaller at 0.26 ppbv h−1.
Nitrate radical production in Seoul may be compared to that in the Los Angeles basin, a U. S. megacity with more than 17 million residents. Although there are no data from the USA that are strictly comparable to continuous measurements from a tower at 300 m AGL in Seoul, research flights within the same altitude range across the Los Angeles basin during the same time of year (May and June) are available from the 2010 CalNex campaign81 using the same CRDS instrument to measure P(NO3).45Fig. 10 compares the distribution of daytime and nighttime P(NO3) from MAPS 2015 and CalNex 2010 research flights. The CalNex data are restricted to the box shown in the inset to include only the urban area of the basin, and are confined to altitudes below 1000 m, the approximate height of the daytime mixed layer.80 Median daytime and nighttime P(NO3) in Seoul were 2.4 and 1.3 ppbv h−1, and 0.75 and 0.28 ppb h−1 from daytime and nighttime CalNex flights. Even 90th percentile P(NO3) were larger in Seoul by factors of 2.5 and 3.8, respectively, during daytime and nighttime.
 Fig. 10  Box and whisker plot distributions (left) of nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3) during daytime and nighttime in Seoul during MAPS 2015 and in Los Angeles during CalNex 2010. Horizontal lines are 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles, whiskers are 10th and 90th percentiles. Seoul data are continuous measurements from the Seoul tower at 360 m. Los Angeles basin data are from daytime and nighttime P-3 flights, shown in the right hand figure, within the red box over the urban area of the basin and within an altitude range below 1000 m. 
Even though this comparison indicates larger P(NO3) in an Asian megacity than in a U. S. megacity in the present day, historical data for the USA suggest much greater nitrate radical chemistry in the past. The first reported tropospheric nitrate radical measurements were from the Los Angeles basin in 1979.82 Those data showed maximum NO3 mixing ratios near 350 pptv, similar to the maximum calculated NO3 in Seoul in 2015. The underlying early evening P(NO3) from Los Angeles in 1979, however, was 57 ppbv h−1,20 some 10 times the 90th percentile value from Seoul in 2015, 3.6 times greater than the maximum, 1 minute average from Seoul and 12 times greater than the maximum day or night value from the CalNex flights. It would be of significant interest to obtain residual layer data for other megacities in Asia, particularly China, where NOx and O3 pollution may be more severe than in South Korea.83
The N2O5 lifetime, τ(N2O5), is a measure of reactivity of NO3 and N2O5.84,85 The lifetime of NO3 is defined similarly to that of N2O5 in eqn (4) (i.e., the ratio of its mixing ratio to its production rate), but is not shown here since for MAPS 2015 NO3 was not an independent measurement. The diel average τ(N2O5) in Fig. 9 shows a typical nighttime profile, increasing steadily between sunset and midnight and remaining more constant from midnight to sunrise. The increase in τ(N2O5) in the early part of the night is interpretable as the time to approach steady state, which often requires several hours, especially at high NO2.84 Average τ(N2O5) between 00:30–05:00 local time was 0.7 ± 0.1 hours, indicating moderately rapid average reactivity of NO3 and N2O5.20
Relative humidity (RH) was a strong influence on τ(N2O5). Fig. 11 shows the dependence of the nighttime only τ(N2O5) distributions on a log scale against relative humidity. Lifetimes were invariant or weakly decreasing with RH from 10–70%, then fell off steeply at higher RH, decreasing by more than 2 orders of magnitude for RH above 90%. Some of the higher RH periods coincided with rain events. The 2013 study in Hong Kong also identified a decrease in τ(N2O5) with increasing RH, but the decrease in τ(N2O5) in Seoul above 70% RH was considerably steeper. The RH dependence suggests that heterogeneous uptake of N2O5 to aerosol was an important process in Seoul and likely dominant at high RH. Due to the lack of aerosol size distribution measurements during this study, however, it is not possible to quantify the N2O5 uptake coefficient.
 Fig. 11  Dependence of nighttime τ(N2O5) on relative humidity. Red points show medians, and grey shaded areas show 25–75th and 10–90th percentile ranges, as the legend indicates. 
3.5 Nitrogen oxide variability
Some previous analyses of nighttime chemistry have identified high frequency variability as a characteristic of NO3 and N2O5. Fig. 12 shows a subsection of the MAPS 2015 data during the highest measured N2O5 on the night of June 1–2, when the 1 minute average N2O5 from Fig. 6 reached 4.82 ppbv. Data for N2O5 at the 0.5 s resolution of the CRDS instrument reached 7.03 ppbv during this event (“Period 1” in Fig. 12), but exhibited large variability. Across the broad N2O5 maximum at the end of Period 1, 2 Hz N2O5 was 4.1 ± 1.2 ppbv (avg ± 1σ), with a relative standard deviation, δ(N2O5) = 29%. In period 2, 2 Hz N2O5 was 2.6 ± 1.6 ppbv, or δ(N2O5) = 61%. Variability in NO3 and N2O5 on this scale has been observed previously within urban-influenced residual boundary layers in Boulder, Colorado, USA74 and Hong Kong, China.59 Our previous analysis in Boulder showed greater variability in NO3 and N2O5 than in other related trace gases,74 suggesting that variability arose from greater reactivity and/or deposition of NO3 and N2O5 than its precursors. For Seoul, the 2 Hz data for NOx and O3 in the second panel of Fig. 12 shows similar and well-correlated variability to that of N2O5, suggesting that variability arose from sampling within vertical gradients associated with the boundary layer structure. Meteorological measurements at 5 s resolution show that fluctuations to high NO2 and N2O5 but low O3 were associated with higher relative humidity (bottom panel). During this period, the 360 m ASL point of sampling may have been at the boundary between the nocturnal boundary layer (NBL) and the residual layer, with the NBL likely rich in NOx and higher in relative humidity. Small fluctuations in the NBL height as the air mass advected across the tower (wind speed = 4.6 ± 0.6 m s−1, wind direction = southwest) would produce the apparent variation in nitrogen oxides and O3 at the sample height. The interval between the two periods of high N2O5 in Fig. 12 had high temperature, low relative humidity, low NOx and high O3, likely characteristic of residual layer air that had not been influenced by recent urban emissions.
 Fig. 12  Time series of N2O5, O3, NOx, Ox, NOx/NOy, P(NO3), τ(N2O5), temperature and relative humidity for a 2 hour period on June 1–2 2015. N2O5 data in the top panel are shown at 1 minute and 0.5 s (2 Hz) time resolution. All quantities except temperature and relative humidity are at 2 Hz. Meteorological data in the lower panel is at 5 second resolution. 
Fluctuations to high N2O5 were associated with higher NOx/NOy (3rd panel of Fig. 12), and thus more recent NOx emission, although the dependence of N2O5 on NOx/NOy did not explain all of its variability, as the top panels of Fig. 13 show. N2O5 showed a non-linear dependence on NOx/NOy, especially apparent during period 2. The interval between the two N2O5 maxima had NOx/NOy < 0.2, consistent with aged air in the residual layer. The N2O5 variability was more clearly dependent on P(NO3) (2nd panel of Fig. 13), which showed large variation that was more clearly and linearly correlated with N2O5. The slope of the N2O5vs. P(NO3) is the N2O5 lifetime defined in eqn (4). The correlation was high during period 1 (r2 = 0.93 for a linear fit), and lines of τ(N2O5) = 1 hour and 2 hours bound the data. The data were more scattered during period 2 (r2 = 0.76) and bounded by lines of τ(N2O5) = 0.6 and 2 hours.
 Fig. 13  Top: Variation of N2O5 with the NOx/NOy ratio for 2 Hz data during periods 1 and 2 (left and right) from Fig. 12. Center: Variation of N2O5 with nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3), during periods 1 and 2 from Fig. 12. Slopes are the N2O5 lifetimes, with bounds indicated by the dashed lines. Bottom: Plot of O3vs. NO2 and NO2 + 3N2O5 for periods 1 and 2 from Fig. 12. 
The high frequency O3 and NOx mixing ratios in Fig. 12 are tightly anticorrelated, consistent with the variability in the two compounds being driven by nighttime NOx–O3 titration. Fig. 12 also shows Ox = O3 + NO2, a quantity which was much more nearly conserved in the 2 Hz data. The lower panels of Fig. 13 show the correlations between O3 and NO2 during the two periods of high NOx and O3 variability. Both give slopes of approximately −0.9, close to the slope of −1 that would be anticipated if NOx had been emitted into a uniform background of O3 in the form of NO and rapid O3 titration had occurred via reaction (R2). However, nighttime Ox also includes 2 × NO3 + 3 × N2O5 since these compounds are formed in this stoichiometric ratio with respect to O3 due to nighttime NOx oxidation.86 Plots of O3vs. NO2 + 3N2O5 (NO3 not included here, but it is a smaller contribution to Ox) in Fig. 13 give slopes considerably greater than −1, indicating a lack of Ox balance within the periods of high variability. The apparent nighttime Ox imbalance is distinct from that observed in Hong Kong, where nighttime Ox and NOx variability at high N2O5 was consistent with conservation of Ox.59 In Seoul, the nighttime Ox imbalance likely arises from a difference in background O3 between the NBL and the residual layer. The apparent imbalance is too large to be explained by direct emissions of NO2 (or a high NO2 to NOx ratio), since the NO2/NOx emission in Seoul has been assessed at 0.11–0.19.87 The NO2/NOx emission ratio would need to be greater than 0.5 to explain the data in Fig. 13. Small variations in 2 Hz Ox in the second panel of Fig. 12 are positively correlated with the NBL air, consistent with higher O3 in the NBL than in the residual layer. Previous nighttime vertical profiling experiments have shown evidence for different O3 levels in the NBL and residual layers.88
3.6 Nighttime biogenic oxidation
The nitrate radical is a selective oxidant that reacts preferentially with unsaturated hydrocarbons, especially biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs).89 Reaction of NO3 with BVOC is a potentially large source of organic nitrates and secondary organic aerosol.90,91 The PTRMS reported data at 2 minute time resolution for major BVOCs, including isoprene, summed monoterpenes and summed sesquiterpenes. Biogenic VOCs were typically present in larger mixing ratios during daytime, with isoprene commonly reaching daytime maxima of 0.5–1 ppbv.
Biogenic VOCs were also present at night at smaller mixing ratios. Inferred nighttime oxidation rates were extremely rapid owing to the large P(NO3) in Seoul. Fig. 14 shows one example from the same night with high nitrogen oxide variability discussed above. Because the PTRMS sample rate was slow compared to the variability of sampling the nighttime boundary layer, the BVOC data are an average of residual layer and NBL air. During the period of residual layer air sampling, BVOC mixing ratios were zero to within the accuracy of the instrument baseline, suggesting that BVOC were associated only with the NBL air during periods of variability. The bottom panel shows the first order loss rate for NO3 radicals calculated from the steady state approximation and from the measured BVOC. The steady state first order loss rate is simply the inverse of the NO3 lifetime, in this case calculated from the N2O5 lifetime since N2O5 is the measured quantity. τ(NO3)−1 = Keq(T)[NO2]/τ(N2O5)(6)here Keq(T) is from reaction (R4). The NO3 first order loss rate constant can also be calculated from measured BVOC. (7)here ki(T) is the temperature dependent (where available) rate constant for NO3 with a given BVOC.89 The lower panel of Fig. 14 compares the two calculations, showing individual contributions from isoprene, monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes. The calculation uses the rate constant for α-pinene, which is in the middle of the range of the monoterpene-NO3 rate constants, to represent the reactivity of the summed PTRMS monoterpene measurement. A single, temperature independent rate constant, k = 1.9 × 1011 cm3 per molecule per s for β-caryophyllene, represents summed sesquiterpenes.89
 Fig. 14  Top: Time series of speciated BVOC (isoprene, monoterpene and sesquiterpene) and nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3), for the June 1–2 period from Fig. 12. Bottom: Comparison of the inverse NO3 lifetime, τ(NO3), to the first order loss rate coefficient, k(NO3), calculated from the sum of BVOC + NO3 reactions. Note that NO3 reactivity is on a logarithmic scale. 
The average of the lower time resolution BVOC–NO3 reactivity, k(NO3), exceeded the τ(NO3)−1 during period 1 and 2, but was near the peaks in τ(NO3)−1 that were likely representative of NBL air. In the data towards the end of the displayed time series, when the variability was reduced and the air sample was from the NBL, k(NO3) and τ(NO3)−1 were nearly comparable, suggesting that most of the 4 ppbv h−1P(NO3) was balanced by loss to BVOC. This apparent balance implies rapid NBL oxidation chemistry, although the 4 ppbv h−1 rate is likely not consistent with the rate of BVOC emission into the NBL. More likely, the observation is the result of vertical gradients in BVOC, NOx and O3 below the measurement height. At surface level, NOx was likely much larger and O3 much smaller, with potentially complete O3 titration and P(NO3) = 0. This surface level air could provide a low oxidation reservoir in which BVOC could accumulate, especially for monoterpenes that are emitted at night. Isoprene, which is not emitted at night, would be residual from the previous day. Upward mixing within the NBL would then lead to nighttime BVOC oxidation at an altitude where O3 was in excess over NOx, resulting in rapid local oxidation rates observed near the top of the NBL, as seen in this example.
3.7 Daytime N2O5
Daytime nitrate radical production rates in Seoul were larger than nighttime owing to warmer temperatures and higher O3 during daytime. Fig. 9 shows the day/night difference in P(NO3) and also shows that the daytime N2O5 lifetime was small but non-zero. Mixing ratios of NO3 and N2O5 during daytime are generally small but can be non-zero, with a well-defined daytime steady state.92,93 NO3 (day) = P(NO3)/[k1[NO] + j(NO3)](8) N2O5 (day) = Keq(T)[NO2]NO3 (day)(9)here, k1 is the rate constant for reaction of NO3 with NO above, and j(NO3) is the NO3 photolysis rate constant. The MAPS 2015 measurements did not include radiometers to characterize photolysis rates. However, for the high NOx conditions characteristic of Seoul, j(NO3) is much smaller than k1[NO] in the denominator of eqn (8) and can be neglected. Fig. 15 shows P(NO3) together with measured and calculated daytime N2O5 for the day with the highest campaign P(NO3), approximately 14 ppbv h−1. Daytime N2O5 between 9 AM to 6 PM local time varied from 5–35 pptv and agreed well with its daytime steady state calculation. Measured NO varied between 5–20 ppbv, corresponding to k1[NO] of approximately 3–12 s−1, much larger than estimated clear sky midday daytime j(NO3) of 0.2 s−1.94 Thus, the simple daytime steady state between NO3 production through NO2 + O3 and loss through NO3 + NO, while maintaining an equilibrium with N2O5, describes the observations.
 Fig. 15  Time series of P(NO3) (left axis) and measured and calculated N2O5 (right axis) during daytime (40 minutes after sunrise to 40 minutes before sunset) on May 29, 2015. See text for the calculation of daytime steady state N2O5. 
Even a small fraction of the large daytime NO3 radical flux could induce non-negligible oxidation chemistry. Isoprene and monoterpene present at approximately 1 and 0.2 ppbv, respectively, present first-order NO3 loss rate constants of approximately 0.02 and 0.03 s−1, insufficient to perturb the daytime steady state. These reactions would amount to 0.4–2% of the total NO3 loss, or up to 0.2 ppbv h−1 of BVOC oxidation for the maximum P(NO3) of 14 ppbv h−1. This daytime NO3–BVOC oxidation rate would be approximately 10% of the oxidation rate attributable to midday OH of 5 × 106 molecules per cm3 for similar BVOC mixing ratios. At lower OH during morning and evening, the daytime NO3 oxidation pathway could become similar to that of OH, although a quantitative comparison is not possible with the available data from MAPS 2015. Simultaneous measurements of OH and NO3 in this environment would be of interest to constrain the roles of both oxidants as a function of time of day in a megacity such as Seoul with large nitrate radical production rates.
4. Conclusions
Cavity enhanced spectroscopy is among the powerful measurement tools for atmospheric composition that have developed concurrently with the increasing need to understand human impacts on the atmosphere during the Anthropocene. Deployment of the NOAA six-channel nitrogen oxide CRDS instrument to Seoul, South Korea, a megacity in Asia, illustrates the utility of CRDS based measurements of daytime and nighttime nitrogen oxides, including NO3, N2O5, NO, NO2 and NOy as well as O3. Although the CRDS instrument provided high time resolution data for most of the MAPS study period, the NO3 data were clearly compromised by wall loss, as evidenced by the lack of apparent agreement with the NO3–N2O5 equilibrium. This artifact is absent in other data sets, but demonstrates that NO3 inlet transmission efficiency should be calibrated in future field measurements where this species is of interest. The measurements during MAPS 2015 provide new measurements of O3 photochemistry in Seoul, and provide the first analysis of nighttime chemistry there. Measurements at 300 m above the urban area from the Seoul tower occurred in an elevation range with active nighttime chemistry. Analysis of NOx, O3 and VOC data during MAPS provides evidence for rapid photochemistry and nighttime chemistry. Diel average O3 increased at 10 ppbv h−1 during sea breeze flow in the morning and early afternoon, leading to an average daily O3 rise of 50 ppbv. Average nitrate radical production rates, P(NO3), were 4 ppbv h−1 during late afternoon and 3 ppbv h−1 in early evening. These P(NO3) were large compared to recent, aircraft data from Los Angeles, a comparable megacity in the USA, but small in comparison to historical data from Los Angeles. Nighttime measurements from the Seoul tower showed periodic, large variability in nitrogen oxides and ozone that was consistent with sampling within vertical gradients, possibly associated with the boundary between the NBL and the residual layer. Apparent biogenic VOC oxidation rates were rapid at the sample altitude, but also may have been influenced by vertical gradients if P(NO3) was also a function of altitude within the NBL. Finally, daytime N2O5 mixing ratios of 5–35 pptv associated with high P(NO3), up to 14 ppbv h−1, agreed well with its predicted, daytime steady state.
Acknowledgements
This study is supported by NRF-2015R1D1A1A01060337, NIER-SP2015-329 and GIST Research Institute (GRI) of South Korea.
References
P. J. Crutzen, Nature, 2002, 415, 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Waters, J. Zalasiewicz, C. Summerhayes, A. D. Barnosky, C. Poirier, A. Gałuszka, A. Cearreta, M. Edgeworth, E. C. Ellis, M. Ellis, C. Jeandel, R. Leinfelder, J. R. McNeill, D. d. Richter, W. Steffen, J. Syvitski, D. Vidas, M. Wagreich, M. Williams, A. Zhisheng, J. Grinevald, E. Odada, N. Oreskes and A. P. Wolfe, Science, 2016, 351, aad2622 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Jimenez, M. R. Canagaratna, N. M. Donahue, A. S. H. Prevot, Q. Zhang, J. H. Kroll, P. F. DeCarlo, J. D. Allan, H. Coe, N. L. Ng, A. C. Aiken, K. S. Docherty, I. M. Ulbrich, A. P. Grieshop, A. L. Robinson, J. Duplissy, J. D. Smith, K. R. Wilson, V. A. Lanz, C. Hueglin, Y. L. Sun, J. Tian, A. Laaksonen, T. Raatikainen, J. Rautiainen, P. Vaattovaara, M. Ehn, M. Kulmala, J. M. Tomlinson, D. R. Collins, M. J. Cubison, E. J. Dunlea, J. A. Huffman, T. B. Onasch, M. R. Alfarra, P. I. Williams, K. Bower, Y. Kondo, J. Schneider, F. Drewnick, S. Borrmann, S. Weimer, K. Demerjian, D. Salcedo, L. Cottrell, R. Griffin, A. Takami, T. Miyoshi, S. Hatakeyama, A. Shimono, J. Y. Sun, Y. M. Zhang, K. Dzepina, J. R. Kimmel, D. Sueper, J. T. Jayne, S. C. Herndon, A. M. Trimborn, L. R. Williams, E. C. Wood, A. M. Middlebrook, C. E. Kolb, U. Baltensperger and D. R. Worsnop, Science, 2009, 326, 1525–1529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Murphy, D. J. Cziczo, K. D. Froyd, P. K. Hudson, B. M. Matthew, A. M. Middlebrook, R. E. Peltier, A. Sullivan, D. S. Thomson and R. J. Weber, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2006, 111, D23S32 Search PubMed .
B. H. Lee, F. D. Lopez-Hilfiker, C. Mohr, T. Kurtén, D. R. Worsnop and J. A. Thornton, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 6309–6317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yuan, A. Koss, C. Warneke, J. B. Gilman, B. M. Lerner, H. Stark and J. A. de Gouw, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2016, 9, 2735–2752 Search PubMed .
E. R. Crosson, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2008, 92, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karion, C. Sweeney, S. Wolter, T. Newberger, H. Chen, A. Andrews, J. Kofler, D. Neff and P. Tans, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2013, 6, 511–526 CrossRef .
B. N. Duncan, L. N. Lamsal, A. M. Thompson, Y. Yoshida, Z. Lu, D. G. Streets, M. M. Hurwitz and K. E. Pickering, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2016, 121, 976–996 CAS .
A. O’Keefe and D. A. G. Deacon, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1988, 59, 2544–2551 CrossRef .
A. O’Keefe and O. Lee, Am. Lab., 1989, 21, 19–22 Search PubMed .
H. Fuchs, W. P. Dubé, B. M. Lerner, N. L. Wagner, E. J. Williams and S. S. Brown, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 7831–7836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Thalman and R. Volkamer, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2010, 3, 1797–1814 Search PubMed .
A. Pettersson, E. R. Lovejoy, C. A. Brock, S. S. Brown and A. R. Ravishankara, J. Aerosol Sci., 2004, 35, 995–1011 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Crutzen, Pure Appl. Geophys., 1973, 106–108, 1385–1399 CrossRef .
A. C. Vandaele, C. Hermans, S. Fally, M. Carleer, R. Colin, M. F. Merienne, A. Jenouvrier and B. Coquart, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2002, 107, 4348 CrossRef .
R. J. Yokelson, J. B. Burkholder, R. W. Fox, R. K. Talukdar and A. R. Ravishankara, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13144–13150 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Chameides, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1978, 5, 17–20 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Day, M. B. Dillon, P. J. Wooldridge, J. A. Thornton, R. S. Rosen, E. C. Wood and R. C. Cohen, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2003, 108, 4501 CrossRef .
S. S. Brown and J. Stutz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6405–6447 RSC .
A. Hilboll, A. Richter and J. P. Burrows, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2013, 13, 4145–4169 Search PubMed .
R.-J. Huang, Y. Zhang, C. Bozzetti, K.-F. Ho, J.-J. Cao, Y. Han, K. R. Daellenbach, J. G. Slowik, S. M. Platt, F. Canonaco, P. Zotter, R. Wolf, S. M. Pieber, E. A. Bruns, M. Crippa, G. Ciarelli, A. Piazzalunga, M. Schwikowski, G. Abbaszade, J. Schnelle-Kreis, R. Zimmermann, Z. An, S. Szidat, U. Baltensperger, I. E. Haddad and A. S. H. Prevot, Nature, 2014, 514, 218–222 CAS .
D. D. Parrish, J. Xu, B. Croes and M. Shao, Front. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2016, 10, 1–13 CAS .
M. Reuter, M. Buchwitz, A. Hilboll, A. Richter, O. Schneising, M. Hilker, J. Heymann, H. Bovensmann and J. P. Burrows, Nat. Geosci., 2014, 7, 792–795 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Smith, J. van Aardenne, Z. Klimont, R. J. Andres, A. Volke and S. Delgado Arias, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2011, 11, 1101–1116 CAS .
J. Xing, R. Mathur, J. Pleim, C. Hogrefe, C. M. Gan, D. C. Wong, C. Wei, R. Gilliam and G. Pouliot, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2015, 15, 2723–2747 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, S. X. Wang, H. Liu, J. Y. Xu, K. Fu, Z. Klimont, J. M. Hao, K. B. He, J. Cofala and M. Amann, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2013, 13, 9869–9897 CrossRef .
S. S. Brown, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 5219–5238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Cavity-Ringdown Spectroscopy, ed. K. W. Busch and M. A. Busch, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  1999 Search PubMed .
P. L. Kebabian, S. C. Herndon and A. Freedman, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 724–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Fiedler, A. Hese and A. A. Ruth, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 371, 284–294 CrossRef CAS .
A. O’Keefe, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 293, 331–336 CrossRef .
R. Grilli, G. Méjean, S. Kassi, I. Ventrillard, C. Abd-Alrahman and D. Romanini, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 10704–10710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Romanini, A. A. Kachanov and F. Stoeckel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 270, 538–545 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Brown, H. Stark and A. R. Ravishankara, Appl. Phys. B, 2002, 75, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Langridge, S. M. Ball, A. J. Shillings and R. L. Jones, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79, 123110 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Washenfelder, A. O. Langford, H. Fuchs and S. S. Brown, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2008, 8, 7779–7793 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Ball and R. L. Jones, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 5239–5262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Platt, J. Meinen, D. Pöhler and T. Leisner, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2009, 2, 713–723 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Varma, S. M. Ball, T. Brauers, H. P. Dorn, U. Heitmann, R. L. Jones, U. Platt, D. Pöhler, A. A. Ruth, A. J. L. Shillings, J. Thieser, A. Wahner and D. S. Venables, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2013, 6, 3115–3130 CrossRef .
R. A. Washenfelder, J. M. Flores, C. A. Brock, S. S. Brown and Y. Rudich, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2013, 6, 861–877 CrossRef .
S. S. Brown, H. Stark, S. J. Ciciora, R. J. McLaughlin and A. R. Ravishankara, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2002, 73, 3291–3301 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Dubé, S. S. Brown, H. D. Osthoff, M. R. Nunley, S. J. Ciciora, M. W. Paris, R. J. McLaughlin and A. R. Ravishankara, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2006, 77, 034101 CrossRef .
H. D. Osthoff, S. S. Brown, T. B. Ryerson, T. J. Fortin, B. M. Lerner, E. J. Williams, A. Pettersson, T. Baynard, W. P. Dube, S. J. Ciciora and A. R. Ravishankara, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2006, 111, D12305 CrossRef .
N. L. Wagner, W. P. Dubé, R. A. Washenfelder, C. J. Young, I. B. Pollack, T. B. Ryerson and S. S. Brown, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2011, 4, 1227–1240 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Washenfelder, W. P. Dubé, N. L. Wagner and S. S. Brown, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 2938–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Wild, P. M. Edwards, W. P. Dubé, K. Baumann, E. S. Edgerton, P. K. Quinn, J. M. Roberts, A. W. Rollins, P. R. Veres, C. Warneke, E. J. Williams, B. Yuan and S. S. Brown, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 9609–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Everest and D. B. Atkinson, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79, 023108 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Osthoff, M. J. Pilling, A. R. Ravishankara and S. S. Brown, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 5785–5793 RSC .

          S. P. Sander, R. R. Friedl, J. R. Barker, D. M. Golden, M. J. Kurylo, P. H. Wine, J. P. D. Abbatt, J. B. Burkholder, C. E. Kolb, G. K. Moortgat, R. E. Huie and V. L. Orkin, Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for Use in Atmospheric Studies, JPL Publication 10-6, Pasadena, CA,  2011 Search PubMed .
H. Fuchs, W. R. Simpson, R. L. Apodaca, T. Brauers, R. C. Cohen, J. N. Crowley, H. P. Dorn, W. P. Dubé, J. L. Fry, R. Häseler, Y. Kajii, A. Kiendler-Scharr, I. Labazan, J. Matsumoto, T. F. Mentel, Y. Nakashima, F. Rohrer, A. W. Rollins, G. Schuster, R. Tillmann, A. Wahner, P. J. Wooldridge and S. S. Brown, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2012, 5, 2763–2777 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Day, P. A. Wooldridge, M. B. Dillon, J. A. Thornton and R. C. Cohen, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2002, 107, 4046 CrossRef .
C. C. Womack, J. A. Neuman, P. R. Veres, S. J. Eilerman, C. A. Brock, Z. C. J. Decker, K. J. Zarzana, W. P. Dube, R. J. Wild, P. J. Wooldridge, R. C. Cohen and S. S. Brown, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2016, 2016, 1–30 Search PubMed .
K. Mauersberger, D. Hanson, J. Barnes and J. Morton, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 1987, 92, 8480–8482 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Edwards, S. S. Brown, J. M. Roberts, R. Ahmadov, R. M. Banta, J. A. deGouw, W. P. Dube, R. A. Field, J. H. Flynn, J. B. Gilman, M. Graus, D. Helmig, A. Koss, A. O. Langford, B. L. Lefer, B. M. Lerner, R. Li, S.-M. Li, S. A. McKeen, S. M. Murphy, D. D. Parrish, C. J. Senff, J. Soltis, J. Stutz, C. Sweeney, C. R. Thompson, M. K. Trainer, C. Tsai, P. R. Veres, R. A. Washenfelder, C. Warneke, R. J. Wild, C. J. Young, B. Yuan and R. Zamora, Nature, 2014, 514, 351–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Edwards, C. J. Young, K. C. Aikin, J. A. de Gouw, W. P. Dubé, F. Geiger, J. Gilman, D. Helmig, J. S. Holloway, J. Kercher, B. Lerner, R. Martin, R. McLaren, D. D. Parrish, J. Peischl, J. M. Roberts, T. B. Ryerson, J. A. Thornton, C. Warneke, E. J. Williams and S. S. Brown, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2013, 13, 8955–8971 Search PubMed .
E. E. McDuffie, P. M. Edwards, J. B. Gilman, B. M. Lerner, W. P. Dubé, M. Trainer, D. E. Wolfe, W. M. Angevine, J. deGouw, E. J. Williams, A. G. Tevlin, J. G. Murphy, E. V. Fischer, S. McKeen, T. B. Ryerson, J. Peischl, J. S. Holloway, K. Aikin, A. O. Langford, C. J. Senff, R. J. Alvarez, S. R. Hall, K. Ullmann, K. O. Lantz and S. S. Brown, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2016, 121, 8712–8729 CAS .
R. J. Wild, P. M. Edwards, T. S. Bates, R. C. Cohen, J. A. de Gouw, W. P. Dubé, J. B. Gilman, J. Holloway, J. Kercher, A. R. Koss, L. Lee, B. M. Lerner, R. McLaren, P. K. Quinn, J. M. Roberts, J. Stutz, J. A. Thornton, P. R. Veres, C. Warneke, E. Williams, C. J. Young, B. Yuan, K. J. Zarzana and S. S. Brown, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2016, 16, 573–583 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Brown, W. P. Dubé, Y. J. Tham, Q. Zha, L. Xue, S. Poon, Z. Wang, D. R. Blake, W. Tsui, D. D. Parrish and T. Wang, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2016, 121, 2457–2475 CAS .
T. Wang, Y. J. Tham, L. Xue, Q. Li, Q. Zha, Z. Wang, S. C. N. Poon, W. P. Dubé, D. R. Blake, P. K. K. Louie, C. W. Y. Luk, W. Tsui and S. S. Brown, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2016, 121, 2476–2489 CAS .
G. J. Phillips, N. Pouvesle, J. Thieser, G. Schuster, R. Axinte, H. Fischer, J. Williams, J. Lelieveld and J. N. Crowley, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2013, 13, 1129–1139 CrossRef .
G. Schuster, I. Labazan and J. N. Crowley, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2009, 2, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Thieser, G. Schuster, J. Schuladen, G. J. Phillips, A. Reiffs, U. Parchatka, D. Pöhler, J. Lelieveld and J. N. Crowley, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2016, 9, 553–576 CAS .
C. A. Odame-Ankrah and H. D. Osthoff, Appl. Spectrosc., 2011, 65, 1260–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Thaler, L. H. Mielke and H. D. Osthoff, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 2761–2766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Ayers, L. Apodaca, W. R. Simpson and D. S. Baer, Appl. Opt., 2005, 44, 7239–7242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Simpson, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74, 3442–3452 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Dorn, R. L. Apodaca, S. M. Ball, T. Brauers, S. S. Brown, J. N. Crowley, W. P. Dubé, H. Fuchs, R. Häseler, U. Heitmann, R. L. Jones, A. Kiendler-Scharr, I. Labazan, J. M. Langridge, J. Meinen, T. F. Mentel, U. Platt, D. Pöhler, F. Rohrer, A. A. Ruth, E. Schlosser, G. Schuster, A. J. L. Shillings, W. R. Simpson, J. Thieser, R. Tillmann, R. Varma, D. S. Venables and A. Wahner, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2013, 6, 1111–1140 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, D. Sanchez, M. Wang, R. Seco, D. Jeong, S. Hughes, B. Barletta, D. R. Blake, J. Jung, D. Kim, G. Lee, M. Lee, J. Ahn, S.-D. Lee, G. Cho, M.-Y. Sung, Y.-H. Lee, D. B. Kim, Y. Kim, J.-H. Woo, D. Jo, R. Park, J.-H. Park, Y.-D. Hong and J.-H. Hong, Faraday Discuss., 2016, 189, 231–251 RSC .
S. S. Brown, W. P. Dubé, H. D. Osthoff, J. Stutz, T. B. Ryerson, A. G. Wollny, C. A. Brock, C. Warneke, J. A. de Gouw, E. Atlas, J. A. Neuman, J. S. Holloway, B. M. Lerner, E. J. Williams, W. C. Kuster, P. D. Goldan, W. M. Angevine, M. Trainer, F. C. Fehsenfeld and A. R. Ravishankara, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2007, 112, D22304 CrossRef .
S. S. Brown, W. P. Dubé, H. D. Osthoff, D. E. Wolfe, W. M. Angevine and A. R. Ravishankara, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2007, 7, 139–149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stutz, B. Alicke, R. Ackermann, A. Geyer, A. B. White and E. Williams, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2004, 109, D12306 CrossRef .
J. A. de Gouw and C. Warneke, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2007, 26, 223–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Brown, H. Stark, T. B. Ryerson, E. J. Williams, D. K. J. Nicks, M. Trainer, F. C. Fehsenfeld and A. R. Ravishankara, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2003, 108, D94299 Search PubMed .
W. L. Chang, S. S. Brown, J. Stutz, A. M. Middlebrook, R. Bahreini, N. L. Wagner, W. P. Dubé, I. B. Pollack, T. B. Ryerson and N. Riemer, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2016, 121, 5051–5070 CAS .
H. Fuchs, W. P. Dubé, S. J. Ciciora and S. S. Brown, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 6010–6017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. I. Kleinman, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39, 575–586 CrossRef CAS .
R. Volkamer, P. Sheehy, L. T. Molina and M. J. Molina, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2010, 10, 6969–6991 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Brown, W. P. Dubé, R. Bahreini, A. M. Middlebrook, C. A. Brock, C. Warneke, J. A. de Gouw, R. A. Washenfelder, E. Atlas, J. Peischl, T. B. Ryerson, J. S. Holloway, J. P. Schwarz, R. Spackman, M. Trainer, D. D. Parrish, F. C. Fehsenfeld and A. R. Ravishankara, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2013, 13, 11317–11337 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Young, R. A. Washenfelder, L. H. Mielke, H. D. Osthoff, P. Veres, A. K. Cochran, T. C. VandenBoer, H. Stark, J. Flynn, N. Grossberg, C. L. Haman, B. Lefer, J. B. Gilman, W. C. Kuster, C. Tsai, O. Pikelnaya, J. Stutz, J. M. Roberts and S. S. Brown, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 10965–10973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Ryerson, A. E. Andrews, W. M. Angevine, T. S. Bates, C. A. Brock, B. Cairns, R. C. Cohen, O. R. Cooper, J. A. de Gouw, F. C. Fehsenfeld, R. A. Ferrare, M. L. Fischer, R. C. Flagan, A. H. Goldstein, J. W. Hair, R. M. Hardesty, C. A. Hostetler, J. L. Jimenez, A. O. Langford, E. McCauley, S. A. McKeen, L. T. Molina, A. Nenes, S. J. Oltmans, D. D. Parrish, J. R. Pederson, R. B. Pierce, K. Prather, P. K. Quinn, J. H. Seinfeld, C. J. Senff, A. Sorooshian, J. Stutz, J. D. Surratt, M. Trainer, R. Volkamer, E. J. Williams and S. C. Wofsy, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2013, 118, 5830–5866 CAS .
U. Platt, D. Perner, A. M. Winer, G. W. Harris and J. N. J. Pitts, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1980, 7, 89–92 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, A. Ding, J. Gao and W. S. Wu, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2006, 33, L21806,  DOI:21810.21029/22006GL027689 .
S. S. Brown, H. Stark and A. R. Ravishankara, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2003, 108, D174539 Search PubMed .
U. Platt, D. Perner, J. Schröder, C. Kessler and A. Toennissen, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 1981, 86, 11965–11970 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Brown, J. A. Neuman, T. B. Ryerson, M. Trainer, W. P. Dubé, J. S. Holloway, C. Warneke, J. A. de Gouw, S. G. Donnelly, E. Atlas, B. Matthew, A. M. Middlebrook, R. Peltier, R. J. Weber, A. Stohl, J. F. Meagher, F. C. Fehsenfeld and A. R. Ravishankara, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2006, 33, L08801 CrossRef .
Z.-H. Shon, K.-H. Kim and S.-K. Song, Atmos. Environ., 2011, 45, 3120–3131 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Brown, J. A. Thornton, W. C. Keene, A. A. P. Pszenny, B. C. Sive, W. P. Dubé, N. L. Wagner, C. J. Young, T. P. Riedel, J. M. Roberts, T. C. VandenBoer, R. Bahreini, F. Öztürk, A. M. Middlebrook, S. Kim, G. Hübler and D. E. Wolfe, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2013, 118, 8067–8085 CAS .
R. Atkinson and J. Arey, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 4605–4638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fisher, D. J. Jacob, K. R. Travis, P. S. Kim, E. A. Marais, C. Chan Miller, K. Yu, L. Zhu, R. M. Yantosca, M. P. Sulprizio, J. Mao, P. O. Wennberg, J. D. Crounse, A. P. Teng, T. B. Nguyen, J. M. S. Clair, R. C. Cohen, P. Romer, B. A. Nault, P. J. Wooldridge, J. L. Jimenez, P. Campuzano-Jost, D. A. Day, W. Hu, P. B. Shepson, F. Xiong, D. R. Blake, A. H. Goldstein, P. K. Misztal, T. F. Hanisco, G. M. Wolfe, T. B. Ryerson, A. Wisthaler and T. Mikoviny, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2016, 16, 5969–5991 CAS .
H. O. T. Pye, A. W. H. Chan, M. P. Barkley and J. H. Seinfeld, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2010, 10, 11261–11276 CAS .
S. S. Brown, H. D. Osthoff, H. Stark, W. P. Dube, T. B. Ryerson, C. Warneke, J. A. de Gouw, A. G. Wollny, D. D. Parrish, F. C. Fehsenfeld and A. R. Ravishankara, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2005, 176, 270–278 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Osthoff, R. Sommarvia, T. Baynard, A. Pettersson, E. J. Williams, B. M. Lerner, J. M. Roberts, H. Stark, P. D. Goldan, W. C. Kuster, T. S. Bates, D. Coffman, A. R. Ravishankara and S. S. Brown, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2006, 111, D23S14 Search PubMed .
H. S. Johnston, H. F. Davis and Y. T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 4713–4723 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Daytime and nighttime chemical cycles of nitrogen oxides in the lower atmosphere. The insets show the characteristic visible absorption spectra of NO2 and NO3 overlaid on the daytime and nighttime diagrams, respectively.	 
Leff(λ) = Lbase/[1 − R(λ)]	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Top: Generalized schematic showing the basic elements of a cavity enhanced spectroscopy (CES) instrument, including light source, detector and high reflectivity (HR) mirrors (top). Bottom: Different CES approaches using time domain (CRDS = Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy, CAPS = Cavity Attenuated Phase Shift Spectroscopy) and intensity domain (ICOS = Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy, CEAS = Cavity Enhanced Absorption Spectroscopy, CE-DOAS = Cavity Enhanced Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy). Intensity domain approaches can be monochromatic or broadband, with the latter illustrated in the schematic.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the six-channel NOAA CRDS instrument for nitrogen oxides and ozone. The instrument consists of two diode lasers at 662 nm and 405 nm that detect NO3 and NO2, respectively. Inlet conversion of N2O5, NO, O3 or NOy to NO3 or NO2 as described in the text provides simultaneous, fast response techniques for these species.	 
	(2)
NO + NO3 → 2NO2	(R1)
k1 (298 K) = 2.6 × 10−11 cm3 molecule per s (ref. 50)
NO + O3 → NO2 + O2	(R2)
k2 (298 K) = 1.8 × 10−14 cm3 per molecule per s (ref. 50)
NO2 + O3 → NO3 + O2	(R3)
k3 (298 K) = 3.2 × 10−17 cm3 per molecule per s (ref. 50)

 	Fig. 4  Left: Map of South Korea showing the location of Seoul (Google Maps). Center: Photograph of the Seoul tower and the hilltop on which it is built. Instruments were housed one level above the main observation deck near the center of the tower at 360 m ASL. Right: Boom extending over the edge of the platform above the observation deck level on which the inlets for chemical instrumentation and meteorological instruments were mounted.	 

 	Fig. 5  Top: Wind roses showing data for all times of day (left), daytime (center) and nighttime (right), where day is defined as a solar zenith angle of less than 90°. Radial axes are probability and wind speed bins are in 2 m s−1 increments. Bottom: Diel average wind speed and standard deviation. Shading at the back indicates the average duration of day and night during the 27 day measurement period.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time series of O3, NO, NO2, NOy, NO3 and N2O5 (top 3 panels) at 1 minute time resolution during MAPS 2015 in parts per billion by volume (ppbv) mixing ratio. The dashed lines on the O3 data show the 60 and 100 ppbv standards for 8 hour and 1 hour averaged O3 in South Korea. Mixing ratios of NO3 in the third panel are calculated from N2O5 (see text) and multiplied by 5 for visibility on the same scale with N2O5. Bottom panels show temperature, relative humidity and solar elevation angle (SEA, bottom, no scale) to differentiate day (yellow shade) from night (grey shade).	 
NO3 + NO2 ⇆ N2O5	(R4)
[N2O5]/[NO3] = Keq(T)[NO2]	(3)

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of measured and predicted ratio of N2O5/NO3 from MAPS 2015 and CalNex 2010. Left: MAPS 2015 data showing a comparison of measured N2O5/NO3 ratio to the predicted equilibrium ratio, Keq(T)[NO2] at 1 minute time resolution for a single night in the top panel, and a scatter plot of N2O5/NO3vs. Keq(T)[NO2] for all data from MAPS 2015 in the bottom panel. Right: CalNex 2010 aircraft data comparing N2O5/NO3 to Keq(T)[NO2] at 1 second time resolution for a single night flight in the top panel, and N2O5/NO3vs. Keq(T)[NO2] for four night flights (May 30 and 31, and June 2 and 3) in the bottom panel, also at 1 second resolution.	 

 	Fig. 8  Top: Diel average mixing ratios of NOx, NOy (left axis) and their ratio, NOx/NOy (right axis). Bottom: Diel average O3 mixing ratio. Shaded region shows the 2σ variation.	 
P(NO3) = k3[O3][NO2]	(4)
τ(N2O5) = [N2O5]/P(NO3)	(5)

 	Fig. 9  Diel averages of nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3) (top) and N2O5 lifetime, τ(N2O5) (bottom). See the text for definitions. The shaded region in the top plot shows the 1σ range for P(NO3), where 1σ is used in the place of 2σ here due to the large variation. The log scale on the lower plot illustrates daytime and nighttime N2O5 lifetimes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Box and whisker plot distributions (left) of nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3) during daytime and nighttime in Seoul during MAPS 2015 and in Los Angeles during CalNex 2010. Horizontal lines are 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles, whiskers are 10th and 90th percentiles. Seoul data are continuous measurements from the Seoul tower at 360 m. Los Angeles basin data are from daytime and nighttime P-3 flights, shown in the right hand figure, within the red box over the urban area of the basin and within an altitude range below 1000 m.	 

 	Fig. 11  Dependence of nighttime τ(N2O5) on relative humidity. Red points show medians, and grey shaded areas show 25–75th and 10–90th percentile ranges, as the legend indicates.	 

 	Fig. 12  Time series of N2O5, O3, NOx, Ox, NOx/NOy, P(NO3), τ(N2O5), temperature and relative humidity for a 2 hour period on June 1–2 2015. N2O5 data in the top panel are shown at 1 minute and 0.5 s (2 Hz) time resolution. All quantities except temperature and relative humidity are at 2 Hz. Meteorological data in the lower panel is at 5 second resolution.	 

 	Fig. 13  Top: Variation of N2O5 with the NOx/NOy ratio for 2 Hz data during periods 1 and 2 (left and right) from Fig. 12. Center: Variation of N2O5 with nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3), during periods 1 and 2 from Fig. 12. Slopes are the N2O5 lifetimes, with bounds indicated by the dashed lines. Bottom: Plot of O3vs. NO2 and NO2 + 3N2O5 for periods 1 and 2 from Fig. 12.	 
τ(NO3)−1 = Keq(T)[NO2]/τ(N2O5)	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 14  Top: Time series of speciated BVOC (isoprene, monoterpene and sesquiterpene) and nitrate radical production rate, P(NO3), for the June 1–2 period from Fig. 12. Bottom: Comparison of the inverse NO3 lifetime, τ(NO3), to the first order loss rate coefficient, k(NO3), calculated from the sum of BVOC + NO3 reactions. Note that NO3 reactivity is on a logarithmic scale.	 
NO3 (day) = P(NO3)/[k1[NO] + j(NO3)]	(8)
N2O5 (day) = Keq(T)[NO2]NO3 (day)	(9)

 	Fig. 15  Time series of P(NO3) (left axis) and measured and calculated N2O5 (right axis) during daytime (40 minutes after sunrise to 40 minutes before sunset) on May 29, 2015. See text for the calculation of daytime steady state N2O5.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
