Applications and limitations of two step metal oxide thermochemical redox cycles; a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05025A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05025A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18951-18966Applications and limitations of two step metal oxide thermochemical redox cycles; a review

        
          
            B. 
            Bulfin
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Vieten
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Agrafiotis
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Roeb
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            C. 
            Sattler
          
          
        
      
Institute of Solar Research, German Aerospace Center, 51147 Cologne, Germany. E-mail: bulfinb@tcd.ie;   Tel: +49 2203 6014130
Received 
      9th June 2017
    , Accepted 16th August 2017First published on 16th August 2017AbstractTwo step metal oxide thermochemical redox cycles have seen growing interest in the research community over the last two decades. In particular, they have often been studied as a means of converting heat from concentrated solar power to chemical energy, which can subsequently be used for a number of applications. In this work, we offer critical perspective and valuable insight on these research fields, from authors with a combined experience of 50+ years in metal oxide redox cycles. The current fundamental understanding of thermochemical redox materials, and the implications and limitations this has on the redox thermodynamics are discussed. The underlying fundamentals of the redox materials are then used to give insight into the theoretical limitations imposed on a number of applications including; solar thermochemical fuel production, solar energy storage for off sun power generation, thermochemical air separation, oxygen pumping, and thermochemical heat pumping. A number of recent novel process developments are also presented, which offer valuable motivation and direction for the respective fields. The analysis shows that oxides which undergo a stoichiometric phase change during reduction, such as ZnO or Co3O4, have much larger specific energy storage than materials undergoing partial reduction such as ceria and perovskites. The partial reduction materials generally have faster kinetics and better activity at low temperature, and the selection of materials for the various applications is often a compromise between the importance of high specific energy storage vs. fast kinetics and low temperature operation.B. BulfinDr Brendan Bulfin is a research scientist in the Institute of Solar Research at the German Aerospace Center, where he has worked since summer 2015. His research focuses on thermochemical processes driven by concentrated solar power with an emphasis on the development and characterization of functional redox materials. He holds a PhD in Physics from the University of Dublin (Trinity College Dublin).J. VietenJosua Vieten is currently working as a PhD student in the Institute of Solar Research at the German Aerospace Center (DLR). His research is focused on the synthesis and characterization of oxide materials for solar thermochemical processes such as air separation and water splitting. He received a Master's degree in Chemistry from the TU Munich in 2016 and a Master's degree in Advanced Materials Science from a joint program of TU and LMU Munich and the University of Augsburg in 2015.C. AgrafiotisDr Christos Agrafiotis is a research scientist at the German Aerospace Center's (DLR) Institute of Solar Research, which he joined as an EU Marie-Curie Research Fellow (2012–2014). His research is focused on advanced ceramic materials and in particular their applications in the exploitation of concentrated solar power, production of solar fuels and thermochemical solar energy storage. He holds a Diploma (University of Patras, Greece, 1983), a M.Sc. (University of California, Santa Barbara, U.S.A., 1986) and a Ph.D. (SUNY/Buffalo, U.S.A., 1991), all in Chemical Engineering.M. RoebDr Martin Roeb is the leader of the high temperature solar engineering group at the German Aerospace Center's Institute of Solar Research, where he has worked since 1999 in the field of solar high temperature applications. His research interests address processes and materials related to solar thermochemical water and CO2 splitting, solar upgrading of hydrocarbons, high temperature electrolysis and solar recycling and production processes of chemical commodities. He holds a diploma in chemistry and a PhD in physical chemistry both from the University of Cologne.C. SattlerProf. Dr Christian Sattler is head of the Department of Solar Chemical Engineering of the German Aerospace Center's Institute of Solar Research. He is professor for solar fuel production at the Technical University of Dresden. His main work is the production of fuels especially hydrogen by solar thermo- and photochemical processes. He serves as vice president of the research association N.ERGHY a member of the European Joint Undertaking for Fuel Cells and Hydrogen and he is the national representative to tasks of the IEA's SolarPACES and Hydrogen Implementing Agreements. He holds a diploma and a PhD in chemistry both from the University of Bonn.
Two step metal oxide thermochemical redox cycles have been the subject of increasing research efforts in recent times, due to their potential for application in a number of important industries. Such cycles can be combined with concentrated solar power (CSP), offering a means of converting solar energy to chemical energy, via a reduction reaction. (1)
This chemical energy can then be used for a number of applications, which is illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Concentrated solar power can be combined with a thermochemical redox cycle to store solar energy. The stored energy can then be used for a number of applications, including; as heat storage for off sun electricity generation in CSP power plants, as a chemical potential for CO2 and H2O splitting providing fuel, and for air separation and oxygen pumping via the absorption of oxygen. The oxide oxygen affinity (ΔE) and operational temperatures depend on the target application. 
For a number of years these cycles have been investigated as a possible route to solar fuels, where the reduced metal oxide can be used to split H2O and CO2,1–5 which has been demonstrated to offer a route to renewable liquid hydrocarbon fuels.6 Another common area of research for these cycles is that of energy storage, where the reduced oxide offers a high specific energy storage, which could be used for off-sun power generation in CSP plants.7–9
Redox cycles have been used for many years in chemical looping combustion (CLC), where the oxide is chemically reduced using a fuel and then re-oxidised in air, which allows for a cleaner (no NOx) lower temperature fuel combustion. More recently these cycles have been proposed and investigated as an oxygen absorber for thermochemical air separation,10–12 with the possibility of producing both oxygen and nitrogen. Oxygen production via this method has recently been applied in chemical-looping combustion with oxygen uncoupling (CLOU), where the redox oxide is thermally reduced releasing gas-phase oxygen to a solid fuel reactor,13,14 allowing for a pure oxygen burn and CO2 capture similiar to CLC. The production of nitrogen via a CSP powered air separation redox cycle, could also be an inherently sustainable alternative to the Thomson–Linde process,15 where air is separated by cryogenic distillation. Using this process as a nitrogen source would be particularly relevant for the production of ammonia (NH3) via the Haber–Bosch process, an industry which is attributed to at least 1% of worldwide primary energy consumption.16
A very recent publication has also highlighted the high potential of using such a cycle to pump oxygen to low partial pressures,17 which can be beneficial in a number of applications, including thermochemical fuel production and membrane reactors.18,19 This method of pumping could avoid much of the energy sapping losses of mechanical vacuum pumping (friction losses and leakage), and also has the potential for a much higher throughput than established oxygen selective electrochemical membrane pumps.20
A simple reverse of this oxygen pumping method allows the cycle to be used as a heat pump, which has recently been suggested by Ströhle et al. as a means of upgrading the heat stored in thermochemical energy storage systems.21
All of the above applications rely on the choice of a suitable redox material for the cycle, which should be optimised for the given application. Although the best choice can be different in each case, they have commonalities in the type of redox thermodynamics and material properties that are beneficial, and thus the selection of the correct redox cycle in each case is subject to similar boundary conditions. The thermodynamics are the first and most critical point which should be considered when trying to optimise materials or select conditions for two-step thermochemical redox cycles. If the thermodynamics are promising, the application may still have problems such as kinetic restrictions, material degradation, etc. Conversely, if the thermodynamics are not promising then it is certain that the practical implementation will be bound by this restriction.
Here we aim to offer a broad view of what is known in terms of fundamental material thermodynamics, and how best to use this knowledge when selecting and developing new materials for a given application. In addition, we discuss some new breakthroughs and recent novelties proposed in the respective fields. Overall, this work should offer a very accessible roadmap for researchers to assess and further develop these promising technologies.
Redox materials and thermodynamics
The thermodynamics of two step thermochemical redox cycles can be understood using the standard change in Gibbs energies for the reactions, Δg° = Δh° − TΔs°,(2)where the lower case symbols indicate that they are per mole. In this manuscript the quantities are given per mole of atomic oxygen, with the usual subscript notation, , omitted to improve readability.
At non-standard pressures the change in entropy becomes (3)where p° is standard pressure.
Assuming then that the change in enthalpy is independent of this pressure, which is reasonable in the cases presented here, we have the change in Gibbs free energies at non standard pressure given by (4)where the oxygen partial pressure term is often referred to as the external work performed on the reaction system.
At this point it is convenient to consider two cases, which can be distinguished by the underlying thermodynamic fundamentals used to characterize them. The first one we look at is reduction which occurs due to equilibrium between multiple phases, such as the reduction seen in the decomposition of ZnO to zinc and oxygen gases at high temperatures. We refer to this as phase change reduction. The second case is partial reduction, specifically where the oxide is reduced via the formation of oxygen vacancy defects, but the underlying crystal motif does not change, and the reduction thermodynamics are characterized by an equilibrium between oxygen gas and a dilute mixture of oxygen vacancies in the oxide lattice. The most well known example of this is the partial reduction of CeO2, which maintains a cubic flourite structure over a wide range of non-stoichiometries.22,23
Phase change reduction
Phase change reduction is often characterized by a total phase change which proceeds and releases oxygen gas in a stoichiometric proportion, (5)
Some simple examples of phase change reactions are (6) (7) (8)where these three reactions include three different types of phase change, accompanied by the release of oxygen gas. In the first reaction Co3O4 undergoes a phase transition to a solid CoO, in the second case Fe3O4 decomposes leaving liquid FeO, and finally the case of ZnO which sublimates into zinc and oxygen gases. The thermodynamics of these cases are straightforward, with the change in enthalpy for the reaction given by the difference in enthalpy of the reactants and products. (9)
Similarly the change in entropy is also given by the difference in entropy between reactants and products (10)
Software such as Factsage,24,25 contain databases for the enthalpy and entropy for a large number of oxides and metals, allowing for the thermodynamics of these systems to be calculated. Fig. 2 shows an Ellingham diagram for these reactions.
 Fig. 2  An Elligham diagram for the redox reactions given in eqn (6)–(8), with data taken from Factsage.24,25 When Δg° < 0, the phase change is thermodynamically favourable and the reduction reaction can proceed releasing oxygen at pO2 = p°. For lower partial pressures the entropy change is larger according to eqn (11), and the reaction can proceed at lower temperatures where Δg° crosses the partial pressure lines plotted to the right hand axes. The reverse reaction, oxidation, is thermodynamically favourable when Δg > 0. 
In these cases phase transitions can also take place in either the products or reactants. For example the kink in the ZnO/Zn line in Fig. 2 corresponds to the boiling point of Zn, which adds an additional gas phase, increasing both the change in enthalpy and entropy. The change in entropy for the reaction now has a dependence on the partial pressure of both gaseous products as follows, (11)where pZn has double the effect of oxygen pressure on the entropy, due to its stoichiometric ratio, and thus greatly affects the Gibbs free energy and the reduction temperature if changed.
When one aims to extract information from an Ellingham diagram such as that shown in Fig. 2, it is the points where Δg = 0 that are of most interest. These are the intersection points between the Δg° lines and the various pressure lines plotted. A much more compact plot, which yields this information can be obtained by plotting contours of Δg = 0 on a temperature vs. pressure graph. Setting eqn (4) equal to zero gives the relevant equation for the contours as (12)

Fig. 3 shows a plot of these contours, where a number of simple redox pairs can be compared. Using such a graph, one can quickly see the conditions required for reduction/oxidation and decide if it is sensible within the scope of a certain application.
 Fig. 3  Contours of eqn (12) on a temperature vs. pressure graph. The x-axis pressure, in most cases, is pO2, but for the volatile oxides (ZnO and SnO2) it is the total pressure, p = pO2 + pZn, so that the left hand side of eqn (12) becomes pO20.5pZn/p°. Another point worth noting is that some of the contours have slight kinks, which occur when there is a phase change in the products or the reactants. Data obtained from Factsage.24,25 
An interesting subset of phase change oxides are multi-component oxides, such as the Mn2O3–Fe2O3 system, which has been investigated for energy storage.26,27 Thermodynamically, these mixed oxides are more complex, as one must consider the equilibrium between multiple phases and solutions of the possible phases. These systems can lead to partial reduction properties as has been described by Miller et al. for ferrites,28 but the underlying phase equilibrium thermodynamics leads to different behaviour to the systems discussed in the next section. Block and Schmücker provide another excellent study of such mixed oxide systems for thermochemical energy storage,29 where they summarise the phase diagrams and investigate the reduction properties of the binary oxide systems Co–Fe,30,31 Cu–Co,32,33 Cu–Fe,34,35 Cu–Mn,36 and Fe–Mn.37,38 They conclude that for binary metal oxide systems, the reaction temperatures, kinetics and long-term cycling stability can be improved in certain cases with respect to their single cation metal oxide components.
Partial reduction
The second case, and a very interesting family of redox materials, are the oxides which undergo partial reduction, (13)without changing phase, where δ is non-stoichiometric and depends on the temperature and partial pressure. Examples of these reactions are ceria based materials and perovskite oxides, (14) (15)which both allow oxygen to move through and leave the lattice without a decomposition of the crystal structure.39–41 The extraordinary properties of these materials make them suitable for a number of applications, including oxygen conducting membranes and redox catalysts. Here we focus more on their redox thermodynamics and the implications this has for their application in thermochemical cycles. It should be noted that these materials can also undergo phase change reduction, such as the reduction of CeO2 to Ce2O3 under very strong reducing conditions,42,43 but here we focus on the regions of partial reduction.
Ceria can form solid solutions with other metal oxides, such as ZrO2, which also exhibit partial reduction properties.44,45 The perovskite structure on the other hand can be attained using a huge variety of A and M site ions.46–50 This offers the ability to essentially tune the redox thermodynamics to suit a given application, which is illustrated in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Perovskites as tunable redox materials, where the A site can be used to ensure the tolerance factor given in eqn (16), is within the desired range and the M site is used to set the enthalpy of reduction. 
In AMO3, whether or not the perovskite structure can be formed is determined by the Goldschmidt tolerance factor,51 (16)which should be close to one if a perovskite is to be formed, and exactly one for an ideal cubic perovskite. This tolerance factor can be controlled, for example in perovskites of the form A2+M3+/4+O3–δ, by choosing the correct alkali earth metal on the A site, while the M site can then be occupied by a number of transition metals including Co,52,53 Fe,54,55 Mn,56,57 and Ti,58,59 with the possibility of adding other metals in small quantities such as Cu.60 By appropriately selecting this M site ion, the enthalpy of reduction can be tuned over a very large range of ΔhO = 100–500 kJ mol−1 (from The Materials Project).61,62
Distorted perovskites can also be formed, such as hexagonal or rhombohedral perovskites if the tolerance factor t is greater than approximately 1.02, or orthorhombic and tetragonal phases for t < 1.57,63–65 Transitions between these phases, can take place during reduction due to changes in the atomic radii of the cations, as is the case for Mn4+ → Mn3+ in CaMnO3.57 In these cases, sufficient reduction can also result in a decomposition of the perovskite structure as was seen in CaMnO3,66 or the metastable cubic SrMnO3 phase.57 The type of perovskite phase (cubic, or distorted) is also very important for the redox behaviour, as a DFT study by Curnan and Kitchin suggests that the cubic phase has a lower formation energy for oxygen vacancies.67 This finding was confirmed by the authors, where the addition of Sr to CaMnO3 giving Ca0.8Sr0.2MnO3, decreased the distortion of the perovskite phase and decreased the reduction enthalpy.66
Perovskite oxides in general form a very rich variety of redox materials, which are largely unexplored, however as described above, the broader fundamental understanding of these materials has seen much progress in recent years.
In both ceria and perovskite based oxides, reduction results in defects forming in the lattice, which can then move around subject to some constraints. These additional degrees of freedom can be accounted for using a configuration entropy term, which has a dependence on the number of defects. In the case that the defects are free to move independently, one can treat the system as a dilute species and the configuration entropy becomes the standard entropy of mixing. One can then apply standard equilibrium chemistry to the defects.
Taking this into account, the thermodynamic properties now contain a δ dependence and the equilibrium thermodynamics are better understood using partial molar quantities,22,23 giving (17)where the δ subscript indicates the derivative . The entropy has a δ dependence due to the defect configurations, and the enthalpy can also have a dependence on δ due to changes in the lattice affecting the formation energy of defects, which is the case for CeO2 based oxides.23,68,69 More generally both the enthalpy and entropy of the reaction can also have a temperature dependence,70 but this is omitted here for simplicity. In equilibrium the concentration of oxygen vacancies δ, takes a value such that the partial molar change in Gibbs free energy is zero, .
At non-standard pressures the entropy is again (18) (19) (20)where sO2 is again the entropy of oxygen gas, Δsph is the change in vibrational states, and Δscon (δ) is the configuration entropy. In its simplest form this is given by the Boltzmann formula Δscon = kln(Ωcon), where Ωcon is the total number of distinct configurations, which assumes that every configuration is equally likely. However, it can be the case that there are preferential defect ordered structures, as in SrFeO3,71 in which case a weighted sum over the configurations is required, and the configuration entropy term will decrease.

Fig. 5 shows the δ dependence of the partial entropy change for a number of materials. The change in entropy is the driving force for the reduction reaction, and so we see from Fig. 5 that for small δ there is a large driving force for reduction, but it quickly decreases for increasing δ. Therefore, these materials can quite easily exhibit a small amount of reduction, but larger reduction extents become increasingly difficult.
 Fig. 5  The partial molar entropy vs. δ for CeO2,22,23,72,73 Ce0.85Zr0.15O2,68,73 and the perovskites Ca0.8Sr0.2MnO3,66 and La0.6Sr0.4Mn0.4Al0.6O3 (LSMA6446),74 which shows their dependence on the non-stoichiometry δ due to the configuration entropy. Also plotted are simple dilute species model fit's of the configuration entropy.66,73 This varying Δs° give rise to the partial reduction properties of these materials. 
It is also worth noting that CeO2 has the largest change in entropy over the plotted range. DFT studies suggest that for pure ceria, defect clusters of Ce3+ and oxygen vacancies, prefer the next nearest neighbour sites,75,76 leading to a lot of possible internal configurations for any given defect cluster. This is on top of the configurations that arise from moving the defect clusters as a whole through the lattice, leading to a very high number of configurations and a large configuration entropy.68 The addition of Zr into ceria likely leads to preferential ordering of the defects and defect clusters, and thus reduces the configuration contribution to the entropy. In the case of the Ca0.8Sr0.2MnO3 perovskite, there is a much lower entropy of reduction which is due to the fact that vacancies form clusters of Mn3+ and oxygen vacancies, which have no internal degrees of freedom. LSMA6446 perovskite, is an interesting case, as here only the Mn cation changes valence during reduction, and thus the maximum reduction extent is quite limited. It does show a high initial entropy which quickly drops off with increasing vacancy concentration.74
Finally the equilibrium thermodynamics at non standard oxygen partial pressures can be described using the equation of state (21)

Fig. 6 shows contours of equilibrium (Δgδ = 0) for various materials at fixed non-stoichiometry, highlighting some of the key features of partial reduction materials. One can see for instance, that the equilibrium for CeO1.98 is at much less reducing conditions than CeO1.9, as expected from the decreasing entropy change with increasing δ seen in Fig. 5. Another, feature of these materials is the possibility of tuning the redox properties by changing the composition. The reducibility of CeO2 can be improved by substituting some Zr in place of Ce, which reduces the enthalpy of reduction.68,77 Similarly, substituting Sr onto the Ca site in CaMnO3 also improves the reducibility by improving the perovskite cubic structure and thus decreasing the enthalpy of the reaction.66,70
 Fig. 6  Contours of eqn (21) on a temperature vs. pressure graph for some fixed δ values. Here the pressure is in all cases the oxygen partial pressure. Also shown for reference is the contour of phase equilibrium partial reduction of NiFe2O4 to NiFe2O3.8.28 The data for the ceria based materials and the Mn perovskites is taken from models developed by the authors in previous work.66,73 
Applications
When trying to narrow down the redox materials for specific applications there are a number of critical points to be considered. A thermochemical redox cycle can be broken down into two steps, the reduction and the oxidation. The reduction step essentially stores energy which can then be utilised in the oxidation step. The amount of energy which is stored in the reduction step is therefore of utmost importance. Another key property for cycles which involve a temperature swing, is the thermal mass which must be cycled for a given energy storage. Both of these properties are illustrated in Fig. 7, where the most striking point, is that partial reduction materials have much lower energy storage (particularly pronounced when considering similar ΔhO, and reduction conditions) compared to phase change reactions, as one might expect due to the small stoichiometric changes.
 Fig. 7  The specific energy storage of redox pairs vs. the atomic molar energy storage (similar to energy storage per thermal mass, because for solids Cp ∼ number of atoms), for a number of redox pairs in their standard state. The thermal mass is considered to be approximately proportional to the moles of atoms, according to the Dulong Petit Law. For partial reduction oxides the storage is reported for certain stoichiometry changes, i.e. CeO2/1.9. For reference CeO2/1.9 has similar specific energy storage to a rechargeable NiMH battery, and ZnO/Zn has about 10% the specific energy of diesel fuel. The data was obtained from the following sources; simple oxides – Factsage,24,25 CeO2, Ce0.85Zr0.15O2 and CaMnO3 – Bulfin et al.,66,73 NiFe2O4/3.8 from Miller et al.,28 and CaTiO3 data was obtained from the Materials Project.61,62 
There are other benefits to the partial reduction materials, such as fast kinetics and flexibility in the reaction conditions. The high ionic conductivity of these materials, and the lack of an overall phase change during the reaction, means that rapid kinetics are observed, even at low temperatures (<300 °C).60,66,78,79 They also exhibit variable reduction extent over a large range of temperatures and pressures, which is convenient in terms of research output, as one almost always has a result, as opposed to phase change oxides which require more specific conditions for the reactions to proceed.
When trying to select materials for certain applications one should consider the temperatures and partial pressures that can be considered suitable, as well as the function of the material, i.e. are fast kinetics and the flexibility of operating conditions preferable to overall energy storage. In the following discussions we give a perspective on the rationale behind selecting redox cycles for a number of applications, with a focus on using the so far discussed properties of the many available redox materials, to narrow down the promising options for each application.
Energy storage
The simplest and most obvious application of a thermochemical cycle is to store energy in the reduced metal oxide. This is of particular interest for concentrated solar power plants, where they could be used to store heat for off sun operation. The state of the art for heat storage in these plants is to use solid to liquid phase change materials such as molten salts,80,81 which are limited to temperatures of around 600 °C. A thermochemical redox cycle on the other hand can have higher specific energy storage, and store the heat at higher temperatures, allowing for more efficient electricity production.
In terms of theoretical limitations on this technology, all of the heat that is stored as sensible and chemical heat can be recovered, and the efficiency of such a system has no theoretical upper bound. In practice however, there would be heat losses, and exergy losses if the re-oxidation takes place at lower temperature than the reduction. If the heat is used to produce power, then the power production is of-course bounded by the Carnot efficiency. The important thermodynamic properties for this application are shown graphically in Fig. 3, 6 and 7.
Phase change redox materials are the obvious choice here as they have high specific energy storage, as can be seen in Fig. 7. However, the cycles which have very high specific energy storage (ZnO/Zn, NiO/Ni, Fe3O4/FeO… etc.), require excessive temperatures for this application according to Fig. 3. The selection then becomes a compromise between specific energy storage and the temperatures required for reduction given by equation. In this case it would be more reasonable to store heat at temperatures in the region of 500–1100 °C and the reduction should ideally take place in air (pO2 = 0.2 bar). In this way the cycle can be driven using a hot air stream from a volumetric receiver like e.g. in the 1.5 MWel Solar Tower Jülich (STJ) plant in Germany.82,83 In the case of phase change redox materials the energy is stored at a specific temperature. For example in an air atmosphere Co3O4 will undergo reduction at approximately 870 °C and can be re-oxidised at just a few degrees below that.7
Looking at Fig. 3 and 7, suggests that amongst the simple binary oxides Co3O4/CoO, BaO2/BaO (similar specific energy storage to Co3O4/CoO) and at higher temperatures CuO/Cu2O, are promising candidates. Indeed, these materials have all been investigated experimentally. The CuO/Cu2O system is limited by the fact that the reduction temperature is high enough to cause extensive sintering and shrinkage of the material during cycling.84,85 In the BaO2/BaO system, the reduced phase reacts even with traces of moisture and/or CO2 present in the surrounding atmosphere to hydrated barium hydroxides and barium carbonate respectively,85–87 a fact severely limiting its potential implementation under realistic on-site conditions. On the other hand, the Co3O4/CoO system exhibits high energy density and undergoes stoichiometric, cyclic reduction–oxidation under a variety of heating/cooling rates and within a narrow temperature range.88
Furthermore, the currently employed state-of-the-art, regenerative sensible heat storage employed at STJ,89 where excess solar energy during on-sun operation is stored as sensible heat in porous ceramic honeycombs that function as recuperators during off-sun operation,90,91 led to the idea of employing similar ceramic honeycombs and/or foams coated with,92–94 or manufactured entirely from Co3O4,95–98 for hybrid sensible-thermochemical storage of solar heat. A demonstration of this approach has been carried out at STJ, culminating in a 74 kW hth pilot-scale TCS unit composed of 90 kg of Co3O4 coated on cordierite honeycombs, which clearly showed temperature effects due to chemical reactions.99–101 Preliminary techno-economic evaluations indicated that the concept is promising with the main challenge being to identify active materials with a lower cost than Co3O4, but at the same time comparable to it in terms of energy density, cyclability and redox kinetics. The most likely candidates to replace cobalt oxide are mixed oxide systems, such as the Fe–Mn redox system.29
This energy storage concept can be further elaborated in using a cascade of redox materials for combined sensible and chemical heat storage. In this case the redox materials can be arranged in order of their reduction temperatures, allowing more heat to be utilized from the hot air stream from a volumetric receiver.102 This idea is illustrated in Fig. 8, and has already been tested in lab-scale.85,94
 Fig. 8  A cascade of redox cycles used to store energy. This allows energy to be stored at varying temperatures which allows more heat to be transferred from the hot air stream used to charge the storage. During discharge the air stream is reversed offering maximum temperature process heat. 
Very recently, many researchers have also investigated perovskites for this application.103–107 From Fig. 7, we can see that perovskite oxides have low specific chemical energy storage, which is a result of their partial reduction properties. Therefore, hope among researchers should be tempered, and the rationale for investigating these materials should be carefully considered. Perovskites do have reasonably high sensible heat storage,108,109 cycling stability,107 and they can be synthesised from abundant materials.46 As suggested in many of these studies they could then offer a combined sensible and chemical storage option where the reduction reaction offers a boost in the specific energy storage density. However, it remains to be seen if such a concept could be cost effective compared to a purely sensible storage system utilising a cheap storage media such as naturally occuring rocks.110
In the case of combined chemical and sensible storage using a cascade, as illustrated in Fig. 8, perovskites may also be of interest at lower temperatures, as they show redox activity down to 300–400 °C.52,60 Perovskites alone do not offer high specific chemical energy storage, but a cascade using both phase change reduction and perovskites at lower temperatures may have promising properties in terms of utilization of the hot air stream.
Fuel production
Two step thermochemical fuel production using a metal oxide redox cycle is an ambitious endeavour that could if successful have a significant impact on human society and the environment. Although, the technical challenges associated with such technology are very substantial.
In terms of thermodynamics it is important in this case to also consider the oxidation step of the reaction. For example with Fe3O4 as the redox material H2O (or indeed CO2) can be split via the following reactions (22) (23)
Since these two reactions sum to water splitting, then for a given temperature and pressure, their changes in Gibbs free energies also sum to that of water splitting giving, Δgws = Δgrd + Δgox,(24)where the subscripts indicate; ws – direct water thermolysis, rd – reduction of metal oxide, and ox – oxidation of the metal oxide under steam.
For the oxidation reaction we have (25)
If we just consider standard conditions with an equilibrium fuel conversion of 50%, i.e., then eqn (24) can be re-arranged to give (26)
In every reasonable cycle  (metal oxide reduction involves a solid turning into a gas), which means the second term in eqn (26) is positive. Therefore in order for the oxidation to proceed  one must then have, (27)
Alternatively, one has pH2 ≪ pH2O, and the fuel conversion becomes negligible. Larger values of  will tend to have better H2O or CO2 to fuel conversion ratios, , but are conversely more difficult to reduce. We can use this criteria to initially screen which materials are suitable, which has also been used by Dimitrakis et al. in a DFT screening study for the same purpose.111 Another important selection criteria is that we would like  to be as large as possible, as this is a driving force for the reduction step.

Fig. 9 shows the enthalpy and entropy of reaction for a number of redox materials. From this we can immediately rule out the cycles below the H2O/H2 line as they do not have a sufficiently strong oxygen affinity to split H2O or CO2. Cycles which are close to this line, such as SnO2/Sn will have similar problems, due to lack of a significant driving force for the splitting reaction, resulting in a poor fuel conversion ratio.
 Fig. 9  A plot of the reaction enthalpy vs. the reaction entropy for the reduction of a number of oxides. The black line indicates the enthalpy of reduction for steam, which suitable materials should be above. Also shown is a shaded region in which perovskites with reduction extent ABO2.9 would likely be. An important point worth noting here is that at high temperatures the entropy and enthalpies of the phase change materials can increase significantly due to phase changes in the products, for example Zn becoming a gas. Data taken from the same sources as Fig. 7. 
Having ruled out many cycles, we should next consider the specific and molar energy storage, the latter of which is inversely proportional to the energy required to heat the oxide during the cycle. From Fig. 7, it is clear that the ZnO/Zn cycle has by far the superior thermodynamics. It has very high specific and molar energy storage, and if both zinc and oxygen gas pressures are decreased, then the reduction temperature decreases rapidly. In reflection of this, there has been extensive research into this cycle. An excellent review of some of these efforts has been published by Koepf et al..112
However, the ZnO/Zn cycle has not yet been developed to a stage where it could be industrially applied. One of the main problems which hinders the practicality and the efficiency of this process, is that a sweep gas, such as argon, is used to carry away the products (also reducing pO2 and pZn, and thus the reduction temperature according to Fig. 3), which must then be quenched to avoid a back reaction. This quenching is then followed by a separation process to remove the oxygen and regenerate the sweep gas. This separation process is very energy intensive, and a reasonable techno-economic analysis predicted a hydrogen cost of 50$ per kg,112 which is not competitive.
Fe3O4/FeO and AxFeO1–x ferrites are also promising candidates, with an excellent perspective on these cycles given by Miller et al.28 They show that partial reduction can be achieved at lower temperatures than those seen in Fig. 3 for Fe3O4/FeO, which can be explained by the formation of solution phases of the reactants and products. However, the reduction still takes place at temperatures above the melting point of FeO, introducing significant cycling challenges. As an alternative, ferrites have been investigated, most notably NiFe2O4, where the products have a higher melting point, and they allow partial reduction to take place at lower temperatures as seen in Fig. 6.113,114 The partial reduction of NiFe2O4 inevitably gives low specific energy storage as seen in Fig. 7 (NiFe2O4/3.8), and questions remain over the cyclability.28 Furthermore, this cycle requires low temperatures (<700 °C) for a reasonable fuel conversion ratio (eqn (26)),28 but in practice the oxidation temperature is often set to values in the region of 1000 °C for kinetic reasons, with very low experimental fuel conversion ratios, peaking at around .115 This low conversion means that a lot of energy must be used to produce excess H2O or CO2 for the oxidation reaction, and in the case of CO2 one must somehow separate a small amount of CO from the product stream.
With the challenges faced in the above phase change cycles, many researchers have focused their efforts on partial reduction materials, in particular ceria based oxides.1,6,42,116–118 A quick look at the specific energy storage (Fig. 7) and the temperature and pressure conditions required to reach a reduction extent of CeO1.9 (Fig. 6), show that its thermodynamics are far from ideal. One must heat ceria to high temperatures at low oxygen partial pressures, to achieve a specific energy storage comparable to a rechargeable Ni-MH battery. However, in terms of experimental investigation and practical implementation, the ceria cycle does have many benefits. The lack of a phase change means that it is suitable for both fixed bed and particle fed reactors, and it's partial reduction properties give flexibility in the operating conditions.
Extensive studies have been dedicated to improving ceria by adding other metal ions such as Zr and Hf into the lattice.119–123 The goal of such studies is often to reduce the reduction temperature required, which can be achieved by either reducing the enthalpy of reduction or increasing the entropy. Increasing the entropy is not likely, as pure ceria has a very high configuration entropy term and the addition of other metal cations into the lattice only leads to preferential or fewer overall configurations, and thus reduces the change in entropy. The addition of Zr4+ into ceria for example, improves the reducibility, by decreasing the enthalpy of reduction, but also decreases the entropy of reduction.68,77
The critical point from these studies is that lower Δhrd saves on the reduction energy (and conditions) but one must pay for this in the oxidation step by heating excess steam, which is a thermodynamic limitation of this process.77,124–126 This limitation should always be considered when searching for new materials, where materials with improved reducibility do not necessarily improve the process efficiency. Unfortunately, research efforts typically take the approach of searching for oxides which are more easily reduced, and usually by decreasing Δhrd. This often leads to claims of new improved materials, which are later disregarded, when not just the yield, but also the oxidant to fuel conversion ratio  are considered.
Rather than decreasing the enthalpy of reduction Δhrd, a more interesting materials improvement method might be to try and increase Δsrd. Unfortunately, this change in entropy is limited by the type of reaction taking place. Larger changes in entropy can be achieved with phase changes, such as the sublimation of ZnO to Zn and O2 gases, a case which can be considered an upper bound for the entropy change in such reactions.
More recently many researchers have also turned their attention to perovskites,127–132 with a recent review on these efforts by Kubicek et al.133 Again the goal of this research is often improving the yield at lower temperature, where improved reduction is easily mistaken for improved performance, without fully considering the fuel conversion ratio. Perovskites, like ceria, have a low specific energy storage (Fig. 7), and the low entropy of reduction when compared to ceria (Fig. 5) combined with their higher specific heat capacity,108,109 means that they are unlikely to offer any significant improvement over ceria, which has been noted by Ezbiri et al. in an in-depth study of fuel production thermodynamics with perovskites.74
The current state of the art, is that CeO2 remains to be the most pragmatic solution, in that it has been proven to work, and is therefore suitable to demonstrate the feasibility of the cycle and key process components such as solar reactors. Researchers at ETH Zürich recently reported a 5.25% reactor efficiency with a peak fuel conversion ratio of 83% CO2 → CO, using the CeO2 cycle in a lab scale reactor,134 which was a large increase in demonstrated efficiency for this technology. For comparison to other renewable fuel technologies, researchers at Stanford University recently demonstrated a solar energy to hydrogen fuel conversion efficiency of 30%, using multilayer PV cells and PEM electrolysis.135 This method would not have been suitable for CO2 splitting, and in the end the cost is more important than the efficiency, but it does illustrate the high development level of some competing technologies, and the need for innovation in the process implementation of thermochemical fuel production.
In general, these thermochemical fuel production cycles could be greatly improved by efficiently achieving low oxygen partial pressures. At present, this is achieved using a pump or a sweep gas, with current trends seeing research move more in the direction of pumping as it requires less energy and offers better kinetics.78,125,134 Although the theoretical energy required to reduce the oxygen partial pressure is not very large, standard vacuum pumps are inefficient at low pressures (pO2 < 10−2 bar),17 and innovations, such as the thermochemical oxygen pump discussed later, are needed to make this approach of improving the cycles more attractive.
Air separation
The idea of using such thermochemical cycle for temperature swing air separation was proposed by Moghtaderi in 2009 as a method of oxygen production.10 Note that this method differs from the well established processes of chemical looping combustion, where air is also separated, but the oxide is reduced chemically, by directly reacting it with a fuel. Some further research into the thermodynamics of oxygen production via this method have been conducted, with authors suggesting Pb3O4/PbO, Ag2O/Ag, and CrO2/Cr2O3 (very similar reduction conditions to Ag2O/Ag) as low temperature options, and at higher temperatures CuO/Cu2O and Co3O4/CoO.11,12 It has also recently been suggested as a method of solar powered nitrogen production,60 which could offer a renewable supply of N2 for ammonia production.
The key thermodynamic point to consider is that one can use the temperature at which the oxidation and reduction take place to control the partial pressure of oxygen, according to eqn (12). We can re-write this equation to get a clearer view of the effect of temperature enthalpy and entropy on the oxygen partial pressure, (28)
From this we see that for a given oxide, performing the oxidation reaction at lower temperatures means that oxygen gas can be consumed by the reaction at lower pressures. This oxygen can then be released again at ambient pressure, following reduction of the metal oxide at relatively higher temperature.

Fig. 10 illustrates the separation of the gases and the energy balance. The cost of separation is a loss in exergy. It also shows that the nitrogen produced has some remaining oxygen with a partial pressure given by eqn (28). This is very important as if one would like to produce nitrogen as well as oxygen, the oxygen impurity becomes critical. For the Haber–Bosch process for example, an oxygen impurity of approximately 3 ppm can be tolerated.136 According to eqn (28), the partial pressure can be decreased by conducting the oxidation at lower temperature (greater exergy loss) or by using a cycle with a larger , which increases the overall energy input per mole of oxygen removed. From this point of view it makes sense to use at least two cycles, one for oxygen production with a low energy requirement per mole of oxygen , and a second cycle in series with a larger oxygen affinity for nitrogen purification, as illustrated in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 10  A schematic illustrating the energy cost of thermochemical air separation. The red upwards arrows indicate heat flow into the system, and the blue downward arrows heat flow out of the system. The entire process here does not change the internal energy of the system and so all of the heat supplied is released again. However, the irreversible work required to pump the oxygen results in an exergy loss, and the heat is released at lower temperature. 
 Fig. 11  A schematic showing how two redox cycles can be used for first an oxygen production cycle removing the bulk of the oxygen from air, followed by a nitrogen purification step. Both cycles are the same as that shown in Fig. 10, with the second cycle operating with oxygen depleted air in the oxidation step. Most of the oxygen is removed with a lower energy input per mole of oxygen QI, and then the remaining oxygen is removed with a stronger oxygen affinity material requiring a larger energy input per mole of oxygen QII. The oxidation temperatures could be matched and heat exchangers could be used for the air. 
For oxygen production, an ideal material would have a large oxygen storage capacity, a low reduction energy requirement Δhrd, and be capable of removing most of the oxygen from air to minimise the amount of air which must be heated per mole of oxygen produced. For this, one would look to the phase change oxides due to their stoichiometric oxygen storage, and indeed it seems that in terms of thermodynamics, Pb2O3/PbO, Ag2O/Ag and CrO2/Cr2O3 meet the requirements (Fig. 3). The Ag2O/Ag cycle can undergo reduction but the reversibility is not spontaneous in air,52 and the reversibility of CrO2/Cr2O3 is also highly unlikely due to the very low temperatures required. The Pb3O4/PbO cycle on the other hand is reversible,137 but more detailed studies on stability, kinetics and thermodynamics of the cycle in practice would be required to determine it's suitability. It may also be beneficial to consider solid solutions with other oxides, such as in the PbO–CuO or PbO–CaO systems,138,139 which could improve the stability and kinetics.
One very recent breakthrough in the field of oxygen storage redox materials, may offer an excellent alternative option for oxygen production via thermochemical air separation. Aoki et al. have reported a very interesting study of yttrium chromium phosphates, YCr1–xPxO4–δ, which have shown mass changes of more than 1% due to reversible oxidation and reduction at remarkably low temperatures in the range 50–450 °C.140 Such low temperature reduction implies a very low enthalpy Δhrd, which they found experimentally to be in the region 20 kJ mol−1, and also calculated a theoretical value of 14 kJ mol−1 using DFT. This low temperature range would also allow for very effective heat exchangers and these yttrium chromium phosphates may offer a very competitive oxygen production process.
After the oxygen production cycle, one would ideally have a hot stream of air with oxygen depleted to roughly 1% or less. The purification of this air stream to low oxygen ppm suitable for the Haber–Bosch process, then requires an oxide with a stronger affinity to oxygen. From Fig. 3 Co3O4/CoO, CuO/Cu2O and BaO2/BaO, could be used to absorb oxygen at low partial pressures. It remains to be seen however, if they can maintain reasonable kinetic activities at the relatively low temperatures and partial pressures required. Perhaps a more promising option to achieve low partial pressures and avoid high reduction temperatures due to high Δhrd (eqn (28)) are perovskite oxides, many of which show kinetic activity down to temperatures as low as 300 °C and in low oxygen partial pressures of 10−5 bar.60,66 In this case the low specific energy storage would not be a major issue, as only a small amount of oxygen needs to be absorbed at very low partial pressures, meaning the energy requirement is small, and so fast kinetics and lower operating temperatures would become the key selection criteria.
The process shown in Fig. 11, if realised together with renewable water splitting, could provide the feedstocks for sustainable fertilizer production. For example, one of the most common nitrogen fertilizers, ammonium nitrate NH4NO3, requires nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen as feedstocks, with N2 and H2 for ammonia synthesis, and O2 for further processing of the ammonia via the Ostwald process. This offers strong motivation for further study into such thermochemical air separation processes.
Oxygen pump
The idea that a two-step thermochemical redox cycle could be used as a means of pumping oxygen gas was mentioned in the literature by Kawabe et al. as early as 1997, using praseodymium oxides as the redox material (Pr9O16).141 The concept seems to have then turned dormant for over a decade, until authors began to look at these cycles for air separation, as described above, which is essentially selective oxygen pumping.
The key thermodynamic equation in this case, is the same as that for air separation, eqn (28). The heat requirement to power such a pump is the heat required to cycle the oxide (29)where the second term could be partially supplied using a heat exchanger, if the temperatures were not too high. Such a pump is particularly interesting at low pressures, where mechanical pumps have very poor efficiency due to adiabatic pumping, friction and leakage losses.17 A thermochemical pump would consume oxygen in a chemical reaction, removing the need for mechanical pumping. Calculations performed by the authors show that for a pump operating using the Co3O4/CoO cycle, the pumping efficiency would be orders of magnitude greater than that of mechanical pumps at pressures bellow 10−3 bar.17
Similarly to air separation, pumping to low partial pressures can be achieved using materials with large Δhrd and/or by performing the oxidation at low temperatures, according to eqn (28). This concept has, as of the publication of this manuscript, not received an in-depth screening of suitable oxides. It is unclear if any of the phase change oxides, which show large oxygen storage such as Pb3O4/PbO or at high temperatures Co3O4/CoO, show the kinetic activity required to react with low partial pressure oxygen gas at low temperature. On the other hand perovskites may be a viable alternative which are known to show rapid kinetics even at low temperatures and partial pressures.60,66
An example application of such an oxygen pump, and a method which may make thermochemical fuel production more competitive is by coupling the cycle to a thermochemical oxygen pump, allowing oxygen to be efficiently and selectively pumped to low pressures, which could for example make the ZnO/Zn cycle viable without a sweep gas. The oxygen pump could be powered using the waste heat from the fuel production cycle as illustrated in Fig. 12(a).
 Fig. 12  (a) A novel fuel production processes, with the waste heat from a thermochemical fuel production cycle powering a thermochemical oxygen pump, which provides low oxygen partial pressure for the reduction reaction. (b) An oxygen pump used to reduce the electrical energy demand of high temperature electrolysis by providing an oxygen chemical potential across the electrolysis membrane, with the waist heat used for steam production. 
Another interesting application of an oxygen pump is to use low oxygen partial pressures to create a chemical potential across an oxygen conducting membrane. In membrane reactors, partial oxidation of methane to syngas on one side of a membrane creates low oxygen partial pressures and enough oxygen chemical potential to allow H2O or CO2 to be reduced on the other side of the reactor, producing additional syngas.19,142,143 In high temperature electrolysis the chemical potential is provided using electricity. An interesting hybrid between the two ideas would be to use a thermochemical oxygen pump, to produce low pressure and an oxygen chemical potential, reducing the electrical voltage and thus electrical energy demand in high temperature electrolysis. This idea is illustrated in Fig. 12(b), where the heat supplied to the oxygen pump is re-released at lower temperature and then used to produce steam, which can be used to provide the heat to the electrolysis or indeed for electricity production.
There are sure to be many areas of the chemical production industry where achieving low oxygen partial pressures are desired and many potential applications for such an oxygen pumping technology.
Heat pump
Another hypothetical technology, which is the inverse of an oxygen pump, is a heat pump. This has very recently been proposed as a method for upgrading heat in thermochemical energy storage by researchers at ETH Zürich.21 The concept is simple, instead of using the temperature of the reactions to control the pressure, one can instead use a pressure swing to control the temperature (see Fig. 13), resulting in a thermochemical heat pump that could be operated at high temperatures.
 Fig. 13  Schematic of a metal oxide thermochemical heat pump, where oxygen is pumped from a reduction reaction at relatively low temperature to an oxidation reaction at relatively higher temperature. 
A standard heat pump uses pressure to control the temperature of evaporation and condensation, whereas here the pressure is used to change the temperature of chemical reactions. This allows for larger amounts of heat per mole of gas pumped and for operation at higher temperatures. Table 1 shows some example cycles and the quantities of heat pumped as well as the temperatures operated between.
Table 1 Some theoretical heat pump parameters for select redox cycles with a pressures swing of 0.1–1 bar.24,25 The electrical energy input Welec ≈ 13 [kJ molO−1], to pump half a mole of oxygen gas from 0.1–1 bar was taken from data for vacuum pumps17




Cycle

T
rd → Tox, [K]
ΔT, [K]

Q ≈ ΔhO, [kJ mol−1]

, [—]




CuO/Cu2O
1266 → 1397
131
141
10.84


Co3O4/CoO
1145 → 1212
67
197
15.2


BaO2/BaO
978 → 1107
129
85
6.53


Pb3O4/PbO
618 → 668
50
60
4.61




As well as upgrading the heat in thermochemical energy storage systems, such a heat pump may have some other niche applications. For example, if one needs to upgrade some heat in order to integrate it in a chemical reaction process. Experience gained from the other thermochemical applications could be applied here, but more specific studies are required to better assess this concept.
Outlook
Two step thermochemical redox cycles offer some valuable options for energy storage and conversion, which if realised, could have a huge impact on power generation, and large scale chemical industries such as fertilizer and fuel production. Here we highlight the importance of considering the fundamental redox properties of the metal oxides, in order to make informed decisions in developing these technologies. It is shown that the partial reduction materials ceria and perovskites exhibit very low specific energy storage when compared to simple oxides which undergo a phase change during reduction. This has important implications for applications such as energy storage, where thermochemical cycles using only these partial reduction oxides do not have ideal thermodynamics and could struggle to match the performance of competing technologies. In the case of fuel production, there is a need for greater innovation. Perovskites can be engineered to have high redox activity at low temperatures, which should be beneficial in air-separation and oxygen pumping technologies. In this growing field of research the data and insight presented here should help researchers to set achievable targets and choose suitable directions for their research into two step metal oxide redox cycles.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from the Helmholtz Association VH-VI-509 in the framework of the virtual institute SolarSyngas, and the project DÜSOL which is co-funded in the Klimaschutzwettbewerb “ErneuerbareEnergien.NRW” by the state of Northrhine-Westphalia, Germany, and the European EFRE fund.
References
W. C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S. M. Haile and A. Steinfeld, Science, 2010, 330, 1797–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb, A. G. Konstandopoulos, L. Nalbandian, V. Zaspalis, C. Sattler, P. Stobbe and A. Steele, Sol. Energy, 2005, 79, 409–421 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roeb, A. G. Konstandopoulos, A. Steele, P. Stobbe, C. Agrafiotis, C. Sattler, R. Klüser, V. Zaspalis, L. Nalbandian and N. Monnerie, 
            et al.
          , J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2006, 128, 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 254–285 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Carrillo and J. R. Scheffe, Sol. Energy, 2017 DOI:10.1016/j.solener.2017.05.032 .
D. Marxer, P. Furler, J. Scheffe, H. Geerlings, C. Falter, V. Batteiger, A. Sizmann and A. Steinfeld, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 3241–3250 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Wong, Thermochemical Heat Storage for Concentrated Solar Power, Technical Report - General Atomics,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Neises, S. Tescari, L. de Oliveira, M. Roeb, C. Sattler and B. Wong, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 3040–3048 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tescari, C. Agrafiotis, S. Breuer, L. de Oliveira, M. Neises-von Puttkamer, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Energy Procedia, 2014, 49, 1034–1043 CrossRef CAS .
B. Moghtaderi, Energy Fuels, 2009, 24, 190–198 CrossRef .
K. Shah, B. Moghtaderi and T. Wall, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2038–2045 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Q. Yu and Q. Qin, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2013, 112, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mattisson, A. Lyngfelt and H. Leion, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2009, 3, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rydén, H. Leion, T. Mattisson and A. Lyngfelt, Appl. Energy, 2014, 113, 1924–1932 CrossRef .

          R. G. Stokes and R. Banken, Building Upon Air: A History of the International Industrial Gases Industry from the 19th to the 21st Centuries, Cambridge University Press,  2015 Search PubMed .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brendelberger, H. von Storch, B. Bulfin and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2017, 141, 91–102 CrossRef CAS .
N. Itoh, M. A. Sanchez, W.-C. Xu, K. Haraya and M. Hongo, J. Membr. Sci., 1993, 77, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, H. Wang, S. Werth, T. Schiestel and J. Caro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9341–9344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yuan and F. Kröger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 594–600 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ströhle, A. Haselbacher, Z. Jovanovic and A. Steinfeld, Appl. Energy, 2017, 196, 51–61 CrossRef .
D. Bevan and J. Kordis, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1964, 26, 1509–1523 CrossRef CAS .
R. Panlener, R. Blumenthal and J. Garnier, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1975, 36, 1213–1222 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bale, P. Chartrand, S. Degterov, G. Eriksson, K. Hack, R. B. Mahfoud, J. Melançon, A. Pelton and S. Petersen, CALPHAD: Comput. Coupling Phase Diagrams Thermochem., 2002, 26, 189–228 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bale, E. Bélisle, P. Chartrand, S. Decterov, G. Eriksson, K. Hack, I.-H. Jung, Y.-B. Kang, J. Melançon and A. Pelton, 
            et al.
          , CALPHAD: Comput. Coupling Phase Diagrams Thermochem., 2009, 33, 295–311 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Carrillo, D. P. Serrano, P. Pizarro and J. M. Coronado, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1947–1954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Carrillo, D. P. Serrano, P. Pizarro and J. M. Coronado, Journal of Energy Storage, 2016, 5, 169–176 CrossRef .
J. E. Miller, A. H. McDaniel and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(2) DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300469 .
T. Block and M. Schmücker, Sol. Energy, 2016, 126, 195–207 CrossRef CAS .
I.-H. Jung, S. A. Decterov, A. D. Pelton, H.-M. Kim and Y.-B. Kang, Acta Mater., 2004, 52, 507–519 CrossRef CAS .
T. Block, N. Knoblauch and M. Schmücker, Thermochim. Acta, 2014, 577, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
F. Driessens, G. Rieck and H. Coenen, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1968, 30, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Zabdyr and O. B. Fabrichnaya, CALPHAD: Comput. Coupling Phase Diagrams Thermochem., 2004, 28, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
D. Buist, A. Gadalla and J. White, Mineral. Mag., 1966, 35, 731–741 CAS .
K. Jacob, K. Fitzner and C. Alcock, Metall. Trans. B, 1977, 8, 451–460 CrossRef .
F. Driessens and G. Rieck, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1967, 351, 48–62 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Crum, B. J. Riley and J. D. Vienna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 2378–2384 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kjellqvist and M. Selleby, J. Phase Equilib. Diffus., 2010, 31, 113–134 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hodges, S. Short, J. Jorgensen, X. Xiong, B. Dabrowski, S. Mini and C. Kimball, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 151, 190–209 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Johnsson and P. Lemmens, Handbook of magnetism and advanced magnetic materials,  2007 Search PubMed .
G. J. VanHandel and R. N. Blumenthal, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1974, 121, 1198–1202 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abanades and G. Flamant, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 1611–1623 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zinkevich, D. Djurovic and F. Aldinger, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 989–1001 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, P. R. Shah, T. Kim, P. Fornasiero and R. J. Gorte, Catal. Today, 2007, 123, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
G. Balducci, M. S. Islam, J. Kašpar, P. Fornasiero and M. Graziani, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 677–681 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Castelli, T. Olsen, S. Datta, D. D. Landis, S. Dahl, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5814–5819 CAS .
Z. Li, B. Wei, Z. Lü, X. Huang and W. Su, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 207, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
E. Filonova, A. Demina, E. Kleibaum, L. Y. Gavrilova and A. Petrov, Inorg. Mater., 2006, 42, 443–447 CrossRef CAS .
T. Motohashi, M. Kimura, T. Inayoshi, T. Ueda, Y. Masubuchi and S. Kikkawa, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 10746–10752 RSC .
T. Motohashi, Y. Hirano, Y. Masubuchi, K. Oshima, T. Setoyama and S. Kikkawa, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 372–377 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ezbiri, K. M. Allen, M. E. Gàlvez, R. Michalsky and A. Steinfeld, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1966–1971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nagai, W. Ito and T. Sakon, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 177, 3433–3444 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bakken, S. Stølen, T. Norby, R. Glenne and M. Budd, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 167, 367–377 CrossRef CAS .
C. Haavik, T. Atake, H. Kawaji and S. Stølen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 3863–3870 RSC .
E. Bakken, T. Norby and S. Stølen, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 217–223 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rørmark, A. B. Mørch, K. Wiik, S. Stølen and T. Grande, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4005–4013 CrossRef .
M. Pishahang, Y. Larring, M. McCann and R. Bredesen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 10549–10556 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rydén, A. Lyngfelt and T. Mattisson, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2011, 5, 356–366 CrossRef .
J. Vieten, B. Bulfin, F. Call, M. Lange, M. Schmücker, A. Francke, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13652–13659 CAS .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. a. Persson, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
A. Jain, G. Hautier, S. Ong, C. Moore, C. Fischer, K. Persson and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 045115 CrossRef .
M. Schmidt and S. J. Campbell, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2002, 63, 2085–2092 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Cussen, J. Sloan, J. F. Vente, P. D. Battle and T. C. Gibb, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 6071–6077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Vieten, B. Bulfin, M. Senholdt, M. Roeb, C. Sattler and M. Schmücker, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 308, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bulfin, J. Vieten, D. E. Starr, A. Azarpira, M. Haevecker, K. Skorupska, M. Schmuecker, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 4, 7912–7919 Search PubMed .
M. T. Curnan and J. R. Kitchin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28776–28790 CAS .
Y. Hao, C.-K. Yang and S. M. Haile, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6073–6082 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bonk, A. Remhof, A. C. Maier, M. Trottmann, M. V. Schlupp, C. Battaglia and U. F. Vogt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 120, 118–125 Search PubMed .
K. J. Albrecht, G. S. Jackson and R. J. Braun, Appl. Energy, 2016, 165, 285–296 CrossRef CAS .
C. Haavik, T. Atake and S. Stølen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 1082–1087 RSC .
O. T. Sørensen, J. Solid State Chem., 1976, 18, 217–233 CrossRef .
B. Bulfin, L. Hoffmann, L. de Oliveira, N. Knoblauch, F. Call, M. Roeb, C. Sattler and M. Schmuecker, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 23147–23154 RSC .
M. Ezbiri, M. Takacs, D. Theiler, R. Michalsky and A. Steinfeld, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4172–4182 CAS .
B. Wang, X. Xi and A. N. Cormack, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3687–3692 CrossRef CAS .
G. Murgida, V. Ferrari, M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano and A. Llois, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 115120 CrossRef .
M. Takacs, J. Scheffe and A. Steinfeld, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 7813–7822 RSC .
B. Bulfin, F. Call, J. Vieten, M. Roeb, C. Sattler and I. Shvets, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2027–2035 CAS .
B. Bulfin, A. J. Lowe, K. A. Keogh, B. E. Murphy, O. Lubben, S. A. Krasnikov and I. V. Shvets, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24129–24137 CAS .
M. Liu, N. S. Tay, S. Bell, M. Belusko, R. Jacob, G. Will, W. Saman and F. Bruno, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 53, 1411–1432 CrossRef CAS .
R. Raud, R. Jacob, F. Bruno, G. Will and T. A. Steinberg, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 70, 936–944 CrossRef .
G. Koll, P. Schwarzbözl, K. Hennecke, T. Hartz, M. Schmitz and B. Hoffschmidt, Proceedings, 2009 Search PubMed  , http://elib.dlr.de/60306/.

          K. Hennecke, P. Schwarzbözl, G. Koll, M. Beuter, B. Hoffschmidt, J. Göttsche and T. Hartz, Proceedings of ISES World Congress 2007 (Vol. I–Vol. V),  2009, pp. 1749–1753 Search PubMed .
E. Alonso, C. Pérez-Rábago, J. Licurgo, E. Fuentealba and C. A. Estrada, Sol. Energy, 2015, 115, 297–305 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2016, 139, 695–710 CrossRef CAS .
A. Carrillo, D. Sastre, D. Serrano, P. Pizarro and J. Coronado, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8039–8048 RSC .
R. Bowrey and J. Jutsen, Sol. Energy, 1978, 21, 523–525 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb, M. Schmücker and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2014, 102, 189–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Fricker, Energy, 2004, 29, 871–881 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tamme, U. Taut, C. Streuber and H. Kalfa, Sol. Energy Mater., 1991, 24, 386–396 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zunft, M. Hänel, M. Krüger, V. Dreißigacker, F. Göhring and E. Wahl, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2011, 133, 031019 CrossRef .
C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb, M. Schmücker and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2015, 114, 440–458 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, S. Tescari, M. Roeb, M. Schmücker and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2015, 114, 459–475 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, A. Becker, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2016, 139, 676–694 CrossRef CAS .
G. Karagiannakis, C. Pagkoura, A. Zygogianni, S. Lorentzou and A. Konstandopoulos, Energy Procedia, 2014, 49, 820–829 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pagkoura, G. Karagiannakis, A. Zygogianni, S. Lorentzou, M. Kostoglou, A. G. Konstandopoulos, M. Rattenburry and J. W. Woodhead, Sol. Energy, 2014, 108, 146–163 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pagkoura, G. Karagiannakis, A. Zygogianni, S. Lorentzou and A. Konstandopoulos, Energy Procedia, 2015, 69, 978–987 CrossRef CAS .
G. Karagiannakis, C. Pagkoura, E. Halevas, P. Baltzopoulou and A. G. Konstandopoulos, Sol. Energy, 2016, 133, 394–407 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, S. Tescari, G. Lantin, C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2017, 144, 453–465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tescari, S. Breuer, M. Roeb, C. Sattler, F. Flucht, M. Schmücker, G. Karagiannakis, C. Pagkoura and A. G. Konstandopoulos, Energy Procedia, 2015, 69, 1039–1048 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tescari, A. Singh, C. Agrafiotis, L. de Oliveira, S. Breuer, B. Schlögl-Knothe, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Appl. Energy, 2017, 189, 66–75 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Agrafiotis and R. Pitz-Paal, German Patent Organization, DE102013211249A12014,  2013 .
Z. Zhang, L. Andre and S. Abanades, Sol. Energy, 2016, 134, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Babiniec, E. N. Coker, J. E. Miller and A. Ambrosini, Sol. Energy, 2015, 118, 451–459 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Babiniec, E. N. Coker, J. E. Miller and A. Ambrosini, Int. J. Energy Res., 2016, 40, 280–284 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, T. Block, M. Senholdt, S. Tescari, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Sol. Energy, 2017, 149, 227–244 CrossRef CAS .
L. Imponenti, K. J. Albrecht, J. W. Wands, M. D. Sanders and G. S. Jackson, Sol. Energy, 2017, 151, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guyot, P. Richet, P. Courtial and P. Gillet, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1993, 20, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jacob and M. Attaluri, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 934–942 RSC .
V. Becattini, T. Motmans, A. Zappone, C. Madonna, A. Haselbacher and A. Steinfeld, Appl. Energy, 2017, 203, 373–389 CrossRef .
D. Dimitrakis, N. Tsongidis and A. Konstandopoulos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 23587–23595 RSC .
E. Koepf, I. Alxneit, C. Wieckert and A. Meier, Appl. Energy, 2017, 188, 620–651 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gokon, T. Mataga, N. Kondo and T. Kodama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 4757–4767 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama, N. Gokon and R. Yamamoto, Sol. Energy, 2008, 82, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agrafiotis, A. Zygogianni, C. Pagkoura, M. Kostoglou and A. G. Konstandopoulos, AIChE J., 2013, 59, 1213–1225 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Kang, C.-H. Kim, C.-S. Park and J.-W. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2007, 13, 657–663 CAS .
Q.-L. Meng, C. i. Lee, T. Ishihara, H. Kaneko and Y. Tamaura, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 13435–13441 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bader, R. B. Chandran, L. J. Venstrom, S. J. Sedler, P. T. Krenzke, R. M. De Smith, A. Banerjee, T. R. Chase, J. H. Davidson and W. Lipiński, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2015, 137, 031007 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, C. Wen, Y. Guo, G. Lu and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9889–9897 CAS .
F. Call, M. Roeb, M. SchmuÌĹcker, C. Sattler and R. Pitz-Paal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6929–6938 CAS .
M. Kuhn, S. Bishop, J. Rupp and H. Tuller, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 4277–4288 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kaneko, S. Taku and Y. Tamaura, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 2321–2330 CrossRef CAS .
A. le Gal and S. Abanades, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13516–13523 CAS .
I. Ermanoski, J. E. Miller and M. D. Allendorf, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8418–8427 RSC .
B. Bulfin, F. Call, M. Lange, O. Luübben, C. Sattler, R. Pitz-Paal and I. V. Shvets, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 1001–1009 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bulfin, M. Lange, L. de Oliveira, M. Roeb and C. Sattler, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 19320–19328 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. McDaniel, E. C. Miller, D. Arifin, A. Ambrosini, E. N. Coker, R. O'Hayre, W. C. Chueh and J. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2424–2428 CAS .
J. R. Scheffe, D. Weibel and A. Steinfeld, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 4250–4257 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bork, M. Kubicek, M. Struzik and J. Rupp, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15546–15557 CAS .
A. Demont and S. Abanades, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3536–3546 CAS .
Q. Jiang, J. Tong, G. Zhou, Z. Jiang, Z. Li and C. Li, Sol. Energy, 2014, 103, 425–437 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Al-Mamun, Y. L. Zhong, L. Jiang, P. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Yang and H. Zhao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1013–1017 Search PubMed .
M. Kubicek, A. H. Bork and J. L. Rupp, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11983–12000 CAS .
D. Marxer, P. Furler, M. Takacs and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(5), 1142–1149 CAS .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Jennings, Catalytic ammonia synthesis: fundamentals and practice, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
D. Risold, J.-I. Nagata and R. Suzuki, J. Phase Equilib., 1998, 19, 213–233 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitaguchi, J. Takada, K. Oda and Y. Miura, J. Mater. Res., 1990, 5, 929–931 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Suzuki, J.-i. Nagata and D. Risold, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 81, 2493–2496 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Aoki, K. Kuroda, S. Hinokuma, C. Kura, C. Zhu, E. Tsuji, A. Nakao, M. Wakeshima, Y. Hinatsu and H. Habazaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(32), 11197–11206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kawabe, H. Ono, T. Sano, M. Tsuji and Y. Tamaura, Energy, 1997, 22, 1041–1049 CrossRef CAS .
A. Evdou, L. Nalbandian and V. Zaspalis, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 325, 704–711 CrossRef CAS .
A. Evdou, V. Zaspalis and L. Nalbandian, Fuel, 2010, 89, 1265–1273 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
B. Bulfin	Dr Brendan Bulfin is a research scientist in the Institute of Solar Research at the German Aerospace Center, where he has worked since summer 2015. His research focuses on thermochemical processes driven by concentrated solar power with an emphasis on the development and characterization of functional redox materials. He holds a PhD in Physics from the University of Dublin (Trinity College Dublin).
J. Vieten	Josua Vieten is currently working as a PhD student in the Institute of Solar Research at the German Aerospace Center (DLR). His research is focused on the synthesis and characterization of oxide materials for solar thermochemical processes such as air separation and water splitting. He received a Master's degree in Chemistry from the TU Munich in 2016 and a Master's degree in Advanced Materials Science from a joint program of TU and LMU Munich and the University of Augsburg in 2015.
C. Agrafiotis	Dr Christos Agrafiotis is a research scientist at the German Aerospace Center's (DLR) Institute of Solar Research, which he joined as an EU Marie-Curie Research Fellow (2012–2014). His research is focused on advanced ceramic materials and in particular their applications in the exploitation of concentrated solar power, production of solar fuels and thermochemical solar energy storage. He holds a Diploma (University of Patras, Greece, 1983), a M.Sc. (University of California, Santa Barbara, U.S.A., 1986) and a Ph.D. (SUNY/Buffalo, U.S.A., 1991), all in Chemical Engineering.
M. Roeb	Dr Martin Roeb is the leader of the high temperature solar engineering group at the German Aerospace Center's Institute of Solar Research, where he has worked since 1999 in the field of solar high temperature applications. His research interests address processes and materials related to solar thermochemical water and CO2 splitting, solar upgrading of hydrocarbons, high temperature electrolysis and solar recycling and production processes of chemical commodities. He holds a diploma in chemistry and a PhD in physical chemistry both from the University of Cologne.
C. Sattler	Prof. Dr Christian Sattler is head of the Department of Solar Chemical Engineering of the German Aerospace Center's Institute of Solar Research. He is professor for solar fuel production at the Technical University of Dresden. His main work is the production of fuels especially hydrogen by solar thermo- and photochemical processes. He serves as vice president of the research association N.ERGHY a member of the European Joint Undertaking for Fuel Cells and Hydrogen and he is the national representative to tasks of the IEA's SolarPACES and Hydrogen Implementing Agreements. He holds a diploma and a PhD in chemistry both from the University of Bonn.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Concentrated solar power can be combined with a thermochemical redox cycle to store solar energy. The stored energy can then be used for a number of applications, including; as heat storage for off sun electricity generation in CSP power plants, as a chemical potential for CO2 and H2O splitting providing fuel, and for air separation and oxygen pumping via the absorption of oxygen. The oxide oxygen affinity (ΔE) and operational temperatures depend on the target application.	 
Δg° = Δh° − TΔs°,	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 2  An Elligham diagram for the redox reactions given in eqn (6)–(8), with data taken from Factsage.24,25 When Δg° < 0, the phase change is thermodynamically favourable and the reduction reaction can proceed releasing oxygen at pO2 = p°. For lower partial pressures the entropy change is larger according to eqn (11), and the reaction can proceed at lower temperatures where Δg° crosses the partial pressure lines plotted to the right hand axes. The reverse reaction, oxidation, is thermodynamically favourable when Δg > 0.	 
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 3  Contours of eqn (12) on a temperature vs. pressure graph. The x-axis pressure, in most cases, is pO2, but for the volatile oxides (ZnO and SnO2) it is the total pressure, p = pO2 + pZn, so that the left hand side of eqn (12) becomes pO20.5pZn/p°. Another point worth noting is that some of the contours have slight kinks, which occur when there is a phase change in the products or the reactants. Data obtained from Factsage.24,25	 
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 4  Perovskites as tunable redox materials, where the A site can be used to ensure the tolerance factor given in eqn (16), is within the desired range and the M site is used to set the enthalpy of reduction.	 
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 5  The partial molar entropy vs. δ for CeO2,22,23,72,73 Ce0.85Zr0.15O2,68,73 and the perovskites Ca0.8Sr0.2MnO3,66 and La0.6Sr0.4Mn0.4Al0.6O3 (LSMA6446),74 which shows their dependence on the non-stoichiometry δ due to the configuration entropy. Also plotted are simple dilute species model fit's of the configuration entropy.66,73 This varying Δs° give rise to the partial reduction properties of these materials.	 
	(21)

 	Fig. 6  Contours of eqn (21) on a temperature vs. pressure graph for some fixed δ values. Here the pressure is in all cases the oxygen partial pressure. Also shown for reference is the contour of phase equilibrium partial reduction of NiFe2O4 to NiFe2O3.8.28 The data for the ceria based materials and the Mn perovskites is taken from models developed by the authors in previous work.66,73	 

 	Fig. 7  The specific energy storage of redox pairs vs. the atomic molar energy storage (similar to energy storage per thermal mass, because for solids Cp ∼ number of atoms), for a number of redox pairs in their standard state. The thermal mass is considered to be approximately proportional to the moles of atoms, according to the Dulong Petit Law. For partial reduction oxides the storage is reported for certain stoichiometry changes, i.e. CeO2/1.9. For reference CeO2/1.9 has similar specific energy storage to a rechargeable NiMH battery, and ZnO/Zn has about 10% the specific energy of diesel fuel. The data was obtained from the following sources; simple oxides – Factsage,24,25 CeO2, Ce0.85Zr0.15O2 and CaMnO3 – Bulfin et al.,66,73 NiFe2O4/3.8 from Miller et al.,28 and CaTiO3 data was obtained from the Materials Project.61,62	 

 	Fig. 8  A cascade of redox cycles used to store energy. This allows energy to be stored at varying temperatures which allows more heat to be transferred from the hot air stream used to charge the storage. During discharge the air stream is reversed offering maximum temperature process heat.	 
	(22)
	(23)
Δgws = Δgrd + Δgox,	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)

 	Fig. 9  A plot of the reaction enthalpy vs. the reaction entropy for the reduction of a number of oxides. The black line indicates the enthalpy of reduction for steam, which suitable materials should be above. Also shown is a shaded region in which perovskites with reduction extent ABO2.9 would likely be. An important point worth noting here is that at high temperatures the entropy and enthalpies of the phase change materials can increase significantly due to phase changes in the products, for example Zn becoming a gas. Data taken from the same sources as Fig. 7.	 
	(28)

 	Fig. 10  A schematic illustrating the energy cost of thermochemical air separation. The red upwards arrows indicate heat flow into the system, and the blue downward arrows heat flow out of the system. The entire process here does not change the internal energy of the system and so all of the heat supplied is released again. However, the irreversible work required to pump the oxygen results in an exergy loss, and the heat is released at lower temperature.	 

 	Fig. 11  A schematic showing how two redox cycles can be used for first an oxygen production cycle removing the bulk of the oxygen from air, followed by a nitrogen purification step. Both cycles are the same as that shown in Fig. 10, with the second cycle operating with oxygen depleted air in the oxidation step. Most of the oxygen is removed with a lower energy input per mole of oxygen QI, and then the remaining oxygen is removed with a stronger oxygen affinity material requiring a larger energy input per mole of oxygen QII. The oxidation temperatures could be matched and heat exchangers could be used for the air.	 
	(29)

 	Fig. 12  (a) A novel fuel production processes, with the waste heat from a thermochemical fuel production cycle powering a thermochemical oxygen pump, which provides low oxygen partial pressure for the reduction reaction. (b) An oxygen pump used to reduce the electrical energy demand of high temperature electrolysis by providing an oxygen chemical potential across the electrolysis membrane, with the waist heat used for steam production.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of a metal oxide thermochemical heat pump, where oxygen is pumped from a reduction reaction at relatively low temperature to an oxidation reaction at relatively higher temperature.	 

CuO/Cu2O	1266 → 1397	131	141	10.84
Co3O4/CoO	1145 → 1212	67	197	15.2
BaO2/BaO	978 → 1107	129	85	6.53
Pb3O4/PbO	618 → 668	50	60	4.61

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
