On the nature of active phases and sites in CO and CO 2 hydrogenation catalysts  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CY01216D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CY01216D
(Perspective)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 5681-5707On the nature of active phases and sites in CO and CO2 hydrogenation catalysts

        
          
            Alberto V. 
            Puga
          
          
        
      
Instituto de Tecnología Química, Universitat Politècnica de València-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Avenida de los Naranjos, s/n, 46022 Valencia, Spain. E-mail: apuga@itq.upv.es
Received 
      11th June 2018
    , Accepted 9th September 2018First published on 10th September 2018AbstractThe production of hydrocarbons or oxygenates via the hydrogenation–polymerisation of either CO (Fischer–Tropsch) or CO2 as carbon sources has significant similarities from a catalytic perspective. However, strategically, the two processes differ. Fischer–Tropsch technologies, which have been commercially implemented for almost a century, rely mostly on fossil resources such as coal or natural gas after previous gasification to obtain syngas. Conversely, the direct transformation of waste CO2 using renewable hydrogen is in demand to partially compensate for its enormous emissions and to alleviate their impact on the global climate. The development of catalysts for Fischer–Tropsch processes is mature and has resulted in valuable knowledge; it also represents a valid starting point for the use of CO2 as a feedstock. In general terms, catalysts require active phases to promote (i) CO–CO2 interconversion via the water–gas shift (WGS) and its reverse (rWGS) reaction; (ii) CO activation via dissociation; (iii) hydrogenation; (iv) polymerisation leading to hydrocarbon chain growth; and (v) non-dissociative CO insertion for the formation of oxygenated moieties. Characterisation techniques have traditionally pointed to iron oxides as active phases for rWGS, to metallic cobalt or iron carbides as active phases for hydrogenation–polymerisation into hydrocarbons, and to copper, mixed cobalt–copper and rhodium as selective phases for oxygenate formation. However, the nature of these active phases and sites is still debated. Novel, improved in situ and operando investigations are challenging some previously accepted concepts by allowing the observation of metastable phases, most likely in the form of few-layer surface domains, which may play key roles. For example, the direct implication of cobalt carbides either as precursors of highly active Co(hcp) or as genuinely active phases has been proposed. Thus, the simplistic view of unique catalytically active sites is progressively being replaced with a more dynamic scenario wherein surface interconversion appears to be a common phenomenon. Herein, a perspective on the most enlightening of the recent discoveries regarding the nature of active COx hydrogenation phases and sites, providing valuable knowledge for future catalyst design, is presented.Alberto V. PugaAlberto V. Puga received a PhD in Chemistry from the Autonomous University of Barcelona. He has been a post-doctoral research fellow at Queen's University of Belfast and a Marie Curie researcher at Rovira i Virgili University (Tarragona). Dr. Puga is currently a research associate at Instituto de Tecnología Química (ITQ, Valencia). Topics of interest to his research include heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis, solar energy, hydrogen production, carbon dioxide capture and reduction, and biomass valorisation.
1. Introduction
1.1. Suitability of CO and/or CO2 as carbon sources for hydrogenation–polymerisation
The utilisation of carbon resources for the production of fuels and chemicals has been dominated by the exploitation of fossil reserves—coal, crude oil and natural gas—since the time of the industrial revolution.1 As a result, the carbon cycle has experienced (and still experiences) significant disruptions which endanger the sustainability of human activities due to the unforeseeable consequences that this situation may lead to in the mid-term future.2 Concerns raised by the increasing levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and in oceans and by the related climate warming events are thus spurring the scientific community to advance on alternative technologies with regard to sustainable sources of carbon. In this context, the judicious utilisation of biomass resources3–5 and the recycling of carbon dioxide6,7 are the most widely investigated options.
One of the most versatile technologies to compete with petrochemical routes derived from crude oil is the Fischer–Tropsch conversion of syngas (H2/CO mixtures) obtained via gasification of either biomass or fossil (i.e. coal, natural gas) carbon feedstocks. The market relevance of this well-established commercial technology as a source of fuels and chemicals strongly depends on crude oil prices.8 Fischer–Tropsch processes allow efficient production of a range of alkanes, alkenes and oxygenates with different chain lengths (see examples in Table 1) using heterogeneous catalysts, most frequently composed of group VIII metals.9–12
Table 1 Generic reactions taking place in CO (Fischer–Tropsch) and CO2 hydrogenation–polymerisation, gasification and overall coal-to-liquids or biomass-to-liquids processes, taking olefins as model end products




Process
Reaction







a The water–gas shift reaction often takes place under thermodynamic control, tuning the ratio of reagents during COx hydrogenation–polymerisation.
b Pure (i.e. graphitic) carbon and cellulose are taken as model substances for coal and biomass, respectively.
c These equations are the sum of a complex set of reactions, including the water–gas shift (eqn (3)).
d (5) = (1) + (4) × x.
e (7) = (1) × 6 + (6) × x.





Fischer–Tropsch olefin synthesis

 


        (1)
      


(1)



CO2 hydrogenation to olefins

 


        (2)
      


(2)



Water–gas shifta

 


        (3)
      


(3)



Coal gasificationb

 


        (4)
      


(4)





Coal-to-liquidsb

 


        (5)
      


(5)





Biomass gasificationb

 


        (6)
      


(6)





Biomass-to-liquidsb

 


        (7)
      


(7)







The Fischer–Tropsch concept can be adapted to the direct hydrogenation of CO2 with minimal technical modifications to generate valuable hydrocarbons and oxygenates.13–15 In fact, both transformations may share the same mechanistic routes to a significant extent.16 The aforementioned minor modifications can be effectively achieved by catalyst design,14 as amply discussed in this review. The utilisation of CO2 in this manner is a potential recycling approach to partially neutralise the massive anthropogenic emissions of this gas into the atmosphere and, in turn, mitigate its effects on the global climate, provided renewable H2 is used.7,17
Syngas for Fischer–Tropsch processes can be obtained from various feedstocks—natural gas, coal, oil or biomass—via gasification in the presence of oxygen and steam, entailing a complex network of chemical reactions (including partial oxidation, steam reforming, water–gas shift or disproportionation) taking place under harsh conditions of temperature and pressure.9 The composition of the final product (most importantly, the H2/CO/CO2 ratio) depends on the type of raw material used and on the operation conditions. Coal12,18 and biomass4,19–21 gasification produce H2/CO mixtures with inappropriate ratios (≤1) and thus require water–gas-shift (WGS, eqn (3), Table 1) units downstream from the gasifiers to convert some of the CO into CO2 and H2 (eqn (4) and (6), respectively, Table 1). Coal-to-liquids is a mature technology; however, unfortunately, about half of the carbon in the feedstock is released into the atmosphere as waste CO2 (eqn (5), Table 1). Biomass-to-liquids represents a renewable alternative;22–24 however, as in the case of coal, theoretical usage of carbon is also ca. 50% (eqn (7), Table 1). The main (and most relevant) difference between coal- and biomass-to-liquid processes is apparent: while the former depends on a fossil resource, the latter conforms to the provisions of sustainability, provided the biomass is utilized according to environmental conservation principles. Alternatively, the reforming of oxygenates derived from biomass may also represent a route towards H2/CO2 mixtures that are valuable for further synthesis of fuels or chemicals in the scenario of judicious biomass transformation strategies in bio-refineries.25,26
As opposed to Fischer–Tropsch, which mostly uses fossil feedstocks, and even for the most efficient biofuel production routes, involve the formation of large amounts of waste CO2,27 the recycling of CO2via hydrogenation appears to be the only truly carbon-neutral strategy to maintain human activities based on liquid hydrocarbon fuels and chemicals, provided renewable H2 is used.6,7,17,28 Although it is not economically attractive at present, CO2 hydrogenation may become a key technology in the scenario of future sustainable energy and chemical production, especially in a scenario of eventual scarcity of inexpensive oil and favourable policies towards reducing the costs of externalities caused by climate change.1,7 In this context, harvesting CO2 from the atmosphere, where its concentration is rather low (ca. 0.04%), appears to be an unattainable task. However, capture of CO2 from gaseous effluents where it is present in high proportions is more realistic and, arguably, necessary. The data in Table 2 show that enormous amounts of CO2 by-product are generated from a number of processes at well-established point sources.
Table 2 Selected data on global CO2 emissions by sector and ranges of molar CO2 concentration in common gaseous effluents of these activities




Source
Emission/Mt(CO2) per year
Year
[CO2]mol/%
References





a Estimation based on global organic waste production from ref. 32 and rate of gas release from anaerobic decay in landfills taken from ref. 31.





Power generation (total)
13656
2013



29



Coal
9887
2013
10–14

29, 30


Gas
2753
2013
4–8

29, 30


Transportation
5547
2013
12–14

29



Landfillsa
≈100
2012
34

31, 32


Cement manufacture
3670
2015
25

29



Metal manufacture
2500
2010
18–20

33



Refineries
900
2014
Variable

6



Ammonia synthesis
160
2014
>95%

6



Natural gas sweetening
30
2014
>95%

6



Fermentation
11
2005
≈100

34





Power plants and transportation cause major CO2 emissions, although at low concentrations (<15%, see Table 2). The deployment of new coal-fired power plants will probably require the implementation of carbon capture and storage (CCS) units, thus representing an option for recycling the generated CO2, whereas the disperse transportation sources preclude efficient capture. In a more immediate scenario, massive point sources of more concentrated exhausts already exist, yet are largely ignored. Cement production and metallurgy release huge amounts of CO2 (>6 Gt per year, see Table 2) and thus represent interesting opportunities for capture and utilisation. Activities requiring integrated separation (ammonia synthesis or natural gas purification, see Table 2), together with fermentation, are the current commercial sources of CO2 due to the notable purity of these effluents.
Although CCS appears to be a key technology to abate emissions,30,35 the concerns raised by the suitability and stability of massive geological reservoirs call for alternatives. The implementation of a circular carbon economy based on CO2 transformation into fuels and chemicals using renewable H2 is likely to play an important role in the scenario of a sustainable future. Most of the required knowledge is directly derived from the well-established Fischer–Tropsch catalysis technology, given the parallelism between processes using either CO or CO2 as feedstocks.13,14,36
1.2. Mechanistic aspects: analogies and differences between CO and CO2 hydrogenation catalysis
Under typical CO hydrogenation conditions (200 to 350 °C, pressures from one to several tens of atmospheres), mechanisms can be non-dissociatively or dissociatively initiated.37,38 Non-dissociative routes may follow two pathways, both involving oxygenated intermediates: (i) insertion into M–H to generate formyl (eqn (8)), which is then hydrogenated into methyl (eqn (9)), prone to a second CO insertion into acetyl (and subsequent propagation by repetition of these steps, resulting in growing alkyl/acyl moieties, eqn (10)). CO(ad) + H(ad) → HC(O)(ad)(8) HC(O)(ad) + 4H(ad) → CH3(ad) + H2O(9) CO(ad) + CnH2n+1(ad) → CnH2n+1C(O)(ad) (n = 1 for methyl-to-acetyl)(10)or (ii) hydrogenation of both carbon and oxygen to form hydroxymethylene (eqn (11)) and, subsequently, methylene via hydrogenolysis (eqn (12)). CO(ad) + 2H(ad) → HC(OH)(ad)(11) HC(OH)(ad) + 2H(ad) → CH2(ad) + H2O(12)
The dissociative (or surface carbide) route results in individually adsorbed oxygen and carbon atoms (eqn (13)), which are subsequently transformed into water and methylene upon hydrogenation (the latter reaction is represented by eqn (14)). CO(ad) → C(ad) + O(ad)(13) C(ad) + 2H(ad) → CH2(ad)(14)
Both the non-dissociative and dissociative routes may result in formation of methylene units (eqn (12) and (14), respectively) which are hydrogenated to methyl (eqn (15)) or further inserted into growing alkyl chains (eqn (16)) as the pathway for propagation: CH2(ad) + H(ad) → CH3(ad)(15) CH2(ad) + CnH2n+1(ad) → Cn+1H2n+3(ad) (n = 1 for methyl-to-ethyl).(16)
Although an insightful discussion of the different Fischer–Tropsch mechanisms is beyond the scope of this perspective (informative overviews on this topic can be found in the literature),8,11,37,38 this basic account is worthwhile given the importance of mechanistic studies for both active phase elucidation and catalyst design. Suffice it to say here that regarding the mode of CO activation, a higher degree of consensus has been reached in support of the dissociative (surface carbide) route for the selective production of hydrocarbons for both iron and cobalt catalysts, whereas oxygenate formation requires that part of the CO be non-dissociatively activated, such as on cobalt–copper or rhodium catalysts.37,39–41 It should be noted that the nature of the active sites is often dynamic owing to the incorporation of carbon atoms from the feed to surface (or even bulk) carbide structures and their eventual release as part of the products.42,43
Distinction between non-dissociative and dissociative activation of CO is challenging under real working conditions. Experimental results on model cobalt surfaces by photoemission spectroscopy have suggested that CO dissociation is the only activation route,44 challenging theoretical calculations which pointed to CO hydrogenation into oxygenate species.45 It is worth mentioning that a recent study has proven the possibility of CO dissociation on oxygen-deficient oxides (ZnCrOx) followed by hydrogenation to methylene and subsequent reaction with additional CO to form ketene as an intermediate in the production of lower olefins on a mesoporous aluminophosphate catalyst.46 Regarding chain growth, a thorough study by Gaube and Klein concluded that both CO and methylene insertions (eqn (10) and (16), respectively) occur simultaneously in Fischer–Tropsch processes and that the former route is predominant for cobalt catalysts, whereas methylene insertion is more important when using iron counterparts.47
The mechanistic similarities between the CO and CO2 hydrogenation–polymerisation processes are clearly apparent.13,14,36 Starting from CO2, two main activation routes have been proposed: (i) the non-dissociative route, whereby a hydrogen–carbon bond is firstly formed; and (ii) the dissociative route, initiated by the cleavage of a carbon–oxygen bond that gives rise to a CO molecule.16 These situations are represented by reaction eqn (17) and (18), respectively. CO2(ad) + H(ad) → HCO2(ad)(17) CO2(ad) → CO(ad) + O(ad)(18)
Kinetic studies on CO2 methanation have showed a preference for dissociative routes via CO,48–51 which suggests a strong parallelism between the CO2 and CO hydrogenation mechanisms.52 In contrast, methanol synthesis takes place by non-dissociative routes according to various studies.53,54 The numerous investigations in favour of CO2 dissociation into CO as the initiating step have also resulted in important considerations of the nature of the active phases for either CO2 or CO hydrogenation–polymerisation because it follows that the main difference between the two processes is that the former requires an active catalyst for the reverse water–gas shift (rWGS, back-reaction of eqn (3)) reaction to generate CO as an intermediate, after which the subsequent steps are essentially identical.10,14 Knowledge from the classical Fischer–Tropsch technology has been used to successfully propose iron catalysts for CO2 in preference over the most common cobalt counterparts for CO due to the known activity of the former (in particular, of its oxides) in the rWGS reaction.10–12,14,36,55,56 As mentioned above for carbides, the surface layers also dynamically evolve by creating oxygen vacancies as active sites in iron oxides.57 Traditionally, cobalt catalysts are considered to be extremely efficient for Fischer–Tropsch, but not for rWGS; therefore, low activities and/or high methanation activities are frequently observed when switching to CO2 as feedstock. These aspects, among others, will be discussed in detail throughout this review.
1.3. Phase evolution under operation and relevance of particle size
Classical Fischer–Tropsch catalysts are generally prepared in the form of oxide precursors of the active metal, either in bulk or dispersed on a support material.10,58–60 The starting oxide forms evolve to one or more active phases during pre-treatment and operation. The nature of these active phases has been a matter of study for almost a century; however, there is still a strong debate about the role of each of the individual proposed phases: oxides, elemental metals and carbides.11,13 During catalytic operation, the performance of the catalysts may eventually decrease below acceptable levels. Although this may be due to physical changes, such as attrition of the catalyst particles or diffusion limitations,10,11,18,61 chemical modification of the active phases and sites often account for decreased activity and selectivity.11,62
The starting oxide phases generally transform into intermediate oxides and eventually into metallic phases under reductive pre-treatments in either hydrogen or syngas atmospheres. Another common event is the formation of carbide phases under CO-rich regimes. A schematic of these transformations, which are reversible to a certain extent, is shown in Fig. 1 for the specific case of iron; however, similar situations have been observed for other metals, especially cobalt, as amply discussed in the dedicated sections below.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the common transformations observed between different iron phases during Fischer–Tropsch and CO2 hydrogenation processes. 
A key parameter in catalyst performance is the particle size of the active phases.63 These particle sizes are dependent on the synthetic and pre-treatment procedures. In general, increased metal loading and higher pre-treatment temperatures for supported catalysts result in larger particle sizes. A number of independent reports on Fischer–Tropsch catalysis have concluded that the activity per active site (i.e. turnover frequency, TOF) is not affected by decreases in particle size up to a given value, below which efficiencies generally decline.63 This has been observed for different metals, including cobalt and ruthenium; however, the behaviour of iron catalysts is less consistent, with several studies reporting higher activity for smaller particles (a graphical comparison for examples of each metal is illustrated in Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Particle size dependence of surface-specific activity for different Fischer–Tropsch catalysts. Left: Hydrogenation ability (based on chemisorption data) for cobalt nanoparticles prepared by microemulsion techniques and supported on delaminated zeolites (H2/CO = 2:1, 220 °C, 20 bar, χ(CO) = 10%) vs. Co(0) particle size. Centre: CO consumption and CH4 production activities for ruthenium catalysts prepared by impregnation on γ-Al2O3 (H2/CO = 10:1, 250 °C, 1.8 bar) vs. Ru(0) particle size. Right: CH4, C2+ and total hydrocarbon production activities for iron catalysts supported on carbon nanotubes and annealed under Ar (H2/CO = 1:1, 340 °C, 20 bar) vs. FexC particle size. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 (left), ref. 68 (centre), and ref. 70 (right). Copyright (2009) Elsevier, (2011) Elsevier, and (2012) American Chemical Society, respectively. 
In the case of cobalt, the hexagonal close-packed Co(hcp) phase is more stable for large particles, whereas the face-centred cubic Co(fcc) lattice can be stabilised in small particles.64 However, a thorough multi-technique study by de Jong and co-workers revealed that the higher activities and chain growth probabilities for larger (>6 nm) particles were due to the existence of terraces hosting the variety of sites needed for efficient Fischer–Tropsch performance rather than to the effects of the crystal phase.65 Coincident conclusions were established in another study for Co/C(graphite) Fischer–Tropsch catalysts, suggesting in this case that particles of a sufficiently large diameter (>7 nm) presented step edges required to lower the activation energy for CO dissociation; moreover, the C5+ selectivities increased with particle size, presumably due to a higher density of polymerisation active sites.66 A similar trend was outlined by Prieto et al. for cobalt catalysts supported on delaminated zeolite supports (see Fig. 2, left); however, they ascribed the lower activity of smaller particles to flattening and to a subsequent higher propensity for cobalt oxidation on the perimeter of these surface-reconstructed species.67
Decreasing surface-specific activities below a critical diameter (<10 nm, in a particular study on Ru/γ-Al2O3 samples treated at varying reduction pre-treatment temperatures and times for the attainment of different sizes) has also been observed for ruthenium (see plot in Fig. 2, centre).68 In this case, the lower rates on smaller particles were attributed to strong CO adsorption rather than to intrinsic changes of the surface active sites. It should be noted that a thorough screening of metal dispersions and supports on either ruthenium or cobalt catalysts by Iglesia and co-workers showed that the effects of particle size on rates under Fischer–Tropsch relevant conditions were minor, provided that metal reduction was essentially complete; however, no assessment of the minimum critical size was undertaken.69
The case of iron is less clear, with opposite trends observed.11,63,71 A plausible reason for this data scatter is the formation of inactive mixed oxide phases (silicates or aluminates) from small iron nanoparticles supported on non-inert materials (silica or alumina), which result in lower apparent specific activities. This was suggested after studies using inert carbon nanofiber supports; it was shown that smaller iron particles gave rise to higher TOFs, but that this was mainly caused by enhanced methanation (an example is shown in Fig. 2, right).70,72,73 As supported by theoretical calculations of CO hydrogenation on iron carbide (χ-Fe5C2 assumed as the active phase) reported by de Jong and co-workers, there is an inverse relationship between the surface coverage of H/CHx species and the particle size, which accounts for the higher activities and lower hydrocarbon selectivities of smaller particles.72 In another study, severe sintering of iron carbide particles was observed upon prolonged Fischer–Tropsch operation for Na- and S-promoted iron catalysts, resulting in decreased mass-specific activities.74
In this review, special emphasis will be given to investigations of the evolution of the chemical compositions, morphologies and surface states of catalysts. To this end, various commonly employed characterisation techniques will be analysed (section 2), focusing on rapidly advancing in situ and operando methods which shed renewed light on or challenge previous concepts on the nature of active phases. The roles of the relevant phases of active metals in Fischer–Tropsch and CO2 hydrogenation catalysts will be surveyed (sections 3–5). It is interesting to note that the increasing sophistication of characterisation techniques is not only allowing observation of phenomena at enhanced resolution, but also distinction between the bulk structure and surface sites.11,61,75 Often, the active sites forming on surface phases extend to a very limited depth; for this reason, they are extremely difficult to identify and examine.
2. Identification of active phases
2.1. Classical ex situ characterisation
Routine characterisation techniques—X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Raman spectroscopy, or physisorption, to name a few examples—provide valuable information about the composition of Fischer–Tropsch catalysts. Transmission (TEM) and scanning (SEM) electron microscopy techniques are also crucial to examine the morphologies of the materials. Sample manipulation usually involves contact with ambient air, which may induce bulk or surface oxidation. Especially in deactivation studies, this can be misleading; for example, oxides may be erroneously related to these deactivation events.11,76 Careful post-treatment of used catalyst samples by mild passivation or manipulation in inert atmospheres (i.e. in glove boxes) may prove useful; however, minor phase or surface modifications cannot be completely excluded in these cases.52,61,67,75–79 Notwithstanding, wax-coated samples from slurry reactors have been successfully analysed by several techniques while avoiding bulk modification of the catalysts.76 In other instances, ex situ characterisation has only limited validity and, where possible, additional in situ or pseudo in situ experiments should be performed.62,77,80
2.2. Designed pseudo in situ characterisation
Several techniques indirectly provide hints of the surface phenomena taking place upon contact between the catalyst and reactant gases at conditions close to, but not identical to, operation. Temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) and desorption (TPD) are well-known examples of this phenomenon. The former involves monitoring the reaction between a reducing gas (commonly H2, temperature-programmed hydrogenation, TPH) and a catalyst sample. These techniques can be utilised to investigate active metal phase changes, such as those shown in Fig. 1,81–83 or the nature of carbon deposits on the catalyst surfaces.61,62,76 Moreover, TPD has long been used to suggest plausible surface reactions involving adsorbed reactants or intermediates. This is the case for the studies on Ni/SiO2 samples after CO2 adsorption which suggest direct dissociation (eqn (18)).84 The effects of promoters on the nature of the active sites were also probed by TPR and TPD; in this context, the presence of alkaline metals (chiefly Na or K) is related to higher reduction temperatures, decreased H2 chemisorption and enhanced CO2 adsorption, presumably resulting in higher olefin selectivities in iron-catalysed CO2 hydrogenation reactions.42,85–89
Spectroscopic methods have been adapted to study the evolution of catalysts and related surface phenomena under conditions similar to those employed during reactions. The most frequently employed spectroscopic technique used in the context of Fischer–Tropsch chemistry is infrared (IR) spectroscopy in the presence of reactive gases, especially CO.67,90–92 Kadinov et al. observed different species resulting from the adsorption of CO on cobalt catalysts, namely linear Co(0)–CO and Coδ+–CO, and formation of carbonate/bicarbonate adsorbates with concomitant Co reduction upon exposition to increased amounts of CO, albeit always at sub-atmospheric pressures; desorption was evidenced under vacuum and was significantly accelerated in the presence of H2.90 Diffuse-reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS), whereby the multiple-fold reflection of the incident wavelength on rough solid surfaces enhances signal detection of the adsorbed species, allows more realistic conditions to be applied because high temperature and high pressure sample cells can be adapted to the equipment. An example of the application of DRIFTS to the investigation of the role of cobalt carbides in the transformation of CO into hydrocarbons in Fischer–Tropsch processes was reported by Ha and co-workers; they complemented these measurements with X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) under reductive (H2) treatment at ambient pressure as well as TPH data, which revealed the in situ transformation of Co2C to Co(hcp).81
The identities of the active phases in Fischer–Tropsch iron catalysts were monitored by XAS of samples after exposure to synthesis gas in a quartz absorption cell at reaction temperatures for a given period of time, followed by cooling to room temperature; this study suggested that the formation of Fe3O4 and FexC phases is related to the onset of hydrocarbon production after an induction time.75 Both X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) techniques were used to ascertain the oxidation states of the active metals in various bimetallic catalysts after reduction, in combination with IR measurements in the presence of CO2/H2 mixtures.93 Another technique frequently employed for the study of catalyst composition in the presence of reactive gases at low pressures is XPS.94–98 For example, the proportions of cobalt phases was determined for carbon-coated bulk cobalt nanoparticles under H2/CO2 mixtures (<1 mbar) under both thermal and photothermal conditions; in the same study, Raman spectroscopy was used to monitor the presence of cobalt oxide and graphitic carbon domains.99
Electron microscopy comprises an array of experimental techniques which are rapidly advancing towards the observation of catalyst samples under near-operational conditions. An approximation of in situ examination via TEM is the use of protective atmosphere sample holders which can be loaded after pre-treatment or reactions avoiding contact with air. This setup provides the interesting option of taking micrographs of the same areas before and after controlled exposure to air; for example, this method was used to prove that classical passivation procedures are not appropriate for iron catalysts because they cause transformations of the relevant carbide phases into carbon overlayers.77 Scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) along with low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) have been used to study the interconversion of cobalt species and phases upon annealing in situ under ultra-high vacuum.91
2.3. Advanced in situ and operando methods
The approximation of operational Fischer–Tropsch conditions requires the construction of custom-made measurement cells or modified reaction chambers. The most serious concern in these setups is generally high pressure, which severely affects the safety of the process and, in some cases (chiefly IR spectroscopy), generates excessively noisy background signals which increase the difficulty of observation. However, special experimental designs can be utilised for high-pressure IR observations (such as attenuated total reflectance, ATR).100,101 The most mature technique is probably in situ XRD using quartz capillary cells, which enables measurements under pressures up to ca. 20 atm.80,83,94,102–107 These experimental setups can be used under intense synchrotron radiation to increase signal-to-noise ratios in parallel with XAS measurements to obtain additional information on the oxidation states and local environments of active metal atoms.80,94,103–105,107,108 A schematic of one such cell for combined XRD, XAS and (in addition) Raman analysis is shown in Fig. 3.105 Ideally, in situ XRD cells enable the study of catalysts under working conditions coupled with product analyses by online gas chromatography (GC) or mass spectrometry (MS), thus representing truly operando measurements; this enables phase changes to be related with catalytic activity and/or selectivity.80,105,106,109,110 Pressures up to 50 bar can be applied on a special XANES cell equipped with mica windows, exhibiting remarkable mechanical properties.109
 Fig. 3  Scheme of a combined XRD–XAS–Raman experimental setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
Advanced methods have been also developed for the simultaneous measurement of XAS and wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) to provide insight into both local and long-range order; this enables tracing of the evolution of both amorphous and crystalline phases, respectively.111 Although this study was performed at atmospheric pressures, it is of relevance due to the value of the information generated for a range of supported and non-supported, Cu-promoted and non-promoted, iron catalysts under high-temperature operation. Another insightful study on the identification of cobalt phases was performed by in situ XRD-CT (CT: computed tomography) combined with the pair distribution function (PDF) technique based on X-ray scattering to account for small particles that elude detection by diffraction; both tests were performed under synchrotron radiation on a single pellet at atmospheric pressure.108 Another study based on operando XRD and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) tomography imaging at moderate pressures (<4 bar), wherein each image point contains a spectrum or pattern, enabled monitoring of the chemical composition of a titania-modified silica-supported cobalt–rhenium catalyst in real time at microscopic resolution.110 The nature of the iron phases during the formation of carbon-encapsulated nanoparticles (Fe@C) by pyrolysis of a metal–organic framework (MOF) was also thoroughly monitored by a combined XAS/DRIFTS/Mössbauer spectroscopic study.73 In this work, thermal treatments under moderate pressures were applied and online product analyses were performed by MS, showing the in situ formation of relevant carbide phases.
A recent study has undertaken the study of Rh/TiO2 catalysts under CO2 hydrogenation operating conditions by DRIFTS coupled to online GC analyses in addition to in situ scanning TEM (STEM), proving the formation of surface overlayers composed of oxygenated (HCOx) intermediates and migrating Ti3+ species.112 It should be noted, however, that these experiments were performed at atmospheric pressure and thus represent an approximation of realistic reaction conditions. It should be also mentioned that truly in situ DRIFTS measurements (up to 230 °C and 20 bar) have been reported to study the intermediates of the CO2 hydrogenation reaction to methanol on Cu/ZrO2 catalysts.53 Earlier, Weckhuysen and co-workers developed a nanoreactor for high-temperature operation, also at atmospheric pressure, for scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) observations with a ≈15 nm resolution; they were able to discern several iron phases and to produce corresponding phase distribution maps.113,114 The same authors employed the in situ STXM technique to monitor cobalt species under Fischer–Tropsch operation; they found that dispersion progressively occurred, leading to a more homogeneous Co distribution.115 In addition, they were able to study the elemental distribution of catalyst particles by combining nano-tomographic transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM), providing 3D examination at a relatively lower resolution; STXM of samples prepared by ultra-microtomy provided insight into the interior of the particles, and STEM-EELS (EELS: electron energy loss microscopy) was used to produce sub-nanometre scale elemental maps (see Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic of a multiple chemical imaging approach, from 3D to 2D observation, and from micrometer to sub-nanometer scale of a cobalt-titania catalyst under Fischer–Tropsch conditions. In TXM, TiO2 is shown in red and Co is shown in blue. In STXM, TiO2 is shown in red, Co3O4 is shown in blue and Co2+ is shown in green. In STEM-EELS, TiO2 is shown in red, Co is shown in blue and carbon is shown in green. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright (2010) the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A different approach was adopted by Navarro et al.; they used a purpose-built flow microreactor equipped with a scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) tip, allowing the observation of adsorbed molecules on a Co (0 0 0 1) surface as a model catalyst.116 According to their calculations, the authors claimed that the terraces of cobalt became covered with arrays of linear hydrocarbons with 14 to 15 carbon atoms on average, forming quasi-monolayer islands. Other novel methods are arising as powerful characterisation techniques of observation-elusive phases, such as metastable cobalt carbides, which have been successfully detected by in situ magnetometry at realistic temperatures and partial pressures of CO, H2, and H2O.83
The array of methodologies and microreactor (or nanoreactor) engineering recently explored with significant success strongly illustrates the rapid advancement of characterisation techniques towards providing increasingly insightful knowledge of the chemical identities of catalysts and of related surface phenomena in Fischer–Tropsch and CO2 hydrogenation processes.
3. Cobalt catalysts
Cobalt has long been viewed as the ideal metal for gas-to-liquid Fischer–Tropsch catalysis wherein the H2/CO ratios in the feed gaseous stream are high (≈2) because it tends to provide low WGS activity, enhanced chain growth probability and high stability while enabling satisfactory conversions at relatively low temperatures (<240 °C).14,15,117,118 Notwithstanding, the suitability of cobalt catalysts for coal-to-liquid technologies involving less suitable H2/CO ratios has been demonstrated on a commercial scale.76 In the case of CO2 hydrogenation, Co-based catalysts tend to favour methanation; a separate rWGS unit is generally required upstream to enable previous CO2 conversion to CO.13–15,56
3.1. Cobalt oxides as precursors and emerging phases
Cobalt Fischer–Tropsch catalysts are commonly supported by various methods on appropriate inactive materials, which aid in the dispersion of the active phases.10,58 After cobalt deposition, calcination leads to the location of oxide phases on the support surface; these are subsequently transformed under pre-treatment or operating conditions to the metallic cobalt phases believed to serve as hosts for the active surfaces (analogously to the transformations depicted in Fig. 1 for iron).10,81,82,103,104,108 However, the detection of cobalt oxide phases in used catalysts, or even during operation, is not uncommon. For example, the proportion of CoOx species in carbon-coated cobalt materials under CO2 hydrogenation conditions was higher than 70%, as evidenced by pseudo in situ XPS.99 These may be the result of unreduced oxides, oxide particles only reduced at the surface or at near-surface depths, or re-oxidation of metallic or carbide phases. Re-oxidation can be caused by the action of water generated during the reaction as a by-product.56,108 Although it has been claimed that this latter transformation is not thermodynamically favourable in the bulk of the material, it may be possible in the absence of hydrogen.119 Moreover, highly dispersed cobalt may be susceptible to deactivation in the presence of water vapour.120
Step-wise reduction of Co3O4 to CoO and, eventually, to metallic Co during reductive pre-treatments has been confirmed based on in situ XRD.103,104,108 Several studies consistently support the observation of Co3O4 as the main cobalt phase present in the fresh catalysts after calcination.80,81,103,104,108,109,121 Interconversion between Co3O4 and CoO at near-surface depths was observed in model films under low-pressure CO atmospheres and annealing conditions, where cobalt ion migration is the suggested mechanism.91 A study based on operando (20 bar) XANES measurements of a Co/Al2O3 catalyst after activation under H2 and Fischer–Tropsch operation (H2/CO at 2:1 molar ratio) for 12 h showed that its chemical composition was close to that of a 1:1 (molar) CoO–Co(0) mixture.109 Although cobalt oxides are commonly believed to be inactive, their presence in the form of oxygen-defective shells surrounding Co(0) nanoparticles has been recently related to selective transformation of CO2 into CO, suggesting rWGS activity of these CoOx phases; it should be noted, however, that the reactions were carried out under low H2/CO2 ratios.122 The reaction of cobalt species with the components of the support may lead to the formation of inactive mixed oxides (cobalt silicates or aluminates), especially in the presence of water, at high temperatures, thus undermining the activity.120
Cobalt(II) oxide has been detected in used catalysts after Fischer–Tropsch reaction and passivation; however, the cause of its presence, whether formation under the latter treatment or veritable implication in the reaction, is difficult to ascertain.82,123 A recent study by Somorjai and co-workers evidenced that the nature of the active cobalt phases in either CO or CO2 hydrogenation depends on the nature of the support, based on in situ XAS and XPS methodologies performed under cycles of reductive and oxidative treatments.94 The activity was higher after reduction for Co catalysts on mesoporous SiO2, suggesting that metallic cobalt was the active phase, in accordance with most examples in prior work; the opposite effect was observed on TiO2. The authors concluded that reduction at 250 °C under H2 resulted in the formation of highly exposed CoO particles on the surface due to strong metal–support interactions, which represented a multiple-fold enhancement of reaction rates compared to catalyst samples treated at 450 °C under otherwise identical reduction conditions, wherein the resulting encapsulated Co(0) nanoparticles showed low activities. An illustration comparing both scenarios is shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Representation of the different transformations of cobalt species occurring on a TiO2 support during reduction under H2 (20% by volume, 1 atm, 1 h) at either 450 °C (encapsulation of metallic cobalt nanoparticles by TiOx overlayers, bottom left) or 250 °C (wetting of CoO nanoparticles strongly interacting with the support, bottom right), as suggested by XPS (H2, 1.3 10−4 atm, top right). The reaction rates indicated that the CoO species formed at lower temperatures display enhanced activity for either CO or CO2 hydrogenation (top left, H2/CO2 at a 3:1 ratio, 5 atm, 250 °C, 1 h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
3.2. Role of metallic cobalt
As mentioned above, the most widespread theory about Co Fischer–Tropsch catalysts claims that the species responsible for their activity involve cobalt in its zero oxidation state.10,18,81–83,103,108,119,123 This is based on observations of the different forms of metallic cobalt as major phases in catalysts under operation or after use. Structures based on the two main Co(0) lattices, namely Co(fcc) and Co(hcp), are generally found in different proportions. It should be noted that analogous considerations have been made for CO2 hydrogenation catalysis.14,15 However, the interconversion between the metallic cobalt lattices named above, several carbide stoichiometries, and cobalt oxides in different oxidation states and structures (namely crystalline vs. amorphous) under operation raises uncertainties regarding the exact nature of the active phases.
Theoretical investigations about the activation of CO on different facets of Co(0) lattices under Fischer–Tropsch conditions has suggested that Co(hcp) structures display significantly higher activity than their Co(fcc) counterparts; calculations based on a first-principles kinetic study considering a number of reaction pathways showed that the activation energies are lowest for direct dissociation of CO on several Co(hcp) facets.64 The conclusions of this computational study are supported on the grounds of various experimental examples. Sadeqzadeh et al. monitored phase transitions by in situ XRD and found that the pre-treatment of cobalt oxide precursors in Co/Al2O3 catalysts under hydrogen led to the formation of a bulk Co(fcc) phase showing Fischer–Tropsch activity; interestingly, an inactive carbide (Co2C) formed after further treatment under pure CO atmosphere was in turn reduced again under hydrogen, not in a reverse transformation to the original cubic lattice, but to an even more active Co(hcp) phase.104 Coincident observations stated that Co(hcp) formed by a similar hydrogenation–carburisation–hydrogenation pre-treatment displayed higher reaction rates and selectivities for C5+ products (see data in Tables 3 and 4), in addition to enhanced stabilities; the satisfactory performance of the hexagonal cobalt phase was ascribed to the presence of a larger degree of surface defects as active sites.81,123 The direct observation of growing hydrocarbon adsorbates on Co (0 0 0 1) surfaces by STM under operating conditions provides support for the successful performance of Co(hcp).116 An operando tomography study on a Re-promoted cobalt catalyst supported on TiO2-modified silica recently suggested that the presence of intergrown metallic cobalt, wherein stacking faults form on the Co(0) lattice after re-oxidation–reduction cycles, resulted in mixed fcc–hcp layer assemblies within the same particle; this resulted in high CO conversion, most likely due to an increased number of surface step-edges.110
Table 3 Comparison of the conversions and selectivitiesa of silica-supported cobalt catalysts consisting of either Co(fcc) or Co(hcp) phasesb in Fischer–Tropsch catalysis, showing the higher activity and slightly more favourable chain growth of the latter






TOS/h

χ(CO)/%

S/%







a Experimental conditions: 220 °C, 19.9 bar, H2/CO = 2, 3.0 L h−1 gcat−1.
b Samples prepared by cobalt impregnation (nominal Co loading: 20%) on silica, followed by (i) reduction in H2/He (1:3), 350 °C, 10 h, for the formation of Co(fcc); or (ii) reduction in H2/He (1:3), 350 °C, 10 h; then carburisation in CO, 230 °C, 15 h; then reduction in H2, 230 °C, 24 h, for the formation of Co(hcp). Data taken with permission from ref. 123. Copyright (2013) Elsevier.











CH4
C5+


Co(fcc)
13.0
45.1
6.4
86.1




492.0
32.1
7.2
82.9


Co(hcp)
16.0
63.1
3.5
88.2




450.0
55.5
4.2
90.2




Table 4 Comparison of the conversions and selectivitiesa of Co(hcp) and Co(fcc) phases generated in situ from Co2C/Al2O3 or CoPt/Al2O3 materials, respectively, in a slurry-phase Fischer–Tropsch reaction







χ(CO)/%

S/%









a Experimental conditions: 220 °C, 20 bar, H2/CO/CO2/Ar = 57.3/28.4/9.3/5.0, 4.0 L h−1 gcat−1, catalytic properties determined after 50 h on stream.
b The Pt:Co3O4/Al2O3 material was prepared by impregnation of cobalt and platinum (23 and 0.05% by weight, respectively) on γ-Al2O3, and the derived Co(fcc) phase was formed by ex situ reduction at 400 °C in H2(5%)/He for 12 h.
c The Co2C/Al2O3 material was prepared by reduction in flowing H2(10%)/N2 (1 bar, 500 mL min−1) for 5 h at 400 °C and subsequent carburisation at 220 °C in CO (20 bar, 150 mL min−1) for 5 h; the derived Co(hcp) phase was generated by ex situ reduction at 220 °C in H2(5%)/He (20 bar) for 6 h. Data taken with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2013) Elsevier.









CH4
C2–C4
C5+


Co(fcc) from Pt:Co3O4/Al2O3b
58.0
3.9
6.8
89.3


Co(hcp) from Co2C/Al2O3c
70.0
1.9
4.0
94.1




The formation of efficient COx hydrogenation catalysts consisting of Co(hcp) as the major form of cobalt via H2 treatment of Co2C was also reported for platinum-promoted catalysts.81,82 Successful regeneration experiments performed by carburisation–hydrogenation confirmed this hypothesis based on the intermediate formation of inactive Co2C,82 whereas TPH showed that the carbide is more easily reduced to metallic cobalt (at temperatures as low as 160 °C) than the oxides.81 The interconversions of carbide, oxide and metal phases appear to be reversible to some extent under varying conditions; thus, modulation of their relative abundance in a Co catalyst at a given time is possible at or near the surface. In this line, the formation of surface layers of Co(hcp) by slow decarburisation of any Co2C phases formed by CO pre-treatment in platinum-promoted, alumina-supported materials is reasonable and is likely beneficial for Fischer–Tropsch activity.83 In a study by Claeys and co-workers, the above described transformations were clearly observed by in situ XRD under hydrogenation of cobalt precursors (resulting in the formation of mainly Co(fcc) and, to a minor extent, Co(hcp)), subsequent carburisation into Co2C, and rapid carbide reduction to Co(hcp). A representation of the evolution of the relevant phases in terms of relative abundance is shown in Fig. 6 along with the pre-treatment temperatures. Other reports agree with the formation of Co2C by carburisation under CO atmosphere; meanwhile, they suggest that an interface between the carbide and Co(fcc) is formed on the surface of carbon-supported catalysts during Fischer–Tropsch operation based on TEM measurements and that this particular morphology enables high selectivities to alcohols.124 Theoretical calculations in this study supported that metal and carbide surfaces induce dissociative and non-dissociative CO activation, respectively, presumably leading to the coexistence of hydrogenated and oxygenated carbon adsorbates which eventually interact to form linear alcohols.
 Fig. 6  Evolution of the main phases observed by in situ XRD (bottom panels) during the pre-treatment of Pt:Co/Al2O3 (Pt and Co contents were 0.05 and 20% by weight relative to the support, respectively) under H2, CO and H2 again (100, 130 and 100 mL min−1, respectively, atmospheric pressure in all cases) according to the depicted temperature profile (top panels). Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2014) Elsevier. 
Solvothermal synthesis of Co nanoparticles with controlled sizes has been reported as a suitable methodology for the preparation of CO2 hydrogenation catalysts.97,125 Pure Co nanoparticles supported on silica consisted of partially oxidised species which underwent almost complete reduction to the metallic state at temperatures above 175 °C under hydrogen, as indicated by EXAFS measurements; selectivities for hydrocarbons using these materials were low to moderate.125 This method was later modified for the production of core–shell Ni@Co nanoparticles; they evolved under reactant gases to metallic states wherein part of the nickel migrated to the surface, resulting in NiCo (1:1) alloy shells, as suggested by pseudo in situ XPS, XAS and TEM observations at ambient pressure. Interestingly, significant amounts of C1 oxygenates were formed using these catalysts in a silica-supported configuration at moderate pressure.97 Cobalt–copper alloys, whose preparation is frequently reported to be elusive due to mutual immiscibility,126 were successfully prepared by reduction of molybdate precursors under appropriate conditions (400 °C; Cu/Co ≈ 1/2, higher Cu contents leading to segregation of Cu phases); their performance as selective catalysts for the production of C2+ alcohols via CO hydrogenation was demonstrated.127
3.3. Role of cobalt carbides
There is wide consensus regarding cobalt carbides as inactive phases, and their formation during Fischer–Tropsch or CO2 hydrogenation processes is often related to deactivation.10,13,128 However, some early studies interpreted that the role of cobalt carbides in catalysis may extend further and that they can possibly be implicated as an intermediate surface species in the mechanism8 or, as mentioned in the preceding section, serve as the immediate precursor of active Co(0) sites.80–82,104,106 Synchrotron radiation photoemission spectroscopy on model cobalt surfaces have suggested that adsorbed carbon atoms from CO dissociation dissolve in the bulk, forming carbides, which can subsequently be hydrogenated to hydrocarbons.44 The formation of discrete surface carbidic carbon atoms as intermediates in the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis of hydrocarbons on cobalt catalysts supported on delaminated zeolites has also been observed by pseudo in situ IR spectroscopy.67 Moreover, recent studies based on advanced in situ characterisation techniques are beginning to question the extended view of cobalt carbides as either spectators or inhibitors of the hydrogenation–polymerisation processes, as henceforth discussed.
The comprehensive characterisation study by Claeys and co-workers discussed above demonstrated that only 5% to 7% of cobalt is in the form of carbides under working Fischer–Tropsch conditions because their formation is kinetically strongly inhibited; among the different possible carbides, Co2C was found to be the major—yet metastable—phase, whereas the stability of Co3C was even lower.83 Based on an array of in situ techniques and catalytic tests, carbides were mainly found to exert low activity and selectivity for methane, although their presence as precursors for more efficient Co(hcp) phases was postulated.
Also mentioned in the preceding section is the relevance of carbides for the synthesis of alcohols from syngas, in particular the role of Co2C surfaces in activating CO via a non-dissociating route.124 Another proof of the relevance of cobalt carbides in the catalytic transformation of CO was established by Davis and co-workers; in their report, they demonstrated that the stabilisation of Co2C by introduction of alkaline metals (especially potassium) resulted in noticeably enhanced WGS activity and, in parallel, significantly decreased methane selectivity.129 These conclusions were supported by XRD measurements of passivated catalysts after carburisation pre-treatment (under CO atmosphere) and then after exposure to fuel cell feed reaction conditions (CO/H2O/H2/N2 at a ca. 3:26:30:4 molar ratio, 180 °C to 300 °C), which evidenced the formation of Co2C for all the alkali-modified materials after CO treatment. In line with these findings, the same authors proved that carburised, Na-promoted Co/SiO2 catalysts rich in Co2C exert high C2+ alcohol selectivity in CO2 hydrogenation processes, whereas alkali-free counterparts cannot stabilise carbide phases and evolve mostly into WGS-inactive but methanation-active Co(hcp).130 Interestingly, these results imply that cobalt carbides, in contrast to metallic cobalt, provide CO2 activation sites.
Breakthrough investigations conceiving cobalt carbides as active phases for the production of olefins by Fischer–Tropsch processes have been recently reported; specifically, Co2C nanoprisms were proposed as highly active and selective materials.131,132 This is conceptually analogous to what is generally observed for iron carbides (see the following section), which is supported by the effect of several promoters, among which alkaline metals such as sodium enhance olefin-to-paraffin ratios and limit methanation.132 The formation of Co2C nanoprisms preferentially exposing {1 0 1} and {0 2 0} facets (see Fig. 7) was accomplished via the sequential reduction–carburisation of CoxMn1−xO precursors in the presence of residual amounts of sodium, with concomitant segregation of MnO domains; this resulted in catalysts which showed immediate activity and high olefin selectivity.131 Theoretical calculations supported the hypothesis based on the aforementioned facets conforming to active surfaces for olefin synthesis, together with low activity towards methane formation. Later studies showed that mixed cobalt–manganese oxide underwent reduction to Co(fcc), Co(hcp) and MnO phases, whereas subsequent carburisation under syngas resulted in the formation of Co2C nanoprisms; this transformation was promoted by the presence of sodium.132
 Fig. 7  Low-resolution (a and b) and high-resolution (c–e) TEM images of the Co2C nanoprisms formed by hydrogenation–carburisation of CoxMn1−xO under steady-state Fischer–Tropsch operating conditions, the latter showing the preferentially exposed (1 0 1), (−1 0 1) and (0 2 0) surfaces, according to a parallelepiped model (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2016) Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The case of cobalt carbides is under debate. Their traditional consideration as inactive Fischer–Tropsch phases is widely accepted. However, recent work attributes a more decisive role to metastable Co2C in Fischer–Tropsch processes, mostly as the immediate precursor of highly active Co(hcp). On the other hand, surface cobalt carbides are believed to act as intermediates of the growing hydrocarbon chains. More dissenting observations directly suggest that certain Co2C morphologies may exhibit genuine CO2 activation or Fischer–Tropsch activity.
4. Iron catalysts
After cobalt, iron is the most intensively studied metal for Fischer–Tropsch and CO2 hydrogenation processes.11,12,14,15,133 Iron catalysts are known to promote the WGS (and its reverse) reaction, which accounts for its suitability in situations where favouring the two-way (equilibrium) transformation between CO and CO2 is desired, that is, Fischer–Tropsch feeds high in CO or direct CO2 hydrogenation.15,36,56 As further discussed below, the presence of iron oxide phases that can adsorb and activate CO2 is crucial.52 In any case, iron catalysts appear to enable the attainment of steady CO partial pressures at (near-)equilibrium; thus, their catalytic performance tends to be similar regardless of whether CO or CO2 is used as the carbon source.52 However, the natures of the active iron phases and sites responsible for each particular transformation in these technologies is strongly debated.11,18
4.1. Iron oxides as precursors and emerging phases
The preparation of iron-based catalysts for COx hydrogenation processes may take place by either impregnation on inert supports56,134,135 or by precipitation as bulk materials.59,120 Most procedures include a calcination step, giving rise to the formation of iron oxides. Generally, Fe2O3 is the main oxide formed upon calcination in air,78,95,135 where hematite (α) is a more common polymorph than maghemite (γ); subsequent reduction under streams rich in H2 at moderate-to-high temperatures causes sequential reduction to Fe3O4 (magnetite), FeO, and finally Fe(0), as seen in Fig. 1.11,37,56,86,88 Direct transformation of iron oxides into carbides is also common via treatments under CO or H2/CO.136 During catalytic operation, the phases evolve towards the coexistence of various oxide, metallic and carbidic domains.52,136
Magnetite is frequently considered as a notably active phase for the rWGS reaction.12,14 Other studies suggest the emergence of amorphous FeOx at long time-on-stream regimes as phases favouring rWGS.52 As mentioned above, regardless of the active phase for this reaction, iron catalysts present remarkable versatility to promote hydrogenation–polymerisation processes over a wide range of CO/CO2 ratios.18,52,56,137 High efficiencies have been specifically reported for alkali-promoted iron catalysts.56 It has been postulated that reduced iron phases may re-oxidise in contact with water formed as a by-product during the hydrogenation steps, detrimentally affecting performance,134 whereas alkali promoters stabilise Fe against this oxidation pathway.120,138 However, the presence of significant amounts of iron oxides is often related to high catalyst efficiency. This is the case for a material formed after an induction period during Fischer–Tropsch conditions from a Fe2O3 precursor prepared on an iron foil which has the Fe3O4@Fe5C2 morphology.139
More detailed investigations of the rWGS reaction on iron oxides suggest that surface species in these materials are involved in a redox catalytic cycle, whereby Fe(III) is reduced to Fe(II) by H2 with concomitant abstraction of surface oxygen atoms, leaving the corresponding oxygen vacancies behind. These oxygen vacancies then become the active sites for CO2 activation and reduction via CO bond scission, leading to the release of CO and the restoration of the original Fe(III).43,57 Re-oxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III) in Fe3O4-based materials has been proven by in situ XAS and XPS for the WGS reaction.140 Other studies agree on the exclusive activity of magnetite for the rWGS reaction by demonstrating that CO is the only product during CO2 hydrogenation under high concentrations of steam used to avoid the formation of iron carbides, which induces hydrocarbon formation by Fischer–Tropsch processes.42
Iron oxides have occasionally been suggested as active Fischer–Tropsch phases; however, they are more often considered as precursors for the components that exert catalytic properties and, on occasions, as inactive phases responsible for deactivation.11 Regardless of the interpretation derived from each particular study, iron oxides are always present in variable amounts after use or during operation. For this reason, and based on advanced in situ characterisation techniques, it has been recently postulated that active surfaces (mostly carbides) grow under operating conditions on the surface of presumably inactive iron oxide cores.37,75,141 This morphology was observed by high resolution TEM (HRTEM) after passivation of bulk iron or iron–cobalt catalysts prepared by precipitation and treated by carburisation under CO atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 8.141 Although surface changes are possible during passivation procedures (see section 2.1) and the state of the material under real operation conditions was not studied, the HRTEM measurements show clear differences between pure iron, pure cobalt and iron–cobalt bimetallic materials: whereas carbides and graphitic layers on Fe3O4 cores are clearly visible for compositions containing only iron, the formation of CoxC is less apparent and only oxides (CoO) are present at the surface of metallic phases for pure Co materials; furthermore, mixed oxides (CoFe2O4) were identified in bimetallic samples (Fig. 8). Catalytic performance is markedly influenced by the Fe/Co ratio: whereas conversion decreases with increasing iron content, formation of C2–4 hydrocarbons and oxygenates is enhanced for iron-rich formulations (this is illustrated in Fig. 9 and will be further discussed in section 4.3). The role of bimetallic Fe–Co oxide surfaces in alumina-supported catalysts for the adsorption of hydrogen has been also proposed based on TPH measurements.89 It should be noted that the formation of particles composed of magnetite cores surrounded by layers of iron carbides and graphitic carbon has long been apparent in used Fischer–Tropsch catalysts.133 Another example in this line describes the hydrothermal synthesis of highly dispersed FeOx nanoparticles embedded in a carbon matrix as appropriate precursors for the formation of carbides near the surface of particles.142
 Fig. 8  High-resolution TEM images of Fe–Co catalysts prepared by mixed oxalate pyrolysis: bulk Fe (top left), Fe3Co (top right), FeCo (bottom left) and Co (bottom right) after carburisation treatment (CO atmosphere, 250 °C, 20 h) and passivation (O2(1% mol)/He, room temperature, 6 h), showing the identification of different crystalline phases according to their lattice planar distances. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  Selectivity and conversion dependence upon Fe/Co ratios in carburised Fe–Co materials prepared by mixed oxalate pyrolysis (pre-treatment conditions as in Fig. 8) for CO2 hydrogenation (reaction conditions: 9.2 bar, H2/CO2 = 2.5). Left: CO2 conversions and selectivities towards various product families (as described in the inset legend) at 250 °C. Right: Selectivities for oxygenates at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
In summary, iron oxides show a higher tendency to persist under operating conditions (decreased reducibility) compared to cobalt oxides; for this reason, the common view relating FeOx to the frequently observed WGS/rWGS activity and, hence, to better performance under CO2-rich streams is not surprising. Furthermore, the favourable formation of iron carbides (see the following section) is apparent from many reports, and the interconversion between these carbides and their oxide counterparts on active surfaces is increasingly seen to be a beneficial phenomenon for COx hydrogenation–polymerisation efficiency.37
4.2. Role of metallic iron
In the case of cobalt, the metallic state is frequently believed to provide active surfaces for CO hydrogenation–polymerisation processes; however, this belief is not as widespread for metallic iron.11,12,18,36,55 This is mostly due to the fact that multiple phases are generally identified by characterisation of used or operating iron catalysts, and their proportions vary during the process due to facile interconversion. Metallic iron phases are common in catalysts pre-treated by reduction under H2, where α-Fe (a body-centred cubic lattice) is the most abundant; however, this phase may evolve under operating conditions to carbides, as evidenced in Fischer–Tropsch processes.52
The content of Fe(0) in iron catalysts under Fischer–Tropsch operating conditions was estimated to be between 20% and 40% based on STXM observations, although it should be noted that this technique does not allow unambiguous discernment between metallic and carbide phases.113 The formation of metallic iron has been postulated on the basis of TPH results, showing that the temperatures of reduction can be modulated by the presence of promoters. Whereas alkaline metal additives (chiefly K) invariably impair reduction, other promoters, such as Zn or Zr, cause similar effects at low proportions; however, with increasing concentration, they improve dispersion of iron species and their reduction to the metallic state.86,88 The effects of copper as a reduction promoter in iron catalysts are more obvious, favouring the ultimate transformation of Fe3O4 into α-Fe, as evidenced by TPH and pseudo in situ XPS (under a H2/CO atmosphere at a 1:2 molar ratio and 4 × 10−4 bar), due to both textural and electronic effects.95,96 Copper also provides hydrogenation sites via spillover and promotes non-dissociative CO insertion mechanisms, resulting in lower olefin and higher oxygenate selectivities.96 As also supported by theoretical calculations,143 ethanol tends to be the predominant product in copper–iron catalysed CO hydrogenation due to favourable CO insertion into adsorbed CH2 intermediates.96
Metallic iron has been deemed inactive in some studies, in contrast to what is generally accepted for the metallic phases of cobalt, nickel or ruthenium.52,144,145 This is partly based on the fact that freshly reduced iron catalysts show little Fischer–Tropsch activity initially but require an induction period upon exposure to the reactive syngas feed. A thorough study in this context determined that several episodes can be observed during time-on-stream for a bulk, potassium-promoted, aluminium- and copper-containing iron catalyst. The former episodes are represented by the presence of α-Fe and significant carbon uptake but a lack of CO2 hydrogenation activity (see Fig. 10).52 These phenomena were interpreted as the transformation of the inactive metallic phase into the active carbide phases according to the observed increase in activity during the latter episodes.
 Fig. 10  The composition of an iron catalyst (determined by Mössbauer spectroscopy, K-promoted, Fe–Cu–Al-containing material) at various stages during operation in a CO2 hydrogenation process (H2/CO2 = 3, 250 °C, 10 bar). In episodes I–III, carbon was retained on the catalyst and insignificant hydrocarbon formation was observed, whereas Fischer–Tropsch activity increased as a carbide phase started to dominate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright (2003) Plenum Publishing Corporation. 
The pyrolysis of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) is being proposed as a method for the preparation of highly dispersed, carbon-coated Fe(0) nanoparticles with activity for COx hydrogenation–polymerisation.73,146 However, the evolution of metallic phases into carbide phases was demonstrated by an in situ XAS/DRIFTS/Mössbauer spectroscopic study.73 Considering all the above facts, the relevance of iron carbides for efficient catalytic COx hydrogenation–polymerisation processes is clear, as supported by a number of investigations. The following section delves into the specific functions of the different FexC structures.
4.3. Role of iron carbides
In contrast to the case of cobalt, iron carbides are often described as the active COx hydrogenation–polymerisation phases, although this argument is controversial.11,13,14,135 The underlying reason for this may be related to the propensity for dissociation of CO bonds on iron materials, which is a previous step in the formation of carbide phases by carbon migration into the metallic lattices.56,133 In fact, theoretical calculations have suggested that carbide phases are more stable than metallic iron under relevant Fischer–Tropsch conditions.105 As a consequence, different iron carbide structures are frequently identified as ubiquitous components in spent catalysts; however, this does not necessarily imply their direct participation in providing active sites in all instances. The most common iron carbide compositions are ε-Fe2C, ε′-Fe2.2C, Fe7C3, χ-Fe5C2, θ-Fe3C and amorphous FexC;11,12 their relative stabilities depend on the experimental conditions.105 It should be stressed that iron carbides are extremely prone to oxidation and, thus, are difficult to detect (for example, by TEM) in air-exposed samples, even after mild passivation.79
The formation of iron carbides can be viewed as a result of the inclusion of carbon atoms in metallic iron. These carbon atoms generally occupy interstices in the lattices, and their degree of ordering is limited. Their roles in the structures and properties of the resulting FexC materials are of vital importance. Electron density is transferred from Fe to C in iron carbides, as demonstrated by theoretical calculations.147 Therefore, dissociated hydrogen atoms adsorb preferentially on surface carbon atoms, thus enhancing the hydrogenation capacity of iron carbide surfaces during Fischer–Tropsch synthesis.72 Furthermore, carbon stabilises certain structures, such as the hexagonal close packed lattices in ε-carbides, more than the parent metal.147
Mechanistic studies have frequently considered the possibility of carbon in bulk iron carbides becoming part of the growing hydrocarbon chains during Fischer–Tropsch operation.37,38,128 Other investigations suggest adsorbed carbon (surface carbide) species as the exclusive precursors of the products.61,136 Recently, carburisation of iron catalysts supported on carbon nanotubes using 13CO and subsequent mass analysis of Fischer–Tropsch products proved that carbon in the previously formed Fe513C2 did become part of the evolved hydrocarbon; however, because multiple labelling was negligible, it was proposed that carbide carbon may initiate but not propagate chain growth.148 It is even plausible that bulk carbidic carbon may form aromatic (graphitic) deposits.61
Other studies suggesting the direct involvement of surface carbon atoms on FexC in CO hydrogenation processes using 14CO were reported as long ago as 1948.149 More recent mechanistic studies agree on proposing a catalytic cycle whereby direct hydrogenation of surface carbon atoms results in their eventual abstraction in the form of hydrocarbon products, leaving carbon vacancies behind.42,43 Then, CO is adsorbed on these vacancies and readily dissociates after coordination to the neighbouring iron atoms. Conversely, Fe-terminated surfaces are believed to be appropriate sites for chain growth reactions. These hypotheses have also been supported by theoretical calculations.150,151
The implementation of different pre-treatment procedures may lead to different iron carbide lattices. A systematic study on precipitated hematite precursors (either pure or doped with Ce or Mn) showed that pre-treatment at atmospheric pressure under syngas (H2/CO = 2) or CO at 450 °C resulted in the preferential formation of χ-Fe5C2 or θ-Fe3C, respectively, where the former is less active.136 Investigations on either iron or iron–copper catalysts containing potassium as an additive showed that reduction in H2 at 350 °C favoured the formation of θ-Fe3C and ε-Fe2C, whereas pre-treatment under syngas (H2/CO = 2) at 250 °C was efficient for the preferential growth of the active χ-Fe5C2 lattice in addition to γ-Fe; interestingly, the θ-Fe3C phase appeared to be the precursor for carbon deposits that are responsible for deactivation.111 Along the same lines, carbon-coated iron catalysts prepared by a MOF precursor decomposition method also resulted in the preferential formation of χ-Fe5C2 or ε′-Fe2.2C phases (based on Mössbauer spectroscopy data) after syngas or H2 treatments, respectively; the former led to enhanced chain growth in Fischer–Tropsch catalysis.79 Pre-treatment of precipitated and calcined iron or nickel–iron oxides under syngas (H2/CO = 2) at 280 °C and atmospheric pressure yielded catalysts containing Fe3O4 and χ-Fe5C2 phases with increasing nickel proportions, resulting in decreased carbide contents and thus disfavouring hydrocarbon chain growth; after Fischer–Tropsch reactions, the carbides were transformed into magnetite and FeNi3 alloy.78 A material consisting of FeOx nanoparticles dispersed within a carbon matrix was reduced towards the formation of a mixture of θ-Fe3C and χ-Fe5C2, based on Mössbauer spectroscopy results.142
The χ-Fe5C2 structure has been recognised as the one of the most active iron carbides for Fischer–Tropsch catalysis. In this context, Duan and co-workers performed theoretical calculations, revealing that the χ-Fe5C2 (5 1 0) surfaces are especially suitable for the dissociation of CO and the formation of C–C bonds; this supports the observed efficient production of hydrocarbons by COx hydrogenation–polymerisation.152,153 In addition to χ-Fe5C2, Fe7C3 has also been considered as an active Fischer–Tropsch phase in silica- and potassium-containing catalysts.154 The selective formation of χ-Fe5C2, in addition to metallic Fe and Cu, was reported as the result of sequential pre-treatments of a delafossite (CuFeO2) precursor under H2 and syngas; TPH, XRD, XPS and XAS data indicated that copper acted as an efficient reduction and carburisation promoter, whereas CO2 hydrogenation–polymerisation tests proved that χ-Fe5C2 limited methane and enhanced hydrocarbon (C5+) formation.155
Despite the fact that the formation of iron carbides in different proportions is often an unpredictable result of particular synthetic and pre-treatment protocols, the directed preparation of a given phase has been achieved with significant success. This was the case in the production of ε-Fe2C materials by rapid leaching of aluminium from FeAl alloys in aqueous alkaline media; these materials showed good activity and stability in low-temperature Fischer–Tropsch processes.107 This work claimed that the superior performance of these catalysts compared to other iron carbide and cobalt counterparts was due to the intrinsic features of ε-Fe2C compared to other more common carbide phases, such as χ-Fe5C2, regarding the activation of CO. Ma and co-workers designed a synthetic route towards the formation of χ-Fe5C2 nanoparticles from iron carbonyls in the presence of octadecylamine and a tetraalkylammonium bromide surfactant at moderate temperatures; the resulting materials showed immediate hydrocarbon formation under Fischer–Tropsch conditions, thus proving the intrinsic activity of the iron carbide phases.156
Reduction and carburisation of bulk iron catalysts often results in a mixture of phases dominated by magnetite and χ-Fe5C2. Mössbauer spectroscopy, used to determine their relative amounts in a Na-promoted catalyst, revealed that the metallic iron initially formed upon reduction was subsequently transformed to 67.6% χ-Fe5C2 and 32.4% Fe3O4 after reaction at 350 °C using H2/CO2 (molar ratio = 3:1, 30 bar) as the feed.144 This work shows that carburisation of metallic iron is possible in the presence of CO2 and supports the hypothesis presuming rWGS and Fischer–Tropsch activities for iron oxides and iron carbides, respectively. As shown in Fig. 10, after long CO2 hydrogenation times, in an iron catalyst containing copper, aluminium and potassium, the iron components evolved towards a mixture of χ-Fe5C2, amorphous FeOx, and residual amounts of Fe3O4 and Fe2O3. The carbide and FeOx were suggested to be the active phases of hydrogenation–polymerisation and rWGS, respectively.52 The preferential formation of χ-Fe5C2 was also achieved from K-promoted magnetite materials after successive treatments under H2 (350 °C) and H2/CO (3.5:1, 310 °C) at atmospheric pressure.42 In another study on mixed Fe–Co catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation, the presence of iron carbides, as identified by Mössbauer spectroscopy, was highest for Fe/Co = 1 and was correlated with increased oxygenate and C2–4 hydrocarbon selectivity (see Fig. 9).141
A thorough study on silica-supported iron catalysts containing platinum and potassium promoters proved that the formation of small FexC nodules by carburisation of Fe(0) nanoparticles formed by previous reduction on the surface of Fe3O4 kernels resulted in eggshell particles that exhibited high Fischer–Tropsch activity (see Fig. 11) based on in situ Mössbauer spectroscopic data.61 A similar scenario, based on analyses of catalyst samples after different times on stream during Fischer–Tropsch operation, proposed the attainment of a steady-state morphology consisting of Fe3O4 cores surrounded by thin layers of active FexC.37 In the same line, reduction of Fe2O3 to Fe3O4 followed by surface carburisation to FexC in the presence of syngas was suggested by XAS, and activity measurements performed in parallel evidenced that hydrocarbon formation coincided with the emergence of these structures; the introduction of potassium and copper promoters facilitated the formation of dispersed carbides, presumably by providing nucleation sites and enhancing the reducibility of iron (a sketch showing the proposed morphology is shown in Fig. 12).75 Sodium also promotes the formation of carbide layers on magnetite cores in active catalysts for the Fischer–Tropsch process.139 Carburisation by treatment in pure CO atmosphere for extended times at 270 °C resulted in the coexistence of Fe3O4 and FexC domains; the latter were surrounded by carbon layers, especially after controlled surface oxidation, as evidenced by pseudo in situ XRD and TEM characterisation.77
 Fig. 11  Schematic of the evolution of iron species from Fe2O3 to Fe3O4, then to α-Fe, by reduction, and the ultimate carburisation of α-Fe nanoparticles to FexC nodules in a silica-supported, K- and Pt-promoted Fe catalyst during Fischer–Tropsch operating conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright (2003) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 12  Schematic of the FexC/Fe3O4 core–shell morphology formed during syngas (H2/CO = 2, 250 °C) exposure of iron catalysts; compared to pure iron materials (a), carbide growth is favoured in the presence of surface K and Cu species (b), leading to a more dispersed and thus more accessible carbide layer on the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2002) American Chemical Society. 
Based on the widespread consideration of iron carbides as the active COx hydrogenation phases, several strategies to favour their formation during operation have been studied. Among these, the introduction of alkaline species (especially potassium and sodium)56,75,85,139 or transition metals157 is one of the most explored ways to induce carbide formation in iron catalysts. Different approaches include the encapsulation of iron species in carbon nanotubes, as reported by Bao and co-workers,102 or the aforementioned dispersion of low-coordination iron sites by de-alumination of FeAl alloys.107 Monodisperse Fe(0) nanoparticles prepared by chemical reduction under H2 were used for the hydrogenation–polymerisation of CO; they were transformed during the catalytic process to ε-Fe2C and χ-Fe5C2, as evidenced by XRD and Mössbauer spectroscopy.158 This method was adapted for the preferential formation of ε′-Fe2.2C (82%, diameter = 15.1 nm) over χ-Fe5C2 (18%), which proved efficient for CO2 hydrogenation, although the formation of higher hydrocarbons was limited.159 An in situ nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and MS study demonstrated that the formation of iron carbides is due to the dissociation of CO and subsequent carbon migration into the metallic lattice, whereas this transformation can be reversed to Fe(0) under hydrogenation conditions; moreover, this method allowed the conclusion that the carbon in the hydrocarbons produced under Fischer–Tropsch operation does not originate from the carbide structure but from the CO feed.160
A considerable body of evidence supports the direct implication of iron carbides as key active phases for COx hydrogenation. Their formation is favourable under operational conditions from oxides, either via metallic intermediates or directly. On the other hand, the close contact between oxides and carbides in the form of in situ-generated nanocomposites is regarded to provide a suitable combination of active sites for rWGS, CO activation and further polymerisation, thus promoting the transformation of CO2 into hydrocarbons. The limited tendency of iron carbides to promote hydrogenation appears to favour β-elimination and, hence, olefin production.
5. Catalysts based on other metals
5.1. Ruthenium catalysts
The use of ruthenium catalysts has been frequently related to high methanation efficiencies when using both CO and CO2 as the sources of carbon.13,161–165 However, ruthenium has been identified as the most active metal for Fischer–Tropsch processes, and the average molecular weight of the produced hydrocarbons has been in some instances found to be highest in the following metal order: Ru > Fe > Co > Rh > Ni > Ir > Pt > Pd.10,166 This is especially true at moderate temperatures, as supported by the formation of substantial amounts of adsorbed hydrocarbon residues observed by in situ IR spectroscopy under H2/CO atmosphere.41 Despite the adequate performance of ruthenium catalysts, high cost and limited reserves have prevented their widespread implementation in commercial processes.167
The propensity of ruthenium to dissociate H2 into adsorbed Ru–H species on the surface of its purely metallic forms and then to promote hydrogenation is most likely the ultimate cause of the high methane selectivity often observed in Ru-catalysed COx hydrogenation processes.15,168 Most likely, this is also the reason for the success of ruthenium as a promoter aiding the reducibility of iron or cobalt materials, for example, under COx hydrogenation conditions.10,60,121 Moreover, the stability of metallic ruthenium nanoparticles is better than those of other transition metals, such as nickel, cobalt and iron.36 It has been suggested that surface carbides on ruthenium catalysts readily undergo hydrogenation,41 which would preclude carbon migration to the bulk to form carbide domains.
Fresh Ru/γ-Al2O3 materials contain mostly RuO2 as the ruthenium phase; reduction to Ru(0) takes place readily after pre-treatment under H2 (20 bar) at 200 °C, and this metallic phase remains unaltered after Fischer–Tropsch operation.169 It should be stressed that extremely high selectivities to C5+ products (up to 95%) can be achieved using these Ru/γ-Al2O3 catalysts, whereas lower amounts of those higher hydrocarbons and higher methanation activities have been observed for Ru/SiO2 analogues.169 Using carbon as a support and a biphasic aqueous/organic reaction medium has also resulted in high chain growth probabilities.170 Also consistent with the support effects on selectivity noted above, the use of siliceous materials promoted methanation via CO2 hydrogenation; this was attributed to the increasing metal–support interaction strength, leading to a partial positive charge on Ru and, subsequently, to weaker CO adsorption, higher H2 adsorption, and eventually to more efficient hydrogenation activity, resulting in preferential methanation, based on IR spectroscopy.171 On the other hand, caesium promotes electron enrichment of ruthenium in Ru/C(graphite) catalysts, as observed by XPS; thus, they have the opposite effect of siliceous materials, resulting in higher chain growth probability.66 In contrast to these considerations, Iglesia and co-workers found that the dispersion effects of the supports and metal (Ru or Co) on site-specific rates and selectivities were minor under Fischer–Tropsch-relevant conditions (conversions between 45% and 60%), provided that the metal reduction was essentially complete.69
The occurrence of ruthenium in the form of Ru(0) nanoparticles in CO2 hydrogenation catalysts was proven several decades ago by XPS measurements.172 In contrast, Thampi et al. determined, also by XPS, that a mixture containing ca. 75% RuOx (x ≤ 2) and 25% Ru was more appropriate than a totally reduced counterpart for the methanation of CO2.173 It is likely that depending on particle size, the cores of the Ru catalyst particles remain unreduced, whilst the outer layers are transformed to Ru(0) during COx hydrogenation.
Metallic ruthenium occurs mostly as the Ru(hcp) structure, although Ru(fcc) can be also obtained. A recent study combining theory, catalytic tests and advanced HRTEM characterisation has proven that both Ru(fcc) and Ru(hcp) provide active surfaces; although the CO activation energies appear to be lower on the latter (in accord with the case of Co, see section 3.2), moderately active sites related to the {1 1 1} facets of Ru(fcc) structures are about two orders of magnitude more abundant on the crystal surfaces, thus compensating for the difference in intrinsic activity and resulting in higher Fischer–Tropsch rates and selectivities to higher hydrocarbons (see Fig. 13).40
 Fig. 13  Effects of the exposure of different facets on the performance of Ru(fcc) and Ru(hcp) Fischer–Tropsch catalysts. It is shown that the activity exerted by Ru(fcc) surfaces in hydrothermally synthesised Pt@Ru catalysts is higher than for two Ru(hcp) materials with different particle sizes prepared by solvothermal methods (top left), despite the slightly higher activation energies (1.21 eV) calculated for the former material from Arrhenius plot data (bottom left); reaction conditions: H2/CO2 = 2, 30 bar, aqueous phase. The catalytic results are supported by theoretical calculations, which show that the high surface density of active sites of the ubiquitous {1 1 1} facets, as illustrated by Ru(fcc) nanocrystal models along different directions (right, A–D), compensate for their relatively moderate activity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
5.2. Nickel catalysts
The use of nickel materials as catalysts for the hydrogenation of COx is a technology with a long history, dating back to the pioneering work of Sabatier patented in 1910, wherein selective production of methane was claimed.174 Those results were later confirmed by a large body of investigations, which also demonstrated the strong tendency of nickel catalysts to promote methanation under a range of experimental conditions, given their propensity to activate hydrogen and thus promote hydrogenation and/or hydrogenolysis reactions.10,13,22,161–163,175 However, nickel catalysis can be designed to favour formation of higher hydrocarbons, provided the material formulations and operating conditions are appropriate and carefully adjusted.176 In general terms, low reaction temperatures aiming at disfavouring termination steps by hydrogenolysis, and promoter oxides (Th2O3 is the most notable example) favouring surface condensation of oxygenate intermediates, are desirable for high C2+ selectivities (up to 77%).177 The most serious drawback for nickel COx hydrogenation–polymerisation processes is short catalyst lifetimes due to the formation of volatile nickel carbonyls, which may migrate and cause particle sintering.176 An example of Ni catalyst deactivation is illustrated in Fig. 14, showing that TiO2 as a support reduces the tendency toward carbonyl-mediated deactivation compared to other oxides, such as silica or alumina.178
 Fig. 14  Conversion dependence upon time on stream for a series of nickel catalysts on different supports, prepared by impregnation and subsequent calcination in air; the results show that whilst all of the catalysts suffer deactivation, silica and alumina supports result in almost negligible activity after several hours, and titania supports exert more satisfactory stability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2012) Elsevier. 
Early work by Sabatier described the in situ reduction of NiOx powders to active metallic particles.174 Characterisation of Ni/Al2O3 catalysts used in CO2 hydrogenation by XRD evidenced that only metallic nickel (fcc lattice) was active, whereas the remaining portion was prone to in situ reduction, especially at high loadings (>16% Ni).179 Among the different possible metallic Ni lattices, the formation of the Ni(fcc) structure is thermodynamically favoured, although the Ni(hcp) counterpart can be stabilised for nanoparticle diameters shorter than 4 nm. Theoretical calculations have suggested that the most likely route for CO activation is H-assisted dissociation to C(OH) species and that Ni(fcc) surfaces are more active than those of Ni(hcp), in contrast to the case of Co, wherein Co(hcp) provides lower activation barriers for direct CO dissociation.180
Highly dispersed metallic Ni nanoparticles prepared in the presence of MgO in a silica matrix exhibited high CO2 hydrogenation activity, although the system was almost exclusively selective to methane.181 The oxidation states in Ni@Co nanoparticles selective for the formation of oxygenates via CO2 hydrogenation were examined by pseudo in situ XPS; it was observed that part of the nickel migrated to the surface and that both Ni and Co were reduced to their metallic states under pure H2 (5 Torr, 270 °C).97 Intermetallic Ni–Ga catalysts in their zero oxidation state, as observed by in situ XRD, have been proposed as selective catalysts for methanol synthesis via COx hydrogenation.182,183 Nickel–iron materials containing closely-contacted NiO and γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles proved to be highly active for sunlight-induced CO2 hydrogenation, with significant selectivity to lower alkanes; this is presumably due to the occurrence of interfaces combining the hydrogenation sites related to nickel and the CO2 activation and chain growth sites ascribed to iron.184
Contrary to the common view that metallic phases are the only active components, it was reported that the coexistence of NiOx and Ni metal nanoparticles on the surface of alumina (prepared by the controlled pyrolysis–reduction of a nickel hydrotalcite) favoured hydrocarbon formation during sunlight-induced CO hydrogenation.185 The reduction of nickel oxides to metallic nickel is complete at high temperatures, as observed for Ni/Al2O3 catalysts.49 Considering the existing literature data, it may be concluded that nickel species evolve toward the formation of metallic phases along with partially unreduced oxides under COx hydrogenation conditions. The occurrence of carbides, if any, is irrelevant.61
5.3. Copper catalysts
Synthesis of methanol from CO/CO2 mixtures using copper catalysts is a well-known technology exploited at the industrial level13,186,187 with tremendously relevant commercial importance (its global demand is as high as ca. 50 Mt per year).98 The most successful catalysts for methanol synthesis are Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 materials prepared by co-precipitation. It is worth mentioning that this process usually relies on the use of mixtures of CO and CO2 as feeds. Mechanistic studies have pointed to parallel pathways, among which prior transformation of CO into CO2via WGS and subsequent associative hydrogenation to generate formate species may be predominant.53–55,98 Therefore, methanol synthesis on copper materials is a paradigmatic case for catalyst design wherein active sites able to convert both CO and CO2—and, probably more importantly, to interconvert them—must be sought, and their exact roles in the concerned transformations must be investigated.
Studies on the rWGS reaction on ZnO–Al2O3 materials led to the conclusion that the presence of ZnAl2O4 phases formed upon calcination at high temperatures (≥500 °C) is related to high CO2 deoxygenation activity.188,189 It then follows that these zinc aluminate components may catalyse the reaction in either direction, favouring CO–CO2 interconversion and, thus, attainment of thermodynamic equilibrium. However, the milder calcination procedures (<350 °C) employed for the preparation of Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 catalysts do not result in the formation of ZnAl2O4 to any significant extent. Instead, porous aggregates of highly dispersed CuO nanoparticles alternating with ZnO domains have been identified by TEM; under subsequent H2 treatment, Cu(0) nanoparticles (ca. 10 nm) are readily formed from the oxide precursor while retaining the morphology.190 This study demonstrated that ZnO plays a structural role by favouring the exposure of active Cu surfaces. A more thorough investigation by neutron diffraction analyses of reduced Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 proved the occurrence of Cu(fcc) as the predominant copper phase; however, the most active materials for methanol formation via hydrogenation of CO/CO2 mixtures were rich in planar defects, such as stacking faults, due to the constrained Cu(0) nanocrystal growth amid the aggregated ZnO domains.98 The plot in Fig. 15, top, illustrates the direct relationship between surface-averaged activity and fault probability in Cu. Further HRTEM and XPS observations under H2 (0.25 mbar) atmosphere showed that a strong metal–support interaction leads to a disordered ZnOx overlayer which evolves via partial alloying and reduction of Zn species onto the aforementioned defects (both the ubiquity of stacking faults and the amorphous ZnOx cover are shown in several HRTEM micrographs in Fig. 15, bottom). These zinc species on the stepped copper surface provide adsorption sites stabilising the oxygenated intermediates taking part in the COx-to-methanol mechanistic pathway. Therefore, zinc species are not only spacers for Cu(0) nanoparticles but are also chemical modifiers, endowing the materials with enhanced activity. It should be noted that uniform distribution of copper nanoparticles and zinc species encapsulated within mesoporous silica materials prevents deactivation because sintering of the active phases is limited by diffusion constraints.191,192
 Fig. 15  Top: Cu surface activity as a function of stacking fault (defect) probability; the inset schematically represents the surface defects (step–kinks) generated by the twin boundaries, resulting in stacking faults during crystal growth. Bottom: HRTEM micrographs showing examples of the aforementioned twin boundaries for the most active Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 catalyst (A–D), the derived surface steps exposing different facets (B and C), and the amorphous ZnOx overlayer (B and C); both defects and zinc species on the surface are related to high methanol production performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2012) American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Copper catalysts analogous to the benchmark Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 have been formulated with other reducible oxides, such as ZrO2 or CeO2.186 A meticulously studied case is that of model copper–ceria interfaces, demonstrating that a proper dispersion of domains results in the occurrence of bifunctional sites combining suitable adsorption/reaction sites in close vicinity to each other, thus enhancing methanol productivity by CO2 hydrogenation.193 In particular, whilst CO2 does not absorb on pure metallic copper surfaces, it is readily activated upon inclusion of partially reduced ceria (CeOx) via formation of carboxylate radical intermediates, as evidenced by pseudo in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IRRAS) and XPS.
According to the advanced characterisation reported for copper catalysts, their efficiency and selectivity towards methanol are enhanced by the presence of reducible oxides interspersed among Cu(0) at the nanoscale. The oxides activate COx and stabilise oxygenated intermediates, whereas Cu(0) presumably provides hydrogen dissociation sites. The lack of C–O dissociation sites likely restrains the formation of discrete carbon adsorbates and thus minimises polymerisation or insertion—i.e. chain-growth—routes. However, introduction of iron in the formulation of copper catalysts has resulted in enhancements of C2+ alcohol (and hydrocarbon) selectivities in CO hydrogenation processes, as in the cases of copper–manganese–zirconium,194 copper–manganese–zinc195 and copper–magnesium196 materials prepared by co-precipitation and subsequent calcination.
5.4. Rhodium catalysts
Rhodium catalysts are known to result in the selective formation of higher oxygenates by CO or CO2 hydrogenation.15,117 Given its noble metal character, it is generally accepted that rhodium exists in its zero oxidation state as the commonly occurring Rh(fcc) phase and is frequently deposited as metallic nanoparticles on inert or reducible supports.
Support effects on CO hydrogenation for rhodium catalysts prepared by impregnation and subsequent reduction by H2 are significant: SiO2 or Al2O3 enhance hydrocarbon selectivities, whereas oxides of oxophilic metals (e.g. TiO2, ZrO2 or La2O3) or basic oxides (e.g. ZnO or MgO) promote ethanol or methanol formation, respectively.100 The authors investigated the causes of these selectivity switches by high-pressure IR techniques, concluding that whereas the oxophilic promoters facilitated both CO dissociation and CO insertion (into adsorbed methyl radicals resulting from carbon hydrogenation) on rhodium surfaces, giving rise to acetyl intermediates, basic promoters hindered CO dissociation and mostly facilitated insertion into M–H surface species; this accounts for the C2 and C1 oxygenate selectivities, respectively.100 These results were consistent with later observations by Yin et al., also by high-pressure (up to 30 bar) in situ IR, proving that CO was the main surface species under Fischer–Tropsch conditions on un-promoted Rh/SiO2, whereas addition of Mn, Li and Fe promoters resulted in the formation of adsorbed acetate as a major reaction intermediate; this observation is related to high C2 oxygenate selectivity.101 More recently, Prieto et al. performed a systematic investigation on metal oxide promoters, concluding that the tendency towards formation of either oxygenated or hydrocarbon units, defined as a selectivity descriptor (i.e. the insertion-to-dissociation ratio), correlated with the acidic/basic character of the oxides: the more basic, the higher the oxygenate selectivity, and conversely, the more acidic, the higher the hydrocarbon selectivity.92
The route for direct CO insertion into M–H to generate C1 oxygenates for catalysts based on rhodium and basic oxides (e.g. ZnO or MgO) is remarkably similar to that suggested for commercial Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 methanol synthesis catalysts (interestingly, copper also occurs as a Cu(fcc) lattice).54 Conversely, the route for higher alcohol production based on acyl intermediates is reminiscent of that suggested for copper–cobalt binary catalysts, wherein Cu and Co sites promote non-dissociative or dissociative CO activation, respectively.126,127,197
A recent study delved into the causes of oxygenate selectivity in rhodium catalysts supported on TiO2 for CO2 hydrogenation by in situ DRIFT and TEM techniques. It was found that after sequential pre-treatments in H2 and CO2-rich atmospheres, the supported Rh(0) nanoparticles become covered with HCOx adsorbates, which in turn induced strong metal–support interactions and migration of Ti3+ species onto said overlayer; meanwhile, hydrogenation led to an analogous overlayer that contained only titanium (see Fig. 16).112 This peculiar coverage was porous, thus allowing reactant diffusion, and modified the activity of the metallic Rh surface from methane-selective to oxygenate-selective in CO2 hydrogenation processes.
 Fig. 16  TEM micrographs of Rh(6%)/TiO2 samples showing Rh(0) nanoparticles covered with a crystalline Ti3+-containing overlayer (a, after treatment in H2/N2 5:95, 550 °C, 10 min) or a porous amorphous cover composed of strongly adsorbed HCOx and Ti3+ species (b, after treatment of the reduced sample in CO2/H2/He 20:2:78, 250 °C, 3 h). The latter morphology was related to high oxygenate selectivity during CO2 hydrogenation experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright (2017) Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
In summary, metallic rhodium exhibits good COx hydrogenation performance. Its selectivity is significantly affected by the nature of the supports or promoters: acidic or basic oxides favour the formation of hydrogenated or oxygenated moieties, respectively, in the resulting products.
6. Conclusions
The design of catalysts for the production of hydrocarbons or oxygenates via the reaction of CO and/or CO2 with H2 is of paramount importance in the scenarios of sustainable fuels and chemicals. In particular, the use of CO2 as the feedstock is regarded as a necessary strategy from the perspective of a circular carbon economy, provided renewable hydrogen sources are used. A considerable legacy of research has provided valuable knowledge of the types of metals that should be employed for such processes, even at the industrial level. Cobalt and iron are acknowledged as the most appropriate options, whereas ruthenium is generally considered as exceedingly expensive and nickel is regarded as more suited for synthetic methane production. Moreover, rhodium, especially in the presence of basic oxide promoters or intimately contacted copper–cobalt phases and/or sites, exerts high oxygenate selectivities via non-dissociative COx, whereas copper in the presence of reducible oxides is efficient for COx-to-methanol processes. The type of active phase is crucial to achieve satisfactory performance.
Among cobalt and iron, the former appears to be superior for CO hydrogenation–polymerisation, whereas the latter tolerates high levels of CO2 in the feed. This is due to the potential of iron (in particular of its oxides, FeOx) to promote the water gas shift (WGS) reaction and its reverse transformation (rWGS). Furthermore, notable consensus exists ascribing notable performance for CO dissociation and further polymerisation (Fischer–Tropsch activity) to iron carbides. The case of cobalt has sparked a vibrant debate in recent times. Metallic cobalt has long been considered to be the active phase for the transformation of CO into hydrocarbons via the Fischer–Tropsch process; although cobalt carbides have traditionally been regarded as inactive and irrelevant, recent in situ and pseudo in situ observations strongly support their vital role as immediate precursors of Co(hcp) as the truly active phase for CO hydrogenation–polymerisation, or as active WGS/rWGS phases for CO–CO2 interconversion. Elusive surface carbides may also be involved in chain growth. Furthermore, directed synthesis of pure Co2C with nanoprism morphology phases in fact results in high activities. These observations challenge the most widely accepted notion that Co(0) is the only active phase and suggest that the natures of active iron and cobalt phases may have more similarities than previously conceived.
Recent advances in in situ characterisation methodologies based on electron microscopy (HRTEM), X-ray absorption (XANES and EXAFS) and other spectroscopies (e.g. DRIFTS or Mössbauer) and additionally using microreactors, which allow the operando detection of reaction products under relevant conditions, are providing renewed insight; the results are even challenging some of the previously established views on the nature of active phases in COx hydrogenation catalysts. Thorough in situ studies have concluded that interconversion between metallic, carbide and oxide phases at near-surface depths and, even more likely, the coexistence of different phases exerting distinct catalytic performances in nanocomposite morphologies may play key roles. These transient or emerging surface phases tend to have small dimensions and low crystallinities (or even be amorphous); their identification has remained elusive for a long time. Therefore, the simplistic view of either metallic cobalt or iron carbides as the only catalytically active sites is progressively being replaced with a more dynamic scenario wherein surface interconversion of phases is a key phenomenon.
Due to the rapidly advancing field of in situ and operando characterisation techniques, understanding of the real active phases and sites for the complex hydrogenation–polymerisation of CO or CO2 to hydrocarbons will surely be enriched in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Spanish Government-MICINN through “Severo Ochoa” (SEV 2016-0683) is acknowledged. The author also thanks the Spanish Government (Agencia Estatal de Investigación) and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund) for a grant for young researchers (CTQ2015-74138-JIN, AEI/FEDER/UE).
References

          V. Balzani and N. Armaroli, Energy for a Sustainable World: From the Oil Age to a Sun-Powered Future, Wiley,  2010 Search PubMed .
P. Falkowski, R. J. Scholes, E. Boyle, J. Canadell, D. Canfield, J. Elser, N. Gruber, K. Hibbard, P. Higberg, S. Linder, F. T. Mackenzie, B. Moore III, T. Pedersen, Y. Rosenthal, S. Seitzinger, V. Smetacek and W. Steffen, Science, 2000, 290, 291–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma, S. Iborra and A. Velty, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2411–2502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sheldon, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 950–963 RSC .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 191–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Dry, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 138, 319–344 CrossRef CAS .

          A. de Klerk, Fischer–Tropsch Process, in Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2000 Search PubMed .
A. Y. Khodakov, W. Chu and P. Fongarland, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1692–1744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. de Smit and B. M. Weckhuysen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2758–2781 RSC .
S. Abelló and D. Montané, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1538–1556 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Porosoff, B. Yan and J. G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 62–73 RSC .
R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 884–890 RSC .
G. Prieto, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1056–1070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Miao, S. S. K. Ma, X. Wang, H. Su and S. H. Chan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 4048–4058 RSC .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 195–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Davis, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 8938–8945 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Navarro, M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3952–3991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demirbaş, Energy Convers. Manage., 2001, 42, 1357–1378 CrossRef .
D. M. Alonso, J. Q. Bond and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1493–1513 RSC .
H. Jahangiri, J. Bennett, P. Mahjoubi, K. Wilson and S. Gu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2210–2229 RSC .
K. Krieger, Nature, 2014, 508, 448–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peplow, Nature, 2014, 507, 152–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, X. Y. Li and J. L. Gong, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11529–11653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Puga, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 315, 1–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fargione, J. Hill, D. Tilman, S. Polasky and P. Hawthorne, Science, 2008, 319, 1235–1238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711–1731 RSC .

          J. G. J. Olivier, G. Janssens-Maenhout, M. Muntean and J. A. H. W. Peters, Trends in global CO2 emissions 2016 Report, PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, The Hague,  2016 Search PubMed.
D. Y. C. Leung, G. Caramanna and M. M. Maroto-Valer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 426–443 CrossRef CAS .

Greenhouse Gas Emissions Estimation Methodologies for Biogenic Emissions from Selected Source Categories, RTI International,  2017 Search PubMed.

          P. Bhada-Tata and D. A. Hoornweg, What a waste? : a global review of solid waste management, The World Bank, Washington, DC,  2012 Search PubMed.
CCS for iron and steel production, https://www.globalccsinstitute.com/insights/authors/dennisvanpuyvelde/2013/08/23/ccs-iron-and-steel-production) .
H. S. Kheshgi and R. C. Prince, Energy, 2005, 30, 1865–1871 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Boot-Handford, J. C. Abanades, E. J. Anthony, M. J. Blunt, S. Brandani, N. MacDowell, J. R. Fernandez, M.-C. Ferrari, R. Gross, J. P. Hallett, R. S. Haszeldine, P. Heptonstall, A. Lyngfelt, Z. Makuch, E. Mangano, R. T. J. Porter, M. Pourkashanian, G. T. Rochelle, N. Shah, J. G. Yao and P. S. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 130–189 RSC .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
B. H. Davis, Catal. Today, 2009, 141, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Davis, Fuel Process. Technol., 2001, 71, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Yates and C. N. Satterfield, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 168–173 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Z. Li, J.-X. Liu, J. Gu, W. Zhou, S.-Y. Yao, R. Si, Y. Guo, H.-Y. Su, C.-H. Yan, W.-X. Li, Y.-W. Zhang and D. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2267–2276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. King, J. Catal., 1980, 61, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amoyal, R. Vidruk-Nehemya, M. V. Landau and M. Herskowitz, J. Catal., 2017, 348, 29–39 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Landau, N. Meiri, N. Utsis, R. Vidruk Nehemya and M. Herskowitz, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 13334–13355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, G. Sun, Z. Wang, H. Pan, L. Xu, H. Xu and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 21535–21540 CrossRef CAS .
O. R. Inderwildi, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1305–1307 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao, J. Li, X. Pan, J. Xiao, H. Li, H. Ma, M. Wei, Y. Pan, Z. Zhou, M. Li, S. Miao, J. Li, Y. Zhu, D. Xiao, T. He, J. Yang, F. Qi, Q. Fu and X. Bao, Science, 2016, 351, 1065–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gaube and H. F. Klein, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 283, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Weatherbee and C. H. Bartholomew, J. Catal., 1982, 77, 460–472 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lim, J. McGregor, A. J. Sederman and J. S. Dennis, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 141, 28–45 CrossRef CAS .
T. Van Herwijnen, H. Van Doesburg and W. A. De Jong, J. Catal., 1973, 28, 391–402 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Overett, R. O. Hill and J. R. Moss, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 206–207, 581–605 CrossRef CAS .
T. Riedel, H. Schulz, G. Schaub, K.-W. Jun, J.-S. Hwang and K.-W. Lee, Top. Catal., 2003, 26, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
K. Larmier, W.-C. Liao, S. Tada, E. Lam, R. Verel, A. Bansode, A. Urakawa, A. Comas-Vives and C. Copéret, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saeidi, N. A. S. Amin and M. R. Rahimpour, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 66–81 CrossRef CAS .
T. Riedel, M. Claeys, H. Schulz, G. Schaub, S. S. Nam, K. W. Jun, M. J. Choi, G. Kishan and K. W. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 186, 201–213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Daza and J. N. Kuhn, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 49675–49691 RSC .
E. Iglesia, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 161, 59–78 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rähse, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 1977, 6, 259–265 CrossRef .
S. L. Soled, E. Iglesia, R. A. Fiato, J. E. Baumgartner, H. Vroman and S. Miseo, Top. Catal., 2003, 26, 101–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu and C. H. Bartholomew, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2392–2403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Keyvanloo, M. J. Fisher, W. C. Hecker, R. J. Lancee, G. Jacobs and C. H. Bartholomew, J. Catal., 2015, 327, 33–47 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Liu, P. Wang, W. Xu and E. J. M. Hensen, Engineering, 2017, 3, 467–476 CrossRef .
J.-X. Liu, H.-Y. Su, D.-P. Sun, B.-Y. Zhang and W.-X. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16284–16287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Bezemer, J. H. Bitter, H. P. C. E. Kuipers, H. Oosterbeek, J. E. Holewijn, X. Xu, F. Kapteijn, A. J. van Dillen and K. P. de Jong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3956–3964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Eslava, X. Sun, J. Gascon, F. Kapteijn and I. Rodriguez-Ramos, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1235–1244 RSC .
G. Prieto, A. Martínez, P. Concepción and R. Moreno-Tost, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 129–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. G. Carballo, J. Yang, A. Holmen, S. Garcia-Rodriguez, S. Rojas, M. Ojeda and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Catal., 2011, 284, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
E. Iglesia, S. L. Soled and R. A. Fiato, J. Catal., 1992, 137, 212–224 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Torres Galvis, J. H. Bitter, T. Davidian, M. Ruitenbeek, A. I. Dugulan and K. P. de Jong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16207–16215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Park, Y.-J. Lee, P. K. Khanna, K.-W. Jun, J. W. Bae and Y. H. Kim, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 323, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Yang, A. I. Dugulan, A. Holmen, D. Chen, K. P. de Jong and M. J. Louwerse, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3147–3157 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Wezendonk, V. P. Santos, M. A. Nasalevich, Q. S. E. Warringa, A. I. Dugulan, A. Chojecki, A. C. J. Koeken, M. Ruitenbeek, G. Meima, H.-U. Islam, G. Sankar, M. Makkee, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3236–3247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, H. M. Torres Galvis, A. C. J. Koeken, A. Kirilin, A. I. Dugulan, M. Ruitenbeek and K. P. de Jong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4017–4024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, W. Ding, G. D. Meitzner and E. Iglesia, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Saib, D. J. Moodley, I. M. Ciobîcǎ, M. M. Hauman, B. H. Sigwebela, C. J. Weststrate, J. W. Niemantsverdriet and J. van de Loosdrecht, Catal. Today, 2010, 154, 271–282 CrossRef CAS .
S. Janbroers, J. N. Louwen, H. W. Zandbergen and P. J. Kooyman, J. Catal., 2009, 268, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, H. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Xiang and Y. Li, Fuel Process. Technol., 2014, 118, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Wezendonk, X. Sun, A. I. Dugulan, A. J. F. van Hoof, E. J. M. Hensen, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, J. Catal., 2018, 362, 106–117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Karaca, J. Hong, P. Fongarland, P. Roussel, A. Griboval-Constant, M. Lacroix, K. Hortmann, O. V. Safonova and A. Y. Khodakov, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 788–790 RSC .
G. Kwak, M. H. Woo, S. C. Kang, H.-G. Park, Y.-J. Lee, K.-W. Jun and K.-S. Ha, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kwak, D.-E. Kim, Y. T. Kim, H.-G. Park, S. C. Kang, K.-S. Ha, K.-W. Jun and Y.-J. Lee, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 4594–4600 RSC .
M. Claeys, M. E. Dry, E. van Steen, E. du Plessis, P. J. van Berge, A. M. Saib and D. J. Moodley, J. Catal., 2014, 318, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Falconer and A. E. Zagli, J. Catal., 1980, 62, 280–285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, J. Sun, Z. Wen, C. Fang, Q. Ge and H. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 4786–4793 RSC .
X. Su, J. Zhang, S. Fan, Q. Ma and T.-S. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 80196–80202 RSC .
L. Xu, Q. Wang, D. Liang, X. Wang, L. Lin, W. Cui and Y. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 173, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Lu, X. Su, S. Fan, Q. Ma and T. Zhao, J. CO2 Util., 2015, 12, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
R. Satthawong, N. Koizumi, C. Song and P. Prasassarakich, Catal. Today, 2015, 251, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kadinov, C. Bonev, S. Todorova and A. Palazov, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 3027–3031 RSC .
S. Mehl, P. Ferstl, M. Schuler, A. Toghan, O. Brummel, L. Hammer, M. A. Schneider and J. Libuda, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 23538–23546 RSC .
G. Prieto, P. Concepción, A. Martinez and E. Mendoza, J. Catal., 2011, 280, 274–288 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Porosoff and J. G. Chen, J. Catal., 2013, 301, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
G. Melaet, W. T. Ralston, C.-S. Li, S. Alayoglu, K. An, N. Musselwhite, B. Kalkan and G. A. Somorjai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2260–2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. de Smit, F. M. F. de Groot, R. Blume, M. Haevecker, A. Knop-Gericke and B. M. Weckhuysen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 667–680 RSC .
W.-P. Ma, E. L. Kugler and D. B. Dadyburjor, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 1931–1938 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carenco, C.-H. Wu, A. Shavorskiy, S. Alayoglu, G. A. Somorjai, H. Bluhm and M. Salmeron, Small, 2015, 11, 3045–3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kühl, M. Hävecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B.-L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Nørskov and R. Schlögl, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, A. V. Puga, J. Cored, P. Concepción, V. Pérez-Dieste, H. García and A. Corma, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 186–196 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. H. Sachtler and M. Ichikawa, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 4752–4758 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, Y. Ding, H. Luo, L. Yan, T. Wang and L. Lin, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17, 1401–1406 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Z. Fan, X. Pan and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9414–9419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rønning, N. E. Tsakoumis, A. Voronov, R. E. Johnsen, P. Norby, W. van Beek, Ø. Borg, E. Rytter and A. Holmen, Catal. Today, 2010, 155, 289–295 CrossRef .
M. Sadeqzadeh, H. Karaca, O. V. Safonova, P. Fongarland, S. Chambrey, P. Roussel, A. Griboval-Constant, M. Lacroix, D. Curulla-Ferré, F. Luck and A. Y. Khodakov, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 62–67 CrossRef CAS .
E. de Smit, F. Cinquini, A. M. Beale, O. V. Safonova, W. van Beek, P. Sautet and B. M. Weckhuysen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14928–14941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Cats and B. M. Weckhuysen, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1531–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, B. Sun, J. Lin, W. Wen, Y. Pei, S. Yan, M. Qiao, X. Zhang and B. Zong, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Senecal, S. D. M. Jacques, M. Di Michiel, S. A. J. Kimber, A. Vamvakeros, Y. Odarchenko, I. Lezcano-Gonzalez, J. Paterson, E. Ferguson and A. M. Beale, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2284–2293 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rochet, V. Moizan, C. Pichon, F. Diehl, A. Berliet and V. Briois, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. T. Price, D. J. Martin, A. D. Parsons, W. A. Sławiński, A. Vamvakeros, S. J. Keylock, A. M. Beale and J. F. W. Mosselmans, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602838 CrossRef PubMed .
E. de Smit, A. M. Beale, S. Nikitenko and B. M. Weckhuysen, J. Catal., 2009, 262, 244–256 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Matsubu, S. Zhang, L. DeRita, N. S. Marinkovic, J. G. Chen, G. W. Graham, X. Pan and P. Christopher, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 120–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. de Smit, I. Swart, J. F. Creemer, G. H. Hoveling, M. K. Gilles, T. Tyliszczak, P. J. Kooyman, H. W. Zandbergen, C. Morin, B. M. Weckhuysen and F. M. F. de Groot, Nature, 2008, 456, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. de Smit, I. Swart, J. F. Creemer, C. Karunakaran, D. Bertwistle, H. W. Zandbergen, F. M. F. de Groot and B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3632–3636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Cats, J. C. Andrews, O. Stephan, K. March, C. Karunakaran, F. Meirer, F. M. F. de Groot and B. M. Weckhuysen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 4438–4449 RSC .
V. Navarro, M. A. van Spronsen and J. W. M. Frenken, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 929–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Martínez and G. Prieto, Top. Catal., 2009, 52, 75–90 CrossRef .
A. A. Muleja, Y. Yao, D. Glasser and D. Hildebrandt, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 293, 151–160 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Bezemer, T. J. Remans, A. P. van Bavel and A. I. Dugulan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8540–8541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gaube and H. F. Klein, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 350, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Owen, J. P. O'Byrne, D. Mattia, P. Plucinski, S. I. Pascu and M. D. Jones, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11683–11685 RSC .
G. Yin, X. Yuan, X. Du, W. Zhao, Q. Bi and F. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 2157–2163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Gnanamani, G. Jacobs, W. D. Shafer and B. H. Davis, Catal. Today, 2013, 215, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Pei, J.-X. Liu, Y.-H. Zhao, Y.-J. Ding, T. Liu, W.-D. Dong, H.-J. Zhu, H.-Y. Su, L. Yan, J.-L. Li and W.-X. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3620–3624 CrossRef CAS .
V. Iablokov, S. K. Beaumont, S. Alayoglu, V. V. Pushkarev, C. Specht, J. Gao, A. P. Alivisatos, N. Kruse and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3091–3096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, W. Mao, X.-C. Xu, Z. Yang, H. Li, J. Xu and Y.-F. Han, AIChE J., 2014, 60, 1797–1809 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prieto, S. Beijer, M. L. Smith, M. He, Y. Au, Z. Wang, D. A. Bruce, K. P. de Jong, J. J. Spivey and P. E. de Jongh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6397–6401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Biloen, J. N. Helle and W. M. H. Sachtler, J. Catal., 1979, 58, 95–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Gnanamani, G. Jacobs, W. D. Shafer, D. E. Sparks, S. Hopps, G. A. Thomas and B. H. Davis, Top. Catal., 2014, 57, 612–618 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Gnanamani, G. Jacobs, R. A. Keogh, W. D. Shafer, D. E. Sparks, S. D. Hopps, G. A. Thomas and B. H. Davis, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 499, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, F. Yu, Y. An, Y. Zhao, Y. Sun, Z. Li, T. Lin, Y. Lin, X. Qi, Y. Dai, L. Gu, J. Hu, S. Jin, Q. Shen and H. Wang, Nature, 2016, 538, 84–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Zhong, F. Yu, Y. An, Y. Dai, Y. Yang, T. Lin, S. Li, H. Wang, P. Gao, Y. Sun and M. He, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3622–3631 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Dry, Catal. Lett., 1990, 7, 241–251 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Willauer, R. Ananth, M. T. Olsen, D. M. Drab, D. R. Hardy and F. W. Williams, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3–4, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Torres Galvis, J. H. Bitter, C. B. Khare, M. Ruitenbeek, A. I. Dugulan and K. P. de Jong, Science, 2012, 335, 835–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Herranz, S. Rojas, F. J. Perez-Alonso, M. Ojeda, P. Terreros and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 199–211 CrossRef CAS .
T. Riedel, G. Schaub, K. W. Jun and K. W. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2001, 40, 1355–1363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Patzlaff, Y. Liu, C. Graffmann and J. Gaube, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 186, 109–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Chen and J. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2017, 91, 34–37 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Keturakis, M. Zhu, E. K. Gibson, M. Daturi, F. Tao, A. I. Frenkel and I. E. Wachs, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4786–4798 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Gnanamani, G. Jacobs, H. H. Hamdeh, W. D. Shafer, F. Liu, S. D. Hopps, G. A. Thomas and B. H. Davis, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 913–927 CrossRef CAS .
G.-B. Yu, B. Sun, Y. Pei, S.-H. Xie, S.-R. Yan, M.-H. Qiao, K.-N. Fan, X.-X. Zhang and B.-N. Zong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 935–937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ling, Q. Wang, R. Zhang, D. Li and B. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 30883–30894 RSC .
J. Wei, Q. Ge, R. Yao, Z. Wen, C. Fang, L. Guo, H. Xu and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15174 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Meng, T. Wang, L. Liu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, H. Hu, T. Kako, H. Iwai, A. Tanaka and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11478–11482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, T. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu, T. D. Dao, M. Li, G. Liu, X. Meng, K. Chang, L. Shi, T. Nagao and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-W. Liu, Z. Cao, S. Zhao, R. Gao, Y. Meng, J.-X. Zhu, C. Rogers, C.-F. Huo, Y. Yang, Y.-W. Li and X.-D. Wen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 21390–21396 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Ordomsky, B. Legras, K. Cheng, S. Paul and A. Y. Khodakov, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1433–1437 RSC .
J. T. Kummer, T. W. DeWitt and P. H. Emmett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1948, 70, 3632–3643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Huo, Y.-W. Li, J. Wang and H. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14713–14721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. O. Ozbek and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, J. Catal., 2015, 325, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Pham, Y. Qi, J. Yang, X. Duan, G. Qian, X. Zhou, D. Chen and W. Yuan, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2203–2208 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Pham, X. Duan, G. Qian, X. Zhou and D. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10170–10176 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Datye, Y. Jin, L. Mansker, R. T. Motjope, T. H. Dlamini and N. J. Coville, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2000, 130B, 1139–1144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Choi, Y. J. Jang, H. Park, W. Y. Kim, Y. H. Lee, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 605–610 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, H. Zhao, Y. Hou and D. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15814–15821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lohitharn, J. G. Goodwin and E. Lotero, J. Catal., 2008, 255, 104–113 CrossRef CAS .
V. Iablokov, Y. Z. Xiang, A. Meffre, P. F. Fazzini, B. Chaudret and N. Kruse, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2496–2500 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bordet, L. M. Lacroix, P. F. Fazzini, J. Carrey, K. Soulantica and B. Chaudret, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15894–15898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bordet, L. M. Lacroix, K. Soulantica and B. Chaudret, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1727–1731 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Q. Liu, F. Gu, B. Liu, Z. Zhong and F. Su, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 22759–22776 RSC .
A. V. Puga, Top. Catal., 2016, 59, 1268–1278 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang and J. Gong, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2011, 5, 2–10 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abe, M. Tanizawa, K. Watanabe and A. Taguchi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 315–321 RSC .
G. Garbarino, D. Bellotti, P. Riani, L. Magistri and G. Busca, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 9171–9182 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Vannice, J. Catal., 1975, 37, 449–461 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mikkelsen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 RSC .
P. G. O'Brien, A. Sandhel, T. E. Wood, A. A. Jelle, L. B. Hoch, D. D. Perovic, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2014, 1, 1400001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nurunnabi, K. Murata, K. Okabe, M. Inaba and I. Takahara, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 340, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Ordomsky, A. Y. Khodakov, B. Legras and C. Lancelot, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2896–2899 RSC .
S. Scirè, C. Crisafulli, R. Maggiore, S. Minicò and S. Galvagno, Catal. Lett., 1998, 51, 41–45 CrossRef .
J. Melsheimer, W. Guo, D. Ziegler, M. Wesemann and R. Schlögl, Catal. Lett., 1991, 11, 157–168 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Thampi, J. Kiwi and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1987, 327, 506–508 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Sabatier, US Pat. 956734,  1910 Search PubMed .
F. Sastre, A. V. Puga, L. Liu, A. Corma and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6798–6801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Enger and A. Holmen, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 2012, 54, 437–488 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Hadjigeorghiou and J. T. Richardson, Appl. Catal., 1986, 21, 37–45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barrientos, M. Lualdi, M. Boutonnet and S. Järås, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 486, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garbarino, P. Riani, L. Magistri and G. Busca, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 11557–11565 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Liu, B.-Y. Zhang, P.-P. Chen, H.-Y. Su and W.-X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 24895–24903 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, G. Lu and J. Ma, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 17420–17428 RSC .
I. Sharafutdinov, C. F. Elkjaer, H. W. P. de Carvalho, D. Gardini, G. L. Chiarello, C. D. Damsgaard, J. B. Wagner, J.-D. Grunwaldt, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal., 2014, 320, 77–88 CrossRef CAS .
F. Studt, I. Sharafutdinov, F. Abild-Pedersen, C. F. Elkjaer, J. S. Hummelshøj, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 320–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Puga and A. Corma, Top. Catal., 2018 DOI:10.1007/s11244-018-1030-2  , Ahead of Print.
Y. Zhao, B. Zhao, J. Liu, G. Chen, R. Gao, S. Yao, M. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, J. Xie, X. Wen, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, D. Ma and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4215–4219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Jadhav, P. D. Vaidya, B. M. Bhanage and J. B. Joshi, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2014, 92, 2557–2567 CrossRef CAS .

          A. English, J. Rovner, J. Brown and S. Davies, Methanol, in Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. W. Park, O. S. Joo, K. D. Jung, H. Kim and S. H. Han, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 211, 81–90 CrossRef CAS .
O.-S. Joo, K.-D. Jung, I. Moon, A. Y. Rozovskii, G. I. Lin, S.-H. Han and S.-J. Uhm, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1999, 38, 1808–1812 CrossRef CAS .
M. Behrens, J. Catal., 2009, 267, 24–29 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prieto, M. Shakeri, K. P. de Jong and P. E. de Jongh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2522–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Prieto, J. Zecevic, H. Friedrich, K. P. de Jong and P. E. de Jongh, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Graciani, K. Mudiyanselage, F. Xu, A. E. Baber, J. Evans, S. D. Senanayake, D. J. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. Fernández Sanz and J. A. Rodriguez, Science, 2014, 345, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xu, C. Yang, W. Wei, W.-h. Li, Y.-h. Sun and T.-d. Hu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 221, 51–58 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lin, K. Fang, D. Li and Y. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Q. Huang, S. He, C. Li, J. Zhao and M. Wei, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1324–1332 RSC .
V. Mahdavi, M. H. Peyrovi, M. Islami and J. Y. Mehr, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 281, 259–265 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Alberto V. Puga	Alberto V. Puga received a PhD in Chemistry from the Autonomous University of Barcelona. He has been a post-doctoral research fellow at Queen's University of Belfast and a Marie Curie researcher at Rovira i Virgili University (Tarragona). Dr. Puga is currently a research associate at Instituto de Tecnología Química (ITQ, Valencia). Topics of interest to his research include heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis, solar energy, hydrogen production, carbon dioxide capture and reduction, and biomass valorisation.


Fischer–Tropsch olefin synthesis	
 


        (1)
      
	 	

	
        (1)
      	
(1)



	
        (1)
      
CO2 hydrogenation to olefins	
 


        (2)
      
	 	

	
        (2)
      	
(2)



	
        (2)
      
Water–gas shifta	
 


        (3)
      
	 	

	
        (3)
      	
(3)



	
        (3)
      
Coal gasificationb	
 


        (4)
      
	 	

	
        (4)
      	
(4)





	
        (4)
      
Coal-to-liquidsb	
 


        (5)
      
	 	

	
        (5)
      	
(5)





	
        (5)
      
Biomass gasificationb	
 


        (6)
      
	 	

	
        (6)
      	
(6)





	
        (6)
      
Biomass-to-liquidsb	
 


        (7)
      
	 	

	
        (7)
      	
(7)





	
        (7)
      


	
        (1)
      


	
        (2)
      


	
        (3)
      


	
        (4)
      


	
        (5)
      


	
        (6)
      


	
        (7)
      


Power generation (total)	13656	2013	
	
29

Coal	9887	2013	10–14	
29, 30
Gas	2753	2013	4–8	
29, 30
Transportation	5547	2013	12–14	
29

Landfillsa	≈100	2012	34	
31, 32
Cement manufacture	3670	2015	25	
29

Metal manufacture	2500	2010	18–20	
33

Refineries	900	2014	Variable	
6

Ammonia synthesis	160	2014	>95%	
6

Natural gas sweetening	30	2014	>95%	
6

Fermentation	11	2005	≈100	
34

CO(ad) + H(ad) → HC(O)(ad)	(8)
HC(O)(ad) + 4H(ad) → CH3(ad) + H2O	(9)
CO(ad) + CnH2n+1(ad) → CnH2n+1C(O)(ad) (n = 1 for methyl-to-acetyl)	(10)
CO(ad) + 2H(ad) → HC(OH)(ad)	(11)
HC(OH)(ad) + 2H(ad) → CH2(ad) + H2O	(12)
CO(ad) → C(ad) + O(ad)	(13)
C(ad) + 2H(ad) → CH2(ad)	(14)
CH2(ad) + H(ad) → CH3(ad)	(15)
CH2(ad) + CnH2n+1(ad) → Cn+1H2n+3(ad) (n = 1 for methyl-to-ethyl).	(16)
CO2(ad) + H(ad) → HCO2(ad)	(17)
CO2(ad) → CO(ad) + O(ad)	(18)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the common transformations observed between different iron phases during Fischer–Tropsch and CO2 hydrogenation processes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Particle size dependence of surface-specific activity for different Fischer–Tropsch catalysts. Left: Hydrogenation ability (based on chemisorption data) for cobalt nanoparticles prepared by microemulsion techniques and supported on delaminated zeolites (H2/CO = 2:1, 220 °C, 20 bar, χ(CO) = 10%) vs. Co(0) particle size. Centre: CO consumption and CH4 production activities for ruthenium catalysts prepared by impregnation on γ-Al2O3 (H2/CO = 10:1, 250 °C, 1.8 bar) vs. Ru(0) particle size. Right: CH4, C2+ and total hydrocarbon production activities for iron catalysts supported on carbon nanotubes and annealed under Ar (H2/CO = 1:1, 340 °C, 20 bar) vs. FexC particle size. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 (left), ref. 68 (centre), and ref. 70 (right). Copyright (2009) Elsevier, (2011) Elsevier, and (2012) American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Scheme of a combined XRD–XAS–Raman experimental setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of a multiple chemical imaging approach, from 3D to 2D observation, and from micrometer to sub-nanometer scale of a cobalt-titania catalyst under Fischer–Tropsch conditions. In TXM, TiO2 is shown in red and Co is shown in blue. In STXM, TiO2 is shown in red, Co3O4 is shown in blue and Co2+ is shown in green. In STEM-EELS, TiO2 is shown in red, Co is shown in blue and carbon is shown in green. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright (2010) the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Representation of the different transformations of cobalt species occurring on a TiO2 support during reduction under H2 (20% by volume, 1 atm, 1 h) at either 450 °C (encapsulation of metallic cobalt nanoparticles by TiOx overlayers, bottom left) or 250 °C (wetting of CoO nanoparticles strongly interacting with the support, bottom right), as suggested by XPS (H2, 1.3 10−4 atm, top right). The reaction rates indicated that the CoO species formed at lower temperatures display enhanced activity for either CO or CO2 hydrogenation (top left, H2/CO2 at a 3:1 ratio, 5 atm, 250 °C, 1 h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 



	
	
	CH4	C5+
Co(fcc)	13.0	45.1	6.4	86.1

	492.0	32.1	7.2	82.9
Co(hcp)	16.0	63.1	3.5	88.2

	450.0	55.5	4.2	90.2



	
	CH4	C2–C4	C5+
Co(fcc) from Pt:Co3O4/Al2O3b	58.0	3.9	6.8	89.3
Co(hcp) from Co2C/Al2O3c	70.0	1.9	4.0	94.1

 	Fig. 6  Evolution of the main phases observed by in situ XRD (bottom panels) during the pre-treatment of Pt:Co/Al2O3 (Pt and Co contents were 0.05 and 20% by weight relative to the support, respectively) under H2, CO and H2 again (100, 130 and 100 mL min−1, respectively, atmospheric pressure in all cases) according to the depicted temperature profile (top panels). Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2014) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Low-resolution (a and b) and high-resolution (c–e) TEM images of the Co2C nanoprisms formed by hydrogenation–carburisation of CoxMn1−xO under steady-state Fischer–Tropsch operating conditions, the latter showing the preferentially exposed (1 0 1), (−1 0 1) and (0 2 0) surfaces, according to a parallelepiped model (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2016) Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 8  High-resolution TEM images of Fe–Co catalysts prepared by mixed oxalate pyrolysis: bulk Fe (top left), Fe3Co (top right), FeCo (bottom left) and Co (bottom right) after carburisation treatment (CO atmosphere, 250 °C, 20 h) and passivation (O2(1% mol)/He, room temperature, 6 h), showing the identification of different crystalline phases according to their lattice planar distances. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Selectivity and conversion dependence upon Fe/Co ratios in carburised Fe–Co materials prepared by mixed oxalate pyrolysis (pre-treatment conditions as in Fig. 8) for CO2 hydrogenation (reaction conditions: 9.2 bar, H2/CO2 = 2.5). Left: CO2 conversions and selectivities towards various product families (as described in the inset legend) at 250 °C. Right: Selectivities for oxygenates at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The composition of an iron catalyst (determined by Mössbauer spectroscopy, K-promoted, Fe–Cu–Al-containing material) at various stages during operation in a CO2 hydrogenation process (H2/CO2 = 3, 250 °C, 10 bar). In episodes I–III, carbon was retained on the catalyst and insignificant hydrocarbon formation was observed, whereas Fischer–Tropsch activity increased as a carbide phase started to dominate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright (2003) Plenum Publishing Corporation.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of the evolution of iron species from Fe2O3 to Fe3O4, then to α-Fe, by reduction, and the ultimate carburisation of α-Fe nanoparticles to FexC nodules in a silica-supported, K- and Pt-promoted Fe catalyst during Fischer–Tropsch operating conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright (2003) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of the FexC/Fe3O4 core–shell morphology formed during syngas (H2/CO = 2, 250 °C) exposure of iron catalysts; compared to pure iron materials (a), carbide growth is favoured in the presence of surface K and Cu species (b), leading to a more dispersed and thus more accessible carbide layer on the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2002) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Effects of the exposure of different facets on the performance of Ru(fcc) and Ru(hcp) Fischer–Tropsch catalysts. It is shown that the activity exerted by Ru(fcc) surfaces in hydrothermally synthesised Pt@Ru catalysts is higher than for two Ru(hcp) materials with different particle sizes prepared by solvothermal methods (top left), despite the slightly higher activation energies (1.21 eV) calculated for the former material from Arrhenius plot data (bottom left); reaction conditions: H2/CO2 = 2, 30 bar, aqueous phase. The catalytic results are supported by theoretical calculations, which show that the high surface density of active sites of the ubiquitous {1 1 1} facets, as illustrated by Ru(fcc) nanocrystal models along different directions (right, A–D), compensate for their relatively moderate activity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Conversion dependence upon time on stream for a series of nickel catalysts on different supports, prepared by impregnation and subsequent calcination in air; the results show that whilst all of the catalysts suffer deactivation, silica and alumina supports result in almost negligible activity after several hours, and titania supports exert more satisfactory stability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2012) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Top: Cu surface activity as a function of stacking fault (defect) probability; the inset schematically represents the surface defects (step–kinks) generated by the twin boundaries, resulting in stacking faults during crystal growth. Bottom: HRTEM micrographs showing examples of the aforementioned twin boundaries for the most active Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 catalyst (A–D), the derived surface steps exposing different facets (B and C), and the amorphous ZnOx overlayer (B and C); both defects and zinc species on the surface are related to high methanol production performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2012) American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  TEM micrographs of Rh(6%)/TiO2 samples showing Rh(0) nanoparticles covered with a crystalline Ti3+-containing overlayer (a, after treatment in H2/N2 5:95, 550 °C, 10 min) or a porous amorphous cover composed of strongly adsorbed HCOx and Ti3+ species (b, after treatment of the reduced sample in CO2/H2/He 20:2:78, 250 °C, 3 h). The latter morphology was related to high oxygenate selectivity during CO2 hydrogenation experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright (2017) Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
